
With only a handful of games to go in the 2013-14 season, it’s probably well 
past time we take a look at who’s most likely to make it through to the 
post-season, who isn’t, and who’s still sitting on the cusp of a playoff berth. 
First, though, a quick review of how the seeding works this year with the new 
wild card format and conference setup.


The top three teams from each division are automatically placed in as the top 
six teams in each conference 
<http://www.nhl.com/ice/standings.htm?season=20132014&type=DIV>. That leaves 
two wildcard spots in each conference. Those are filled by the next two highest 
placed teams in each conference, based only on regular season points – 
divisions don’t matter. The top-placed division leader then plays the wild card 
team with the fewest points, and the second best division leader plays the 
second-worst wild card team. Then, the second- and third-placed teams in each 
division square off.

Who’s In

Boston Bruins

Going into Monday’s game against Montreal, the Bruins were on a 12-game 
winning streak, and in their last 24 games had gone 18-2-2. In that time, 
Jarome Iginla managed 15 goals and 14 assists. But have the B’s peaked too 
early? We’ll find out in the post-season.

Pittsburgh Penguins

With the majority of its remaining games at home, the Penguins sit with 97 
points and in an all-but-guaranteed playoff spot. Perhaps a sign of warning, 
however: they lost to the St. Louis Blues on Sunday – that’s a matchup that 
might be one we’re watching in a couple months for the Stanley Cup.

St. Louis Blues

Speaking of which, the Blues are rocking with over 100 points, putting them in 
top spot in the league. They, too, have most of their remaining games at home, 
but some will be tough – namely the Dallas Stars, the Chicago Blackhawks and, 
because they’re still in the fight for a wild card spot in the East and might 
be desperate by then, theWashington Capitals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/washington-capitals>. But they’ll be fine.

Chicago Blackhawks

The Blackhawks have been inconsistent lately, only winning five of their last 
10 as of Monday night. The road ahead doesn’t get a lot better. Before the end 
of the year they’ll face the Stars, the Bruins, the Penguins, the Blues, the 
Canadiens and the Capitals. Still, they should make it through.

San Jose Sharks

As we all know, the Sharks are perfectly capable of making the post-season – 
that’s not really ever the question Sharks fans have these days. It’s what they 
do once they get there that matters.

Anaheim Ducks

Anaheim went through a slump to start March, losing six of their last 10, 
including four straight (one of those was a 7-2 hammering by the Flames, no 
less). So, we’ll see how the rest of the year plays out, but the Ducks ought to 
pick up a few more wins on the way to the playoffs. They’ll play Calgary again, 
the Oilers three times, and the Canucks twice before the year’s through.

L.A. Kings

The Kings have won three straight, and seven of their last 10. The road to the 
playoffs is a mixed bag. They’ll have a short road trip to the Metro division, 
and will play the Flyers, Caps and Pens all in four days. Notably, one of their 
most recent losses (on March 15) was against the Ducks (2-1), and will face 
them again in their final game of the regular season. At writing, the Ducks and 
Kings would meet in the first round.

Colorado Avalanche

They’ve been on a skid of late, dropping their last three, including one to 
the Jets, and will have a rough finish with visits from Boston, San Jose, and 
Pittsburgh along with a stop in St. Louis, but if they can find their feet 
again, they should make it. After that? Who knows. As of right now, they’d face 
Chicago, which would be amazing – for us to watch, that is.

Who’s probably in

Philadelphia Flyers

A very good March has put the Flyers in a good spot to make the cut this year. 
The Flyers have posted six wins in their last 10 games, but that’s not what’s 
really important. What’s really important is who they beat: Pittsburgh 
(back-to-back), Chicago, Dallas, St. Louis. All in a row. Then they dropped one 
to the Kings on Monday. The next 11 matchups are slightly better, though 
they’ll see the Bruins twice and the Penguins again once. Still, if they keep 
it up, they’re all but assured a place.

Montreal Canadiens

Barring a complete and utterly spectacular collapse, the Canadiens will 
probably make the first round. They’ve got a tough schedule but of late have 
proved capable of hanging on to a lead (Toronto), and coming back from a big 
deficit (Ottawa). The real tests will come against Tampa Bay (currently one 
spot above the Habs in the Atlantic), the Blackhawks and, depending on how the 
rest of the season goes, the Rangers.

Tampa Bay Lightning

This team doesn’t mess around, and now that Steve Stamkos is back on the ice, 
there’s little doubt the Lightning will make the post-season. They had a small 
slump (three games) at the beginning of the month, but have since improved, 
five of their last six. Keep an eye on the game against the Habs on April 1, as 
it could foreshadow the first round.

New York Rangers

Bit of a bubble team, but with the rest of the year looking like it does and 
with four straight wins behind them now, the Rangers look like a good bet to be 
in the playoffs. They go for a road trip through the west to finish the month 
which could help their chances. Most likely they’ll get there.

Who’s on the bubble?

Minnesota Wild

The Wild should be a safe bet, but I don’t know. Their schedule to end the 
season is a complete nightmare. It includes a four-game road trip through the 
west against – in order – St. Louis, Phoenix, L.A., and Chicago. Then they come 
home and immediately play the Penguins. Then, before it’s over, they’ll host 
Boston and St. Louis once more. They should be in the category above, but if 
anyone else gets a streak going and the Wild drop all of those contests, they 
might not be quite so safe anymore.

Detroit Red Wings

A tough one. Right now they’re tied with the Leafs, and have gone 50% in the 
last 10 games. What they need now as much as a few wins, is for Toronto to have 
a few more losses. Their schedule isn’t overly difficult, but they’ve struggled 
this year, so it’s anyone’s guess. Still, the Red Wings weren’t expected to do 
much last year in the playoffs (they entered as the 7th seed), and ended up 
pushing the Blackhawks to a Game Seven in the Western semifinal.

Toronto Maple Leafs

Oh boy, I don’t know you guys. Before the Olympics, the parade route had not 
only already been mapped, but the floats were built, the city had painted the 
skyscrapers white and blue, Rob Ford had painted himself white and blue.... And 
now? Another loss this past weekend to the Habs, and James Reimer looks like a 
shadow of the man he was last season. It’s not going to get any easier, either. 
The Leafs host St. Louis on Tuesday night, are in Philly Friday, and before the 
year is through have to face the Red Wings, the Bruins and the Lightning. It’s 
not looking good.

Phoenix Coyotes

At writing, the Coyotes sit in the second wild card spot in the West, two 
points up on Dallas, but one game ahead. Which means it’s tight. They’ve been 
inconsistent of late, dropping their last two against the Bruins and Rangers 
after winning three straight against the Flames, Kings and Panthers. A key game 
will come on March 29 when they face the Wild, and they’ll really need to win 
all those games that look easier on paper – Edmonton, Columbus, Winnipeg, for 
example.

Dallas Stars

The Stars are close, but aren’t doing themselves any favours this month. They 
lost four straight through the middle of the month, including a 7-2 loss to the 
Jets. Maybe they were all slightly rattled afterRich Peverly collapsed on the 
bench during their game against the Blue Jackets on March 10 
<http://www.sportingnews.com/nhl/story/2014-03-19/rich-peverley-update-diagnosis-future-cardiac-event-cleveland-dallas-stars>
 – and fair enough. Still, the road ahead isn’t a smooth one. They go up 
against the Blackhawks and the Blues before the month is out. They’ll have to 
count on the Coyotes losing a few. They’re a solid maybe.

Washington Capitals

It sort of goes without saying the Capitals haven’t been winning enough – if 
they had been, they wouldn’t be in this spot. They’ve only won five of their 
last 10, but are currently on a short road trip through California that’s 
already seen two wins (against Anaheim and San Jose). If they keep that up – 
through another game against the Kings, then one at home against the Bruins – 
they’ll help their chances. Right now, the Caps are only one point out of the 
second wild card spot in the East, and are gaining on Toronto. They, like the 
Red Wings, will also be hoping for a Leaf collapse.

Outside chances

A few teams are probably technically still on the bubble, but look just a 
little more off it than on:

New Jersey Devils

An easy finish to the year means they’ve still got a small chance of making 
it. Currently five points out of a wild card spot in the East, however, means 
they’ll need to really step it up. Unlikely.

Columbus Blue Jackets

Better positioning on paper than the Devils, but likely too tough a schedule 
to finish the year for any serious hope.

Vancouver Canucks

Uh, no.

Of course, most of this is still open to speculation (and criticism), so 
speculate away in the comments. And, as an extra caveat to all of the above, I 
should note my record of predicting things around here: it’s not terrific.

NHL standings <http://www.nhl.com/ice/standings.htm?season=20132014&type=CON>
 