
The government is currently losing a war – a long slow war of attrition. I 
don’t mean the constant flow of voters, councillors, members and activists from 
the Tories to Ukip. It’s a far less publicised struggle, and one that is far 
more damaging for the Tories – their battle with the disability movement.

In all his fanfare about “welfare reform”, Iain Duncan Smith has lost 
connection with reality. Universal credit is his flagship programme. When he
announced it in 2011 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/iain-duncan-smith-sets-out-next-steps-for-moving-claimants-onto-universal-credit>
 he promised that by the beginning of September 2.5 million people would be on 
it, receiving “universal credit in place of jobseeker’s allowance, employment 
support allowance, housing benefit, working tax credit and child tax credit”. 
The actual figure?It’s 8,500 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/universal-credit-statistics>. At 
this rate, it would take 3,000 years to transfer the entire caseload.

What is astonishing is neither the brass neck of Duncan Smith nor his sheer 
incompetence, but the fact that this is nowhere close to the biggest Department 
for Work and Pensions failure. For that we must turn to the key disability 
benefits – employment and support allowance (ESA) and personal independence 
payment (PIP). The first is merely a disaster, the second is a tragedy for 
claimants.

ESA – the successor to invalidity benefit and incapacity benefit – has long 
been a target of cross-party reform. Reform that worked because its focus was 
getting people into work by diverting them before they landed on the benefit 
itself. This was successful and as the flow of new claimants fell, the pool of 
current claimants gradually fell too.

Successful change in social security is always slow and gradual. Duncan Smith 
thought otherwise – he decided to test every single ESA claimant and, in 
effect, drive them off the benefit or into work. Knowing DWP civil servants 
didn’t have the capacity to execute his plans, he adopted his characteristic 
approach. He gave an impossible task to the private sector.Atos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/atos> was the mug that took on the project 
– one it has been unable to deliver, ultimately because of the policy – which 
is why, sensibly, it is handing back the keys to the DWP. No one can do the job 
Duncan Smith wants done because the disability movement has got his number.

Essentially, the Tories have organised the unorganisable. People who are 
long-term sick and disabled have never before had unity or solidarity. Those 
with physical disabilities or mental health problems have, but not the 
claimants with the lingering ailments that have kept them out of work. But 
faced with the new tests, they have fought back. Talk to frontline Atos 
workers, or to theAtos <https://www.theguardian.com/society/atos> doctors, and 
one message comes through strongly – claimants know the system, the tests and 
the questions better than they do. The result? A “reform” designed to drive 
down numbers claiming ESA has led to the first increase in numbers for a 
decade. Some reform. And it has left around 700,000 people waiting for an ESA 
assessment.

But even that’s not the worst failure. The government’s replacement for 
disability living allowance (DLA) – PIP – was introduced in April last year. 
Since then, only 84,000 of 349,000 new claims have had a decision made. Not 
surprising when you investigate. DLA was an excellent benefit – brought in by 
the Tory minister Tony Newton – designed to meet, only partially, the 
additional costs of disability. It’s paid to you whether you are in work or not 
because the additional costs of disability are always there. PIP’s purpose – 
explicitly stated by the coalition – is to cut spend by 20%. No argument that 
the need is illusory. No pretence that there’s cheating. Just a cut – plain and 
simple.

This cannot hold. Over a quarter of a million claimants are getting nothing 
because their claims haven’t been assessed – a number equivalent to the 
population of Derby.

Add to that the ESA backlog and you get nearly a million – a city almost as 
big as Birmingham. That’s the number of people locked out of their rights, with 
more to come – the Tories want to tackle all DLA claimants after the next 
election.

The first casualty has been Atos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/mar/27/atos-quite-work-capability-assessment-contract-early>
 and Duncan Smith wants it to take the blame. But the people cutting disability 
benefits are the government, not the hired help. And it’s the government that 
the disability movement has in its sights. The question is – will mainstream 
politics notice?
 