
Too little is understood about the behavioural impact of abuse as a young 
child. As a mother of adopted girls I live with the fallout, daily.

One day, I am cycling home frantically as I know something is wrong. My elder 
daughter, just turned 20, has been texting my husband and me all day. She wants 
to know exactly when I will get home. There is nothing unusual about her 
constant texting. But the fixation on my estimated time of arrival is unusual. 
It tells me she is probably up to no good.

My daughter, Jess, is in a relationship with a 50-year-old man, called Paul. 
He is my age. We have had the local community support officer check him out. 
For us the local police force is like our social services. In our area, social 
services are notable only by their absence. The community support officer, 
Yvonne, says there is no history of this man "grooming" young girls, the 
evidence indicates a damaged but harmless man with the mental age of a teenager.

I get home and Jess and Paul are sitting in the front room. Our two dogs race 
to greet me and I make a fuss of them. Jess told my husband that a couple of 
days ago Paul had to ring the police as she had a knife and was intending to 
self-harm. She tells me that Yvonne and a therapist are coming to talk to her.

We have struggled for years to get mental health support for Jess. A therapist 
through the police force? Sounds odd, but that will do me. So when a woman 
turns up five minutes later I am pleased. But there is no sign of Yvonne.

"Are you with the police?" I ask the woman. She looks startled.

"No mum, the GP sent her."

I am confused, but the woman does not deny this. I am doubly confused as she 
has her teenage daughter with her. Jess ushers them both into the front room 
and shuts the door in my face.

"I can't talk with you in the room," she says.

I stand outside for a bit and then decide to take the dogs for a walk. I have 
only gone a short distance when the reality of the situation hits me. What the 
hell am I doing leaving the house? I have no idea who this woman is. I run 
back. She is still there. But again Jess will not let me in the front room: 
"Mum, this is private therapy."

I force my way in.

"I just cannot believe the GP would send a therapist at this time, and that 
she would turn up with her daughter," I say. The woman looks uncomfortable, the 
daughter avoids my eyes.

"You should tell your mum," she says.

It turns out that she is from a loan company, and Jess has asked her to come 
to our house as she cannot give Paul's address. Paul has had his benefits cut, 
is desperate for money and has a poor credit history.

I explain to the woman that Jess will not be taking out a loan, that we 
support her. She leaves and Jess makes it clear just how much she hates me. 
Paul makes it clear that there never was an incident with a knife. As ever with 
this particular daughter, confusion reigns. I feel exhausted.

• Jane Green is a pseudonym
 