
Measuring public sentiment against airstrikes on Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> by counting how many people turn up 
to protest would be foolish. Of the thousands who took to the streets across 
the UK to oppose the airstrikes, there were thousands more who could not or did 
not want to attend.

A YouGov poll published on Wednesday 
<https://yougov.co.uk/news/2015/12/02/analysis-sharp-fall-support-air-strikes-syria/>
 showed declining public confidence in the case for airstrikes. Last week, 59% 
of Britons backed the action but now the figure has declined to 48% – this is 5 
million voters. And those who voted Labour in the last general election have 
switched from backing military action by 52% to 26% a week ago, to opposing it 
by 42% to 35%.

 We asked Guardian readers how they would vote, if asked, on UK airstrikes in 
Syria. Overwhelmingly, and perhaps unsurprisingly, they were against military 
action. But many decided against going out to protest.


Res, from Birmingham, is unconvinced by the case for military action in Syria, 
but does not believe in protest. “There needs to be a moral and a practical 
case made for military action. The moral case is clear: Isis should be 
destroyed. But the practical case is inadequate. Airstrikes mean killing 
innocents, and inciting reprisals that against our own citizens,” he told the 
Guardian.


“But I do not believe protests are effective. Protest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/protest> after protest fails to move the 
government – even the huge march against the Iraq war could not stop that. 
Where the government can be swayed, it will be by mass opinion across the whole 
country, not by activism – especially when the activists tend to vote for the 
opposition already.”


Acts of protest are visual expressions of discontent. They are a way of 
venting frustration, even if you know your pleas will not bring immediate 
change. But, by their nature, protests tend to exclude large groups of people, 
most often taking place outside, in crowds, and in large towns and cities. And 
they can require a level of personal confidence, money to travel, and 
attendance is made easier by being connected to relevant groups.


Jeanne, 82, from London, has attended marches since the 1950s but cannot 
attend any more due to ill health. “My daughter and granddaughter are 
protesting on my behalf this time, as I’m now too disabled to march. I was at 
the anti-war on Iraq rallies, but police monitoring is now much heavier and the 
idea of being kettled frightens me,” she said.


On Wednesday, at the end of a 10-hour debate in the House of Commons, MPs 
voted by 397 to 223 in favour of sending Tornado jets to bomb Isis inSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>. Hours later, the first airstrikes 
were carried out.


We asked people against the airstrikes  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/dec/02/are-you-against-uk-airstrikes-on-syria-but-dont-protest-tell-us-why>
why they did not take to the streets to protest <>. Here are five common 
reasons why.


1. Waving a placard will do little to stop the government 

Simon, 35, Hatfield, Hertfordshire: Protests make no difference. Debates make 
no difference. Expert opinion and select committees make no difference. All of 
the participants have made up their minds, probably long ago. I don’t know 
whether that’s because they’re influenced by factors we aren’t told much about 
– arms deals being the obvious one – or something less sinister. But does 
anyone expect the debate in parliament to change anyone’s minds? The last time 
there was a mass anti-war protest, it only resulted in a massive crackdown on 
protests.

Without other forms of intervention, it’s a vanity action, which we all know 
will make little positive difference to the political or social situation on 
the ground and is likely to entrench us in another impossible situation that 
becomes our fault, as well as probably making the UK less safe.

The last protest I went to was the anti-Iraq war protests. In my memory, it 
was a hopeful and positive sense that the country was coming together to make 
its view clear. I spoke to lots of people, and felt a part of something ... but 
that might just be the decade of disappointment that’s followed!

Dawny, 72, London: There must be more effective ways of protesting. I marched 
in London in support of the miners in the 1980s and I experienced the mockery 
of onlookers. And they were right to mock. Standing in the rain on a cold 
winter day waving a placard will do little except amuse those secure in a warm 
office observing the antics of the plebs.


Who, exactly, are the forces going to bomb? The extremists are likely to be 
indistinguishable from the innocent. Or are they considered acceptable 
collateral damage? I am against the proposed bombing campaign in Syria. There 
is little evidence that such action would reduce the chance of further attacks 
similar to that seen in Paris.

Darren, 35, London: I don’t doubt there is a huge number who feel passionately 
against these airstrikes, but also feel that protest is a pointless activity. 
Recent anti-war protest in this country has been ignored by Labour and 
Conservative governments alike.

We find ourselves in a cycle of government-sanctioned violence against 
organised terrorism. Strikes will mean this cycle continues, increasing 
anti-west sentiment and sowing hatred that will last for generations. As 
worrying to me is disenfranchisement regarding our reaction to the perceived 
threat of Isis – after Iraq and Afghanistan I hope that public weariness of 
ineffectual military action will influence a move against conflict.

2. I simply can’t drop everything to go and protest

Mysia, 39, Witney, Oxfordshire: I am a single, working mother of a child with 
special needs. I have used up all my annual leave days from work, and it’s 
nearly Christmas. I simply can’t drop everything to go and protest – this isn’t 
just the protests over the airstrikes, but also over all the other rubbish that 
this government is doing.


I am against airstrikes and I don’t see how they will achieve anything without 
ground support. And there are bound to be innocent civilian casualties.

The last protest I went to was in London against the Iraq invasion. The 
atmosphere was friendly and, dare I say it, fun. The tide of opinion was 
against the government, and it was good to be among like-minded people. There 
was, of course, a feeling that all the protest was futile – sadly proven right 
– but I felt that at least I’d done something.


3. I don’t protest because I fear they’ll turn violent 

Nicola, 27, London: I don’t feel that my presence will have any impact, and I 
also fear that protests tend to end up aggressive or violent, which I don’t 
want to be associated with. There should be a better way for me to share my 
views than standing outside for a bit with a placard.

I don’t believe that attacking a country is the correct solution to deal with 
Isis. I think bombing has the potential to push vulnerable people towards Isis 
or to extremism. These are people who are living in fear, in a war zone, 
fearing for their lives and their families’ lives. People who don’t want to 
live like this – virtually everyone – will want to flee. We will reject them, 
and they will have nowhere to turn to.


Richenda, 29, Cambridgeshire: I am more cautious about protesting these days 
because police brutality has gotten out of hand. I do what I can online 
instead. I also don’t have time as I’m juggling three jobs and full-time study.

I’ve only been on anti-austerity and funding cuts demonstrations, and counter 
marches against the BNP. They are usually friendly and fun. The only negative 
experience is being scared of the police suddenly doing something like charging 
at trapped protesters on horseback. Also, the frustration of having a 
completely peaceful event and then going home to find that the media have 
under-reported the number of people present and have found some isolated 
skirmish somewhere and used that to represent the full demonstration.

4. I would like to protest, but I had other things to do


Jess, 17, Manchester: I am strongly against airstrikes because I believe that 
they will not weaken Isis but only make the civil war in Syria more complicated 
and possibly worse. And this could easily backfire for Europe.


I’ve not attended a protest because I am currently in my second year of 
A-levels and have a large amount of coursework to complete. My parents took me 
to my first protest – against the Iraq war – when I was five. I don’t really 
remember much apart from all my friends and their parents were also there.


Harvey, 17, Norwich: I had to make a choice between going on the climate 
change march on Sunday or the anti-war march on Saturday. I had other things to 
do on that weekend so I just attended the climate march. After all, climate 
change is life or death for the entire human race: billions of potential 
causalities as opposed to millions.


I am firmly against UK airstrikes in Syria. Bombing will not defeat Isis, it 
will strengthen it if anything. People will not forget which country killed 
their friends and family who were essentially collateral damage, and will be 
extremely easy to radicalise. Furthermore, what war against a guerrilla force 
has been won by bombing? None. America is already conducting more bombing runs 
then it needs to. Why send British pilots to their potential deaths, which only 
makes Britain a target and helps Isis?

5. I would protest but I don’t feel able to.


Jeanne, 82, London: I’ve attended protests against the wars in Iraq, Korea and 
Vietnam. They were all good, well organised rallies with like-minded people 
joining from all over the country. I enjoyed the cameraderie and the speeches.

I do not think airstrikes will make us or any other western nation safer from 
attack on home soil. It is likely to alienate even more young Muslims and 
increase such attacks. More effort must be put into surveillance and into the 
Vienna talks.

Jon, 62, Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk: My breathing isn’t up to protesting. But I 
am against the airstrikes. More noncombatants will die, more will become 
refugees. Syrian skies are too crowded for more planes.

Al-Monitor <http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/home.html> reports that the senior 
military leadership of Isis has already moved from Syria to Libya. Would it not 
make more sense to attack military targets in Libya before Isis gets too 
organised? Time to get a step ahead of the enemy.


Louis, 45, London: I am suffering from a condition making my mobility very 
limited and painful. During the first Gulf war, one of the protests I attended 
got violent when the police blocked our path. Since then I protested against 
practically all military interventions up to 2009.

Apart from the huge number of civilian casualties and destruction of 
infrastructure, whilst some terrorists may die, the potential recruits will 
increase, making the world more unstable and dangerous. Bombing by the west is 
a major reason why Isis exists; more bombing will make it worse.


If you are protesting against airstrikes in Syria, we’d love you to share your 
images and video and tell us your arguments why via GuardianWitness using the 
blue button at the top of the article.
 