
It’s easy to poke fun at the resolution-makers, those sweet, optimistic souls 
who write lists and make plans and hope that this year will be different, 
stronger, healthier –better. And it does seem naive sometimes, thinking that a 
person or a life can be transformed as definitively as the numbers on a 
calendar, that somehow with a single clock strike everything can change.

But at the risk of sounding like a starry-eyed idealist: why can’t it? Haven’t 
we all experienced the surreal sense of a life being significantly shifted in 
the space of a single second? It happens every day. So if not midnight on New 
Year’s Day, when?

The hardest part of any new venture is choosing to begin. It’s incredibly easy 
to continue putting off positive change until tomorrow, or next month; after 
things settle down at work, or when you have more time. Enough of that. The 
time is now! (Well, the time is actually two days from now, but you know what I 
mean.)

If you’re looking for a way to create change on a level which goes beyond 
coming up a weird magazine version of a “Whole New You!” or losing 10lbs, I 
have a few ideas that I’ll share over the next two weeks.

But before we even begin discussing the “what” of your resolution list, we 
should discuss the “how”.

Change works best when it’s built to be sustainable. I don’t know about you, 
but “sustainable” doesn’t come naturally to me. When I make up my mind to do 
something, I want to do itnow. This means that on 31 December, I sit down and 
write out plans for a new workout regime, a new diet, a new chore scheduleand 
early morning meditation sessions.

New Year’s Day finds me waking up bleary and cotton-mouthed, enthusiasm 
significantly dampened.

By the time 15 January rolls around, I’ve said to hell with everything except 
a halfhearted attempt at daily meditation. Which, if I’m honest, is really just 
sleeping upright.

One year I was able to break this cycle, and I learned so much from the 
experience that I’ve decided to replicate it again this year and share my 
abundant wisdom with you too. I learned that it’s essential to begin slowly, 
create gradual shifts, and commit to small steps you can achieve, rather than 
setting your sights on scaling mountains right away.

Instead of facing New Year’s Day with a mile-long list, I pick six to 12 
things I’d like to bring into or improve in my life (ie a regular yoga 
practice, more volunteer work, closer relationships, better budgeting, etc), 
and I devote a month or two throughout the year to tackling each one.

By splitting a giant resolution list into manageable chunks, it’s easier to 
focus on each area you’d like to improve, and get accustomed to each new habit 
before taking on the next one. It’s the opposite of multi-tasking – a series of 
focused, conscious, deliberate changes. And they’re far more likely to stick.

Now, typically when we think of resolutions we often seek to add more to our 
life. Weadd workouts and classes and meal planning days. We add 
responsibilities and expectations and place new demands on ourselves. In doing 
so, we are seeking a full life, and a beautiful one too – incredibly worthy 
goals, but we often end up overextended instead.

So instead of adding more, more, more, what if we began by subtracting?

We all have areas of our life where we sink too much time, money, energy or 
all three. We put our hearts into so much that harms us – unhealthy 
relationships, hours of TV watching or internet browsing, fast food or coffee 
habits that deplete us, cluttered closets and garages that overwhelm us.

Take a look at your life as it stands. What’s important to you? What do you 
value most? What nourishes you and excites you? What makes you a better person?

Now look at how you spend your time, your money and your energy. Are you 
putting your money where your mouth is? Do your actions match your words? Are 
you living one reality while dreaming of another? This may sound like hippie 
nonsense, but if you value growth and learning while living a life devoid of 
the same, the chances of you being happy are pretty slim.

Pare down. Rid yourself of excess. Keep what feeds you, and leave the rest 
behind.

Devote a month or two to getting rid of a few items a day. Put a box in your 
living room and choose one thing every day to add to it – clothing you never 
wear, electronics you don’t use, duplicate cooking gadgets, books you hated and 
will never re-read. If you join a buy and sell site, you can earn some extra 
money by getting rid of any gently used items; charity shops always appreciate 
good-quality donations; and many electronics stores take gadgets back for 
recycling.

Literally freeing up space in your home is a visual, tangible reminder of your 
intention to do the same in your life.

Take a few weeks to examine the demands on your time and re-evaluate how the 
hours in your day are allocated. Some (such as work and cleaning the toilet) 
are non-negotiable. Others, such as catching up on a TV series, gossiping or 
even your commute, are worth a second look. A long commute may be made more 
convenient by car, but if you take the train or the bus you can use that time 
to read, do crosswords or daydream about strangers.

Begin 2016 by creating space. Think of it like Michelangelo: “Every block of 
stone has a statue inside it and it is the task of the sculptor to discover it.”

Your life is your sculpture. You’re chipping away at it every day, whether 
you’re conscious of doing so or not. Be intentional with how you shape your 
life. Carve away what doesn’t feed you.
 