
The permanent aquamarine sky in Perth provides the brightest, purest light 
imaginable in which to play cricket. England, though, have played this game in 
a fog, batting with an incompetent mixture of dither and dash in their first 
innings and then compounding the felony by dropping catches off their 
persevering and perspiring bowlers.

 Shining light and English cricket may not go hand in hand but, if the bright 
light and quick pitch of Perth has thrown up an intriguing if condensed Test 
match, then England's bold selection of Alex Tudor has catapulted a sparkling 
new talent into world cricket.

 Rarely have I felt as excited or as riveted by a session of Test cricket as 
during the post-lunch period yesterday.

 England had their backs to the wall, staring at almost certain defeat and, 
worse, total humiliation at the hands of Australia. The second new ball was 
their only hope, in the hands of the bold and bouncy but unlucky Darren Gough 
and the young, gifted and very fast Tudor. The Waugh twins were looking solid 
and the Aussies were 194 for four with the power to add: experience taking on 
youth and naivety.

 Tudor steamed in upwind and bowled as he had been picked to do: he bowled 
fast. He disappeared for three boundaries in his second over, dispatched by the 
phlegmatic elder twin Steve, renowned as the most enduring batsman in the world.

 One ball changed the mood. A searingly quick bouncer seemed to unsettle the 
senior Waugh, who became Tudor's first Test victim next ball, bowled by an 
equally fast, pitched-up nip-backer. Mark followed next over to give the 
21-year-old a pair of Waughs as his first successes. Not a bad place to begin.

 Tudor's rise to Test-match status has been remarkable. He has played in only 
26 first-class games and possesses a rare talent. The ability to bowl fast is 
almost guaranteed to accelerate progress and Tudor bowls extremely fast.

 He was picked for this tour of Australia as England's 17th man, with little 
prospect of playing much and basically along for the ride. Refreshingly he 
says: "I didn't come here for work experience. I saw it differently, as an 
opportunity to play cricket for England."

 His chance came due in no small part to the hard work he has put in in the 
nets, constantly giving his team-mates the hurry-up and impressing everyone 
with his wonderful attitude to the whole process of touring. His batting has 
come under the tutelage of the tour manager Graham Gooch and the impact was 
obvious during his little cameo of a knock in the first innings.

 Tudor looks and moves likes an athlete. He has a graceful yet aggressive 
run-up and delivers the ball from his full height.

 Bob Willis considers him a tremendous prospect and the quickest English 
bowler he has seen in recent times. And Willis had a part in persuading him to 
join Surrey rather than Middlesex some two years ago.

 Tudor's father also works at The Oval as a security officer, and his elder 
brother Ray was formerly on the staff as well. There was an injury shadow over 
the young Tudor for part of last season but, after the way he announced himself 
to the world in this game, all doubts in that quarter have been dispelled.

 In the extraordinary first two days' play Tudor took only two balls to make 
an impact, his second a delivery thudding into the chest of Mark Taylor. 
Immediately Australia had received a warning of his potential.

 Several qualities stood out through his first-innings performance. Pace, yes, 
most certainly, but his line was so good too and also his application. So often 
young quick bowlers, finding themselves on a fast pitch, explore only the 
middle of the wicket, revelling in and relishing the bounce, often wasting all 
their energy. But Tudor used his short deliveries sparingly and kept to an 
admirable full length for much of the innings.

 Four for 89 from 21 overs may not seem a stunning analysis but in context 
they are remarkable figures for a young man of so little experience. David 
Lloyd, the England coach, had the last word: "Alex bowls big boys' pace, and 
England have found a fast bowler today."
 