
This week marks the 60th anniversary of an experiment that failed: Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan>.

Conceived as a secular Muslim state, it has become a cauldron of violent 
extremism. Forget Iran, Iraq and Afghanistan; the most dangerous country in the 
word today is Pakistan.

Its regime is weak and under intensifying pressure. Many of its most powerful 
political and military leaders sympathize with Islamic radicalism. Most 
significant, it is a nuclear power. Imagine a Taliban-like movement with state 
power and armed with atomic weapons. The world may be facing that prospect in 
Pakistan.

How did things go so wrong in Pakistan? Part of the blame lies with the 
British colonialists who "granted" it independence 60 years ago. They devised 
what turned out to be a tragically misbegotten partition of India that set off 
a massive wave of ethnic cleansing in which hundreds of thousands were murdered.

Partition condemned the new Muslim state, Pakistan, to civil war and 
ultimately to the loss of its eastern region, now Bangladesh. Yet Pakistan 
could still have become a stable democracy. That was the dream of its founding 
father, Muhammad Ali Jinnah. His legacy, though, has been all but wiped away. 
Photos of him that hang in every government office are a cruel mockery. Today's 
Pakistan is the incarnation of everything Jinnah detested.

Jinnah's ambition was akin to that of another hugely ambitious nation-builder, 
Kemal Ataturk. He wanted to create in Pakistan what Ataturk had begun to build 
in Turkey: a modern, open, post-Enlightenment state in which Islam would guide 
private behavior but not public policy.

Jinnah's death in 1948 - and the assassination of his closest comrade, prime 
minister Liaquat Ali Khan, three years later - killed that dream. Perhaps the 
same would have happened in Turkey if Ataturk had died soon after taking over 
leadership of his new state, instead of ruling it for a decade and a half.

Over the decades that followed, Pakistan fell under the rule of military 
officers. The longest-running of them, Mohammad Zia ul-Haq, who seized power in 
1977, proclaimed two goals: building a nuclear bomb and creating a "genuine 
Islamic order" in Pakistan. He introduced an Islamic Shari a legal code, filled 
the ranks of the army and intelligence service with officers sympathetic to 
Islamic radicalism, and encouraged the growth of religious schools where 
children were inculcated with fanaticism.

Zia had a strong ally as he worked to turn Pakistan into a nuclear-armed 
fundamentalist power: the United States. American leaders had decided to wage 
war against the Soviet-backed regime in neighboring Afghanistan, and wanted his 
help. Zia agreed, but only on condition that all funds for insurgent Afghan 
commanders be funneled through his government.

That allowed him to support commanders committed to radical Islam - many later 
turned up as leaders of the Taliban - and starve those who were more moderate 
or democratically oriented.

American policies thus laid the groundwork not only for the Taliban takeover 
of Afghanistan, but for a possible future takeover of Pakistan by similarly 
inclined militants.

Britain and the US do not bear all the responsibility for Pakistan's descent 
toward catastrophe. Unlike India, Pakistan never managed to build a strong 
middle class, always a pre-requisite for successful democracy. Its elected 
leaders, most recently Benazir Bhutto and Nawaz Sharif, proved so spectacularly 
corrupt that many Pakistanis came to favor the idea of military rule.

During the waning days of Sharif's government, I attended a dinner in 
Islamabad at which there was much complaining about his misrule. People around 
the table agreed that he had to go.

When I asked how he could be made to do so, one of the other guests replied, 
"Pindi." The rest nodded. "Pindi" is short for Rawalpindi, where the Pakistani 
army has its headquarters. Soon afterward, just as those dinner guests 
predicted, General Musharraf staged his coup and seized power.

In recent months, Musharraf has learned that when troubles come, they come not 
single spies, but in battalions. Powerful forces in Pakistan are determined to 
protect Osama bin Laden and other terrorists who are evidently living freely in 
tribal regions. The United States, which has backed Musharraf so strongly that 
some Pakistanis call him "Busharraf," is pressuring him to crack down on 
lawless regions and groups. Most threatening of all, the army is slowly 
concluding that his continued tenure in office damages its institutional power 
and prestige. That is the kind of conclusion that produces action from "Pindi."

Whether Musharraf survives his current crises politically - or physically - 
will not determine Pakistan's future. It is bleak. This is the world's next 
great crisis.

Read more about India and Pakistan 60 years after partition here 
<http://commentisfree.theguardian.com/category/after_the_raj/>
 