
There is now to be a UK referendum on Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/20/cameron-set-to-name-eu-referendum-date-after-cabinet-meeting>
. As a result there is an open quarrel in the Conservative party. The two 
things are not the same. The first debate belongs to all of us. The second 
doesn’t. It is vital to understand that these are distinct things. The first is 
a national democratic decision with generational implications for all of us; 
the second a partisan psychodrama. It matters a lot whether Britain remains in 
Europe. It doesn’t really matter two hoots thatBoris Johnson has come down on 
the Brexit side of the fence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/21/boris-johnson-eu-referendum-campaign-for-brexit-david-cameron>
. It will deepen the party’s internal rift but, given that his importance is 
routinely overestimated, whether he will be the enormous asset the leave side 
calculates he will be is another matter.

Large parts of the Conservative party and all of the anti-European media have 
blurred these two issues for years. Ever sinceDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> first pledged a referendum 
they have tried to frame the contest as a moment of potential British 
redemption. In this view of the referendum, the Conservative party must be 
liberated from the prime minister’s pragmatism so that the country can then be 
liberated from the EU. That’s what a lot of grassroots Tories believe. It’s why 
Ukip exists. It’s why there was all that jousting over referendum process in 
the past few months. And it is why so many obsessive anti-Europeans have moved 
so quickly into battle mode after Friday’s deal in Brussels, without bothering 
to read it in most cases.

In this narrower context it is important how the Conservative party behaves 
over the next four months. This is still the governing party of the United 
Kingdom for the next four years, although in the light of its current behaviour 
it requires an effort to remind oneself of the fact. The result on 23 June will 
have a huge impact on the party, as well as the country. It could bring down 
the prime minister, though he denies it. It could split the Tories into two, as 
the Corn Laws and imperial preference did in the past, though most observers 
again say it won’t.

It will certainly bring the contest to succeed Mr Cameron closer – that is the 
loud descant to everything that is happening among the Tories at Westminster at 
the moment, as Mr Johnson’s antics demonstrate. It might precipitate an early 
general election.As for Tory party management for the next four months, forget 
it. The cabinet is two-thirds for staying in. The party is at least two-thirds 
for leaving. The referendum will make life hard for some pro-Cameron MPs in the 
constituencies and will make cabinet relations more brittle. Everything else – 
from the migration crisis and the stock market’s travails through George 
Osborne’s budget next month, to the May elections in Scotland, Wales, London 
and elsewhere – will be seen within the party through the lens of the 
referendum. It will be a seriously fractured government and the fracture may 
not heal.

Does it make much difference whether this or that minister has gone over to 
the leavers? Most who have done so were predictable. Few are household names.
Iain Duncan Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/iain-duncan-smith> 
remains popular in the party but not a commanding figure outside it. With the 
exception of Michael Gove, they are a fairly second-rate group. Given her 
departmental responsibilities, it beggars belief that the Northern Ireland 
secretary, Theresa Villiers, is among them. Looking at the lineup reminds us 
that the Tory party of 2016 has been fortunate in its opponents.

But the bigger figures in the cabinet have stayed loyal to Mr Cameron and the 
case for continued membership. And Mr Cameron remains a respected leader with 
the general public, as his opinion poll ratings show. Mr Johnson’s influence is 
overstated in comparison. The ultimate impact of the ministerial leavers is a 
gut call. If you think that a leap in the dark advocated by Chris Grayling, 
Nigel Farage and George Galloway is weightier than a safety in numbers argument 
made by David Cameron, Alan Johnson andNicola Sturgeon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon>, then you will vote 
leave. If you don’t, you won’t. And nor would we.

In the end, the fact of the Conservative split is probably more important than 
the composition of it. This is something that the press enthusiasts for leaving 
the EU should ponder. The risk for Mr Cameron and his successor is that these 
four months will leave a legacy of internal bitterness that will be hard to 
heal and which voters will not like, whatever the result in June. It has 
happened to the Tory party before, and it could happen again. Do not confuse 
the ministerial dramas with the momentous choice that faces us all. Europe is 
too important to be left to theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives>. And so is the country.
 