
On the face of it, SoftBank’s purchase of the UK technology firm ARM Holdings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/18/arm-holdings-to-be-sold-to-japans-softbank-for-234bn-reports-say>
 is good for Britain. Despite the media gloom surrounding Brexit and the dire 
predictions of an economy on the verge of collapse, in reality many large 
foreign investors are keen to get in first when it comes to purchasing UK 
businesses.

ARM Holdings to be sold to Japan's SoftBank for £24bn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/18/arm-holdings-to-be-sold-to-japans-softbank-for-234bn-reports-say>
But sadly that is not the whole story. The acquisition is only the latest 
example of a British-built and British-owned company being sold abroad, against 
the interests of working people in this country. It should be stopped, and the 
wholetrend of selling off British industrial assets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/08/selling-off-britain-ownership-crisis-debate>
 should be stopped too.

As of this week, ARM is not a British business. It is a Japanese business 
based in the UK. But why does it matter who owns the company? All the jobs 
are to be retained, apparently.SoftBank has reassured the ARM board of directors
 
<http://uk.businessinsider.com/softbank-confirms-24-billion-arm-acquisition-2016-7>
 that it will “remain a very significant UK business and will continue to play 
a key role in the development of new technology”.

I am not convinced. We have heard this story time and time again. And despite 
the best intentions of everyone involved, almost every time, the UK has come 
out worse off.

Over the past few decades Britain has sold companies to overseas interests at 
an unprecedented level, and the rate of sales shows no sign of slowing. Foreign 
investors nowown a massive £1tn worth of British companies 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/globalbusiness/11839724/Foreign-investors-own-1-trillion-worth-of-British-companies.html>
, according to the latest figures released by the ONS. Over the past five years 
overseas buyers have increased their stakes in UK firms by 10 percentage points.

The key problem is that when a British company is sold to a foreign owner, it 
is controlled in the interests of those people who are living abroad rather 
than of the workers based in Britain. The focus of the management of a 
foreign-owned company is inevitably – and, I must add, understandably – in 
their home territory. That is where, for instance, they will be keen to base 
their high-level add-on services, such as research and development, which will 
produce the best-paying jobs and create the largest boost for the economy – if 
only because they are easier for them to manage there.

Profits made on foreign-owned companies are most likely to be paid in taxes to 
foreign governments

It is this offshoring of management jobs in the manufacturing and industrial 
sectors that has led to the weakening of experience and skillsets in the UK. It 
makes it more difficult for British managers to build the experience and skills 
they need to run effective industrial companies. If British school-leavers want 
to enter industry and manufacturing, there are now fewer and fewer 
opportunities. This has surely been a big contributor to the large skills gap 
between industrial managers in Germany and Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/mar/30/the-uk-could-learn-a-lot-from-germanys-long-term-industrial-strategy>
.

It is also true that profits made on foreign-owned companies are most likely 
to be paid in taxes to foreign governments. This means that public services 
such as schools, hospitals and transport systems abroad are benefiting from 
British-based companies and British workforces, at a time when we so 
desperately need to inject revenue into our own public services.

Of course, when a foreign company buys a British asset, they must give legal 
assurances that they will maintain a level of investment and activity in the 
UK. These guarantees are usually to provide company workers with certainty that 
the firm will not be relocated. But the guarantees are time-limited, usually to 
five or 10 years. And despite the best intentions of the management – even if 
they want to maintain activity in Britain – if their margins come under 
pressure, they will generally, all things considered, prefer to cut their 
expenditure in Britain rather than in their home market.

Foreign ownership is not always a bad thing. But we have to recognise that we 
have gone too far. By having a policy of selling our assets to foreign owners 
as the first option, we are storing up incalculable problems, which will 
inevitably lead to severe economic difficulties.

If we want to ensure that the British economy has a sound future, that there 
are good jobs across all sectors including manufacturing, and that our national 
interest will be at the heart of the majority of UK companies in 10 years’ 
time, we need to accept that our love affair with quick profits and foreign 
owners is a destructive one.
 