
A high-level British inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/alexander-litvinenko-was-probably-murdered-on-personal-orders-of-putin>
 into the killing in London in 2006 of Alexander Litvinenko, a former KGB 
officer turned critic of the Kremlin, has not only established that the Russian 
state was involved, but that a link could probably be traced to Vladimir Putin 
himself. That home secretaryTheresa May has reacted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/21/theresa-may-pulls-all-punches-with-putin-over-litvinenko-killing>
 by describing the murder as a “blatant, unacceptable, breach of the 
fundamental tenets of international law” is welcome – but not enough. The 
assassination of Litvinenko has now been officially established as “a 
state-sponsored act”, with a “strong probability” that the killers acted “under 
the direct order” of the Russian FSB secret service, in an operation “probably 
approved” by the Russian president. Yet the UK has made plain thatdiplomatic 
relations with Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/alexander-litvinenko-vladimir-putin-russian-exceptionalism>
 will not be affected. True, Mrs May announced that a European arrest warrant 
would be sought against the two Russian agents who poisoned Litvinenko with 
polonium in a London hotel, but if only on the strength of the home secretary’s 
own muscular language – pointing the finger at the upper echelons of the 
Russian regime – this, surely, cannot be enough.

The report’s credibility is not in doubt. The tireless commitment shown by 
Litvinenko’s widow, Marina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/marina-litvinenko-alexander-murder-inquiry-report>
, has successfully drawn a bright, unsparing light on this murder. The crime 
ranks as the first independently documented assassination of a Russian 
dissident by the Russian state on European soil, and – another nasty first – 
using nuclear substances to boot. One needs to go back to the 1978 killing of 
the Bulgarian dissident Georgi Markov, poisoned with the ricin-filled umbrella 
tip on Waterloo Bridge, to find anything comparable.

Insisting there should be no diplomatic fallout amounts to an admission that 
Britain can be cowed. The claimed constraints – especially the need for 
cooperation in the Middle East – are not especially convincing. Russia’s 
policies in Syria have, by aiding the Assad regime, contributed to 
strengthening Islamic State rather than defeating it. If Russia decides to 
sideline Assad one day, that will only happen because of Moscow’s own strategic 
calculations, and not because of Britain dialling down its response to the 
Litvinenko murder. The same applies to the Iran nuclear deal, or Ukraine: to 
say a strong British reaction will derail international diplomacy is to 
overstate British influence. On the contrary, putting some pressure on senior 
Russian officials would enhance British credibility. London only gave the 
inquiry full support afterRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> 
attacked Ukraine. Clearing up the lingering impression that the British court 
system might somehow be negotiated with will now require a tough stand.

The most efficient way to follow up on the report would involve Europeanising 
the issue. After all, the Litvinenko assassination concerns all European 
democracies, not just Britain. Russian political opponents don’t just live in 
London, nor can the reach of Russian agents ordered to eliminate dissidents 
overseas be considered limited to British territory. On the basis of the 
report, European governments should work towards a common sanctions list, 
targeting, by name, the Russian officials linked to criminal activity and human 
rights abuses.

There is a precedent for this, in the US. In 2012, the Obama administration 
enacted the Sergei Magnitsky Act, which led to asset freezes and visa bans for 
30 Russian officials who had been complicit in the death of a crusading Russian 
lawyer while in jail on trumped-up corruption charges. Several European 
parliament resolutions have called for similar EU measures. The Litvinenko 
report is an opportunity to do just that.

It is a chance to focus on all the individual responsibilities that have been 
exposed, including those of such close Putin allies as Nikolai Patrushev and 
Viktor Ivanov – whose names are mentioned in a report that, naturally, they 
have called a sham. Nothing will make Russian officials pay attention like 
being banned from the European mansions and resorts that they enjoy visiting, 
or being blocked from accessing the money they have stashed in European banks. 
Mrs May is right to say any measures against Mr Putin himself would come up 
against a head of state’s immunity. And there is little chance of any 
international justice mechanism moving against Mr Putin even after he leaves 
office – for this assassination or for other crimes. But even if a rerun of the 
Pinochet case is unlikely, it is precisely because this case encapsulates the 
darker side of Putinism that stronger measures, and at a European level, are 
now required.
 