
Topical or what? Wall Street: Money Never Sleeps opened one day after the 
rogue trader Jérôme Kerviel was jailed for three years and ordered to pay 
€4.9bn (£4.3bn) in damages for almost bringing down my old bank, Société 
Générale. But about 20 minutes into Oliver Stone's laboriously self-important 
drama, I realised I'd stopped caring what Shia LaBeouf andMichael Douglas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-douglas> were up to, mainly because I 
was distracted by their swanky apartments with panoramic views of a Manhattan 
lit by the rich glow of a permanent Magic Hour. Gee, I thought, why don't I 
live in a flat like that?

And then I remembered: oh yes, it's because whenever I hear the words "insider 
trading", "subprime" or "hedge fund", my eyes glaze over and I start thinking 
about hats, or miniature dachshunds. And that's the problem with money in the 
movies. Each time you look forward to being privy to the inner workings of the 
global roulette that is sending all our lives into a tailspin, the system pulls 
off a dazzling feat of prestidigitation and – shazzam! – you start admiring 
Carey Mulligan's earrings instead.

Money can't be that hard to understand – some of the dimmest people I've ever 
met have been accountants or merchant bankers – but I suppose it's not 
surprising that cinema colludes in the great game of economic smoke and 
mirrors, considering that the budget of your average Hollywood blockbuster 
could probably bankroll a small country. It seems to me the main difficulty for 
films about money is that no one can decide what genre they should belong to. 
Yes, there are documentaries such as Capitalism: A Love Story, or Cleveland 
Versus Wall Street, but they are designed to be pedagogical without being 
particularly illuminating.

Alan J Pakula probably had the right idea with Rollover, a 1981 conspiracy 
thriller in the same vein as his The Parallax View, and ending in scenes of 
social disorder one fears will soon be played out for real. I still couldn't 
tell you what the people shouting into phones are shouting about (shouting into 
phones is a recurring motif of the fiscal pic) but the moment when Kris 
Kristofferson surveys a roomful of the waltzing wealthy and says, "I was just 
thinking about the illusion of safety," is far more chilling than Stone's 
diamond-encrusted charity banquet set to the hurdy-gurdy theme from Carousel.

Tom Tykwer's The International was a more recent attempt at the financial 
conspiracy thriller, inspired by the dodgy exploits of a real bank, though 
Clive Owen's attempts to bring down it down are undermined by audience 
awareness that financial institutions don't actually need to dabble in arms 
dealing, terrorism and murder to be evil. The story of Kerviel's predecessor, 
Nick Leeson, should have been a gift to film-makers, but Rogue Trader ended up 
as little more than a duff biopic essayed with the clunky literalness that 
characterises British attempts to dramatise sexy headlines. I'll wager economic 
dunces like me learned more about finance from It's a Wonderful Life or Trading 
Places. "Buy low, sell high!" Isn't that all we need to know?

Perhaps black comedy would be a more appropriate genre – God knows the story 
of Bernie Madoff and his Ponzi schemes has a Pythonesque surrealism. Or 
possibly it calls for a microcosmic approach, like that of Robert Bresson, who 
in L'argent relates how a forged banknote ruins innocent lives. L'argent 
updated a Tolstoy short story, but it's a shame no one has recently tried to 
adapt Emile Zola's Rougon-Macquart novel of the same name, in which a now all 
too familiar yarn of stockmarket fraud and collapsing banks is woven into a 
rollicking social tapestry.

Perhaps the subject is simply too vast to be encompassed by a single movie, 
when what we need is the banking equivalent of the Wire, with money taking the 
place of drugs as a key element in the panoramic vision. Or perhaps, since 
economic meltdown is vying with ecological catastrophe as the trigger for the 
end of civilisation as we know it, the most logical genre to depict the world 
of banking is the disaster movie. What we need is the fiscal equivalent of The 
Day After Tomorrow.
 