
Andrew Strauss 8
Calm, measured and authoritative on and off the field, and held in high regard 
by his team, Strauss's tactical acumen is occasionally questioned, but he 
understands captaincy in its widest sense. He might have made a pair in 
Brisbane if Australia's referral for a first-ball leave alone had been upheld. 
But it wasn't and he batted soundly thereafter
Alastair Cook 10
Man of the series. Only Wally Hammond has exceeded his 766 runs for England in 
an Ashes series. An epic performance from a batsman who Australia held to be 
vulnerable. Hebatted for 36 hours in the series, paring down his strokeplay, 
but never has self-denial possessed such serenity. His double hundred in 
Brisbane set the tone
Jonathan Trott 8.5
Australia bowled appallingly at Trott, allowing him to work his favourite 
legside areas at will. He stood shoulder to shoulder with Cook in the first two 
Tests, and although he looked uncomfortable on the quickest pitch of the series 
in Perth, made a second century at the MCG. His fielding has improved too, as 
the run out of Phillip Hughes in the same Test proved
Kevin Pietersen 7.5
Flourished at Adelaide, bagging a double hundred in the Test and a yellow 
Lamborghini parked outside the team hotel. "Live a little," he advised his 
detractors, but he never lived quite as extravagantly in the rest of the 
series. His audacious suggestion that his rebellion against the former coach, 
Peter Moores, had paved the way for the Ashes win was the quote of the tour
Paul Collingwood 5
Collingwood has been a wonderfully serviceable Test cricketer, and a great 
team man, but he was right to announce his Test retirement after an 
unproductive series with the bat. Hail instead his stunning catch at the Waca 
to keep Ricky Ponting's spirits low and his last ball in Test cricket which 
bowled Mike Hussey. Wise counsel for Strauss allowed the vice-captain, Cook, to 
concentrate on his batting. A reluctant five
Ian Bell 8
Australia will claim until the end of time that Bell only made his first Ashes 
hundred in the final Test because of a lucky referral when Hotspot failed to 
show that he had edged the ball. But it was an appropriate finale because he 
was consistently the classiest batsman on show and would have made more runs if 
he had batted, as he should have, at No5
Matt Prior 8 
Finished the tour strongly. Six catches at the MCG and a hundred in the final 
Test in Sydney were his statistical highlights in a solid performance with both 
gloves and bat. Vulnerable on the hook shot, though one of the few Australian 
bowling plans that looked dangerous. The focus for a committed England fielding 
display, as any good wicketkeeper should be
Graeme Swann 7.5
This was a tough tour for Swann. England off-spinners rarely prosper in 
Australia and the pitches gave him little encouragement. But he bowled England 
to victory on the final day in Adelaide before a storm flooded the ground and 
elsewhere he gave England control against all but Mike Hussey. England's 
willingness to allow his outgoing personality to flourish is another management 
triumph
Jimmy Anderson 9
It has been a delight to witness Anderson's development from the tongue-tied, 
naive young quick of four years ago. He swung it both ways, reversed it, barely 
bowled a bad ball and fully deserved his title of leader of the attack. Left 
the tour after two Tests for the birth of his second child, returned to become 
the leading wicket-taker with 24 victims, and finished the tour exhausted. 
Tougher than he might appear
Stuart Broad 6
It looked ominous for England when injury curtailed Broad's Ashes tour, only 
for Tremlett and Bresnan to show their mettle. He took only took two wickets in 
the first two Tests but his economy helped to set the tone for the series. 
Would surely have enjoyed the more favourable bowling conditions later in the 
series.
Chris Tremlett 9
He was a revelation in the last three Tests of the series, taking eight 
wickets on his comeback in Perth and forever troubling Australia with steepling 
bounce
Steve Finn 6.5
England's leading wicket-taker, but also leaking runs when he was dropped 
after the Perth Test. His 14 wickets in three Tests was a decent return for a 
21-year-old with less than a year's international cricket behind him, but some 
were fortunate and he conceded more than four runs an over to put England's 
disciplined, four-bowler strategy under pressure. Vast potential and he will be 
all the stronger for the experience.
Tim Bresnan 8
owled a series-defining spell in Melbourne as England homed in on the Ashes. 
Conditions suited him, but he proved himself a craftier bowler than many 
imagined. A solid professional not remotely fazed by a first bowl of the series 
in front of 90,000-plus at the MCG 