
In the surge to declare England's Ashes win the greatest of all sporting 
triumphs conceived on these shores, one vital element was missing: the presence 
of a credible, functioning opposition against which to measure the achievement. 
To think or write that is to make blood boil but it happens to be true.

Most people engage with the biggest sporting events on an emotional level 
first and then, perhaps, intellectually. The first is necessary for enjoyment 
and the second opens up a whole alternative life of analysis and debate.

Both are means of fulfilment, but sometimes they need separating. In this week 
of exultation, the sheer bliss of escaping Aussie domination has inflated the 
scale of the accomplishment relative to, say, England's rugby World Cup win in 
2003, or even the great Ashes home win of 2005, which surpasses the wipeout 
achieved this winter by Andrew Strauss's men.

On the airwaves and in the blogosphere there have been some seriously touchy 
witnesses to the pageant of English strength. If one chap comes on to say 
Australia were awful, another shouts him down by insisting England were 
brilliant. Are both propositions not correct?

Australia's sneaky revenge was to be so abject that they devalued England's 
gain. Seriously, the mind labours to recall a comparable case of obliteration. 
Ricky Ponting fell apart as captain and batsman. Michael Clarke was a mere 
helpless celeb. Phillip Hughes caused us to wonder again how on earth an 
opening batsman with such basic technical flaws ever got near a Test team. 
Mitchell Johnson's bowling was a lucky dip, either lethal or laughable; and 
there is no spinner in Australia fit to polish Shane Warne's teeth.

While all the garlands were being tossed at Alastair Cook and Jimmy Anderson, 
it shocked to see a great sporting tradition disintegrate. The lone comparison 
in modern cricket is with West Indies in the past 20 years. Elsewhere there are 
few decent parallels. The All Blacks have choked in many a rugby World Cup, but 
have never been humiliated. Brazil have crashed out in knock-out games, but 
seldom have they needed a cave to hide in.

Distorting the picture as Anderson and Cook came of age was the long sorry 
history of English subservience in the big Australian cities. For 24 years, 
England's boisterous followers had craved a release. Following an Ashes tour 
was always the best and worst of holidays. Beach-time, wine trips, beautiful 
scenery, lots of time to read, then desolation after the coin toss. Warne, Adam 
Gilchrist and Glenn McGrath were a cosmic version of those dodgy people you met 
on the plane and were in every hotel and bar you walked into from Brisbane to 
Sydney.

As Joseph O'Neill, author of Netherland, that superb meditation on cricket, 
wrote in Friday'sGuardian: "For the fan of the English cricket team – who need 
not be English, I can attest – the bliss of these Ashes has been without 
precedent, even for those of us who remember Gatting's victorious tourists. For 
such a fan, traumatised by a quarter-century of drubbings and humiliations, the 
spectacle of national excellence by proxy has been nothing less than 
therapeutic."

Three victories by an innings in a five-Test series brought spectacular 
liberation from that 24-year sentence. Strauss and Andy Flower, the coach, are 
the quiet heroes of a transformation in discipline and temperament.

They are a return to cricket's pre-showbiz days: unifiers and facilitators for 
people with talent. The Freddie Flintoff-Kevin Pietersen captaincy experiments 
can now be seen for what they were: a needless bowing to fame.

Radio Five Live burned an hour or so replaying clips of Steve Redgrave winning 
his fifth Olympic rowing gold and Jonny Wilkinson firing the drop-goal that was 
heard around the world in Sydney eight years ago. Some even volunteered Daley 
Thompson and Liverpool's 2005 Champions League win in Istanbul as superior 
feats. This sifting and grading of recent memories annoyed the hell out of many 
cricket purists (clearly some were victims of prolonged sleep deprivation).

To really set them off a caller had only to say Australia were simply too bad 
for this to be English sport's nirvana. The problem is, that sounds about 
right, because England's 2003 rugby World Cup win was preceded by a Six Nations 
grand slam and invincibility against the three big southern hemisphere powers. 
In the tournament itself, a fading England seized victory against the hosts, in 
Sydney, in the final seconds, with a tricky act executed to perfection in 
filthy conditions. In this modern context let's leave 1966 in its museum.

Immortality is assured for this 2010-11 Ashes series, but when the euphoria 
wears off we may say it was only England's third best win of the past six 
years, even given the setting. In 2005, Michael Vaughan's team had to slay the 
Australia of Ponting, Gilchrist, Hayden, Warne and McGrath. The Oval Test in 
that series was a laboratory of human nature. Four years later, Strauss' team 
contrived an improbable recovery from collapse at Headingley to avenge a 5-0 
whitewash in Australia.

Who would have thought the authors of that havoc four years ago could slightly 
diminish this series by making it too one-sided, to England's infinite joy?
 