
 MEDICAL ADVICE 

The first six weeks of the tour were a complete shambles, reflected by the 
continued agonising about the state of Darren Gough's knee or Andrew Flintoff's 
groin rather than the form of the team. England were lamentably short-sighted. 
We can understand why. The hierarchy recognised the lack of depth in English 
cricket. The potential replacements did not inspire confidence so they tried to 
muddle through. This was a fiasco for the players concerned and made the team a 
laughing stock especially when replacements (like Chris Silverwood) could last 
just four overs. The ECB has to investigate how they oversee the upkeep of 
their increasingly expensive assets - their players. The medics were worse in 
their prognostications than weather forecasters and Hussain must have felt 
betrayed. The appointment of a medical officer midway through the tour only 
highlighted earlier cock-ups.

 PSYCHOLOGY 

Nasser Hussain kept protesting that Steve Waugh and his side did not have a 
psychological hold over England. I suppose he could hardly admit that, but it 
was soon painfully obvious that the Australians do have a mental domination 
over English cricketers that may take decades to exorcise. How else can we 
explain as seasoned professionals reacted like novices when the series was 
still alive. It all began before a ball was bowled at Brisbane when Hussain 
defied cricketing logic by opting to field, a crass error that set the tone for 
the series. Confirmation of England's mental frailty came when we watched 
Vaughan and Mark Butcher trying to run between the wickets together in Perth. 
To the credit of all three of the above they soldiered on making gutsy 
contributions once the destiny of the Ashes had been decided - but in a sense 
the pressure was off then.

 SOMERSET 

It has not been a great tour for the Somerset contingent. For England to 
threaten they had to lead the way. For Trescothick the tour should be a 
temporary setback. He has flickered and his place in the side remains assured. 
Indeed it's rare for an Englishman to play so many consecutive Tests without 
being dropped. But now Vaughan is undoubtedly the most coveted English wicket. 
Andy Caddick had to dominate early in the series and early in each match to 
have an influence. He could not manage that. Now England will only keep him 
going at their convenience. Jimmy Anderson is earmarked for his place. The 
transition of the English Test team (farewells are imminent for Stewart, 
Caddick and even Hussain) will be a tricky balancing act for the selectors. If 
past form is any guide those at the sharp end (Hussain and Duncan Fletcher) 
will be more conservative in outlook than chairman David Graveney, but they 
will prevail.

 THEY ARE THAT GOOD 

We will keep having to applaud the Aussies through gritted teeth. There is no 
escape. In terms of fitness, organisation and motivation let alone ability they 
remain streets ahead. But for how much longer? Singing their praises is hard 
work for English players and press alike even if the supporters remain 
remarkably cheerful. The young members of this England squad must remember the 
pain and humiliation of defeat just in case there comes a day when they have 
the Australians on the rack. Remember the pain and be merciless when that time 
comes. The ECB say it will all come together in 2007. I'm not so sure.
 