
There is only one fitting way to begin this column, and that is by 
congratulating England. Other teams have won in Australia, but I have never 
seen anyone annihilate them quite like that. Every single player who was picked 
to play has contributed. England have a squad of individuals who all have the 
strength of character you need to perform at the top level. Andy Flower and 
Andy Strauss have judged and selected players on their dispositions and 
personalities rather than their talent alone. Pick 11 cricketers with flair and 
you will not necessarily win a thing. But pick 11 with strength of character 
and you will always have a chance.

On that note I have to pay tribute here to the one guy who really epitomises 
that approach, Paul Collingwood. Few things have given me as much pleasure in 
my coaching career than watching Collingwood repay the faith we showed in him 
as a Test player by producing the goods over the years. He finishes with a 
batting average of 40.74, and there are a lot of players who are held in high 
regard in England who have worse figures than that. Not that his own record 
will matter much to the man himself. He always put the team first and that is 
why he was such a good person to work with.

As for the England side he is leaving behind, they are pressing on towards 
becoming the world's No1 Test team. At the moment there is very little between 
them and the two sides ranked above them, South Africa and India. It is going 
to be fascinating to watch these three teams battle each other over the next 
few years. We need to see them play each other home and away, and soon. This 
summer's series between England and India is going to be one hell of a contest.

India have the best batting line-up in Test cricket but they are ageing. 
England's top six is solid but still the weakest of those three. They remain 
curiously prone to batting collapses. And they do not have anyone who is as 
consistently dominant as Jacques Kallis or Sachin Tendulkar. At the same time 
both of those players are nearing the ends of their careers. Their teams will 
need to prove that they can be just as effective without them.

Losing even a single great player makes more of a difference to a team than 
the public often appreciate. Especially when they are someone that other 
players tend to bat around. England are a reasonably young squad, so this is 
not a problem they will have to deal with any time soon. And I also know from 
the time I have spent with Hampshire in recent seasons that there are a lot of 
very capable young batsmen in county cricket at the moment. There are certainly 
more of them than there seem to be in Australian State cricket, judging by what 
we saw in this series.

The flip side of the equation is that England's bowling attack must now be 
considered the strongest in Test cricket. South Africa have a group of 
outstanding fast bowlers, but they do not have a spinner who can match Graeme 
Swann. He gives England the edge. South Africa have just called up the 
Pakistani-born leg spinner Imran Tahir, who has qualified through residency. It 
will be interesting to see if he can balance their attack, but at the age of 31 
he is only a short-term solution. And they cannot match the squad depth that 
England have. If South Africa lost Dale Steyn to injury, they would struggle to 
find a bowler of similar calibre to step in and take his place. England have 
been able to replace Stuart Broad and Steven Finn, (not to mention Graham 
Onions, in the longer-term) with players who have done just as well if not even 
better. India have the spinners, notably Harbhajan Singh, but have always 
struggled to settle on their best fast bowling attack. If you could merge their 
batsmen with England's bowlers then you really would have a great side.

England have got their balance right. Jimmy Anderson has that skiddy swing, 
rushing the ball on to the batsman. Crucially Anderson, like Swann, has been 
able to adapt to do different jobs within matches, to switch between defence 
and attack according to the demands of the situation. Chris Tremlett has that 
awkward hostile bounce that means nobody will enjoy facing him. He is similar 
to Steve Harmison in that respect, only he has much more control of his line 
and length.

Tremlett deserves enormous credit for playing so well when so many people 
doubted him. It is just a pity it took so long for him to emerge as an 
international cricketer. Just like Swann, it took a switch of counties to force 
him out of his comfort zone and make him wake up. And in both cases you have to 
feel a little sorry for the teams they left behind, who invested so much time 
and money in their development.

Then you have Tim Bresnan, who makes the ball bounce and uses reverse swing 
very well, and Steve Finn, who showed such promise in the first three Tests. 
And you cannot forget Broad, who bowled with such economy and aggression at the 
start of the series. If England can keep this group fit and focused, nobody 
will look forward to playing them, at home or away.
 