
Well, no one likes to see that. And certainly not the Aussie media where the 
post-Ashes bloodletting, which began on Friday, has continued apace all weekend 
but is now coming to embrace a healthy dose of good old finger-pointing too.

English expat Peter Roebuck had the ball rolling in short order at the Sydney 
Morning Herald where, under the header "Time for the axe, and chop from top 
down", his cull started with the board and went on to include: the 
administration, public relations and communications departments; the selectors, 
coachingand medical staff; and, finally, the Australian states themselves. A 
list so comprehensive that anyone who has so much as smelled linseed oil in the 
past 12 months should be nervous about receiving a knock on the door in the 
middle of the night.

Another ex-Brit, Tim Lane, in the same paper, saw a need to address the 
domestic game by ensuring players regularly participated in the Sheffield 
Shield. It was, he said, time for them to be "asking less as to what Australian 
cricket can do for them, and more about what they can do for Australian 
cricket". It was hard not to imagine his more conciliatory motorcade, observed 
by a beady-eyed Roebuck, stroking his rifle on a grassy knoll.

Rivals over at the Herald Sun had opened their offensive with the martial 
"Remember This Aussies" headline, in an attempt to plant the awful event 
white-whale‑like in the collective consciousness. A cultural metaphor for this 
now nation of Ahabs added to by some fine photoshopping for a gallery of the 
series mimicking the poster for theThe Good (Cook) The Bad (Ponting) and The 
Ugly (Hilfenhaus).

Such lightheartedness could not last. Andrew Webster soon also went after the 
men at the top, describing them as "squeamish deflectors of blame", while the 
chairman of selectors, Andrew Hilditch, he said, was merely repeating the 
comment "England outplayed us" like a skipping record.'

His colleague Robert Craddock, however, was concerned with the twin evils of 
cash and chicken on the Aussie game. No doubt to the consternation of the 
Colonel he noted: "You can't be a KFC outlet and fine dining experience at the 
same time. But Australia knows which way it is going," in reference to the 
finger lickin' sponsorship of their newly revamped annual Twenty20 competition 
and the money and emphasis placed upon it. KFC, he points out disdainfully, has 
been "given the title of 'the official restaurant ofCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Australia'". It was, for Craddock, 
all too late, Australia were paying the price for munching from a bucket: "You 
can have all the Ashes reviews you want but the future is planned along 
economic lines – and you can't have two futures ... Like it or not, cash is 
king in cricket. This is the way the game is going. The era of the headless 
chicken is upon us."

The Australian, however was perturbed on levels away from mere Australian 
culpability. Under the header "England sympathy cuts the deepest", they 
acknowledged the "good manners" and how "gracious and understanding" Andrew 
Strauss had been in victory. Before throwing hair shirt aside to reveal the 
massive Aussie chip perennially lurking beneath: "The scorn of your opponents 
is hard to deal with, but their sympathy is the biggest insult of all."

Or is it? Apparently our press were keen to have a pop too (look, we're even 
doing itright now). The Australian suggesting, with the same breathtaking lack 
of self-awareness shown when fans booed Ian Bell, that there was something 
faintly distasteful about our celebratory reporting. British newspapers 
apparently "revelled" and "let rip" while "lording it up" and "basking in the 
chance to gloat" before the paper added the inevitable, sideswiping caveat, 
that our media's exultation was, of course, only occurring "at long last ..."

Over at Sydney's Daily Telegraph all semblance of normality had long since 
departed. Since frothing at the mouth, wringing of hands and gallows-building 
were held in monopoly by no one, absolutelyeveryone was at it. So the Tel was 
looking for a new take. Enter the gorgeous, pouting Holly Byrnes. "We were 
beaten like common pygmies by a team of mere Englishmen and some people who 
live in England," she opined with a spot of tongue-in-cheek fun that anyone 
bored of gruff, serious men and huffing and puffing would have found quite 
refreshing.

Sadly it didn't last: "It's time to try a bold new approach. To think outside 
of the protective box, as it were. Or maybe ... inside of it!" The exclamation 
point representing the universal signifier for "this was meant to be a bit of 
fun but now it's going to turn into a torturous half-gag stretched out over far 
too many words". And lo: "Can we propose a team based on objectification? 
Instead of selecting players who've stood out in Shield cricket by scoring lots 
of runs, let's just pick the pretty ones."

Probably fully aware by this point that everyone in Australia had long-ceased 
reading (in case you hadn't noticed Holly, it'snot a laughing matter) and that 
it was only Brits eager to mock still there, she batted her eyelids and 
finished the job with the conclusion that the exclamation point had so 
obviously signalled: "Chairman of selectors Andrew Hilditch and his merry 
masochists can retire to the bar and leave naming of the Eye Candy XI to the 
gentler, smarter sex." Roebuck, meanwhile, was adding an extra bullet to his 
clip.

In the same paper and under a banner proclaiming "Finally, The Agony Ends" was 
another woman, this time a femme fatale, as former Aussie swimming champion 
Dawn Fraser decided that: "we've hit rock bottom. It is a terrible, terrible 
lull ... And it's not just Olympic sports. We've lost the Ashes, league, union, 
netball ..." while grown men whimpered and begged for her to stop. "We don't 
have a No1 in swimming. And we've got no one in the athletic field," the 
silver-haired terminator continued, as a nation of burly blokes came to terms 
with the psychological damage of being told they were rubbish at everything. By 
their grandma.

Which begged the question, where do you go from there? Well, how about back to 
theSydney Morning Herald where, with real determination, they'd managed to 
squeeze in a preview of the final women's ODI between our girls and the Aussies 
under the headline: "Stars aim to crush England again." Fair dinkum to you 
chaps, it's the only chance you've had to use that combination of words all 
winter. 
 