
It may be an increasingly well-thumbed Ashes truism, but like all the best 
cliches it is also based in hard fact. The trajectory-setting significance of 
the first day – and even the first ball – of any Ashes series remains undimmed, 
with recent history suggesting overwhelmingly that a good start in Brisbane on 
Thursday is likely to lead to a good middle and a good end for whichever side 
takes the lead.

These occasions have a tendency to scratch away any lingering pretensions. 
Much will continue to be made of Steve Harmison's catastrophic opening delivery 
at The Gabba four years ago, a wide so wide that at least one of Harmison's 
team-mates refused to believe the evidence of his own eyes and assumed the ball 
had arrived at second slip via a pass from the wicketkeeper, Geraint Jones. But 
Harmison's implosion simply proved the rule once again, pointing to an 
unbalanced England party destined for a generational dismantling by one of the 
great Ashes teams.


• Interactive guide to all the Ashes venues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/interactive/2010/sep/22/the-ashes-2010-venues-australia-england>
• Sign up now for our weekly email The Spin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/signup/2010/mar/30/1>
• How to stay awake during the Tests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/nov/22/the-ashes-2010-staying-awake?intcmp=239>
• Follow our daily blog throughout the Ashes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/series/the-ashes-2010-11-daily-live-blog>


Justin Langer is well-placed to appreciate the importance of seizing the 
initiative on these occasions, having faced the two most significant opening 
overs in recent Ashes series history. Not only was Langer on strike for 
Harmison's enduringly surreal off-side wide in 2006, he was also on the end of 
a brutal introduction to the 2005 series at Lord's from the same bowler.

"To be perfectly truthful, I felt let down after that first ball in 2006," he 
says now. "It was such a comedown after Lord's in 2005, where I remember the 
ball flying past my nose to Geraint Jones. I looked around and England were 
coming at me like I was a magnet, even the bat-pad was walking in. After that 
we prepared really well for 2006. We were so pumped up we were like 
street-fighters. As Harmison was running in for that first ball in Brisbane 
there was this wall of noise, all this expectation, I could feel it in my whole 
body.

"And then the ball went to second slip. I looked around and England were 
looking at their toes. Harmison was giggling like a schoolboy. Andrew Flintoff 
didn't know how to react. It was just a huge letdown and that first ball was 
really key. England were on their heels and we ended up having a dream start."

It has not always been a case of opening-night horrors for England. The last 
touring party to win in Australia, Mike Gatting's 1986-87 team, used the first 
day at Brisbane as a springboard to relaunch what had until then been a 
stuttering tour. Gatting set the tone, coming in at No3 and bristling his way 
to a half-century full of counterattacking punch 

"It's fairly indelibly imprinted on the mind," he says. "You have to be 
positive on that first morning. It wasn't a conscious decision to play an 
attacking innings, but you play your shots as they come and it was the best way 
to play for me, being slightly more aggressive and going for my shots, and 
luckily it came off."

Eight years later a similar approach by Michael Slater on the first day of the 
1994 Ashes would provide an emblem, not just for the series, but for the way 
Australia would aim to play as Mark Taylor's team entered the first flush of a 
decade of era-defining dominance. Slater famously smashed Phil DeFreitas's 
opening half-tracker through point for four, and England never really seemed 
to recover.

Phil Tufnell was one of the other England bowlers. "I suppose DeFreitas being 
cut for four first ball did set the tone," he says. "At the time it really 
didn't feel like the end of the world. We just thought: 'Oh right, that's gone 
for four, next ball.' There wasn't a groan around the fielders or anything. 
It's only looking back you can see that it was one of those moments."

For England this has been pretty much the theme of Brisbane in recent times, a 
history of chances missed and opportunities bungled. In 2002 Nasser Hussain 
famously put Australia in to bat on a flat Gabba pitch after winning the toss, 
a decision he came to regret instantly.

"I was pretty surprised when I heard Nasser had won the toss and we were going 
to bowl," says Andy Caddick, who took the new ball that day. "I think at that 
point there was a lot going on and Nass just wanted to get on with things, 
probably to his detriment.

"Nothing was said in the dressing room. We'd take the piss out of Nass a bit, 
because that was the way we did it, but you just get on with things. The first 
sense I got that it was a pretty flat pitch was when Matthew Hayden kept 
tonking it back over my head for four. Hayden set the series up on that first 
day and took it by the scruff of the neck."

Four years earlier Alec Stewart lost the toss and suffered a more protracted 
form of first-day torture watching his experienced seam attack of Darren Gough, 
Angus Fraser and Dominic Cork let slip a position of some promise. "We were 
underdogs in 1998 and that made it all the more important to start well," he 
says. "We were well-placed after lunch but we had a run-out that Alan Mullally 
messed up and then Angus Fraser dropped Ian Healy near the close of play, and 
Healy went on to get 138 and turned the game around. Moments like that, if they 
don't go your way, the opposition can walk all over you."

Such has been the experience of successive touring parties, and so pronounced 
are the scars of Brisbane, that it feels like tempting fate a little to suggest 
that this time around perhaps a bright start might be a little less 
non-negotiable than it once was. Tufnell, at least, believes England might be 
strong enough now not to rise or fall by the opening jousts.

"I don't think England need to put themselves under too much pressure," he 
said. "This England side aren't going to be bullied like we were if things 
don't go to plan in the opening session. It was always crucial we started well 
because we knew we were up against it but Australia have come down a couple of 
rungs, England have gone up a couple, and there's massive pressure on Ricky 
Ponting. England can come away with a draw. If they do the Aussies will start 
to feel the pressure." 
 