
High inflation, cuts and the longest period of wage stagnation on record will 
see the spending power of the average British family plummet over the next five 
years, a leading thinktank warned on Wednesday.

An Institute for Fiscal Studies analysis predicted that average incomes, 
adjusted for inflation, will fall by 3% this year and further in 2012. The 
director of the IFS, Paul Johnson, said: "In the period 2009-10 to 2012-13, 
real median household incomes will drop by a whopping 7.4% – a record matched 
only by the falls seen between 1974 and 1977."

As up to 2 million public sector workers walked out in protest against changes 
to their pensions, and signs emerged of a potentially damaging rift within the 
Liberal Democrats in the wake of George Osborne's autumn statement, the 
thinktank warned that families with children will be worse off in 2016 than 
they were 14 years earlier as they cope with more than a decade of austerity.

The IFS's warning and the strikes came as the world's major central banks 
announced joint emergency measures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/nov/30/central-banks-action-new-credit-crunch>
 to stop the international financial system from freezing up, and pushing the 
global economy into another recession. The measures included cutting emergency 
interest rates on dollar loans to cash-strapped European banks.

A Downing Street spokesman said the emergency measures were necessary because 
the markets were under extreme strain. "We are experiencing a credit crunch and 
that central bank action is about trying to mitigate the effects of that credit 
crunch," the spokesman said.

Not since the Callaghan government of the mid-70s have families come near to 
suffering a similar loss of income as the one now predicted to hit Britain over 
the next five years, the IFS said.

Lower income groups, it confirmed, will bear the brunt of the government's 
latest cuts, outlined byGeorge Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> on Tuesday. The 
chancellor's autumn statement signalled that the deteriorating economic outlook 
meant that there would be two more years of austerity than originally planned 
in his March budget.

Anti-poverty campaigners said the IFS figures showed that the coalition had 
shifted the burden of paying for the deficit on to the most vulnerable.

Alison Garnham, chief executive of the charity Child Poverty Action Group, 
said: "The IFS analysis confirms that the chancellor's new tax and benefit 
measures are a takeaway from low-income families with children to those at the 
middle and top. It is particularly perverse to reduce incomes of the 
lowest-paid working families by reducing tax credits when this is the group the 
government claims it wants to help through improved work incentives."

The oil price shocks of the 1970s forced the then Labour government to survive 
on IMF handouts and push through steep spending cuts and public-sector wage 
freezes. But wages recovered their previous spending power within four years.

The IFS analysis of the UK's current economic woes, and the coalition's 
reaction to them, both suggest that real median household incomes – where 
higher wages and salaries are adjusted to account for higher prices – will be 
no higher in 2015 than they were in 2002. A couple with no children typically 
enjoyed a weekly income of £437 in 2002 but by 2015 that will have dropped in 
real terms to £433. For a couple with two children the weekly income falls from 
£612 in 2002 to £606 in 2015. In the nine years since 2002 the cost of living 
has increased 30%.

The IFS analysis showed the unemployed and pensioners living on state benefits 
would do better than working families after benefits were linked to the 5.2% 
rise in inflation. Johnson said: "Failure to index some elements of tax 
credits, and the reversal of decisions to increase child tax credits in real 
terms, will leave some poorer families worse off and will lead to an increase 
in measured child poverty."

The IFS based its estimates for the squeeze on incomes on forecasts from the 
Office forBudget <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/budget> Responsibility, the 
independent watchdog that oversees Treasury spending plans and which published 
its own outlook for the economy alongside Osborne's statement.

It blamed a repeat oil price shock for most of the cuts in real incomes 
suffered by UK households. High energy prices were the largest single element 
fuelling an inflationary spiral that left many families worse off.

TUC general secretary Brendan Barber said there was an "unprecedented crisis" 
in living standards. "You can't build a sustainable economic recovery on the 
back of people getting poorer," he said.

"Rather than further hammering consumer confidence with public sector pay caps 
and cuts in working tax credits, the government needs to put greater emphasis 
on wage-led growth, starting with a fairer tax system where everyone – 
including the super-rich – pays their share."

Shadow home secretary Yvette Cooper said the IFS report revealed the poorest 
30% of households would lose more than three times as much as the richest 30%.

Official data this week showed UK families' weekly spending fell last year to 
the lowest in real terms for at least seven years. They cut back on spending on 
leisure to try to pay for housing, energy and transport costs. One of the big 
pressures facing households is high inflation, which has left most people worse 
off in real terms.

Pay growth for workers in Britain hit a record low between 2010 and 2011, 
according to official data last week. Pay was up just 0.4% on a year ago in 
terms of gross weekly earnings, meaning that incomes are tumbling in real 
terms, given that inflation stands at 5%. The Office for National Statistics 
also said the gap between Britain's highest and lowest paid workers had widened 
dramatically over the past year.

The IFS said one group whose incomes "are certainly being squeezed" is public 
sector workers. Its analysis suggests that the two years of on average 
1%-a-year pay rises in the public sector to follow the current two-year pay 
freeze would be enough to wipe out the estimated pay gap between men in the 
public sector and private sector.

The thinktank puts the gap between public and private earners at 4.3% for men, 
taking into account education, age and qualification levels. For women the 
public sector premium is 10.5% and for both men and women it stands at 7.5%.

The IFS also looked into differences in public sector benefits across the UK. 
"Looking at pay alone, public sector workers appear, on average, to do 
relatively badly in London and the south-east and really rather well in some 
other areas including Wales and the north of England," Johnson said. The 
findings echo Osborne's move on Tuesday to ask public sector pay review bodies 
to look into how pay can be made more responsive to local labour markets.

Following forecasts for contraction at the end of this year and barely any 
growth next year, Osborne was forced to concede on Tuesday that the UK risked 
falling into recession. The resulting strain on the public finances led the 
chancellor to pencil in two more years of substantial cuts.

"That will extend to six years the period for which total spending will have 
been cut year-on-year," said Johnson. "One begins to run out of superlatives 
for describing quite how unprecedented that is.

"Certainly there has been no period like it in the UK in the last 60 years."
 