
Please note that we will continue to update this programme. Please check for 
new speakers/sessions.

08.30 - 09.30: Registration

Welcome from the chair

Tim Weber, business and technology editor, BBC News Interactive

THE CHALLENGE OF AGILITY IN BUSINESS

Fortune 500 companies rise and fall, business models now last months and not 
years, product cycles and management lessons are being rewritten everyday as 
the influence of technology permeates organisations and the communities we 
serve.

The challenges of agility and constant reinvention will be the focus of this 
morning session.

09.30 - 09.50: Agile government

What lessons can we learn from getting Whitehall to think like a startup and 
embrace digital?

Mike Bracken, executive director of digital, Government Digital Service

09.50 - 10.10: Agile problem solving

Networked approaches to the next great global challenges

Matt Webb, CEO and Principle, BERG

10.10 - 10.30: Agile product design

Jonathon Moore, senior product manager, iOS, Skype

10.30 - 11.00: Activate lightning presentations
 In association with Omidyar Network. 
4 x 5 minute inspirational case studies from organisations that are changing 
the world through technology

Stephen King, partner, Omidyar Network (chair)
Jakub Górnicki, international ambassador, EP Foundation
Rufus Pollock, co-founder, Open Knowledge Foundation
Ariel Peled, founder and CEO, PUBLICi
Sam Gregory, programme director, Witness

11.00 - 11.30: Networking break

11.30 - 11.45: Building communities to inspire global change

John F Moore, founder and CEO, Government in The Lab

11.45 - 12.00: Case study: media in exile

Gerry Jackson, station manager, SW Radio Africa

OPEN VS CLOSED: MODELLING THE FUTURE OF THE WEB

How is the internet being used as a driver of global change?

12.00 - 13.00: Panel discussion and Q&A

How is the internet developing? How has the world changed through events like 
WikiLeaks, Occupy, the Arab Spring, SOPA/PIPA, and what are the driving forces 
behind these? How do we protect the open web where citizens can share content 
and express themselves freely?

Kevin Anderson, editor and manager, Knowledge Bridge, the Media Development 
Loan Fund (moderator)

Rick Falkvinge, founder and first party leader of the Swedish Pirate Party

Birgitta Jónsdóttir, Member of the Icelandic Parliament for the Movement

Ahmed Maher, Nobel Peace Prize nominee and co-founder, April 6 Youth Movement

Ivan Sigal, executive director, Global Voices

13.00 - 14.00: Lunch

14.00 - 14.05: Activate India update

Parminder Vir OBE, co-producer, the Guardian Activate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/activate> Summit India

14.05 - 14.30: Activate lightning presentations
 In association with Omidyar Network. 
4 x 5 minute inspirational case studies from organisations that are changing 
the world through technology.

Tim Weber, business and technology editor, BBC News Interactive (chair)
William Hoyle, founder, Tech for Trade
Mariéme Jamme, CEO, SpotOne Global Solutions
Gavin Starks, founder and chairman, AMEE
Daniel Hirschmann & Bethany Koby, co-founders, Technology Will Save Us

14.30 - 14.35: Omidyar Network announcement

Stephen King, partner, Omidyar Network

RETHINKING MEDIA AND STORYTELLING

14.35 - 14.50: Interview: democratising publishing

Matt Mullenweg, founding developer, Wordpress.com in conversation with Matt 
McAlister, director of digital strategy,Guardian Media Group

14.50 - 15.50: Panel discussion: how are data and social media influencing 
digital storytelling?

What are the smartest ways to utilise the web to create compelling and 
innovative stories online? What's the key to engaging web users in an age of 
shorterning attention spans and a boom in digital content across multiple 
platforms? How are social networks and large data sets revolutionising the 
newsroom?

Katharine Viner, deputy editor, the Guardian (moderator)

Phil Fearnley, general manager, Future Media News & Knowledge, BBC

Stew Langille, founder and CEO, Visual.ly

Neal Mann, social media editor, The Wall Street Journal

Simon Rogers, editor, Datablog and Data Store, the Guardian

15.50 - 16.20: Networking break

INVESTMENT, WEB ENTREPRENEURSHIP, BIG DATA

16.20 - 16.40: Interview: entrepreneurship and growth in the networked age

Serial investor and entrepreneur Kevin Hartz gives his view on trends we see 
now in tech, and how they relate to the past and shape decision-making. Kevin 
will also discuss investment, culture, founding teams, the current state of 
tech investments and the difficulty of execution - starting a business is not 
difficult in this climate, but sustaining one is another story.

Kevin Hartz, co-founder and CEO, Eventbrite in conversation with Tim Weber, 
business and technology editor,BBC News Interactive

16.40 - 17.00: Computation meets knowledge

Conrad Wolfram, strategic director and European co-founder/CEO, the Wolfram 
group of companies

17.00 - 18.30: Drinks and networking reception

The Guardian Activate Summit: London <http://guardian.co.uk/activate/london> 
takes place 27 June 2012 at Kings Place in London.Register your place now 
<https://www.medivents.co.uk/webivents/portal/guardian/activate.asp> to take 
advantage of our special early bird delegate rates.

Guardian Media Network

Join the Guardian Media Network <http://www.guardian.co.uk/media-network> - a 
community of globally-minded media and technology professionals looking for 
content, contacts and connections that will give them the edge.Membership is 
free 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media-network/media-network-blog/2012/feb/15/join-the-media-network>
 and will give you exclusive discounts on network events, breaking industry 
news and the first look at job opportunities tailored to you. Become part of it 
here:guardian.co.uk/media-network <http://www.guardian.co.uk/media-network>
 