
One aspect of "American exceptionalism" was always economic. US workers, so 
the story went, enjoyed a rising level of real wages that afforded their 
families a rising standard of living. Ever harder work paid off in rising 
consumption. The rich got richer faster than the middle and poor, but almost no 
one got poorer. Nearly all citizens felt "middle class". A profitable US 
capitalism kept running ahead of labour supply. So, it kept raising wages to 
attract waves of immigration and to retain employees, across the 19th century 
until the 1970s.

Then everything changed. Real wages stopped rising, as US capitalists 
redirected their investments to produce and employ abroad, while replacing 
millions of workers in the US with computers. The US women's liberation moved 
millions of US adult women to seek paid employment. US capitalism no longer 
faced a shortage of labour.

US employers took advantage of the changed situation: they stopped raising 
wages. When basic labour scarcity became labour excess, not only real wages, 
but eventually benefits, too, would stop rising. Over the last 30 years, the 
vast majority of US workers have, in fact, gotten poorer, when you sum up flat 
real wages, reduced benefits (pensions, medical insurance, etc), reduced public 
services and raised tax burdens. In economic terms, American "exceptionalism" 
began to die in the 1970s.

The rich, however, have got much richer since the 1970s, as every measure of 
US income and wealth inequality attests. The explanation is simple: while 
workers' average real wages stayed flat, their productivity rose (the goods and 
services that an average hour's labour provided to employers). More and better 
machines (including computers), better education, and harder and faster labour 
effort raised productivity since the 1970s. While workers delivered more and 
more value to employers, those employers paid workers no more. The employers 
reaped all the benefits of rising productivity: rising profits, rising salaries 
and bonuses to managers, rising dividends to shareholders, and rising payments 
to the professionals who serve employers (lawyers, architects, consultants, 
etc).

Since the 1970s, most US workers postponed facing up to what capitalism had 
come to mean for them. They sent more family members to do more hours of paid 
labour, and they borrowed huge amounts. By exhausting themselves, stressing 
family life to the breaking point in many households, and by taking on 
unsustainable levels of debt, the US working class delayed the end of American 
exceptionalism – until the global crisis hit in 2007. By then, their buying 
power could no longer grow: rising unemployment kept wages flat, no more hours 
of work, nor more borrowing, were possible. Reckoning time had arrived. A US 
capitalism built on expanding mass consumption lost its foundation.

The richest 10-15% – those cashing in on employers' good fortune from no 
longer-rising wages – helped bring on the crisis by speculating wildly and 
unsuccessfully in all sorts of new financial instruments (asset-backed 
securities, credit default swaps, etc). The richest also contributed to the 
crisis by using their money to shift US politics to the right, rendering 
government regulation and oversight inadequate to anticipate or moderate the 
crisis or even to react properly once it hit.

Indeed, the rich have so far been able to use the crisis to widen still 
further the gulf separating themselves from the rest, to finally bury American 
exceptionalism. First, they utilised both parties' dependence on their 
financial support to make sure there would be no mass federal hiring programme 
for the unemployed (as FDR used between 1934 and 1940). The absence of such a 
programme guaranteed that real wages would not rise and, with job benefits, 
would likely fall – as they indeed have done. Second, the rich made sure that 
the prime focus of government response to the crisis would benefit banks, large 
corporations and the stock markets. These have more or less "recovered".

Third, the current drive for government budget austerity – especially focused 
on the 50 states and the thousands of municipalities – forces the mass of 
people to pick up the costs for the government's unjustly imbalanced response 
to the crisis. The trillions spent to save the banks and selected other 
corporations (AIG, GM, Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, etc) were mostly borrowed 
because the government dared not tax the corporations and the richest citizens 
to raise the needed rescue funds. Indeed, a good part of what the government 
borrowed came precisely from those funds left in the hands of corporations and 
the rich, because they had not been taxed to overcome the crisis. With sharply 
enlarged debts, all levels of government face the pressure of needing to take 
too much from current tax revenues to pay interest on debts, leaving too little 
to sustain public services. So, they demand the people pay more taxes and 
suffer reduced public services, so that government can reduce its debt burden.

For example, California's new governor proposes to continue for five more 
years the massive, broad-based tax increases 
<http://www.csmonitor.com/USA/Politics/2011/0114/Will-Gov.-Jerry-Brown-s-California-budget-run-into-legal-roadblock>
 begun during the crisis and also to cut state services for the poor (reduced 
Medicaid funding) and the middle class(reduced budgets for community colleges, 
state colleges, and the university system). The governor admits that 
California's budget faces sky-high interest costs and reduced federal 
government assistance just when the crisis increases demands for public 
services. The governor does not admit his fear to tax the state's huge 
corporate and private individual wealth. So, he announces an "austerity 
programme", as if no alternative existed. Indeed, a major support for austerity 
comes from the large corporations and wealthiest Californians, who hold the 
state's bonds and want reassurances that the interest on those bonds will be 
paid.

California's austerity programme parallels similar programmes in many other 
states, in thousands of municipalities, and at the federal level (for example, 
social security). Together, they reinforce falling real wages, falling 
benefits, falling government services and rising taxes. In the US, capitalism 
has stopped "delivering the goods", as it so long boasted. The reality of 
ever-deeper economic division clashes with expectations built up when wages 
rose over the century before the 1970s. US capitalism now brings long-term 
painful decline for its working class, the end of "American exceptionalism" and 
rising social, cultural and political tensions.

• Richard Wolff gives his monthly talk on global capitalism at the Brecht Forum
 <http://brechtforum.org/civicrm/event/info?id=11822&reset=1> in New York on 18 
January; for more information about Professor Wolff's lectures, podcasts and 
media appearance,visit his website <http://www.rdwolff.com/>
 