
And as the summer asserts itself, albeit damply, I am reminded yet again that 
there is an optimum temperature range for typing. If – as I have been lately – 
I am trapped in bad-tempered, green-aired and broiling old London the chances 
of my being able to batter out more than a paragraph without lapsing into a 
shallow coma are almost nil. Suddenly, the ghastly similarities between typing 
and what I imagine to be the irritatingly intermittent joys of auto-erotic 
asphyxiation come galloping to the fore. Oh, this is all right. Think I'm 
getting somewhere. Yes, quite nice, probably – especially if we fiddle about 
round that corner bit for a while and then ... Hello, now why am I on the 
carpet? Even when I'm conscious, I spend an unhealthy amount of time battling 
urges towards languid strolling and trying to find a snake I can look at while 
I'm in pyjamas.

(That was a literary reference, Best Beloveds, not a euphemism.)

This means that I am working mostly at night – which does not sit well with 
the numberless work-related things I am supposed to do among people who operate 
– perversely, in my opinion – during the hours of daylight.

Naturally, my earliest years as a typist – in Dundee – were characterised by 
the opposite problem – an inability to keep even slightly warm. As Dundee is 
cold, basic rented accommodation is colder, sitting/crouching/lying still and 
thinking and occasionally writing illegibly (because you are embarrassed to 
even look at what you're producing) is particularly cold, and all forms of 
heating beyond huddling under blankets were unaffordable, I spent a great deal 
of time looking as if I had been prised loose from an outside toilet on the 
Trans-Siberian Express. I write lying down partly because my spinal column was 
designed by a drunken monkey, but mostly because I have spent so many long, 
sniffling, miserable hours lurking in my own bed or those of cheap B&B's, or 
bleak borrowed houses, trying to stay alive long enough to reach the end of the 
next paragraph. Not that there is any shame in wearing hats, coats and/or 
scarves indoors – this can be bracing and dapper. During the winter months I 
may even leave my living room briskly, putting on my jacket and chapka as I go, 
whistling merrily and feeling that the journey along the corridor to my study 
is all I ever really want to know about walking to work.

I only mention this in case any of you have been experiencing unusual 
difficulties in putting one word after another and have, perhaps, not 
considered that you may simply be paying inadequate attention to your 
operational parameters. Perhaps a cold shower would be advisable. Or else a hot 
one. You decide.

Meanwhile, some of you may have noticed that I have been spending rather more 
time than usual on – as it were – the radio. This is always a pleasure – radio 
people take care of words, are generally very courteous and they offer room for 
more reflection and flexibility than you might find in other media. In fact, 
the only drawback is one I bring with me: the immense need to swear.

I do not swear much – unless provoked – and wouldn't normally swear at an 
audience at all, unless I was giving a reading and there were Bad Words on the 
page in front of me. (And goodness knows why it's less offensive to have 
someone say fuck at you when they've carefully written it down first, pondered 
it lovingly, considered other alternatives and then settled on fuck very firmly 
all over again. Surely that should actually be more disturbing that just 
hearing them exclaim fuck spontaneously when they – for example – stub their 
toe on the lectern? But I digress …) Should I, however, be doing something live 
for a radio programme – or, as also occasionally happens, for the telly – there 
will always be the moment when someone charming with a clipboard appears to 
gently murmur, "Of course … not that we think you would, but … you would want 
to avoid swearing …" Which naturally fills me with an unbearable desire to do 
nothing but yell obscenities and blasphemies for the duration. This would be 
why – for example – I spent a portion of one evening last week hopping up and 
down a corridor in Broadcasting House, quietly reciting every allegedly 
appalling word I could think of – just to get them out of my system. It's the 
only way.

Apart from anything else, the murmured requests for verbal restraint are more 
than averagely heartfelt at the moment if you're involved with a BBC broadcast. 
Even the slightest additional misstep from the corporation – perhaps caused by 
an obscure Scottish novelist getting all Anglo Saxon and causing a retired and 
much-loved ophthalmologist in East Cheam to choke on his suppertime rarebit in 
the absence of anyone qualified in the Heimlich manoeuvre and provoking 
"Overpaid, elitist BBC bastards kill popular friend and uncle" headlines – 
could mean the entire licence fee is redirected to fund bankers' bonuses and 
the hunting of immigrants through woodland for sport. And, although it has many 
failings – we all do – I like the idea of theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> and we could still rebuild it and make 
it better and happier with itself and therefore kinder to its viewers and 
listeners – all could go well and is not past saving. I'd hate its demise to be 
in any way my fault.

I have – as a person interested in words – been informed of the BBC's graded 
list of Words That Will Get Us All Fired. You'll be relieved to know that 
orgasm isn't listed and perhaps surprised to learn that what I will voluntarily 
choose to call the C-word is only in second place. The very worst thing to say 
is currently a term implying that a person and his mother are involved in 
relations frowned upon by conventional society and forcing any subsequent 
offspring to search card shops for the Happy Father's Day To My Loving Brother 
options. Obviously, the Beeb interviews a lot more 1970s pimps than I had 
hitherto realised.

Not for the first time, this has led me to reflect on my own ambivalence 
towards swearing. On the one hand, many of the words involved are melodiously 
and perfectly formed for the purpose and, frankly, there are few things more 
dandy – and indeed stimulating – than hearing someone who is genuinely good at 
swearing, someone who works with imagination, eloquence and poise. On the other 
hand, the words English uses as terms of abuse are almost universally terms for 
lovely – or at least interesting – activities and areas of the body which it is 
either wonderful to have, or delightful to be offered for one's temporary 
recreation and/or mutual fun. So I have decided, as an exercise, to try and 
adopt words which would be more logical for me to use when stressed or outraged 
– and not just flirting in a shouty manner: which would lead me back to the 
usual repertoire. I have, during readings where the young and tender were 
present, already used Blair, Blairing and so forth, but I truly don't want that 
in my mouth regularly, so I don't think it'll do. Death is short, to the point 
and something I don't enjoy in others and will probably find oppressive for 
myself … Poverty is definitely offensive and has a good feel to it as a word … 
as some of you may remember, I have a soft spot for 'sblood, but that would 
sound massively eccentric and I need no further help in that direction … and, 
given the burden laid across my every waking minute, there is always novel to 
consider …

Perhaps you, Dear Readers, can assist. (Without swamping the poor old site 
with offensiveness which will simply be disappeared.) Or you could try to 
construct your own lists at home for improved entertainment and expression. 
Onwards.
 