
I wrote This Charming Man for a John Peel session. I just leapt out of bed and 
wrote it. It was the culmination of trying to find a way of playing that was 
non-rock but still expressed my personality. I felt we needed something more 
upbeat in a different key and was miffed that Aztec Camera's Roddy Frame was 
getting on the radio and we weren't. That's why it's got that sunny 
disposition; my usual default setting was Manchester in the rain. When we were 
recording it, Rough Trade's Geoff Travis came in and said: "That's got to be 
the single."

At the time, there'd been this question of whether it was cool to go on Top of 
the Pops, probably from the Clash refusing to do it. But we were a new 
generation and it felt like there were new rules. It's paradoxical, but a 
connoisseur's approach to retro music was modern. We were into Phil Spector and 
the girl groups but wanted a modern currency, which set us apart from the bands 
using electronics. Plus, when the members of the Smiths were children, Top of 
the Pops was one of the most important days of the week. Suddenly we found 
ourselves on it. Previously, we'd been synonymous with the John Peel show, and 
suddenly that culture was on Top of the Pops – John Peel started to present it, 
and it was a new phase: post-punk going mainstream.

Marilyn was on just before us and he was a beautiful creature, but to be 
confronted with the kind of languageMorrissey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/morrissey> used in the song after Paul Young 
and a Tina Turner video must have been very arresting. Interesting and 
subversive ideas can get through if you wrap them up in a great pop tune.

Everyone remembers the flowers Morrissey took on to the show. I'd been very 
aware of how powerful Top of the Pops could be visually, from my childhood 
watching T. Rex. We'd first used gladioli onstage at the Hacienda about a year 
before, to counteract the all-encompassing austere aesthetic of Factory 
Records. People assumed it was an Oscar Wilde homage but that was a bonus. The 
flowers made the stage very treacherous if you were wearing moccasins, but they 
became emblematic, iconic. Morrissey was using those gladioli in a way that was 
far from fey, almost brandishing them. Morrissey provided flamboyance, the rest 
of us wore sweaters and provided a streetwise, gang aspect. We'd had a year of 
rejections, getting in the trenches; nothing had been handed to us on a plate 
and we were ready.

After that we tried to make every TV appearance a spectacle – Morrissey 
pulling off his shirt and having things written on his chest, the hearing aid. 
In a band you can have that visual dialogue with your audience, but you try to 
stay one step ahead. I tried to evolve into one of the Ronettes. By the time we 
did William, it Was Really Nothing, I had a beehive, and we'd get boys turning 
up at gigs with beehives – some of my proudest moments.

Over the years a lot of people have mentioned that first appearance as a 
year-zero event. It's impossible for me to fully analyse the impact without 
growing an ego the size of Chicago, but 11 years later the black Rickenbacker 
on the cover of the first Oasis single is my guitar. Not a lot of people know 
that. It was an acknowledgment.

At the time I noticed it in the record company first. Staff that had looked 
like Ladbroke Grove hippies suddenly looked like our mates. Then quiffs started 
appearing in the high street, and a wave of bands sounded like us. I took that 
as enormously flattering and incredible, but a couple of years later things 
turned a little. There was this idea of how we should sound that ignored a lot 
of what we had done. We were seen as the archetypal indie group, and there was 
a twee aspect to that music that didn't represent us. People grabbed the shadow 
and missed the substance.

The term "indie" started cropping up in our reviews, to describe us as opposed 
to New Order and Depeche Mode, who had an electronic aspect, and the Bunnymen 
and the Cure who were on major labels. Indie seemed to be applied to us in 
terms of the guitar approach and the fact we were on an independent label, but 
being sold in Woolworths.Indie <https://www.theguardian.com/music/indie> now is 
to rock music what rock was to Rock with a capital R when I was in my teens. 
The term "rock" had to be modernised. I think the Smiths were indie through and 
through.

Johnny Marr, guitarist, The Smiths
 