
Shane Watson 8
Watson had a decent series, even if you would never believe it from his morbid 
expression. He constantly gave Australia good starts that they could not 
capitalise on, as indeed nor could he. Nice guy, too soft for loose talk of 
captaincy. As for his run-out mishaps, they are too painful to recall.
Phillip Hughes 3.5
Evidence for the theory that Australia's much-praised Shield competition has 
gone soft. Ricky Ponting says he has "mongrel" about him, but his technique is 
woeful. England preyed upon a rustic style where his back leg flew outside leg 
stump and he flashed at the ball through the offside
Ricky Ponting 3
Ponting is one of the batting giants of this or any age. But England's bowlers 
targeted him brilliantly, his only consolation a hollow half-century in 
Brisbane in a dead match. He played in Melbourne with a broken finger and raged 
at the umpires as the Ashes slipped away. He also skippered for the gallery 
with a new theory every five minutes. Only a fool would write him off, and a 
drop down the order might sustain him, even at 36.
Michael Clarke 3
Australia's suspicion of him is staggering to behold. He is arguably the first 
Australian batsman to be broken by his supposed attraction to celebrity 
culture. He is caught up in Australia's changing social order and to blame him 
is a nonsense. Once a golden boy, his perceived promotion to No4 was a 
disaster. Has given up 20-over cricket to insist that people take him seriously.
Mike Hussey 9
Took part in the most irritating advert of the Ashes series: "Some people call 
me Mr Cricket, some people call me the Huss." But he can almost be forgiven 
because along with Ponting he is the last survivor of a great Australian side 
and under huge pressure he played some impressive innings until his form dried 
late in the series. He proved this England attack was not unplayable. Respect
Steve Smith 5.5
Smith is the second indictment of the Australian system. That he has talent is 
undeniable, but he needs to learn his trade with New South Wales, not to be 
flung into the Test side with impossible expectations. Bat him at No6 and his 
batting is inadequate, at seven and his bowling comes under question. Let him 
develop. A sympathy mark
Brad Haddin 8
A comparison of the rival wicketkeepers would suggest that Haddin matched Matt 
Prior and he can be satisfied with that. He made a stirring hundred in Brisbane 
when his stand of 307 with Hussey filled England with foreboding and gained 
respect from England's attack, but he flopped when Clarke promoted him to No6
Mitchell Johnson 0
How do you mark him, how do you catch a moonbeam in your hand? Largely 
ordinary, occasionally brilliant, his hot half-an-hour at the Waca was the most 
dramatic passage of the series, as he suddenly discovered searing pace and 
lavish inswing, and conjured up victory for Australia in the third Test. He is 
sSo inconsistent with bat or ball that he is impossible to ignore. Mark? Zero 
or 10
Peter Siddle 5.5
An honest trier but his limitations were exposed by his honest reaction to his 
hat-trick ball at The Gabba when he revealed of his successful yorker to 
dismiss Stuart Broad that he was actually "trying to hit the top of off stump". 
After his six wickets in Brisbane he hung in there with commendable spirit, 
with bat and ball, but he lacked the craft of England's pace bowlers
Ben Hilfenhaus 4
It might have escaped your notice that Hilfenhaus was Australia's most 
economical bowler. You might have noticed instead that he took only five 
wickets in the series, three of them in the final Test in Sydney when England 
were slogging their way to victory. A swing bowler and England had his measure
Ryan Harris 7.5
Harris was presented as the sort of tough Australian fast bowler whose 
injury-stricken career had proved that he could fight back from adversity. He 
finished off England's second innings in Perth to take 6-47, and deserves 
colossal respect for that, but then after 80 overs in three weeks he broke down 
after the fourth Test with a stress fracture of the ankle that could end his 
Test career. A breakthrough followed by a breakdown in a matter of days
Simon Katich 6
Revered by much of Australia's sporting public, who see him as a one-man 
resistance movement to the "waxing" era led by Michael Clarke. This really is 
how silly the debate is. He was one Australian prepared to play long innings, 
but his achilles gave way after two Tests. To replace him with Hughes bordered 
on an insult
Marcus North 3
England's win in the second Test in Adelaide caused Australia to switch from 
North, an experienced but limited player who had never proved that he was good 
enough, to Smith, a naive young player who had the same problem. What Australia 
needed was somebody in between. But the vacuum left by the retirement of a 
great Australian side meant that such a player was nowhere to be seenDefeat in 
Adelaide ended his Test career, one limited player making way for another in 
Smith. Neither convinced that they were good enough
Xavier Doherty 2
Andrew Hilditch, Australia's chairman of selectors, insisted after the series 
that the selectors had not made mistakes. So how does he explain the selection 
of Xavier Doherty, a limited-overs specialist from Tasmania, entirely 
ill-equipped for Test cricket. He was picked in Adelaide because he was not 
Nathan Hauritz and if the selectors really did give way to Ricky Ponting's 
wishes then they should be ashamed of themselves
Doug Bollinger 1
His lack of conditioning at Adelaide was quite extraordinary in the modern 
era. England's fast bowlers were not just fit, but fit for cricket, thanks to 
the agonies they have been put through by the fitness coach Huw Bevan. 
Bollinger, who Ponting admitted had "hit the wall" in Adelaide should never 
have been selected with his club player's level of fitness
Usman Khawaja 7
Should have played from the start of the series. He did enough in Sydney to 
suggest he can forge a successful Test career, although the over-reaction to 
his 37 at no 3 on his maiden Test innings – even allowing for the fact that he 
was the first Muslim to play for Australia – summed up Australia's problems
Michael Beer 6
Another spin-bowling wildcard. Superior to Doherty and suggested in Sydney 
that he has a fighting chance to make the grade at Test level 