
When I'm asked for my name by the man behind the counter in the coffee shop, I 
have two options. I can laboriously spell out my first name, and still end up 
with miscreant vowels and extra consonants, or I can just say it straight, and 
accept my new identity along with my hot milk. My other names include Margaret, 
Morag and Morrison. In the old days, before computers got to know me, 
spellcheck would suggest that I call myself "Mormon" or "Moron". Some days I 
took this personally.

I like having an unusual name. The Morven part is not so uncommon in Scotland 
– most people I meet know another Morven, and I know at least half a dozen. I 
once ended up in the pub with two other Morvens, which got funnier as the night 
wore on. Added to the Crumlish, though, my name is, I think, unique. "There 
can't be more than one Morven Crumlish!" is something I hear a lot, when the 
different parts of my life accidentally collide, which makes it difficult to 
misbehave. In the past my name has become an abstraction. "So this is what a 
Morven Crumlish looks like," said the porters who wheeled me down to get my 
tonsils removed, reducing me to an indefinite object.

It's an ice-breaker, at least. People can ask where my name is from (is it 
Welsh? Scottish? Gaelic? Irish?) and if my parents were from the Highlands (no, 
they were just hippies). Naturally, when my daughter was born I felt it was 
important that her name would single her out, and give her something to talk 
about at parties. I named her after a character in a children's book, though 
occasionally I lie and say I named her after a band, or a Bob Dylan song (it 
depends who I want to impress or annoy). Still, it seems impossible to me that 
her identity is so tied up with my whim, and when she tells me she'd like to 
change her name I can't feel offended. It makes sense that we should have more 
of a say in what we're called – perhaps we should all change our names when we 
are 18, to something we think suits us better than Ann or Jane or Pocahontas.

On their own, we like or dislike names because of their poetry, but once they 
are attached to a person, a place, an object, names can warp and distort to fit 
our perception of their bearer. This is the main reason they are renaming the
asbo <https://www.theguardian.com/society/asbos?INTCMP=SRCH>; it is no longer a 
conveniently pronounceable acronym, but has become a descriptor, a definition, 
an object in itself. Suggested replacements are thecrasbo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2011/feb/07/charities-condemn-asbo-rebrand?INTCMP=SRCH>
 (cranberry asbo) and the asbelina (an asbo who is dating Angelina Jolie).

With this being the case, perhaps trying to source the perfect name is a waste 
of energy. This certainly seems to be the opinion of the Wildlife Rescue Centre 
in Clackmannanshire, who named arescued red squirrel 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-highlands-islands-18059235> 
"Squirrelly". Their lack of imagination is doubtless made up for by their 
veterinary and pipette-wielding skills, and as long as Squirrelly remains 
squirrelly, then his generic name is of no consequence. A dead squirrel named 
Bernard or Flavia will get no pleasure from an elegant name; Squirrelly up a 
tree would scoff at such fanciful labelling. Better to number your children, 
and raise them to be delightful and useful, than to have exotically monikered 
but despicable offspring. Bear in mind, though, the lesson of Mrs McCave in Dr 
Seuss'spoem 
<http://immortalmuse.wordpress.com/2011/03/29/tuesday-poem-too-many-daves-by-dr-seuss/>
: she "had 23 sons, and she named them all Dave", which led to confusion and 
regret.

At the coffee shop, the man behind the counter got my name right first time. I 
was impressed. His colleague, though, calling me when my drink was ready, 
stumbled and was confused. Marvin? Moron? Was I one of the smart arses sticking 
it to the man by giving a false name in return for my franchised beverage? I 
thanked him, and didn't bother correcting him. Coffee is coffee, after all.

• Follow Comment is free on Twitter @commentisfree 
<http://twitter.com/#!/commentisfree>
 