
For whom was The Secret Diary of Adrian Mole, Aged 13 ¾ originally written? 
With its jokes about Simone de Beauvoir and Dostoevsky, and the comedy of the 
arsonist inmate of Holloway Prison called Grace Poole, with whom Adrian begins 
a correspondence, you know that the author had grown-up readers in mind. One of 
the readers who came to hearSue Townsend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/sue-townsend> (right) discuss her satirical 
classic at the Guardian book club told her that he had loved the book "when I 
was young". But this was not quite what she hoped to hear. While she was 
grateful for her many youthful readers, she told us that she had written even 
the earliest volumes of the Adrian Moleroman fleuve "for adults".

And perhaps only parents would catch the true notes of mingled censoriousness 
and complaint that distinguish the post-pubescent voice of Mole. (We mused on 
Adrian's refrains: "Just my luck" and "It's disgusting".) A commenter on the 
book club website seemed to recognise that the passing years made him 
understand our diarist better. "I was a bit of a precocious brat when it came 
to reading age, so first encounteredAdrian Mole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/adrian-mole> when I was still at primary 
school – I thought he was incredibly clever and sensitive, and I even admired 
his poetry. Every re-reading since has been tinged with a combination of 
embarrassment and disbelief at my former naivety."

Was there some original for this now mythical character? Only in her own 
tendencies and secret thoughts, confessed his creator. "Adrian Mole, c'est 
moi," she insisted. He was the secretly self-important moaner in all of us. 
Perhaps anyone who starts turning the events of his or her life into a 
day-by-day narrative risks becoming Mole-like. A commenter on the website 
conceded as much. "I tried keeping a diary last year. I gave up when I realised 
that every entry made me sound like Adrian Mole. Particularly embarrassing 
considering I'm 35."

You presume that this writer is a man, but why? The first questioner of the 
evening in fact went to the heart of the matter by asking why Townsend had made 
her narrator male. "If Adrian is you, why did you choose to make him a boy?" Of 
course it was because boys were "far more secretive", she said, and the gap 
between what a character might say and do, and what he might confess to his 
diary, was far wider.

More than one reader felt that Adrian deserved more contentment than he had 
been allowed. His creator agreed to allow Adrian happiness, but pointed out 
that it would be impossible to grant him the recognition as a writer that he 
craved (his output being so evidently without literary merit). How would 
Adrian's future misadventures pan out? One reader was particularly interested 
in the role of "current affairs" in the diaries, which have tracked public 
events for almost three decades. "I was wondering if, when you listen to the 
news, you are thinking about how Adrian would feel about things." Townsend 
admitted to a lapse in her own once-obsessive interest in news events, but the 
reader had her own Mole-ish responses to suggest. "I imagine that Adrian would 
have voted for Nick Clegg." "Yes, I think he would," Townsend agreed – as did 
all the readers in the room.

Readers found the influence of Adrian Mole everywhere, from The Curious 
Incident of the Dog in the Night-time to the TV comedy The Inbetweeners. There 
was a shared disappointment, however, about the TV dramatisations of the Mole 
books – in one of which, Townsend recalled with distaste, all the main 
characters seemed to be adopting Birmingham accents, unperceived by the 
Hungarian director. (She explained that Adrian's diaries were written to the 
rhythms of Leicester speech.) She agreed that the best bits of Adrian's diary 
were those that any television adaptation would omit: the inconsequential 
episodes or records of boredom. Adrian's account of "the desolation of the 
human spirit" was not particularly "televisual". "We can't let talk of the 
television go," another reader observed, "without talking about the radio."

Adrian Mole began (as "Nigel Mole") on Radio 4 in 1982, and this enthusiast 
recalled that the diaries made for "wonderful radio". The medium was perfect 
for getting "into Adrian's mind". "I agree," Townsend replied. She recalled 
Nicholas Barnes, the boy who performed Adrian's chronicle of disappointed 
hopes, who was "exactly 13¾" when he played the part – "a wonderful actor". "He 
didn't know what he was saying" – but as Adrian himself is blind to so much, 
especially the antics of the adults around him, this somehow helped his 
enactment. "I'm really, really hurt that the BBC are not doing it any more." 
Perhaps a campaign for his restoration to the airwaves could start here?

John Mullan is professor of English at University College London. From next 
week he will be looking atSmall Island by Andrea Levy. Join them for a 
discussion on Monday 24 January at 7pm, Hall One, Kings Place, 90 York Way, 
London N1 9AG. Tickets £9.50online <http://www.kingsplace.co.uk/> or £11.50 
from the box office: 020 7520 1490.
 