
Andreas Whittam Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/media/andreas-whittam-smith>
 has completed his investigation into the Independent columnist Johann Hari, 
suspended by the paper in the wake of accusations about plagiarism – leaving a 
final decision on the writer's future at the newspaper to his editor, Chris 
Blackhurst.

Those close to the newspaper say that Whittam Smith, the founding editor of 
the Independent, was inclined to be lenient as he completed his deliberations, 
but it is unclear whether Blackhurst will reach the same conclusion. A decision 
from the newspaper's new editor is expected shortly.

Hari was accused of plagiarism in June by bloggers examining alleged 
similarities between his interviews and other articles and writings elsewhere. 
A month later that was followed by further allegations of "sock puppetry", or 
using an online alias to hit back at journalists and others who criticised his 
work.

Blackhurst's long-serving predecessor, Simon Kelner, had previously defended 
Hari, but the claims of "sock puppetry" coincided with the arrival of the new 
editor. It had been alleged that Hari had used a pseudonym to make unflattering 
revisions to Wikipedia entries of journalists Nick Cohen and Cristina Odone. 
Hari was then suspended for two months by the newspaper pending the results of 
Whittam Smith's investigation.

The verdict will also be used to help determine whether Hari will keep the 
2008 Orwell prize for political journalism, with the awarding jury waiting for 
a formal announcement from the Independent before deciding what action to take. 
The prize committee wants to consider further representations from Hari, but 
these cannot be made until the newspaper's internal inquiry has concluded.

Blackhurst declined to comment today, other than to confirm he had received 
the report from Whittam Smith. It is understood that the newspaper's owners, 
the Lebedev family, will leave the final decision to the editor, as they do not 
want to interfere with editorial content at the title.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 