
It was 1972, the Year of No Money. I had just turned 25 and had been living in 
Paris for 16 months: first in an apartment on the Rue Jacques Mawas (during the 
Year of Some Money) and now in a tiny chambre de bonne on the sixth floor of a 
building on the Rue du Louvre. It had been given to me free of charge by 
Jacques and Christine Dupin, who were renting a large apartment on one of the 
lower floors. I had started translating Jacques's poetry five years earlier, 
and by now he and Christine had become fast friends of mine. Such was their 
kindness that when I fell on hard times, they saved my skin by offering me the 
use of their upstairs room for as long as I needed it.

Cramped as it was in there (just large enough to hold a bed, small table and a 
chair), I was by no means unhappy with the accommodation. Many of the poems 
that appeared in my first book were written in that room, and when I opened the 
window and stepped out on to the minuscule balcony, I looked directly into the 
face of one of the gargoyles jutting from the church next door: Saint Germain 
d'Auxerrois, the same church where the bells had rung out on August 24 1572 to 
announce the Saint Bartholomew's day massacre during the French wars of 
religion.

Not only is Jacques one of the leading French poets of his generation, but he 
is also a distinguished art critic (author of a short book on Giacometti as 
well as the definitive monograph on Miró). At the time, he was one of the 
directors of the Galerie Maeght, and it was through him that I was given much 
of the translation work that kept me from starving during that difficult year. 
When translation work was scarce, there were frequent invitations from the 
Dupins to join them for dinner at their apartment. On one of those occasions, 
we were joined by one of Jacques's oldest friends, David Sylvester.

It turned out to be a memorable evening. After the meal, we carried our drinks 
into the living room and went on talking until well past midnight. The rotund 
Sylvester took off his shoes and sat on the floor, and, while the rest of us 
managed to add a comment every now and then, it was our English companion who 
dominated the conversation, discoursing on art and life in a brilliant stream 
of epiphanies, rhetorical questions and humorous anecdotes. Without a doubt, he 
was one of the greatest talkers I have ever met.

That was how I got the job of translating this piece of the long interview he 
had conducted with Giacometti in 1965. I can't remember why he wanted to have 
the text in English, but it must have had something to do with the book he was 
preparing on the artist's work (which wouldn't be published until 1994). He 
offered to pay me 500 francs (the equivalent of $100), and I accepted. I did 
the work the next day, and the day after, I met him in a hallway of the Louvre, 
where I handed him the translation and he gave me an envelope with five 100 
franc notes in it. We shook hands, expressed mutual thanks for the service each 
had rendered the other, and I never saw him again.

A final twist. Looking through Sylvester's Giacometti book today (April 17 
2003), I notice that some of the following material is included - but in a 
different translation, which would seem to suggest that he lost the manuscript 
I gave him.

Ironically, I wound up misplacing my first-draft copy of the translation, and 
for the next 31 years I was certain that it had been lost as well. Several 
weeks ago, however, I happened to open an old issue of the defunct literary 
magazine L'Ephémère - where the French text of the interview was originally 
published - and out fell the long-vanished pages.

© Paul Auster <https://www.theguardian.com/books/paulauster>
 