
Jimmy Anderson <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jimmy-anderson>, England's 
most successful fast bowler in Australia since Frank Tyson 56 years ago, marked 
England's Ashes victory by curling up in the dressing room and going to sleep.

Anderson can be as cutting edge as an England cricketer gets. He is not the 
sort to go to sleep in the middle of a party. But he has had a demanding two 
months on the road and as soon as it was all over his body finally admitted it.

Five Tests as leader of the attack, 24 wickets, sound claims to be regarded as 
the finest swing bowler in the world, and a dash home midway through the series 
to be at the birth of his second daughter, Ruby. It is not a bad piece of work.

No wonder that he remarked through half-closed eyes: "It's been hectic and it 
has taken its toll. I actually had half-an-hour's sleep after the presentations 
and initial celebrations because I was absolutely knackered.

"We have won the Ashes in Australia and the first thing I did was to sleep. 
It's not exactly rock and roll, but I've not been that well this week."

England have given Anderson licence to take a fortnight off, and miss the two 
Twenty20 internationals and first three ODIs. Nobody should question that. He 
will fly back to England for a second time, reacquaint himself with reality and 
change a nappy or two.

"It has just been a long seven weeks, especially with me going home and coming 
back," he said. "It has been one of the most emotional times for me in my life. 
It was amazing to get back home for the birth of my daughter. Then to come back 
here and celebrate Christmas with all the other families here except mine was 
quite tough.

"I'm just delighted the way it has worked out and I can't wait to get back to 
England now. I'd like to think I've earned a bit of time off, although it won't 
all be feet up. I'll have a couple of days off, but then I've got to stay fit 
because as soon as I get back out here I'll be playing one-day cricket."

For a bowler feeling the strain, it was quite a display. Outswing, inswing, 
reverse swing, all delivered with immense accuracy. Throughout this series he 
has looked a true craftsman. That Alastair Cook would be named man of the 
series for his 766 runs was inevitable, but Anderson deserved all the 
honourable mentions going.

"The biggest thing that I've improved on in the last few years is the length 
that I hit," he said. "I bowl the right length much more consistently now. You 
can have all the skills in the world but if you don't hit a good length then 
you're going to go for runs. I can swing the ball and reverse swing it and now 
I can hit the right length and I want to keep improving on that.

"When the ball is moving laterally it is a lot easier for us to have plans for 
the batsmen and you can set them up a bit more. It worked a couple of times in 
the second innings and it felt great. But our plans for each of their batsmen 
have worked throughout the series. We've had good plans and we've executed them.

Australia had heard that Anderson was no longer the shrinking violet of four 
years earlier, and they now believe it .

"There were no doubts in my mind that I could perform out here," he said. 
"There might have been doubts elsewhere, but if anyone was judging me on how I 
bowled in Australia four years ago then they're not a cricket supporter because 
in the last two or three years I've really improved as a bowler.

"I'm just delighted with my form. On this tour I think I've bowled as well as 
I ever have. Hopefully it is just a starting point and I can kick on and 
improve even more."

As the leading wicket taker on either side, the series confirmed Anderson's 
position among the world's best bowlers, but the 28-year-old was quick to 
deflect praise towards his team-mates.

"I've been delighted with my form this tour," he said. "I enjoy my role 
leading the attack but my job has been made easier by the guys at the other end.

"[Chris] Tremlett has been amazing, so has [Graeme] Swann and [Tim] Bresnan, 
not forgetting [Stuart] Broad and [Steven] Finn."

It was also announced that Simon & Schuster have acquired the rights to 
publish Anderson's autobiography.
 