
I'm lying down, Best Beloveds. This is as close as I get to a hobby. Over the 
weekend I attempted to establish sleeping as a further leisure activity, but 
I'm afraid that the vast list of things I have to do before most days break – 
or, indeed, I myself break – made that impossible. So lying down and working – 
it's almost as good as a rest.

Not that I am complaining about being in work. Being in work is a good thing. 
Being in work when you are self-employed and me – and your employer is 
therefore almost as mentally sturdy as Charlie Sheen – is a less good thing. 
Not that I'm in any way chemically enhanced, or unhanced – I can forget why 
I've ended up in the kitchen again and am holding a single shoe without any 
assistance from prescribed or clandestinely imported substances. When I shake 
my head my brain thumps against its sides like a neatly parcelled corpse in the 
boot of a slewing car.

Meanwhile, I have been asked to write a little about the typist's progress 
from hoping-to-be-published-anywhere-at-all-ever to 
dear-God-shoot-me-just-in-the-shin-then-I'll-get-a-day-off. This is, of course, 
both a happy progression and something that should be much better organised in 
my case. Here, I'll try and look at what we might call the very early days. The 
awful and wonderful early days.

So, to begin at the beginning. My own experience of starting out was haphazard 
and almost certain to fail. I didn't really intend to write, I was simply 
living in a tiny, cold bedsit with no other ways of being constructive. (And if 
your only way to prove yourself useful is by producing a steady trickle of 
maimed and ugly short stories, you should probably take a good look at 
yourself.) I joined a writer's group and then remembered that I don't like 
groups. I sent off stories without really researching my target magazines who 
duly returned my efforts, often accompanied only by a scribble on a square of 
paper slightly larger than a commemorative stamp. I had occasional successes, 
and an encouraging letter of rejection, or – dear God – an acceptance, or – 
good heavens – not just a free copy of "Quentin's Quarterly Gallimaufry", but a 
check for 20 quid, could light up my month. I was more often disappointed than 
not, but I was also learning that I cared about this. I cared so much that I 
would start again after every sad envelope flopped in, write something else, 
forget that it hurt to be knocked back.

I was writing by hand with later multicoloured corrections as nervousness and 
tinkering racked up rewrites. There weren't really any personal computers about 
(imagine that). A bit of planning before I'd started and then stepping back for 
an overview would have helped me much more than altering things blindly and 
investing affection, rather than criticism. As it was, I ended up with page 
after page of Jackson Pollocked nonsense. I didn't know any better. I wanted 
advice, but I was afraid that someone well-informed would simply tell me I 
shouldn't bother because I was incurably dreadful. I felt lonely and pointless 
and hungry.

If you're at that stage now then you have my sympathy – it's horrible. And 
it's worse now: opportunities to get involved with tutoring, or reviewing, or 
workshops are evaporating; the publishing landscape is ever-shrinking as are 
advances; there are fewer magazines out there and fewer anthologies; there are 
fewer places for new books in bookshop chains. And, yes, it may be that you 
don't ever get published and reach anyone's shelves. You may be a risk that 
someone would have taken 10 years ago, while today you seem unaffordable. You 
may be a good writer, but unlucky. There may be a day when you fold that set of 
ambitions away and set your mind to something else. We have to consider this.

But if you haven't given up yet, I can say – and I think I am being honest 
about this – that even this initial grind needn't turn out to be 100% horrible. 
Really. It needn't. When everything about writing is a slog and you seem to be 
getting nowhere, your lack of pressing demands from numerous admirers does mean 
you have the time to sit back and consider why you're putting all this effort 
into what appears to be an unrewarding relationship. You're flinging out the 
best love letters you can, you're breaking your heart and no one's answering, 
but on you go regardless – why? If your answer is that you love what you're 
doing and couldn't abandon it without being someone other than yourself, then 
you probably have to keep slogging. The certainty that you have to write can be 
a pain in the neck, but it's also a great, firm truth to build around – the 
shysters and manipulators and compromise-peddlers won't be able to shake you, 
if you fasten yourself to that.

And if you are eventually successful and your work as an author does take off 
in one direction or another it's not unlikely that there will be other times 
when, for other reasons, you come to doubt if the effort is worth it, or if 
you're suited to it. Your experience in those first, hard times will be there 
for you then. If you've not had enough money and not had enough support (or any 
support), if people have thought you were crazy and yet you've kept on and 
tried to learn your craft and taken notes and practised observation and made 
horrible mistakes and pondered giving up and listened and puzzled and fretted 
and wasted your time and woken at three in the morning being shaken by the best 
idea you've ever met and fought sentences for days until they've actually 
rolled over and let you win, then you already, deeply, know that you're a 
writer. You already know that you kept writing, even when you had no reason to. 
You already know that it calls in you, that it's a good thing, a life-changing 
thing and that you'd be foolish to ignore it.

Way back when I was at my beginning I summoned up the courage to find my local 
writer in tesidence – we had one, funded by the Scottish Arts Council – and he 
read my material while I felt nauseous. Then he showed me how to make cocoa. 
Thinking back on it, making cocoa is probably all he could think of to do with 
someone who was clearly a ball of pure tension and liable to cry, if not faint, 
at any moment. I've been in his position since and it's hard to be correctly 
tender and correctly firm with someone who's just handed you an armful of their 
dreams – cocoa might not be a bad distraction. Someone who has fully committed 
to their work, pressed everything they can into word after word – because 
half-measures won't cut it – they will have more than a little interest in what 
you think of the results.

I sat and pondered my gradually cooling mug while he talked me through the two 
or three stories I'd handed over and was factual about their flaws and kicked 
the crap out of one of the endings – I still remember – and generally 
bludgeoned me. It was sore by the time we'd finished, but it was wonderful, 
too. Here was a writer who was talking to me as if I were a writer. I wasn't a 
good writer – what I'd done was full of flaws and holes and silliness – but 
somebody qualified had read my work and thought it had enough merit to deserve 
close examination.

I left knowing how to make cocoa – I still use his method – and feeling 
bruised. But I also knew it was all right. Somehow, it was going to be all 
right. I would start again, and I would rewrite.

So Dear Readers, I wish you the very best attentions of a reader you can 
trust. Quite possibly this won't be all 38 variously deluded members of your 
workshop, or your partner, or a secretly embittered relative, or a stranger on 
a bus, or anyone you have to pay. You'll need somebody who cares about writing, 
who wants to help, quite possibly who wants to pass along the help they 
received when they were starting out. I wish you a Good Reader. Onwards.
 