
Even a dedicated hater of the Oscars <https://www.theguardian.com/film/oscars> 
like me has to admit that last week's ceremony offered up one or two special 
moments. When, for instance, was the last time you actually stood up and 
cheered for Michael Moore? Been a while, hasn't it? But there he was, a whole 
lot bigger than life, putting wishy-washy mealy-mouthed Hollywood (like master 
political theorist and complete pussy Ben Affleck, who left the decision on 
wearing a peace-dove "to my stylist") to shame for its pathetic silence at an 
important time for dissident voices.

And there was that Oscar for Roman Polanski, the one they should have given 
him 35 years ago for Rosemary's Baby: first person on his feet to applaud him 
was fellow nominee Martin Scorsese, Hollywood's senior creative figure, casting 
his eyes 360-degrees at the audience, like a headmaster sternly demanding that 
respect be given where it was due.

And there was Adrien Brody <https://www.theguardian.com/film/adrien-brody>, 
pin-up boy for the non-Hollywood Left, the whelp of the Best Actor nominees, 
who sailed right past vets like Caine and Nicholson to become the youngest 
winner ever in his category, who shushed the orchestra when it tried to drown 
him out ("C'mon guys, I only get one shot at this"), and whose simple and 
modest acceptance speech had as big an effect as Moore's, albeit minus the 
chauvinistic booing.

You can tell by his previous performances - in Bread And Roses, Harrison's 
Flowers, and Liberty Heights - and his nervous appearances on TV chat shows 
that Brody isn't your typical Tinseltown boy-bimbo. Son of a Village Voice 
photojournalist, he grew up in the shadow of the New York New Left, and he's 
more interested in the work than the razzle-dazzle. And his politics are 
coherent and nuanced. Before Moore was drowned out, I had assumed that Brody 
would be the one to make such a speech, but circumstances made his spontaneity 
a better choice.

His very reactive, often almost-silent performance in The Pianist (pictured) 
is like watching Buster Keaton getting sent to hell. Terrence Malick may have 
cut his part in The Thin Red Line to the bone, but this time the kid stays in 
the picture for good. Let's hope it doesn't ruin him. *

 Career high  Well, what do you think? 

 Career low  Oxygen's a pretty terrible serial killer movie, but it's not 
Brody's fault. Now all of Hollywood wants a piece of him, though, and that's 
nipped many a career in the bud.

 Need to know  May be the first Best Actor winner whose next film (The Singing 
Detective) features him in a role so small it's called "First Hood".

 The last word  [On his Pianist role] "It made me have a much greater 
understanding of loss, of loneliness, and the level of intense tragedy that so 
many people have experienced in this world. I take a lot less for granted."
 