
In 1988, there were two versions of a social revolution. The first, fuelled by 
ecstasy, involved climbing over fences chased by the police. You knew rave had 
made it when a teenage Ian Beale namechecked Sunrise on EastEnders. Capitalism 
looked doomed.

The second version started on ITV at 1am (repeated – like some loop of hell – 
at 4am). The Hitman and Her was hosted by northern soul expert and model 
railway enthusiastPete Waterman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/pete-waterman> (The Hitman) and abused 
animal-stroker in waiting Michaela Strachan (Her).

Each week, they came to you live!!! from Mr Smiths!!! in Warrington!!! (or 
Bananas!!! Bolton's ultimate pleasuredome!!! – two years down the line, ripping 
out the mirror balls to become a superclub co-owned by Ryan Giggs, Mick 
Hucknall and Chris Evans). The Hitman and Her could simply have satisfied 
itself with displaying the cold harsh reality of any discotheque from 1975 to 
1988 – Club 18-30 games like putting chipolatas down the diamanté Speedos of 
"the dancers" (Eugene & Storm) or passing custard-filled balloons between the 
breasts of dead-eyed girls with Bonnie Tyler hair.

But somehow, between The Hitman and Her being commissioned and made, rave and 
ecstasy happened – so what you got instead was a fantastic disconnect: a shunt 
of a TV programme that managed to capture the weird transition of Britain from 
Rita, Sue and Bob Too! to nightmare Creamfields with a corporate Vodafone tent, 
plugged in serendipitously to the exact moment when it switched.

One minute, the hordes would be shuffling to Touch Me by Sam Fox, with a Sam 
Fox-ish lookalike being lowered from the ceiling in a plastic gondola, 
half-heartedly "touching herself" as punters tried to look up her skirt. The 
next, a 46-year-old cameraman would be doing his best to crash-zoom in and out 
of a solitary gurner, stumbling about to Acid Tracks or Spank Spank by Phuture 
Pfantasy Club.

The Hitman and Her was such a mystifying anomaly on TV (largely because in the 
days before reality TV, it was one of the few places in the schedules where you 
could see real people doing real things – looking bored, getting drunk and 
trying to get off with each other) that The Late Show sent Paul Morley to try 
and analyse it. The item ends with him simply standing in the middle of the 
dancefloor, for the first and last time in his life, speechless.
 