
Apologies for the unscheduled break. I wasn't waylaid by an endless stream of 
A-list book launch activities, fervid searches for an unhackable phone and 
invitations from the Big Brother production team. I was simply ill. Again. 
Which gets tedious. I now have a specialist for whatever is wrong with my 
stomach and everyone telling me to rest in order to beat the post-viral/ 
recurring-viral labyrinthitis. Picture me earlier this month in a small, 
boiling flat somewhere in Soho, lying down, throwing up, having panic attacks 
and listening to helicopters grind overhead to deal with full-blown or 
incipient riots. And crying if I had to do something complicated – like putting 
on my shoes, or trying to discuss my schedule with my editor. I was a bit 
tired. Writing a novel in 11 months instead of 13 isn't a good thing. I console 
myself thatwriting two books a year gave Muriel Spark hallucinations 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/radio3/johntusainterview/spark_transcript.shtml>. I'm not 
bloody surprised.

Meanwhile, we may want to discuss the fact that book launches are always 
fairly horrible, even setting illness aside. And this isn't just my opinion – I 
have checked with other writers and creative sorts, including actors – whom you 
would think were simply gagging for engagement with the wider public – and the 
feedback has been comfortingly similar. It seems that for many of us, 
representing our work in the wider world always feels both disappointingly 
anti-climactic and weird. At a certain level you're aware that, even if you 
could call yourself an artist at other times, you are currently much more of a 
pimp. And, given that you're halfway pimping yourself… well, your job 
description gets rapidly less appetising.

At this point, all those of you who haven't been published will wish to shout 
at your screens/HTC's/iThings/looted Blackberrys, "Yes, but… you've got it now. 
You are published. You do earn your living. Shut up and stop moaning. I will be 
delighted when I am published. I will be dancing in the sodding street, thank 
you very much." And I know how you feel. And I thought that, too. But I was 
wrong and it may be that you are wrong also. Perhaps.

When you're writing, when matters are actually going well and your work is 
being with you and you're with it – that's a cause for dancing in the street. 
When you've found someone insane enough to pay you – real cash money – for 
doing something you love and the pressure of payment hasn't thrown you off… by 
all means and why not have a go at something pavement-related and 
terpsichorean. When the first draft is finished, done, the final slope 
clambered up leaving you with skinned knees and exhausted, but you made it… 
dance away. Absolutely. When the final rewrite, the final twiddle, the 
dearGodatakeitawaybeforeIkillit stage has been passed and it's in the big, 
threatening envelope or, more likely, has been attached and emailed as per 
contractual blahdiblahs – well, that's probably an excuse for naked living room 
dancing. Or else, and do feel free, you may prefer something more alfresco 
which could help you to get arrested and therefore start the whole publicity 
machine running, albeit a touch early. And when you open the big box of author 
copies and there it is – your book… Your shiny, genuine book, in person and in 
your hands… Dance while you can, I'd say.

But publication is funny – in the sense of being not remotely amusing and not 
really very much to do with you. Publication is what your publisher enjoys – if 
that special blend of moderate concern, review-checking, subscription-checking 
and moving on to what's next from whoever's next can be called enjoying. 
Publication is when something with which you've spent a lot of time 
definitively walks away and belongs to other people who either get it, or don't 
get it, or write to you about it, or trash it in the press, or love it in the 
press (best to keep away from either) and it all feels… odd. On the one hand, 
you're thinking of what's next for you – or trying to – and seem strangely far 
away from the material you are suddenly being asked to discuss (quite possibly 
with an audience present) and on the other hand, here are all these strangers 
fossicking about in stuff that was quite recently only your stuff. Your book 
slept with you and travelled with you and woke with you and nagged you and 
delighted you and drove you crazy and tired you out. Now it's just another 
volume on a shelf – you hope – in a bookshop, much the same as all the others 
and it belongs to everyone but you. You are the only person who can't pick it 
up and read it. In fact, why on earth would you ever want to? And how lovely 
and yet really quite dispiriting it is that people will read it – this thing it 
took you years to build – in a few days and then that's that. They'll read 
something else. You're over. The launching experience is, to be frank, mainly 
lonely. I don't say this to discourage you, not at all. I say this as an 
encouragement to get your fun in early – enjoy the parts that are real, that 
are about writing. Be glad and then more glad and then absolutely grateful if 
anyone, any human being, tells you that you gave them pleasure with your work. 
If you got one person through some hours in a good way, thank them for saying 
so and thank them again and thank providence for the opportunity to be of 
service – that's the only thing that really matters, or could be worthwhile. 
Truly. And try to defend the part of you that has to be kept soft and tender, 
the simply loving place from which you write. Keep it safe from the 
writing-related experiences which are not soft and tender or simple and loving 
at all.

So I will tell you and then choose to forget the launch day I spent mainly 
feeling lousy and oppressed and dizzy and worrying about a number of matters 
including my inability to recover. I will forget about suiting up – because my 
suit knows what it's doing – and being steered out to a bookshop reading that 
felt very much like an absurd opportunity to celebrate the accumulated failures 
of my life. I will forget having to concentrate rather too hard on putting one 
word after another for an audience who had bothered to turn up and made an 
effort and who were courteous and in no way responsible for my wanting to vomit 
and lie down. I will forget wanting to curl up and cry while signing books when 
there is nothing wrong with signing books and it is very nice when people want 
them. I will forget about having dinner in a dizzyingly loud restaurant with 
three people I knew only slightly who were very kind, but who also just wanted 
to get on and have some good grub and a laugh – only there I was, the 
inconvenient spectre at my own feast. I will forget about being sick on or near 
my editor's shoes while he escorted me through a hot and weaving and vomiting 
Soho within which I seemed simply more of the same, although not drunk and not 
stoned and not determined to party – just being led to my temporary home with 
instructions to cease trading forthwith and take have a proper rest.

In four or five years, it will all be faded and simply a story. And – if I'm 
lucky – around about then I'll be doing it again. But I hope better. I do hope 
for better. And for all of you also. Onwards.
 