
Don't tell Michael Vaughan <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/michael-vaughan>
, but Australia's cricketers are in serious danger of rediscovering their 
snarl. The thin-eyed glare, the volleys of advice/abuse, the prototypically 
Australian will to win; it was all strangely missing during the Ashes last 
summer. But, suddenly, it has returned, as a country focuses on one date - 
November 23 - the day that England begin their defence of the famous urn down 
under.

Let's face it: Australia went soft on England, partly because they had been 
thrashing them for 14 years, partly because Andrew Flintoff disarmed them by 
consoling Brett Lee at the end of the Edgbaston thriller. By the time Australia 
realised they were in a scrap, England had one hand on the urn and one eye on 
Trafalgar Square. When defeat was confirmed, one ex-player bemoaned the absence 
of "mongrel". Note the breed - or the lack of it. The mongrel is as wild as the 
outback, needs little provocation, and is central to Australia's sporting 
philosophy.

In recent weeks, it seems, the mongrel has bit back. Australia's recent 
Test-series win over South Africa was marked by dissent, fines, sledging, 
accusations of excessive appealing and a concerted hatchet job on the 
opposition captain Graeme Smith. All it lacked, in fact, was a Sun-style band 
of didgeridoo players marching past the South Africans' hotel at two o'clock in 
the morning. Or perhaps they are saving that for the English.

Ricky Ponting's determination to relocate the mongrel has shades of Allan 
Border, the man who turned Australia from a bunch of losers (older readers will 
understand) into the best team in the world. In the mid-1980s, Border became 
the first Australia captain for three decades to lose successive Ashes series, 
and the English loved him for it. Not only did he lose cricket matches, but he 
lost them with good grace, which, as Tim Henman and Eddie the Eagle know, is a 
quality highly prized on these shores.

In 1989 Border changed tack, and told his opposite number David Gower he was 
"prepared to be as ruthless as it takes to stuff you". Essentially a decent man 
with a tough streak, he took a pragmatic decision and shelved the decency. When 
the England batsman Robin Smith asked for a glass of water at Trent Bridge, 
Border's response was unequivocal. "What do you think this is, a fucking tea 
party? No you can't have a fucking glass of water. You can fucking wait like 
all the rest of us." Australia won 4-0.

One of the joys of the 2005 series was the obvious respect and affection 
between the two sides, but it is a cosiness that jars with the Australian 
sporting psyche. If Ponting wants to avoid doing a Border and losing to England 
twice in a row, he will have to, well, do a Border and start growling at 
anything not wearing a baggy green. By the looks of things, it will not prove 
too difficult
 