
Deep within the preposterous Euro pudding that is Bathory, there lurks a 
would-be revisionist account of the woman cited in the Guinness World Records 
as having killed "the most number [650] of victims attributed to one 
murderess". In between Anna Friel's mad wigs, a babel of accents and a parade 
of indistinguishable Magyars, Juraj Jakubisko's film suggests Erzsébet Báthory 
was a sort of Renaissance Florence Nightingale figure who had an affair with 
Caravaggio. She didn't mean to stab her hairdresser with a pair of scissors! 
Those bathtubs of virgins' blood were nothing but water tinted red by herbs! 
She was framed!

Báthory has been portrayed on film some 30 times since 1970, has lent her name 
to a Swedish black metal band and, since she could almost be the patron saint 
of torture porn, has also been granted the dubious honour of guesting, in name 
at least, in Hostel: Part II. Her story (or myth, since it's a moot point as to 
how much of it was true and how much a calumny cooked up by the Catholic 
church) offers a film-friendly mix of lust, power, murder and the quest for 
eternal youth, with an added dash of lesbianism. No wonder the subject appealed 
to erotic auteur Walerian Borowczyk, who turned her story into one of his 
Immoral Tales in 1974, featuring Paloma Picasso and a chamber full of prettily 
photographed naked wenches.

As indicated by the title of Hammer's Countess Dracula, there's also a hint of 
vampirism, with Báthory cast as the female equivalent of Vlad Tepes in 
bloodsucker lore. The 1971 film provided the late Ingrid Pitt with one of her 
signature roles as a sort of prototype cougar who tries, with some success, to 
pass herself off as her own daughter before succumbing to accelerated ageing at 
her own wedding to a younger man. A more explicitly vampiric incarnation of the 
character can be found in Harry Kümel's glorious Daughters of Darkness, in 
which arthouse diva Delphine Seyrig swans around like a centuries-old Marlene 
Dietrich in red chiffon and silver sequins preying on a honeymooning couple in 
Ostend. As in Countess Dracula, the quest for eternal youth appears to have 
succeeded pretty well, albeit on a temporary basis.

There's a vogue for putting the case for villainesses such as the Wicked Witch 
of the West (in Gregory Maguire's Wicked), Milady de Winter (in Arturo 
Pérez-Reverte's The Dumas Club), or The Sleeping Beauty's Maleficent, 
about whom Disney is currently developing a live-action film – all of whose 
motto might as well be Jessica Rabbit's line from Who Framed Roger Rabbit: "I'm 
not bad – I'm just drawn that way." Báthory ought to be a shoo-in for this sort 
of treatment, yet both Jakubisko's and another recent film, Julie Delpy's The 
Countess, fudge the issue by failing to fix on any one genre and instead 
attempting to wrangle a coherent narrative out of incompatible chunks of 
historical epic, romance, politics, horror and half-baked feminist revisionism.

Both films try to take Báthory's corner, but at the same time are loath to do 
away entirely with the story's sensational selling points: the slaughter of 
innocents, the nude bathing and sanguinary facials. She's depicted as a victim 
in both films, trapped by 16th and 17th-century definitions of a woman's role 
and persecuted by male peers wanting to get their hands on her assets. (In 
Delpy's film, at least, the persecution comes across as somewhat justified when 
she starts slicing up peasant girls in the delusion that their blood is some 
form of early Botox.) Both films abandon the supernatural angle, but fail to 
convince at a basic psychological level.

But never mind, because there's another Báthory-fest in preproduction, which, 
on paper at least, blows all other recent efforts out of the water. Ulrike 
Ottinger is set to direct The Bloody Countess from her own screenplay, 
co-written by Elfriede Jelinek of The Piano Teacher fame. The cast features 
Isabelle Huppert, Udo Kier and erstwhile Fassbinder regular Irm Hermann, with 
none other thanTilda Swinton <https://www.theguardian.com/film/tilda-swinton> 
in the title role. With a barking mad lineup like that, I don't care what genre 
this one turns out to be; I just hope and pray it gets made.
 