
With the return this week of chatshows from Graham Norton and Paul O'Grady, we 
assess the state of the genre in 2011. In a post-Ross era, who are the chitchat 
heavyweights pulling in the big guests this side of the Atlantic? We see your 
Letterman, Mr Yankee-Doodle Beefburger, and we raise youAlan Titchmarsh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/alan-titchmarsh>. OK, our chatshows 
are mostly weedy daytime barley water to America's extra-strength bourbon, but 
we did send them Piers Morgan for part of the year so we basically win. Here 
are Britain's reigning giants of chat …

THE GRAHAM NORTON SHOW 
Friday, 10.35pm, BBC1

He's the best chatshow host because he plies his guests with booze. From 
reality show pip-squeak to major Hollywood star, all sit on his sofa, swilling 
sauv blanc while he eggs them on to one appalling overshare after another. 
Chatshows yield disappointingly few revelations from their media-trained guests 
these days, but Norton's got a gift. And he does get the actually famous on as 
opposed to a parade of Pasquales and Prengers.

PAUL O'GRADY LIVE
Friday, 9pm, ITV1

The elder statesman of the circuit now that Parky's gone, O'Grady conducts 
interviews like he's having a good bitch over the garden wall. He played 
ping-pong with ITV and Channel 4 for years but has now settled on ITV1 
primetime. Thank the stars, because O'Grady was no fun on daytime. Take a 
former drag queen from the northern club circuit and tell him to keep it clean 
and see how far you get.

FERN
Weekdays, 5pm, Channel 4

The most recent addition to daytime with her new C4 show, Fern Britton 
continues to draw the nation to her greatly reduced bosom. Every day at five 
she invites us into what looks like the pocket of a Cath Kidston apron for some 
pastel chat and cake decorating. The guests are middle-aged man-totty for the 
50+ market. It might as well have a toilet door "Ladies" sign as its logo.

THE VANESSA SHOW
Weekdays, 2.15pm, Channel 5

Vanessa Feltz <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/vanessa-feltz> 
co-hosts informal sofa banter with her fiance, Ben, who looks like he's won a 
competition. They sit at opposite ends of a pretend house, winking at each 
other. His role has been gradually reduced to sitting on a sofa while Vanessa 
grills showbiz heavyweights at the breakfast bar. Heavyweights like Right Said 
Fred.

THE ALAN TITCHMARSH SHOW
Weekdays, 3pm, ITV1

The TV equivalent of a fleece-lined mono-slipper. The ageless foliage-tamer 
augments the trad format with a panel of three celebrity fluffers who warm him 
up before he moves on to his interviews. There's always one Carole Malone-type, 
spouting hate-filled intolerance while he shrugs benignly. In true Partridge 
style, there's even a gardening spot called Alan's Allotment. Adorable.

PIERS MORGAN'S LIFE STORIES
Saturday, 9pm, ITV1

A perspiring estate agent extracts un-formation from bankable celebrons while 
the camera does big close-ups of their bone-dry yet crying faces. It's one of 
ITV1's biggest draws. Piers introduced Gordon Brown with the words, "He's about 
to face the biggest challenge of his career." What, not vomiting down your tie, 
smirko?
 