
There will be much argument about whether it was more in Azerbaijan’s or in 
Armenia’s interest to suddenly reignite a conflict that had mostly been frozen 
for over 20 years. But one thing that should not be doubted is that Europe’s 
wider interests will be at risk if a new spiral of violence erupts in the 
disputed enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh, a region where big power politics could 
all too easily overpower the calculations of local factions.

Fighting broke out last week in Nagorno-Karabakh between the Azerbaijani army 
and the Armenian separatists who have controlled the enclave since the early 
1990s, when they came out on top in what was arguably the most violent war 
associated with the demise of the Soviet Union – an estimated 30,000 people 
were killed, and a million displaced, between 1988 and 1994. Aceasefire 
announced on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/05/nagorno-karabakh-azeri-armenian-ceasefire-agreed>
, after clashes that reportedly killed dozens, could prove extremely fragile. A 
bout of diplomatic activity will now try to quell these new tensions, with 
Russian emissaries due to visit the capitals, Baku in Azerbaijan and Yerevan in 
Armenia, and a delegation of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in 
Europe expected to travel to the region. Concerns about the conflict escalating 
have also been aired in the US and the EU.

This far-flung, almost forgotten conflict matters so much because Armenia and 
Azerbaijan stand at a crossroads of geopolitical confrontations. Although 
Armenia never officially recognised the self-declared independence of 
Nagorno-Karabakh, it has backed it through financial and military means. Russia 
is, in turn, the traditional ally of Christian Armenia. On the other side of 
the frontline, Muslim, Turkic-speaking and energy-rich Azerbaijan has long been 
supported by Turkey. And over the last year, Russian-Turkish relationshave been 
poisoned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/30/turkey-says-russian-jet-invaded-its-airspace-despite-warnings>
 by the war in Syria, so there is an dangerous potential for escalation if 
passions are not rapidly quelled: an all-out war over Nagorno-Karabakh could 
drag in both the big regional powers.

Less-than-reassuring was the reaction of Turkey’s prime minister, Ahmet 
Davutoğlu, to the recent outburst of fighting. Ankara would,he said 
<http://uk.mobile.reuters.com/article/idUKKCN0X20V2?irpc=932>, “stand 
shoulder-to-shoulder with Azerbaijan in the face of Armenian aggression and 
occupation until the end of time”. Official Russian declarations, meanwhile, 
were ascribing all responsibility solely to Azerbaijan. Russia was quick to 
position itself last week as a potential peace broker but it has also played an 
ambiguous game over the years, intensely arming both sides of the conflict.

Nagorno-Karabakh is, along with Transnistria, Abkhazia and South Ossetia – and 
since 2014, Eastern Ukraine – one of a series of separatist conflicts that can 
flare up anytime and further inflame relations between Russia and the west. And 
all sorts of local factors could pile extra fuel on to the immediate fire: 
nationalist sentiment and warmongering slogans on both sides, and indeed
revelations from the Panama Papers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/05/panama-papers-london-law-firm-helped-azerbaijan-first-family-set-up-secret-offshore-firm>
 which pile extra pressure on the Azerbaijani presidency, which could make 
incendiary talk of reconquering lost territory seem like a welcome diversion. 
But whatever motivations may yet be at work on each side of this conflict, 
swift international diplomacy is urgently needed to address a volatile crisis 
before it takes on larger proportions, with unpredictable consequences. The 
world looks to Russia and to Turkey to play their cards with care.
 