
Between now and mid-June the European political elite must give its answer to 
an existential question. Will it honour the deal it made to rescue Greece last 
July; or will it push the radical left government into default –effectively 
creating a failed state in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/09/greece-financial-emergency-tragic-absurd-imf-debt-relief>
?

That this is primarily Europe’s dilemma, not Greece’s or the IMF’s, is clear 
after Monday’s Eurogroup. The IMF boss, Christine Lagarde, warned the Europeans 
that the Washington-based fundwill not participate in further bailouts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/06/imf-threatens-greece-eurozone-christine-lagarde>
 without a substantial debt write-off.

In turn, the Greek prime minister, Alexis Tsipras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexis-tsipras>, forced through the last of 
the main austerity measures demanded by creditors: reforms to the pension 
system that will leave worse off everyone who is receiving more than €1,000 
(£800) a month, and demand much higher contributions from workers in future.

However, by delaying their approval until now, the lenders have managed, once 
again, to pushGreece <https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> towards 
bankruptcy. Although growth is better than predicted, tax receipts are still 
dire and bailout disbursements suspended.

Worse, and more insidious, the months of callous inaction have pushed the mood 
in Greek society into a dangerous place. A population that, two years ago, 
started demanding and giving printed receipts as an act of collective moral 
renewal, has given up on them once again. The most popular graffiti tag has 
become “all this political shit”.

The only thing that can end the crisis is debt restructuring. One way or 
another, Europe’s creditors – the taxpayers of Germany, France, the Netherlands 
etc – have to lose money. It may be dressed up by extending repayment dates; or 
it may take the form of the “haircut”, whereby the treasuries of northernEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> – and the ECB – write down the 
value of the €350bn they have lent Greece. But it has to happen. And that means 
Germany’s politicians must change their minds.

The old problem in Europe was a transnational freemarket economy with no 
democratic government; a central bank obliged by treaty to impose deflation; 
and a Germany willing to take the upside of the project – 4% unemployment 
versus 25% in Greece – but never to lead it. The new problem is different: when 
the EU overturned the will of the Greek people last year July, it became, 
effectively, a political entity based on force, not law.

Those applying the force were the German elite and a collection of east 
European countries who have in common weak democratic traditions, 
mafia-infested economies and rightwing electorates still traumatised by the 
Soviet era. Then, in a second act of force, by overturning the Dublin Treaty 
and letting nearly a million refugees come to Germany, Angela Merkel destroyed 
the coalition that had imposed the defeat on Greece. Eastern Europe has defied 
Merkel’s call for refugee quotas and answered her appeal for humanitarianism by 
putting razor wire at every border choke-point.

So, now it’s no longer about austerity: there is a three-way battle for the 
soul of Europe; between a beleaguered centre that’s seeing its consent to 
govern drain away; a resurgent nationalist and racist right; and a modernised 
radical left. The Greek request for debt relief poses to the European centre 
the question: which side are you on?

Amid this, the resurgent radical left faces tough decisions of its own. To 
understand why, we have to understand the source of its recent strength. 
Podemos came out of the millions-strongindignados movement in 2011; Syriza 
expanded during the “occupation of the squares” the same year. The 188,000 
people who joined the Labour party during and after Corbyn’s campaign are not 
just trade unionists and old lefties; at their core are student activists who 
learned their politics during occupation movement of 2010/11, and hordes of 
returning Greens. Sinn Fein’s transformation and growth in Ireland is likewise 
driven by a grassroots protest movement against water charges.

But in every one of these left movements there is a disconnect between the 
political culture of the networked youth and structures and ideologies 
inherited from the mid-20th-century left.

Syriza, although it governs, is substantially hollowed out as a political 
force. Although its leaders are still prepared to say, “We do austerity under 
protest,” they no longer so often complete the thought “... and it will not 
work.”

With a vacuum on the left, what has broken through in Greece is pessimism, 
cynicism and economic nationalism, pooled with large amounts of suppressed 
anger. “Being held incommunicado in a cell drives you mad quicker than knowing 
you’re going to be executed,” is how they put it in the coffee bars of Athens.

Tsipras has spent so long seeking closure with Greece’s lenders that, should 
he achieve a debt deal by June, it may feel like victory. But unless he finds a 
way to rebuild the left as a combined political and social movement, it will be 
hollow.

To return both Greece and Europe to the path of social justice and human 
rights, we need, yes, some modernised left parties prepared to fight the power 
of capital. But we also need grassroots action to achieve things from below.

If the worst happens, and the European project falls apart, then all the left 
can offer is that movement from below. From Madrid to Athens to Westminster, 
the new breed of radical left politicians needs to understand this and break 
out of the mesmeric bubble of parliamentary success. Europe’s leaders are 
dicing with disaster – and no longer just in Athens. Europe’s people must be 
mobilised to ensure that neither harsh austerity nor anti-migrant racism 
defines the end years of this decade.
 