
A few short weeks from now, with the world looking on, William Arthur Philip 
Louis Windsor willexchange rings <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/royal-wedding> 
with Catherine Elizabeth Middleton, and much of Britain will rejoice. Yet, at 
such moments, certain voices – this newspaper's included – have long expressed 
dissent. All this mawkish celebration, they maintain, merely bolsters an 
anti-democratic institution based on privilege and patronage, a costly 
anachronism that ought to be abolished. That view is understandable. But it is 
time for them – for us – to reconsider. A decade ago, the Guardianprominently 
announced its commitment to republicanism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2000/dec/06/monarchy.guardianleaders>. But 
Prince William has shown that he can be a new kind of king. That is why, in a 
significant change of course, we today pledge our full-throated support for the 
British monarchy.

Let's face it: the current crop of world leaders is far from inspiring. Across 
the Arab world, dictators battle their own people; at home, attitudes towards 
Cameron and Clegg alternate between apathy and outrage. In America, the hope 
that greeted Barack Obama has long since faded. AsThe King's Speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/137858/king-s-speech> so vividly 
reminded us, there are times when only the calming leadership of a hereditary 
monarch will do; and as the MPs' expenses scandal illustrates, it can be 
dangerous to trust power-hungry elected officials, who lack the security 
provided by land ownership and immense wealth. Amid all this, William in 
particular stands out as something unique: a bastion of tradition with a deeply 
modern sensibility – not to mention a helicopter pilot's licence. When the time 
comes, we urge Prince Charles to redouble his focus on his important work in 
the field of alternative medicine, and to pass the mantle of head of state to 
his son.

For too long, a hair-shirt tendency on the left has insisted that a commitment 
to progressive values is incompatible with an appreciation for the magic and 
wonder of royalty. But in this era of austerity, couldn't we all do with being 
a bit more "happy and glorious"? Few things, after all, are as likely to lift 
the spirits of Britain's embattled public sector workers or benefit claimants 
than the sight of Kate Middleton's sure-to-be-spectacular wedding dress.

The couple themselves, meanwhile, reflect values close to this paper's own. 
William encapsulates our spirit of internationalism, thanks to his Greek and 
German heritage on his father's side, and his gap year in Chile. Kate embodies 
our commitment to gender equality in the way in which she has faced work-life 
challenges common to many women today, juggling such roles as accessories buyer 
for Jigsaw and being one of Tatler magazine's top 10 fashion icons. Other 
royals, too, are surely deserving of recognition: belatedly, for example, we 
have come to appreciate the crucial work done by Prince Andrew, using his 
personal connections to plant the seeds of democracy in repressive regimes 
worldwide.

Beginning today, the Guardian announces a raft of changes designed to ensure 
that our royal coverage is unrivalled by any other media organisation. We begin 
an unprecedented month-long, 24-hour royal wedding live blog, offering 
minute-by-minute coverage of the preparations. We will be recalling 
correspondents from some less newsworthy parts of the globe, such as north 
Africa and south-east Asia, so they can focus on palace matters instead. And we 
will shortly be making available to readers a range of attractive commemorative 
crockery.

The marriage of a prince to a commoner – a true bridging of class divides, if 
ever there was one – represents the perfect moment for progressives to commit 
again to the promise of hereditary monarchy. Great philosophers, from Burke to 
Andrew Morton, have argued powerfully for the institution's value. In any case, 
it would be churlish to fight the tide of excitement and optimism currently 
flooding the nation. It is time to put away the cynicism, and get out the union 
jacks.
 