
As cathedrals of dreams go, Abbey Road's Studio Two is unprepossessing. It has 
something of the air of an old school gymnasium: battered parquet floors, 
whitewashed brick walls, a ceiling with elaborate mouldings that could do with 
a lick of paint.

According to the studio manager, Dave Holly: "It's functional and unchanged 
since about 1960, because people who use it want the heritage as well as the 
sound."

Stripped of any instruments or recording equipment, the only hints of its 
glamorous function are some theatrical spotlights, apparently installed in the 
mid-60s at the Beatles' behest.

It suggests that Studio Two was no more alluring when musical history was 
being made within its north London walls than it is today, open to the public 
for the first time, serving as a makeshift gallery for a photographic 
exhibition.

But it is still hard not to feel overawed. This was the room in which that 
first, clanging chord of A Hard Day's Night echoed around, where the whine of 
feedback at the start of I Feel Fine was accidentally discovered, the room from 
which John Lennon was led away by Paul McCartney after mixing up his supply of 
pills and accidentally taking LSD while recording Sergeant Pepper's Getting 
Better.

Dave Holly is full of tales of American record company executives kissing the 
studio floor and bursting into tears while being shown round. Not even rock 
superstars are immune. The exhibition brochure contains a poem by Roger Waters 
in which the erstwhile leader of Pink Floyd hymns the "asdic ping" of pianos 
past and "dancing motes that never fade away".

The exhibition forms part of the Abbey Road Film Festival, a fortnight-long 
attempt to draw attention to the studio's "pre-eminence as the world's greatest 
centre for film scoring". Films are being shown in the larger Studio One, and 
accordingly, the Studio Two exhibition makes a brave attempt to play down the 
Beatles' role.

They recorded virtually everything they released here, but there are only two 
photographs of them, plus a rare post-Beatles shot of Paul McCartney with a 
loaded tray from the studio canteen.

The first Beatles photo dates from around 1963. They are in shirts and ties, 
listening intently to their producer, George Martin: these were clearly still 
the days when he told them what to do. By the time of the second photo, the 
opposite istrue. Lennon and Ringo Starr stand in their Sergeant Pepper regalia, 
surrounded by impossibly beautiful-looking young women and men.

The rest of the exhibition is given over to Studio Two's other denizens. Pink 
Floyd are pictured listening to a playback in the control room, wearing 
expressions that strongly suggest their motes are failing to dance and their 
pings are insufficiently asdic.

But most of the subjects emphasise Abbey Road's pre-pop history - Glen Miller 
recorded his last studio session here - and its links with the cinema: Dirk 
Bogarde, Bing Crosby and Fred Astaire, Bette Davis and, perhaps slightly less 
exotically, Gracie Fields, who apparently turned up to recording sessions 
dressed in a manner that would be considered too formal for dinner at 
Buckingham Palace.

Dudley Moore plays the piano, while just out of focus, the rest of the Beyond 
the Fringe team look on from the control room stairs.

You take the exhibition's point, but it has set itself a hopeless task. Nobody 
kisses the floor or bursts into tears because Harry H Corbett and Frankie 
Howerd recorded a version of Alice in Wonderland here. Nobody who wanders 
through Studio Two's doors in the next fortnight is in search of a sense memory 
of Matt Monroe's hair oil or Sophia Loren's perfume.

Almost 36 years after they last convened here, The Beatles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/thebeatles> still seem to own the studio. 
Every scrawled message on the wall outside relates to the Fab Four, apart from 
a game effort to assert McFly's superiority to Lennon and McCartney, a couple 
of mentions of Pink Floyd, and a Japanese tourist's attempt to draw attention 
to his own band - which seems to be called PLINCIPAL.

The studio was not even called Abbey Road before the album of the same name 
was released: for the first 68 years it was simply EMI Studios.

"I've spoken to about seven film crews this morning," says Dave Holly. "We 
seem to get on to the Beatles pretty quickly."

And yet, it's easier to picture the early Beatles here than the makers of 
Sergeant Pepper. It is difficult to imagine Strawberry Fields Forever or To 
morrow Never Knows emanating from such ascetic surroundings.

Perhaps it would seem different if it was late at night, and the lights were 
low and the air was thick with incense and marijuana smoke.

What you can imagine is the sort of scene depicted in the exhibition's first 
Beatles' photograph: the four of them in shirts and ties, listening intently 
and respectfully to their producer, before he bounds up the staircase to the 
control room and they dutifully launch into another ver sion of Money or All My 
Loving or It Won't Be Long.

· Alexis Petridis is the Guardian's pop and rock critic. 

· The Abbey Road Film Festival runs from today until April 3. Admission to 
screenings are £15 and £20.
 