
C's mother has this amazing way of saying "No". Whenever she says it, T stops 
whatever it was he was doing. It's almost as if it conveys some kind of 
meaning, which he understands. I can't say how she does it. I guess the tone is 
relatively firm and unambiguous, but I think that's true of most people when 
they say "no". She has an unperturbed pitch, which manages simultaneously to 
convey that a) she trenchantly disagrees with taking all the DVDs off the 
shelf, then squirting them with milk, then putting them in the bin and yet b) 
she is emotionally neutral about the DVDs and isn't about to get upset or 
hysterical or anything.

This is how you're meant to be with animals, firm but dispassionate. I read 
this in a book (ha, a lie - actually a short article) about training leopards. 
All attention is currency, so anger or irritation are as likely to encourage 
behaviour as avert it, since they're all on a spectrum of excitement, and 
animals (also children, also many adults) can't tell the difference. They just 
know some fun excitement has occurred.

So I get the principle. I just cannot apply it. How do you sound as if you 
mean it, and yet that you are ultimately above it all? It's an incredibly 
subtle manoeuvre. Or maybe I'm reading too much into it; maybe she does the 
same voice as everybody else, but combines it with hypnosis.

Yes, it's that time already. Precisely a metaphorical five minutes ago, T 
could only roll and had no free will, and even if he'd had it, he wouldn't have 
been able to act on it. Now he has all the free will in the world, and he 
channels it all, for every second that he's awake, into breaking things. It's 
concentrated, totally diligent destruction, like a kind of anti-job. Or maybe 
he's trying to keep the economy afloat by making me constantly buy new stuff. 
What he can't break, he puts in the bin, closes the bin and keeps his fingers 
crossed that some crushing machine will cover his failure somewhere down the 
chain of turning perfectly serviceable things into rubbish. If by some 
appalling chance I'm watching the bin, or sitting on the bin, he puts the stuff 
through the cat flap. I have lost things that have literally never been lost, 
by anybody, in history. I have lost the landline phone, and the weights off the 
kitchen scales and one trainer. And the pastry lattice-cutter. And the DVD of 
Buffy - the Musical. And a flannel.

Naturally, the answer to all this is to devise some sort of training system, 
where I would say "no" and he would heed me and go off to play with something 
fit for purpose. So this is how it goes: I say "no", T looks at me, continues 
on course; I say "no" again, he looks at me, smiles, continues on course; C, 
exasperated, says "no" in a more staccato tone, and I immediately start 
laughing, because even though I know this is nauseatingly indulgent, lazy, 
irresponsible, short-sighted parenting, it does amuse me how totally T ignores 
the both of us. One of us, now, will attempt to distract T, although I have to 
admit, we just as often distract each other by arguing about how annoying I am.

But of course there comes a point when the behaviour is not even fleetingly 
amusing, it is simply untenable, and let's call that point "pulling an animal's 
tail".

He cannot pull the cat's tail because it is cruel. He needs to learn empathy. 
She is not a young cat; she finds the incursion of his existence stressful 
enough, I think, without the ceaseless physical torment. And he cannot pull the 
dog's tail because one of these days he'll get bitten in the face. So after a 
day full of half-hearted "no"s, "no"s followed by undermining laughter, 
inconsistent "no"s, "no"s tinged with a confusing lack of conviction, suddenly 
he gets the full force of a bellowed"NO. THAT IS REALLY BAD!"

T is appalled: there's been no incremental build-up, no slightly bad to worse 
to really bad - just regular, pushover parent to raging bull in considerably 
under 60 seconds. He wails. The dog thinks it's his fault, creeps to a corner. 
The cat hides under the furniture. The room is an absolute picture of misery.

This is reading like a textbook in how not to do discipline, isn't it? I'm 
like anti-supernanny. For brevity, crap-nanny.
 