
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> will recall her 
habit of dancing to Abba’s Dancing Queen in a pair of flared trousers and a 
yellow blouse with “huge voluminous sleeves” during a guest appearance onDesert 
Island Discs. The Radio 4 programme is, at times, in danger of making her sound 
like a veteran clothes designer rather than a woman with her eyes fixed on 
Britain’s top political job – especially when May selects a lifetime 
subscription toVogue magazine as her one permitted luxury item.

“I enjoy clothes,” the home secretary confesses, adding that she wants an Abba 
track to have “something to jump up and down to”. “My husband and I are sort of 
theAbba <https://www.theguardian.com/music/abba> generation,” the 58-year-old 
politician explains.

“So, home secretary, did you agree to appear as a castaway to show a warmer, 
personal side?” asks the presenter, Kirsty Young, before many discs have been 
spun. After all, Young continues, the leading Conservative has been criticised 
by parliamentary colleagues in the past for not being sufficiently clubbable.

No, May insists, this is not the reason for the interview. “This is genuinely 
a huge opportunity to do a programme that has become an integral part of 
British life. Not everybody gets invited onDesert Island Discs.” And when it 
comes to clubbability and hanging around in Westminster bars, she is 
forthright: “It is not me.”

The first of her chosen eight discs is the Four Seasons’ hit Walk Like a Man, 
and yet, although May loves the song, she argues it is important to her that 
she is allowed to do her job as herself. In politics, she says: “People should 
not feel they ought to walk like a man.”

Young repeatedly questions May about her supposed ambition to lead her party, 
but she will not be drawn: “David Cameron is a first-class leader and a 
first-class prime minister. I hope he will be doing it for a very long time.”

Her own political philosophy revolves around the idea that “individual people 
can make better decisions than government”. She says: “I don’t think I have got 
a ruthless streak. And I don’t have an ‘ism’ other than Conservatism.”

Her Home Office role, May confirms to Young, is tough and so she would like 
one desert island track to “enliven my mood on occasion”. A recording from the 
1980s BBC sitcomYes, Minister fits the bill; she is given an extract from the 
episode The Compassionate Society, written by Antony Jay and Jonathan Lynn, in 
which a government minister learns that a new hospital in north London is 
treating only one patient.

Philip May, her banker husband of 34 years, is “her rock”, the home secretary 
says. He helped her cope when her mother and then her father, who had been an 
Anglican cleric, died in quick succession in 1981. May and her husband met, she 
confirms, when they were Oxford students attending a Conservative Association 
disco. A fellow undergraduate, the late Pakistani politician Benazir Bhutto, 
made the introduction. Was there a romanticcoup de foudre? “I quite liked him,” 
reveals May.

The hardest part of her current job is being forced to look at the worst side 
of humanity, and further shocking revelations about historical child abuse lie 
ahead, May strongly suggests: “We have only just begun to even start to 
recognise the enormity of this question.”

In a highly controlled performance, the politician admits to just one recent 
mistake: parliament should perhaps have been given a vote on European arrest 
warrants. “If we were starting again we should look at that,” she says.

Asked by Young about her diagnosis last year as a type 1 diabetic, May is 
characteristically matter-of-fact. “I just get on and deal with it. I inject 
insulin four times a day. You just have to get into a regime,” she says.

As a book to read during her desert island stay, the home secretary picks Jane 
Austen’sPride and Prejudice.
 