
The outsourcing bandwagon has now been rolling for three decades, but it's 
remarkable how little robust evidence we have about contracts and contracting 
in public service. Assertions and propaganda, yes; rigorous evaluation and 
instructive case studies, no.

The Local Government Association says 
<http://www.local.gov.uk/shared-services-map> hundreds of councils across 
England – 95% of them – are now inside shared service arrangements. The LGA 
claims hundreds of millions of efficiency savings. That's a formidable body of 
potential evidence, but to be useable it needs audit and high-grade external 
appraisal. Shared services may be an efficient alternative to outsourcing, but 
as yet we have no way of knowing.

The Institute for Government's Tom Gash – who is as clued up as anyone – has 
to reach back to the 1980s to come up with credible figures on possible savings 
from outsourcing. Those came from the first round of local authority cleaning 
and bin emptying contracts, which were very much of their time. Why is there 
nothing more recent?

The IfG and the National Audit Office have done good, informative work about 
the companies proffering their services. But where are the shelves full of 
analysis on the voluminous experience of Whitehall and local government in 
specifying, letting and monitoring service contracts with for-profit firms?

"Good question", was the response of the Cabinet Office's Ed Welsh, who was on 
the panel with Gash at a recent IfG "new ways of working in Whitehall" event. 
Welsh is an ex-Rothschild banker in charge of promoting commercial models. He 
can't be held responsible for the Cabinet Office's failure to do research and 
collect data, which could be due to its oddly contingent relationship with 
other departments. The same could be said of the Treasury and Number 10.

Such as with defence. The Ministry of Defence's permanent secretary Jon 
Thompson said at the IfG that the MoD was not going to take instruction from 
the Cabinet Office but it could surely benefit from intelligent appraisal of 
how other departments, and local authorities, have dealt with private firms. Of 
course, military procurement and national security are particular to the MoD, 
but couldn't there be a wide two-way street between it and the rest of 
Whitehall on markets, commissioning and performance improvement?

A more public debate needs to be had. The failures of Serco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/sercogroup>, G4S and Atos have convinced 
most people the claim traditionally made for outsourcing – that contracting 
saves money without jeopardising service quality – is false. So where next?

Ministers (justice minister Chris Grayling at their head) still have dogmatic 
views about the benefits of compulsory tendering, but Whitehall officials add 
they must also think through the consequences of outsourcing for accountability 
and the involvement of service users. Does outsourcing really bring innovation, 
or are there other ways of improving performance in public services and 
departments?

Unusually, the consultants who are so facile at putting themselves ahead of 
the game are struggling to catch up.PriceWaterhouseCoopers, the patrons of the 
IfG seminar, produced a booklet, Opening Out? <http://www.psrc.pwc.com>, which 
is still locked into the belief that private firms will always do a better job, 
and that government should not press them too hard on their performance and 
profits.

Even the Confederation of British Industry, which has been conducting a 
consultation on the future of public services contracting,acknowledges that 
after Serco and G4S, the least the public expects is transparency 
<http://www.cbi.org.uk/business-issues/public-services/21st-century-public-services/>
 around their governance, ownership and profits.

Is it naive to look forward to a more reasoned and evidence-rich discussion 
about how public bodies cope with financial pressure and demand, given what we 
now know about the limits and risks of traditional contracting?

David Walker is contributing editor to the Guardian Public Leaders Network

• Want your say? Email us at public.leaders@theguardian.com. 

Join the Public Leaders Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for more comment, analysis 
andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/government-and-politics/senior-executive/>, 
direct to your inbox. Follow us on twitter via@Guardianpublic 
<https://twitter.com/guardianpublic>.
 