
I've just asked Ken Loach if he is a "romantic". The 67-year-old director 
seems perplexed by the question. "No, not really, no, no ... I can't think of 
any way that would apply to me," he says, as if someone had just inquired if he 
ever votes Tory. Nonetheless, there is a strong romantic undertow to his new 
film,Ae Fond Kiss <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ae-fond-kiss>, the third 
part of his so-called "Glasgow trilogy" with writer Paul Laverty (after My Name 
Is Joe and Sweet Sixteen).

The archaic-sounding title comes from an old Robert Burns poem. It's a story 
of love across the ethnic divide. Roisin (Eva Birthistle) is a young Catholic 
teacher who starts an affair with Casim (Atta Yaqub), a second-generation 
Scottish-Pakistani. The hitch is that he is due to marry his cousin in nine 
weeks' time and his parents, Tariq and Sadia, devout Muslims, are appalled that 
he has chosen to live with a "goree", a white girl.

For Loach and Laverty, Ae Fond Kiss is about assimilation, racism, arranged 
marriages and the problems of immigrant families. Laverty says he was inspired 
to write the film by the events in the wake of 9/11, when "Muslims were 
demonised". He had heard from friends how Scottish-Asian kids were targeted and 
bullied after the terrorist attacks and he wanted to explore "another part of 
Scottish culture". Loach, for his part, describes the relationship at the heart 
of Ae Fond Kiss in typically downbeat language. "It's two people who fancy each 
other, and want to be together, and get on - that's not romantic: that's the 
way you are when you meet somebody you really enjoy being with; like and laugh 
with and are touched by and care for."

Whatever the writer and director claim, many audiences are likely to take Ae 
Fond Kiss as a romantic drama: an East Is East-style version of Romeo and 
Juliet relocated to the south side of Glasgow. Even the actress Eva Birthistle 
describes it as "a love story ... a very gentle love story." For once in a 
Loach movie, there are few explicit political references. This is nothing like 
the account of the bungled privatisation of the railways (The Navigators) or of 
the justice-for-janitor campaign in the US (Bread and Roses). The real emphasis 
is on the family - and the threat that Casim's affair with a white woman poses 
to it. In particular, Casim risks ruining for ever his relationship with his 
revered father (Ahmad Riaz).

Loach acknowledges that there are parallels with his own experiences. When he 
gave up his legal career to work in drama, his father (an electrician) was 
intensely disappointed. "But he came round in the end. When I got a job at the 
BBC, that was seen as respectable ... he thought that was a steady job because 
the money came in regularly."

Loach is a deceptively mild-mannered film-maker. On set, Birthistle recalls, 
he was "very friendly and unassuming and gentle and vicar-like, but he has a 
clever way of making you believe you came up with an idea when actually he is 
getting his way." His methods are well known. He shoots in sequence, rarely 
rehearses, and doesn't allow his actors (many of whom are non-professionals) to 
know in advance what is going to happen to the characters they play.

"It's a liberating way to work," Birthistle says. "It keeps you on your toes. 
It's as close to real life as is humanly possible. You don't know what's around 
the next corner.

"But we were trying to wheedle information out of crew members, who've all 
read the script, after they'd had a couple of drinks in the pub. They get 
frightened if you sit beside them and suddenly walk off in case you ask them 
any questions."

Loach's goal is always to capture what he calls "authenticity of experience". 
In one key scene in which Roisin is confronted by Casim's family for the first 
time, the director deliberately kept secret from Eva what she was about to see. 
"In the first take, the shock actually made her colour up, and tears came to 
her eyes. If you rehearsed that, you'd never get that. You can't do that to 
order," he says.

The director's reputation as a polemicist who shoots in his own gritty, 
realist style is so ingrained that critics are sometimes oblivious to the 
humour in his movies and to the delicate way in which he treats relationships. 
In his work with Laverty, relationships are invariably foregrounded. My Name Is 
Joe was the tale of a love affair between a recovering drunk (wonderfully 
played by Peter Mullan) and a middle-class health visitor. The strongest parts 
of Carla's Song were arguably those dealing with the relationship between 
Nicaraguan refugee (Oyanka Cabezas) and the Glaswegian bus driver (Robert 
Carlyle) she meets by chance. In Bread and Roses (which he is currently 
re-editing), he interweaves the story of the Justice for Janitors campaign with 
an account of the relationship between Maya (Pilar Padilla), the young Mexican 
woman recently arrived in LA and the union activist Sam (Adrien Brody).

The difference about Ae Fond Kiss is that the love affair is not just an 
element in a bigger story: it is the central focus. The film features some of 
the frankest sex scenes in any of Loach's work. The director admits these were 
hard to film without lapsing into voyeurism or prurience. "I don't know whether 
we've succeeded, but we tried to play it straight and not lose the emotional 
contact between the people, the eye contact. The relationship stays there and 
they don't just become bodies."

Still, Loach doesn't want to spend too long discussing the intricacies of 
shooting sex scenes. It's intriguing how quickly he will steer any given 
conversation back to politics. During a press conference at the Berlin film 
festival, after patiently answering questions about whether or not Ae Fond Kiss 
was optimistic or romantic, he took the opportunity to launch a withering 
attack on the Labour government's policies toward asylum seekers. Ask him about 
his recent trip to Japan to accept the £85,000 Praemium Imperiale from the 
Japanese Royal Family and he'll acknowledge that, yes, it was a little 
"surreal" having an audience with the Japanese emperor and his wife ("they were 
very pleasant"), but he then tells you that he was much more interested in 
meeting some sacked Japanese railway workers, to whom he donated part of his 
prize.

Ask him about the changes he has witnessed in British film culture over the 
years, and he advocates a nationalised cinema chain. "We need cinemas that are 
programmed by people who enjoy films, not by people who are good at looking 
after fast food - cinemas which have a wide range of films on show and are not 
driven by the market. Imagine if you did that in libraries: you'd just have 
John Grisham and Jeffrey Archer books in public libraries."

The day before I interviewed Loach, I was in the audience at a special 
European Film Academy event in Berlin, entitled How I Learned to Stop Worrying 
and Love the Critics. Speaking on the panel, Loach struck a surprisingly fierce 
note. He expressed his dismay at "trivial" and "celebrity-driven" reviewing, 
and bemoaned critics who "don't take on board the subject matter you're trying 
to deal with", or spend too much of their time comparing films to earlier 
movies they have seen. "That's completely stupid and a waste of space and 
irresponsible and they (the critics) should be knee-capped," he said.

He went on to argue that big Hollywood movies provided reviewers with the 
perfect opportunity to become politically engaged. "You can actually write 
about American imperialism if you get the chance to review Black Hawk Down," he 
said. "The films Hollywood make give us a way of speaking about their role in 
the world."

Loach, one guesses, will not be happy if critics and audiences choose to 
regard Ae Fond Kiss as a romantic drama and to ignore the bigger question it 
poses about class, race and religion. Nor does he much enjoy the reverence in 
which he is held by his peers. "You have to remember you're just one person who 
has contributed to a series of films ... they owe as much to writers like Paul 
Laverty, Jim Allen and all the other people who've worked on them as to me. 
We've just been lucky to hit it off on certain occasions - and the director 
often takes the credit for other people's work."

Even now, he is not quite sure what his work has achieved. Back in the late 
1960s, his famous TV drama Cathy Come Home (about a homeless mother) provoked 
questions in parliament and led to the founding of homelessness charity, 
Shelter. His 1990 feature, Hidden Agenda (a film he now dismisses as "not 
terribly good") dealt directly with Britain's shoot-to-kill policy in Northern 
Ireland. In his work, he has tackled social and political questions head-on. 
But ask him if he feels his films have made a difference and he strikes a 
strangely tentative note. "A film or a television programme can contribute to a 
climate of opinion," he muses. "That's all you can do: add that one voice to a 
general discussion about a particular subject."

·  Ae Fond Kiss screens at the Edinburgh film festival on August 22, 23 and 27 
and is on general release on September 17.
 