
EU heirs and graces

Tony Blair

He was all set to become president of Europe. Cherie was busy picking out 
robes and trying to decide between a 12-starred sceptre and a Wallonia-shaped 
tiara as her leaderene accoutrement of choice. All was well. And then the 
bloody foreigners start playing up.

French and German socialists start up with all this "he's not a socialist" 
stuff. EU conservatives start saying, "Yes, he's nice to rich people and he 
starts wars, but really, he's still not one of us either," and before you know 
it, in a terrible twist of fate, Gordon Brown is the last man standing in 
support of the former most popular boy in school.

Will he press ahead with getting Tony the job that he has broken all pledges 
on holding a constitutional referendum to bring within his grasp? Or will he, 
driven mad with the desire to see that smile falter just once, go the other 
way? Who's to say? Who's to say?

Albert Square exit

Barbara Windsor

You'reavvinalarfincha? Alas, no. The actor has announced that after 15 years 
she is quitting her EastEnders' role as Peggy Mitchell, Queen Vic landlady, 
stilettoed mistress of all she surveys, mother to a brace of sociopaths, 
betrayed wife of Frank Butcher (is there any other kind?), part-time gangster's 
moll, insurance scammer, blood feuder, pint-sized pot of squawking prejudice, 
misery, venom, idiocy and innumerable other qualities that ensured she was 
taken straight to the bosom of the soap's viewing family.

Windsor, 72, says it's time for her to spend some time with her husband, Scott 
Mitchell, 47. "He's not getting any younger," she explained. Here's to you, you 
chirpy-off-set little Cockney sparrer.

Crystal clear

Andre Agassi

The 1992 Wimbledon champion and winner of seven other Grand Slam titles has 
published his autobiography which reveals that he took crystal meth in the late 
90s before marring Brooke Shields and lied when he failed a drugs test in 1997, 
claiming he had had his drink spiked.

Oh, and he hates tennis. Hates it, hates it, hates it "with a dark and secret 
passion and always have", recalling the hours before his last tournament in 
2006. By then, he says, his body was prematurely aged by the physical stress of 
years of competitive play and training. Observers will note that this still 
leaves the most pressing question of his career – namely, the 1985-1994 Michael 
Bolton hair – unanswered.

What we've learned

Britain is the 12th most prosperous country when ranked by wealth and happiness

Exactly where the battle of Bosworth was fought 524 years ago

Yves Saint Laurent was last year's highest earning dead celebrity – 'he' raked 
in £213m

One shop in 10 has closed down in the UK over the past nine months

10% of 14-year-old boys have a reading age of nine

… and what we haven't

What we're going to do with our time now that scientists can create eggs and 
sperm in the lab
 