
I'm late for everything. I'm always texting that I'll be there in five 
minutes. My friends have two times: Angela time and real time.

My father was Irish and my mother was born to Italian parents. My mum says I'm 
more like my dad's family, very laid-back, but I always support Italy in the 
World Cup. England at a push.

My family always ate together. My mother or my grandmother cooked. I was the 
eldest granddaughter so I had to help wash up and clear the table. My brother 
was older than me but never had to help because he was a boy. It was an Italian 
thing.

When I was a student I worked as a postman over Christmas. There was one 
Alsatian on the round that I thought would take my hand off so I used to repost 
that family's letters. I apologise if they never got their Christmas cards.

I used to go to Waterstone's to read between services when I worked at Pétrus. 
They had sofas, so I could cat-nap as well. If I was reading a book at home I 
wouldn't bring it in – I'd find it on the shelf, carry on from where I'd got 
to, then put it back.

My grandmother made pasta by hand. She had great strength – there were no 
machines back then and nothing was ever weighed. It was all done by eye and 
feel.

Running a kitchen can be more about people management than cooking. I look for 
people who are passionate and hard working. And they need a sense of humour.

Chefs sometimes don't realise there's a world outside of cooking.

Gordon Ramsay taught me that even if you're sending out a bacon sandwich it's 
got to be the best. He can be extremely kind. I was having a bad time in Dubai 
once and he said, "Shall I come over?"

Female-run kitchens are calmer. Which isn't to say women can't get just as 
angry.

It's been easier for me because I'm a woman. Being one of a few women in a 
male-dominated profession makes you stand out. Some might think I'm dissing the 
sisterhood, but I'm being honest.

I'm very happy with my life. I could have gone the family-and-kids route but 
that's still not beyond the realms of possibility. People are having kids at 70 
these days.

Angela is at the Taste of London restaurant festival at Regent's Park, 17-20 
June (tastefestivals.com <http://tastefestivals.com>)
 