
Five years after the beginning of the so-called Arab spring, the situation in 
the various countries involved is far from stable or good. The aspirations and 
dreams of the youth, who were behind the uprisings, have turned out to be at 
best mirages, and in some cases nightmares. Devastating civil wars have 
erupted. The main objectives – democracy and freedom – have been forgotten. New 
threats such as the rise ofIslamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> (Isis) and terrorism are shaking the 
region.

Even Tunisia, considered the most successful example, and awarded the 2015 
Nobel peace prize for its civil society’s efforts to avoid civil war through 
implementing dialogue between rival political parties, is challenged by terror 
and the exapansionism of Isis. It is claimed that the country is the biggest
exporter of jihadis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/13/tunisia-breeding-ground-islamic-state-fighters>
 to Syria and Iraq. The rapid spread of the terrorist group suggests that the 
vast majority of young Arabs are poised and ready to join Isis.

Most young Arabs reject Isis and think 'caliphate' will fail, poll finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/12/vast-majority-young-arabs-isis-shunning-poll>
But the Arab Youth Survey refutes that claim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/12/vast-majority-young-arabs-isis-shunning-poll>
. Conducted to explore attitudes among Arab youth in 16 countries in the Middle 
East and North Africa (Mena) region, the survey found that an overwhelming 
majority of young Arabs reject Isis and believe that the group will fail in its 
aim of establishing an Islamic state. Rather, the group surveyed believes that 
the biggest obstacles facing the region are unemployment, lack of democracy, 
rising living costs and civil unrest. Only 13% of the 3,500 interviewed agreed 
with the statement: “If Isis did not use so much violence, I could see myself 
supporting it”; 78% rejected it while 9% were unsure about their position. And 
the majority of those interviewed perceive the lack of jobs and unemployment as 
the top reason for joining Isis.

As an activist and teacher I have had the opportunity to discuss these issues 
with my students, as well as young people taking part in demonstrations. A few 
months ago, I went to Kasserine where protest movements had erupted after the 
death of a young man. He had been electrocuted while protesting at being 
rejected for a government job. What happened evoked memories of the
self-immolation of Mohammed Bouazizi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jan/20/tunisian-fruit-seller-mohammed-bouazizi>
, that triggered the Tunisian revolution. Demonstrations started in Kasserine 
and spread to other regions of the country – even the capital.

While there, I talked to many young people and overwhelmingly they rejected 
terrorism and Isis. Many protesters denounced a narrative that presents their 
city as a pillar of terrorism in Tunisia. It is worth remembering that 
Kasserine’s mountains – Chaambi, Semama, Mghila – are the main hiding places 
for terrorists inTunisia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/tunisia>, and there 
have been several stories about cooperation between the inhabitants of 
Kasserine and the terrorist groups. Many of those arrested or killed in recent 
months were from the area.

Nevertheless, I did hear some angry voices expressing their readiness to join 
the terrorist organisation. They spoke of the indifference of politicians to 
their demands. Many of the social problems highlighted in 2011 have still not 
been resolved. Unemployment has worsened since the revolution. They wonder if 
joining Isis might be a solution to their problems and help them to have a 
better life.

In other parts of the country I visited these themes resurfaced. But the 
majority of young people, both those who totally reject Isis and those who 
consider it a viable alternative, see that unemployment, marginalisation and 
lack of opportunities are behind the rise and proliferation of the terrorist 
group.

It is obvious that world leaders, and in particular those in Arab countries, 
do not understand the challenges they face. We hear much about the fight 
against terrorism and Isis; security strategies dominate and ignore the 
socio-economic challenges. The leaders appear to be blind to the roots of the 
problem.

Economic stagnation, social dislocation, violence, instability, the growth of 
terrorist groups, illegal immigration and many other problems are expressions 
of the lack of perspective, blocked horizons, and bankrupt ideologies that make 
it impossible for young people to envisage a better future. A lack of values 
and effective policy from our lawmakers is a familiar tale around the world.

Those who join terrorist groups are not simply sick, traumatised people – they 
are representatives of sick societies

And what about the never-ending conflicts? Are the young people who migrate 
clandestinely, throwing themselves into the waves on hazardous journeys, or 
those who join terrorist groups, not simply sick, traumatised people? They are 
representatives of their sick societies.

They live in a world dominated by the exploitation of people and natural 
resources. Is it any wonder that the young seem to have lost all hope and be 
completely disoriented? They seem to be emptied from inside.

It is despair that moves and agitates them now. And it is clear that the 
strength and power emanating from this despair cannot be anything but 
destructive.
 