
In the evening of 8 August, 2004, a 14-year-old boy was ordered to his room 
after, allegedly, giving cheek to an adult. He refused to obey andphysical 
force was used against him <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-12297125>. The 
truth about the terrible consequences of this most ordinary example of childish 
non-compliance finally emerged yesterday, when an inquest jury in Easington, Co 
Durham, found that Adam Rickwood, the youngest child to die in custody in 
modern times, had been treated unlawfully by staff at Hassockfield Secure 
Training Centre (STC) in the same county, before he ended his young life at the 
end of a makeshift noose.

For Adam's family, this week's verdict marked the end of a long and painful 
search for justice. The jury in the first inquest into Adam's death, in 2007, 
were not allowed to consider whether the force used on the boy was lawful. That 
ban, imposed by the coroner, was wrong – STC rules, drawn up by the Youth 
Justice Board (YJB) clearly stated that restraint, for non-compliance, should 
not be used on the children in their care. But the staff concerned went further 
than restraint: they applied a "nose distraction" technique to the boy – in 
plain speaking, a sharp blow to his nose. Adam was incensed and wrote in his 
suicide note "What right have they got to hit a child?"

It took three judicial reviews, brought by Rickwood's mother, Carol Pounder, 
challenging that flawed inquest, before a high court judge ruled the verdict 
unlawful and ordered a second examination of the circumstances of his death.

The use of nose distraction technique – and restraint for non-compliance – is 
now banned in STCs. Shamefully, that is no thanks to those charged with the 
care of young children who take a wrong turn in life. Following Rickwood's 
death – and that of 16-year-oldGareth Myatt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2007/jul/04/youthjustice.prisons>, who 
died while being restrained in another STC in the same year – the Ministry of 
Justice, backed by the Youth Justice Board, tried to bring the use of restraint 
for non-compliance, along with other painful methods into STC rules. In July 
2008 they were foiled by the court of appeal, which ruled that such methods 
were an infringement of young people's fundamental human rights.

During this second inquest, some members of the jury openly wept when they 
heard of the treatment imposed on a troubled young boy with a history of 
self-harming, incarcerated some 150 miles away from his home and family. In 
2004, I was present at another inquest, when another jury shed tears on hearing 
how 16-year-old Joseph Scholes had taken his life in a Young Offenders 
Institution. Thirty children have met their deaths in custody since 1990 – how 
many more must die before the state, which is acting in loco parentis, decides 
there must be a better way of dealing with damaged children?

The portents offer little hope of change. Last October, it was revealed that 
21 children had sustained injuries while being restrained at Hassockfield in 
the previous year and that restraint was used 543 times in 2008 and 2009 at the 
privately run centre.

And only a few days ago, following a freedom of information request, the 
charityChildren and Young People Now  <http://www.cypnow.co.uk/>reported that 
almost a third of custodial staff working with young offenders had not 
completed training on safeguarding, and assessing the vulnerability of, those 
in their charge.

Deborah Coles, the co-director of Inquest <http://inquest.gn.apc.org/website/>
, which supported Adam Rickwood's family throughout their campaign, believes 
that only a public inquiry into the way we treat children who break the law 
will bring about change.

She says the whole population should hear the evidence that made juries into 
deaths in custody weep. I endorse her view on a highly personal level. For I 
was the same age as Adam when I first went into custody, more than half a 
century ago – and I weep now when I think how rich my life has been since then, 
and despair that we allow such damaged children to suffer the kind of treatment 
to which we would not dream of subjecting our own children.
 