
Alabama Shakes, On tour

When the Shakes renamed themselves the Alabama Shakes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/alabama-shakes>, they aligned themselves 
with the thrilling nexus of southern soul and rock made in the late 1960s and 
early 1970s. From the passionate vocalising of singer-songwriter Brittany 
Howard to the warm, churchy tones of the Hammond B3 organ, the band's debut 
album, Boys & Girls, is what an Adele album might sound like if she was backed 
by the White Stripes; and therein lies much of their popular appeal.

Manchester Academy, Mon; Barrowlands, Glasgow, Tue; Olympia Theatre, Dublin, 
Wed; The Coronet, SE1, Fri

John Robinson

TNGHT, London

A partnership between two producers, one from Scotland and one from Canada, 
TNGHT are proof of just how widely the international language of hip-hop can be 
understood. Formed of Hudson Mohawke, (once a teenage turntable prodigy, now an 
in-demand producer for artists as big as Kanye West), and Lunice (a more 
engaging performer than you'll often find behind a laptop, and an associate of 
Diplo). So far the pair have made one five-track EP, a slightly frightening 
template of industrial hip-hop beats, sped-up vocal samples and industrial 
clanking. The pair's shows are a flashpoint for a crowd derangement that looks 
certain to continue at this one-off date.

Oval Space, E2, Thu

JR

Joe Driscoll & Sekou Kouyate, On tour

Driscoll (a rapper in the Ed Sheeran sense of the word) and Kouyate, an 
accomplished kora player, met at a French festival, and "festival" is pretty 
much the aroma that their music continues to give off. The latest in a series 
of such cross-cultural hook-ups, Driscoll & Kouyate are at times in danger of 
so loving the image of themselves as collaborators and vaulters of cultural 
fences, they run the risk of forgetting the very thing they love – the music. A 
mix of beats and guitar loops, all laced with kora, it was possibly a mistake 
for the pair to try reggae, too. Still, since Kouyate is known as the "Jimi 
Hendrix of the kora", this may be good value live.

Bell Inn, Bath, Wed; The Croft, Bristol, Thu; Hootananny, SW2, Fri; touring to 
8 Dec

JR

Esperanza Spalding, London

One of the newly risen mainstream stars of the 2012 London jazz festival, 
bassist and songwriter Esperanza Spalding shot out of the jazz cloisters to 
celebrity status when she pipped Justin Bieber to 2011's Best Newcomer Grammy. 
Since then, the serious-minded but charismatic artist with the quiet soul voice 
and the flying bass technique (she's played for no less a post-bop hero than 
saxophonist Joe Lovano) has introduced a growing flock of fans to her 
particular brand of jazz-meets-classical eclecticism, often driven by funk. 
This year's Radio Music Society album has more of a pop flavour than Spalding's 
earlier work but her stage show is full of variety, from the mimicry of a radio 
slewing between stations with which it often opens, through call-and-response 
between the agile Spalding and her horn players, and interpretations of Wayne 
Shorter's intricate melodies.

Royal Festival Hall, SE1, Thu

John Fordham

Jack DeJohnette Group, On tour

US percussion star Jack DeJohnette plays drum solos so melodically eventful 
they can sound like medleys of songs, but his illustrious employers – a list 
that has included Thelonious Monk, Bill Evans, Charles Lloyd, John Coltrane, 
Miles Davis and Keith Jarrett – have primarily hired him for the kind of power 
and dynamism that makes the classiest lineups sound even better. But if 
DeJohnette has been an inspired accompanist, he has led a vibrant parallel life 
as a composer-bandleader, and a gifted occasional pianist. He's led cross-genre 
bands with unusual instrumental lineups, developed his own angles on world jazz 
(drawing on Native American influences), and explored a quirky take on Latin 
jazz with clarinet virtuoso Don Byron, who joins him here.

Royal Northern College Of Music, Manchester, Tue; Howard Assembly Room, Leeds, 
Wed, Corn Exchange, Cambridge, Thu; Queen Elizabeth Hall, SE1; touring to 21 Nov

JF

Hudderfield Contemporary Music Festival

The blend of music – improvised and fully notated, instrumental and 
electronic, theatrical and meditative – that Graham McKenzie has cultivated as 
artistic director of Huddersfield Contemporary Music festival is well 
established. McKenzie has become an expert at finding new angles or new 
composers to place in the spotlight. So, though the opening weekend of the 
festival ranges from a recital by Nicolas Hodges devoted to the early piano 
music of Jean Barraqué (St Paul's Hall, 17 Nov) through the UK premiere of 
Wolfgang Rihm's large-scale choral work Vigilia (St Paul's Hall, 18 Nov), to a 
commission from composer-in-residence, the Norwegian Maja SK Ratjke (Bates 
Mill, 18 Nov), the first concert is Alan Pierson conducting a portrait of 
Donnacha Dennehy (St Paul's Hall, Fri).

Various venues, Fri to 25 Nov

Andrew Clements
 