
Today parliament publishes its response to the MPs' expenses scandal. A 
special selectcommittee on parliamentary reform 
<http://www.parliament.uk/parliamentary_committees/reform_committee/reform_committee_members.cfm>
 was set up by Gordon Brown and it has published a report calledRebuilding the 
House 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200809/cmselect/cmrefhoc/1117/1117.pdf>
.

The main thrust of the report is to shift the balance of power away from the 
executive and towards parliament by "wresting control" away from ministers. 
Everyone thinks that's a good idea. I don't agree.

To misquote Prof Vernon Bogdanor 
<http://www.gresham.ac.uk/event.asp?PageId=45&EventId=875>, I think we are 
"shifting power between elites" rather than looking at how we can "shift power 
from elites to the public". At a time when parliament has been so discredited, 
we need to take a big step back and ask some fundamental questions about how 
and why we do things. Instead, we are re-arranging the deck chairs.

Our central proposal in the report is to set up a business committee of 
backbenchers, elected by the whole house, who should meet with ministers and 
propose a weekly legislative timetable. That proposal will be put before the 
house for a vote. Any government, with its majority, should always win, but the 
idea is that it will give backbenchers a bit more of a say. In theory, yes, but 
what does this mean in practice? At a time when we have the biggest crisis in 
our democracy, parliament's answer is to set up a committee. That is not an 
adequate response.

We need to find better ways of holding government to account. Backbenchers 
need to be able to initiate legislation and they should have a say over what 
gets debated. We need to have meaningful scrutiny of the laws we make. But what 
gives a small committee the right to decide how much time a directly and 
democratically elected government gets to spend on its legislation? And time is 
very important. Our committee spent many hours talking about who controls time, 
but we never discussed what we wanted to achieve with our time. Because the 
great unasked question of theMPs' expenses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/mps-expenses> scandal was: what is that 
MPs actually do?

We have no job description. Nothing forces us to go to our constituencies to 
hold surgeries. No one can make us go to Westminster to vote. In fact, there is 
no contract of any kind to say what an MP should or shouldn't do. Not too many 
years ago, an MP visited the constituency rarely – so rarely that it was a big 
event. There was no need for a second home or travel costs. An MP was elected 
and sent to Westminster to make laws, scrutinise legislation, hold the 
executive to account, and debate the important issues of the day.

Things are different now. Today we have a constituency role. A good MP is a 
local MP. This is a welcome change. The constituency role is extremely 
important. Constituents do hold us to account. They give us a much-needed dose 
of normality. We can see for ourselves how the laws we make with the best of 
intentions just don't work or have unforeseen consequences.

We meet the people we represent and hear their views and opinions. If a policy 
is unpopular, they tell us to our face. For many MPs, including me, this is the 
part of the job we love most. It's where we can actually make a difference to 
people's lives. We can empower those who do not have a voice.

But, over the years, the constituency role of an MP has evolved. We are 
councillors and counsellors. A small number of people who have an issue will 
take it to every welfare/voluntary/charitable organisation. MPs are on that 
list. Most government agencies have MPs' hotlines and even whole departments 
that deal with MPs' enquiries. Going to see your MP has become a way of 
fast-tracking your CSA, benefit, tax credit or pension problem. And we 
encourage this because we know that every four or five years we will ask our 
constituents to vote for us. They are more likely to do so if they have had a 
direct and personal contact with us.

This constantly pulls us to our constituencies and away from Westminster. If 
we were having an honest conversation about time, it isn't about whether we 
have September sittings or even sit all year round, it is about what we do with 
the time we have.

Our committee's recommendations do not mention this. Our basic assumption is 
that the system is fine – it just needs a bit of recalibrating. Our report 
wants us to return to a world where parliament matters again, not because we 
care about plugging a democratic deficit, but because we want to matter.

We want parliamentarians who are strongly independent and speak their mind. I 
agree that the ability to think independently is an essential quality in a good 
MP. Everyone must have a line over which they will not step for the sake of 
party loyalty. But there is no place for people who set themselves above their 
political parties and distance themselves from the political fray by hiding 
behind the political "neutrality" of being a parliamentarian.

Our parliamentary system is built on party politics. The vast majority of MPs 
will stand on a party ticket when it comes to election time. Most would lose 
their seats if they didn't. There is, though, a crisis in party politics too. 
The two main political parties in British politics have over many years 
dismantled their ideologies. Instead of philosophies and big ideas we have 
dividing lines.

We only talk to those people who have voted in previous elections because the 
others are unlikely to vote at all. We are paying a high price for this with 
mass disengagement and the rise of extremist parties that do have big ideas.

This makes mainstream politics more important now than it has ever been. We 
need to make our political parties stronger and more distinct. We need to 
inspire people to get involved again. We must make politics an active part of 
people's lives. We must allow people to shape their parliament. We can only do 
that by talking directly to them – not by retreating to the comfortable 
gentlemen's politics of parliament.

If we didn't have a parliament, we would have to invent one, but it would look 
nothing like what we've got today. Any report on parliamentary reform needs to 
start here.
 