
After voicing the kind of Conservatism that makes Labour's PR ­ department's 
job a cinch, the inestimable Daniel Hannan might have forced David Cameron to
malign his opinions as "eccentric" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/aug/14/health-nhs>; but in one area 
at least, he, the Tory leadership and an increasing number of Westminster 
high-ups are in happy agreement. By the autumn, there may well be no stopping 
them — and while Hannan's friends in the US will still be fretting about the 
importation of crypto-communist British ideas about healthcare, we could be on 
the way to adopting a very American way of running our politics.

Primaries are the summer's big political thing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/aug/04/tories-totnes-mp>, as proved 
by the Tories' transformation of a once-unremarkable Devon town into the 
People's Republic of Totnes. Notwithstanding Hannan's excitement about local 
developments (as a paid-up primaries anorak, he thinks events there changed 
British politics "utterly, permanently and benignly"), the T word is now a 
signifier for the Cameroons' progressive affectations, and two weeks after the 
local Conservatives announced the result of their hyped open primary, one other 
after-effect is obvious: plenty of non-Tory voices hailing such wheezes as the 
definitive answer to the expenses controversy, and much more besides.

Among Labour people, those who have advocated primaries in the past – 
including David Miliband, and the higher education minister David Lammy – are 
speaking out again. Now, the inevitable has happened: echoing a proposal first 
put forward in 2006 by that adventurous outrider Stephen Byers, the 
little-known but vociferousLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> 
MP Tom Harris wants to use some kind of mass national primary to select the 
party's next leader.

How did we get here? Essentially, the expenses crisis has sparked two broad 
responses, neither of which will go away. First, there is that overheated kind 
of anti-politics whereby Westminster is portrayed as rotten to the core, and an 
untainted cavalry is imagined, arriving to make everything OK. Meanwhile, there 
are revived calls for constitutional change, and electoral reform in 
particular. For the Tory leadership and their allies, as well as some Labour 
people, the latter obviously represents dangerous talk – better by far to 
somehow direct the great anti-political hurricane in an advantageous direction. 
The result: a theatrical rubbishing of standard-issue politics, awash with 
cant, that will actually leave the essential features of the political class 
unchanged.

My favourite example is a recent piece in the Times by the venerable William 
Rees-Mogg, which looked forward to what the headline called "a new political 
army" marching on Westminster. With so many MPs standing down, he reckoned, the 
mood crystallised in Totnes would lead a new generation of MPs to kick over 
"the altar of undue deference". He should know – among the roll-call of 
suitably iconoclastic Tory candidates are two of the Rees-Mogg children: 
Eton-educated Jacob; and Annunziata, who was selected in a low-key primary that 
was barely reported, perhaps because it attracted only 250 people.

For the Conservative leadership, the Totnes effect allows Cameron and his 
allies to pull off a magical sleight-of-hand. Even if there are more Tory 
primaries, a rule change agreed in late July means that in newly vacated seats 
the choice of candidate will be from a shortlist decided at Tory HQ in a 
process weighted in favour of party managers. Moreover, as of the new year, 
byelection rules will kick in, and the maximum number of centrally-imposed 
candidates will be three. The details of all this are inevitably arcane, but 
their upshot was recently bemoaned by the co-editor of the website Conservative 
Home, who wrote of power being grabbed by "the party at the centre, ironically 
enough at a time when the party is talking in national policy terms about 
localism and decentralisation". Evidently, the New Labour manual still has its 
uses.

Such chicanery aside, the case against British primaries is easier to argue 
than it seems. The Totnes model, we hear, is grassroots democracy in action – a 
cover, surely, for the fact that no national politicians have any convincing 
plans for the revival of local government. In Westminster, strangulated 
parliamentary discipline will remain, meaning that even if local mavericks do 
make the grade, they will still be endlessly cattle-prodded through the lobbies.

Who wouldn't enjoy great national and local democratic carnivals, enlivened by 
the idea that everyone has a real say? That's actually what our existing 
elections should provide, but our creaking voting system sucks the air out of 
them. Take the pro-primaries crowd seriously when they accept all these 
failings, and one other democratic deficit: the fact that as the wider world 
has embraced online pluralism, non-hierarchical organisation and the rest, 
British political parties have either failed to keep up (the Tories) or moved 
in the exact opposite direction (witness the Soviet-esque emasculation of the 
Labour party). As a result, they have emptied out: now, the political class 
decides the only option is to kill them.

If primaries are pushed from Westminster constituencies, through mayoral 
contests and up to the election of national leaders, the importance of money 
will grow and grow. To reverse the terms of the current transatlantic shouting 
match over healthcare, look at the US. The primary system at least partly 
explains why, at the last count, at least 40 of America's 100 senators were 
millionaires. Donation-heavy incumbents are the sole candidates in the vast 
majority of congressional primaries – and if they are challenged, 
lobbyist-funded war chests of $500,000 plus are not uncommon (this, needless to 
say, is one of the reasons why Barack Obama's health reforms are in such a 
mess). Even if British queasiness about mixing politics and cash led to some 
spending and donation caps, we would still move into an expensive new age of 
cold-calling, multiple mail-outs and unprecedented political advertising.

Aside from that, courting the more reactionary parts of the press would often 
be crucial, and debate would always be in danger of being reduced to the 
currency of name and face recognition: as one British academic recently told 
me, "it's big money, or it's Arnold Schwarzenegger" (or rather, Esther Rantzen).

Obama-mania is one of the devices used by pro-primaries advocates in the UK, 
but he was an imperfect exception to an otherwise depressing rule. For all the 
fabled small donations and refusal to take money from registered federal 
lobbyists, his campaign was helped by the usual largesse of big players in 
pharmaceuticals, finance, oil and the rest – though the key point is 
illustrated by the kind of candidates primaries will always favour. On the 
Democratic side, an archetypal winner was the timid and extremely well-off John 
Kerry; when it comes to the Republicans, look at any number of former wealthy 
hopefuls (in their different ways, both John McCain and Mitt Romney fit the 
bill).

Here, surely, is the great weakness at the heart of the case for British 
primaries, highlighted by the moment at which some people have chosen to pipe 
up. If they have their way, the irony will be truly surreal: if you think 
parliament is stuffed with middle-of-the-road careerists driven by either money 
or their own egos, you ain't seen nothing yet.
 