
In the natural world, regeneration is a common process by which individual 
organisms continuously adapt to changing circumstance. This constant 
transformation enables entire ecosystems to flourish, even in the face of 
damage or shocks to the system.

It's a good lesson for businesses. 

Modeling healthy eco-systems, the corporate world needs to imagine a 
"regenerative economy" that responds to the real and changing needs of society 
rather than creating imaginary or unhealthy needs in order to profit by feeding 
them.

Some companies have already begun moving toward this economic shift, 
developing innovative and adaptive products and business models. In the 
process, they're not only responding to today's social, environmental and 
economic challenges, but are preparing for tomorrow's business opportunities. 
As June'sSustainable Brands conference 
<http://www.sustainablebrands.com/events/sb14?gclid=CjkKEQjw75CcBRCz2LiEs5OPsZoBEiQADgUmawWyeYDNAvUUr3X-36ebHhx0sUaSWvHZeOdfQAinCm3w_wcB>
 approaches, it's worth noting some of the most effective – and promising – 
strategies.

Sustainability as evolution: One emerging and powerful trend is the growing 
redefinition of sustainability as a tool for delivering human purpose and 
well-being. By addressing deeper human, cultural and societal concerns, 
companies are acknowledging the complexity and interconnectedness of the 
challenges that they and their consumers both face.

Some, like Chipotle, are beginning to share a broader story about 
sustainability by articulating a compelling company purpose. Chipotle'sFood 
with Integrity <http://www.chipotle.com/en-us/fwi/fwi.aspx> campaign delineates 
its approach to serving the best food while treating animals, farmers and the 
environment with respect. The result is not only rapidly growing sales for 
Chipotle but also increased consumer awareness about serious issues in the 
American food system.

Sustainability as innovation: Another emerging trend is an embrace of 
sustainability as a core driver of innovation.Unilever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/unilever> is a leading 
example of a company taking this challenge to heart. It has not only redefined 
sustainability as purpose at the brand level, but has become adept at 
innovating products and services that deliver on this purpose.

Recently, Unilever launched The Foundry <http://foundry.unilever.com/>, a hub 
for the company's engagement with technology innovators. The program focuses on 
collaborative innovation and sustainability, and its latest project invited 
startups with technologies that can help it to develop "smart kitchens". At the 
same time, it hopes, these advancements will give households intelligent 
insights into their family's eating habits.

Sustainability as value creation: Along these same lines, some companies are 
also looking at how to create shared value through their supply chain. For 
example, Natura, Brazil's leading cosmetics and personal care company, has 
created theEkos line <http://www.natura.net/port/cosmoprof/ing/ativos.asp>, a 
collection of products that use traditional, natural ingredients. It partners 
with 32 local Brazilian communities to source some of the substances 
traditionally used by these groups. Through a benefit-sharing model, Natura 
works with the communities to encourage sustainable agricultural practices and 
investment in local social and economic development.

Sustainability as storytelling: Some leading companies are also becoming 
sustainability storytellers, combining action with promotion to bring critical 
issues to light.

For example, Sainsbury's Triple Zero stores 
<http://www.j-sainsbury.co.uk/media/latest-stories/2013/20131120-sainsburys-opens-first-triple-zero-stores/>
 aim for three "zeros". First, they send zero waste to landfills. Second, they 
use strategies such on-site biogas generators to become carbon neutral. Third, 
they achieve water neutrality through a combination of water efficiency and 
offsetting partnerships that ensure that the total water used in the local 
catchment area remains the same. In doing so, they address key resource 
concerns in their communities, while engaging customers with a compelling 
narrative about conservation.

Sustainability as fun: Taking a different approach, many companies are working 
to make sustainability fun. For example, Fiat's Environmentally Sexy campaign, 
launched in the US, combines sex appeal, environmental awareness and humor to 
draw in consumers. Designed like an online dating service,Fiat's site 
<http://www.environmentallysexy.com/> includes videos of couples who have found 
their eco-love matches and features an interactive match maker that will pair 
customers with their perfect mate – a 500e.

Sustainable employee relations: Well-executed communications aren't enough to 
build a regenerative economy. As brands become better storytellers, many are 
also engaging their employees around sustainability. For example, SAP's 
employee ridesharing program, introduced in 2011, translated into 88 avoided 
tons of CO2 and $5m in savings over the course of the following two years. 
Based on this success, SAP recently introduced its formally internal 
ride-sharing app,TwoGo <https://www.twogo.com/>, to the public.

Sustainability as business community: Finally, many brands are supporting 
multi-sector collaboration. For example,Business for Innovative Climate & 
Energy Policy <http://www.ceres.org/bicep> (BICEP) is an association of 
businesses pushing for energy and climate legislation. Their Climate 
Declaration, which garnered more than 750 signatories, has led to gatherings 
that bring corporate leaders together with policymakers to discuss the risks 
and opportunities presented by these issues.

Beyond traditional business and government partners, companies are also 
seeking innovative partnerships with celebrities, activists and other 
non-traditional groups to attract interest and attention. For example, Coca 
Cola and Levi's have collaborated with artist will.i.am to launch a newEkoCycle 
<http://www.ekocycle.com/> brand that aims to encourage sustainability-minded 
behaviours through affordable lifestyle products.

Such collaborations provide fertile ground for new ideas and the potential for 
large-scale shifts in the marketplace. Ultimately, this is what will be needed 
to achieve a regenerative economy – a collective reimagining of the roles, 
responsibilities and opportunities for businesses to enable sustainable 
profitability alongside more meaningful forms of prosperity for humankind.

KoAnn Vikoren Skrzyniarz is CEO and Founder of Sustainable Life Media and 
Sustainable Brands
 