
Tim Henman suffered one of the more significant defeats of his career when he 
let slip a two-set lead against the Argentine Guillermo Canas. It mattered 
little to him that the match provided gripping entertainment. It was a contest 
he should have won; it was a defeat that confounded the high promise contained 
in his victory in the Paris Masters last November.

Everything looked so encouraging as Henman took control of the match in the 
sunshine that bathed the Margaret Court Arena in late afternoon. Tantalisingly 
- inevitably, some may reckon - as the light faded, so did the Henman game 
against Canas's relentlessly pounding groundstrokes that first gained him the 
initiative and then carried him to a 6-7 (5-7) 5-7 7-6 (7-3) 7-5 9-7 victory in 
nine minutes short of five hours.

Quite apart from winning the first two sets, Henman led 4-1 in the decider and 
later held a 7-6 30-0 advantage on the Canas serve. In all, Henman struck an 
impressive 100 clean winners, the equivalent of 25 games, but Canas smote the 
one that mattered, a mighty running forehand that flew past the British number 
one's desperate attempt to scoop over a backhand. Canas fell on his back after 
achieving his fourth win over Henman in five meetings - his second successive 
five-set win in this tournament - and when he did make it to the net he 
received only the most cursory of handshakes from a desperately disappointed 
Henman.

'That was probably a good match to watch but it is about winning or losing,' 
Henman said, accurately. 'There's not a lot of constructive things I can say 
about that.'

'There is obviously very little between us, as that scoreline suggests,' he 
added. 'But when he was behind he came up with some brilliant shots. It's 
probably the longest uninterrupted match I've played... yeah, to lose it is 
pretty disappointing.'

Canas said: 'I feel great. It is amazing, it is two years since I have played 
a match like this. Maybe I played better the important points. That was the key 
to winning this match.' Depressingly, there was no 'maybe' about it.

Henman's dejection was easy to understand. It was not only the British media 
who had invested so much hope in that Paris victory, when, on successive 
nights, he beat four of the world's best players: Sebastien Grosjean, Gustavo 
Kuerten, Roger Federer and Andy Roddick. Henman himself saw it as a turning 
point, his tennis liberated after recovery from an injury to his right shoulder 
and the end of his not entirely satisfactory association with the American 
coach Larry Stefanki.

The validity of all this optimism was always going to have to wait until the 
year's first grand slam and the sad fact is that we now see that it was not as 
genuine as it appeared. Canas is strong and willing, but he did spend even 
longer out of action last year than Henman after surgery on his right hand and 
he came into these championships without a seeding. Henman, with his more 
varied game, showed in the first two sets that he had Canas's measure, but, 
from past experience - and despite all the talk of a Henman renaissance - the 
Argentine sensed that if he could put the squeeze on Henman he might still 
prevail. And so it proved, with all the old frailties re-emerging in Henman's 
game, not least when he twice double-faulted to drop serve, decisively, in the 
fifteenth game of the fifth set.

It is still possible to defend Henman against the 'flaky Brit' jibes - Canas 
is a very good player - but it does become harder after days such as these.  
Wimbledon remains the only grand-slam tournament at which Henman has travelled 
beyond the fourth round, which is a puzzlingly poor return for a player who has 
been as high as four in the world rankings.

Canas now faces his fellow Argentine David Nalbandian, the eighth seed, who 
has been in superb form in 2004. He scored an ever-so comfortable 6-2 6-4 7-5 
victory over South African Wayne Ferreira and said afterwards he was intent on 
erasing the memory of losing the 2002 Wimbledon final to Lleyton Hewitt. 
'Always I dream about winning a grand-slam final, so I'm going to be ready for 
the next final,' he said. 'I would love to play another grand-slam final. In 
the Wimbledon final...Lleyton played a great match. But I think next time is 
going to be different.'

If he meets Hewitt in this tournament, it will be in the quarter-finals. 
First, Hewitt must beat Roger Federer, last year's Wimbledon champion who has 
yet to be properly tested in Melbourne. Hewitt had his hardest match yet 
yesterday when he beat the Spanish teenager Rafael Nadal 7-6 (7-2) 7-6 (7-5) 
6-2.

You've read the piece, now have your say. Email your comments, be as frank as 
you like, we can take it, tosport.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:sport.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk>, or mail the Observer direct at 
sport@observer.co.uk <mailto:sport@observer.co.uk>
 