
Tiger Woods shrugged off three consecutive bogeys as the California weather 
turned distinctly chilly on the back nine at Torrey Pines to coast to an 
eight-shot victory at the Buick Invitational, his 62nd PGA Tour title, and move 
into joint fourth place on the all-time winners' list, alongsideArnold Palmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/arnold-palmer>.

Eight ahead of the pack overnight, the world No1 fired a one-under-par 71 on 
the South course. It was a fourth successive victory in the event for Woods, 
32, and a sixth in total. In yesterday's round he accumulated five birdies and 
four bogeys for a 19-under total of 269.

Woods returns to Torrey Pines in June for the US Open, and if the past four 
days are any indication it could be another long week for his peers. His 
comment that the Grand Slam - all four major in one calendar year - is "easily 
within reason" is looking every bit of that on this evidence.

"What he's going to do is screw the US Open up for everyone else," joked the 
veteran Fred Couples, who had a level-par round for a five-under total and a 
share of eighth place. "If he had shot 10 or 11 under, the USGA would have 
said, 'Well, maybe we have it in the right spot.' Now, they may have to 
re-group a little."

Woods has won his last two US PGA Tour events by eight shots, moreover, and 
this was the ninth time in his career he has won by at least eight shots. The 
Buick is also the thirdPGA Tour <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/pga-tour> 
event he has won six times, the others being the Bridgestone Invitational and 
the CA Championship. "I wanted to go out there and make no bogeys and shooting 
something under par," he said after picking up the trophy. "I got half of it 
right."

The forecast had been for heavy rain overnight and into yesterday, with the 
possibility of a Monday finish. But the clouds cleared as Woods was warming up, 
and he played the front nine under brilliant blue skies although he closed out 
his victory under a mixture of rain and clouds. Japan's Ryuji Imada closed with 
a 67 to finish a distant second at 11 under, two ahead of South Africa's Rory 
Sabbatini (67) and Stewart Cink (73). "My goal going into today was to finish 
second," Imada said. "That's almost like winning the golf tournament to me."

Cink added: "I'd say this is the best I've seen Tiger play. The last couple 
days, off the tee, the control he had was just really very impressive. The 
Tiger that we saw a year and two years ago, hitting it sort of all over the 
place, I think that's a thing of the past."

Only Sam Snead (82), Jack Nicklaus (73) and Ben Hogan (64) have more PGA Tour 
wins than Woods and Palmer. "I congratulate Tiger," Palmer said last night. 
"I'm sure that there are many, many more coming in the future. There isn't any 
question about that."
 