
Tim Sherwood will have an opportunity to stake his claim to succeed André 
Villas-Boas <https://www.theguardian.com/football/andre-villas-boas> at 
Tottenham Hotspur after the club turned to their highly rated technical 
coordinator to oversee first-team affairs following the dismissal of the 
Portuguese.

Villas-Boas was dismissed in the wake of the home trouncing by Liverpool on 
Sunday with the Spurs chairman, Daniel Levy, unconvinced he could deliver 
Champions League qualification this season despite the club having spent £107m 
in the summer to revamp the squad.

He departed after 18 months in charge and with the team only five points 
adrift of fourth place but the psychological effects of heavy defeats by West 
Ham, Manchester City and then Liverpool had eroded the board's faith in his 
ability.

Sherwood, a former Tottenham midfielder, was a member of the coaching staff 
during the Harry Redknapp era and was under consideration for the role of 
technical director over the summer before Levy turned instead to Franco 
Baldini, then of Roma.

The club felt the 44-year-old Sherwood's talents lay more in coaching and he 
was duly granted the title of technical coordinator to oversee the under-21 
development squad and youth set-up. His impressive progress with the junior 
sides has been noted, with Levy content to lean on him in the short term.

He will be assisted by Les Ferdinand and Chris Ramsey for the immediate 
future, starting with visit of West Ham in the Capital One Cup quarter-final 
and Sunday's trip to Southampton, while Steffen Freund and Tony Parks will 
continue as part of the coaching staff. With a burgeoning reputation Sherwood 
may become a contender to take the job, at least on an interim basis to the end 
of the season, if his initial stint proves successful.

Levy is considering his options and will sound out more experienced figures 
but he is still to determine the best approach, with many of those under 
consideration for the long term potentially out of reach until the summer at 
the earliest.

Principal among them is Fabio Capello, who is contracted with Russia until the 
World Cup finals but still owns a property in London and has worked regularly 
with Baldini throughout his career. The 67-year-old Italian would not represent 
a progressive appointment, however, and has not ventured into club management 
since leaving Real Madrid in 2007 prior to a four-year stint in charge of 
England, but he has the reputation and authority to take over at White Hart 
Lane. Capello was actually at Sunday's game as a pundit for Sky Italia when 
Liverpool won 5-0 to condemn Villas-Boas to the sack.

There is admiration, too, for Southampton's Mauricio Pochettino, though 
prising him away from the south coast club's ambitious chairman, Nicola 
Cortese, would be easier said than done. Luciano Spalletti, currently at Zenit 
St Petersburg, FC Basel's Murat Yakin – Baldini was in Basel for the Swiss 
club's Champions League victory over Chelsea last month – and Swansea's Michael 
Laudrup would also be considered.

Guus Hiddink, who had been favoured by the board as a natural interim 
appointment having fulfilled similar duties with Chelsea in 2009, is understood 
to have indicated a reluctance to take up the position. He will take up a 
permanent role with the Holland set-up after the World Cup.

Villas-Boas' dismissal was confirmed in a brief meeting with Levy at the 
club's Enfield training ground , after discussions between the chairman and the 
owner, Joe Lewis, overnight. The Portuguese had envisaged taking training as 
normal, having spoken at length with Levy and Baldini the previous evening, and 
had even arrived at the complex with Christmas presents for members of staff. 
He left towards the end of the afternoon – along with his staff José Mário 
Rocha, Luís Martins and Daniel Sousa – having said his farewells to the 
players, with his exit technically "by mutual consent and in the interests of 
all parties".

His team sit seventh in the top flight but the brutal nature of their defeats 
by West Ham, Manchester City and now Liverpool had undermined faith in his 
ability.

Levy and Lewis had been angered initially by the 3-0 home defeat by West Ham 
in October, a result which prompted an intense examination of Villas-Boas' 
suitability to fulfil longer-term ambitions. The hierarchy had sanctioned a 
huge spend over the summer on seven new players, including three club record 
fees, reinvesting the money raised by Gareth Bale's sale to Real Madrid and 
more.

Yet the new personnel, while enjoying fine reputations on paper, have taken 
time to adapt to the Premier League and the team's stodgy and conservative play 
has failed to enthuse those in the boardroom. They have scored only 15 goals in 
16 league games, a reality that has overshadowed their serene progress in the 
Europa League which has led to a knockout tie with the former Spurs manager, 
Juande Ramos, who is now with the Ukrainian club Dnipro Dnipropetrovsk.

The Portuguese was contracted until the summer of 2015 and following his brief 
and unhappy tenure at Chelsea, which ended abruptly in March 2012, may now seek 
to re-establish his reputation abroad. "The club can announce that agreement 
has been reached with head coach, André Villas-Boas, for the termination of his 
services," read the club's statement. "The decision was by mutual consent and 
in the interests of all parties."
 