
Gloucester staged a last-gasp 31-29 away victory over Harlequins yesterday to 
set up a LV Cup semi-final against Cardiff Blues. With the last kick of the 
game their fly-half Tim Taylor converted Gloucester's fifth try scored by the 
full-back Tom Voyce. The bonus point win enabled Bryan Redpath's side to edge 
out Scarlets at the top of Pool Two.

Redpath praised the resilience of his much changed side who had trailed 20-0 
after 25 minutes. First-half tries by James Simpson-Daniel and Taylor put
Gloucester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucesterrugby> back in the hunt 
before they turned the game around with a second from Simpson-Daniel before 
their centre Tim Molenaar and then Voyce touched down in a dramatic last five 
minutes.

It left the former All Blacks fly-half Nick Evans on the losing side despite 
his 24-point haul, including two excellent first-half tries, for Harlequins.

Both sides were depleted by international calls and Redpath admitted: "It 
showed. But we came back and showed great resilience and commitment to win the 
game and give ourselves a bit of credit back."

Harlequins had needed an 11-try win to overhaul Cardiff Blues, the Pool Three 
leaders who gained a bonus point win over Scarlets on Saturday. John Kingston, 
the Harlequins head coach, said: "We lost the iron grip we had on the game just 
before half-time with the two soft tries."

The two sides meet again at Kingsholm on Saturday in the Premiership, now 
Quins' only route to qualification for next season's Heineken Cup. Gloucester's 
LV Cup semi-final at Cardiff will be on Sunday 14 March.

On the same day Saracens will play their LV Cup semi-final against Northampton 
at Franklin's Gardens.

Despite losing 23-22 to Newport Gwent Dragons yesterday, the complex 
regulations of the competition mean that Saracens go through to play Saints. 
Had they beaten the Dragons,Saracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> would have faced Cardiff away.

Brendan Venter, the Saracens rugby director, warned his players they will not 
win the Premiership if they make the kind of mistakes he sat through at 
Vicarage Road.

Venter said: "We will not win the Premiership if we play like that and I have 
told the players it's important that we learn from this experience. If we want 
to be the best in the league we have to eradicate those mistakes. There was no 
lack of effort out there, it was just that Newport adapted better to the 
conditions."

The man of the match was the Dragons wing Will Harries, who scored two 
excellent tries, the first a superb solo effort on 15 minutes. Harries said: 
"I'm delighted with my tries and what a fine effort we all put in. The only 
shame is that we were not going for the semi-final as well."

The Newcastle director of rugby, Steve Bates, defended his decision to give 
his squad fringe players plenty of game time in the LV Cup after the Falcons 
failed to register a win in any of their four pool games.

Three penalties from the former Falcon David Walder, captaining Wasps for the 
first time, sentNewcastle <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/newcastlefalcons> 
tumbling to a 9-3 defeat at Kingston Park. It was an error-strewn game in which 
all but two of the 16 players on the respective benches were used.

Bates said: "The four weeks of this competition were all about giving some 
players a run and others a rest and that's worked. Some of our younger players 
have put their hands up and some of our fringe players have been given valuable 
game time."

Newcastle were already out of contention for the semi-finals after last 
weekend's defeat at Cardiff, whileWasps' chance of qualifying disappeared after 
Saturday's results.

Some big names were missing for the visitors because of Six Nations and 
England Saxons duty. There was also no sign of Danny Cipriani, who has been 
linked with a move to the new Australia Super 15 side Melbourne Tigers, 
although it is being suggested that he will sign a new deal withWasps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> this coming week.

Tony Hanks, the Wasps director of rugby, refused to discuss the Cipriani 
situation, preferring to concentrate on his side's performance on the pitch. 
"The players out there deserve that," he said. "They did a great job today and 
it was hard to get any pace going on that pitch and in the conditions but we 
won it in the end."
 