
I moved around a lot as a kid and, oddly, the meal that most signifies home 
for me was eaten not at my house, but at my nan’s, in Fishponds, Bristol. It 
brings back feelings of warmth, love and belonging, but it’s extra-significant. 
I can clearly remember thinking about it when I wasn’t there, calling it to 
mind, re-experiencing and appreciating it. I analysed it, I considered it, even 
though I was about six. It was the start of a love affair with food that 
continues to this day.

We went to Nan’s on Saturday, and in the evening I’d change into my prized 
Bri-Nylon Man from Uncle pyjamas before tea and Doctor Who. I sat on the floor, 
with my back leaning on the rough uncut moquette of a wing chair, and stared, 
rapt, at the teak-effect box on which … well, let’s just say one of the earlier 
Doctors battled unconvincing aliens. I’ve never bought into the fond collective 
delusion about hiding behind the sofa: the monsters were always crap. That was 
the point.

Tea came on a tray, on thick china, and comprised a mound of mushed marrowfat 
peas, three slices of corned beef and a towering berg of handmade chips.

Mum was of a generation that thought serving chips was akin to feeding your 
child sticks of carby lard-death

I have to put this into context here. Mum was of a generation that thought 
serving chips was akin to feeding your child sticks of carby lard-death. Dad, 
an insurance loss adjuster, spent too much of his life in the kitchens of tiny 
semis like Nan’s: the handsome, washable vinyl wallpaper seared from the walls 
by exploding chip pans, polystyrene ceiling tiles melted into smutty 
stalactites by a dripping-fuelled fireball. Mum and Dad were “modern”, and 
quietly disapproved. Nan, though, small, fragrant and doughty, had grown up in 
a chip shop on the rough edge of Bristol and knew that there was no faster way 
to a small boy’s heart than a lovingly prepared chip.

Corned beef and chips with mushy peas

1 box dried marrowfat peas
White pepper
Maris piper potatoes
Oil for deep frying
1 tin corned beef
Worcestershire sauce

1 Soak the dried marrowfat peas overnight, not forgetting to add the large 
pellet of “bicarb” that comes in the box. This, apparently, helps to maintain 
colour and softens the skins, but I suspect it just adds the delicious taste of 
bicarb. Drain the peas, add fresh water and cook slowly until all structural 
integrity is lost. Ground white pepper is the only additional flavouring 
required. You can, apparently, buy marrowfat peas in a tin, but only if you 
don’t love your grandson very much at all.

A recipe for a proper crisp, green salad | A taste of home
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/18/david-tanis-chef-interview-green-salad-recipe>
2 Hand-cut the potatoes into chips. Nan’s were mathematically regular at 
around 8mm square, but you can go thicker or thinner to taste.

3 Don’t rinse the chips but lay them out on a clean tea towel to dry. You can 
speed this process up by putting the chips on a tray in the fridge, but I’m not 
sure Nan would have had much time for that idea.

4 Heat the oil in your fryer to 140C/ 275F. You can check this with a probe 
thermometer or by dropping a chip in to see whether it bubbles and floats up. 
Nan checked the temperature by looking at the oil sternly. I still believe it 
adjusted itself under her gaze. Fry the chips for around 8 minutes or until 
they have a blond, bubbly skin. Remove and drain thoroughly.

5 Remove the tin of corned beef from the fridge and ply the “key” provided. It 
is absolutely vital that the corned beef remains cold. Warm runny fat is 
unappetising to grandsons.

6 Raise the temperature of the oil to 165C/330F and refry the chips for 4 
minutes or until browned and gorgeous.

7 To plate, lay out three 5mm slices of corned beef, fanned out but not 
touching anything else that might be hot (see #5 above). Stack the chips until 
they look like they might fall over the edge. Fill any disheartening white 
space with mushy peas. Ketchup was for other children. Nan’s chips should 
always be served with Worcestershire sauce. Lea & Perrins was the preference in 
Bristol but I can entirely understand loyalty to Henderson’s further north.

 * Tim Hayward is a food writer, journalist and broadcaster and the owner of 
the Cambridge bakery FitzbilliesTimHayward.com <http://www.timhayward.com/>, 
fitzbillies.com <http://www.fitzbillies.com/>, @timhayward 
<https://twitter.com/timhayward>
 