
It seemed faintly heretical to think it on Friday night, amid the decibels and 
worship-delirium of 65,000 people lauding anotherUsain Bolt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/usainbolt> 100m victory. And it seems even 
more so now after Bolt's scorching finish in the men's 4x100m relay when, 
despite the heat and wet-mitten humidity at the Anniversary Games, he was a 
195cm tall monument to cool.

But this is what I suspect: that Bolt – the greatest sprinter of all time and 
the greatest sporting showman of these times – has peaked. At least when it 
comes to the 100m, his absolute best performances will no longer be seen in our 
shared futures but in YouTube clips.

Of course Bolt will provide millions with a quick knee-trembler for years to 
come. He will also win many more medals at world championships andOlympic Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games>. He is a freak. A phenomenon. 
A brilliant natural talent. And a lighthouse in these difficult, murky times 
for the sport.

But will he ever seriously threaten his own world record, set in 2009, of 
9.58sec again? I doubt it.

Partly this is down to motivation. Bolt has admitted that he found it "hard to 
refocus" after London 2012, an entirely understandable reflex. He is a triple 
world record holder in the 100m, 200m and 4x100m relay and a six-time Olympic 
gold medallist. What else is there to achieve?

Bolt's new goal, he says, is to dominate until 2016 and "do a three-peat, 
which has never been done before". But that can probably be achieved without 
mining new depths in the 100m; by running into the 9.7s rather than 9.5s.

In a sense, Bolt is also an unwitting victim of the idiocy of others. The 
positive drugs tests for Tyson Gay and, to a lesser extent,Asafa Powell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/asafapowell>, means he has fewer rivals who 
can scare him into driving his body harder.

Then there are the physical factors, which grind and chip away at athletes. 
Bolt is picking up more niggles early in the season, which make it harder to 
put in the training blocks required to go even faster.

As the world-renowned sprint coach Stuart McMillan explains: "Even though he 
is mechanically extremely sound, his programme isn't great (a ton of 
over-distance, which puts added stress to the system), his diet is poor 
(increasing inflammation), his weight programming is not optimal, and his 
therapy set-up is not dialed in.

"Much of these are the realities of staying and training in Jamaica," he adds. 
"The environment is perfect, obviously, but the expertise – especially in the 
'support services', like sports medicine, nutrition, and biomechanics – just 
isn't there."

Bolt is also like a thespian who dramatically raises his game when in the West 
End rather than the provinces. That he set the three fastest times in history 
at Olympics and world championships is no fluke.

But given that his best 100m time this year is 9.85sec, modest by his 
standards, it seems unlikely that at this year's world championships he will 
come close to the 9.63sec he ran at London 2012.

Next year Bolt only has the Commonwealth Games and the Diamond League to shoot 
for. If 2010 is any guide, where his best time was only 9.82sec, Bolt may feel 
he doesn't need to get in shape to go sub-9.70 in 2014. And by time the 2015 
world championships take place in Beijing he will be 29. That is old for a 
sprinter. Of the 54 fastest times in history – ranging from 9.58sec in Berlin 
to 9.83sec – 35 of the times were run by athletes 25 or younger.

A glance at the top sprinters in history also suggests that Bolt, who turns 27 
next month, may not get any quicker. Maurice Greene ran his fastest time at 24, 
Powell at 26, Gay at 27, as did Ben Johnson, and Donovan Bailey at 28. True, 
some runners buck the trend – Justin Gatlin was 30 and Linford Christie 33 when 
they set personal bests – but both, like Johnson, have blemished CVs.

As McMillan puts it: "I honestly feel we have seen the best of Usain, and he 
is on the backside decline of his career. This is not to say he still won't win 
titles, and dominate the scene - I just don't see him consistently hitting the 
heights he has before. True he doesn't really have any weaknesses in his 
mechanics – he accelerates extremely efficiently, transitions with patience, 
and relaxes very well at top speed: there are no holes. But when he is dinged 
up – or hasn't got enough training in – he tends to react poorly, accelerate 
slowly, rush his transition because he is behind, and tighten up."

Of course there are caveats. There always are with Bolt. A 2.0 m/s tailwind is 
worth about 0.11sec compared to a nil wind performance, and running at altitude 
also makes a small difference. Perhaps running in Mexico City with perfect 
wind, weather and the latest Red Mondo track surface would help him go faster. 
As would having someone like Yohan Blake back fit and in his face.

But another scenario is more likely to play out. Bolt will continue to win and 
occasionally wow during the next three years. But those incredible, 
fantastical, supersonic 100m times that made the jaw drop – and stay dropped – 
are likely to remain permanently in the past.
 