
Tom McCarthy
Author of Tintin and the Secret of Literature
TINTIN 


The difference between Asterix and Tintin is like the difference between a 
Quentin Tarantino and a David Lynch film. One's witty entertainment, the 
other's great art.Asterix <https://www.theguardian.com/books/asterix> is 
charming and funny, but it's fairly one-dimensional; Tintin has this massive 
complexity of plot, symbolic register and theme. It deals with technology, 
history and politics. It has deep Freudian dimensions. For instance, The Secret 
of the Unicorn and Red Rackham's Treasure are both about Captain Haddock's 
family. Haddock's ancestor, Sir Francis Haddock, is the illegitimate son of the 
French Sun King – and this mirrors what happened in Hergé's family, who liked 
to believe that his father was the illegitimate son of the Belgian king. This 
theme played out in so many of the books. In The Castafiore Emerald, the opera 
singer sings the jewel song from Faust, which is about a lowly woman banged up 
by a nobleman – and she sings it right in front of Sir Francis Haddock, with 
the captain blocking his ears. It's like the Finnegans Wake of the cartoon. 
Nothing happens – but everything happens.

Mohsin Hamid Author
ASTERIX 


As a boy I had a Dutch friend who was a fan of Tintin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tintin> and Asterix, so that's how my 
father and I first encountered them. Initially he would read them to me. What I 
loved about Asterix was that it cut across generations. As a boy I often tried 
to copy it in my imaginary world, drawing a village with its timber fence, dry 
moat and a few houses. Then, as I grew up, different levels of reading opened 
up to me: the humour in the names, the plays on words, the illustrations. There 
is something about the notion of one tiny little village, where everybody knows 
each other, trying to hold off the dark forces of the rest of the world. Being 
the underdog, up against everyone, but with a sense of humour and having fun, 
really resonated with my child's eye view of the world. There was a time when 
my mother turned to my father and said: "He keeps reading these comics and 
doesn't want any actual books." My dad replied: "He wants to read, he wants a 
book for a present. He's learning to love books, so he'll be fine." I've become 
a novelist and I can't draw, so I think Asterix was my gateway drug into the 
wild world of books.

AL Kennedy Author
TINTIN 


Both Tintin and Asterix were very good for reading in bed while poorly. The 
wordplay in Asterix was lovely and the visual style in Tintin was great. But I 
am, probably even now, swayed over to Tintin by my heartfelt affection for 
Captain Haddock. I loved his pullover, his strangely large feet, his endless 
swearing and his inability to pass a bottle without emptying it. He combined 
bravery and helplessness in a manner I found irresistible.

Naomi Alderman Author
TINTIN 


I am definitely in the Tintin camp; I always loved a good detective story and 
there's something about the clean lines of the drawing that's just so 
comforting. Plus Tintin goes to amazing places: the moon! The pyramids! I 
understand that Asterix is funny but it just wasn't enough for me. Give me wild 
adventures and two men called Thomson and Thompson any time.

Dom Joly Comedian
TINTIN 


Asterix wins hands down for humour but, if forced, then I'd have to come down 
on Tintin's team. Tintin gave me my wanderlust. Almost every frame of every 
book is a work of art in itself.

Nick Park Film-maker
TINTIN 


I can appreciate Asterix, especially the parody and poking fun at different 
nationalities. But I felt an affinity with Tintin – his innocence, wanting to 
solve problems, always optimistic and brave. I started to buy Tintin books as a 
student. Hergé was into film-noir and thriller movies, and the panels are 
almost like storyboards for The Maltese Falcon or African Queen. Tintin has 
influenced my work in a big way. In A Grand Day Out there is a cigar-shaped 
rocket, and the techno trousers that Wallace wears are almost straight out of 
The Explorers on the Moon.
 