
Premiers have agreed to toughen their states’ security laws to ensure there 
are no loopholes that terrorists or criminals could exploit,Tony Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-abbott> said after the Council 
of Australian Governments (Coag) meeting.

The prime minister said on Friday he expected state parliaments would mirror 
the federal government’s latest round of counter-terrorism measures, in a 
similar way to the harmonisation approach taken after the Howard government’s 
security reforms.

Abbott underlined the need to work together to deal with the terrorism threat, 
after discussing the issue with state and territory leaders at the first Coag 
meeting since the federal budget ushered in $80bn of cuts to projected health 
and education funding.

Several premiers expressed their discontent with the unilateral cuts to 
long-term funding, but the prime minister said the federal government would 
work constructively with states and territories on the white paper process to 
reform the federation.

The West Australian premier, Colin Barnett, agitated over the “broken” system 
for carving up revenue from the goods and services tax (GST) – a perennial 
topic of frustration – by emphasising that the current system was bad for the 
stability of state budgets.

In an attempt to broaden the argument rather than simply complain about WA 
being a net provider of funding to smaller states, Barnett argued Queensland 
and New South Wales would be “next in the firing line” to lose funding under 
the existing formulas and this could lead to ongoing “chaos” in state budgeting.

Abbott pointed to a forthcoming tax white paper as the vehicle to address 
these concerns and achieve a “transparent and fair system”. He noted that the 
present GST system may well be fair “but it is certainly not transparent”.

But in the area of national security state and territory leaders expressed a 
strong desire to work in partnership with the federal government, including by 
reaching out to communities to counter radicalisation.

Coag leaders were briefed by security agencies on the domestic security 
environment and the threat posed by Australians who may return from the 
conflicts in northern Iraq and Syria after joining extremist groups such as 
Islamic State (Isis).

Last month, Australia’s terrorism alert level was increased from medium to 
high. The federal government has proposed a series of changes to national laws 
to increase the powers of security agencies and make it easier to detain and 
prosecute suspected foreign fighters and supporters.

The Coag communique issued on Friday said: “States agreed to introduce 
legislative amendments to their parliaments to safeguard the national laws 
underpinning our ability to arrest, monitor, investigate and prosecute domestic 
extremists and returning foreign fighters.”

At the post-meeting press conference, Abbott said: “If you look at the 
security laws that the Howard government introduced from 2003 onwards, they 
were all mirrored in relevant state legislation and my hope and expectation is 
that the new security laws that we are bringing in at the moment will likewise 
be mirrored in state legislation.

“We are all in this together. This is not a party political issue. This is a 
national security issue.

“This is an issue of keeping Australians safe and we all want to ensure that 
and the best way to do so is to make sure that there are no loopholes that can 
be exploited by people who would do us harm and a harmonisation of security 
laws is very important.”

Several premiers, in their addresses to the media, chose to highlight the 
importance of reaching out to disengaged community members and ensuring they 
were not at risk of radicalisation. They also noted their concerns about 
reports that Muslim Australians were experiencing abuse when out in public.

The Queensland premier, Campbell Newman, said Coag had “reflected on the need 
to maintain that great sense of community harmony that we have in this 
wonderful multicultural country”.

The Victorian premier, Denis Napthine, said engaging with the “diverse 
multicultural community and particularly with our Islamic community” was “the 
best way to make our community safer in the long run”.

The South Australian premier, Jay Weatherill, said the clearest possible 
message must be sent to the Islamic communities that they were “valued citizens 
of Australia”.

“Our thoughts in particular are with women in those communities who because of 
the nature of their dress may attract some attention and we are aware of some 
negative attention that they’ve received,” Weatherill said.

“We want to commit ourselves to reaching out to those people that have perhaps 
been the subject of unfair criticism and say that you are welcome, you are a 
valued part of our community.”

Felicity-Ann Lewis, who attended Coag as president of the Australian Local 
Government Association, backed the calls for harmony, saying she had heard 
stories about women “being targeted in shopping malls and so on”.

The NSW premier, Mike Baird, said Coag had shown a “clear collective will” to 
work together in partnership on counter-terrorism measures.

The Northern Territory chief minister, Adam Giles, praised Abbott and the 
security agencies for their efforts in combating terrorism. “We have to get it 
right 100% of the time; the bad guys have to get it right once,” Giles said.

The Coag meeting discussed a range of other issues, including the challenges 
faced by people seeking to adopt children from overseas.

Abbott said the federal government would set up a new national body to help 
people navigate the process of obtaining approvals from a range of state and 
commonwealth agencies.

He said the agency, to be established early next year, would “basically take 
people by the hand and lead them from agency to agency”.

Barnett welcomed the “sensible” announcement but called for further talks to 
extend its remit to include surrogacy arrangements.

Coag also discussed the report by billionaire Andrew Forrest on Indigenous 
affairs, but did not endorse specific recommendations.

Abbott said he had briefed Coag on the referendum to recognise Indigenous 
people in the constitution and he expected “to soon set a date” – a move he 
expected would crystallise debate about the form of words to be put to voters.
 