
Tony Blair <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> has admitted he 
profoundly underestimated the forces that were going to be unleashed in Iraq 
after the war, and says his understanding of the Middle East is much deeper now 
than at the time of the invasion in 2003.

He also revealed the extent to which the mistakes in Iraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> had led him to call for a much more 
evolutionary solution to regime change in the wake of the Arab spring.

Blair has made similar admissions of culpability before but these remarks, 
weeks beforethe July publication of the Chilcot report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/04/chilcot-inquiry-iraq-war-after-eu-referendum-says-no-10>
 into the war, are likely to be seen as his chief line of defence.

Speaking at an event sponsored by Prospect magazine in Westminster, he said: 
“For sure we underestimated profoundly the forces that were at work in the 
region and would take advantage of change once you topple the regime. That is 
the lesson. The lesson is not complicated. The lesson is simple. It is that 
when you remove a dictatorship out come these forces of destabilisation whether 
it is al-Qaida on the Sunni side or Iran on the Shia side.”

He added: “To be honest my understanding of the Middle East is a lot deeper 
today than it was when I was prime minister, quite frankly.”

He said that when the the Arab spring began “I was one of these that said ‘Let 
us be careful’. What did we learn from Iraq? We learned that once you get rid 
of the dictatorship, that is the beginning of a new chapter where all these 
poisonous forces and influences come out and start to disrupt the situation.”

He said that led him to support a process of political evolution. 


Blair again refused to apologise for the invasion even though he knows he is 
set to be criticised by the Chilcot report for making commitments to the US 
about it, and for failing to consult his cabinet more fully before troops were 
sent in.

He said the sectarianism of the Maliki government, which took office in 2006, 
played a part in the disaffection of Sunni Muslims and the rise of Islamic 
State. But he said the roots of Isis went back many decades, and was not the 
responsibility of one government.

He said he regretted the way Saddam Hussein was removed, but still called for 
more western troops on the ground in Syria and Iraq to defeat Isis.

In Syria, he admitted, Russia’s intervention had given it the leverage around 
the negotiating table. He added that a solution there might take years: “This 
is as close to a problem being without a solution right now as anything I can 
remember.”

He said the west had “not yet taken on board that there is no way of defeating 
these people without defeating them on the ground. Airstrikes are not going to 
defeat Isis. It does not mean it has to be our forces all the time – it could 
be that our forces are in support. But be in no doubt, if you want to defeat 
these people you are going to have to wage a proper ground war against them. 
The only question for us is whether we are prepared to.”

Tony Blair: west must be ready to deploy ground troops against Isis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/27/tony-blair-west-must-be-ready-to-deploy-ground-troops-against-isis>
 He said the fight against Isis required a mindset in which the west 
recognised that the battle required the same slower rhythms of the cold war.

Referring to the Arab spring, Blair said it showed that young populations with 
radical forces operating within them were not going to accept authoritarian 
governments.

The dictatorships which fell after 2011 did so, he said, because economic 
anxiety and frustration brought together two groups of people: “Disorganised 
liberal-minded people that wanted rule-based economies and tolerant societies, 
and on the other side, numerous and extremely well-organised Islamists”.

Blair attacked Donald Trump, saying: “I want an American president that is 
strong, engaged and is going to build the alliances necessary for the western 
world and you are not going to build the alliances you need with the Muslim 
countries by denigrating all Muslims.”
 