
Tony Blair <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> was jeered by 
anti-war protesters at University College London on Tuesday.

Students <https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> and campaigners from 
the Stop the War Coalition repeated their demand that the former prime minister 
be tried for war crimes.

Blair was speaking in London Bridge at the launch of the Institute for 
Security and Resilience Studies (ISRS) – a research institute which shares an 
address with UCL – alongside former defence secretary John Reid and education 
secretary Michael Gove.

UCL says it is independent from the ISRS however protestors point out 
professor Malcolm Grant, who is president and provost of UCL, appears on the 
ISRS's advisory board.

Students say the event's organisers behaved in an underhand manner by failing 
to advertise where the speech would take place, and by charging £700 for 
tickets.

Chris Nineham, vice-chair of Stop the War Coalition, which organised the 
protest at UCL says: "It is completely insane for a man who lied to parliament 
to be speaking at a conference supported by one of Britain's premier 
educational institutions. It is an absolutely mad situation."

UCL student Ollie Sutherland, one of dozens who protested, agreed that Blair 
was not welcome on campus: "Universities need to make the world a better place 
and inviting people like Tony Blair runs contrary to that."

UCL, however, has defended its position, saying: "The event is being held 
under the auspices of the ISRS, an independent research institute and 
not-for-profit company.

"They are responsible for the conference, and no funding, facilities or 
accommodation for the conference have been requested or are being provided by 
UCL.

"The conference is not taking place at UCL. As an institute devoted to 
learning, UCL values freedom of speech highly and encourages the widest 
possible expression of differing views, within the law. We do not operate a 
policy of barring speaker with controversial views."

Earlier this week, Labour MPs Jeremy Corbyn and John McDonnell said they were 
"appalled" by the news that Blair was to appear at the event, and called on UCL 
to "reconsider its position in hosting this institution and instead protect its 
own academic independence".

• This article was amended on Wednesday 14 November. The original story 
suggested Tony Blair was appearing at UCL. This has been corrected. It was also 
added that ISRS shares the same address as UCL, and that the university's 
provost appears on the ISRS advisory board.
 