
Andre Agassi's march towards a fifth Australian Open title continued unabated 
with a quick-fire straight sets victory over young Czech Tomas Berdych.

The defending champion stunned Berdych, a promising 18-year-old, 6-0 6-2 6-4 
in just one hour 22 minutes, stretching his unbeaten run at Melbourne Park to 
23 matches.

Agassi started like a bullet from a gun, racing to take the first set 6-0 
before Berdych, who enjoyed great success on the Challenger Tour, could find 
his feet.

From there, victory for the 33-year-old American was virtually a formality as 
he made just 10 unforced errors.

"I thought that was a high standard match," said Agassi. 

"Sometimes the scoreline is not reflective of the work that has going into a 
match. That was a match where we were both striking the ball very cleanly. I 
was coming up with the right shots at the right time."

Agassi spoke positively of Berdych's potential: "I like his game a lot. He is 
going to be a real good player. He is a big guy, moves pretty well for his 
size, and has a big serve that is only going to get better. He's not scared to 
take chances.

"When he came in he looked like he knew what he was doing at the net. He has a 
lot to look forward to."

Sjeng Schalken, seeded 16, progressed in four sets past Spaniard David Ferrer, 
winning 6-3 6-2 5-7 6-1 to book a third round clash with Austrian Jurgen Melzer.

Gustavo Kuerten, three times a French Open champion, had never progressed 
further than the second round on Melbourne Park's Rebound Ace surface. Never, 
that is, before today.

The Brazilian beat Ivan Ljubicic in four sets, 7-5 6-7 (5/7) 6-4 6-3, to reach 
uncharted territory at the Australian Open.

He will face fellow American Taylor Dent in an intriguing third round clash. 
Dent, seeded 27, took nearly four hours to battle past Argentina's Juan Ignacio 
Chela in five dramatic sets 3-6 6-4 4-6 7-6 (7/4) 7-5.

Agassi will meet Thomas Enqvist after the Swede beat Karol Beck 7-4 4-6 6-3 
6-4 while ninth seed Sebastien Grosjean booked a third round clash with 
Slovakian Dominic Hrbaty.

Both won in straight sets - the Frenchman beating Jan-Michael Gambill of 
America 6-4 6-3 6-2 and Hrbaty overcoming Gaston Gaudio 6-1 7-5 6-0.
 