
Let's face it: the Indian family is irresistible to readers. Will the 
grandmother reveal the secret about mad Uncle Arun? Will Preeti go through with 
the arranged marriage? And what are they going to cook next and where can we 
get some?

But I'm less interested in the sequins and spices than the family tensions 
that occur due to immigration, an accident or disease, the introduction of a 
new element or person, or that sense of displacement we've all come across in 
arriving in a new place and not knowing how time works. I'm always drawn to 
writers who explore similar themes. So, here are 10 stories about Indian 
families.

1. Rich Like Us by Nayantara Sahgal

When Ram Surya marries cockney girl Rose and brings her back to India, his 
first wife Mona and the family are dumped into chaos. Ram doesn't appear to be 
affected by the conflicts caused by his decision to have two wives. Saghal 
shows how male selfishness is trumped by the adaptability and strength of 
women, regardless of tragic outcomes (no spoilers!)

2. The Shadow Lines by Amitav Ghosh 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781848544178>

This was riveting from start to end. I'm always fascinated when the narrator 
is unnamed. This one's in love with his family's stories and grows up to be a 
professional story-seeker – a researcher. He sees the world, secondhand, 
through his family's memories of London, Calcutta, and Dhaka – memories that 
are more vivid to him than his own experiences. He is in Calcutta during the 
terrible riots of 1964, but the violence leaves him with vague impressions he 
can't describe. The story's tragedy is that without his family's narrative 
voices he is unable to take part in his own world.

3. The In Between World of Vikram Lall by MG Vassanji 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781841956060>

This begins with escalating tensions with Lall's family, third-generation 
Indians living in Kenya. Bad Things Are Going To Happen in this study of what 
happens when the family is suspended between two mutually suspicious cultures. 
Vassanji is an expert at capturing the family's confusion and shifting 
identities during the corruption and power-crazy period of Jomo Kenyatta's 
post-independence presidency.

4. Mrs Sen's by Jhumpa Lahiri (from The Interpreter of Maladies 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780006551799>
)

Lahiri uses "bonsai" moments of infinite delicacy to demonstrate American and 
Indian perceptions of family. Mrs Sen, a recent immigrant to the US, takes care 
of Eliot for his working and often distracted mother. To Eliot's delight, Mrs 
Sen describes how her family prepares for a celebration: the women, gossiping, 
laughing and chattering in a huge circle, preparing vegetables throughout the 
night.

5. Life Isn't All Ha Ha Hee Hee by Meera Syal 

I'm a big fan of Syal's work as a comedian, so, I devoured her novel about 
British-born Indian women with successful working lives who then "morph into 
obedient wives and self-abnegating mothers the moment they come home". The 
story jumps off the page and drags you in so that you feel like you're running 
around London with Sunita, Chila and Tania.

6. The Journey by Indira Ganesan

This novel works for me because it doesn't provide solutions. Ganesan's 
fictional Prospero's Island in the Bay of Bengal is the setting for the return 
of an immigrant family to mourn the loss of a beloved cousin. The family has 
thoroughly adapted to America but this return awakens their Indian roots. 
Ganesan upends expectations: the loss of speaking Hindi isn't a tragedy and the 
discovery that one character, Kish, is the son of a (gasp) Spanish mother isn't 
shameful, at least to Kish. The book triumphs in not judging as the family 
see-saws between the two cultures.

7. Family Life by Akhil Sharma 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571314263>

After their move to America, the Mishras seem to have everything going for 
them. But when Ajay's older brother, Birju, suffers a swimming accident and is 
pronounced brain dead all the love that the family have isn't enough. They try 
endless unsuccessful therapies to get Birju to respond. The Mishras struggle, 
fail, and then turn on each other. Sharma's unsentimental and honest approach 
to all the characters makes this story utterly compelling.

8. Haunting Bombay by Shilpa Agarwal <http://hauntingbombay.com/>

A deftly told ghost story woven around three generations in 1960s Bombay. 
Grandmother takes Pinky in after her mother's death, but, stepmother Savita and 
her husband Jaginder have no time for her. The awkward outsider and adolescent 
frees the ghost from the bathroom, forcing the family to confront a shadowy 
past.

9 and 10. From English Lessons by Shauna Singh Baldwin 
<http://www.shaunasinghbaldwin.com/ReviewsELess.html>

Gayatri: There's terrific humour in the conflict between the eponymous older 
married woman, and Reena, the impulsive and irritating younger sister-in-law. 
When the latter marries an African American, Gayatri hopes for a vengeful 
family response. But husband Ramesh supports her decision, recognising – more 
than Gayatri does or ever could – the kind of support Reena is going to need. 
There's sympathy, too, for Gayatri who finally sees that tradition has kept her 
from the choices she never dreamed were possible.

The Insult: Mother, hoping to get Neelu, her ageing (23!) daughter married, 
attempts to enlist Nimmi, her sister, as husband-hunter on an upcoming trip to 
India. But Nimmi ignores the hint and the "insult" alienates the sisters for 
two years. In the interim, Neelu does marry. Baldwin elegantly depicts the 
delicate skirmishing, the bone-deep emotional wound to pride and the fractured 
relationship of the sisters. An eventual "had-you-back" insult from the mother 
to Nimmi ends the stand-off.

• This article was amended on 26 June 2014 to correct the spelling of the 
names of Nayantara Sahgal and Shilpa Agarwal.
 