
It was breaking the rules, said TV chef Angela Hartnett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/angelahartnett>, but nobody minded as 
she urged the most creative of Britain’s food lovers to get behind an “amazing” 
campaign of solidarity with Syria – in British kitchens.

Hartnett was picking up a prize at the Observer Food Monthly Awards  
<https://www.theguardian.com/observer-food-monthly-awards/gallery/2016/oct/14/observer-food-monthly-awards-2016-the-winners-in-pictures>
last week on behalf of the InstagrammerClerkenwell Boy 
<https://www.instagram.com/clerkenwellboyec1/?hl=en>, an anonymous blogger and 
food critic whose photographs and opinions of much of what he consumes each day 
in eateries around the capital have become an internet phenomenon.

Flouting the “no speeches” rule to promote this “best cause” as she picked up 
the prize, Hartnett urged not only her fellow chefs, bakers and restaurateurs 
in the audience – including Jamie Oliver and Nigel Slater – but also people up 
and down the country to get behind Clerkenwell Boy’sCook for Syria  
<http://cookforsyria.com/>fundraising campaign, which kicks off at the end of 
this month and runs through November, aiming to raise money for the Unicef UK’s 
Children of Syria fund.

OFM Awards 2016 best Instagram feed: Clerkenwell Boy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/16/ofm-awards-2016-best-instagram-feed-clerkenwell-boy>
And the response has already been overwhelming, according to Clerkenwell Boy, 
who keeps his identity secret, and will reveal only that his first name is, or 
might be, Tim.

He told the Observer: “It started because I was doing some writing for Suitcase
 magazine who asked me to come up with a gala dinner, a charity one-off, to 
raise money forSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/weather/syria> through food – 
and it exploded a bit.”

Now the charity dinner in London, at which six leading chefs – Hartnett, 
Fergus Henderson, José Pizarro, Nuno Mendes, Sami Tamimi and Yotam Ottolenghi – 
will cook their own signature dishes with a Middle Eastern twist, will be the 
first of dozens of events in a month-long campaign.

But even those who cannot attend the dinner – priced at donations of £150 a 
ticket – can expect the flavours of a falafel and a flatbread, a fig or a 
spiced lentil, to be turning up in new ways on the menus of restaurants around 
the country throughout November. For those not planning to eat out in the month 
before Christmas, a website is being created full of not only the chefs’ 
specially created Syrian-inspired dishes, but also featuring those from Syrians 
in Britain and abroad who are supporting the project and sending in treasured 
family recipes.

“There are stories to go with some of these wonderful recipes, so we’re 
putting them alongside. I hope people will be inspired to have their own supper 
nights for friends and maybe donate to Cook forSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>,” said Clerkenwell Boy. “At the same 
time as raising money, you’re celebrating a culture and helping to protect a 
cuisine that could be in danger of becoming extinct.”

Social media campaigns have often been criticised for the supposed 
ineffectiveness of the “retweet and re-post” style of information sharing, the 
charge being that a lot of “likes” and posted outrage on a photo of a 
rubble-torn street in Aleppo do little to stop the war. But Clerkenwell Boy and 
his supporters believe and hope their campaign could become a model for how to 
turn the world of hashtagging, Snapchatting and Instagramming into a force for 
good. “This couldn’t have happened in this short time without social media and 
we’ll try to raise as much awareness and money as we possibly can,” he says.

“I feel we are producing a bit of a model here; it’s a model that other places 
could easily follow. We haven’t spent a single penny, just produced a campaign 
with people’s time and passion.

“Everyone I’ve approached or who has come to me is offering their services 
completely free and we have an amazing network of volunteers for something 
which only really began as an idea two months or so ago,” he said.

“It taps into the enormous frustration people have in feeling helpless in the 
face of what they see happening in Syria. People want to do something. And 
hopefully this will empower people to make a small difference.

“At the moment we have 60 restaurants who have signed up to putting 
Syrian-inspired dishes on the menu and donating some of the cost. Some of the 
amazing contestants who have been onThe Great British Bake Off are coming up 
with cake recipes for us.

“The response from Syrian families has been particularly moving,” he added. 
“Some of them have been very passionate about getting involved. If we can get 
people to pre-order it we could easily fund a cookbook at the end of it – we 
have such beautiful dishes and photographs and stories behind the food. 
Everyone just wants to do something.”

The charity dinner event takes place in London on 31 October in collaboration 
withSuitcase magazine and NEXTGen London, Unicef UK’s young professional 
movement, and is already sold out. One of the chefs, Ottolenghi, an 
Israeli-born British chef whose business partner is Palestinian Sami Tamimi, 
said the food culture of the Middle East was hugely important, and that no one 
was forgetting the struggles going on inside Syria as people tried to find 
enough food just to sustain themselves and their families.

“Sami and I – like so many chefs – live to eat,” he said. “It bends the mind 
to think of how many children in Syria are, on the other hand, eating to live. 
The stakes are so high.

“Somewhere in between these two crazy extremes we are looking forward to an 
amazing evening of feasting. The night will be spent eating and, in so doing, 
raising money to help the lives of the next generation in Syria.”
 