
Speyside waterwheel

Sugar was the key crop in Tobago from the time that Gedney Clarke, a British 
landowner, exported the first shipment in 1770. The cultivation, reaping and 
processing of sugar canes dominated all aspects of island life and culture into 
the early 1900s. Although very little sugar cane is now grown (and that only 
for consumption by the planters), the island is dotted with rusting machinery 
and crumbled stone walls – silent reminders of the sugar days. Near the village 
of Speyside, on the north-eastern tip of Tobago, you can see the ruins of a big 
iron waterwheel that once provided power for a thriving sugar plantation.

Kimme Museum, Bethel

Luise Kimme spent more than three decades defining the Tobagonian in her art. 
Her elongated and fanciful interpretations of the human figure were very 
distinctive, and pieces found their way into collections all over the world. 
The private museum and home of this German-born artist and sculptor, who died 
of cancer earlier this year, is known locally as Kimme Castle. It reflects the 
artist's vast imagination and creativity, and houses around 100 of her bold, 
wooden figures, as well as many of her other works, from bronzes to embroidery.
• luisekimme.com <http://www.luisekimme.com> 

Crusoe's Cave, Crown Point
 Photograph: Fred Hoogervorst 
In 1719, Daniel Defoe shipwrecked Robinson Crusoe on a desert island populated 
only by wild goats and fierce Amerindians, and gave the literary world its most 
famous castaway. Crusoe and his major-domo, Man Friday, lived on an island 
within sight of the 'great island of Trinidad' – and this could only be Tobago. 
A mere stone's throw from the airport, and a few minutes' walk from an old 
hotel that bears Crusoe's name, is a cave sunk into the limestone bluff 
overlooking the beach at Crown Point. This cavity is known as Crusoe's Cave and 
is best visited at low tide.

The grave of Gang Gang Sara, Golden Lane

In the tiny hamlet of Golden Lane, just off the main road on Tobago's wildly 
beautiful leeward coast, locals tell the story of a witch, Gang Gang Sara. She 
was a slave on a sugar plantation in the area and was reputed to be a 
necromancer. One day, so the story goes, she climbed a mighty kapok tree and 
attempted to fly back to Africa. But – having eaten salt – she had lost the 
power of flight, and so fell to earth and died. Her grave, and those of other 
plantation slaves, can be seen near the hamlet, and locals can point out Sara's 
burial place from the rest.

Fort James, Plymouth
 Photograph: Alamy 
Fort James is an 18th-century British coastal fortification that once defended 
the town of Plymouth, Tobago's former capital. Founded by Jacobus, or James, 
Duke of Courland, the fort sits atop several previous military structures, 
including the foundations of a blockhouse erected when the Dutch held sway over 
the island. The walls of the fort are constructed from hand-hewn limestone 
blocks, laid together without mortar. The location offers a stunning view over 
the blue waters and golden sands of Great Courland Bay.

Fort King George, Scarborough

Built during the 1770s, in the turbulent period when Tobago changed hands 
between the French and the British, Fort King George is perched on a high 
elevation, from where its silent cannons look down on the island's largest 
town, Scarborough. The fort has undergone a recent renovation and is home to 
the Tobago Museum. The small collection here features a fascinating array of 
old maps and colonial artefacts, as well as Amerindian remains, including 
several complete skeletons. The grounds of the fort are beautifully landscaped 
and are a good place from where to watch the sun set.
• Tobago Museum is open Monday to Friday, 9.30am-4.30pm

Courland Monument, Plymouth
 Photograph: Fred Hoogervorst 
Plymouth was the site of the first European settlement in Tobago. In 1654, a 
small band of pioneers arrived on the island, sent by the Duke of Courland 
(Courland is now in western Latvia) to establish a foothold in the new world. 
This outpost suffered the ravages common to many early colonisers – namely 
disease and attacks by hostile native people. The Courlanders were ousted in 
the wake of squabbles over the island between English, French and Dutch powers. 
In 1978, the Latvian-American artist Janis Mintiks created a concrete 
minimalist structure of imposing proportions to mark the site of the Courland 
settlement.

Plymouth mystery tombstone

A short walk from Fort James is the sleepy village of Plymouth. Here, a 
tombstone bears an inscription that has mystified generations of locals and 
tourists alike – so much so that it has become a Tobagonian landmark. A 
memorial to Betty Stiven, records that she was the beloved wife of Alex B 
Stiven, and died on 25 November 1783 at the age of 23. Thereafter comes the 
cryptic statement "she was a mother without knowing it and a wife without 
letting her husband know it except by her kind indulgences to him".

Moravian churches, Spring Garden and Black Rock
 Photograph: Fred Hoogervorst 
In the villages of Spring Garden and Black Rock, early Moravian missionaries 
constructed two churches, in 1852 and 1859 respectively. Almost identical, 
these simple chapels are remarkable for their design, which incorporates 
wood-shingle walls and hipped roofs, resting on foundation piers of hand-hewn 
coral limestone. These Moravian churches were bastions of colonial Tobago and 
their primary function was in ministering to plantation slaves and educating 
their children – and the good works continued long after Emancipation in 1834. 
These seemingly humble churches were two of the few structures that survived 
devastating Hurricane Flora in 1963.
• The churches are generally open daily, reasonable hours

Scarborough Court House

The old Court House overlooks James Square in the heart of bustling little 
Scarborough. It's a fine Georgian building, constructed in 1825 for the Tobago 
House of Assembly, and it is home to the government of the island today. In 
1847, a hurricane destroyed Scarborough's Catholic and Protestant churches, but 
the Court House survived. It hosted alternate services for the churches in the 
main courtroom – which is still wonderfully preserved, with original furniture.

Angelo Bissessarsingh is a historian and columnist for the Sunday Trinidad 
Guardian
 