
Sailing 

Sailing around Tobago can be both idyllic and tough depending, on the wind 
conditions and coastline. While the north of the island has many protected bays 
for anchorage, the choppy windward side is only for experts. The best sailing 
conditions are to be found from December to May, when winds are strong and 
consistent. The Buccoo-reef protected area of Pigeon Point and the sheltered 
Bon Accord lagoon next to it are good sailing spots for all levels, 
particularly those with little experience – 13ft Hobie Waves are available to 
rent there and are ideal for beginners.

Another way to travel wind-assisted around the island is on a catamaran 
charter. With food, drinks and music provided, plus stops at a few tropical 
bays, the trips are more "party on a catamaran" than real sailing.
• Radical Sports, +1868 631 5150, radicalsportstobago.com 
<http://www.radicalsportstobago.com>; Catamaran Charters +1868 639 7245, 
sailtobago.com <http://www.sailtobago.com>

Kitesurfing
 Photograph: Alamy 
Tobago's south-western Pigeon Point peninsula is a particularly blustery piece 
of coastline, ideal for water sports requiring wind. It also has clear, shallow 
waters encircled by the Buccoo Reef, and is popular with kitesurfers of all 
abilities. With friendly, safety-conscious instructors and equipment available 
on the peninsula, you can take it at your own speed and wait for winds that 
suit you.
• Tobago Kiteboarding Organization, +1868 331 3775, 
tobagokiteboardingorganization.webs.com 
<http://www.tobagokiteboardingorganization.webs.com>

Scuba diving
 Photograph: Alamy 
Tobago is a well-known dive destination: with more than 60 established dive 
sites, some say it is the best in the Caribbean. Tobago's waters cater for all 
levels of experience, offering shallow-reef dives for beginners, as well as 
more technical dives, such as drift, wreck and deep diving. The north side of 
the island, particularly around Speyside and Charlotteville, contains Tobago's 
most famous dive sites, as well as the island's only recompression chamber. 
Dive sites in the southern part of the island are also plentiful, but 
visibility is not always as good. Dive shops are located all over the island; 
the most safety conscious ones are members of the Association of Tobago Dive 
Operators (ATDO).
• AquaMarine Dive, +1868 639 4416, aquamarinedive.com 
<http://www.aquamarinedive.com>

Snorkelling
 Photograph: Alamy 
You don't need to take a boat ride to find great snorkelling spots; there are 
many at the end of several popular beaches. However, Buccoo Reef – a complex 
ecosystem composed of 30 acres of coral reef that are perfect for peering into 
– is most easily reached by glass-bottom boat tours from Store Bay (or Pigeon 
Point). Glass-bottom boat operators provide snorkels and tickets are available 
on a walk-up basis.
• Diving in Tobago, +1868 639 7936, divingintobago.com 
<http://www.divingintobago.com>

Windsurfing
 Photograph: Alamy 
The centre for windsurfing on the island is, again, Pigeon Point peninsula. 
Winds are best between December and June, and it is common to see windsurfers 
speeding far into the distance. This period is also best for windsurfing 
clinics, run by local operators and international companies who specialise in 
windsurfing holidays. During the rest of the year, the conditions are great for 
beginners.
• Radical Sports, as above

Parasailing
 Photograph: Alamy 
One of the worst things you can do in the tropics is to get drunk in the hot 
sun and not hydrate properly. The doctors call it sunstroke; unsympathetic 
friends and family call it a really bad hangover. Strapped into a parachute, 
winched up into the air and floating 90 metres above Buccoo reef isn't the most 
obvious way to overcome such a condition – but, surprisingly, it worked for me, 
thanks to the panoramic vistas, cool breeze and sheer effortlessness. 
Parasailing is great for all ages and abilities. Slow or twin glides are 
available, and, in most cases, your feet will never touch the water.
• Tobago Kite and Surf Camp, +1868 313 1260, surfcamp-tobago.com/en/parasailing
 <http://www.surfcamp-tobago.com/en/parasailing>

Sea kayaking
 Photograph: Fred Hoogervorst 
One of the calmest and most scenic water sports in Tobago is sea kayaking. 
It's great for all the family and many of the beach hotels have kayaks 
available for their guests. A variety of sea kayaks – sit-on-top, recreational 
and touring ¬– can also be rented from water-sport providers. Kayaking around 
the Bon Accord lagoons and mangroves is a good way to see wildlife. Another 
popular kayaking spot is Charlotteville (11.31806, -60.54986), with its coves 
that can only be reached by sea. Kayak tours of other parts of the island, plus 
lessons, can be easily organised.
• Tobago Sea Kayak Experience, Charlotteville, +1868 660 6186

Surfing
 Photograph: Alamy 
Mount Irvine is the number one surf spot in Tobago. While the size of the 
waves depends on the direction of the swells and the time of year, when it's 
big at Mount Irvine it's massive – three to four metres in the back and six to 
seven metres in the face. With a shallow, coral bottom, when this break is 
pounding it isn't for the faint-hearted. On the other side of the bay, "Lefts" 
is another popular spot and, with its sandy bottom, is a lot less gnarly. 
However, big swells are not regular and, more often than not, the waves at 
Mount Irvine are waist-high. They have a perfect shape and, with a good local 
instructor, Mount Irvine is great place to learn to surf, with schools located 
on the beach. Other popular waves in Tobago include the choppy "Crazies", off 
Bacolet Point, and the outer reef at Pigeon Point. These waves are more suited 
to advanced surfers, however
• High Tide Surf Lessons, Mount Irvine, +1868 294 6509

Wakeboarding
 Photograph: Alamy 
Wakeboarding is to waterskiing what snowboarding is to skiing: you're strapped 
to a single board rather than two skies. Radical Sports Tobago, the biggest 
water-sports centre on the island, offers lessons and all the equipment you 
need to get standing in no time. They also welcome those with prior experience, 
who they are then quick to encourage into wake jumps, 180s and more.
• Radical Sports Tobago, as above

Stand up paddling
 Photograph: Alamy 
Stand up paddling (SUP) is one of the more recent additions to the Tobago 
water-sport scene. It looks very Hawaii Five-0 when done by experts: for 
novices, sedate paddle cruises around the calm waters of Petit Trou lagoon are 
a good way to start. There are other options too, including stand-up fitness 
and yoga paddling.
• Stand Up Paddle Tobago +1868 681 4741, standuppaddletobago.com 
<http://www.standuppaddletobago.com>

Dylan Kerrigan is an anthropologist at The University of the West Indies, 
writes regularly for the Trinidad Guardian and he lives in Port of Spain
 