
The relationship between a diary and a diarist is supposedly a private, sacred 
affair. A diary's pages are the ideal place to record your deepest, heart-felt 
passions or your darkest desires, safe in the knowledge that your diary will 
take those secrets to the grave. Write whatever you like – it's all totally 
secret.

Isn't it? Err, well no, actually. Because once those thoughts are out of your 
head and onto the page they can be seen by anybody. They can be found. Which is 
kind of the whole point of writing something down in the first place, isn't it? 
To have it read.

I am fairly unscrupulous. I will hesitate only as long as it takes me to find 
a comfy chair before I start reading any diary that I happen to stumble upon 
(or find after hours of searching in my daughter's bedroom…). Diaries are 
intriguing. They offer us an insight into someone else's head. If we're really 
lucky they provide reassurance that other people think like we do. The best 
part about reading a diary (and this applies to reading your own, old diaries) 
is discovering what the writer of that diary chose to record. What was 
important to them on that day? Seemingly irrelevant, mundane comments can say a 
lot about a person, even if it's that "I had the biggest laugh at school today. 
Jason was messing about with a Bovril sandwich and somehow it ended up being 
shoved down my jumper (I hasten to add that it was wrapped in cellophane). I 
got it out, crawled over to James' bag and put it inside without him seeing. 
Everyone else saw – it was well funny." The unabridged entry goes on for so 
long that I ended up adding three sides of A4 paper to my diary, so hilarious 
was the incident of the Bovril sandwich. I was 16-years-old. I was supposed to 
be revising for my GCSEs.

Books based on diaries give a reader something really special. The feeling 
that someone is confiding in you; sharing things with you that they would never 
tell another living soul. There are many fantastic books for children and 
teenagers with a diary format. These are my top ten, in no particular order as 
these books are so diverse that it would be impossible to compare them to each 
other.

Rebecca Westcott's debut novel Dandelion Clocks is published by Penguin and 
follows the diary of 11-year-old Liv from thirteen weeks before to six months 
after the death of her much-loved mum from cancer.

1. Artichoke Hearts by Sita Brahmachari 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780330517911>

12-year-old Mira's beloved Nana Josie is dying. There is no doubt about this – 
Nana has plans to decorate her own coffin and when it arrives on Mira's 
birthday it's clear that Nana hasn't got long to go. At the same time, Mira 
joins a writing club at school where she is encouraged to write a diary. The 
timing is perfect. Things are changing and Mira is suddenly less keen to 
confide in her best friend. The diary becomes her keeper of secrets. This is a 
beautiful book, full of what it means to love and be loved. It also contains 
the sentence I most wish I had written. It's a sentence that keeps coming back 
to me and could be the opening line to a thousand different stories. "You can 
have too much history when you're only twelve years old." Sita Brahmachari has 
created characters that leave you longing to know more about them and their 
lives.


2. The Diary Of A Young Girl by Anne Frank 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780241952443>

Mention children's books based on a diary to most people and this is the first 
one they'll think of. Since its first publication in 1947 it has been 
translated into 70 languages and sold over 30 million copies.

It's a great example of a diary being written to be read. When Anne first 
began her diary in 1942, it was intended as a personal journal, for her eyes 
only. That changed in 1944 when she heard that the Dutch government was looking 
to collect letters and diaries after the war that would show the plight of the 
Dutch people. At this point, Anne revisited her old diaries, adding more detail 
and editing existing entries. She wanted to become a famous writer and imagined 
her diaries as a way of enabling that.

This fact makes reading The Diary of a Young Girl a doubly powerful 
experience. Anne was a real teenager with real teenage concerns - the back of 
the book describes her as "an ordinary yet extraordinary teenage girl." So, 
pretty much like all teenage girls, then. Her chatty, friendly style of writing 
means that her diary entries possess a dry humour despite being poignant and 
devastatingly awful. This is a children's book that is as much for adults as it 
is for children.

3. I Capture The Castle by Dodie Smith 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099460879>

It is 1934 and 17-year-old Cassandra Mortmain has decided to keep a journal. 
She has two motivations – to practise her speed writing and to prepare herself 
for writing a novel. However, the six months that follow are so full of change 
and drama that Cassandra's journal becomes a place where she records all that 
is happening (and quite a lot that isn't happening too). This story explores 
sibling relationships, loyalty and ultimately, the issue of unbalanced love. We 
meet highly likeable, touching characters who are prepared to love more than 
they are loved. There is a lot of passion flying around this book and it 
culminates in one of the most powerful endings I have ever read. I found myself 
applauding Cassandra's sense of self-worth while feeling incredibly sad that it 
had to end this way.

4. Z for Zachariah by Robert C O'Brien 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780435122119>

16 year old Ann Burden believes that she is the only survivor of a nuclear 
holocaust. That is, until the day that Mr Loomis walks into her valley, wearing 
a protective suit and dragging a wagon of provisions behind him. This was one 
of my favourite books as a teenager and the feeling of sinister menace that I 
remembered was just as strong when I recently re-read it. What if you were the 
last female on earth?
 In Ann, we are given a strong heroine who considers practicality at every 
step but isn't averse to a little daydreaming. Her diary is written over a 
period of three months and the ending is haunting. You desperately wish that it 
could somehow be different but it's clear that Ann is taking the only action 
available to her.

5. Diary Of A Wimpy Kid by Jeff Kinney 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141324906>

My kids, along with millions of others the world over, absolutely love these 
books. You only need to read the first few entries to understand why. In Gregg 
Heffley, we are given a character who lies, cheats and does whatever he deems 
necessary to get through his day. He suffers at the hands of his big brother, 
Rodrick and struggles to understand why his parents are so totally devoted to 
his little brother. The only person available for Gregg to assert any power 
over is his friend, Rowley – and even that goes wrong when he pushes Rowley too 
far over the worm-terrorising incident. I asked my son to explain why he thinks 
these books are international bestsellers. His answer – Gregg isn't 
particularly good at anything and that's what makes him so appealing to kids. 
He's an unlikely hero – a hero without heroic qualities. There's a bit of Gregg 
Heffley in everyone.

6. Angus, Thongs and Full Frontal Snogging by Louise Rennison 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007218677>

This is not a book to read on public transport unless you are comfortable with 
laughing hysterically in a crowded train carriage. Georgia is feeling the 
pressure of teenage life – Dad's disappeared to the other side of the world in 
search of work, she's pretty sure Mum is having an affair with the builder and 
her little sister, Libby, has a penchant for hiding her dirty nappies in 
Georgia's room. What I love about this book is the relationship that Georgia 
has with her friends. It's honest and brutal and very, very realistic. A 
brilliant book for 12+ readers who will all find something about Georgia that 
they can identify with.

7. Dear Nobody by Berlie Doherty 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141311760>

This book is an excellent read for older teenagers. The story of Chris and 
Helen and their little Nobody is heartbreaking and thought provoking. It isn't 
strictly a diary - the majority of the story is told from the point of view of 
Chris as he recalls the events of the last nine months. His memories are 
interspersed with letters written by Helen to their unborn baby – both of which 
create a diary feel throughout the book. Chris is desperate to do the right 
thing and take responsibility for his actions, but Helen won't let him. The 
relationship between Helen and her mother is difficult but ultimately, the 
arrival of Nobody helps to heal generations of hurt.

8. Are You There God? It's me, Margaret by Judy Blume 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780330398084>

This book was written in 1970 and is still being enjoyed by pre-teen and early 
teenagers today. It's another book that, while not strictly written in a diary 
format, creates the intimate feeling of a diary. Written in the first person by 
11-year-old Margaret, we are taken on a journey of awkward moments, humiliating 
experiences and some serious self-doubt. Margaret 'talks' to God throughout the 
story, asking his advice and telling him her deepest secrets – she talks to God 
in the way that another girl might write a diary. The real beauty of this book 
lies in Margaret's innocence – she feels angry with God and loudly professes to 
have no religion but not once does she question the reality of God.

I loved this book when I was younger and have recently passed it to my 
12-year-old daughter. "It's full of cringe-worthy stuff," she told me, before 
she disappeared to her room to continue reading. Obviously that's a good thing!


9. Diary of a Killer Cat by Anne Fine 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780140369311>

This book is great for readers aged six-nine years (although when I recently 
read it as a bedtime story to my six-year-old son, my 12-year-old daughter 
snuck in to listen as she remembered enjoying it so much when she was younger). 
We are told the story from the point of view of Tuffy, the killer cat, who 
likes to talk straight and tell it like it is. Tuffy's no-nonsense approach 
makes him a charismatic narrator. Right up until the end, we have no idea 
whether he is a villain or a hero, and this makes it a book that children don't 
want to put down.

10. The Secret Diary of Adrian Mole by Sue Townsend 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141315980>

I first read this book when I was 13 ¾ years old and thought it was the 
funniest book I'd ever read in my life. The week where Adrian decides to paint 
over his Noddy wallpaper with black paint is truly one of the funniest scenes I 
think I've ever read.

Reading this again as an adult, with a more parental perspective, I can hear 
the sadness in Adrian's voice, which I didn't really notice as a teen reader – 
then, I just thought it was funny (as have my own children). Adrian is a 
teenage boy in desperate need of a hot bath and some care and attention, but 
his parents are too engrossed in their own issues (plus, he is a highly 
annoying teenager with a large streak of arrogance). Everyone will know someone 
like Adrian – this book will remain a firm favourite for teenagers and adults 
alike, for many, many more years to come.
 