
Pigeon Point

Stretching for miles, this narrow, white-sand beach, fringed by small trees, 
hugs clear, blue waters. Pigeon Point Road is lined with fishing huts – some 
converted into restaurants – and stalls selling trinkets (calabashes and the 
like). Further along the peninsula there is a beach facility with cabanas, bars 
and a restaurant. There is a £2 entry charge to access this section, through a 
garden of coconut trees, but it's worth the money – it's probably the most 
beautiful beach in Tobago. The water is calm and warm, lifeguards patrol the 
sand, and a pier with a thatched roof makes for great photos.

Campbleton Bay 

Just after a sign saying "Welcome to Charlotteville" – and before you start 
descending into the picturesque village – you'll see an overgrown patch of 
grass and the beginning of a path. It heads down to this secret bay – it's not 
even listed on most maps. On the 10-minute hike down, you'll see butterflies 
among the bamboo and may even spot vibrantly coloured birds such as the 
rufous-tailed jacamar. At the bottom is a small, heavenly beach, where you 
won't see another soul. Long vines hang down from towering trees; wading birds 
hunt fish in the river; the waves break gently on unspoiled sand.

Englishman's Bay 
 Photograph: Fred Hoogervorst 
With a backdrop of rainforest that matches the emerald-green sea of the bay, 
it's surprising thatEnglishman's Bay 
<https://maps.google.com/maps?q=11.297271,+-60.669937&oe=utf-8&client=firefox-a&hnear=0x8c485691c8faa4bd:0xe74c9c044fcdec1e,11.297271,+-60.669937&t=m&z=17>
 is not overrun by an army of beach lovers. But golden-sand beaches such as 
this in Tobago are often empty: that's the beauty of the island. Approached 
through a cluster of almond trees, this is a quiet and secluded stretch, but – 
thanks to Eula's restaurant here – you don't need a packed lunch or icebox. The 
clear water is great for snorkelling and exploring the marine life of the rocky 
headland jutting away from the sand.

Parlatuvier Bay 

This horseshoe-shaped beach 
<https://maps.google.com/maps?q=11.297271,+-60.669937&oe=utf-8&client=firefox-a&hnear=0x8c485691c8faa4bd:0xe74c9c044fcdec1e,11.297271,+-60.669937&t=m&z=17>
 spans the width of a charming fishing village with a French-Caribbean look 
thanks to the colourfully painted houses (bright pinks and turquoise) dotted 
along the road to the beach. It could pass for a St Lucia seaside town, in the 
style of Soufrière. A long jetty stretches into the sea from the centre of the 
beach and you'll often see local children diving off it into the deep water. 
Small fishing boats are anchored in the bay, listing and bobbing on the tide. 
From morning until lunchtime, fishermen return with their catches. More boats 
sit on the beach, some upturned, ready for repairs, giving a comforting feeling 
that this place really is a working village, not just a beach retreat.

Bacolet Bay
 Photograph: Fred Hoogervorst 
Walt Disney's Swiss Family Robinson was filmed here in 1960. It is a romantic 
driftwood-strewn beach, overlooked by the Blue Haven Hotel, which was glamorous 
haunt of Rita Hayworth, Robert Mitchum and other 1950s Hollywood film stars, 
but now encapsulates faded glory. A large beach-hut bar is set back from the 
sea, providing shade as well as drinks. The sea here gradually deepens, unlike 
some beaches in Tobago that go from shallow to deep in an instant, so taking a 
dip at Bacolet Bay is a relaxing experience.

Back Bay, Mount Irvine

The south-west of Tobago, close to the airport, is the tourist hub of the 
island, but even here it's easy to get off the beaten track. Mount Irvine's 
main beach is very pleasing to sun, sand and sea worshippers, but just half a 
kilometre north-east sits Back Bay, hidden from sight and accessed via a dirt 
track (or a scramble over the rocks from Mount Irvine Beach facility). First 
you will see a lovingly tended herb garden, then a set of wooden steps, carved 
from branches, descending into a grove of tall manchineel trees (attractive, 
but poisonous – don't touch) that shade the approach to the beach. Back Bay is 
tended by government-paid community workers, so the sand is always perfectly 
clean and the shrubbery well pruned.

Castara Bay
 Photograph: Fred Hoogervorst 
From the lookout at the top of the hill above Castara, you can view the 
village in all its glory while swallows fly around your head. Framed by velvety 
green hills, the long golden sands of Castara are sublime. The sea is 
chlorophyll green, the waves break soporifically on the beach. With 
justification, the locals are fiercely proud of their village – Castarans seem 
almost separatists from Tobago. Many people come to the island only to visit 
Castara, but it's not swarming with tourists and there's no hassle, just 
barbecued fish grills on the beach front, and long, idle days soaking up sun. 
You won't find jetskis or surfing here, just gentle water, perfect for swimming.

Speyside, Tyrell's Bay

On the windward coast of Tobago, where the Atlantic meets the Caribbean, the 
landscape becomes wild and rugged. Speyside is a fishing village with a beach 
stretching for about a mile. The waves are rougher on the Atlantic side, less 
suited to bathing, but great for diving. The views are the real highlight, 
however. Goat Island (where Ian Fleming is said to have owned the windswept 
white house visible to the naked eye above the rocks) and Little Tobago lie out 
to sea in the distance. Dotted along the beach front are seafood cafes, little 
rum shops and diving schools.

King Peter's Bay
 Photograph: Fred Hoogervorst 
This is a true adventurer's beach and only a handful of people ever come here. 
It is so eerily quiet and abandoned it recalls a time when the hidden coves of 
the island were navigated only by 18th-century merchant ships and pirate 
vessels. A black-sand beach awaits if you are prepared to negotiate the 
three-mile, winding road. The wild, grassy track might seem intimidating if it 
weren't for the odd goat tied up to graze at the side of the road. You can 
almost guarantee the beach will be deserted when you arrive.

Lovers' Bay

Another beach for the adventurous – and the amorous. Lovers' Bay is accessible 
only by boat from Charlotteville: you will need to commission a local fisherman 
or anyone with a boat – expect to pay around £10-20 for the round trip and be 
sure to arrange a pickup time or you'll be stranded. Lovers' Bay is a small but 
glorious cove. Crushed seashells mingle with the sand, making the beach glow 
pink and sparkle in the sun. It is a hidden gem.

Joshua Surtees <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/joshua-surtees> is a 
former editorial researcher in the Guardian's audience department who now works 
for the Trinidad Guardian as a journalist.

• This article was amended on 02/10/2013 to correct an error in the byline.
 