
Go goat and crab racing in Buccoo

Thousands head for Buccoo on the Tuesday after Easter for the Goat & Crab Race 
Festival. Goat racing, an indigenous sport, has been practised here since 1925 
and the animals are trained for at least two months before race day. Goat 
handlers are called jockeys and they have to be fit – goats have been known to 
outrun their jockeys. Crabs don't take to training easily. Crab catchers do the 
hard work of rounding them up and then anyone can sign up for the race. You get 
your own crab, tied to a piece of string, and it's your job to coax a winning 
performance out of it. The festival coincides with the annual village harvest, 
so there's usually plenty to see and to eat.
• Buccoo Goat Race Festival, buccoo.net <http://www.buccoo.net>

Take a 4x4 safari
 Photograph: Alamy 
Only one tour operator offers off-road safaris: Fabrizio 'Fab' Ceppi, who runs 
Tobago Now Tourism, started his 4x4 trips in 2005 and has steadily added to his 
fleet of customised vehicles to meet demand. The average six-hour tour takes 
you well off the beaten track, past small freehold farms, where bananas, 
mangoes, avocadoes and cocoa are grown, and into the Main Ridge Forest Reserve. 
Stops include the Highland Waterfall and the Hillsborough Dam.
• Tobago Now Tourism Services, 420 Orange Hill Road, Prospect, Patience Hill, 
+1868 639 1476,tobagonow.com <http://www.tobagonow.com> 


Join in village cricket
 Photograph: Alamy 
Cricket is as popular in Tobago as it is elsewhere in the Caribbean. Local 
teams can often be seen on village greens, practising or playing inter-village 
fete matches. If you know how to play and there's a practice match taking 
place, teams may be happy to give you a place in the field. You may even find a 
pick-up game on the beach – or you could join the party on the sidelines. At 
some fete matches, DJs are hired to play between team changes and to signal a 
batman's walk back to the pavilion with an appropriate selection.
• Details of regional and national fixtures from the Trinidad & Tobago Cricket 
Board (ttcb.co.tt <http://ttcb.co.tt>)


Off-road cycling 
 Photograph: Fred Hoogervorst 
Tiny Tobago covers just 300 square kilometres, yet there is surprising 
diversity in its terrain – and that's why the island is considered a great 
place for mountain biking. Trails wind along the Main Ridge Forest Reserve, 
through old cocoa estates and into mangrove forests – and just about every one 
ends at a spectacular beach or a refreshing waterfall. Two leading outfits, 
Mountain Biking Tobago and Slow Leak Tours, both run by passionate riders, hire 
bikes and devise tours to suit all skill levels.
• Mountain Biking Tobago, Orange Hill Road, Prospect, +1868 639 9709, 
mountainbikingtobago.com <http://www.mountainbikingtobago.com>; Slow Leak 
Tours, Pleasant Prospect +1868 332 5872,tobagomountainbike.com 
<http://www.tobagomountainbike.com> 

Chase waterfalls
 Photograph: Fred Hoogervorst 
Tobago's highest waterfalls are to the east: just outside of Roxborough, the 
spectacular Argyle Waterfall drops 54 metres in a series of cascades. Happily, 
it is not difficult to reach – and there are guides on site to lead you along a 
short trail to the base, where you can shower in the spray or cool off with a 
swim in the deep pool. A little further west, Craig Hall Waterfall near Mason 
Hall is easy to get to, although no swimming is allowed here. Across the other 
side of the island, the Highland Waterfall at Moriah is becoming increasingly 
popular, despite being difficult to find – it is nestled deep in the rainforest.
• Argyle Waterfalls, Mon-Sat 9am-5pm, 15-20 minute walk from the car park

Explore a cocoa estate, near Roxborough
 Photograph: Fred Hoogervorst 
You may almost feel overwhelmed by the dense greenery and heady smell of 
fermenting cocoa as you stroll the trails of the Tobago Cocoa Estate, where 
large red and yellow cocoa pods hang from trees like oversize Christmas 
decorations. Cocoa was once king in Trinidad and Tobago, but crop disease and 
Hurricane Flora stopped its cultivation in the 1960s. Then, in 2004, chocolate 
artisan Duane Dove – who grew up on the island – started to replant: he now 
runs Tobago's only functioning cocoa estate. Set in Roxborough, in the east of 
the island, the estate is also a heritage park, where you learn about the 
history of cocoa and see how the bean is processed.
• Tobago Cocoa Estate, Roxborough, +1868 390 2021, tobagococoa.com 
<http://www.tobagococoa.com>. Tours Mon, Wed and Fri, 9am-11am. Weekends by 
reservation

Play football 
 Photograph: Shaun Botterill/FIFA 
Football is the most popular sport in Tobago and at Bacolet, near Scarborough, 
there is a stadium named after local boy and former Manchester United player 
Dwight Yorke. It was built for the 2001 FIFA Under-17 World Championship and, 
with a capacity of 7,500, local league and national matches are now played 
here. There is plenty of football action elsewhere: you'll see football being 
played in the streets, in fields and on the beach, where it isn't simply a 
spectator sport – you can play, too.
• Dwight Yorke Stadium, Bacolet, +1868 660 7655

Ride along the beach in the west
 Photograph: Richard Blunt/Alamy 
Veronika and Lennon La Fortune established Being with Horses in 2008, and, 
with five horses, provide riding suitable for beginners as well as the more 
experienced. Rides take in the western coastline overlooking Nylon Pool and 
Buccoo Reef, and go through mangroves and wetlands – you can even have a swim 
with the horses. Time your trip just right and you'll be at Buccoo Bay at 
sunset. The stables offer western and English saddles.
• Being with Horses, 14 Galla Trace, Buccoo +1868 639 0953, 
being-with-horses.com <http://www.being-with-horses.com>


Hike the Main Ridge
 Photograph: Michael Melford/Getty Images/National Geographic Creative 
A band of tropical rainforest, the Main Ridge is Tobago's backbone and runs 
lengthways across two thirds of the island. The highest point is 550m Pigeon 
Peak, at the north end. Established as a reserve in 1776, Main Ridge is the 
oldest legally protected forest in the western hemisphere. Much of it remains 
untouched but for a few hiking trails, the most established of which is the 
Gilpin Trace trail whose the entrance is marked just off the Roxborough-Bloody 
Bay Road. It is a downhill trek, past a small waterfall, to Bloody Bay.

Tee off
 Photograph: Fred Hoogervorst 
Tobago offers two championship-quality, 18-hole golf courses. On the north 
coast, coconut trees line the fairways at Mount Irvine Bay Golf Course and the 
9th hole is a special treat, with views of Buccoo Point and Buccoo Reef. On the 
south coast, Tobago Plantations golf course offers panoramic views of the 
capital, Scarborough. The course is dotted with lakes and runs for two and a 
half miles along the beach front.
• Mount Irvine Bay Golf Course, +1868 639 8871, mtirvine.com 
<http://www.mtirvine.com>; Tobago Plantations, Hampden Road, Lowlands, +1868 
660 8800,magdalenagrand.com <http://www.magdalenagrand.com>

Tracy Assing is contributing editor of the Caribbean arts magazine ARC and the 
former editor of Discover Trinidad & Tobago travel guide
 