
Britain's first black Conservative MP, Adam Afriyie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/adam-afriyie>, yesterday earned £13m from 
the sale of his political information business.

Mr Afriyie entered the House of Commons this year after winning the Tory safe 
seat of Windsor in the general election. He can now plan his political career 
in the knowledge that his financial future is equally secure:Emap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/emap>, owner of FHM magazine and the Nursing 
Times, yesterday agreed to buy his DeHavilland Information Services business 
for £18m in cash.

The MP, aged 39, will receive the majority of the proceeds - just under £13m - 
due to his 72% shareholding in DeHavilland. The business comprises one 
internet-based subscription service: Public Affairs Briefing. PAB tracks the 
daily comings and goings in the houses of parliament and the implementation of 
government policy. Its subscribers are organisations that deal with the 
government regularly, including trade associations, companies and charities.

In a statement, Mr Afriyie indicated that a potential conflict of interest 
between his business and his duties as an MP helped hasten a deal. However, it 
is understood that he stepped back from the day-to-day running of the business 
some years ago.

"I am personally sad to be exiting the public affairs information sector but, 
given my parliamentary duties, it is both timely and makes good sense," he said.

Mr Afriyie will retain part of the DeHavilland business following the deal. 
Although the DeHavilland brand has been signed away to Emap, Mr Afriyie and 
company co-founder William Bracken will retain ownership of the company's 
corporate and consumer news subsidiary.

Mr Afriyie was born in Wimbledon to an English mother and a Ghanaian father. 
He studied agricultural economics at Imperial College before embarking on a 
successful career as a businessman.

He was a founding director of Connect Support Services, an IT company which 
was declared one of Britain's fastest growing private companies three years 
ago. Throughout this time he was active in the Conservative party, having 
joined in 1990.

Mr Afriyie will probably not appreciate the publicity over his windfall. He 
told the BBC website this year: "I'm not comfortable with the media spotlight 
... [I] just want to get on with doing a good job."
 