
The Wales manager, John Toshack, admits he is relying on youthful enthusiasm 
in tomorrow's World Cup qualifier againstAzerbaijan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/azerbaijan> after suffering a number of 
blows to his preparations. Having already instigated a five-year rebuilding 
programme based on bringing through young players, Toshack has been forced to 
delve even deeper into the Under-21 ranks for the testing clash in Baku.

Having lost the services of three Premier League players to injury on Monday, 
to bring the total number of regular squad absentees to 10, Toshack is set to 
send out Wales' youngest ever side, captained by the 22-year-old Joe Ledley.

Reading's 20-year-old striker Simon Church will almost certainly make his full 
international debut after winning his first cap as a second-half substitute in 
last week's friendly against Estonia, but the loss of Jack Collison, Gareth 
Bale and Ched Evans this week means Toshack is likely to bring in another 
20-year-old, Oldham's Neil Eardley, to win his 10th cap at right-back.

"Stronger Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales> squads than this 
have had problems in Baku," said Toshack. "This is a very tough test for these 
youngsters. But losing Premier League players like Collison, Evans and Bale has 
hit us hard. It is cruel on the lads and typical of the cruel luck we have had 
to contend with for years.

"It was always going to be tough here, but it is even harder now. But these 
youngsters know that in the future if they want to have long careers and 
achieve things, then they are going to have to handle games like this. If they 
want to win things, they have to cope with difficult places like this."

Toshack is set to switch the Spurs teenager Chris Gunter to left-back and 
recall Wolves' midfielder David Edwards, 23, for his 14th cap. "We have had to 
ask a lot of lads to grow up quickly, and some of those are not even here for a 
game that would have been an important part of their development.

"Now we have had to call in some even younger players. To be without more than 
10 first-choice players is very hard to contend with. But you feel for them, 
not only for Wales but for their club careers too. Some of the bad injuries 
young players have picked up have been really cruel.

"Youngsters like Joe Allen and Andy King are being thrown in. Frankly, they 
are not really ready for international football yet but we have no choice now 
and at least they are keen, determined and very enthusiastic. We always seem to 
be making five changes for games, and this time it has happened and it has hit 
deep into our resources.

"Azerbaijan see us as targets. They will look at our squad and fancy their 
chances. We have failed in our target to take third place in the group from 
Finland, and now we must not allow anyone to push us further down the group."
 