
André Villas-Boas might have permitted himself a little smile as he broke off 
from his preparations for a family Christmas to examine the result of his most 
recent club's initial attempt to move on from his 17-month reign at White Hart 
Lane. On Wednesday night a stopgap manager, Tim Sherwood, tried a quick shift 
back from his predecessor's fancy continental cuisine to the good old British 
meat-and-two-veg of a 4-4-2 formation, and saw his side go out of the League 
Cup,losing 2-1 at home to West Ham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/18/tottenham-west-ham-united-capital-one-cup>
.

AVB's reluctance to invite Emmanuel Adebayor to justify his massive wages by 
actually appearing in a football match was apparently one of the causes of the 
manager's growing estrangement from Daniel Levy, Tottenham Hotspur's chairman. 
Duly mindful of his boss' wishes, Sherwood had the satisfaction of watching 
Adebayor celebrate his first start of the season with a fine goal. But Spurs' 
collapse in the closing stages robbed the acting manager of any lasting 
satisfaction and led him to suggest that the players were not physically fit 
enough to play 90 minutes of the kind of high-intensity football that may be 
required of Villas-Boas's permanent successor.

A failure with one big Premier League club is no reason to write off a young 
manager's future in the game. To fail with two in a row, however, suggests that 
Villas-Boas needs to rethink the shape of his career if he hopes one day to be 
given a chance to make it third time lucky. A successful move elsewhere in 
Europe would not necessarily convince sceptics in England, who remember that 
the trophies which secured his reputation at Porto were won with an already 
star-studded side.

We hear a lot about big clubs apparently making overtures to AVB, from Paris 
Saint-Germain and Real Madrid in the summer to Milan in recent days. But having 
twice demonstrated that he currently lacks the authority to control and 
motivate experienced players at clubs with Champions League aspirations, he 
might be better advised to follow the example of Roberto Martínez and Brendan 
Rodgers. They are now established and enjoying success near the top of the 
Premier League after building themselves a firm foundation of achievement at 
clubs of a more modest size: Reading, Swansea, Wigan.

In such an environment, with a lower level of pressure and scrutiny, he could 
work alongside a patient chairman or chief executive to build a team around 
players wanting to make their mark on the game and ready to buy into his vision.

If he has a vision, of course. That is what we have yet to discover. He was a 
little unlucky with injuries at Spurs, particularly among his defenders, 
although he hardly helped himself by allowing Benoît Assou-Ekotto to go on loan 
to Queen's Park Rangers at the start of the season. "What a good Monday," the 
Cameroon international tweeted after hearing of AVB's dismissal. How Spurs 
could have done with his dynamism in recent weeks. And Christian Eriksen's 
enforced absence has robbed the team of a player who could yet take his place 
among the line of the club's distinguished playmakers, from John White to Luka 
Modric, although it appears that Villas-Boas was not particularly keen on the 
acquisition of the gifted young Dane from Ajax.

But the mention of Modric raises the question of Spurs' greatest problem, 
which is that of holding on to their best players, particularly when Real 
Madrid come calling. The Croatian midfielder had previously enjoyed a serious 
flirtation with Chelsea, during which he claimed that Levy had promised to let 
him go if a "big club" came calling. Hewent to Madrid in the summer of 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/aug/27/luka-modric-tottenham-real-madrid>
 and was joined a year later by Gareth Bale, who had become not just Spurs' 
best player but a sort of talisman. They had been preceded through the exit 
door by Dimitar Berbatov, the club's most reliable source of goals, who was 
allowed to depart for Manchester United in 2008.

Liverpool's recent approach to the business of holding on to Luis Suárez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/luis-suarez>, a player who seemed likely 
to become the object of impassioned invitations to start next season at the 
Bernabéu, offers an object lesson in thinking and acting like a proper big 
club. Rodgers, his position strengthened by recent good results and the 
successful integration of younger players, could demonstrate to Suárez that 
Liverpool had something serious to offer as well as a salary of around £200,000 
a week. Standing second in the table as Christmas approaches, only two points 
behind the leaders, they are showing genuine signs of climbing back towards the 
heights upon which they once made their home.

Suárez already knew that Liverpool's management supported him – or, as many 
neutrals would put it, exhibited an extraordinary degree of indulgence – when 
his own behaviour was found wanting. He saw the ferocity with which Ian Ayre, 
the club's managing director, repelled Arsenal's attempt to secure his services 
in the summer. By demonstrating the extent of a belief that the striker is 
crucial to their plans,they have now persuaded him to put his signature on a 
new contract which expires in the summer of 2018 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/20/luis-suarez-signs-long-term-liverpool-deal>
.

Over at Spurs, Levy seemed to feel that the money wrung out of the 
negotiations was sufficient compensation for letting Berbatov, Modric and Bale 
go. But Ayre and Rodgers managed to give the impression – to their club's fans 
as well as to the Uruguayan – that they were genuine in their desire to pay 
whatever it would take to get him to remain at Anfield on the basis that he 
will be a part of a team regularly challenging for the very highest honours 
once again.

Unlike Levy, they did not seem to be indulging in a game of bluff in which a 
profit would be guaranteed whatever the outcome. Liverpool's chance rested on 
their ability to make Suárez feel as though even double the amount Real paid 
for Bale would be no compensation for the loss of his contribution to their 
cause. As, on current form, and thinking back tothose four stunning goals at 
home against Norwich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/04/liverpool-norwich-premier-league-match-report>
 at the beginning of the month, indeed it would not.

We do not know the precise terms of the new contract and it would be 
hopelessly optimistic to believe that, if his present form continues, Suárez 
will not be in receipt of further enticing overtures from elsewhere. But 
Liverpool's fans will not be left feeling that their club betrayed an absence 
of ambition, a defective commitment to prioritising success on the field, or a 
lack of football nous. Over at Spurs, by contrast, no such certainty is 
possible.
 