
Ian Blair was an unpopular commissioner, as much for his awkward social skills 
as the perceived closeness to New Labour that earned him the relentless 
loathing of the Conservative press. He resigned in October after the mayor of 
London, Boris Johnson, engineered a coup and made it clear he had withdrawn his 
support. At the time Blair was facing challenges on a number of fronts. Sir 
Ronnie Flanagan, HM chief inspector of constabulary, was investigating the 
awarding of £3m of Metropolitan police contracts to Blair's friend and skiing 
partner, Andy Miller. That has still to be resolved. The inquest into the death 
ofJean Charles de Menezes <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/menezes> was 
unravelling a chaotic anti-terrorism operation – leading later to the 
catastrophic open verdict.

Andy Hayman, the head of Special Operations, was forced to resign last 
December after an inquiry was launched into his £15,000 expenses claims for 
drinks, restaurants, hotels and foreign travel, sometimes accompanied by his 
former staff officer, sergeant Heidi Tubby. He also faced questions about his 
relationship with a female official in the police watchdog, the IPCC. In April 
a three-month inquiry headed by Gwent chief constable Mike Tonge found there 
was insufficient evidence to bring misconduct charges. Hayman was responsible 
for coordinating national policy on counter-terrorism and working with foreign 
police forces. His remit included the security of London, the protection of the 
royal family, liaising with M15 and briefing the prime minister on the terror 
threat. He was criticised by the IndependentPolice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Complaints Commission over his role in 
the bungled operation which led to the killing of Jean Charles de Menezes at 
Stockwell Tube station in July 2005. He was accused of "misleading" the public 
and his boss, Sir Ian Blair, by failing to pass on suspicions that the 
Brazilian was not a wanted man straight away.

Tarique Ghaffur, Britain's most senior Asian police officer, was suspended 
from duty in September after an increasingly acrimonious row with Sir Ian Blair 
about claims of racial discrimination. What galled Blair was Ghaffur's highly 
personal attack on him at a press conference after he lodged his discrimination 
claim. Following weeks of legal argument Ghaffur accepted an out-of-court 
settlement of around £300,000 days before Sir Ian retired, and withdrew his 
claim.

A police officer for 34 years, Ghaffur claimed he was sidelined, discriminated 
against and humiliated in his role as boss of security planning for the 2012 
Olympics. He alleged that the discrimination went back to 2000, when Blair was 
the deputy commissioner and in charge of the corruption unit which investigated 
a high-flying Asian officer to whom Ghaffur was a mentor. The claim said he was 
subjected to covert surveillance and was the only senior officer excluded from 
meetings, sending out the message to his senior colleagues that he could not be 
trusted.

Peter Clarke, the highly respected head of Counter Terrorism Command, retired 
at the age of 52 in March. He was one of the Met's star detectives who had led 
the investigations into every major Islamic terrorist plot since 2002 as well 
as the poisoning of the former Russian spyAlexander Litvinenko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexander-litvinenko>. He was credited with 
the successful prosecution of 60 terrorists and at his leaving party was 
showered with tributes from other anti-terrorist agencies. A keen proponent of 
the 42-day detention period, he vigorously joined the debate about balancing 
individual liberties with collective security. The legal and ethical standards 
of the UK's counter-terrorist effort, he argued, were "incredibly high", and he 
championed the benefits of the surveillance society. He recently wrote: "We 
should draw satisfaction that due to terrorist convictions in our courts 
thousands of people are alive today because those who wanted to kill them could 
be bugged and burgled – within the rule of law and for the common good."
 