
Cycling history is as much a matter of interpretation as of fact but that 
cannot hide the fact that a Tour de France is beckoning that has a 
once-in-a-generation look to it. It is almost a quarter of a century since a 
Tour boasted four favourites of the stature of Chris Froome, Nairo Quintana,
Alberto Contador <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alberto-contador> and 
Vincenzo Nibali.

Each has won at least one Grand Tour in convincing style and challenged 
strongly in others while Nibali and Contador are among the minority to have won 
all three major Tours. There is little that puts any one of them in front of 
the others and, most strikingly, each appears to be approaching the race in 
close to his best form.

Scanning the history books for parallels, one would be the 1991 race, in which 
Greg LeMond, Gianni Bugno, Pedro Delgado and Laurent Fignon were among the 
favourites, although LeMond and Fignon were past their sell-by dates and the 
race eventually went to Miguel Indurain. Another would be 1989, with LeMond, 
Fignon and Delgado in the box seat. It is virtually impossible to compare, 
however, because the reality of the Tour is that in most years it has one clear 
favourite or at most two.

One reason the 2015 race is so finely poised is that in the post-Armstrong, 
biological-passport era of cycling no one rider has managed to dominate the 
event. That has opened up the race.

There is also a collision of the generations: two mature athletes in Froome 
and Nibali coinciding with Contador contemplating retirement and the newcomer 
Quintana. It is also a continental clash, old cycling versus new: an Italian 
and a Spaniard versus a South American and a cyclist born in Kenya, albeit with 
a British racing licence.

The planets have aligned to bring the quartet together and they do so on a 
route which is almost perversely designed to throw random elements into the 
equation. On top of that there is a mouthwatering number of younger riders on 
an upward curve who can be expected to challenge the Big Four as Indurain shook 
LeMond et al. The American Tejay van Garderen and the Frenchmen Thibaut Pinot 
and Romain Bardet spearhead this generation.

The resurgence of French cycling – will it continue this year or stall again? 
– is one of the subplots within the main drama. The bigger story, however, is 
Alberto Contador’s quest for one of cycling’s most coveted prizes, the double 
of the Giro d’Italia and Tour.

It was first achieved in 1949 by Fausto Coppi, who repeated it in 1952, 
emulated only by Jacques Anquetil, Eddy Merckx, Bernard Hinault, Indurain, 
Stephen Roche and the late Marco Pantani, who died tragically in 2004, six 
years after a controversial, drug-fuelledannus mirabilis  in 1998.

Roche, who won both in 1987, and Hinault, who did it in 1982 and 1985, believe 
that Contador has a decent chance of joining them this July. Contador, for his 
part, knows it would seal his place in history, although some would question 
quite where in the pantheon that would leave the Spaniard, the dominant Grand 
Tour rider of his generation, but with a blot on his copybook in the form of a 
two-year ban for a clenbuterol offence.

A victory in his only race between the Giro and Tour, the Route du Sud, 
suggests the Spaniard has hit form. “C’est possible. There is no reason why he 
shouldn’t do it,” Hinault told theObserver. “He managed the Giro well. He let 
his rivals get on with it at times and put his foot down when he needed to go 
for it. He raced a bit like Nibali did in the 2014 Tour, without ever going 
beyond his limits. It’s impressive how he has come out of the Giro; he has 
managed that without difficulty. Physically he is in the same condition as at 
the Giro.”

“One to one, Quintana and Froome should be better than Contador, so on paper 
he will be up against it,” said Roche, recalling the 2013 Tour when the 
Spaniard was out-climbed by both men. “With Contador you can never say: ‘Oh, 
he’s third or fourth or fifth and that’s it, he’s gone.’ He will always look 
for an opportunity. If you leave a window open for him, he’s in there.”

Hinault and Roche are bemused that today’s top stage racers so rarely contest 
both Giro and Tour. “I don’t understand it,” said Hinault, “particularly as 
there is an extra week’s recovery time. For me it was a long-term objective, 
you prepared it properly and it was straightforward. If Eddy Merckx could do 
it, I don’t see why the riders today can’t. They are not obliged to keep their 
condition at a peak for three months, you can finish the Giro in good 
condition, kick back a little bit as Contador has done, then press on again as 
he has done.”

“Contador’s Giro win wasn’t a surprise and it would be unfair to say that 
there weren’t so many top riders there,” said Roche. What concerns the 
Dubliner, however, was that Contador showed his hand so soon after the Giro. “I 
was surprised that he put so much into the Route du Sud, to get rid of 
Quintana. I’d have been hiding, recovering. But if he had been quiet, he’d have 
been criticised for lacking panache. It’s just a bit risky two weeks out from 
the Tour.”

Between winning the Giro and starting the Tour, Roche simply went to ground. 
“It’s partly different [for Contador] because there is a week extra between the 
two races. He clearly wanted to know how he was. At this stage it’s all about 
recovery. That Giro will have put him under pressure physically – there was 
something going on every day, and he was leading for a long time. There is 
pressure there too, from the media, and now the pressure will be greater, with 
everyone saying it’s impossible.”

“There are two fundamental things,” Contador told the Observer when asked 
about the double. “Staying focused for such an extended length of time and, of 
course, maintaining a good fitness level after the end of the Giro to get to 
the Tour and get to its finale with the certainty of being in good condition.

“The problem with the Tour is that it is the second race and there is a 
cumulative effort after the Giro. As for competitors, every race is different 
and someone strong always appears to make it hard, as happened in Italy with 
[Fabio] Aru and [Mikel] Landa. Perhaps Froome stands a little above the other 
two. As for the course, both the Giro and the Tour are similar in the level of 
the demands they make.”

Contador is keen to quash one other rumour, that his flamboyant team owner, 
Oleg Tinkoff, wants him to go for a possible triple by starting the Tour of 
Spain on top of the other two Grand Tours. “t is already challenging enough 
trying the double of Giro-Tour to consider continuing with the Tour of Spain. 
It’s too much.”

But if the Tour de France <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tourdefrance> 
delivers half of what it promises, that should be more than enough.
 