
On a stage decided largely by inclement weather, it seemed weirdly appropriate 
that the main beneficiaries should be Sky.Chris Froome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chris-froome> could barely conceal his 
delight following the first mass-start stage of this Tour, in which Vincenzo 
Nibali and Nairo Quintana lost major chunks of time following a mid-stage split 
in a bunch paralysed by anxiety in extreme weather conditions. In stark 
contrast, for Mark Cavendish it was a day of frustration and irritation as the 
Etixx-Quick-Step rider finished out of the money but slap bang in the middle of 
a potentially explosive confrontation with his team-mates.

The riders started in the desert-dry noon heat on the often bottleneck narrow 
streets of Utrecht and then headed in a gentle meander towards Rotterdam, 
followed by a leisurely spin towards Zeeland on the North Sea coast along roads 
so flat you can see into the future if you squint hard enough. This 166km stage 
should have been so straightforward – it was anything but.

As predicted, it came down to the sprint in which André Greipel pipped Peter 
Sagan by a tyre’s width and there were many eyebrows raised when both men 
out-sprinted Cavendish, whose form coming into this race has been imperious. 
Bizarrely the British sprinter was also beaten by Fabian Cancellara, whose 
third place was enough to earn the Swiss the yellow jersey just ahead of 
Cavendish’s team-mate Tony Martin. On Monday he will wear it for the 29th time 
in six different Tours over 11 years. Small wonder they call him Spartacus.

Tour de France 2015: stages one and two – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2015/jul/05/tour-de-france-2015-stages-one-and-two-in-pictures>
Cavendish, the clear favourite when a sprint finish was inevitable, was quick 
to blame his normally reliable lead-out man Mark Renshaw for jumping the gun 
and “leaving me hanging”, with the Briton paddling in tar as Greipel, Sagan and 
then Cancellara swept past him in the closing metres. “The day Cancellara beats 
me in a sprint I’ve gone too long,” said a clearly frustrated Cavendish. “I’ve 
gassed it. It’s disappointing, Tony’s disappointed. I have just watched it back 
on the video and the guys behind played it perfect. I reckon I could get a job 
as a lead-out man for them.”

Having criticised his team-mates, Cavendish went on Twitter to confront 
armchair sprinters who had condemned him for sitting up when it became apparent 
he would not win the stage, although his team boss seemed unconvinced by his 
assertion that cycling is not “a computer game”. Insult was added to the 
sprinter’s injured pride when Etixx-Quick-Step’s chief, Patrick Lefevere, 
accused him of selfishness. “Cavendish stopped sprinting and this costs Tony 
the jersey,” he said. “I am not happy at all. Probably this was our last chance 
to take the yellow jersey.”

Behind the fast men another drama was unfolding and, as was always likely to 
happen on a stage whose route took in the coast, crosswinds were to blame. 
Invariably liable to take their toll by smashing up the bunch and forcing the 
formation of echelons from which it is very easy for unwitting or unlucky 
riders to get dropped, they are the bane of cyclists but make for terrific 
racing. Winds duly blew in not long after a four-man breakaway had made an 
audacious bid for escape that ended a lot sooner than they might have hoped.

It was apocalyptic weather that did for the quartet of opportunist escapees. 
With rain hammering down and the wind howling, the teams of the main GC 
contenders reeled them in and fought to keep their men at the front of a bunch 
where assorted laws of physics dictate that only so many riders could fit in 
order to avoid the potentially catastrophic consequences of being shelled out 
of the tradesman’s exit. The majority of the field suffered, among them Nibali 
and Quintana, along with the overnight race leader Rohan Dennis, as they lost 
time to a lead group in whichAlberto Contador 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alberto-contador> and Froome were safely 
swaddled in the protective blanket of assorted lieutenants.

“I’m really thankful to my team-mates today,” said Froome. “They kept me in 
front all day, especially when it mattered when that split happened. I think 
everyone was hoping that storm was going to hold off until after the finish, 
but that wasn’t to be today and I’m just glad it worked out the way it did. I 
had the support from my team-mates when I really needed it in the final split. 
They did a great job keeping me up there. We’re two days down now and I 
couldn’t have hoped for much more.”

Not half. Without so much as a speed-bump having been traversed, Froome, 
Contador and the BMC rider Tejay van Garderen can sleep soundly in their beds 
knowing they put a potentially game-changing 1min 28sec between them and two of 
the pre-race favourites with less than 200km of the route behind them. “We were 
unlucky,” said Nibali. “We chased a long time. What could we do? This is 
cycling. The bad days you have to accept.” Nibali was more unlucky than most, 
having to recover from a puncture, on top of all the other misfortune heaped 
upon his slender shoulders.

With Monday’s finish on the small but beautifully punishing climb that is the 
chapel-lined Mur de Huy, Cavendish is extremely unlikely to repair team 
relations by taking his 26th stage win, although with the Tour touch-paper well 
and truly lit after just two stages we can expect plenty more peloton 
pyrotechnics as the riders head uphill.
 