
A change swept British architecture into fresh waters from the 1980s. 
This wasn't just a matter of style – although such provocative and breathtaking 
buildings as Lloyd's of London would have been unthinkable only a few years 
earlier – but the result of a profound shift in the structure of the nation's 
political economy.

With the rise of neoliberal economics, shipped in from the US and Latin 
American dictatorships, public architecture went into a rapid decline. Once 
Margaret Thatcher came to power, what mattered was lucre. Everything that could 
be privatised was. Greed was good. Anything that failed to make a profit and to 
shovel money shareholders' way was a problem rather than an opportunity.

The triumph of the computer changed architecture radically. Out went drawing 
boards, T-squares and pencils. In came computer screens, computer-aided design 
and PowerPoint presentations. The talk among all too many architects was no 
longer about public spiritedness, but marketing and branding. Buildings were 
increasingly designed as slick products. By the mid-1990s, this had given us 
"icons", or comic-book buildings plastered across city centres: big, bold and 
media-savvy.

Through the National Lottery, meanwhile, money was poured into ambitious new 
museums and art galleries that, in the spirit of the times, were wilfully 
populist as well as architecturally bombastic. The Tate Modern – housed in the 
former Bankside power station made over by the Swiss duo Herzog and de Meuron – 
was astonishingly popular, drawing millions of people through its mighty doors 
from its opening in 2000.

This was also the year of the Millennium Experience, an unfathomable £1bn 
exhibition held inside theMillennium Dome <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/dome>
, designed by the Richard Rogers Partnership, that appeared to sum up the new 
"bread and circuses" social policy adopted by the New Labour movement voted 
into office in 1997. Now the people could be kept amused by entertainment on an 
epic scale while the public realm was flogged off to the highest bidders.

The rise of money culture, encouraged at every stage by the government, led 
not just to such architectural follies, but also to a resurgence of 
skyscrapers. Now every British city worthy of the name had to propose tall 
buildings to prove it was up with the money. Some of these, such as Foster and 
Partners' 30 St Mary Axe, better known as the Gherkin, were impressive, but all 
too many were either lacklustre or zany.

Even so, many of Britain's most adventurous architects, notably Zaha Hadid, 
were excluded from this rush in construction until late in the day. While Hadid 
was feted in Germany, Italy, France, the US and the Middle East, here she was 
seen as a talent too far. Britain had gone wild, in architectural terms, but 
preferred bling to true aesthetic and structural adventure.

Architects of quiet refinement, such as David Chipperfield, were also kept at 
bay. This was odd, as Chipperfield was knighted in 2009 for his work – although 
what officials were looking at was his studious, patient and refined 
renaissance of the Neues Museum in Berlin rather than anything he might have 
built at home.

Equally, some of the finest British buildings of recent years have been modest 
affairs, owing nothing to the world of instant sensation, celebrity culture and 
media overkill. I particularly like the Kielder Observatory in Kielder forest, 
Northumberland, by Charles Barclay, a delightful timber ship of a building that 
allows us, with the aid of telescopes, to navigate our way through the 
constellations, escaping the world of telly and shopping. I like, among 
a number of modest art galleries up and down the country, Raven Row in 
Spitalfields on the fringe of the City of London; here 6a Architects has 
nurtured a quietly bewitching marriage of Georgian and a contemporary form of 
design better described as elemental rather than minimalist.

Canary Wharf, Westminster, Southwark and other stations on the Jubilee Line 
extension of the London Underground from the West End to Stratford – a last 
gasp of true public design – proved what can be achieved when architects and 
engineers work to the highest standard of design for the common good.

The saddest thing is that new British housing is pretty much a complete 
disgrace. We like to invest in supermarkets, shopping malls, distribution 
centres, spiky office towers and show-off museums, and yet appear to care not a 
jot for how we house those with little power or money. This is the next 
challenge for British architecture. But who, in New Britain plc, will foot the 
bill?

• Jonathan Glancey is the Guardian's architecture critic
 