
She stood paralysed, frozen in front of a wall of immaculate drawings of 
impossibly elaborate visions: airships dragging contraptions across moon-rock 
landscapes, fleets of hover vehicles gliding to and fro. It could have been the 
storyboard for the next 3D superhero extravaganza from Marvel Studios – but it 
was in fact the final diploma project of a student at one of the UK's leading 
architecture schools.

The question I had asked, which sent the student into dumbfounded shock, was: 
"Why have you done it? What does it mean?"

It is a mystery that has recurred in recent weeks, as I've sat on panels of 
external critics at a range of schools, watching students present their 
projects for feedback. It has been an illuminating experience, seeing the 
mesmerising display of graphic ability and modelling skills – but not one 
without frustrations.

Time and again, the projects seemed intent on fleeing the real world of people 
and places, scale and context; retreating instead into fantasy realms of 
convoluted forms with no seeming purpose. There were scaleless worlds of 
splintered shards and riverine landscapes, in which forlorn mechanisms had been 
implanted like post-apocalyptic ruins of a distant-future race. Clouds of lines 
and layers were regularly employed as a smokescreen to disguise the fact that 
there wasn't really an idea at all: visual complexity masking conceptual 
thinness.

Elsewhere, data was the order of the day, with sinuous blobs generated by 
computer-scripted commands, wrenched into algorithmic oblivion then squirted 
out on a 3D printer. This was generally a process so tortuous that students had 
forgotten quite where their starting point was – or even what their building 
was for.

Other projects were staged in near-future scenarios of such complexity – with 
new legal, social and political structures – that after half an hour of 
explanation, the assembled critics were none the wiser as to what the student 
was proposing.

Bizarrely, architectural education – the discussion of places and spaces, 
cities and landscapes, a discipline of engaging with the world around us – has 
been allowed to stagnate in the UK as a hermetic, inward-looking pursuit for 
more than 50 years. The extended three-part system, which takes a minimum of 
seven years to complete, is still based on the model that emerged from the RIBA 
Conference on Architectural Education in 1958.

With tuition fees now standing at £9,000 per year, as well as the added costs 
of printing, laser-cutting, field trips and living expenses, students can 
expect to graduate with debts of £100,000 or more – at a time when there are 
few job opportunities in the profession. It has never been more urgent to call 
out the emperor's new clothes, to question those courses that are only there to 
further the theoretical position of their tutors.

The architect's role has also increasingly diminished since the days of the 
50s maestro sitting at his drawing board dreaming up brave new towns for the 
postwar world. Architects' position at the top of the pyramid has been eroded 
by the proliferation of sub-consultants for every stage of the process, as well 
as the rise of contractor-led forms of procurement, in which the architect is 
often sidelined altogether. Faced with all this, a retreat into the world of 
arcane academia must be enticing.

But there are signs that long-awaited pressure for change is gathering 
momentum. A recent report by theUK Architectural Education Review Group 
<http://www.bdonline.co.uk/news/cost-of-studying-architecture-creates-artificial-barrier/5053326.article>
 recommended scrapping the three-part system altogether, and has suggested 
shortening the length of courses, as well as letting students carry out their 
studies alongside paid work.

This is a rallying cry Will Hunter, of the Architectural Review, has taken up 
with his campaign forAlternative Routes for Architecture 
<http://www.architectural-review.com/essays/alternative-routes-for-architecture/8636207.article>
, or the "promotion of architecture as a problem-solving spatial discipline 
engaged with the challenges of the real world". Launching this academic year, 
it is conceived as a 21st-century apprenticeship, with a reciprocal 
relationship between practices and students, focusing fees on tuition by 
reducing the overheads of a fixed school.

In a similar vein, Sam Jacob of FAT Architecture recently began a night school 
programme 
<http://www.dezeen.com/2013/04/18/sam-jacob-opinion-architectural-education-crisis/>
 at London'sArchitectural Association <http://nightschool.aaschool.ac.uk/>, 
returning to the roots of the Bedford Square bastion as an informal bi-weekly 
gathering of architects convening to discuss their work with critics. "We hope 
to turn the culture of architecture schools inside out," says Jacob, "to offer 
it up to a wider audience of students from other schools, to recent graduates 
and professionals buried deep in practice, and to the general public."

While these fringe initiatives could offer alternative ways forward, it is the 
big university courses that need to be radically rethought. With European 
schools, from Switzerland to Denmark, offering much lower fees and an often 
stellar cast of tutors, students may well begin voting with their feet.
 