
This is the prepared testimony of Akio Toyoda, president of Toyota Motor 
Corporation, released ahead ofhis appearance before the US congressional 
committee on Oversight and Government Reform this afternoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/feb/23/toyota-president-toyoda-apologises-congress>
:

"Thank you Chairman Towns. I am Akio Toyoda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/akio-toyoda> of Toyota Motor Corporation. 
I would first like to state that I love cars as much as anyone, and I love 
Toyota as much as anyone. I take the utmost pleasure in offering vehicles that 
our customers love, and I know that Toyota's 200,000 team members, dealers, and 
suppliers across America feel the same way. However, in the past few months, 
our customers have started to feel uncertain about the safety of Toyota's 
vehicles, and I take full responsibility for that. Today, I would like to 
explain to the American people, as well as our customers in the US and around 
the world, how seriously Toyota takes the quality and safety of its vehicles. I 
would like to express my appreciation to Chairman Towns and Ranking Member 
Issa, as well as the members of the House Oversight and Government Reform 
Committee, for giving me this opportunity to express my thoughts today.

I would like to focus my comments on three topics – Toyota's basic philosophy 
regarding quality control, the cause of the recalls, and how we will manage 
quality control going forward. First, I want to discuss the philosophy of 
Toyota's quality control. I myself, as well asToyota 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/toyota>, am not perfect. At times, we do 
find defects. But in such situations, we always stop, strive to understand the 
problem, and make changes to improve further. In the name of the company, its 
long-standing tradition and pride, we never run away from our problems or 
pretend we don't notice them. By making continuous improvements, we aim to 
continue offering even better products for society. That is the core value we 
have kept closest to our hearts since the founding days of the company.

At Toyota, we believe the key to making quality products is to develop quality 
people. Each employee thinks about what he or she should do, continuously 
making improvements, and by doing so, makes even better cars. We have been 
actively engaged in developing people who share and can execute on this core 
value. It has been over 50 years since we began selling in this great country, 
and over 25 years since we started production here. And in the process, we have 
been able to share this core value with the 200,000 people at Toyota 
operations, dealers, and suppliers in this country. That is what I am most 
proud of.

Second, I would like to discuss what caused the recall issues we are facing 
now. Toyota has, for the past few years, been expanding its business rapidly. 
Quite frankly, I fear the pace at which we have grown may have been too quick. 
I would like to point out here that Toyota's priority has traditionally been 
the following: First; Safety, Second; Quality, and Third; Volume. These 
priorities became confused, and we were not able to stop, think, and make 
improvements as much as we were able to before, and our basic stance to listen 
to customers' voices to make better products has weakened somewhat. We pursued 
growth over the speed at which we were able to develop our people and our 
organization, and we should sincerely be mindful of that. I regret that this 
has resulted in the safety issues described in the recalls we face today, and I 
am deeply sorry for any accidents that Toyota drivers have experienced.

Especially, I would like to extend my condolences to the members of the Saylor 
family, for the accident in San Diego. I would like to send my prayers again, 
and I will do everything in my power to ensure that such a tragedy never 
happens again.

Since last June, when I first took office, I have personally placed the 
highest priority on improving quality over quantity, and I have shared that 
direction with our stakeholders. As you well know, I am the grandson of the 
founder, and all the Toyota vehicles bear my name. For me, when the cars are 
damaged, it is as though I am as well. I, more than anyone, wish for Toyota's 
cars to be safe, and for our customers to feel safe when they use our vehicles. 
Under my leadership, I would like to reaffirm our values of placing safety and 
quality the highest on our list of priorities, which we have held to firmly 
from the time we were founded. I will also strive to devise a system in which 
we can surely execute what we value.

Third, I would like to discuss how we plan to manage quality control as we go 
forward. Up to now, any decisions on conducting recalls have been made by the 
Customer Quality Engineering Division at Toyota Motor Corporation inJapan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>. This division confirms whether there 
are technical problems and makes a decision on the necessity of a recall. 
However, reflecting on the issues today, what we lacked was the customers' 
perspective.

To make improvements on this, we will make the following changes to the recall 
decision-making process. When recall decisions are made, a step will be added 
in the process to ensure that management will make a responsible decision from 
the perspective of "customer safety first." To do that, we will devise a system 
in which customers' voices around the world will reach our management in a 
timely manner, and also a system in which each region will be able to make 
decisions as necessary. Further, we will form a quality advisory group composed 
of respected outside experts from North America and around the world to ensure 
that we do not make a misguided decision. Finally, we will invest heavily in 
quality in the US, through the establishment of an Automotive Center of Quality 
Excellence, the introduction of a new position – Product Safety Executive, and 
the sharing of more information and responsibility within the company for 
product quality decisions, including defects and recalls.

Even more importantly, I will ensure that members of the management team 
actually drive the cars, and that they check for themselves where the problem 
lies as well as its severity. I myself am a trained test driver. As a 
professional, I am able to check on problems in a car, and can understand how 
severe the safety concern is in a car. I drove the vehicles in the accelerator 
pedal recall as well as the Prius, comparing the vehicles before and after the 
remedy in various environmental settings. I believe that only by examining the 
problems on-site, can one make decisions from the customer perspective. One 
cannot rely on reports or data in a meeting room.

Through the measures I have just discussed, and with whatever results we 
obtain from the investigations we are conducting in cooperation with NHTSA, I 
intend to further improve on the quality of Toyota vehicles and fulfil our 
principle of putting the customer first.

My name is on every car. You have my personal commitment that Toyota will work 
vigorously and unceasingly to restore the trust of our customers.

Thank you."
 