
Apologetic and stony faced, the boss of the Japanese carmaker Toyota 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/toyota> repeatedly expressed "sincere 
regrets" for faulty accelerator pedals linked to dozens of deaths and injuries 
yesterday as US lawmakers pounded his handling of a safety crisis afflicting 
more than 8m vehicles globally.

During a rancourous day-long session before a Congressional committee, 
Toyota's president,Akio Toyoda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/akio-toyoda>, offered sympathy to the 
relatives of those killed in crashes involving runaway Toyota cars: "I 
sincerely regret that some people actually encountered accidents in Toyota 
vehicles."

The grandson of Toyota's founder admitted his company had grown too fast, 
blurring its priorities, and pledged to shake up management structures to 
sharpen its focus on safety. But Toyoda stopped short of agreeing to foot 
healthcare bills for drivers hurt in crashes and insisted that he only found 
out about the safety scare, which dates back many months, "towards the end of 
last year".

During a rare appearance by a Japanese captain of industry in front of US 
politicians, Toyoda listened as lawmakers hammered him for letting down 
customers, showing an "appalling" attitude in cost cutting and in allowing his 
firm's reputation to be tarnished.

"I'm embarrassed for you sir," said John Mica, a Republican congressman from 
Florida. "I'm embarrassed to the Toyota dealers I've talked to. I'm embarrassed 
for thousands of hard-working Americans who work in [Toyota] plants throughout 
the United States."

A Democratic congressman, Paul Kanjorski, told Toyoda that his company had 
damaged an enduring belief that the label "made in Japan" was a sign of 
quality. Another, Gerald Connolly, said it showed "extraordinary 
compartmentalisation" that Toyota's top executive only found out in late 2009 
about a problem raised by US safety regulators months earlier.

A former Democratic presidential candidate, Dennis Kucinich, said it was 
"ironic" that Toyoda claimed his company had grown too fast: "The problem 
wasn't that you were moving too fast but moving too slow – too slow to 
recognise the ­material defects that were putting peoples' lives at risk."

But to the frustration of his questioners, Toyoda refused to rise to bait and 
declined to give pithy answers. After delivering an opening statement in 
English, he opted to deliver long, technical responses in Japanese through an 
interpreter. "We'll make a double commitment with new vigour to make 'safety 
and customer first' permeate throughout every Toyota business," said Toyoda, 
often allowing his US chief, Yoshimi Inaba, to do the talking.

The Congressional hearing was greeted with trepidation among Toyota dealers 
and employees, who lobbied Congress to go easy on a "friendly" competing 
economic power, fearing a cultural clash for Japanese businessmen unused to 
such harsh confrontation.

In Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>, there was pressure on 
Toyoda to restore confidence in Japanese exports amid concern that fierce 
criticism of Toyota in the US could spark a wider backlash against Japanese 
goods.

"I certainly would like to hope this matter will not undermine the trust of 
the Americans, not just [in] Toyota as a company, but Japan as a whole," 
Japan's foreign minister, Katsuya Okada told the Guardian. "It is essentially a 
matter of one enterprise … there's very little the Japanese government can do."

Toyota's faulty accelerators and brakes have been linked to 39 deaths. The 
company says a recall of 8.5m vehicles has fixed the problem, which it blames 
on wandering floor mats and sticky pedals. But critics have suggested 
underlying electronic faults are responsible.

Prosecutors in the US have subpoenaed Toyota to appear before a grand jury in 
the first stage of possible criminal charges. In a surprise twist yesterday, 
the FBI raided the offices of three Detroit-based companies supplying parts to 
Toyota, although law enforcement sources said the raids were connected to 
competition issues, rather than the safety crisis.
 