
Being live, collective and usually drug-enhanced, the "rave" experience has 
never been easy to replicate on film. But wherever there's a ramshackle youth 
movement, there's a clueless cash-in and, as with 60s psychedelia, Hollywood 
got it entertainingly wrong more often than it got it right (two words: Matrix 
Reloaded). Two exceptions were Doug Liman's Go (featuring Katie Holmes, Sarah 
Polley and Scott Wolf), which had fun with the LA warehouse party scene, and 
Blade, whose great bloody opening (to the Pump Panel Reconstruction Mix of New 
Order's Confusion, trackspotters) was the last word in clubbing exclusivity. 
For once, the Brits knew best.

Danny Boyle's Trainspotting was ostensibly the first rave generation film, in 
attitude at least, though apart from Underworld's Born Slippy, the soundtrack 
was pretty rock-based. Instead, prime contender for the best time-capsule rave 
document would have to be 1999's Human Traffic, made by 25-year-old Justin 
Kerrigan and starring John Simm, Shaun Parkes and Danny Dyer. A confused Roger 
Ebert described it as "a sad comedy about druggies in Wales", which shows just 
what a good inside job it did on the musical tribalism, vinyl fetishism, 
back-of-taxi banter and live-for-the-weekend ethos of generation rave.

The soundtrack (supervised by Pete Tong) is pretty representative too: Felix 
Da Housekat, Fatboy Slim, Carl Cox,Primal Scream 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/primal-scream> … those were the days, eh? In 
fact, there wasn't much left to say after Human Traffic – apart from the 
occasional club scenes in films such as Black Swan or Tron, and, of course, 
Michael Winterbottom's oddball biopic of the Hacienda era, 24 Hour Party 
People. Actually, send-up movies such as It's All Gone Pete Tong and, 
particularly, Harry Enfield's Kevin & Perry Go Large captured the reality of 
Ibiza clubbing as accurately as any serious effort. The good news is, many 
veterans of 90s dance are doing a nice line in movie scores themselves these 
days, among them Moby, Daft Punk and the Chemical Brothers. Sorted!
 