
I want to buy my boyfriend a piece of jewellery that is special but not 
necessarily very expensive - something that is unusual but feels quite modern 
and personal.
 Valentine

I love bracelets and bangles on men, and they are a good, safe, first piece of 
jewellery to buy a boyfriend. Jewellery label Seven's sterling-silver bracelets 
are simple but add a modern twist by incorporating leather and semi-precious 
stones into designs. Look for the silver and leather bangle (£75). Their 
necklace range includes a hammered silver cross on a leather rope (£47) and a 
wooden and silver striped pendant (£50). I would avoid rings: men tend to 
either love or hate them, and it's impossible to get the size right without 
dragging your partner along for a fitting. If you are heading into London, 
check out the first floor men's jewellery department in Selfridges, which 
should have something to suit the pickiest partner.

I am going on a week's beach holiday by car and luggage space is limited: 
we're only allowed a small holdall each. Any tips for packing light?
 Lesley

There are a few tricks you can use. Take two bikinis - push them into your 
shoes when you're packing - and one swimsuit you can wear in the day but dress 
up with shorts or skirt for night time. Invest in black shorts that are great 
for the beach, but look smart enough to wear to a restaurant or bar. Two 
dresses should see you through the week - choose one plain frock which you can 
accessorise, to play with its look, and one printed. Roll up a belt in your 
holdall's side pocket - a belt is useful for changing your look and altering 
the shape of your dress. Pack a lightweight cardigan: you may well be glad of a 
cover-up at night, and slipping it on will transform your dress into a skirt 
and top. Wear your heaviest shoes to travel and slip a simple pair of metallic 
or pretty flip-flops into your case for daywear. Finally, decant your 
toiletries into smaller travel containers, and you should have room for some 
holiday souvenirs.

· If you have a wardrobe question for Jo Jones, email ask.jo@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:ask.jo@observer.co.uk>
 