
When the eight best tennis players in the world gather in London from Sunday 
for their final week's work of the year at least two of them,Novak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic> and Mardy Fish, will be 
operating well below maximum efficiency because of recent or chronic injury.

Fish, who has broken down twice in the past few weeks, may not even make it to 
work.

The entire field in the ATP World Tour Finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atp-world-tour-finals> at the O2 Arena will 
be carrying some twinge, minor or major, real or imagined. Pain is the price 
modern professional athletes pay for their lucrative lifestyles, and they do 
well to resist the temptation to complain about it more often than they do.

What they will say, when pushed, is they are asked to play too often. In the 
case of cricket and tennis, two of the most demanding international circuses, 
they utter their mantra: burnout. This rare virus – not peculiar to sport but 
virulent there nonetheless – did not stop Kevin Pietersen simultaneously 
railing against his workload and signing a contract to play in the Indian 
Premier League.

Tennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> players also have a choice, 
within parameters, and recently have grumbled to the point of considering 
strike action, an unlikely scenario – although the last time they stood up for 
themselves, in the Wimbledon boycott of 1973, the game underwent profound 
change.

On two fronts, however, elite players are on a hiding to nothing when they 
complain about the gilded existence that is part of the legacy of that rare 
outbreak of hippy-era militancy.

They know or suspect there will be little sympathy from fans who never see 
them strapped to the physio table with aching limbs and shredded tendons, nor 
appreciate the significant physical stresses of their hi-tech calling, not to 
mention the strain of travel, the suitcase life, the loneliness and the 
boredom. Tough, is the universal response from lives more ordinary.

And players far removed from the demands of playing nearly every match of 
every tournament, who leave after a round or two most weeks, will not be on the 
picket line with their richer comrades. Many would happily play every day. Some 
just about do, from Chennai to Kitzbühel.

For Djokovic the stumble towards his personal wall did not begin in Paris last 
week, where he withdrew from the Paris Masters after two matches with what he 
dismissed as "inflammation" in his right shoulder. Nor did it start in Basel 
the week before, when he was bageled in the final set of a dispiriting defeat. 
Djokovic's shoulder started to give up on him at least three months ago.

When the world No1 quit at the start of the second set in the final of the 
Cincinnati Masters againstAndy Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray>, he knew the injury was serious 
enough to jeopardise his chances in the US Open a fortnight later. He received 
treatment to his shoulder throughout the New York tournament and ignored the 
inconvenience long enough to win a quite extraordinary semi-final against Roger 
Federer before reaching a peak of excellence in the final against Rafael Nadal.

While he denied a widely circulated report that he had been to see a friend in 
New Jersey for radical therapy inside a giant egg-shaped chamber, he was 
nonetheless fighting his body.

He rested, came back for the Davis Cup and had to retire again, when a set and 
0-3 down to Juan Martín del Potro, himself a young veteran of the treatment 
room. In Paris, Djokovic struggled on as far as he could, hurt by the 
accusation that he had only started the tournament to collect $1.6m (£1m) as 
part of the loyalty bonus afforded senior players on the Masters tour. It did 
not look good, either way.

And that is part of the problem. Sponsors would be apoplectic if players 
declared beforehand that they might not fulfil their commitment to a 
tournament. And to be so candid would break the compact of sport, a world where 
matches are so often won in the mind. Later, they are more comfortable 
unburdening themselves.

In New York, however, the uprising took place before the end. When Murray, 
Nadal and Andy Roddick complained that the rain-wrecked schedule in the second 
week was not giving them the best chance to perform well, they were concerned 
enough to raise the possibility of taking industrial action. Tennis took a deep 
breath.

The last major of the quartet, "the Slam from hell", as Sports Illustrated 
calls the noisy two-week bash at Flushing Meadows, puts absurd demands on any 
player who gets past the quarter-finals because US television insists on having 
both semi-finals on the second Saturday, 24 hours before the final. In a 
calendar where events already bump against each other, this is unreasonable. 
The ATP tour starts on the second day of the year, visits 61 cities (exclusive 
of grand slam events and the Davis Cup), and leaves room for a six-week break 
before they do it all over again.

At the start of this 2011 journey, in the emotional moments after losing to a 
then-fit Djokovic in the final of the Australian Open, Murray said: "I will 
need to take a little break from training so that mentally I can just get away 
from tennis because it is such a long season. You don't want to get burnt out 
after a couple of months."

Two weeks ago in Basel, Murray's right buttock gave up on him. In tennis, you 
never know where your next pain in the butt is going to come from.
 