
'Barnacle" Bailey: the alliterative sobriquet clung to him, just as did some 
of those too glib pejorative adjectives, such as boring, cussed, aloof, pompous 
and mercenary. The detractors of theEssex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/essex> and England cricketer Trevor Bailey, 
who has died in a fire at his home aged 87, among them the bowlers who could 
not shift him and the spectators who lacked the imagination to find anything 
aesthetic in the forward defensive stroke, were a good deal less than fair to 
him. What they singularly failed to appreciate was that he was, in his dogged, 
single-minded way, one of our finest postwar all-rounders.

His stand against Australia with Willie Watson at Lord's in 1953, when the 
Test was saved and a significant step taken towards regaining the Ashes after 
almost 20 years, became one of cricket's cliches. Bailey had been anchored to 
the crease for 257 minutes in scoring 71. A nation listened and newspaper front 
pages were hastily revised. Who dares to say blocking is boring?

It was a rearguard action of heroic proportions, never pretty and at the same 
time exasperating to the Australian bowlers. Some of them were close to hating 
him – "get a move on, mate" was among the less offensive of the cynical 
entreaties from his impatient adversaries. Such jibes only strengthened his 
resolve. He would run a gloved hand with unconcern through his thick wavy hair 
– and continue to push every ball back, almost as if encapsulating the ritual 
for some soulless coaching manual. In the years that followed, he discouraged 
the constant, well-intentioned retelling of the innings.

There were, of course, many slow innings from him. Some seemed excessive or 
needless. Certainly, some were counterproductive. He argued their importance, 
from mid-order, to the overall shape of the match. He was a thinker, analyst 
and technician. Bailey possessed an attractive repertoire of shots which he had 
paraded successfully as a schoolboy and at Cambridge University, and was quite 
capable of dusting off in the championship. He scored 28 centuries in his 
28,641 runs. Not all came, by any means, in that excruciating, one-paced style.

Yet that is what we remember: the 68 in seven hours, 38 minutes at Brisbane in 
the 1958-59 series; or his two hours over eight runs against South Africa at 
Leeds. The defiance at times carried a palpable psychological edge to it. 
"Bloody Bailey, stop crawling, let's see some cricket," the irritated Aussie 
crowds would chorus. And he tenaciously dropped his wide, eloquent bat on the 
next six deliveries.

Only in retrospect did the grudging admiration emerge. Opposing Test players 
acknowledged his value to England in the 1950s.Keith Miller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2004/oct/12/guardianobituaries.cricket>, who 
groaned whenever he saw Bailey walking out, wrote a warm foreword to Jack 
Bailey's 1993 biography of his namesake. "Trevor was such a pain if you were 
playing against him – a damned nuisance in fact. You knew that if you could get 
this bloke out of the way, the chances were that you would win. All too 
frequently Ray Lindwall and I would find the task beyond us and it got under 
our skin."

That was his batting. As a bowler, he was well above medium-pace, able 
to swing away from the right-hander, to seam and "to get one to nip back". He 
had neither the big hands nor the big frame of a fast bowler. Off his longish 
run, he made the batsman play, and he retained a competitive zeal that showed 
in the glint of his eyes, and a set expression that rarely broke into a smile.

He took all 10 wickets for Essex in an innings at Clacton against Lancashire 
in the late summer of 1949. His 10-90 came off 39.4 overs, all in one day. 
It is perhaps mean-spirited to dally on the fact that his captain, Tom Pearce, 
greatly assisted the feat by eventually using unrecognised bowlers at the other 
end. That was still a marvellous piece of sustained swing, as early victims, 
includingCyril Washbrook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/1999/may/01/guardianobituaries>, Winston Place
 <https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/feb/13/guardianobituaries.andywilson>
and Jack Ikin were to testify. In all he took 2,082 wickets at 23.13.

Bailey had his share of injuries – and controversy. In a match against Sussex, 
also at Clacton, he went off for a massage after bowling a few overs. Then he 
came back with the intention of immediately rejoining the attack. "Hang on", 
said James Langridge, the Sussex skipper who went on to the field to protest. 
The umpires ruled against Bailey, who had to wait for an hour.

Behind that phlegmatic exterior, though, lurked a measure of mischief, often 
based on his willingness to confront the game's laws with as much determination 
as legally permissible, and reinforced by his obsessive desire to win. He was 
on occasion accused of time-wasting. He could be outspoken at the expense of 
those committee members for whom he had little time. Some of cricket's grandees 
were weary of him – he was too independent for their liking, too much of a 
"pro" when nominally an amateur.

The son of an Admiralty civil servant, Bailey went from prep school to Dulwich 
college, south-east London, and then into the Royal Marines with a commission, 
before going to St John's College, Cambridge, to read history and English. 
There was a brief stint of teaching, but Essex beckoned this clean-cut young 
man from Westcliff-on-Sea.

Bailey played for the county from 1946 until 1967. There were 482 appearances 
and on occasion, he seemed to be virtually carrying the side when it was short 
of players. From 1961 until 1966 he was the captain, leading by example. 
Team-mates were amused at the way he entwined himself in bandages to support 
his aching joints and would take the field in thick layers of MCC sweaters. Ray 
East recalled: "The wonder was not that he could bowl so well once warmed up, 
but that he could bowl at all."

Less amused were opposing batsmen, impatient at the number of practice runs he 
took, accompanied by cosmetic excuses when he pulled up. As an amateur he was 
more professional than most of his contemporaries. He was secretary of Essex 
from 1955 until 1967, combining that with his playing. He would often find a 
corner of the dressing room, while waiting to bat, to type his latest 
commissioned newspaper article.

Bailey's ability as a cricketer was beyond question. He played in 61 Tests 
between 1949 and 1959 and took 132 wickets. Early on he opened the bowling with
Alec Bedser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/apr/05/sir-alec-bedser-obituary>, later 
he was first change to Brian Statham and Frank Tyson. He toured Australia and 
New Zealand, the West Indies, South Africa and Australia again. He was 
disappointed to be overlooked for the England captaincy.

For 20 years he was cricket and football correspondent of the Financial Times. 
He gained a soccer blue at Cambridge and a winners' medal in the FA Amateur Cup 
for Walthamstow Avenue in 1952. He played at inside-forward or on the right 
wing, taking the corners, invariably with his socks round his ankles. He liked 
football almost as much as cricket and went on to become a director of Southend 
United FC.

When he retired from Essex, he did PR and promotional work, as well as being 
involved in the toy business, to supplement his commitments as a journalist and 
author, and as a member of the commentary team on BBC Radio's Test Match 
Special until 1999, where his opinions were expressed in that distinctive, 
authoritatively clipped voice, devoid of compromise. He had little time for 
cream-cake frivolity in the commentary box. He was appointed CBE in 1994.

Bailey is survived by his wife, Greta. They had two sons, Kim and Justin, and 
a daughter, Sharon.

• Trevor Edward Bailey, cricketer, born 3 December 1923; died 10 February 2011
 