
Just a fortnight ago it seemed inconceivable that Alec Stewart and his team 
could possibly perform a lap of honour at the SCG and receive a standing 
ovation from English and Australian supporters alike. But that, more than 
anything, illustrated the new life that Stewart's men breathed into not just 
this series - but certainly the next Ashes tour here in four years' time. This 
winter had to provide a contest and, in the last two weeks, we have had one.

But the frustrations of the first three Tests are not easily forgotten. Catch 
after catch was dropped - most of them off the tireless Darren Gough who 
received his just rewards in the end but whose patience, even in Adelaide, 
never flagged. Had Healy and Steve Waugh been caught in Brisbane on the opening 
day of the series the whole direction of the tour might just have been 
different. As it was, it set the pattern for the first three games.

So what produced the change in attitude that enabled Stewart to salute the 
Barmy Army at the end rather than scuttling out of the back of the pavilion 
hidden under a blanket? The cynics would say that, too often, England win 
matches that do not matter after the main event has already been lost. There 
might be some truth in that, although the players strenuously deny it. But 
something happened between Adelaide and Melbourne that transformed England into 
a tenacious, competitive cricket team.

Three things, in fact. Catches were suddenly taken, Dean Headley burst onto 
the scene taking 14 wickets in two Tests, and Gough grew in stature to the 
extent that he must now be considered one of the leading fast bowlers in the 
world. With Ramprakash and Hussain building their reputations in the middle 
order - and the progress made by Tudor and Mullally - England's future suddenly 
looks surprisingly bright. But only as long as they consistently play with the 
same level of intensity and purpose as they showed here, and not simply when it 
is too late to do anything else.
 