
In his autumn statement (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/dec/05/george-osborne-welfare-autumn-statement>
, 6 December), the chancellor claimed "we are all in it together", yet his 
announcement that working-age benefits will rise by only 1% for the next three 
years means people like me are unfairly penalised. I have been unable to work 
for 16 years due a chronic illness (ME). I hate not working and it has severely 
affected my sense of self-esteem. I currently receive employment and support 
allowance (ESA) at £105 a week which will increase by only 1% in the next three 
years. The latest 2012 CPI inflation rate is 2.7%, which over three years would 
become 8-9%, so this decision would cause me a loss of 6% in real terms. The 
only income I have comes from ESA and disability living allowance. The 
chancellor has "balanced" this cut in benefits by reducing tax-free pension 
contributions to £50,000 a year for the richest 2% of people. This is presented 
by George Osborne as evidence he has ensured that "everyone pays their fair 
share". Really?
Tony Williams
Oxford

• Labour's two Eds are on shaky ground when criticising the government's 
income tax policy. Both were enthusiastic bag carriers for Gordon Brown when he 
cut the standard rate and failed to increase higher rates. Like many otherwise 
sensible people, he seems to have fallen for rich men's propaganda. For decades 
they've been telling us it's disastrous to tax rich men and, across the globe, 
they've succeeded in getting their dubious theories accepted.

The days when progressive taxes were accepted as being the least-worse option 
are becoming distant memories. Nostalgic lefties might even yearn for Margaret 
Thatcher's time, during most of which the highest rate of income tax was 60% 
and standard nudged 30%. Slashing these rates has left a huge annual hole in 
the exchequer while much of the untaxed income has been spent by the allegedly 
"squeezed middle" on purchases such as imported consumer goods and 
multi-channel TV subscriptions. Meanwhile the genuinely hard up increasingly 
struggle to pay for essentials, public services become shabby while the 
super-rich party on.

Until sanity and political courage return, the gap between rich and poor will 
go on growing and governments will have to continue using regressive and/or 
stealthy ways to fund all the infrastructure and services that complex nations 
increasingly require.
Brian Hughes
Cheltenham, Gloucestershire

• At last, someone has written it the way it is (Our political class clings to 
the delusion that growth will return 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/dec/05/political-class-delusion-growth-return>
, 6 December). As the pundits rake through the minutiae of Osborne's autumn 
statement they stick to the impossible dream – continuous growth and the 
promised pot of gold for everyone at the end of the coalition rainbow – not 
this year, or next, but as soon as we get "back on track". As Suzanne Moore 
points out, continuous growth is impossible with limited resources. What is 
required is a redistribution of wealth and living within our means.

And as, in our fantasy world, we cut benefits to the poor and ringfence the 
wealth of the super-rich there lurks in the background the unmentionable – the 
hundreds of billions we squander on wars, our armed forces and Trident.
Jim McCluskey
Twickenham, Middlesex

• I listened with familiar dismay to the chancellor's autumn statement. 
Particularly demoralising was the announcement that schools can now decide to 
pay staff based on performance. This was welcomed as "balanced" by the 
headteachers' union, the NAHT. I can't say I am surprised as it means a 
headteacher can now use a measure that they deem appropriate to rule on how 
much teachers should get paid.

I have been rated as an outstanding teacher by Ofsted, so in theory should be 
optimistic about my impending pay increase. Yet I get the feeling this is going 
to act as an excuse for schools to save money rather than reward staff. I am 
sure the government will analyse and produce figures on the overall changes to 
the average amount teachers are paid. But until then, am I the only one who 
thinks this looks distinctly like a stealthy pay cut?
Richard Cooper
Head of religious studies, Bournemouth School

• A lot of the debate about the autumn statement hinges on the failure to meet 
growth and debt reduction targets and fails to challenge the apparent 
"necessity" for further austerity to get the economy back to health. But this 
misses a fundamental point. The Tory-led coalition is clearly using the crisis 
as cover to reduce benefits, dismantle the welfare state and erode employment 
rights. By their lights, the government is actually doing well. The NHS and 
state education are being privatised. High unemployment keeps wages down. And 
the poor are paying for a crisis of capitalism.

Until there's more widespread recognition of this elemental point, I fear 
little will change. The left needs to challenge the current terms of debate 
more clearly and articulate the case for an alternative economic strategy based 
on a reversal of the financialisation of our economy, an active industrial 
strategy and withdrawal from the EU (without which none of this is possible).
Chris Guiton
Crowborough, East Sussex

• I wish to assure George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> that when I worked shifts 
and had to get up early to catch the 3.30am staff bus, I felt grateful to have 
a steady job, which paid quite well and which I enjoyed doing. In no way was I 
envious of those unfortunate people who faced one bleak day after another 
without work, no matter how long they were able to stay in bed.
Barry Parker
Leeds

• Please can a stop be put to the use of this oxymoron "negative growth"? 
Contraction would be a better term; recession better still.
Nick Wall
Wallasey, Merseyside

• Where on earth do the Tories get that horrible, mirthless laugh from? Do 
they teach it in Tory training school?
Roy Boffy
Walsall
 