
The Australian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> used 
to be the least considered of the four slams. Jimmy Connors only played it a 
couple of times, John McEnroe was generally an absentee, although he still 
managed to get himself disqualified in 1990, and Bjorn Borg made just the one 
trip down under. And the scars are still apparent.

Imagine anybody at Wimbledon, Roland Garros, or the US Open suggesting that 
the tournament might be bought out or moved to China. It is unthinkable, yet 
such questions were raised at the beginning of the Australian Open this year - 
a reminder that there remains a deep insecurity. No doubt it has been fuelled 
by Australia's inability to produce players of international quality to compare 
with Rod Laver, Ken Rosewall, Roy Emerson or John Newcombe, together with the 
continent's geographical isolation. Furthermore the Australian Open is marketed 
as the grand slam of Asia/Pacific, which may have been a sound idea but has 
added to a feeling of vulnerability, as if being simply being the Australian 
Open was not, in some way, quite good enough. Imagine Wimbledon being sold as 
the grand slam of northern Europe. No, it's simply Wimbledon, or, more 
correctly, The Championships. Enough said.

Fortunately, during the 80s the leading players began to realise what a 
fabulous beginning to the year this tournament was, and although the chuntering 
about it being too early in the year still surfaces from time to time, the 
success of Andre Agassi, towards the autumn of his career, and now Roger 
Federer has placed it firmly on a par with the other three. It is no longer the 
poor man's slam, and long may it be played in January during the school summer 
holiday. The proposed move to switch it to March was preposterous and has 
rightly died a death.

One of the consequences of the Australian Open being played so quickly after 
the off-season of November and December is that it puts a premium on those 
players who train the most assiduously, when others might be inclined to rest 
up a little longer and enjoy Christmas and the family that little bit more. Tim 
Henman's failure to ever get past the fourth round in Melbourne, the only slam 
he failed to do so, may be blamed on his lack of preparation. That is not to 
say he was not fit, merely that he might have been fitter.

Agassi was always a demon trainer, with Gil Reyes, his profoundly loyal friend 
and trainer, making sure he arrived here as fit as the proverbial butcher's 
dog. The same applies to Federer, who prepares in Dubai with equal assiduity. 
Indeed the outstanding fitness of the Swiss is one of the least considered 
aspects of his astounding 12 major titles in the last 18 slams.

As each year goes by, tennis players train harder and harder, and on the men's 
side this has led to numerous surprises here in recent years, the latest being 
France's Jo-Wilfried Tsonga, whose success follows on the heels of Chile's 
Fernando González last year, Marcos Baghdatis of Cyprus two years ago, and 
before that Rainer Schüettler of Germany, and Arnaud Clément, also of France.

Federer mentioned here that the public could relate to always seeing the same 
players in the latter stages of big tournaments. "It's good to have a few guys 
at the top who are playing consistently," he said. Well he may like to think 
that, but one of the undoubted joys of the Australian Open is its uncertainty, 
and long may it continue that players like Tsonga burst through in the early 
part of the year and take everybody by surprise.
 