
The Australian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> 
favours the fit and the exuberant, those who arrive from the northern 
hemisphere winter, open up the curtains, and let the sunshine flood in. It is 
an over-simplification perhaps, but just as Marcos Baghdatis etched his name 
here two years ago by reaching the final, so this time Jo-Wilfried Tsonga has 
made a indelible mark. It might have been Andy Murray, but it was the 
22-year-old Frenchman with the Muhammad Ali looks who seized the moment.

The French began the tournament with 29 players in the singles draw. "We are 
10 years behind them," said Stuart Smith, the president of the LTA in the lobby 
of the Hilton that overlooks both the MCG and the tennis centre. "But we'll get 
there." It seems unlikely, principally because the infrastructure in place 
throughout France, most of it government backed, is beyond anything Britain can 
reasonably hope for, even in 10 years' time. It is doubtful Britain will ever 
produce such numbers in depth, although two or three would be a start.

Now the French are down to Tsonga, which prompted the thought that Britain 
would, in all probability, see that as constituting a disaster if it had 
happened to them. 'But where are the champions?' would be the cry. The French 
are altogether more phlegmatic and reasonable, accepting success when it comes 
and not getting unduly concerned when matters do not work out. The sheer 
numbers of top French players brings an altogether more civilised and 
intelligent approach to the sport and success, and everyone is currently 
delighted for Tsonga who has had to cope with a multiplicity of injuries, 
including a career-threatening herniated disc in his back.

So how does Tsonga feel about his current run of success? "It's a joke," he 
grins, revelling in the incongruity of winning and staying fit. And could he 
possibly take the title? "Of course. For sure. Otherwise I would not have come 
to Melbourne." After each win he points to his back with his thumbs, 
emphasising that he is part of the French team again, something that was denied 
him two years ago as he struggled to come to terms with one injury after 
another: back, shoulder, abdomen. While Richard Gasquet and Gael Monfils (now 
injured himself) played the circuit, Tsonga swam around a pool attempting to 
knit body and soul together.

He badly missed the camaraderie, while all the time it dawned on him more and 
more just how lucky he had been during his junior days when only Baghdatis had 
prevented him from becoming the world junior No1. He had taken the success and 
his status for granted; now he knew, above everything else, that he wanted to 
get back on course, to be fit, and to compete at the top of his sport. Last 
year he entered the top 50 for the first time, and over the last few days he 
has been on fire. "When I beat Andy in this first round I knew I could beat a 
lot of other guys. And I love to react to the public, to make a show."

There is no doubt that he has thrilled the crowds here and captured their 
imagination with his athletic and dynamic displays. He might not quite float 
like a butterfly and sting like a bee, but as he said: "I try to fly".
 