
Suddenly Andy Murray's first-round defeat here looks altogether more 
respectable. Everybody had always suspected, given the draw, that whoever won 
that opening match between the Scotsman and France's Jo-Wilfried Tsonga would 
have a wonderful chance of pushing deep and hard into the second week of the 
year's opening grand slam championship. And Tsonga, the youngster with the 
Muhammad Ali looks, has done that with a vengeance. In the first of the 
night-time semi-finals he simply annihilated Spain's Rafael Nadal, the world 
No2, in three electrifying sets of brilliant tennis.

Never before had Tsonga played like this. "It's ridiculous for sure. 
Everything was perfect," he said. This was indeed something special, a victory 
of such composed and sustained brilliance that the 15,000 in the Rod Laver 
arena found themselves laughing out aloud at the incongruous joy of it all. 
"Tsonga Tsunami" read a banner and it just about summed up the Frenchman's 6-2, 
6-3, 6-2 victory achieved in a little under two hours.

Nadal, three times the French Open champion and twice Wimbledon runner-up, was 
engulfed. Nobody can be sure if his vulnerability is short term or not, 
although he was heavily defeated by Russia's Mikhail Youzhny in the final of 
the Chennai Open recently, a lead-up tournament to theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>. Nadal's game is dependent 
on the imposition of his physical strengths, running down every ball and firing 
in his wickedly spinning and swerving ground strokes. Tsonga, a wonderful 
athlete himself, simply went for broke and there was absolutely nothing the 
Spaniard could do about it. Tsonga served 17 aces, clumped his forehand with a 
severity that frequently left Nadal chasing shadows and displayed a sureness 
and deftness of touch at the net that was beyond his opponent's comprehension.

There was a glorious moment when Tsonga picked up a half-volley a few feet 
from the net that looped gently over and died in the instant it hit the ground. 
Tsonga smiled and so did Nadal. It was an outrageous shot and the 22-year-old 
from Le Mans, a year older than Nadal, continued to achieve the improbable for 
the rest of the evening. This was only his fifth major and by reaching the 
final he will break through into the top 20 for the first time next week, while 
doubling his prize money.

So where has he been hiding? Tsonga was always an outstanding youngster, just 
missing out on becoming the world junior No1 in 2003 to Marcos Baghdatis of 
Cyprus, the equally surprising 2006 finalist here. His problems began three 
years ago when a serious back injury, a herniated disc, threatened to cut his 
career off at its prime. No surgeon or doctor could tell him for sure that he 
would be able to play again and the French federation, to its credit, offered 
him every support and kept him in its squad.

Now, after each victory, Tsonga points his thumbs at his back as if to 
emphasise that solidarity and his delight that he is once again an integral 
part of the French tennis family. He has never won an ATP singles title, not 
even reached a final, yet now, spectacularly, his first could be the Australian 
Open. It is small wonder that he feels himself to be in a trance, a waking 
dream.

This tournament has thrown up a number of surprises in recent years, Chile's 
Fernando González, Baghdatis, Rainer Schüttler and another Frenchman, Arnaud 
Clément, all being unlikely finalists, while Sweden's Thomas Johansson won his 
one and only major here in 2002. What has singled out Tsonga, who entered 
ranked No38 in the world, his best ever position, has been the élan he has 
brought to the court every time he has played. It would have been perfectly 
understandable if he had frozen against Nadal. Instead he played the game of 
his life and revelled in every moment of it.

As he went to serve for the match his eyes were dancing around the arena as if 
to say, "Yes I am here and I belong here too". Every detail was feeding into 
his brain, even if a stunned looked temporarily passed over his face as he aced 
Nadal for a final time to clinch his place in the final. Nadal, for whom this 
was his first Australian Open semi-final, accepted the defeat without the 
semblance of an excuse. "He played unbelievable. I thought I had been playing 
well enough to win the title but there was no way I could have beaten Tsonga 
tonight. His running was unbelievable and physically he was very explosive. 
Everything. What can I say?"

Tsonga's plethora of injuries, all of them stemming from his back, might be 
seen as a motivation but the Frenchman, whose Congo-born father, Didier, is a 
teacher, as is his mother, Evelyne, prefers to talk about the sheer 
unadulterated joy at being able to play free of pain, and to have been able to 
train as hard as he has ever done this last winter. Before my body was not 
ready for me to play this way. I knew that I could play unbelievable tennis if 
my body let me." Nobody doubts that now.

Men from nowhere: Surprise Aus finalists

Jo-Wilfried Tsonga, 2008

Reached the final in Australia in only his second appearance in the 
tournament, having lost in the first round last year. The 22-year-old has 
appeared only once in each of the other grand slam events, his best the fourth 
round at Wimbledon last year.

Current ranking 38

Fernando González, 2007

Lost to Roger Federer 7-6, 6-4, 6-4

The 26-year-old's victims en route to the final included Lleyton Hewitt, 
Rafael Nadal and Tommy Haas. Became the first Chilean to reach the quarters of 
all four grand slams, though his Melbourne performance last year was the only 
occasion he had progressed beyond the last eight.

Current ranking 7

Marcos Baghdatis, 2006 

Lost to Federer 5-7, 7-5, 6-0, 6-2

Unseeded 20-year-old Cypriot beat third seed Andy Roddick, Ivan Ljubcic and 
David Nalbandian. Made the last four at Wimbledon the same year but has not 
advanced beyond the fourth round in any other major.

Current ranking 16

Rainer Schüttler, 2003

Lost to Andre Agassi 6-2, 6-2, 6-1

The 31st-seeded German, then aged 26, saw off Nalbandian and Roddick on the 
way to the final against Agassi, where he was overwhelmed. Has never gone 
beyond the fourth round in any other grand slam event.

Current ranking 145

Thomas Johansson, 2002

Beat Marat Safin 3-6, 6-4, 6-4, 7-6

The 26-year-old Swede, seeded 16th, pulled off a shock win over Marat Safin to 
become the first Swede to triumph in Australia since Mats Wilander in 1988. 
Rose to seventh in the world rankings later that year but has not gone further 
in a major since his 2002 win than a semi-final appearance at Wimbledon in 2005.

Current ranking 51

Arnaud Clément, 2001

Lost to Andre Agassi 6-4, 6-2, 6-2

The 15th seed became the first French player to reach the Australian Open 
final in 73 years. The 23-year-old's victims included the then-unseeded Roger 
Federer and fourth seed Yevgeny Kafelnikov. Has not reached a major 
quarter-final since, though won the men's doubles at Wimbledon last year with 
Michael Llodra.

Current ranking 59
 