
Tunisian forces have killed 21 jihadis who attacked police and army posts near 
the Libyan border in clashes which left four civilians dead. It was the second 
deadly exchange in the border area in less than a week.

The defence ministry said a soldier was also killed during the attack on an 
army barracks in the town of Ben Guerdane on Monday. Hospital official 
Abdelkrim Chafroud said a 12-year-old was among the dead civilians, and that 
two security agents were killed.

Six militants were wounded and detained, the defence ministry spokesman Rachid 
Bouhoula said.

The interior ministry said the militants also attacked a police station and a 
national guard post in the town, but those attacks were repelled. Army units 
were deployed across the town and authorities ordered a nighttime curfew.

The Ras Jedir border crossing with Libya was closed, as well as the main road 
connecting Ben Guerdane with the rest ofTunisia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/tunisia> through the town of Zarzis, 45 
miles (70km) north.

Witnesses said troops used loudhailers to urge residents to stay indoors. The 
defence ministry appealed for information on any suspicious activity.

The office of the prime minister, Habib Essid, said he would hold an emergency 
meeting with the defence and interior ministers.

Last Wednesday, troops killed five militants in a firefight outside Ben 
Guerdane in which a civilian was also killed and a commander wounded. Troops 
have been on alert in the area following reports that militants had been 
slipping across the border ever since a US airstrike on anIslamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> training camp in Libya on 18 February 
killed dozens of Tunisian militants.

At least four of the five militants killed in last week’s firefight were 
Tunisians who had entered from Libya in an attempt to carry out attacks in 
their homeland, the interior ministry said. Deadly attacks by Isis on foreign 
holidaymakers last year, which dealt a devastating blow to Tunisia’s tourism 
industry, are believed to have been planned fromLibya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya>.

Tunisia has built a 125-mile barrier along almost half the length of its 
border with Libya in an attempt to stop militants infiltrating.

Last month’s US strike on the Isis training camp outside the Libyan city of 
Sabratha targeted the suspected mastermind of two of last year’s attacks, 
Noureddine Chouchane. Washington has said Chouchane was likely to have been 
among the dozens of militants killed, and that the strike probably averted a 
mass shooting or similar attack in Tunisia.

Chaos has engulfed Libya since the Nato-backed ousting of dictator Muammar 
Gaddafi in 2011.

Rival administrations which have vied for power since mid-2014 are being urged 
to sign up to a UN-brokered national unity government to help restore stability 
and tackle a growing jihadi presence. Isis and other extremist organisations 
have exploited the power vacuum to seize significant territory along the coast 
around the central city of Sirte, as well as around Sabratha, between Tripoli 
and the Tunisian border.

The Isis presence just across the Mediterranean from Europe has raised alarm 
bells among western governments, which have made contingency plans for 
intensified military action against the jihadis. The presence of US, British 
and French special forces have already been reported in Libya.

A contingent of about 50 Italians was set to join them, Il Corriere della Sera 
reported on Thursday, citing a classified order signed by the prime minister, 
Matteo Renzi, last month.

Britain announced last week it was sending a team of about 20 soldiers to 
Tunisia to train troops patrolling the border with Libya.

Thirty Britons were among 38 foreign holidaymakers killed in a gun and grenade 
attack on a beach resort near the Tunisian city of Sousse last June, while last 
March, jihadi gunmen killed 21 tourists and a police officer at the Bardo 
museum in Tunis.

According to a UN working group on the use of mercenaries, more than 5,000 
Tunisians, mostly aged 18 to 35, have travelled abroad to join jihadi groups, 
many of them in Libya.
 