
The Turkish Airlines jet that crashed into a field near Schiphol airport in the
Netherlands <https://www.theguardian.com/world/netherlands>, killing nine 
people and injuring dozens, underwent repairs for a major system malfunction 
two days before the accident, it emerged last night.

The Boeing 737-800 was briefly taken out of operation on Monday after the 
pilot reported a problem with the "master caution light" programme, which 
checks that the aircraft is functioning correctly, the airline said in a 
statement.

The revelation will raise questions about the recent safety record of the 
plane, which lost power while approaching the end of its flight on Wednesday 
morning and hurtled into the field below, two miles from the runway.

Last night Pieter van Vollenhoven, president of the Dutch agency leading the 
investigation into the disaster, said he believed engine failure to be behind 
the crash as the plane had "dropped almost vertically" from the sky. Witnesses 
reported that the plane dived tail-first. "This would seem to indicate that the 
engines were not giving enough forward thrust," said Fred Sanders, a spokesman 
for the Dutch Safety Board.

Engine failure can be caused by a lack of fuel, or by a collision with birds - 
as happened last month when a US Airways flight glided to safety on the Hudson 
river in New York. "There are a number of things that can lead to failure of 
this kind," said Sanders. "But there is no indication as yet that these are a 
possibility."

An exchange between air traffic controllers and the crew recorded minutes 
before the crash gave no indication of any technical trouble. "Turkish 1951 
descending from level 7-0," one of the pilots is heard saying, referring to its 
altitude of 7,000ft. The controller then clears the airliner to an altitude of 
4,000ft in preparation for landing, and the conversation ends calmly.

Yesterday investigators began sifting through the wreckage, taking photographs 
and raking through debris to try to find clues to why an apparently functioning 
aircraft lost power in good visibility and at the end of a smooth-running 
flight.

A British woman, Susan Lord, and her two daughters, Sofia and Lisa Labeij, 
were confirmed as being among the passengers who managed to scramble out of the 
plane as it lay in pieces. They had been travelling with Jacobus Labeij, the 
girls' Dutch father and Ms Lord's husband, who also emerged unscathed from the 
crash. "We understand that they are the three Britons involved and that they 
are all in good health," said a spokeswoman for the British embassy in The 
Hague.

Of the 135 people on board Turkish Airlines Flight 1951, six remained in a 
critical condition last night, said a spokesman for the local crisis team. The 
dead included four Americans - one a Boeing employee - and five Turks, 
including three members of the crew, who had wrestled with the plane's controls 
before becoming trapped in the wreckage. Paying tribute to the efforts of 
Captain Hasan Tahsin Arisan, the Turkish transport minister said: "At the cost 
of his own life, [he] ensured that human casualties were low."

Results from the black box, which was sent to Paris on Wednesday night to be 
analysed by specialists, should be available in the next few days. But it will 
be weeks before investigators can present their interim findings and as long as 
a year before they can say with any certainty what went wrong, according to 
Sanders.

In its statement yesterday Turkish Airlines insisted the problems on Monday 
should not be seen as a potential cause of the crash. "Since then the aircraft 
undertook eight flights and encountered no problems," it said. "Turkish 
Airlines has undertaken all required maintenance work on the plane in line with 
the directives of the manufacturer as well as national and international 
authorities."

Speaking to journalists from hospital, many survivors said that they had been 
given no warning during the crash. "Neither the pilot nor the crew said 
anything," said Mustafa Bahcecioglu. "It happened so fast - from the moment the 
plane started shaking to the moment we hit the ground it was a matter of six or 
seven seconds."

Officials confirmed that most passengers were Turkish or Dutch. There were 
also seven Americans, four of whom worked for Boeing, one German, one 
Bulgarian, one Finn, one Italian, one Taiwanese and 15 people whose 
nationalities have not yet been identified.
 