
Q I am a fan of Japanese designers, and I noticed that the whole of the latest 
Junya Watanabe show is based on the biker jacket. Can I dig out my old biker 
jacket and make it work for autumn?
Josh

A You should never throw away jackets or coats, as outerwear styles always 
come back into fashion. At the Watanabe show, the designer cleverly dissected 
the classic biker jacket, using key components - zips, collar and studs - that 
give it its distinctive shape, and reworked them. The zip was moved to the 
collar so it encircled the neckline. He also created a new suit style with a 
biker jacket and matching trousers in wool. If you want to emulate the look, 
make sure you team your jacket with black jeans - blue looks a little too David 
Hasselhoff. If you're feeling adventurous, search second-hand stores for cheap 
old biker jackets (with shoulderpads and ruched details that no one could 
possibly want) and add the zip or collar to your own. A good seamstress with an 
industrial sewing machine should be able to customise it for you - very Blue 
Peter.

Q I've read a lot about the body-conscious trend and wondered if you'd 
recommend it to anyone over a size 8.
Amie

A If you think back to the Eighties and models like the statuesque Cindy 
Crawford and Jerry Hall in figure-hugging Lycra tube dresses, you see how good 
a tight, well-cut dress can look on a woman with curves. Also, technical 
fabrics have come a long way. From the Titanium fabric used in Roland Mouret's 
Galaxy dress to the triple-thick elastic-bandage fabric used by labels such as 
Preen, us ladies have never had so much support. This, combined with the 
revival of the past masters of body-conscious design such as Herve Leger and 
Azzedine Alaia, means you can show off your buxom curves with pride, no matter 
what your dress size. The real trick to looking good is confidence. So if you 
want to wear a figure-hugging frock, hold your head high and believe you can. 
Oh, and heels are essential.

· If you have a wardrobe question for Jo Jones, email her at 
ask.jo@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.jo@observer.co.uk>
 