
Mounting urgency has returned to Greece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> with the country’s financial 
predicament igniting fears of a re-run of last summer’s nail-biting drama.

Rejecting a Greek request for an extraordinary EU summit to discuss its 
troubled bailout programme, European council presidentDonald Tusk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/donald-tusk> instead urged eurozone finance 
ministers to resume talks that would avert further turmoil. The nation faces 
default if it fails to receive the necessary loans to cover €3.5 bn in maturing 
debt in July.

“We have to avoid a situation of renewed uncertainty for Greece,” he told 
reporters after speaking with prime ministerAlexis Tsipras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexis-tsipras> on Wednesday. “We need a 
specific date for a new Eurogroup meeting in the not-so-distant future and I am 
talking not about weeks but about days.”

In a repeat of last year’s heady days, Athens’ leftist-led government is 
scrambling to raise funds to ensure payment of salaries and pensions in May.

The reserves of state entities and pension funds have effectively been 
sequestered with officials demanding deposits be placed in the central bank on 
short-term loan to cover looming shortfalls.

“The government is behaving as if it has already run out of money,” said 
prominent political commentator Pantelis Kapsis. “That in itself signifies 
there will be no agreement soon. There is great uncertainty. All scenarios are 
on the table including early elections.”

Greece’s embattled prime minister appealed for the emergency EU summit after 
Athens and its creditors failed late Tuesday to resolve differences over the 
extent of budget cuts and reforms the debt-stricken state must make in return 
for rescue loans.

The lack of headway prompted Dutch finance minister and Eurogroup chairman, 
Jeroen Dijsselbloem, who oversees negotiations, to cancel a scheduled meeting 
at which it was hoped the talks would finally be concluded on Thursday.

Speaking in Paris after talks with his French counterpart Michel Sapin on 
Wednesday, Dijsselbloem said a new meeting would be lined up in the weeks 
ahead. “I don’t have a deadline, although there is a sense of urgency that we 
all share, so we’ll have to see whether it can be next week or ultimately the 
week after,” he told reporters. “There are practical issues that many countries 
have, with national holidays next week.”

Negotiations have been deadlocked for months. Initially it was hoped the 
review – the first since Greece signed up to a third, €86bn bailout – would be 
completed in October, allowing badly needed loan instalments to be disbursed.

Tusk’s intervention highlights the fears that the drawn out process has now 
unleashed. “We are undoubtedly heading for another very hot summer,” said one 
EU diplomat. “And are back again seeing another round of brinkmanship.”

Greek officials insist that a package of austerity measures worth €5.4bn – or 
3% of GDP – that the government accepted to enact when it signed up in August 
to the bailout has been agreed. The measures, which include tax increases and 
the overhaul of the pension system, have formed the bulk of negotiations.

But this month the IMF made the dramatic move of demanding that Greece would 
also have to legislate additional “contingency measures” worth €3.6bn, or 2% of 
GDP, to be enforced in the event that it failed to meet fiscal targets. IMF 
officials said the need for extra assurances emanated from differences in view 
between the Washington-based fund and EU officials over Athens’ ability to 
achieve a 3.5% primary surplus in 2018.

Tsipras’s embattled government has rejected the demand out of hand describing 
it as both outlandish – the Greek economy has contracted by more than 25% since 
the debt crisis erupted in late 2010 – and unconstitutional.

With the ruling Syriza <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syriza> party deeply 
divided – and MPs facing angry constituents – there are grave concerns over 
whether the government, clinging to power with a majority of just three, would 
even be able to pass such measures.

On Wednesday it appeared to win support from the president of the EU 
commission, Jean-Claude Juncker, who also described the demand for extra 
measures as “unreasonable,” saying: “No parliament in the world would accept 
that.”
 