
Is there anything British comedians can't do? Not content with dominating the 
airwaves with their comedy shows, chat and quiz shows, they've been branching 
out into journalism, novels and, increasingly, the movies. And I'm not just 
talking about performing, though nowadays it's hard to escapeRussell Brand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/russell-brand>, who popped up in The 
Tempest, will shortly be heard as voice of the Easter Bunny in Hop, and seen as 
Arthur in the remake of a film that starred Dudley Moore, another British TV 
comedian who was (briefly) clutched to the bosom of Hollywood.

No, because here comes Richard Ayoade, best known for roles in Garth 
Marenghi's Darkplace, Nathan Barley and The IT Crowd, making his feature 
writing and directing debut with Submarine. Also coming soon to a multiplex 
near you is Attack the Block, the writing-directing debut ofJoe Cornish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/joe-cornish>, best known as half of The Adam 
and Joe Show. My jury is still out on these films (in other words, I haven't 
yet had a chance to see them) but Ayoade and Cornish are only the latest in a 
trend of British TV funnymen trying their hand behind, as well as in front of, 
the camera.

Of course, British TV comedians have been making the leap from small screen to 
big ever since the gogglebox was invented, with mixed results. The Rebel, Tony 
Hancock's first foray into cinema was judged a failure, though is now 
recognised (by me, anyway) as a minor masterpiece, while the Monty Python team 
is responsible for at least three big-screen classics. There's a long history 
of TV-to-film slippage in the ranks of sitcom writers, theéminences grises 
being Dick Clement and Ian La Frenais (who have been pursuing parallel careers 
in film and telly since the 1960s) and, more recently,Richard Curtis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/richard-curtis>. Clement and La Frenais 
appear to understand the difference between the two, whereas Curtis apparently 
does not; Four Weddings, Notting Hill and Love Actually feel more like 
collections of loosely connected sketches than coherent stories.

Today's comic mafia (or laffia, if you will) seems as interested in writing 
and directing as in performing, though rare are those TV-reared Britcom stars 
who have managed to cross over to an international audience as film-makers 
rather than just clowns.Ricky Gervais 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/ricky-gervais> has somehow managed the 
transatlantic leap, though The Invention of Lying, which he co-wrote and 
directed with Matthew Robinson, labours under the influence of a TV mentality, 
appearing as an undernourished sketch padded out to (interminable) feature 
length.

Few of the TV comedy graduates seem familiar with William Goldman's maxim that 
"screenplay is structure". Chris Morris's Four Lions has an audacious premise 
and brilliant moments, but still feels like a series of disconnected skits. 
Paul King's Bunny and the Bull is more like four overlapping episodes of The 
Mighty Boosh than a film, while Armando Iannucci's In the Loop works more as a 
treat for fans of the original series than as a standalone satire for The Thick 
of It virgins like me. Mark Gatiss, as prolific with his teleplays as with his 
TV appearances, has yet to attempt the transition (though will surely do so), 
while Andy Nyman, to judge by his and Jeremy Dyson's tightly constructed stage 
show Ghost Stories, is certainly capable of better than his story credit for 
the lame David Mitchell and Robert Webb vehicle, Magicians.

But if these guys want to be taken seriously as film-makers rather than as 
small-screen celebs with big-screen aspirations, they need to pay more 
attention to the nuts and bolts of narrative and character development. Almost 
alone among hisconfrères, Simon Pegg seems at home in the cinema, with Shaun of 
the Dead and Hot Fuzz showing an innate understanding of genre and structure. 
But then Pegg was working in tandem with Edgar Wright, who even before their 
collaboration on Spaced was making no-budget spaghetti westerns in Somerset. 
Let's hope Ayoade and Cornish are following in their footsteps, rather than 
those of Morris or King.
 