
A who’s who of senior executives from Silicon Valley giants, including Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter>, Google, AOL and Vice Media 
will this week pitch their wares in London to advertisers and media buying 
agencies, in a sign of the growing significance of the UK’s digital media 
economy.

For the first time in Britain leading digital media companies will host a 
series of high-profile events showcasing upcoming content, organised by the 
Internet Advertising Bureau UK under the umbrella brandUK Digital Upfronts 
<http://www.iabuk.net/events/digital-upfronts>.

The week-long event takes a leaf from the US TV industry’s long-established 
annual TV industry “upfronts” presentations in New York every May, when the 
networks give advertisers a preview of their programming for the coming year.

In total 11 companies including Mashable, Microsoft, Millennial Media and 
Publicis Groupe-owned agency DigitasLBi will be giving presentations in venues 
across the capital.

Launching such an event in London is considered a necessity to help 
advertisers and agencies keep up with the explosion in digital advertising and 
content.

In the UK, digital display advertising is growing 30% annually and by the end 
of this year the internet ad market will be worth £7bn, more than twice as 
large as TV ad spend at £3.9bn.

“The industry is now moving so fast and there are so many new opportunities – 
in mobile, branded content, native advertising and video – that have only been 
around for maybe a year or so that we can introduce agencies and advertisers 
to,” says Guy Phillipson, chief executive of the InternetAdvertising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/advertising> Bureau UK.

“Digital upfronts have occurred in the US for the last three years, this is 
the first one here for the internet and mobile advertising industry.”

Mark Melling, AOL’s director of video for Europe, confirmed the company will 
be reinforcing its position in the converged world between TV and the internet.

“We are focussing on using the upfronts as a platform to go through what our 
strategy is,” said Melling. “We don’t think of ourselves as a pure digital 
player, we are between TV and digital, almost a third medium where lines are 
blurred. TV is not disappearing, it is transforming, and we want to be part of 
that.”

AOL’s session on Thursday will be used to unveil a slate of digital series 
featuring well-known UK stars, following on from the success of its first 
commissions. The event will showcase the success of its first digital showcase 
that featured stars Sarah Jessica Parker, James Franco, Steve Buscemi and 
Nicole Richie.

Melling is keeping the names of the British stars “close to his chest” but 
said the celebrities featuring in the next wave ofAOL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/aol> Originals all have “large social 
media followings”.

Twitter’s session on Tuesday is similarly heavily focused on the possibilities 
of video and its Twitter Amplify product.

“Video on Twitter is relatively new and this is a brilliant opportunity to 
showcase the evolution of video on our platform,” said Theo Luke, senior 
manager for Twitter Amplify Europe, Middle East and Africa. “It is a great 
opportunity to inform and educate.”

For Yahoo it is a chance to explain what opportunities there are to tap into 
Tumblr, the blogging platform itacquired for $1.1bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/may/20/yahoo-tumblr-david-karp-marissa-mayer>
 last May, and the company’s new ad platform Yahoo Ad Manager Plus.

“This is a chance for digital companies to reveal big themes and products 
important to us,” says Jason Talley, Yahoo UK’s commercial director, who will 
present on Tuesday. “Tumblr is a big thing and there is a lot of excitement 
about how brands and advertisers can work with Tumblr.”

The week-long event will end on Friday evening with Vice Media founder Shane 
Smith giving what promises to be a lively presentation.

The company is not giving away much, beyond “new channels in news, food and 
sport”, but it is promising to end the first UK digital upfronts with a bang.

“Located in an 18th century church, the Vice UK digital upfront will be a Ride 
of the Valkyries attack on the senses with the best video content, the loudest 
music, the strongest cocktails and a VIP after party at the Vice pub, The Old 
Blue Last,” a Vice Media spokesman said.
 