
Consolidating its position at the cutting edge of new media technology, the 
Guardian today announces that it will become the first newspaper in the world 
to be published exclusively viaTwitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter>, the sensationally popular 
social networking service that has transformed online communication.

The move, described as "epochal" by media commentators, will see all Guardian 
content tailored to fit the format of Twitter's brief text messages, known as 
"tweets", which are limited to 140 characters each. Boosted by the involvement 
of celebrity "twitterers", such as Madonna, Britney Spears and Stephen Fry, 
Twitter's profile has surged in recent months, attracting more than 5m users 
who send, read and reply to tweets via the web or their mobile phones.

As a Twitter-only publication, the Guardian will be able to harness the 
unprecedented newsgathering power of the service, demonstrated recently when a 
passenger on a plane that crashed outside Denver was able to send real-time 
updates on the story as it developed, as did those witnessing an emergency 
landing on New York's Hudson River. It has also radically democratised news 
publishing, enabling anyone with an internet connection to tell the world when 
they are feeling sad, or thinking about having a cup of tea.

"[Celebrated Guardian editor] CP Scott would have warmly endorsed this - his 
well-known observation 'Comment is free but facts are sacred' is only 36 
characters long," a spokesman said in a tweet that was itself only 135 
characters long.

A mammoth project is also under way to rewrite the whole of the newspaper's 
archive, stretching back to 1821, in the form of tweets. Major stories already 
completed include "1832 Reform Act gives voting rights to one in five adult 
males yay!!!"; "OMG Hitler invades Poland, allies declare war see 
tinyurl.com/b5x6e for more"; and "JFK assassin8d @ Dallas, def. heard second 
gunshot from grassy knoll WTF?"

Sceptics have expressed concerns that 140 characters may be insufficient to 
capture the full breadth of meaningful human activity, but social media experts 
say the spread of Twitter encourages brevity, and that it ought to be possible 
to convey the gist of any message in a tweet.

For example, Martin Luther King's legendary 1963 speech on the steps of the 
Lincoln memorial appears in the Guardian's Twitterised archive as "I have a 
dream that my four little children will one day live in a nation where they 
will not be judged by the colour of their skin but by", eliminating the waffle 
and bluster of the original.

At a time of unprecedented challenge for all print media, many publications 
have rushed to embrace social networking technologies. Most now offer Twitter 
feeds of major breaking news headlines, while the Daily Mail recently pioneered 
an iPhone application providing users with a one-click facility for reporting 
suspicious behaviour by migrants or gays. "In the new media environment, 
readers want short and punchy coverage, while the interactive possibilities of 
Twitter promise to transform th," the online media guru Jeff Jarvis said in a 
tweet yesterday, before reaching his 140-character limit, which includes 
spaces. According to subsequent reports, he is thinking about going to the 
theatre tonight, but it is raining :(.

A unique collaboration between The Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/theguardian> and Twitter will also see the 
launch of Gutter, an experimental service designed to filter noteworthy liberal 
opinion from the cacophony of Twitter updates. Gutter members will be able to 
use the service to comment on liberal blogs around the web via a new tool, 
specially developed with the blogging platform WordPress, entitled GutterPress.

Currently, 17.8% of all Twitter traffic in the United Kingdom consists of 
status updates from Stephen Fry, whose reliably jolly tone, whether trapped in 
a lift or eating a scrumptious tart, has won him thousands of fans. A further 
11% is made up of his 363,000 followers replying "@stephenfry LOL!", 
"@stephenfry EXACTLY the same thing happened to me", and "@stephenfry 
Meanwhile, I am making myself an omelette! Delicious!"

According to unconfirmed rumours, Jim Buckmaster, the chief executive of 
Craigslist, will next month announce plans for a new system of telepathy-based 
social networking that is expected to render Twitter obsolete within weeks.

From the archive

Highlights from the Guardian's Twitterised news archive

1927
OMG first successful transatlantic air flight wow, pretty cool! Boring day
otherwise *sigh*

1940
W Churchill giving speech NOW - "we shall fight on the beaches ... we shall 
never surrender" check YouTube later for the rest

1961
Listening 2 new band "The Beatles" 

1989 
Berlin Wall falls! Majority view of Twitterers = it's a historic moment! What 
do you think??? Have your say

1997
RT@mohammedalfayed: FYI NeilHamilton, Harrods boss offering £££ 4 questions in 
House of Commons! Check it out
 