
Two men have been convicted of the murder of a British honeymoon couple on the 
holiday island of Antigua.

Ben and Catherine Mullany were shot in the back of the head during a dawn raid 
at their chalet in the five-star Cocos Hotel in 2008. Their parents spoke of 
their relief after Kaniel Martin, 23, and Avie Howell, 20, were found guilty 
after a two-month trial.

The families said: "There is no joy, just a sense of relief that after three 
years of waiting there is justice for our children. These two individuals can 
never again inflict the same anguish and devastation to any other family as 
they have to ours.

"We will never be able to comprehend the senseless nature of their deaths, the 
total disregard shown for human life and that no remorse has ever been shown."

Howell and Martin who were also convicted of the murder of a 43-year-old local 
shopkeeper will be sentenced on 26 September.

The Mullanys had been married for just over two weeks when the raid took place 
on 27 July, on the last night after their honeymoon. Nearby guests heard 
screams coming from their cottage before the sound of gunshots.

The newlyweds from Pontardawe, South Wales were discovered by an American 
nurse. Catherine Mullany, a doctor, died instantly but the nurse tried to 
stabilise Ben Mullany, a student physiotherapist, before paramedics arrived. He 
was initially conscious but slipped into a coma and was flown back home to 
Swansea's Morriston hospital where his wife had worked but his life-support was 
turned off a week later.

The couple were buried in the grounds of St John the Evangelist church, 
Cilybebyll, where they had married.

The killers entered the cottage at 5am and used a stolen handgun at close 
range. As the couple lay dying, the killers stole two inexpensive mobile 
phones, a cheap digital camera and a small amount of money before escaping.

Two weeks later, Howell and Martin, nicknamed Sample Dan and Demon, murdered 
43-year-old Woneta Anderson.

The pair, who refused to face questioning in court, had protested their 
innocence throughout their trial high court in St John's which saw more than 90 
witnesses give evidence.

As the jury of eight men and four women delivered its verdicts, after more 
than 10 hours of deliberations, the parents of the newlyweds broke down.

In their statement they added: "Ben and Cath will live in our hearts for ever. 
On 12 July 2008, Ben and Cath shared a truly perfect day with their friends and 
family. Just over two weeks later our lives were changed for ever as theirs 
were cruelly taken."

Ben Mullany's parents, Cynlais and Marilyn, and his wife's father and mother, 
David and Rachel Bowen, praised the work of the Metropolitan, South Wales and 
Antigua police. They described coming face-to-face with their children's 
killers as a distressing experience but said their pain had been made more 
bearable by the love and support they received had from their families, friends 
and colleagues.

It was the murder of the shopkeeper that led police to the killers. After 
breaking into Anderson's shop, they shot her at close range. After stepping 
over her bloodied body, they ran off taking two mobile phones and a handful of 
top-up cards.

A bandana with Howell's DNA was found at the scene as well as a blood-stained 
footprint. While the murder weapon was never found, tests later showed the 
bullets in all three killings came from the same gun. Gunshot residue was later 
found on Martin and Howell's clothing as well as in a gun holster found at 
Martin's home.
 