
Welcome, Best Beloveds, to the 8.35am train out of Richmond, Virginia – 
heading for New York and Pennsylvania Station, one of the very few rail termini 
to have been demolished in the real world and then reconstructed within Satan's 
colon. Lately, I have been spending a good deal of time in Penn Station and 
have wondered – not for the first time – whether 65% of the people waiting for 
trains there appear to be seriously mentally distressed because they arrived 
that way, or because they have stepped into an alternative universe of heat, 
bewilderment, pain and ambient evil. You may be aware that many US rail 
stations are grand expressions of generous respect to their users, full of 
stately perpendiculars, handy benches and lots of gold leaf – high-ceilinged 
temples to mass transit and the communal hopes of a bygone age. Penn Station is 
there for balance: to remind you that this Depression will not produce a New 
Deal, and that many members of the general public are surplus to requirements; 
and to hint that your train will travel at the speed of lazy treacle on a cold 
day, will shudder along rails that even Railtrack would call poorly-maintained, 
and will give priority to freight, cars, pedestrians and any animal above the 
size of a healthy adult woodchuck.

Yet I continue to love American (and Canadian) trains. I am trying to rebrand 
my debilitating and expensive fear of flying as Steampunk Travel and – at a 
certain level – I find I am convincing at least myself that rail transportation 
is a good and lovely, as well as an ecological, option. US trains are roomy, 
their passengers have no expectations and therefore often eschew UK passengers' 
lapses into frenzied disappointment and rage when they are delayed, misled, or 
ignored. Plus, US trains are still rich in the iconic elements that I, lover of 
black and white movies that I am, find intoxicating. They are monumental: they 
still roll majestically into stations with their bells ringing like harbingers 
of strange mortality, they still hoot across the countryside in the manner of 
wistful mechanical whales, the conductors still wear little round blue 
conductor's hats and the Red Caps still wear red caps – although sometimes 
they're baseball caps ... From my first exposure to a real live US train around 
20 years ago in California, I have been in love with them. It glided and wailed 
along the sunset into a wood-canopied rural station full of cicada songs and 
moist heat and my heart was lost.

Of course, this only slightly mitigates the fact that I am back to business as 
usual – typing on trains and rattling from city to city, performing readings or 
the one-person show while trying to keep the novel on track in spite of 
tiredness and an increasingly cranky spine. This isn't ideal, but life rarely 
is and I'm up over the 300-page line, which is a comfort: the pages may not be 
great, but they are there and I can always rewrite a page that's there. I would 
have to make up a page that isn't there from scratch. Currently, of course, the 
350lb gentleman in front of me who is thrashing in his seat, sighing and 
occasionally exclaiming "Phnnah-urr" isn't helping matters, but I have come to 
expect this on trains. Trains are where people speak to themselves with loud 
enthusiasm, trains are where those listening to mp3 players air drum without 
shame and where those not listening to anything do much the same, and trains 
are where people eat hot dogs made of reconstituted protein substances illegal 
in many countries.

I can particularly recommend travel from New York to Montreal – the journey 
takes around 11 hours for no really good reason, beyond a type of shyness that 
will leave your train hiding, loitering and then simply fainting to a halt at 
regular intervals. When you are travelling north it will wait like a faithful 
lover to meet and be passed by the southbound train and when you are travelling 
south it will also wait. You will do a great deal of waiting. But you will be 
beguiled by the autumn foliage (should it be autumn) the picturesque wetlands 
and gentle vistas – all slightly distracting if you're trying to write a sex 
scene and are already freaked out by your somewhat intrusive surroundings and 
the fiddly technical matters you have to consider. Fortunately, you will be 
able to spot great blue herons, egrets and red-tailed hawks aplenty as you 
wonder who should do what to whom first and from which angle.

As usual, it's much easier to leave the US than to enter it again. US Border 
Control began with the usual questions – "Are you travelling for business? How 
long were you in Canada? How long will you be in the US?" - but then escalated 
to the kind of enquiries I never handle well: "What kind of writing? Would I 
have read you? What kind of novels?" I find it oddly difficult to give an 
adequate definition of literary fiction to men with guns – and yet it's 
surprising how often they seem to need one. And I am always alarmed when the 
first option they reach for as a genre suggestion is, "So ... you write 
romance?" This leads me to believe they are poor judges of character and 
therefore unsuited to their jobs. On this occasion the interrogation moved 
forward into areas including, "What about 'Braveheart' - was that accurate?" – 
which could be a normal conversational gambit, but which seems to develop 
dangerous significance when delivered in a tone one would imagine should be 
reserved for poorly-trained drug mules and parrot-smugglers. I had no idea if I 
was being given an opportunity to prove my Scottish credentials or simply 
chatting with someone unable to not be violently earnest.

It was then decided that the carriage "smelled weird" – of course, it smelled 
weird, it's a railway carriage. After a small discussion about whether the 
aroma was, in fact, "weird" or "just bad", reinforcements were brought in with 
inadequate tools and a sniffer dog, travellers were evacuated and the next two 
hours or so were spent hanging about and listening to the noises of a train car 
being disassembled. Meanwhile, my chum with an interest in contemporary fiction 
and Mel Gibson loped down the aisle shouting, "Scottish novelist?" in way that 
led me to be both nervous and hurt that he hadn't remembered my face. I then 
had to present my passport to be re-checked by a more senior and rather languid 
official, installed in the buffet car. Arrival by boat is rare and therefore 
leaves unusual traces on one's passport. I was forced, once again, to reflect 
on my student days when I had the idea that putting "Writer" in my passport 
would somehow challenge and unsettle officials of all kinds, prove my interior 
fortitude, and generally involve me in sticking it to The Man. In fact, I tend 
to become craven when anywhere near The Man, and The Man, in return, seems to 
regard my vocation as a mildly amusing indulgence. Writing can, of course, 
unseat governments, free the soul and prepare the mind and spirit for all 
possible rigours and joys – but I did not find myself or my vocation especially 
uplifting as I plodded back from the buffet car to a seriously interfered-with 
carriage that now smelled both "bad" and "of warm Alsatian".

And now, Dear Readers, as we wait in Washington Union Station, I must leave 
you. I have a few more days of woodland scribbling to try and get my characters 
into physical sync and all shiny for the end of their book and then I will 
begin the long journeys to Oregon and New Mexico. More landscape, more scary 
food and more sitting and writing … Onwards.
 