
Massive corruption, a huge increase in heroin production, foreign aid
pouring in for many years to come. This is the conclusion of a major
report 
<http://www.iiss.org/publications/adelphi-papers/adelphis-2011/afghanistan-to-2015-and-beyond//>
 by a leading defence and security thinktank. This was not a
worst case scenario. Far from it.

It reflects a view of what the International Institute for Strategic
Studies calls "restrained optimism".

These are some of its findings.

The Afghan government will be unable to pay for its projected
400,000-strong security forces until at least 2020, and more like
2025;
those security forces are estimated to cost as much as $8bn a year (US
now pays 90% of this but has made clear it expects other Nato to cough
up in future);
opium poppy and heroin in Afghanistan is increasing rapidly - last
year poppy growing returned to three previously poppy-free provinces
(opium poppies were scarcely grown in Afghanistan before 1979 -it
became a force for funding anti-Soviet forces, then when they left in
1989, a main source of income for warlords);
the Afghan constitution concentrates huge power in the hands of the president, 
Hamid Karzai, that bears little or no resemblance to the actual reach of Afghan 
state institutions, says Toby Dodge, straight-talking academic and one of the 
report's editors. Karzai presently has $15bn at his disposal to buy loyalty.

However, what Dodge calls a "tenacious, robust, but corrupt ruling oligarchy" 
is likely to remain in power in Kabul.

That is especially likely to be the case if Afghanistan can continue to rely 
on western aid. The IISS report may contrast markedly with optimistic accounts 
of the situation in Afghanistan from US, UK, and Nato officials. However, there 
is one thing they all agree on - Afghanistan will need, and indeed get 
substantial financial help from the west for decades to come.

Sir Simon Gass, Nato's senior civilian representative in Afghanistan, went as 
far as to say at a meeting at the Royal United Services Institute in London on 
Monday, that a US-Afghan "strategic partnership" would be the "cornerstone" of 
Afghanistan's future security.

Ben Barry, IISS land warfare specialist, offers in the Institute's report one 
cause for relative optimism - the cut in the number of what he called "infidel 
boots on the ground" after 2014 would reduce the level of support for the 
Taliban in Afghanistan.

But all bets are off if the US or Israel attacks Iran. Iran would respond by 
increasing financial and military support for the Taliban and the violent, 
extremist, Haqqani network based in Pakistan, and generally ferment instability 
in Afghanistan, warns the IISS.
 