
At long last there are now children's commissioners for each part of the UK. 
But while the appointment of the government's former child health "tsar",Al 
Aynsley-Green <https://www.theguardian.com/society/alaynsleygreen>, as 
England's first commissioner has been broadly welcomed, there are concerns 
about how he will work with his counterparts in Scotland, Wales and Northern 
Ireland.

It is feared in particular that Aynsley-Green's comparatively limited powers 
in England, coupled with his overarching responsibility for children and young 
people throughout the UK, could undermine the authority and autonomy of the 
other commissioners. While their remits do vary, they have broadly similar 
powers: they are responsible for safeguarding the rights of children and young 
people, can launch their own inquiries and are free from ministerial control.

When it emerged that the English commissioner could be directed to undertake 
inquiries by a secretary of state, and would only be able to represent 
children's interests, the other commissioners lobbied for the role to be 
strengthened. But moves to do so were thwarted last year by children's minister 
Margaret Hodge, who removed five references to children's rights from the
Children <https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> Act that established 
the post. At the time, she said the government wanted the commissioner to 
consider the wider interests of children rather than get "bogged down" in 
"policing children's individual rights".

Hodge also frustrated the Welsh, Scottish and Northern Ireland commissioners 
by refusing to give them responsibility for non-devolved matters. So in Wales, 
it is Aynsley-Green who holds responsibility for criminal justice, social 
security and refugee issues - a situation the Welsh commissioner, Peter Clarke, 
has described as "daft".

Phillip Noyes, director of public policy at children's charity the NSPCC, says 
the confusing relationships among the commissioners remains unresolved. "It's 
when, rather than whether, there will be a conflict. If the English 
commissioner had the stronger powers, you could have argued: 'Let's get the 
other UK commissioners up to speed, then give them responsibilities for all 
child policies'. But it's the other way round: the English commissioner has 
less power and is not truly independent of government."

Aynsley-Green is clearly frustrated about being written off before having 
started. He says: "I really hope people will move on. There's been a lot of 
concern about this role. Let's put this behind us." He admits that his budget, 
powers and resources are "modest". But he says his critics should wait to judge 
him on his record. If his powers do prove too weak, he has promised to make 
that clear to government.

Clarke says the four commissioners plan to do swaps among their staff. They 
have also provisionally formed a UK commissioners' group, with the aim of 
establishing common policies on issues such as asylum and the commercial 
pressures facing children.

Clarke admits, however, that his concerns about the working relationship 
remain. "Nothing has changed, particularly with regards to non-devolved 
matters," he says. "I'm still left with one set of powers in one area and much 
weaker powers in another. I'm going to have to live with it for now."

Nigel Williams, the Northern Ireland commissioner, shares Clarke's worries 
about non-devolved matters. He says: "I find it slightly odd how the Children 
Act puts the English commissioner under onus to talk to children here [in 
Northern Ireland] and to me, and to mesh our work together, but also states how 
he can undertake an inquiry on reserved matters with no onus to talk to me at 
all."

The Scottish commissioner, Kathleen Marshall, who met Aynsley-Green last 
month, is slightly more optimistic. She believes the commissioners' range of 
backgrounds will complement one another. "I'll find it helpful to draw on Al's 
healthcare experience," she says. "While my background in human rights law will 
be useful to him."

Marshall, a lawyer, has advised Aynsley-Green that his remit may not be as 
limited as some claim. She believes he will have scope to safeguard childrens' 
rights through an amendment to the Children Act that states that the English 
commissioner must have to have a duty to regard the UN convention on the rights 
of the child.

"The duty to have regard to the convention opens a lot of doors to how the 
role is interpreted," says Marshall. "I would say it's in the interest of 
children to have their basic rights protected, so there's scope for the English 
commissioner to move forward [with the other commissioners] on a common, 
rights-based agenda." For a closer look at the different roles and powers of 
the UK's children's commissioners go to:societytheguardian.com/children 
<http://www.societytheguardian.com/children>

The commissioners

Northern Ireland: Nigel Williams

Age: 50, Salary: £75,000

Annual budget: £1.9m

Williams became commissioner for children in October 2003 after leaving his 
job as chief executive of charity Childnet International, which campaigns to 
protect children from internet paedophiles. His priorities are listening to 
children and young people, protecting their rights and encouraging those who 
work with them to do better. He can investigate any public body involved with 
children and tell them how they need to improve their services. All government 
departments must consult him about any bills that may affect children, and he 
can request a "child impact statement" on any proposed policy. His term in 
office is four years.

Scotland: Kathleen Marshall

Age: 51, Salary: £72,000

Annual budget: £1.5m

Child law expert Kathleen Marshall took up her post last year. She is 
reputedly a "plain speaker" and has warned she will comment on any issues 
affecting children in Scotland - regardless of whether they fall within her 
statutory remit. Marshall can launch investigations into how services take 
account of children's rights, interests and views. Like the commissioners in 
Wales and Northern Ireland, she can hold a public inquiry into children's 
services. Like the English commissioner, she cannot focus on a case involving 
an individual child. Unlike the Northern Ireland and Welsh commissioners, her 
remit covers criminal justice, as it has been devolved to the Scottish 
parliament. Marshall's term runs for five years.

Wales: Peter Clarke

Age: 56, Salary: £70-75,000

Annual budget: £1.2m

Appointed in 2001, Clarke's remit is to promote and protect the rights and 
welfare of children. His brief is very similar to that which was given to the 
commissioners in Northern Ireland and Scotland. He can make recommendations to 
the Welsh assembly and review new laws and policy if they affect or potentially 
affect children. He can hold public inquiries and subpoena witnesses. Like all 
the commissioners, he must produce an annual report. Clarke's achievements 
include winning £700,000 funding for mental health services for children after 
he said the service was in crisis. He also influenced the assembly in its 
decision to develop a strategy for child poverty. His term runs for seven 
years. Director of the charity Childline Cymru until his appointment, Clarke 
began his career as a social worker in London.

England: Al Aynsley-Green

Age: 61, Salary: £130,000

Annual budget: £3m

Consultant paediatrician Al Aynsley-Green was appointed in March. 
Aynsley-Green, who is Nuffield professor of child health at Great Ormond Street 
hospital, London, will step down as national clinical director for children to 
take up the new post. Like the other commissioners, he must have regard to the 
UN convention on the rights of the child. But he can only represent children's 
views and interests, rather than safeguarding their rights. He also holds 
responsibility for non-devolved matters in Scotland, Wales and Northern 
Ireland, including criminal justice and asylum issues. His term lasts five 
years.
 