
George Osborne's economic credibility suffered a fresh blow on Thursday when 
Standard and Poor's became the third of the major credit ratings agency to put 
the UK's AAA rating on negative outlook.

In a statement issued just after the London markets closed, S&P warned there 
was a one-in-three chance that it would strip the UK of its cherished AAA 
status within the next two years.

"We believe this could occur in particular as a result of a delayed and uneven 
economic recovery, or a weakening of political commitment to consolidation," it 
said.

S&P did not call for the government to abandon its austerity plans, but it 
warned that the deficit-cutting strategy will continue to undermine growth.

"We continue to believe that government's efforts over the next few years to 
engineer the planned correction in the UK's fiscal accounts will likely drag on 
economic growth."

It added that belt-tightening by debt-burdened consumers and weak investment 
by anxious firms were likely to continue to depress demand.

Ministers, including chief secretary to the Treasury Danny Alexander, have 
played down the significance of a ratings cut in recent days; but the 
chancellor has pinned his political reputation on maintaining Britain's 
reputation as a "safe haven" for foreign investors.

S&P's announcement came after Osborne was forced to announce in last week's 
autumn statement that economic growth has been far weaker than he hoped even in 
his March budget; and he now expects to flunk his self-imposed rule of cutting 
the public debt burden by 2015-16.

S&P said its own calculations suggested the debt-to-GDP ratio, forecast by the 
independent Office for Budget Responsibility to peak just below 80% of GDP, 
could actually hit 100% of GDP - on its own definition - if the economic 
recovery continues to disappoint.

Its decision followed similar moves from the two other major ratings agencies, 
Fitch and Moody's, and will ratchet up the pressure on the government over its 
handling of the economy.

A Treasury spokeswoman said, "it is a hard road, but the economy is on the 
right track." She added, "in their assessment, Standard & Poor's endorse the 
government's 'strong commitment to implementing the fiscal mandate' and 
specifically warn against slowing 'the pace and extent of fiscal 
consolidation'."

Government insiders have also been buoyed by the fact that both the US and 
France have lost their AAA ratings in the past two years, without seeing their 
borrowing costs rocket.

David Tinsley, of investment bank BNP Paribas, said, "2013 looks like being a 
year when the UK could lose its AAA rating fairly comprehensively...we would be 
surprised if the UK got through next year without at least one downgrade, and 
quite possibly two or three."

He added: "the Bank of England will continue to stand as a 'buyer of last 
resort' of gilts if the economy worsens. Nonetheless, some of the safe-haven 
glow of the UK is looking a bit tarnished."

S&P's intervention came after the chancellor defended his autumn statement 
before the cross-party treasury select committee of MPs.

Osborne hinted that he might consider rewriting the Bank of England's job 
description, forcing it to focus on kick-starting growth, after the idea was 
mooted by governor-to-be Mark Carney.

The chancellor acknowledged that there was a "debate going on," about the best 
way for monetary policy to support recovery.

Carney, currently governor of the Bank of Canada, has floated the idea that 
central banks could aim at boosting nominal GDP - economic output plus 
inflation - instead of tracking an inflation target, the framework followed in 
the UK since the early-1990s.

Proponents of a nominal GDP target argue that it would increase the pressure 
on policymakers to take aggressive action to re-start growth, instead of 
fretting about unleashing inflation.

The chancellor said he currently had, "no plans," to change the Bank's remit; 
but commented that there is "innovative stuff happening around the world."

"There is a debate going on. I'm glad the future Bank of England governor is 
part of that debate".

It was announced on Thursday that Carney, who will take over from Sir Mervyn 
King next summer, will himself appear before the select committee on 7 February 
next year. He is expected to be questioned about whether the Bank's remit 
should be shifted to reflect the lessons of the economic crisis.

Osborne told MPs: "It's totally to be expected after everything that has 
happened to the international economy, and indeed to the British economy over 
the last four or five years, that there is a debate about the future of 
monetary policy." However, he stressed that there would need to be a "pretty 
strong case" for any change.

One of the nine members of the Bank's monetary policy committee echoed that 
cautious note yesterday. Paul Fisher, executive director of markets at 
Threadneedle Street, said the "real debate" was not about the technicalities of 
specific targets, but, "what should policy be doing in the current environment."
 