
Europe's largest independent clearing house, London-based LCH.Clearnet, has 
rebuffed a £400m bid for the company from InterContinental Exchange (ICE). The 
offer by ICE, based in Atlanta, Georgia, was backed by the Singapore stock 
exchange and highlights how clearing has become a major new sector for mergers 
and acquisitions in the wake of the financial crisis.

Regulators are drawing up rules that will force almost all derivatives 
transactions to go through registered exchanges and be processed by clearing 
houses.

The moves are designed to boost transparency in the derivatives market and 
improve risk management for deals that have traditionally been done 
over-the-counter (OTC): in other words, in private via brokerages or 
"bilaterally" between individual institutions.

Clearing houses act as central counterparties, ensuring that players get their 
money back if one participant involved in a deal goes bust. Clearers require 
clients to furnish collateral or "margin" to provide a financial cushion for 
the clearing house so that it can repay debts that turn sour.

The opacity of the OTC market was blamed for the near-collapse of the US 
insurer AIG in 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/sep/16/marketturmoil.creditcrunch>
and is a major reason for reforms being introduced on both sides of the 
Atlantic.

LCH.Clearnet is controlled by more than 90 shareholders who are also its users 
– mostly banks and trading organisations such as the London Metals Exchange.

The organisation is believed to have rejected ICE's bid on the grounds that it 
did not reflect the true value of the clearer. ICE's offer also ran into 
opposition from LCH.Clearnet's shareholders who feared a takeover could result 
in higher trading fees from fewer players in the market. "A higher offer could 
have brought them round to the negotiating table," said one stakeholder.

Roger Liddell, chief executive of LCH.Clearnet, refused to comment on "bid 
speculation" but admitted the upshot of initiatives to put trading in financial 
instruments such as credit default swaps through registered exchanges and 
clearing houses would be "extreme".

He said: "Just look at the interest rate swap market, where trades today are 
worth a notional value of $350tn [£219tn] but only $115tn go through LCH, the 
rest are traded over-the-counter."

Liddell said the expanding market will increase competition but bring fees 
down in the long term as consolidation follows "proliferation".

ICE serves global markets for agricultural, credit, currency, emissions and 
energy markets. It also operates three futures exchanges, including the 
London-based ICE Futures Europe, which hosts daily trading in half of the 
world's crude and refined oil futures contracts.

Two years ago, ICE began to build its clearing house operation in London, but 
observers believe the Americans want to acquire LCH.Clearnet because building 
their business organically was too slow a process. The Singaporeans are keen to 
expand in London and view ICE as a potential ally.

Paul Swann, of ICE Clear Europe, said: "We are likely to see more asset 
classes go through clearing houses following initiatives announced at the G20 
meeting in London last year and the passing of new laws in Washington."

Analysts say LCH is under pressure as the London Stock Exchange has indicated 
it plans to set up its own clearing house for cash equities, making it more 
important than ever that LCH expands into areas that were previously dominated 
by over-the-counter businesses.
 