
The government can keep secret “super-sensitive” documents from Britain’s spy 
agencies that might shed light on the mystery death of a fugitive Russian, the 
high court has ruled.


Justice Cranston upheld an application by the home secretary, Amber Rudd, who 
is refusing to release documents from MI5 andMI6 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi6> concerning Alexander Perepilichnyy, who 
collapsed and died in November 2012 outside his home in Weybridge, Surrey.

Surrey police have said there was nothing suspicious about the death of the 
44-year-old, who had been out jogging. They were unable to find a cause.

However, in 2015 it emerged that traces of a rare and deadly plant poison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/may/18/russian-whistleblower-traces-poison-stomach-plant-expert-says-alexander-perepilichnyy-inquest>
,Gelsemium elegans, were found in Perepilichnyy’s stomach. The poison has been 
used by Russian and Chinese assassins, a hearing was told.

The judge said he could not see “cogent or solid reasons” for rejecting the 
government’s application for “public interest immunity” or PII. He said he 
agreed with the home secretary’s view that disclosing the intelligence files 
would cause “real and significant damage to national security”.

Cranston added that the position of the coroner, Richard Travers, who had 
brought the application to see the secret evidence was “now untenable”. But the 
government had refused, merely showing him a “gist” or vague summary of its 
contents.

The ruling comes after an unusual one-day hearing at the high court. The judge 
heard some of the case in public, before considering the unknown secret 
material in a closed session.

Travers will now be replaced by another coroner who has gone through direct 
vetting and is security-cleared, the judge indicated. The new coroner will be 
allowed to see the “sensitive material” before a three-week inquest takes place 
in March, he added, at a court in Woking.


The judgment is likely to dismay several of the participants in the inquest 
who opposed the home secretary’s secrecy application. They have pointed out 
that the official position is baffling. The government is refusing to release 
sensitive files in the case of a man who – according to Surrey police – wasn’t 
murdered.

The Guardian argued that there was an overwhelming public interest in 
transparency, given the fact that several high-profile Russians have died in 
recent years on UK soil. The judge said the newspaper’s submissions were 
“invaluable” in resolving what he called “this very difficult application”.

The ruling comes on the 10th anniversary of the murder in November 2006 of the 
Russian dissident Alexander Litvinenko, killed with a radioactive cup of 
polonium tea. It follows a warning by Andrew Parker, the head of MI5, that 
Russia is aggressively using propaganda, espionage and subversion across both
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and the UK.

In the run-up to his death, Perepilichnyy received many death threats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/may/19/poisoned-russian-whistleblower-was-fatalistic-over-death-threats>
. He revealed details of a $230m (£160m) fraud carried out by a Russian crime 
gang with links to the Kremlin. The money was stolen from taxes paid by the 
investment company Hermitage Capital to the Russian treasury.


Perepilichnyy shared this information with Swiss prosecutors. They had frozen 
several Swiss bank accounts involved in the fraud. Shortly before he died, 
Perepilichnyy – who had fled to the UK from Moscow – took out life insurance 
worth £2m.

Perepilichnyy’s stomach contents were thrown away after an inconclusive 
autopsy.

 