 The operators of Heathrow and Gatwick airports yesterday reacted with alarm to 
a £10 billion plan to build an airport on a man-made island in the sea, six 
miles off the Dutch coast.
 The BAA, which runs seven British airports, said the plan posed a serious 
threat to the expansion of its two main airports, particularly Heathrow. It 
handles 24 million transfer passengers a year because people like to come 
through London, with its wide choice of connecting flights.

 But the development of Paris, Frankfurt and the possible removal of Schiphol 
airport near Amsterdam, lock stock and barrel to the man-made island in the 
North Sea worries the BAA, which said that Heathrow could lose its position as 
the world's largest international airport if the Schiphol plan went ahead.

 The BAA said: 'Britain needs to be thinking fast about how to tackle the 
problem. The delays on terminal five at Heathrow are becoming ridiculous. Even 
if the scheme gets the Government's approval, the terminal will not become 
operational until 2006.' Britain's longest running planning inquiry will finish 
next month almost four years after it started. But the inquiry inspector has 
said he is unlikely to publish his report for two years. It leaves the 
Government to make a politically sensitive decision in the lead up to the 2002 
election.

 The Dutch are being forced to look around them for extra space at Schiphol 
because the airport is in a heavily congested area. To remove it to a safe 
haven in the North Sea would solve many problems for the Dutch government. The 
downside is the huge cost and the likely protest from environmentalists.

 The issue has been given a new and sinister twist in Holland with the long 
delayed public inquiry into the El Al plane crash into a tenement building in 
Amsterdam, where 43 people were known to have died. Possibly many more may have 
perished in this air crash the worst for the Netherlands as immigrants lived in 
the building and few records had been kept of them.

 A stunned public has been following the televised proceedings of the inquiry, 
hearing that El Al received special treatment, which led to astonishing lapses 
in public safety at Schiphol and over Dutch airspace.

 Civil servants, state aviation and air traffic controllers now stand accused 
of conspiring to conceal the fact that the El Al cargo plane was carrying 
explosives, the deadly sarin nerve gas, and munitions, rather than flowers and 
perfumes. The Dutch prime minister, Win Kok, has described the cover-up as 
terrible and shocking, and criminal proceedings are expected.

 Wilco Sweijen, Schiphol's European marketing manager, yesterday admitted that 
the outcome of the inquiry could have an important effect on where the new 
airport is sited. 'The North Sea site is the safest option, but it is the most 
expensive.' But, apart from continuing to develop the airport on its present 
site, it is the government's only option.

 Mr Sweijen said the government had come to its conclusion that, 
environmentally, the North Sea island was the best solution, just as the public 
inquiry was about to start. He said the noise factor would be removed, out at 
sea. But the planners will also have to take into account, the effects of the 
weather, birds and seawater on the installations.

 Mr Sweijen deflected suggestions that such a site would be too isolated, 
stressing that the airport would be built only six miles off the coast in 
shallow water. The plan is to join it, underground, to the mainland, giving a 
journey time of less than half an hour to the centre of Amsterdam.

 The BAA said that it did not matter where Schiphol was sited. It was already 
expanding at a fast rate while Heathrow was standing still. Heathrow's two 
other main European competitors were also forging ahead.

 Frankfurt, which has expansion plans worth £3.5 billion, was looking to 
triple its capacity, while Charles de Gaulle airport in Paris was building two 
additional runways.

 Tougher action by the Dutch government on breaches of noise levels have 
already cost Schiphol dear. One of its runways was closed for a month for 
night-time flights. It placed a burden on other runways and posed an even 
greater annoyance to residents in other areas.

 There is a growing feeling among the Dutch that their man-made island will 
prevail. The BAA said: 'We would like to do the same, but our geography is 
against us. Terminal five will be the final chapter at Heathrow.

 'We have got to build on existing airports like Stansted to maintain our 
premier position in Europe.'
 