
Up to 200 UK special forces servicemen are expected to remain in Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> as a counter-terrorism unit 
after the formal pull-out of British forces in 2014. The news emerged ahead of 
the start of a two-day Nato summit dedicated to discussing the future stability 
of the country.

The proposed troops will be in addition to the 90 British officers due to stay 
behind to train senior Afghan officers in what has been described as "a 
Sandhurst in the sand". It is the first time there has been a recognition that 
some UK troops will remain in a combat role, even if the vast majority of UK 
forces will pull out on schedule.

A senior British official said: "British forces will not remain in a combat 
role in Afghanistan beyond 2014. The majority of forces that remain in 
Afghanistan will be in a training and mentoring role, for example the Afghan 
Officer National Training Academy. But I would not rule out a small number of 
forces playing a counter-terrorism role This would be in keeping with how we 
protect ourselves from the terrorism threat emanating from other parts of the 
world such as the Arabian Peninsula."

The training academy will also be staffed by Americans and Canadians with the 
intention of tutoring 1,300 Afghan National Army officers a year.Nato 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nato> hopes Afghan security forces will have 
grown to 352,000 later this year, though their quality is questionable.

Almost all 130,000 combat troops in the international security force are due 
to leave by the end of 2014, but key decisions on the speed of the pull-out and 
the composition of any remaining troops will not be made until the middle of 
next year. The timetable allows Nato to respond to the possibility of 
Republican Mitt Romney winning the presidency and then imposing a rethink on 
the withdrawal timetable. Romney's foreign policy views have yet to be fleshed 
out.

Nato is hoping at its summit to announce it has assembled a $4bn (£2.6bn) a 
year programme to help the Afghan government post-2014 to improve the 
resilience of the Karzai administration against Taliban attacks. So far 
Britain, Germany Australia and Austria have committed funds. Nato's planning 
has been disrupted by the decision of the new French president, François 
Hollande, to announce he is removing all 3,500 French combat forces by the end 
of this year, but Britain is relieved he has said troops will remain longer 
both to remove equipment and train the Afghan army.

The French sector is due to be handed over shortly and in practice the French 
have not been conducting operations for some time in response to the killing of 
four French soldiers. It is also hoped that the Pakistani president, Asif Ali 
Zardari, will tell the summit that he is lifting the six-month blockade against 
Nato supply trucks put in place after US air strikes killed 26 Pakistani troops 
in November. Nato has also pressed Islamabad to do more to prevent insurgents 
from taking advantage of the porous Afghan-Pakistani border region to take 
sanctuary inside Pakistan.

"We can't solve the problems in Afghanistan without the positive engagement of 
Pakistan," Nato's secretary general, Anders Fogh Rasmussen, said.
 