 Gordon Brown is planning a radical scheme to subsidise farmers in Afghanistan 
to persuade them to stop producing heroin, as part of a wide-ranging drive to 
re-energise policy in the conflict the prime minister now regards as the front 
line in the fight against terrorism.
The Foreign Office minister Lord Malloch-Brown has admitted that the rise in 
opium production in the country means Britain "cannot just muddle along in the 
middle" and must come up with more imaginative ideas on opium eradication.

Ministers are looking at what Lord Malloch-Brown describes as a system of 
payments loosely along the lines of the common agricultural policy to woo the 
Afghan farmers off opium production. The government is conducting joint 
research on suitable economic incentives with the World Bank.

British and allied forces are also looking at destroying drug factories inside 
Afghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>, and a much 
better-targeted drive against the big traffickers responsible for 90% of the 
opium which reaches the west.

Mr Brown is expected to make a Commons statement on security and development 
in Afghanistan in the next few weeks, and is likely to highlight the strategic 
importance of the war against the Taliban in his first annual foreign affairs 
speech at Mansion House on Monday.

The focus on Afghanistan comes as British troop levels there are now higher 
than in Iraq. There are approximately 7,700 British troops in Afghanistan, 
compared with around 5,000 in Iraq.

Critics in the British aid agencies claim that too little western aid is set 
aside to provide alternative livelihoods for opium farmers in Afghanistan, and 
comparatively too much going on building state structures or funding public 
sector salaries.

Senior British officers believe the Afghan war remains largely misunderstood 
in Britain, and say security is the precondition for building alternatives to 
opium production. Lord Malloch-Brown recently returned from Afghanistan to tell 
peers: "The Department of International Development is looking at whether we 
can put on a more formal and structured long-term basis what one would 
controversially describe as an Afghan equivalent of a CAP, with subsidised 
purchase of legal crops to make returns more like those from poppy."

But he added: "We have to do a much better job of not targeting the farmers, 
the producers whose hearts and minds we are trying to win in the 
counter-insurgency effort. We have to target the industry above that - the 
financiers, the shippers, the drug big men who are benefiting from the 
production. We know who they are and the government of Afghanistan know who 
they are. A system banning them from travel, listing them and freezing their 
bank accounts, hitting at the industry's infrastructure, strikes me as an area 
in which more can be done."

He pointedly added that only the US favoured aerial spraying of opium crops.

Illegal Afghan opium was selling for as much as $125 per kilo in 2006. The UN 
said the area under cultivation rose this year from 165,000 to 193,000 hectares 
and the harvest rose from 6,100 to 8,200 tonnes.

Opium production is heavily concentrated in areas of insecurity, with the 
British area of responsibility in Helmand now the world's biggest source of 
illicit drugs.

The UK has provided $20m to an Afghan criminal justice taskforce that has 
managed to secure only 400 convictions.

Some influential figures, including the former Foreign Office permanent 
secretary Lord Jay, have become so despairing of the fight that they are 
backing calls for opium to be produced legally and used as medical morphine, 
but the idea appears to have been rejected.

Christian Aid has also called for an aid switch to improving irrigation and 
water management; achieving food security through expanded cereal production; 
credit facilities for farmers; and building export markets for fruit and nuts.
 