
A meeting of the UK National Security Council will order a shift in resources 
and energy in its counter-terrorist strategy away from a sole focus on 
Afghanistan, Pakistan and the Middle East towards what David Cameron described 
as a "generational struggle" against al-Qaida-inspired militants in north 
Africa.

Speaking to parliament in the aftermath of the jihadist seizure of an Algerian 
gas field, which left 38 hostages dead, including six Britons and a 
Colombian-born British resident, the prime minister pledged to make 
international co-operation to fight terrorism a priority of his chairmanship of 
the G8 leading economies this year.

He suggested the national security strategy would continue to tilt towards 
investing in special forces, cyber-security, drones and intelligence 
capability, rather than conventional forces. He said the international 
community's response must be "tough, intelligent and patient", involving 
political efforts to tackle instability and resolve grievances in the region.

Four of the British victims have been named: a former member of the British 
speed skiing team, Carson Bilsland, 46, an oil worker originally from near 
Blairgowrie, Perthshire; Paul Morgan, 46, a security expert; Garry Barlow, 49, 
a systems supervisor from Liverpool; and planning manager Kenneth Whiteside, 
59, from Glenrothes, Fife. Carlos Estrada, a Colombian BP executive who lived 
in London, is also believed to be among the dead.

Raising the changing nature of the terrorist threat, Cameron told MPs: "Four 
years ago, the principal threat from Islamist extremism came from the 
Afghanistan and Pakistan region. A huge amount has been done to address and 
reduce the scale of that threat . Whereas at one point three-quarters of the 
most serious terrorist plots against the UK had links to that region, today 
this has reduced to less than half."

He said al-Qaida franchises had grown in Yemen, Somalia and parts of north 
Africa. These states were now no longer threatened by terrorists, he argued, 
but in danger of becoming "a magnet for jihadists from other countries who 
share this poisonous ideology".

The Algerian government said 37 foreign hostages and one Algerian worker had 
been killed in the jihadist attack on the In Amenas gas complex on the eastern 
border with Libya and during the subsequent four-day siege by the country's 
special forces. It claimed the raid had been co-ordinated by a 
Canadian-Algerian jihadist and relied on extensive inside knowledge of the 
facility.

In the short term, Britain is only going to send a handful of people to the EU 
military training mission in Algeria's neighbour, Mali, but Cameron wants to 
see a new intensity of international co-operation to prevent states such as 
Mali descending into the chaos of Somalia.

The prime minister's aides denied that Cameron was experiencing some kind of 
epiphany that Tony Blair experienced in the wake of the 9/11 attacks in New 
York, but said he did see a growing long-term threat to western security

Cameron did not repeat any criticisms of the Algerian response to the crisis, 
saying it was best to "understand the challenges thatAlgeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/algeria> faced in dealing with over 30 
terrorists bent on killing innocent people in a large and extremely remote and 
dangerous industrial complex".

He said: "This would have been a most demanding task for security forces 
anywhere in the world and we should acknowledge the resolve shown by the 
Algerians in undertaking it."

Cameron told MPs that forensic experts from the UK, US and Norway were working 
with the Algerian authorities to formally identify a number of bodies found at 
the site, thought to include three further Britons, but he warned that the 
process may take some time.

The Algerian prime minister, Abdelmalek Sellal, said on Monday that the final 
decision by the country's special forces to storm the site on Saturday was 
triggered by an intercepted order to execute the remaining seven hostages and 
by the jihadists' plans to blow up the desert gas pumping plant which, Sellal 
said, could have spread debris across a 5km radius.

Sellal said 29 jihadists from the al-Qaida splinter group Signers in Blood had 
been killed and three had been captured alive.

He said the attack was orchestrated by a Canadian national known only as 
Chedad, who he said was now in Mauritania. Surviving hostages also talked of a 
militant at the scene with a north American accent calling on foreign 
contractors to come out of hiding.

John Baird, the Canadian foreign minister, said: "We can't confirm the 
accuracy of these reports. But our embassy in Algiers and our team in Ottawa 
are working to try to verify this information."

Sellal said the militant cell included men from Egypt, Mali, Niger, Mauritania 
and Tunisia, as well as three Algerians, and he claimed the plot had been 
hatched at least two months previously.

The attackers had driven hundreds of miles from Mali arriving across the 
Libyan border.

The jihadist operation "knew the facility's layout by heart" from a former 
driver from the plant from Niger, Sellal said.

Sellal said the Signers in Blood group – followers of a veteran Algerian 
jihadist called Mokhtar Belmokhtar – had planned to blow up the In Amenas gas 
field and take hostages back to Mali to use as bargaining chips.

"Their goal was to kidnap foreigners," he said. "They wanted to flee to Mali 
with the foreigners but, once they were surrounded, they started killing the 
first hostages."

He said a guard at the gate of the complex who was wounded in the initial 
attack had set off an alarm that stopped the flow of gas and warned workers of 
an imminent attack. "It was thanks to him that the factory was protected," 
Sellal said.

He said Algerian special forces had no choice but to intervene because the 
jihadists were going to flee the country with their captives and because they 
planned to kill the hostages and blow up the installation.

He said talks with the militant group had been "a real labyrinth" in which the 
hostage-takers made "unreasonable" demands. There was no choice for Algerian 
forces but to attack, he said.
 