
A match billed as as 'the Battle of the Belgians' by an Australian media 
desperate to, as they say in these parts, 'spruik' the final of a women's 
championship hit by withdrawals and early defeats of star attractions did not, 
ultimately, need to be talked up.

Justine Henin-Hardenne, 21 and from the French-speaking south of Belgium, and 
Kim Clijsters <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kim-clijsters>, 20, from the 
Flemish-speaking north, the world number one and two, may not have served up a 
classic final, but two players who constantly deny any bad feeling between them 
did produce a thrilling seesaw match that Henin won 6-3 4-6 6-3. It lasted 
one-and-three-quarter hours and its dramatic moments included an erroneous 
overrule by the French umpire at a crucial point in the final set that almost 
certainly decided the outcome.

Clijsters, who said her ankle injury was not a factor during the match 
although she will have another MRI scan this week, looked nervous and tight as 
she lost the first, desperately dull set in half an hour. Henin was more 
willing to go to the net and won almost every point when she did; Clijsters, on 
the other hand, was struggling to find her rhythm and making noticeably more 
unforced errors.

For a while at the start of the second set, it looked as if it might be a 
walkover as Henin raced to a 4-2 lead. But in the seventh game, Clijsters 
started her fightback, much to the pleasure of the crowd, who have adopted her 
as an honorary Aussie since she started dating Australian number one Lleyton 
Hewitt, to whom she became engaged at Christmas. 'Do it for Australia, Kim!' 
shouted one fan.

Clijsters, on her first break point of the match, pulled back to 4-3, albeit 
courtesy of an unforced error from Henin, who sent what should have been an 
easy forehand wanly into the net. Clijsters then held serve to love and had her 
second break point when Henin double-faulted for the first time. A whizzing 
forehand close to the deep sideline caused Henin to lob wildly and Clijsters 
was ahead for the first time at 5-4. She served for the set, but Henin made her 
work for it, taking her to deuce.

Henin, serving first, came out fighting at the start of the third set, the 
first time in the tournament that either of them had had to go the full 
distance. She won the first four games to love, 40, 30 and love. 'I was 
fighting hard,' she said. 'Kim likes these moments. It's when she plays her 
best tennis and she's dangerous.'

But it wasn't over. Clijsters clawed back to 3-4 and either player looked good 
enough to win. At 30-40 on Clijsters's serve, though, came the match's 
turning-point. Clijsters hit a high forehand that clipped the baseline. To most 
of the 15,230 spectators in the Rod Laver Arena, including the line judge, it 
looked good, but Henin objected and umpire Sandra De Jenken quickly overruled. 
After a brief and polite query, Clijsters accepted the decision, to go 5-3 down 
and allow Henin to serve for the match.

The by-now partial crowd booed loud and long as Henin stepped up to serve for 
the match. She need only five points to take the championship, doing so with a 
flourish as she served a ball that Clijsters barely got her racket to. Then, in 
a rare display of on-court emotion, Henin sank to her knees and held her head 
in her hands for several moments before going to the net, where the compatriots 
shared a warm embrace.

Clijsters has now lost all four of her grand-slam final appearances (three to 
Henin). She is often accused in the media of choking in big matches, but could 
it be that she is simply too nice to win? Questioned about the overrule, 
Clijsters said: 'I'm not the sort of player who complains after matches. I 
definitely had the feeling it was in and it was disappointing that she [the 
umpire] overruled, but everyone makes mistakes.' When pushed to comment 
further, she said: 'I don't want to start any trouble.'

Henin, however, was brooking no argument. 'I needed to take a game,' she said. 
'It was a key point and right now I don't care too much about it.' End of 
discussion.

Henin now holds three of the four majors and will go into Wimbledon determined 
to gain the only title missing. 'That's definitely the goal,' she said. If 
taking your chances, fairly or unfairly, is the difference between a champion 
and a runner-up then, on the evidence of this match at least, she may well 
achieve it.

French pair Michael Llodra and Fabrice Santoro made it one for the ladies as 
they stripped to their underwear in the final of the men's doubles, in which 
they beat American brothers Bob and Mike Bryan 7-6 (7-4) 6-3.

They started by throwing towels and shirts into the crowd and, egged on by 
fans, they then discarded their shorts as well. Fortunately, they had extra 
pairs to spare their blushes on the way back to the changing rooms.

You've read the piece, now have your say. Email your comments, be as frank as 
you like, we can take it, tosport.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:sport.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk>, or mail the Observer direct at  
sport@observer.co.uk <mailto:sport@observer.co.uk>
 