
Detainees held by the Syrian government are dying on a massive scale amounting 
to a state policy of extermination of the civilian population, a crime against 
humanity, United Nations investigators has said.

The UN commission of inquiry called on the security council to impose 
sanctions against Syrian officials in the civilian and military hierarchy 
responsible for or complicit in deaths, torture and disappearances in custody, 
but stopped short of naming individuals.

In their report released on Monday 
<http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/HRCouncil/CoISyria/A-HRC-31-CRP1_en.pdf>
, the independent experts said they had also documented mass killings and 
torture of prisoners by two jihadi groups, al-Nusra Front and Islamic State, 
constituting war crimes.

“Over the past four and a half years, thousands of detainees have been killed 
while in the custody of warring parties,” the commission of inquiry onSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> said. 


Syria: Angela Merkel 'horrified' by suffering under Russian airstrikes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/08/syrian-army-advances-in-north-as-rebels-withdraw-from-kurdish-villages>
“The killings and deaths described in this report occurred with high 
frequency, over a long period of time and in multiple locations, with 
significant logistical support involving vast state resources. There are 
reasonable grounds to believe that the conduct described amounts to 
extermination as a crime against humanity.”

Tens of thousands of detainees are held by President Bashar al-Assad’s 
government at any one time, and thousands more have “disappeared” after being 
arrested by state forces or gone missing after abduction by armed groups, the 
report said.

Through mass arrests and killing of civilians, including by starvation and 
untreated wounds and disease, state forces have “engaged in the multiple 
commissions of crimes, amounting to a systematic and widespread attack against 
a civilian population”.

There were reasonable grounds to believe that high-ranking officers, including 
the heads of branches and directorates commanding the detention facilities and 
military police, as well as their civilian superiors, knew of the deaths and of 
bodies buried anonymously in mass graves.

They are thus “individually criminally liable”, the investigators said, 
calling again for Syria to be referred to the prosecutor of the international 
criminal court.

Over the past four years, the investigators, who include former ICC prosecutor 
Carla Del Ponte, have drawn up a confidential list of suspected war criminals 
and units from all sides which is kept in a UN safe in Geneva.

Isis and al-Nusra Front have committed mass killings of captured government 
soldiers and subjected civilians to “illicit trials” by sharia courts which 
ordered death sentences, the report said.

“Accountability for these and other crimes must form part of any political 
solution,” the investigators said, five days after UN-sponsored peace talks 
were suspended without any result.
 