
David Cameron’s hopes of parachuting senior Tory Andrew Lansley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrewlansley> into a top UN humanitarian 
role have hit snags amid an increasingly bitter “jobs for cronies” row that 
threatens to impact on Britain’s diplomatic standing.

The prime minister is keen on Lansley becoming the next UN under-secretary 
general for humanitarian affairs and emergency relief 
<http://www.unocha.org/about-us/headofOCHA>, a position that traditionally goes 
to a Briton. But sources familiar with the process say the former health 
secretary is no longer a frontrunner, and it may go to someone from another 
country when Baroness Amos steps down next month. This would be a major 
humiliation for Cameron and a diplomatic snub for Britain, which has positioned 
itself as a champion of disaster relief.

Experts say appointing a politician can no longer be justified when the world 
faces unprecedented humanitarian crises. More than 50 million refugees are 
displaced around the world, while the Ebola crisis has highlighted how 
localised crises can quickly become international in scale.

There is acute pressure on UN secretary general Ban Ki-moon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ban-ki-moon> to ensure that the position 
does not become a “jobs for the boys role”, in the words of one humanitarian 
aid expert who asked not to be named. Britain is believed to have submitted a 
shortlist of three names, with Lansley still its preferred candidate. The 
others are Caroline Spelman, former shadow international development secretary, 
and Stephen O’Brien, a former under-secretary of state in the same department.

Failure to secure the position for Lansley would raise questions about 
Britain’s influence in the world. Key UN jobs tend to go to people from 
particular countries. France normally provides the head of the UN peacekeeping 
mission, while an American usually heads Unicef.

Failure to appoint a Briton to the emergency relief role would suggest an end 
of the status quo. It would also be a sharp rejoinder to Cameron, who has 
vigorously defended allocating 0.7% of Britain’s income to overseas aid and 
said maintaining its commitment to helping to alleviate humanitarian crises 
around the world is a source of personal pride.

However, the signs are that Britain can no longer consider itself a shoo-in. 
Ban has appointed a panel of experts to help the UN decide who should replace 
Amos. Interviews will be conducted in the next couple of weeks. Some 70,000 
people have signed an online petition on the Avaaz website protesting against 
Lansley getting the job.

“Being old friends with David Cameron isn’t a globally recognised 
qualification for a senior UN job that millions of refugees and Ebola victims 
rely on,” said Sam Barratt, campaign director at Avaaz. “In pushing so hard for 
Andrew Lansley, the prime minister has put Britain’s diplomatic credibility on 
the line. Seventy thousand people are calling forDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> to drop support for Lansley 
and for Ban Ki-moon to hire a candidate on the strength of their CV, not the 
colour of their passport.”

More than 80 non-governmental organisations have signed a letter to the UN 
calling on it to seek someone with profound expertise in disaster relief. “It 
should be a robust, open and transparent process, given how demanding and 
important the job is,” said Maya Mailer, head of humanitarian policyand 
campaigns at Oxfam <http://www.oxfam.org.uk>.

Some insiders suggest Ban would prefer a woman from the southern hemisphere to 
get the job. Amina Mohamed, a Somali lawyer in the Kenyan government, is 
considered a strong candidate.”
 