
It is a rare grand old English institution that finds itself mourning the 
absence – as opposed to the presence – of a few strident American accents. But 
this is Wimbledon: historically the stage for the most affectionate of 
transatlantic sporting love affairs, one that over the years has proved both 
mutually flattering (we've got the championship; you bring the champions) and 
emotionally resonant.

On a fevered opening Monday, with bars thickly peopled and the brass band 
parping triumphantly, there was still time to ponder the one missing ingredient 
from the All England Club mix. Where have the great Americans gone? The decline 
in American tennis has been widely bemoaned by those with an interest in its 
fortunes but it is also felt keenly in SW19.

On Monday America's two leading men, Andy Roddick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andy-roddick> (seeded 8) and Mardy Fish 
(10), were due to be in action: neither is fancied to threaten the European 
hegemony. In the women's draw the Williams sisters may yet stage another grand 
slam smash and grab but beyond them you are down to Bethanie Matteck-Sands, the 
No30 seed. It is a sweeping decline, albeit one that is not without precedent. 
There have always been lulls in a lineage of triumph that has seen American men 
win a quarter of all Wimbledon singles titles and American women an amazing 
46%. The difference now is a sense of dwindling away, a lack of thrust in the 
next generation.

America's tournament started with a midday meeting of two men – Alexander 
Bogomolov Jr and Donald Young – who have defeated Andy Murray in the last six 
months. Both have hovered around the top 100, although watching Bogomolov get 
the best of four uneven sets it was tempting to see those results as decisive 
proof of the depth of Murray's doldrums at the time.

At least Court 17 seemed a poignant location for a display of American 
grass-court tennis 2011 vintage, lodged in the shadows of Centre and No1 court, 
its seating so shallow passersby lean in at the edges like neighbours craning 
across a garden hedge. At one stage Bogomolov lost his grip on his racket and 
sent it hurtling over the midget-level rear awning and clattering on to the 
Tarmac walkway outside, narrowly missing a pedestrian.

There were no stars and stripes flags here, not even a celebratory whoop or 
yowl or "Yoo! Ess! Ay!" as the backwards-capped Bogomolov broke in the second 
set to shift the momentum of the match. Young, a lovely mover possessed of an 
elegant backhand slice, is seen as a little fragile and so it proved in the 
face of the more aggressive Bogomolov. "Booger – we're here for you!" intoned 
an English voice at one point, and with his yelled "Come on!" and his clumping 
backhand Bogomolov – who was born in Moscow and is the son of a Soviet tennis 
coach – did come close at times to conjuring an imprint of that familiar 
flushed and titillated Wimbledon-love for the explosive American.

In the men's game this relationship reached a peak in the early 1980s, the 
golden run of four successive titles for John McEnroe and Jimmy Connors, a 
passionate, occasionally ragged rivalry that was followed by the steamrollering 
domination of the 1990s, when Andre Agassi and Pete Sampras won eight titles 
out of nine. The years since have brought three losing finals for Roddick as 
men's tennis has spun on its axis to face Europe, albeit continued female 
domination has brought nine titles out of 11 in the Williams era.

Why America should be facing a lull is unclear. The lack of depth in the 
women's game is attributed by some to the application of Title IX, a law that 
insists on equal opportunity in college scholarships, and has opened up a far 
greater number of sporting avenues for young women. In the men it is simply 
assumed to be a cyclical thing. One wag in the US press corps blamed a lack of 
manipulative and over-controlling parents coming through the system. Others 
bemoaned the general absence of bitter rivalries at the top of the game, a lack 
of a galvanising bad guy ("Americans don't get Nadal. He's too nice") which has 
fuelled a troubling drop-off in interest.

As Fish – entirely unMcEnroe-ish despite his red hair and headband – clinched 
a disciplined and gentlemanly 7-6, 7-6, 6-4 victory over Marcel Granollers on 
Court 12 there were a few collegiate whoops and a lone cry of "Yo Mardy!". 
Fish, Roddick and the Williamses remain but there is still a faint sense that
Wimbledon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon> is missing its 
Americans already.
 