
The recent debate about parliamentary expenses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/commentisfree+politics/mps-expenses> 
and the questions asked about the behaviour of parliamentarians has renewed 
fundamental questions about exactly how our democracy functions. What is 
parliament for? How are our representatives answerable to the communities they 
serve? How can that relationship between parliament and the people lead to a 
rich level of debate on the issues of the day and the making of good laws to 
serve the best interests of our nation?

The debate on our constitutional arrangements and reforming the Lords is now 
fundamental to restoring public trust in our politics. This makestoday's 
wide-ranging roundtable discussion event <http://strawlords.eventbrite.com/> 
hosted by Unlock Democracy and the Guardian particularly timely. I hope it will 
invigorate the public dialogue about exactly what sort of second chamber should 
serve our country in the future.

" … Whereas it is intended to substitute for the House of Lords as it at 
present exists a second chamber constituted on a popular instead of hereditary 
basis, but such substitution cannot be immediately brought into operation," 
intones the preamble to the1911 Parliament Act 
<http://www.parliament.uk/parliament/guide/parlacts.htm>. (That act followed 
the Lords defeat of Lloyd George's1909 People's Budget 
<http://www.number10.gov.uk/history-and-tour/prime-ministers-in-history/david-lloyd-george/1909-peoples-budget-transcript>
, and two general elections in 1910.) The Lords has shown itself to be 
surprisingly resilient to fundamental change, but for the first time in the 
long history of attempted reforms broad agreement now exists across the 
political parties about plans for the future. This provides a historic 
opportunity which we must seize.

Our 1999 reforms dramatically changed the Lords for the better. But this 
remains unfinished business. Theconstitutional reform and governance bill 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200809/cmbills/142/09142.i-iv.html>
, which will receive its second reading in October, sets out our plans to phase 
out hereditary peers from the second chamber. It is an outdated concept in a 
society where influence and power should be based on merit rather than on the 
family into which one is born. The current situation where 90 hereditary peers 
retained their seats in the Lords was only ever intended as an interim step.

We aim for an elected second chamber which could become wholly elected, but 
would be substantially so. Our proposals stem from the outcome of free votes on 
Lords reform which took place in 2007. TheHouse of Commons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons> voted in favour of 
reforms leading to a 100% or 80% elected second chamber and against all other 
options. The Lords took a different view – rejecting election – but given that 
the Commons is the primary chamber in parliament, a core principle which 
informs all our work on this issue, we are implementing the will of the Commons.

To have reached this stage is a considerable achievement. While some 
disagreements remain on some detail, more than two years of talks between the 
parties, and crossbenchers and bishops too, led to a white paper last summer 
which set out a substantial reform package. I do not pretend that the proposals 
command unanimous support in parliament or beyond. There are people on all 
sides who disagree with parts of it, and others reject it all. That is the 
nature of the reform debate. But we have come further than ever before; broad 
agreement on the way forward between the party frontbenches.

An unelected second chamber with no direct link to the people raises serious 
questions of legitimacy. The body itself is fundamental to the making of 
legislation. In a modern democracy its members must be answerable to those they 
serve.

We propose members of the second chamber are chosen by elections, serving long 
terms of office but unable to stand for more than one term. This will help 
underline that while important as a "backstop" to the Commons, the second 
chamber is there to complement, not rival the Commons. Each member would 
represent large constituencies, with elections taking place at the same time as 
general elections, but only a third of seats would be contested each time – 
again underlining the subordinate status of the second chamber. How they would 
be elected – under what system – is a question for discussion. The choices are 
the single transferable vote, regional lists (either open or semi-open), or 
first past the post.

The agenda I have outlined is far-reaching and radical. With the shared will 
of parties and further informed public debate it is a change we can achieve. An 
unelected second chamber is an anomaly which must be dealt with. In years to 
come it will seem as perverse in the 21st century as the lack of universal 
suffrage did in the 20th.

While calling for these reforms I acknowledge that much of the work the Lords 
currently does is of a very high quality. It contains within it some 
exceptional individuals and it often effectively holds the executive to account 
and revises legislation for the better. But this is an age where the public 
rightly demands a far greater degree of accountability. They demand a say in 
the people who serve in their parliament, and on those who will speak on their 
behalf. And close to the centenary of that commitment in the 1911 Parliament 
Act is hardly too soon.
 