
The federal government will push universities to publish more transparent 
admission information in an effort to clear the “fog” and “double speak” around 
entry standards.

On Friday the education minister, Simon Birmingham, announced the government 
would adopt all 14 recommendations of the higher education standards panel, 
including the call for a My School-style website to compare admissions 
standards across universities.

In November, the panel report found 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/16/coalition-pushes-for-clarity-after-report-finds-universities-inflating-admission-cut-offs>
 the practice of some universities publishing only main round offer cut-offs 
misled students, because many were admitted in later rounds with lower ranks.

Coalition pushes for 'clarity' after report finds universities inflating 
admission cut-offs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/16/coalition-pushes-for-clarity-after-report-finds-universities-inflating-admission-cut-offs>
It recommended a national one-stop-shop information platform to include 
information on the minimum Australian Tertiary Admission Rank (Atar) 
requirements for the course at the completion of all offer rounds.

The report proposed a template for universities to disclose the percentage of 
students admitted to a course with bonus points, the maximum number of bonus 
points available and the Atar required to be in the top 25%, bottom 25% and the 
middle of the student intake.

“These reforms are about clearing away the fog and doublespeak that has 
clouded higher-education admissions processes so prospective students can make 
well-informed decisions about if and what they want to study,” Birmingham said.

Birmingham said the federal government would put the onus on universities and 
higher education providers to be upfront about what they could offer 
prospective students, suggesting the information platform could also include 
graduate outcomes.

The government will ask universities to adopt the recommendations voluntarily. 
But Birmingham warned it would use “additional regulatory or funding 
obligations” if necessary, potentially using commonwealth grants to 
universities to force the changes.

As part of its transparency push, the government has also published new data 
from the graduate outcomes survey on thequality indicators for learning and 
teaching website <https://www.qilt.edu.au/>.

“There will be no more hiding behind fluffy descriptions of entry requirements 
or inaccessible information on graduate outcomes,” Birmingham said.

In November the Universities Australia chief executive, Belinda Robinson, 
welcomed the panel’s report as “a measured and sensible way out of an 
increasingly complex and confusing admissions information mire”.

“The university sector is unified in its acknowledgement of the need for 
greater transparency, consistency and clarity of information on university 
admissions policies, processes [and] procedures,” Robinson said.

In August the head of the Group of Eight universities, Vicki Thomson, called 
for a single national application process 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/17/universities-urged-to-be-upfront-with-students-about-work-prospects>
 and greater transparency around admission standards to counter a perception 
that the sector tossed around bonus points for special university entry “like 
confetti”.

“Only total transparency can reassure potential students and their families 
that the system is just,” she said.

Some universities, including the Group of Eight, have already committed to 
publish more transparent information about their entrance requirements.
 