
Anna Nicole Smith once claimed to have had sex with a ghost. There was a time, 
before she got fat and noisy and the world turned its nose up, when Smith was a 
sex symbol so powerful that not only was the physical world under her spell but 
the supernatural one, too. Last month she was described in the WikiLeaks cables 
as a "hurricane": "Not since Wallis Simpson dethroned a king and moved to 
Nassau," a leaked memo read, "has an American femme fatale so captivated the 
Bahamian public and dominated local politics thanAnna Nicole Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/anna-nicole-smith> did during her time on 
the island."

Alive, she was able to brush off criticisms that veered between judgements on 
her relationships (a mother at 17, single at 18, proudly bisexual, wife to an 
89-year-old millionaire at 26) and her voluptuous body (aPlayboy centrefold in 
1992, she ballooned milkily and was the face of a controversial diet pill when 
she died of an accidental overdose in 2007), but today, as the Royal Opera 
House prepares to stage the story of her life, she's unable to either comment 
or cash in.

Though there's every chance the opera will be great, sensitive, fun, the 
promise of a Jerry Springer-style show about a real person, one who suffered 
horribly, whose extended, oddly transgressive glamour meant she sometimes broke 
through from sexy to scary, feels wrong. It is not yet four years since she 
passed away, and with court cases still hovering over her death and the 
daughter she left behind, her life is already being rewritten as a camp 
tragedy, with Smith cast, as she was in life, as the grim antiheroine.

In her lifetime the public perception of Smith wobbled from Monroe-esque 
beauty (hair bleached so blonde it was almost baby blue) to outrageous monster, 
often in time with her fluctuating weight; a female grotesque, even before her 
death at 39 she was a walking cautionary tale of greed, class and gender, used 
to teach girls how not to live – how not to marry, how not to dress, how not to 
eat fried food. Not only does this way of life make you less feminine, her 
story seems to say, but in the end it kills you. Some seemed to take a bitter 
pleasure in her decline and her death – the bubble of cultural anxiety around 
a woman who'd married for money was burst. It made them feel better about their 
choices. "Poor Anna" was hated, said theWashington Post upon her death, because 
she was "a living reminder of an economy of sexual exchange that we like to 
pretend doesn't exist".

It was bad enough that she was forced to stand for so much when alive – now 
that she is unable to reply, I'd hope that her little joys and tragedies would 
no longer have to teach or entertain, that we could resist seeing her as 
a character, at least for just a little while longer.

It was a sad and lonely death she suffered in Florida's Hard Rock hotel (her 
son buried only a year before), not, as some writers sniffed, a fitting end to 
her "car-crash life". The idea of a musical – an opera, no less, the room all 
a-snicker at the sight of a lurid boob tube – fills me with dread.

UNDER THE SPELL

The holiday season, for me, has been diced into small cubes and numbered by 
letter. I've played Words With Friends, the iPhone game that bears some 
relation to Scrabble, almost constantly since Christmas Day. New Year's Eve saw 
me sitting at dawn screaming vowels over a pub table at Susie, player two, 
while behind me people danced. My hangover was lifted in early 2011 by another 
friend hitting me with "gonad" for 20 points. For the first time in my life, 
I'm dreaming in spelling. Someone messaged me that the game felt like a crystal 
meth addiction and she needed to stop. We agreed that it was dangerous but 
(I replied as darkness fell again) that it hurt so good. Daylight sentences 
detach themselves from spoken paragraphs and reassemble themselves behind my 
eyes like a box of sleepy kittens. My phone battery can be recharged, but I 
worry for my mind.

Email Eva at e.wiseman@observer.co.uk <mailto:e.wiseman@observer.co.uk> or 
visit
theguardian.com/profile/evawiseman <http://theguardian.com/profile/evawiseman> 
for all her articles in one place
 