
Timothy Geithner <https://www.theguardian.com/business/timothy-geithner>, a 
key player in the US government’s 2008 bailout of American International Group 
Inc, is due back in court on Wednesday in a trial of a lawsuit filed by the 
insurance giant’s former CEO over the handling of the rescue.

On Tuesday, Geithner affirmed his belief that the bailout was needed to avert 
disaster for the financial system. Geithner was president of the New York 
Federal Reserve at the time of the rescue and later Treasury secretary.

A lawyer grilled Geithner at the trial of the lawsuit brought by former AIG 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/aig> chairman and CEO Maurice Greenberg. 
He is suing the federal government for about $40bn in damages, asserting that 
it violated the fifth amendment by taking control of the insurance giant 
without “just compensation” for the shares it received.

The $85bn loan package for AIG, which was teetering toward bankruptcy in 
September 2008, gave the government control of 80% of the New York-based 
company’s stock. While upholding the necessity of the AIG bailout, Geithner in 
his testimony Tuesday also acknowledged that he had said the bailout “wiped 
out” AIG shareholders.

That statement was in line with testimony Monday by former Treasury secretary 
Henry Paulson, who said the AIG bailout was specifically designed by the 
government to punish the company. Paulson, who headed the Treasury Department 
at the time of the rescue, said AIG shareholders should have faced punishment 
for the company’s troubled balance sheet.

Geithner is expected to return Wednesday for a second day of testimony in the 
trial at the US court of federal claims in Washington. Former Fed chairman Ben 
Bernanke is also scheduled to testify later in the week.

Geithner was questioned for a full day by Greenberg’s attorney, David Boies. 
Geithner reconstructed in detail the New York Fed’s deliberations over and 
decision to extend the aid to AIG, and its discussions with AIG executives on 
terms for the loan. He frequently said he couldn’t recall specific facts or 
details.

He said he was “deeply involved” in discussions to determine an interest rate 
for the loan to AIG, which was set at about 12% annually.

Boies read from a 17 September 2008 document written by a New York Fed 
official saying “AIG was told this was ‘take it or leave it.’ Nothing could be 
negotiated.”

With Geithner giving AIG’s then-CEO Robert Willumstad an hour or two to get 
the company’s board to approve the terms, Boies asked Geithner, “You gave them 
a deadline, correct?”

Answered Geithner: “I don’t know … how I framed the deadline, but I made clear 
that we had very little time.”

Geithner also acknowledged concern among New York Fed officials that AIG 
shareholders could vote to reject the government’s terms for the loan.

In a moment of levity during the tedious back-and-forth, Boies – a famed 
litigator known for his fight for gay marriage and advocacy of Al Gore before 
the supreme court in the 2000 election – asked Geithner whether he had a “high 
regard” for Greenberg. “I had … I would say a complicated regard for him, just 
to be honest about it,” he replied.

AIG nearly collapsed after making huge bets on mortgage investments that later 
soured. Federal regulators were concerned that if it were allowed to fail it 
would send shock waves through the financial system, which was already reeling 
after Lehman Brothers collapsed in September of 2008.

AIG became a symbol for excessive risk on Wall Street and a touchstone of 
public anger. It was criticized, among other things, for paying millions of 
dollars in bonuses to executives after it was bailed out.

The $85bn loan package eventually grew to $182bn in government aid, which AIG 
has since repaid. The company has returned to profitability, and its stock has 
risen more than 45% over the past two years.
 