
Debate is raging in the US about whether Australian point guard Matthew 
Dellavedova is a dirty player. The 17 points he scored against theAtlanta Hawks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atlanta-hawks> in the Cleveland Cavaliers’ 
overtime victory on Sunday to take a 3-0 lead in the NBA Eastern Conference 
Finals is just a footnote in the debate in the US media about Dellavedova.

“Matthew Dellavedova is a dirty player,” was a headline on the USA Today 
website. The New York Post told its readers: “As James Bond creator Ian Fleming 
once wrote: ‘Once is an accident. Twice is coincidence. Three times is an enemy 
action’.”

The latest incident happened in game three when Dellavedova and Hawks All-Star 
centre Al Horford became tangled, fell to the floor and Horford, believing the 
Australian aimed his body at his knees, threw a forearm and elbow. Dellavedova 
said TV replays showed Horford pulling him down. Horford was ejected from the 
game and Dellavedova was hit with a technical foul.

On Friday Dellavedova dived for a loose ball, swung his back toward the ankle 
of Hawks’ three-point specialist Kyle Korver and hit with such impact Korver is 
out for the season and may need surgery. And in the semi-final series against 
the Chicago Bulls Dellavedova locked up forward Taj Gibson’s legs and Gibson 
was ejected when he lashed out with his legs.

After the game multiple Hawks players pointed to Dellavedova’s “track record”. 
Cavaliers coach David Blatt said Dellavedova has a “pattern of behaviour”, but 
the pattern is to play hard, physical and cleanly. LeBron James also backed his 
team-mate, telling reporters “people are trying to give him a bad rap and he 
doesn’t deserve it”.

USA Today’s Mike Foss agreed Dellavedova’s work ethic could not be contested, 
but wrote “to say that these are just a series of unfortunate events is naive 
at best. This is a guy who doesn’t know the line and is risking other players’ 
careers.”

Game four is in Cleveland on Tuesday and if the Cavaliers win they will play 
for theNBA <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba> Championship against the 
winner of the Golden State Warriors and Houston Rockets Western Conference 
Finals series. The Warriors hold a 3-0 lead, with game four on Monday in 
Houston.
 