
The American Heritage Dictionary defines farce as a "light dramatic work in 
which highly improbable plot situations, exaggerated characters, and often 
slapstick elements are used for humorous effect."

If the authors ever visited Flushing Meadows in the New York borough of 
Queens, they would have been well placed to make such an observation on tennis. 
This year's US Open has had it all.

The punchline arrived on Thursday. After two days washed out by rain, play 
resumed in milky sunlight as organisers tried to work through the backlog of 
matches. On Wednesday they had similarly made an effort to get some play in, 
only to be told byRafael Nadal <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rafaelnadal>, 
Andy Murray and Andy Roddick -les Mousquetaires nouveaux de tennis - that it 
was too dangerous to play on the dampened courts. The players won that duel 
without swishing a racquet.

On Thursday, Murray and Nadal got through the remainder of their fourth-round 
matches without interruption or fuss. Roddick hit another roadblock. Midway 
through the resumed first set of his match against David Ferrer, the court was 
declared unplayable because it was bubbling up under the sunshine after a night 
of torrential rain.

The US Open organisers, of course, do not have covers on their artificial 
courts – because, says tournament director Jim Curley, they would not drain the 
surface any more quickly. Well, they might help the process if there was a 
torrential overnight downpour – as there was after everyone went home on 
Wednesday night. For hours, heavy rain lashed those unprotected courts – and, 
when the sun came out, up came the warp.

It is tempting, but unfair, to blame the weather on the United States Tennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Association. However, their handling 
of the elements and their effects on the showpiece tournament of the American 
season, the last grand slam event of the year, has aroused little sympathy, 
from players, fans or critics.

Only American television, which has an obvious vested interested, has made 
much of an accommodation for either their short-sightedness in sticking with a 
ludicrous schedule over the years, or their insistence that covers on the 
courts are impractical and a roof on the main stadium, Arthur Ashe Court, too 
expensive, as well as technologically challenging because it is build on 
landfill.

The result of this long-term stubbornness is that, from the first day to the 
last weekend, this tournament hangs by a thread. Choosing to play the first 
part of the men's draw over three days, they eat further into the week with 
matches that, plainly, are attractive for TV but dangerous for the schedule if 
the weather turns foul – as it has done for the past five years.

When the USTA moved from nearby Forest Hills, it appeared to be a 
forward-looking move. Americans, after all, are slightly more attached to the 
dollar than they are to sentiment (although it can be a close call).

However, having settled on this imperfect site, they decided in the 
mid-nineties that a roof was not appropriate for the deep, cavernous Arthur 
Ashe Stadium. When the sun shines and the crowds are boisterous, it is the most 
wonderful, exciting arena. At night, too, it can be a brilliant bearpit of 
sport. But those are in ideal conditions.

This tournament, argue the number crunchers, is a once-a-year event; it would 
be a waste of money to put up a roof. This was the same thinking that for many 
years held back Wimbledon, Melbourne and Paris, the other three slam venues. 
Melbourne took the gamble in 2000, Wimbledon two years ago and Paris will have 
a roof by 2016.

New York? Not likely, says Curley, even when surrounded again by angry players 
and bemused fans, frustrated that two days this week were a waste of time.

Had the USTA used the $150m available to them two years ago, they could have 
had a roof (with a $50million shortfall in funds, it has to be said). But 
finding the extra ought not be beyond the wit of wizard businessmen - if, 
indeed, that is what they are.

We've seen it all before, sadly. The past three finals have been played a day 
late, on Monday, wrecking the holiday and work arrangements of fans, 
inconveniencing the players - and even the media.

At the core of it, is a draw that suits CBS's Super Saturday, with both men's 
semi-finals, then the final 24 hours later.

Nadal, leader of the Wednesday Three, saw it this way: "Our part of the draw 
will be in a very difficult situation for the player who will be in the final. 
The semi-finals maybe, too, because two days in a row playing tough matches is 
difficult. The matches, quarter-finals, semi-finals, four rounds of Grand Slam 
normally are tough matches. If you don't have rest, you have a big chance not 
be enough fit to play well the next match."

And that is what this should be about: the fairest way of finding the best 
player over seven matches and two weeks of tennis. We are a long way from that.

Eight years ago, Juan Carlos Ferrero had to play four matches in four days, 
and lost to Roddick in the final, the American's only slam title. Roddick 
played four matches in five days. Was that fair? Probably not. But it should 
not have happened. As now, the foul-up drained legitimacy from the 2003 US Open 
as a sporting contest.

It is a ham-fisted way to run a tournament the organisers claim is the best 
attended of all annual international sporting events, and which can afford to 
offer the players a record $23.7million in prize money - but not always the 
means to get their hands on it.

And those bottom-line numbers should be the most persuasive for the USTA.
 