
Andy Roddick <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andy-roddick> has called for 
players on the ATP Tour to unite in a bid to avoid the farcical scenes which 
have marred this year's US Open.

The American was speaking after easing into the quarter-finals in New York 
with a four-set win over David Ferrer in a match which had to be moved to Court 
13 after the Louis Armstrong Court was deemed unplayable by the players.

The inclement weather, a high water table at Flushing Meadows and poor 
scheduling have played havoc over the past fortnight and now means the bottom 
half of the men's draw will stay behind the top half. As a result, the men's 
final has already been switched from Sunday to Monday.

Rafael Nadal, Roddick's last-eight opponent, earlier called for players to be 
given a greater say in scheduling and Roddick would be willing to lead a 
delegation on behalf of the protagonists.

The No21 seed said: "I have been trying to tell people that talent normally 
wins in negotiations. But until we unite as one voice, then we're not going to 
get what we want. Therefore, we don't have the right to complain about it.

"I think you have to have the right person involved who might understand the 
business side of it. You're going to have to have a player who's willing to 
make some sort of sacrifice.

"At this point in my career, I would jump at the chance to leave the sport in 
a better position for the players moving forward."

Speaking after beating Gilles Müller, Nadal said: "The problem is we need to 
have the right representation in these tournaments. Things like this cannot 
happen. Having the semi-finals on Saturday is something crazy for the players.

"The problem, in my opinion, is not the organisation of the US Open. The 
problem is we don't have enough power in these kind of tournaments. That's what 
has to change very soon. I think everybody agrees that these things have to 
change."

Roddick's countryman John Isner reached his first grand slam quarter-final 
with a 7-6 (7-2), 3-6, 7-6 (7-2), 7-6 (7-4) victory over Gilles Simon.

The 6ft 9in American will meet Andy Murray next, the Scot cruising past the 
home hope Donald Young 6-2, 6-3, 6-3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/sep/08/andy-murray-donald-young-live>.

The two quarter-finals in the top half also took place on Thursday night with 
Roger Federer again looking impressive. The Swiss, who is without a grand slam 
success since winning in Melbourne last year,crushed the Frenchman Jo-Wilfried 
Tsonga for the loss of just 10 games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/sep/09/roger-federer-novak-djokovic>.

The world No1 Novak Djokovic had a tougher night against his Serbian 
compatriot Janko Tipsarevic. Tipsarevic took the fight to his countryman and 
tested his legendary powers of defence but began to struggle in the third and 
lost nine games in a row before retiring at 7-6 (7-2), 6-7 (3-7), 0-6, 0-3 down.
 