
As Apple prepares to expand Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> Pay to Europe at WWDC, anecdotal 
evidence suggests that the company’s forecast for US adoption may be too 
optimistic and that many retailers remain skeptical about the payment system.

Chief executive Tim Cook made the confident prediction in January that 2015 
would be “the year of Apple Pay”. Since then, Apple has aggressively courted 
retailers – and claimed significant success. A spokesman said “about half” of 
the top 100 US merchants will accept Apple Pay this year, with more to follow 
in 2016.

The service is one of Apple’s biggest bets – a chance to tie customers more 
tightly to its phones and its new smartwatch, as well as to take a tiny bite 
from every retail transaction.


 To assess Apple’s progress, Reuters took the National Retail Federation’s 
list of the top 100 US retailers, surveying the 98 that had brick-and-mortar 
outlets (two sell only online); 85 supplied detailed responses, and 11 others 
supplied information only about whether or not they accept Apple Pay, while two 
did not respond.

 While some of the top US retailers said they use and like the mobile payment 
system, fewer than a quarter of the retailers said they accept Apple Pay, and 
nearly two-thirds said they would not be accepting it this year. Only four 
companies said they planned to join the scheme in the next year.

 The top reasons retailers cited for not accepting Apple Pay were insufficient 
customer demand, a lack of access to data generated by transactions and the 
cost of technology to facilitate the payments.

Some merchants said they were waiting to participate in a new mobile payment 
system being launched by a coalition of retailers later this year.

Small but growing market

Accurate figures on mobile wallet payments are difficult to obtain. Neither 
the companies offering payment systems nor credit card issuers will disclose 
detailed data about usage. However, analysts agree that they are used for only 
a tiny fraction of US retail transactions.

 An online survey conducted by Verifone and Wakefield Research released in 
January 2015 found that mobile wallets accounted for about 4% of the overall 
payments market for in-store US retail transactions.

 How that market is divided up among the major players is not entirely clear. 
An ITG Investment Research study conducted in November, soon after Apple Pay 
was launched, found that the service accounted for 1% of digital payment 
dollars, while Google Wallet accounted for 4%.

 Since then, analysts agree, Apple Pay’s market share has grown considerably. 
Steve Weinstein, senior internet analyst for ITG, said: “In the last six months 
or so there has been more acceptance of Apple Pay. Google Wallet has kind of 
stalled out.“

Tim Cook said on a call with analysts in January that Apple Pay accounted for 
two out of three dollars spent in “contactless payments” in the US, but the 
company did not provide further details.

 Still, it is clear Apple Pay has made considerable progress in signing up 
vendors, with more than 700,000 sites as of 9 March – the last time Apple 
updated its numbers, including self-service terminals such as vending machines, 
laundromats and parking meters.

 Interviews with retailers suggest that the company has relied on aggressive 
marketing to recruit participants. “They have been pushing hard and it’s been 
that way for months,” said the representative of one large retailer that has no 
plans to accept Apple Pay. “They have called and tried to persuade us even 
after we communicated our decision to them.”

He added that the company had not adopted Apple Pay because not even a “small 
percentage” of its customers had asked for it.

‘Speed, convenience and security’

Many companies that accept Apple Pay report that they and their customers are 
happy with it. Whole Foods spokesman Michael Silverman said that Apple Pay 
transactions accounted for 2% of its US sales as of March and that it expects 
use to rise.


 “Our shoppers are really enjoying the speed, convenience and security of 
Apple Pay,” he said.

 But for other retailers and consumers, Apple has yet to answer the question 
“what is in it for us if we use Apple Pay?” said Alberto Jimenez, program 
director for mobile payments at IBM, which provides technology to mobile wallet 
makers and retailers.

 The program does not offer loyalty rewards to customers, as companies such as 
Starbucks do with their mobile applications, nor does it provide customer 
information to retailers about Apple Pay users.

 For 28 of the retailers surveyed by Reuters, lack of access to data about 
customers and their buying habits is a key reason they don’t accept Apple Pay. 
“One of the biggest concerns is data control,” said Mario De Armas, senior 
director, international payments at Wal-Mart Stores.

 When a credit card is swiped through a terminal, the retailer gets the name 
and card number, which when combined with publicly available demographic data 
like address, phone and email, helps retail chains send well-targeted 
promotions to customers.

 Wal-Mart and 18 of the other top retailers are part of a coalition 
challenging Apple Pay with a mobile wallet called CurrentC, which is scheduled 
to launch later this year.

 Retailers participating in CurrentC will not be allowed to accept any other 
mobile wallet until 2016, according to a senior official at MCX, the company 
launching CurrentC.

For that reason alone, 19 of the NRF’s top 100 retailers will not be able to 
accept Apple Pay before the end of the year, although three of them said they 
plan to accept Apple Pay by early 2016.

 Another reason cited for not accepting Apple Pay by retailers surveyed was 
the cost of terminals and computer upgrades required to accept a mobile wallet.

The cost of accepting a mobile wallet is highly variable depending on what 
technology they already have in place. Apple declined to comment on the cost to 
retailers of accepting Apple Pay.





 