
Not content with a planned march into one of Pakistan's most dangerous 
regions, a group of middle-aged American women are considering mounting a 
hunger strike outside the US embassy in Islamabad as part a campaign against 
CIA drone attacks in the country.

Thirty-five activists from Code Pink, a US anti-war group, have gathered in 
the Pakistani capital this week as they prepare for an unprecedented march and 
political rally in South Waziristan, one of the semi-autonomous tribal areas on 
the Afghan border, which is a hotbed of Taliban militancy.

Despite intense publicity surrounding the event, doubts persist over whether 
it will be able to take place. Local authorities have expressed strong doubts 
about the safety of the march, even though the Pakistani military has long 
claimed its operations in the area have brought a semblance of security.

Medea Benjamin, the veteran activist leading the Code Pink delegation, said: 
"Frankly, it's a win-win situation for us, whether we get into Waziristan or 
not.

"We are going because we are challenging the Pakistani government to allow us 
to go to a place that has been off limits but needs to be seen. And if they try 
to stop us, it will be clear they do not want the world to see what is going on 
there."

On Tuesday in Islamabad, the women met retired generals, ambassadors and even 
a former head of the notorious military spy agency Inter-Services Intelligence 
(ISI), and discussed other tactics to publicise their cause.

Those included mounting a hunger strike outside the US embassy in Islamabad. 
Benjamin said the group was still considering the idea.

"It was something a couple of members of the group brought up, but we wanted 
to wait until we got here to see how appropriate that might be," she said.
 The whole tribal belt has been off limits to foreigners since Taliban 
fighters started seeking sanctuary there 
There was also a lengthy discussion about whether Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan>, which publicly decries the drone 
campaign despite signs that it continues to give tacit approval, should attempt 
to shoot down US drones in its airspace.

On Wednesday, the women met people from North Waziristan who said they were 
victims of the US drone campaign, having lost relatives to missile strikes by 
the remote-controlled planes. They will also hold meetings with Pakistani and 
US government officials.

The group includes Mary Ann Wright, a former US diplomat and army colonel who 
condemned her country's covert drone campaign as Barack Obama's "personal 
execution device", in reference to the US president's weekly meeting at which 
he is reported to choose targets for missile strikes.

The march, led by Imran Khan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/imran-khan> 
and his Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) party, is due to take place this 
weekend. Organisers hope to spend Saturday night in a town outside the tribal 
areas and then move on to Jandola, just inside the border of South Waziristan, 
where they will hold a rally.

The Taliban have given mixed signals over the march. In August, a spokesman 
said Khan would be targeted because he is a "liberal", but other reports have 
said the Taliban will support the march.

Supporters say Khan has been assured by General Ashfaq Kayani, the head of 
Pakistan's army, that if they go to South Waziristan they will remain safe.

The ambitions of march organisers have already been significantly downgraded. 
The original hope had been to travel to North Waziristan, a far more dangerous 
area rife with militants drawn from across the world.

The vast majority of drone strikes take place there, and the Pakistani army 
has almost no influence over the tribal area, where they have long-resisted US 
calls to mount military operations.

Nonetheless, although Jandola is in a relatively safe part of South 
Waziristan, all of the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (Fata) have been off 
limits to foreigners since the tribal belt became a sanctuary for Taliban 
groups fighting against Nato troops inAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> and Pakistani government forces.

Few politicians have dared to campaign in the area. If successful, the march 
will cement Khan's position as a pre-eminent opponent of the US drone campaign.

Code Pink, which originally formed to oppose the second Iraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> war, claimed its anti-drone campaign 
was still in its infancy. Benjamin said: "When it comes to drones, we are at 
the very beginning of turning public opinion against them in the US."
 