
Usain Bolt's coach, Glen Mills, says that Jamaican sprinters are being 
"unfairly targeted" because of their dominance at world level and that 
criticism of the country's anti-doping programme is unjustified.

On Monday the World Anti-Doping Agency announced it would be launching an 
"extraordinary" audit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/oct/14/jamaica-drug-testing-wada-investigation>
 into allegations that there was only one random drugs test in Jamaica between 
March and July 2012 in the run-up to the Olympics.

But Mills, who also coaches Yohan Blake and Warren Weir, says that the 
international media is guilty of "sensationalising" the issue of doping in the 
country.

"They target Jamaica because of its success," said Mills. "There is no doubt 
about it. Nobody wants to see Jamaica continue its dominance of sprinting at 
the world level. One has to question the balance of their reporting. I have 
read some terrible articles written about Jamaica. I have read some terrible 
articles trying to insinuate that Usain Bolt's success is false because of all 
of this."

This year six Jamaican athletes – including the former world 100m record holder
Asafa Powell <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/asafapowell> and Veronica 
Campbell-Brown, who has won 16 medals at Olympics and world championships – 
have tested positive for banned substances. However, Mills insisted that 
Jamaica's success was hard-earned.

"We have had some adverse analytical findings for stimulants and those other 
things, but there are so many cases of steroid use in other countries in the 
past couple of months, yet there is no sensationalising around those countries 
or athletes,"he told The Gleaner 
<http://jamaica-gleaner.com/gleaner/20131008/sports/sports1.html>.

"Yet everyone is banging on the Jamaicans because of our success, and the 
truth of the matter is that our success has come through hard work, excellent 
coaches and making the best use of our facilities that are below world-class 
standards," said Mills, who also stuck up for the Jamaica Anti-Doping 
Commission (Jadco), despite recent criticisms from its former executive 
director Renee Anne Shirley, pointing out that it was performing well given 
that it was only established in 2008.

"The Jamaican anti-doping programme is fairly new," he said . "Most countries 
performing at our level have been well advanced in their anti-doping programmes 
in terms of years of experience and expertise."

But Mills did admit that both the Jamaican government and the Jamaica Athletics
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> Administrative Association 
(JAAA) needed to do more to help the island's athletes.

"The government is lagging behind; whether it is a financial reason or 
whatever, but they need to do a lot more," he said. "They could even set up a 
helpline where an athlete can call in and ask about a medication and receive 
advice if there is any danger or get it tested. It doesn't have to be a Jadco 
thing; this can come under the Ministry of Health, for instance.

"I also feel that the JAAA has not done a good job. Too often they have been 
silent and dormant, as if they are afraid to come out and defend Jamaica's 
image."
 