
A beat or two after 9.50pm local time on Sunday the eight fastest men in the 
world will drop to their knees. Then, after a frenzied polka of flashlights 
around the Luzhniki Stadium, a pistol will puncture the sky and the silence.

And the 100m – the grandest and briefest show at these world championships – 
will be under way.

When it comes to the thin line between incredulity and suspicion, the men's 
100m walks not so much a tightrope as a piece of floss. That impression, forged 
in the Ben Johnson era of the late 80s, was merely hardened following the 
positive drug tests of Tyson Gay andAsafa Powell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/asafapowell>, the second and fourth fastest 
100m runners in history.

But Donovan Bailey, the Canadian who followed in Johnson's footsteps by 
winning 100m gold at the world championships and Olympics – but did so clean – 
believes the primal allure of the event remains strong.

"The 100m will always be the blue riband race, no matter what," he says. "It 
is the only event at the Olympics that stops the world. Only a World Cup final 
can match it.

"Our sport has taken a slight black eye but come Moscow everyone will be 
watching to see what Usain [Bolt] is going to do and if anyone can challenge 
him."

Dwain Chambers <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/dwain-chambers>, one of the 
sport's more perceptive voices on drugs since serving his ban for taking the 
designer steroid THG, admits he is not sure whether the 100m is cleaner now 
than it was a decade ago. "It's sad to see that people I look up to have fallen 
in the same trap that I once did," he says. "They should look at what I went 
through. It's been a tough road for me."

But ask Chambers whether the 100m has lost any of its lustre and he demurs. "I 
don't think so because everybody's still excited to seeUsain Bolt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/usainbolt>," he says. "People want to see 
how fast he can run and what he can achieve. Even those chasing him want to see 
how fast they can go behind him."

Bolt is athletics' biggest star and its Atlas. But you wonder what would 
happen if injury – or worse – intervened. If Bolt is carrying the burden of the 
sport on his shoulders, there was little sign of it when Jamaica's sprinters 
trained on Thursday. The smiles were easy, the vibe relaxed. Bolt did not speak 
to the media but instead trained, put his arms around his fellow athletes and 
laughed away, even when the team masseuse was kneading Mueller massage lotion 
deep into his calves and thighs.

Meanwhile Warren Weir, the young Jamaican who took bronze in the 200m at the 
London Olympics in 2012, was promising that his team-mates would "give people 
good news after the bashing our sport has gotten" by winning well and clean in 
Moscow. "Yes, you can still believe there are clean athletes out there," he 
said. "I myself am one of the clean ones. You can't bash all for some."

Jamaica's new head coach, Michael Clarke, was later asked about Victor Conte's 
comments that his country was years behind in testing athletes. He disagreed. 
"I think we are slowly keeping pace with what's expected," he said, which 
sounded a typically Jamaican way of doing things– except, of course, when it 
comes to sprinting. A follow-up question about how to deal with cheats was 
blocked by Jamaica's press officer, Dennis Gordon, who told him not to take any 
questions about doping.

Bailey, who will be commentating from Moscow for BBC Radio 5 Live, is clear 
about the punishments that should be meted out. "If it was up to me, it would 
be a lifetime ban," he says. "It should be like the false start. It doesn't 
really matter who you are. Even if you are a global superstar, if you false 
start once you're out. It should be the same thing with drugs."

He also holds no truck with those who blame supplements for positive tests. 
"Athletes should know what they are putting in their bodies," he says. "That's 
the deal you sign with the IAAF and with your federation.

"I knew every morsel of food I put in my body. I knew what kind of massage oil 
my masseuse used. It's crazy the sacrifices you have to live by but I 
recognised it was my life brand."

Bailey, incidentally, believes Gay and Powell "have been stupid rather than 
cynical" and is just as emphatic when asked if anyone can beat Bolt on Sunday 
night. "No," he says. "He can make 100 mistakes between the blocks and the 
finish line and still win."

Millions will watch the race, enthralled by every 9.something seconds of it, 
giddily smiling as Bolt hyper-accelerates away from his rivals again.

Despite the scandals, despite the doubts, 'twas ever thus.
 