
Usain Bolt <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/usainbolt> sits bang in the 
middle of a sprawling hotel room on a lazy Sunday afternoon. After he stretches 
out his hand, smiles and says a soft hello, the world's fastest man becomes a 
long-legged study in stillness and calm. He barely twitches a muscle while 
everyone else walks and chatters busily around him. Bolt has settled himself in 
the centre of a plush sofa as he waits for my questions. His eyes are hidden by 
dark glasses and he seems very serious, with so little time left before this 
week's world championships in Moscow.

Ten days ago, in London, Bolt transfixed a raucous crowd at the Anniversary 
Games whenhe won the 100m with typical ease, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/26/usain-bolt-anniversary-games> 
despite a "horrifying" start. His status as the world's most famous and 
cherished sportsman remains strong. The track, however, is a much darker place 
now.

Last month two of Bolt's oldest rivals, his close friend Asafa Powell and 
Tyson Gay of the US,were shamed within an hour of each other 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/0/athletics/23307913> when it was announced they 
had both tested positive for banned substances. It was a terrible day for the 
sport – even if it could be a landmark victory in the slow war against doping. 
These are troubling times for athletics, especially in Jamaica, wherefive men 
and women from the island 
<http://news.sky.com/story/1115711/five-jamaican-athletes-fail-drug-tests> – 
including their most successful female sprinter, Veronica Campbell-Brown – have 
failed drug tests this summer. Bolt's name has featured in debate surrounding 
the scandal, which explains why, in London, he spoke more bluntly than usual at 
a massed press conference: "I know I'm clean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/25/usain-bolt-athletics-jamaican-doping>
."

This new urgency and clarity of purpose explains Bolt's personal rigour. As we 
begin, amid the otherwise languid atmosphere, he chides his friends for 
chatting in a corner of the room. "Come on," Bolt says, waving them away, 
"don't distract me."

As they leave, one of the men's mobile phones chirrups and Bolt raises a brow 
to accentuate his point. This is a different Bolt. He is quiet yet forceful, 
emphatic but reflective too, as he considers what he needs to do to seal his 
renown as the greatest sporting phenomenon of our time and separate himself 
still further from the tawdry doubts. Yet his competition at the world 
championships will be limited because the list of absent runners is striking. 
Yohan Blake, his training partner and most talented competitor, who beat him 
twice last season, will be missing because of injury. No Powell. No Gay. No 
Blake.

Bolt nods before asserting that he is now driven by a higher motivation and 
more bracing pressure. "I know that in Moscow I've not only got to win. All 
these guys are missing, so I've got to run real fast to settle any doubts."

He looks steadily at me when I say the obvious words: "World record fast?"

"Yes, I'd like to do something special in Moscow. Of course it depends on the 
track, the weather, everything but if I get my technique right, and a good 
start, anything is possible. That's why I've been working so hard. I want to 
run fast and show the world again what I can do."
 Usain Bolt wants to win a third consecutive hat-trick of Olympic gold medals 
in Rio. Photograph: Tom Oldham Photography 
Bolt's blistering impact runs so deep it seems strange to remember that five 
years ago, in early August 2008, he was just a promising young athlete with a 
name that looked like a future headline. Since then he has won six Olympic gold 
medals with a witty brand of showmanship. He appears more unbeatable than ever 
– with his world record times of9.58 in the 100m 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3nbjhpcZ9_g> and 19.19 in the 200m 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zVwFhKf40Wo> still looking indestructible since 
he set those blazing marks at the corresponding world championships in Berlin 
during 2009.

In Bolt's mind, the best way he can answer the bleak allegations surrounding 
sprinting is by becoming more dominant and running still quicker. He would love 
to break his 200m record most of all and he wonders if it might even be 
feasible to shatter the almost mythical 19-second barrier.

His boldness is brave and it underpins my personal conviction that Bolt is as 
clean as he insists. Some lesser athletes might feel it would be better just to 
win rather than fuel more attention with another startling performance. But 
Bolt does not look much like a man about to wilt beneath the burden of carrying 
a soiled sport on his back.

"I spoke up [last month] because I've been doing this since I was 15," he 
says. "I've broken every record in every one of my events for over 10 years. 
All I can do is keep working hard and running fast to help the sport."

Asked how he felt when first hearing Powell had tested positive, he reiterates 
his shock – "I couldn't believe what I was hearing" – and concern. But, trying 
to stay loyal to Powell, he adds: "A lot of details still need to be looked at. 
So, like the rest of Jamaica, we wait to see what happens next."

Powell is as popular in Jamaica as Bolt; and the ramifications for a 
sprint-mad island have been desolate. "It's not been good but now it's down to 
me to run well and help people focus on that again."

Does Bolt discuss the prospect of breaking more world records with his coach, 
the gruffly grounded Glen Mills? "We focus less on times than winning. Since I 
told him I want to go to Rio [and the 2016 Olympics] and win another three gold 
medals our target has become very clear."

Bolt's extraordinary tilt at sporting history is epitomised by his ambition of 
winning a third consecutive hat-trick of Olympic races. He drawls softly: "To 
win three in Rio would mean I am with legends like Muhammad Ali and Pele. So 
that's why I'm ready to work so hard and make all the sacrifices of a clean 
athlete. I can do it."

A languid smile stretches beneath the shades for, like Ali, he relishes making 
grand predictions and then bringing them to fruition. This time last year Bolt 
had just won the 100m at the London Olympics, when he obliterated the field and 
made warnings that he might lose seem churlish and even absurd.

His own prophecy when we had met a few weeks earlier was that he would beat 
Blake and everyone else decisively 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jul/24/usain-bolt-jamaica-olympic-100m>.

Bolt celebrated winning the 100m at London 2012 by posting pictures of himself 
kidding around in his room with three young women from Sweden's handball team 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/sport/olympics/athletics/9456300/Usain-Bolt-celebrates-100m-gold-with-Swedish-womens-handball-team.html>
 at 3am. It was a familiar Bolt way of preparing himself for the 200m and relay 
finals – which he duly won in imperious style.

This year has been different. Aware of the need for renewed concentration, 
Bolt says that, after the Anniversary Games, "I didn't go out. I'm focused on 
the worlds. It's competition time. That's why the coach is happy."

When has Mills, a tough trainer slow to offer praise, been happiest with 
Bolt's performances? "He's happiest when I'm training hard. He likes it most, 
like now, when I'm training in Europe. There are no distractions. He loves 
that."

Bolt's world championship record is not as pristine as his Olympic legacy – 
when only his difficulties as a teenager at the 2004 Athens Games resulted in 
disappointment. The worlds have been harder. He might regard two silver medals 
in Osaka in 2007, behind Gay in the 200m and the relay, as a turning point 
because it gave him the belief that he could become a champion. But the pain of 
2005 and, especially, 2011, lingers.

"Of course I remember," he says of 2005, in Helsinki, when he reached the 200m 
final. But he ran badly, injured himself and finished last. "I was in lane one, 
which is no good when you're as tall as me." His disqualification in Daegu in 
2011, after onefalse start in the 100m final 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fzc28lvHEIE>, frames his saddest moment on the 
track.

"Definitely," Bolt says as we relive the way in which he was reduced to raging 
against a wall in a tunnel as he realised his chance of another world title had 
been ruined by his impetuous breakaway. "It was so disappointing because I was 
in great shape. I felt that the win was mine. It was a hard lesson."

Bolt and Mills are now aware that his one invincible and invisible opponent is 
called Father Time. Can he outrun the passing years long enough to sustain his 
glory in Rio? "It's going to be tough. Some of these guys, like Yohan Blake, 
will be in their prime at 26 but we'll work hard to make sure I can do it."

He nods at a reminder that he will turn 27 this month. But Bolt then laughs 
and briefly buries his head in his hands when I point out, as a very old man 
myself, that he will officially enter his late-20s. "I keep telling my coach 
I'm old but he says not to think like that. I listen to him."

Has his body begun to feel the strain? "A little bit but it's more to do with 
things like going out. I could go out and train the next day a few years ago. 
Not now. I need to control my training. I have to put up with ice baths. I take 
them after training and it's painful but I do what I've got to do."

As age creeps insidiously across his preparation and recovery, so Bolt has 
tempered his interest in dabbling in other sports. His genuine desire to play 
professional football won't happen – and there will be less speculation about 
Twenty20 cricket in Australia. "The one [football] thing I have been talking to 
[his agent] Ricky Simms about is the All-Star Champions League game next year. 
I'm working hard to convince him to let me play."

Bolt, presumably, will do better than he did as a basketball player in the 
NBA's All-Star Celebrity exhibition in February when he scored only two points 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/feb/16/usain-bolt-nba-all-star> in 29 
long minutes on court. He grins and confirms, instead, that football is his 
game. In more meaningful choices, a speculative aim to compete in the long jump 
has been abandoned: "When I told my coach I wanted to go to Rio we agreed I'd 
focus only on the 100m and 200m."

He will still engage happily in crowd-pleasing stunts. Beyond his trip on a 
rocket around the London Olympic stadium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2013/jul/27/anniversary-games-in-pictures#/?picture=413782350&index=1>
 last month he was tickled to drive aFormula One car at a Diamond League meeting
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/picture/2013/jun/14/usain-bolt-formula-one-car>
 in Oslo. "I liked that even more than the rocket," Bolt smiles. "That was a 
lot of fun because I love cars."

And he did not even stall his F1 car? "No, but it was an electric car, so I 
was always going to be OK."

Such moments, combined with his comic routines before and after races, mean 
that the next three years are likely to be an entertaining Bolt extravaganza. 
He points out, for example, that he has never been to Moscow and his sponsor, 
Puma, has relished helping him learn a few Russian catchphrases in the kind of 
promotional video he does with such effortless good cheer.

There is, however, a new seriousness and even gravitas to Bolt. He has always 
been professional but he suggests that he is even more ready to deal with 
increased scrutiny. "You get used to it. Yohan used to see me leave training 
early to do things away from the track and he'd shout: 'No training?'

"I'd say: 'You wait until you're a star!' And then last year the time came 
when he also had to leave and it was my turn to shout: 'No training?' There are 
things we need to do in our position."

Jesse Owens, the sprinter whom Bolt most admires, was dogged by injustice and 
only competed in the 1936 Olympic Games in Berlin, where he trumped the Nazis. 
If racism was the burden Owens could never escape, Bolt has a third Olympics in 
prospect to outshine the shadows of doping that shroud his sport.

His task, which resumes in Moscow as he enters the 100m heats on Saturday and 
the final on Sunday, is to keep running fast and winning clearly and cleanly. 
It is the best way to restore dented faith in an ancient battle to continually 
find the world's fastest man.

We will eventually discover if he can ever run as fast as he did in 2009, when 
he was only 22, but it seems more important that Bolt continues to prove the 
doubters and sceptics wrong.

"I'm ready to do it," he says simply, "like always."

Usain Bolt wears PUMA Faas 100R running shoes 
 