
When a federal advisory committee created the first federal proposal to 
explore the relationship between nutrition and the environmental impacts of the 
American diet in December, it unsurprisingly drew the ire ofmeat producers and 
their allies 
<http://www.jsonline.com/news/health/proposed-dietary-rules-draw-beefs-from-cattle-industry-b99419097z1-287395591.html>
 in Congress.


It’s not hard to see why. One of the committee’s central findings was that: “A 
dietary pattern higher in plant-based foods … and lower in animal-based foods 
is more health promoting and is associated with lesser environmental impact 
than is the current average US diet.”

This month, Secretary of Agriculture Tom Vilsack and Secretary of Health and 
Human Services Sylvia Mathews Burwell will review the dietary advisory 
committee’s final report before releasing it to the public for comment. The 
report, in turn, will provide the scientific basis for the upcoming eighth 
edition of the federal government’s dietary guidelines for Americans – a highly 
influential policy document that the government publishes every five years.

“The reason to include sustainable diets, a new area to [the committee], is to 
recognize the significant impact of foods and beverages on environmental 
outcomes,” explained Miriam Nelson, a professor at Tufts University who heads 
the subcommittee on sustainability and safety.

Where’s the beef?

Following the committee’s December 15 meeting, meat industry groups expressed 
outrage over the removal of “lean meats” as a component of healthy diets. 
Noting that the government’s 2010 guidelines included lean meats among its 
dietary recommendations, Barry Carpenter, president of the North American Meat 
Institute, called this year’s omission “arbitrary and capricious”.

In a letter addressed to officials at the Department of Agriculture and the 
Department of Health 
<http://www.meatinstitute.org/ht/a/GetDocumentAction/i/108410>, Carpenter 
claimed that the committee’s recommendation “reflects either an astonishing 
lack of awareness of the scientific evidence or a callous disregard of that 
evidence, again calling into question the entirety of the recommendations 
submitted by the [committee] to the agencies”.

He predicted “serious, adverse consequences” for America’s health if the 
recommendations presented in December were to make the final cut into the 
actual policy document to be released later this year.

“This risk would become real if the agencies incorporate this recommendation 
into federal policy because it will affect many programs”, including school 
lunch programs and other food and nutrition initiatives.

The federal advisory committee also advised that a “moderate amount of seafood 
is an important component of many of the dietary patterns associated with 
improved health and sustainability”. This includes both farm-raised and 
wild-caught fish.

Meat producers also questioned the report’s focus on sustainability. Chase 
Adams, a spokesman for the National Cattlemen’s Beef Association, declined to 
comment on the possible impact of the committee’s recommendations on the beef 
industry. He did, however, suggest that the report overshot its purview.

“Production practices are not a part of the dietary guidelines as authorized 
by Congress,” Adams said, referring to the year-end appropriations bill, in 
which Congress directed Secretary Vilsack to address only direct dietary 
information, not “extraneous factors”, in the guidelines.

In December, the meat industry and other opponents of the draft 
recommendations set up a new umbrella group, theBack to Balance Coalition 
<http://www.bk2balance.org>, aimed at combating “public policy efforts 
occurring at the local, state and national levels to malign and restrict 
certain foods”. Among its members are the American Association of Meat 
Processors, American Meat Institute, American Frozen Foods Institute, Canned 
Food Alliance, Snack Food Association and the Sugar Association.

Eating: the most powerful impact on the environment

Environmental groups and independent food researchers welcomed the move to 
incorporate sustainability into US dietary guidelines.

“Our health is not bound by our bodies but reflects the health of the entire 
food chain from which we eat,” Michael Pollan, author of The Omnivore’s 
Dilemma, told the Guardian. “Many people don’t yet think of their eating as 
their most powerful impact on the environment, but it is and this would serve 
as a salutary reminder,” he added.

Martin Heller, a researcher at the University of Michigan’s Center for 
Sustainable Systems <http://css.snre.umich.edu>, said that it was too early to 
tell if the 2015 guidelines would actually help reduce food-related greenhouse 
gas emissions given the uncertainties over which recommendations will be 
included in the end.

“I also expect that there are recommendations that can be supported by current 
nutritional health research – such as reduced consumption of red meat – that 
don’t make it into the 2015 guidelines that would most certainly lead to 
further reductions in diet-related greenhouse gas emissions,” he said.

Kari Hamerschlag, a food expert at environmental group Friends of the Earth 
<http://www.foe.org/>, hopes that the Obama administration will stand its 
ground. “There is no doubt the USDA and the USHHS are under intense pressure 
from the meat industry and their defenders in Congress to squash important 
information about the major environmental impacts of food production,” she said.

Committee members and government agencies have declined to comment on 
reactions to the recommendations until the final report is published at the end 
of February.

The Vital Signs <https://www.theguardian.com/vital-signs> platform is funded by
Avery Dennison, Domtar and Chiquita.All content is editorially independent 
except for pieces labelled advertisement feature. Find out more here. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>
 