
If Kevin Keegan thought he faced an uphill struggle at Newcastle then he 
should try walking in the shoes of John Toshack. His former Liverpool strike 
partner is charged with guidingWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales> to their first major final since 
1958 through a qualifying group that includes a finalist and semi-finalist from 
Euro 2008. It is not an impossible task, but one that makes nailing jelly to 
the ceiling look easy.

With trips to Germany and Russia looming, the latter coming in four days' time 
in Moscow, Toshack, not to mention the whole of Wales, knew that victory against
Azerbaijan <https://www.theguardian.com/football/azerbaijan> was imperative if 
the Principality were going to have any say in the make-up of Group 4. It is 
not often Wales get the opportunity to play a country 85 places below them in 
the world rankings. And how close they came to blowing it, a goal seven minutes 
from the end of a stale performance giving them the three points they so 
desperately required. Wales will have to play a lot better than this against 
Russia if they are going to avoid a hiding on Wednesday.

Bereft of several key players, most notably captain Craig Bellamy who, despite 
scoring for West Ham against Blackburn last weekend, still needs time to 
continue his rehabilitation after injury, Toshack chose to field a 4-5-1 
formation with Robert Earnshaw spearheading the attack alone.

Fears that the injury list would affect the attendance were sadly well 
grounded, with only one side of the Millennium Stadium near full. True, the 
weather had been awful in these parts during the preceding 24 hours, but if 
Wales are going to do anything other than make up the numbers in this group, 
they need better support than this.

Still, at least the pitch looked good, the surface having been relaid last 
Tuesday after a concert by Madonna. Good for the stadium's bank balance, sad if 
you are the Welsh squad who planned to spend the early part of the week 
training on the pitch. The lush turf looked perfect for Jason Koumas to strut 
his stuff down the left, the Wigan midfielder having passed a fitness test on 
Thursday. A shame then that he went missing throughout large parts of the 
opening half, testing the Azeri goalkeeper Kamran Agayev with a curling, 
long-range effort in the 32nd minute, but otherwise making little impression.

If anything it was Azerbaijan who played the better football during the first 
20 minutes with lone forward Branimir Subasic of Red Star Belgrade firing over 
Wayne Hennessey's crossbar. After that the Wolves' keeper was a virtual 
spectator until the break, the visitors content to sit back and let Wales come 
at them, something they singularly failed to do. Earnshaw narrowly failed to 
latch on to a Gareth Bale free kick and David Edwards floated a 20-yard shot 
wide, but that was about the sum of it. No doubt about it, Toshack's men 
deserved the boos that rang out from the skeleton crowd as they left the pitch 
at half-time.

The early indications were that the second half was not going to get any 
better for the 17,106 scattered beneath the roof, closed on Friday to keep out 
the month's worth of rain that fell in these parts in 24 hours. Frustrations 
grew when Bale was shown a yellow card by the fussy Macedonian referee for 
taking a free-kick too early, but that was nothing compared to what would 
follow shortly after the hour mark.

When Chris Gunter's run into the left hand side of the Azeri penalty area was 
curtailed by a rash trip from Rashad Sadikhov, Wales were rightly handed a 
golden opportunity to open the scoring. Koumas took the kick, drilling his shot 
hard to Agayev's right only to see the goalkeeper make a splendid save. The 
ball promptly ran free in the direction of Koumas who fired in a left-foot shot 
only to see Agayev not only block the effort but hold on to the ball.

To give Wales credit they refused to give up despite the penalty set-back, 
drawing inspiration from a second yellow card shown to Fabio Luis Ramim for 
what must have been talking back to the referee. Down to 10 men, Azerbaijan 
continued to defend even deeper and were duly punished with seven minutes 
remaining when a corner from the right by Koumas found its way through to Sam 
Vokes, on as a second-half substitute for his Wolves team mate David Edwards. 
He bundled the ball home from close range.

That was pretty much that. With only forward, Azerbaijan were in no position 
to save the game, though they deserve praise for the way their rearguard action 
kept an albeit lacklustre Wales side at bay for so long. And in goalkeeper 
Agayev they undoubtedly had the man of the match, his all round handling and 
double-penalty save enlightening a drab afternoon.

Match rating: six
 