
Michael Vaughan at least gave England a glimmer of hope in Melbourne 
yesterday, and that commodity has been in desperately short supply this winter. 
Nobody was rushing out to bet against Australia, but just by taking the Test 
into a fifth day Vaughan restored pride - and he did so with another innings of 
such command over a quality attack that at times he took the breath away.

On 55 overnight, he might, had he gone for broke in the final quarter-hour of 
the morning, scored a hundred more runs in the session. On the way, though, he 
completed his seventh Test century and, more pertinently, his sixth in 18 
innings since he took Sri Lanka apart at Lord's last summer. In the process he 
became the second most prolific scorer in a calendar year, his 1,481 overtaking 
Sachin Tendulkar on 1,392 as the leading run scorer in 2002.

If it has been evident in this country that he is a batsman of genuine world 
class since he and Marcus Trescothick took the attack to the Australians on the 
second day of the first Test, then that reputation has been enhanced as the 
series has unfolded. His 177 in Adelaide was marvellous; this innings of 145, 
spread over the weekend, simply stupendous.

He did not hang about. It took him 21 deliveries to move from 66 to 102, with 
a series of boundaries all round the wicket, three figures coming up with 
another pull rifled through midwicket as Brett Lee strained for extra pace and 
dropped fractionally short.

In the aftermath of his celebrations, Vaughan could have been forgiven if he 
lost some concentration, for while Nasser Hussain and David Gower are recent 
England players to have made two centuries in an Ashes series, it is a rarity. 
One could be luck, but not a brace.

But there was no lapse. Instead, Jason Gillespie was pulled high over 
midwicket for six, and Stuart MacGill similarly deposited. After lunch, Vaughan 
felt compelled to step out to MacGill and loft him elegantly for a third six 
over long-off before sweeping another boundary.

That prompted the leg-spinner to move to around the wicket and he had 
immediate revenge as, much to his relief, Vaughan attempted to chop down to 
third man and instead saw a top-class slip fielder in Martin Love hold a reflex 
catch. Vaughan had added 90 more runs yesterday from 112 balls with 12 fours 
and three sixes to go with the seven boundaries already hit.

That innings, backed up by a maiden Test half-century from Robert Key and 
contributions from Hussain, John Crawley and Craig White, helped England to 
387, their highest total of the series and their third highest second innings 
score ever at the MCG, and gave them a lead of 107, which Matthew Hayden and 
Justin Langer had reduced by eight at stumps.

Vaughan has now completed a remarkable calendar year at the crease that began 
unpromisingly in New Zealand but which has gathered pace ever since. On 
Saturday, when reaching 44, he overtook Dennis Amiss's 28-year-old England 
record of 1,379 runs, and yesterday, a further 28 took him to 1,408, one more 
than Sunil Gavaskar managed in a heady 1979. By the time he had finished, he 
could boast 1,481 runs in the year at an average of almost 62, and, in 
aggregate, behind only Viv Richards' remarkable 1976 record of 1,710 runs with 
seven hundreds. It is exalted company he keeps now.

Yesterday he acknowledged his debt to the England coach Duncan Fletcher. "It 
has been pretty special to score six centuries," he said, "and the manner in 
which I have scored them has been pleasing. These against Australia have been 
extra special because they are my first abroad and they are against one of the 
best teams of all time.

"They put you under such incessant pressure, you have to be flying to score 
runs against them. But before the tour I had convinced myself it would be only 
the same red ball coming down at me as for the past 10 years. The work with 
Duncan has been a great help, teaching me new shots and working on basics such 
as stance and trigger movements."

There was praise too from MacGill, who while in no way carrying the aura of 
Shane Warne, nor indeed the uncanny standards of accuracy, still spun his way - 
sharply at times - through 48 of the 120.4 second-innings overs bowled by 
Australia to take five for 152, his fifth five-wicket haul in 18 matches and 
his third in four innings against England.

MacGill knew what to expect from Vaughan after his brief and incredibly 
successful time at Nottinghamshire last season. "I was pleased with getting him 
out," he admitted. "He plays so well and has great concentration. He is one of 
the most composed batsmen I have played against.

"There are really good shots there and you cannot afford to be off the game 
because he puts every full toss away for four or six and that puts the pressure 
on. If Brian Lara is head and shoulders above anyone in my playing experience, 
then Vaughan has a faultless temperament."

The innings of Key, Crawley and White all showed they should have a part to 
play when England begin the rebuilding process next summer. Key responded well 
after his second-ball nought in the first innings, while Crawley's technique is 
now unquestionably tighter.

White, not included in the original touring party, has been a revelation, 
taking his chance to bowl wholeheartedly. Stauncher lower-order support on 
Saturday might have helped him to a well deserved century but the side strain 
he took in bowling on the second day will almost certainly rule him out of the 
final Test in Sydney, and could well wreck his World Cup hopes.
 