 A paratrooper who died during a gunfight with the Taliban in Afghanistan was 
probably killed by friendly fire when he was "caught in the crossfire", an 
inquest was told yesterday.
Corporal Bryan Budd, 29, who was awarded the Victoria Cross for acts of 
"inspirational leadership and the greatest valour", was found lying in a stream 
after being shot in the abdomen. Fragments of a bullet of the type used by 
British troops were discovered in his body.

Recording a narrative verdict, Andrew Walker, Oxfordshire's assistant deputy 
coroner, told his widow: "On August 20 2006, Cpl Bryan Budd was on active 
service, leading his men through a maize field in Sangin [in southern 
Afghanistan's Helmand province] when they came under withering fire. Cpl Budd 
fell when caught in the crossfire. That soldiers like these are prepared to 
face bravely the constant threats to their lives with unhesitating courage is a 
credit to them, their unit and our armed forces."

Budd's widow, Lorena, a soldier in the Adjutant General's Corps, said the 
inquest had been a difficult experience. She said in a statement: "Bryan laid 
down his life in an act of supreme valour. By making the ultimate sacrifice, 
his conspicuous gallantry reflected the highest traditions of the Parachute 
Regiment."

Ed Wallace, a ballistics expert, told the court that tests on two bullet 
fragments had established that they were 5.56 calibre ammunition, which is 
issued to British troops. But tests of 24 weapons used by Budd's comrades had 
failed to establish if any of them had fired the fatal shot.

After hearing Wallace's evidence, the coroner told the hearing: "In summary, I 
can be satisfied on the balance of probability that this was a Nato 5.56 
projectile fired from a Nato weapon." Wallace replied: "Yes, that's the most 
likely cause."

Budd's VC citation referred to two incidents in 2006. In July, after two of 
his comrades were hit, he "personally led the attack on the building where the 
enemy fire was heaviest, forcing the remaining fighters to flee across an open 
field, where they were successfully engaged".

A month later, Budd decided to attack a group of Taliban fighters. As his 
section moved forward they came under a "withering fire that incapacitated 
three of his men. Cpl Budd continued the assault on his own, knowing full well 
the likely consequences of doing so without the close support of his remaining 
men".

His widow, from Ripon in North Yorkshire, added: "Bryan was a loving husband 
and father to our two daughters, Imogen and Isabel. He will always be missed, 
but his memory continues to live on."

Budd's commanding officer, Lt Col Stuart Tootal, said: "The fighting in which 
Cpl Budd lost his life ... took place over extremely difficult ground, which 
included fields of high-standing crops of maize and involved direct engagement 
with the enemy, often at distances of only a few metres."
 