
July's Observer Food Monthly is a vegetarian special, guest edited by Paul, 
Mary and Stella McCartney. As part of this very special event, OFM sourced a 
selection of vegetarian recipes from top chefs and celebrities, with everyone 
fromJamie Oliver <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/oliver> to Gwyneth 
Paltrow contributing their favourites.

For more information on Meat Free Monday visit supportMFM.org 
<http://supportMFM.org>; for more on Linda McCartney Foods: 
lindamccartneyfoods.co.uk <http://lindamccartneyfoods.co.uk>

David Thompson's mixed vegetable and fruit salad dressed with tamarind, palm 
sugar and sesame seeds

This is a versatile salad, you can use a wide range of ingredients. Below I 
have used all Thai items but you can stretch the boundaries a bit by adding 
some non-Thai stuff. I've considered horseradish, various types of lettuce and 
herbs and even a few pieces of pear. What is important, though, is finding good 
fresh ingredients – hardly a secret but imperative nonetheless.

Serves 4

For the dressing:

½ cup best quality palm sugar
125ml thick tamarind water
 2-3 tbsp light soy sauce
a good pinch white sesame seeds
4 sliced and deep-fried red shallots

For the salad, a mixture of some of the following: 

a handful of mixed mint leaves and dill sprigs
a handful of mixed Thai, holy and lemon basil
some sliced yam bean (jicama)
2 tbsp sliced green beans
1 tbsp pak chi farang (long-leaf coriander), shredded
½ small green mango, shredded
1 stalk lemon grass, cleaned and finely sliced
1 sliced apple aubergine 
4 shredded kaffir lime leaves
½ star fruit, elegantly sliced (optional)
1 large red chilli, deep-fried 

To make the dressing, dissolve the palm sugar in the tamarind water and soy. 
Toast the sesame seeds and once fragrant and golden, allow to cool. Crush the 
sesame seeds and deep-fried shallots in a pestle and mortar and stir into the 
sauce. It should taste sweet, sour and only very slightly salty. It might be 
necessary to lighten the sauce with a few tablespoons of water. If the sauce 
has been refrigerated, bring to room temperature.

Combine the prepared fruits and vegetables in a bowl. While not every 
suggested vegetable is necessary, a good selection gives a rounded balance to 
the salad. Dress and serve sprinkled with coarsely crushed deep-fried chilli.

Alicia Silverstone's Moroccan couscous with saffron

I adore couscous, and this is a wonderful way to prepare it. Not only is it 
tasty, it looks gorgeous on a big serving plate. You can complement it with a 
simple salad or let it be the beginning of a feast that includes soup, hummus 
and veggies. This recipe serves six, but you can halve it or just make a big 
batch and keep leftovers in the fridge.

Serves 6

2 cups butternut squash, peeled and cut into 5mm to 1cm cubes
2 cups yellow onion, cut into large dice
1½ cups carrots cut into 5mm to 1cm cubes
1½ cups courgette cut into 1.5cm cubes
2 tbsp extra virgin olive oil 
fine sea salt
1½ tsp freshly ground black pepper
375ml vegetable broth
2 tbsp non-dairy butter
¼ tsp ground cumin
½ tsp saffron threads 
1½ cups wholewheat couscous
spring onions 2, chopped

Preheat the oven to 190C/gas mark 5. Place the butternut squash, onion, 
carrots and courgette on a baking sheet and toss with the olive oil, 1 teaspoon 
salt and 1 teaspoon pepper. Roast for 25 to 30 minutes, turning once with a 
spatula about midway through.

While the vegetables roast, bring the broth to the boil in a pan. Remove pan 
from the heat and stir in the butter, remaining ½ teaspoon pepper, cumin, 
saffron and salt to taste. Cover pan and steep for 15 minutes.

Scrape the roasted vegetables and their juices into a large bowl and add the 
couscous. Bring the vegetable broth back to the boil, and pour over the 
couscous mixture all at once. Cover tightly with a plate and allow to stand for 
15 minutes. Add the spring onions, toss the couscous and vegetables with a 
fork, and serve.

• The Kind Diet by Alicia Silverstone (Rodale, £19.99)

Mario Batali's shaved asparagus with Parmigiano Reggiano

Serves 6

800g medium asparagus, tough bottom ends snapped off
75g Parmigiano Reggiano, coarsely grated
juice of 1 lemon
 2 tbsp warm water
125ml extra virgin olive oil
Maldon or other flaky sea salt and coarsely ground black pepper

Using a Benriner (Japanese mandolin) or other vegetable slicer, or a vegetable 
peeler, thinly shave the asparagus, making long diagonal shavings.

Put the Parmigiano in a large bowl and whisk in the lemon juice and warm 
water. Whisking constantly, slowly drizzle in the oil to make a loose emulsion. 
Add the asparagus and toss gently to coat. Season with salt if necessary and 
with pepper and serve.

• Molto Gusto: Easy Italian Cooking by Mario Batali (Ecco Press, £19.99)

Valentine Warner's elote: sweetcorn with mayonnaise, cheese and chilli

The Mexicans really understand maize like no other nationality and the 
following recipe is one that you will find being sold on many streets across 
the country. This is not about manners, knives or forks – and be warned, there 
are no maize workshops to help you through your subsequent addiction to this 
recipe. I prefer shop-bought mayonnaise for elote, and as for the cheese – 
Wensleydale seems the closest to the crumbly ones used in Mexico. Bottom line 
is you can always use a mild cheddar.

Serves 4

4 cobs of corn
40g Wensleydale cheese, grated
4 tbsp bought mayonnaise
1 lime
chipotle powder or hot smoked paprika
salt
4 wooden skewers

Peel the sweetcorn of its husks and threads. Boil the corn for 8 minutes in a 
pan of salted water.

While the corn boils, take a large plate – on one side put the grated cheese, 
and on the other dollop the mayonnaise. Cut the lime in half and have the 
chilli ready. If you have the chipotle chilli powder great! Otherwise hot 
smoked paprika will get the job done.

When the cobs are ready, take them out of the water. Holding each one with a 
tea towel, drive a skewer into the stem end. Holding it by the skewer, roll it 
first in the mayonnaise thoroughly and then in the grated cheese. Sprinkle it 
all about with the chipotle powder or smoked paprika. Finish it with a little 
squeeze of lime juice and some more salt. Relish not only the taste but also 
the mess you are creating.

• Valentine Warner will be at Harvest at Jimmy's 11-12 September; 
harvestatjimmys.com <http://harvestatjimmys.com>

Mark Hix's elderflower ice cream

Rich and creamy, with a subtle fragrance, this is the perfect ice cream to 
serve with summer berries and fruit jellies. It is best eaten on the day it is 
made, though it can be kept in the freezer for a day or two.

Makes about 750ml

300ml creamy milk, such as Guernsey or Jersey
6 egg yolks
100g caster sugar
300ml Jersey cream or clotted cream (or a mixture) 
200ml elderflower syrup, or more to taste

Pour the milk into a saucepan and bring to the boil, then remove from the heat.

Whisk the egg yolks and sugar together in a bowl, then pour on the milk, 
whisking as you do so. Return to the pan and place over a low heat. Cook, 
stirring constantly, using a whisk, for about 5 minutes, until the custard has 
thickened lightly, but don't let it boil.

Pour the custard into a bowl and whisk in the cream and elderflower syrup. 
Leave to cool, then churn in an ice cream machine until thickened. Scoop into 
glass bowls and serve, with summer berries if you like.

• British Seasonal Food by Mark Hix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/mark-hix> (Quadrille, £25) 

Jason Atherton's roasted beetroot with baby chard, goat's cheese and walnuts

This is a relaxed version of one of my star restaurant dishes. The simple 
marriage of beetroot and goat's cheese works beautifully and the glaze adds a 
lovely complexity. it's a very easy dish to put together.

Serves 4 as a starter or 2 as a main course

3 red beetroot, washed
sea salt
1 plain goat's cheese log, about 150g, without rind
40ml milk
40g baby chard leaves, or mixed baby greens, such as rocket or spinach
olive oil, to drizzle

For the walnut dressing:

100g walnuts, shelled and chopped
15g parsley leaves, finely chopped
15g chervil leaves, finely chopped
15g garlic, peeled and crushed
2 tbsp white wine vinegar 
150ml olive oil 

For the glaze:

40ml thin honey
50ml red wine vinegar
65ml olive oil

Preheat the oven to 200C/gas mark 6. Trim the tops and roots from the 
beetroot, chop the trimmings and put them into a saucepan. Cut off and roughly 
chop a quarter of 1 beetroot; add to the pan. Loosely wrap all the rest of the 
beetroot in foil, sprinkle with a little salt and bake until tender when tested 
with a knife (1-1½ hours). Unwrap and leave to cool.

In a small bowl, mix the goat's cheese with the milk using a fork to loosen it 
slightly. Cover and refrigerate.

For the walnut dressing, toast the walnuts in a dry frying pan over a medium 
heat until light golden brown and starting to give off a nutty aroma. Tip into 
a bowl and add the herbs, garlic, wine vinegar and olive oil. Stir to combine 
and season with salt to taste.

Peel the cooled beetroot and set aside; add the skins to the other trimmings.

To make the glaze, pour 200-300ml water over the beetroot trimmings – just 
enough to cover them. Bring to the boil and simmer for 10 minutes or until the 
water is deep red in colour. Strain, discarding the trimmings, and return to 
the pan. Whisk in the honey, wine vinegar, olive oil and some salt. Simmer 
until reduced and thickened to a syrupy glaze, about 6-8 minutes.

Meanwhile cut the beetroot into wedges. Toss into the pan and gently move them 
around with a spoon to coat with the glaze and heat through, about 3-5 minutes.

To plate: Place a ring of beetroot wedges on each plate and drizzle with the 
glaze. Dollop the goat's cheese in between and spoon on the walnut dressing. 
Arrange the salad leaves decoratively and sprinkle with a few drops of olive 
oil and a little sea salt.

• Gourmet Food for a Fiver by Jason Atherton (Quadrille, £14.99)

Anjum Anand's Bengali squash with chickpeas

Serves 4

3 tbsp vegetable oil 
a good pinch of asafoetida
1 bay leaf
¼ tsp panch phoron 
1 or 2 mild dried red chillies 
1 small onion, peeled and sliced
½ tsp turmeric
2 scant tsp ground cumin 
1 rounded tsp ground coriander 
salt, to taste
¾ tsp sugar or to taste
2 tsp ginger paste 
500g butternut squash, peeled, seeds removed and flesh cut into 4cm chunks
150-200g tinned chickpeas, drained and rinsed
¾ tsp garam masala 
¾ tsp fennel seeds, powdered

Heat the oil in a large non-stick saucepan. Add the asafoetida, bay leaf, 
panch phoron and chillies; cook over a low heat for about 1 minute.

Add the onion and cook until soft and golden. Stir in the turmeric, cumin and 
coriander, along with the salt, sugar and ginger paste. Give the pan a stir, 
add a splash of water and cook for another minute.

Add the squash, and pour in 150ml water. Bring to the boil, then cover and 
simmer until the squash is cooked through, around 15-18 minutes.

Stir in the chickpeas, garam masala, fennel seed powder and a splash of water. 
Cook for another minute and serve. The dish should be moist but not gravied.

• Anjum Anand's I Love Curry (Quadrille, £17.99) will be out in October

Thomasina Miers's summer tacos with courgette and corn

I love this filling. Lightly sautéed courgette and corn flavoured with fresh 
summer herbs. What could be simpler?

Serves 4

2 tbsp olive or vegetable oil 
2 small shallots, finely chopped
1 clove garlic, chopped
corn kernels cut from a cob
1 green chilli, finely chopped
700g courgette, cut into small dice
1 tbsp chopped mint
1 tbsp chervil, chopped
juice of ½ lime
sea salt and black pepper
crumbled feta, to serve (optional)

Heat a heavy-bottomed frying pan and add the oil. When it is hot, add the 
shallots, garlic, corn, chilli and courgette. Fry, stirring all the time, until 
the vegetables are gently coloured on all sides and the onion is translucent. 
It is delicious if the courgette still has a little bite. Stir in the herbs, 
squeeze over the limes and season to taste. This is really good sprinkled with 
a little crumbled feta.

• Mexican Food Made Simple by Thomasina Miers (Hodder & Stoughton, £20) 

Sam and Eddie Hart's beetroot and St Tola tart

Serves 4

250g dried figs, finely chopped
250ml red wine 
125ml port 
500g red onions, sliced into thin rounds
50g butter 
8 beetroot 
puff pastry
80g St Tola cheese 
½ clove garlic, crushed
1 tsp thyme leaves, chopped
a splash of milk 
salt and pepper

Marinate the figs in the red wine and port – leave for at least half an hour.

Preheat your oven to 180C/gas mark 4. Cook the onions in the butter very 
slowly until translucent. Add the figs, wine and port and reduce until syrupy, 
then set aside.

Cook the beetroot in plenty of salty water until tender. Remove from the pan, 
peel and slice into 5mm rounds.

Roll the puff pastry into a 5mm sheet. With a 9cm pastry cutter, cut 4 rounds. 
Place the puff pastry rounds on a lightly oiled baking tray, place another 
heavy tray on top (to stop the puff pastry rising too much), and blind bake in 
the oven for 12 minutes.

While the pastry bakes, mix the St Tola with the garlic, thyme, and milk to 
form a paste, then season with salt and pepper. Remove the pastry bases from 
the oven and leave to cool for 5 minutes.

Then assemble the tarts: on top of each pastry base place a spoonful of the 
figs and onions, then a couple of slices of beetroot, then a dollop of cheese. 
Bake in the oven for 5 minutes.

Drizzle a little of the remaining fig and onion syrup around each tart and 
serve at once.

Clare Smyth's spiced aubergine salad

Serves 4

2 aubergines 
salt
vegetable oil 
1 shallot
1 tbsp cumin 
½ tbsp tomato purée 
250ml tomato juice 
50g raisins, soaked
1 tbsp flat parsley, chopped
2 tomatoes, peeled, seeded and chopped

Dice the aubergine into 2.5cm square pieces and salt them for 2 hours. After 
the 2 hours, dry them off on a clean towel then deep-fry them until golden 
brown. Leave to cool on kitchen paper to soak up the excess oil.

Finely slice the shallot and sweat down in a saucepan, add the cumin, cook out 
for 30 seconds, then add the tomato purée and cook out again for 2 minutes on a 
low heat.

Add the tomato juice and cook for a further 2 minutes, add the raisins and the 
aubergine, mix well and check the seasoning. Leave to cool.

When the mix is cool, add the chopped parsley and fresh tomatoes. Serve at 
room temperature with some crusty bread and mint yoghurt.

Clare Smyth's spiced aubergine salad

Serves 4

oil
1 shallot
1 tbsp cumin 
½ tbsp tomato purée 
250ml tomato juice 
50g raisins, soaked
2 aubergine
1 tbsp flat parsley, chopped 
2 tomatoes, peeled, seeded and chopped 

Dice the aubergine into 2cm square pieces and salt them for 2 hours. After the 
2 hours dry them off on a clean towel, then deep-fry them until golden brown. 
Leave to cool on kitchen paper to soak up the excess oil.

Finely slice the shallot and sweat down in a saucepan, add the cumin, cook out 
for 30 seconds, then add the tomato purée and cook out again for 2 minutes on a 
low heat.

Add the tomato juice and cook for a further 2 minutes, add the raisins and the 
aubergine, mix well and check the seasoning. Leave to cool.

When the mix is cool add the chopped parsley and fresh tomatoes. Serve at room 
temperature with some crusty bread and mint yoghurt.

• Clare Smyth is head chef at Restaurant Gordon Ramsay (gordonramsay.com 
<http://gordonramsay.com>)

Jeremy Lee's beetroot with poached eggs

Serves 2 as a main course

2kg smaller-sized beetroot of every colour and variety
125g caster sugar 
250ml very good red wine vinegar 
6 soft-boiled eggs
a stick of horseradish 
salad leaves 
chopped chives (optional) 

For the dressing:

2 tbsp caster sugar 
2 tbsp white wine vinegar 
2 tsp good Dijon mustard
6 tbsp double cream 

Trim and wash the beetroot well. Place in a suitable pot to steam until quite 
cooked through and tender. When done, remove them to a bowl and when cooled 
slightly, rub the skin away from the beetroot. When all are peeled, cut the 
beetroot into large pieces, random shapes of roughly the same size.

In a bowl, whisk the sugar and vinegar until it is dissolved and add the 
water. Pour this light pickle over the beetroot and cover well. Refrigerate. 
These pickles will happily last a week in the fridge.

Bring a pan of water to a furious boil. Drop in the eggs and let cook for 3 
minutes once the water is returned to the boil. Remove the eggs to a bowl of 
iced water and once cooled, peel carefully, storing them in another bowl of 
iced water.

To make the dressing, dissolve the sugar and the vinegar in a bowl. Stir in 
the mustard until smooth then add in the cream. Pour into a bowl, cover and 
refrigerate.

Peel the horseradish and keep covered until needed. Wash the salad leaves, dry 
well and keep covered.

Should chives be at hand, then slice them very thinly in readiness.

Tumble the salad leaves onto a plate, then heap the beetroot thereon. Cut the 
egg in half and lay upon the beetroot, seasoning with a little salt and pepper. 
Liberally spoon over the mustard dressing and then grate horseradish all over, 
swiftly followed by the chives.

• Jeremy Lee is head chef at the Blueprint Cafe (blueprintcafe.co.uk 
<http://blueprintcafe.co.uk>)

Trina Hahnemann's baked green and white asparagus salad

Serves 4

15 green asparagus spears 
15 white asparagus spears 
4 tbsp extra virgin olive oil 
grated zest and juice of an organic lemon
salt and pepper 

Preheat the oven to 180C/gas mark 4. Cut 3cm from the base of each asparagus 
spear, then peel the white ones only from the head down. Rinse the asparagus 
with the tips downwards in cold water. Place the spears in an ovenproof dish 
and mix well with the olive oil, lemon zest and juice and some salt and freshly 
ground pepper.

Bake the spears for 5-7 minutes. You can then serve them as they are, hot or 
cold, or cut the spears into smaller pieces, making sure the lemon zest and 
juice are still coating the asparagus.

• Scandinavian Cookbook by Trina Hahnemann (Quadrille, £14.99)

Skye Gyngell's farro with broad beans, peas, asparagus and spinach

Serves 4

60g cooked broad beans
8 asparagus spears, quickly blanched
60g cooked peas 
125g cooked spinach 
250g cooked farro 
4 tbsp extra virgin olive oil 
juice of 1 lemon
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

As a rule of thumb, vegetables that grow above the ground should be dropped 
into boiling, well-salted water, while vegetables that grow below the ground 
should go into cold water. Broad beans need no more than a minute in boiling 
water – asparagus the same. Peas need a minute or so more. I prefer not to 
refresh cooked vegetables under running water but to dress them quickly while 
still warm. I believe that this gives them a better flavour.

Cook the spinach by simply rinsing well in cold water and placing in a dry pan 
over a low heat – the water that clings to the leaves is enough to create steam 
to wilt the spinach. Once it is wilted, remove quickly and drain in a colander.

I always double-pod broad beans – I do not find the pale, tough, outer skin 
pleasant to eat. It's extra work, but well worth it. Place the spinach, peas, 
broad beans and asparagus and farro into a bowl and dress with olive oil and 
lemon.

Season with sea salt and black pepper and toss together lightly with your 
fingers. Again, serve quickly while the flavours are fresh.

• Skye Gyngell is head chef of Petersham Nurseries Cafe (petershamnurseries.com
 <http://petershamnurseries.com>)

Vivek Singh's stir-fried okra with dried mango

Serves 4-6

800g okra, topped and tailed, sliced into 1cm roundels
100ml corn or vegetable oil
2 tsp cumin seeds 
2 onions, peeled and finely chopped
2 tomatoes, cleaned and roughly chopped
1 tsp chilli powder 
3cm ginger, finely chopped
1 tsp dried mango powder (available in Asian stores – otherwise use black salt 
or chaat masala)
½ tsp garam masala powder 
oil to flash-fry the okra 

Fry the okra for 30 seconds in very hot oil and drain on kitchen towels.

Heat the 100ml oil for the sauce, add the cumin seeds, and when they crackle 
add the onions and cook until they start to turn brown. Add the tomatoes and 
cook till they are soft and the juices dry out.

Add the chilli powder and cook for a further couple of minutes. Add the 
flash-fried okra and toss quickly. While stirring briskly on high heat, add the 
ginger, salt and dried mango powder to finish.

To give an extra touch of flavour, garam masala powder may be added at the end.

• Vivek Singh is executive chef, the Cinnamon Club (cinnamonclub.com 
<http://cinnamonclub.com>)

Pasquale Amico's carpaccio di zucchine e rucola (Courgette carpaccio with 
rocket salad)

Serves 2

For the dressing:

juice of a small lemon
salt and pepper
4 tbsp organic extra virgin olive oil 
1 medium-sized courgette
15g rocket salad 

Place the lemon juice in a bowl, add a pinch of salt and pepper, pour in the 
oil and whisk until all is amalgamated. Set to one the side.

With a mandolin, slice the courgette thinly, place in a bowl and season with 
salt and pepper. Add some lemon dressing and mix well. Place the courgette on 
the plate starting from the side to the centre, forming a ring.

Place the rocket salad in a bowl, season with salt and pepper, and add the 
lemon dressing. Place on top of the courgette in the middle and serve.

• Pasquale Amico is the chef at Amico Bio, London's first organic vegetarian 
Italian restaurant (amicobio.co.uk <http://amicobio.co.uk>)

Mark Sargeant's mango curry

Serves 4

3 medium-ripe mangoes, peeled, pit removed and flesh cut into 1cm pieces 
1 tsp ground turmeric 
1 tsp cayenne pepper 
1-1½ tsp salt 
55g jaggery or brown sugar, if needed 
310g coconut, freshly grated 
3-4 fresh hot green chillies, coarsely chopped 
½ tbsp cumin seeds 
250ml water 
290ml natural yoghurt, lightly beaten 
2 tbsp coconut oil or any other vegetable oil 
½ tsp brown mustard seeds 
3 or 4 dried hot red chillies, broken into halves 
½ tsp fenugreek seeds 
10-12 fresh curry leaves, if available 

Put the mangoes in a medium-sized pan. Add 250ml water. Cover and stew for 
8-10 minutes over a medium-low heat. Stir occasionally. Add the turmeric, 
cayenne pepper and salt. Stir well. (If the mangoes are not sweet enough, add 
the jaggery or brown sugar to make the dish sweeter.) Meanwhile put the 
coconut, green chillies and cumin seeds into a blender. Add 250ml water and 
blend to a fine paste.

When the mangoes are cooked, mash them to a pulp. Add the coconut paste. Mix. 
Cover and simmer over a medium heat, stirring occasionally, until the mixture 
becomes thick. This should take about 10-15 minutes. Add the yoghurt and heat, 
stirring, until just warmed through. Do not let the mixture come to the boil. 
Remove from the heat and put to one side. Check for seasoning.

Heat the oil in a small pan over a medium-high heat. When hot, add the mustard 
seeds. When the mustard seeds begin to pop (a matter of a few seconds) add the 
chillies, fenugreek seeds and the curry leaves. Stir and fry for a few seconds 
until the chillies darken. Quickly add the contents of the small pan to the 
mangoes. Stir to mix.

Peter Gordon's chilled beetroot and sourdough soup

This chilled soup is thickened with sourdough, which gives it great body and 
texture.

Serves 6

700g unpeeled red beetroot, skins gently scrubbed
100ml white vinegar or cider vinegar 
1 tsp salt
100g sliced sourdough bread, crusts removed (2-3 slices)
1 red onion, peeled and thinly sliced
4 garlic cloves, peeled and sliced
1 tsp coriander seeds
1 tbsp olive oil 
2 bay leaves
2 tsp fresh thyme leaves (or try oregano or rosemary)
8 large tomatoes, chopped
600ml water
50ml crème fraîche 
mint leaves, a small handful shredded 

Place the beetroot and 90ml of the vinegar in a pot with plenty of cold water 
to cover, add 1 tsp of salt and bring to the boil. Cook, with a lid on, until 
you can easily insert a knife through them. Drain and place in a bowl of iced 
water until they are cool enough to handle, then peel them (wearing gloves) and 
cut into chunks.

While the beetroot are cooking, toast the bread until golden and crisp, then 
tear into pieces.

Sauté the onion, garlic and coriander seeds in the oil until it is just 
beginning to caramelise, then add the herbs and tomatoes and bring to a boil. 
Add the chopped beetroot and the water and bring back to the boil, then put a 
lid on and rapidly simmer for 30 minutes.

Add the toast and give it a good stir, then put the lid back on and cook 
another 10 minutes. Remove the bay leaves, add the reserved vinegar and purée 
till smooth. I find using a stick blender the best method, as you can do this 
while the soup is still really hot. If you have to use a blender, then leave it 
to cool down before puréeing. Adjust the seasoning and leave to cool, then 
place in the fridge to chill down for at least 3 hours.

To serve, give it a good stir, then taste for seasoning – when food is served 
cold it usually needs a little extra salt. Ladle into bowls then dollop on the 
crème fraîche and shredded mint.

Peter Gordon's golden beetroot pesto with linguine, peas and mint

I prefer to use golden beets in this recipe, although you can substitute them 
with red ones. There are so many varieties out there it'd be worth you 
experimenting with them.

Makes a great lunchtime meal for 4, a starter for 6-8

3 golden beetroot (about 400g)
100g lightly toasted macadamia nuts 
3 garlic cloves, peeled
a handful basil leaves and stalk, shredded
a small handful tarragon leaves
a small handful parsley leaves
80ml extra virgin olive oil 
40g grated Parmesan (and extra for serving)
salt and freshly ground black pepper
400g dried linguine, spaghettini or tagliatelli 
200g peas (frozen will work)
a handful of mint leaves, torn 

Preheat the oven to 200C/gas mark 6. Wash any dirt from the beetroot then wrap 
them tightly in foil, either individually or all in one sausage shape. Roast 
for 90 minutes then poke a skewer or thin sharp knife through the foil to see 
if they're cooked – it should go through with the tiniest resistance. Once 
they're cooked, open the foil up and plunge into iced water to cool for 5 
minutes, then rub their skins off with your fingers or a sharp knife. Dice 2 of 
them to be tossed through the pasta, and cut the other into chunks.

Place the macadamia nuts and garlic in a small food processor and blitz to 
give coarse crumbs. Add the beetroot chunks, basil, tarragon and parsley and 
blitz for 10 seconds, then add 60ml of the olive oil and blitz again briefly. 
Tip into a bowl and stir in the Parmesan. If the mixture looks too dry then mix 
in a little extra olive oil. Taste for seasoning, adding salt and freshly 
ground pepper to taste.

Bring a large pan of lightly salted water to the boil (no need to add any oil) 
and drop the pasta in, then give it a good stir. Cook it until almost al dente 
then add the peas and boil another 2 minutes before draining into a colander. 
Tip into a large bowl, or back into the pan, add the diced beetroot, remaining 
olive oil, the mint and ⅔ of the pesto. Mix it together really well, divide 
among your bowls, then dollop on the remaining pesto. Offer extra grated 
Parmesan as you serve it.

Peter Gordon's mushroom and seawood broth with shiitake dumplings

You can save time by buying wonton wrappers instead of making your own 
dumpling dough, but the five-spice adds a great flavour.

Serves 4

For the dumpling dough:
½ tsp five-spice powder
90g strong flour (bread flour)
1 medium egg
1 tsp sesame oil, plus extra for cooking
12 shiitake mushrooms, stems removed (reserve stems for broth)
100ml soy sauce 
1 spring onion, thinly sliced
1 x 10cm length kombu seaweed 
1 stalk celery, thickly sliced
2 thumbs ginger, peeled and finely julienned or diced (reserve peel for broth)
5g dried wakame or arame seaweed 
3 tbsp mirin (or 1 tbsp sugar) 
a generous handful of raw Asian mushrooms (I use shimeji, enoki and oyster 
mushrooms)
cress or snipped chives to garnish 

Make your dumpling dough first. Sieve the five-spice with the flour on a work 
surface, making a well in the centre. In a small bowl whisk the egg and oil 
together with a few pinches of salt and pour into the well. Using your fingers, 
mix the egg mixture into the flour and bring it together to form a dough, then 
gently knead for 30 seconds. It should be moist but not sticky – add more flour 
if it's too wet. Wrap in cling film and put to one side in a cool place (not 
the fridge) to rest for an hour.

Thinly slice the shiitake caps, then fry two-thirds of them in a little sesame 
oil (preferably in a non-stick pan as it'll need less oil), stirring all the 
time, until they collapse and soften. Stir in 1 tablespoon of the soy then take 
off the heat and mix in the spring onion.

Take 8 small marble-sized lumps of the dough and flatten between your fingers 
to form a disc, then either roll out on a lightly floured work surface or use a 
pasta roller to get the disc quite thin. Place a spoonful of the shiitake 
mixture in the centre, lightly brush the outer rim of dough with a little cold 
water, then fold one side over to the other. Press down gently but firmly to 
expel any air. Use a fork dipped in a little flour to secure the seams. Lay on 
a tray lined with cling film while you make the rest. You'll have plenty of 
dough left over – it'll keep in the freezer for one month.

Soak the kombu in tepid water for 20 seconds, then wipe it gently all over 
with a cloth to remove the white powdery coat. Place in a pan with 1 litre cold 
water, the celery and the shiitake stems and the ginger peelings. Bring almost 
to the boil, then simmer with a lid on for 8 minutes, turn the heat off and 
leave to infuse for 20 minutes.

Strain the stock into a wide pan, add the seaweed, ginger julienne, mirin and 
the remaining soy and bring to a rolling simmer. Add the dumplings and cook 
with a lid on, turning them over after 4 minutes. Add the mushrooms and cook 
another 4 minutes with the lid ajar, gently stirring from time to time. Taste 
for seasoning then ladle into warmed soup bowls, garnishing with the cress or 
chives.

• Fusion: A Culinary Journey by Peter Gordon (Jacqui Small, £25) 

Angela Hartnett's arancini

This is a fantastic recipe for using up leftover risotto. Filled with melting 
mozzarella, arancini (meaning "little oranges") are perfect comfort food. If 
you like, roll them into smaller, bite-sized balls and serve them as canapés 
with drinks.

Makes 12-15 large balls, 20-25 smaller ones

½ quantity basic risotto (see recipe below)
 4 tbsp olive oil
250g mixed wild mushrooms, wiped with a damp cloth and finely chopped
1 x 125g ball buffalo mozzarella, finely diced
1 tsp fresh flatleaf parsley, finely chopped 
dash of truffle oil (optional)
200g "00" flour
salt and freshly ground black pepper
200g fresh white breadcrumbs 
3 eggs, beaten
vegetable oil, for deep-frying

If making the risotto, spread it out on a flat tray to cool.

Heat the olive oil in a pan over a medium heat, add the mushrooms and cook for 
3-4 minutes until golden brown. Transfer to a bowl, mix in the mozzarella and 
parsley, and season. If you have some truffle oil, you can add a dash of it to 
the mixture.

Add the risotto to the bowl and stir well. Take a heaped tablespoonful of the 
mixture and roll it between the palms of your hands to form a ball about 4-5cm 
in diameter. Set aside on a plate while you roll the rest of the mixture.

Put the flour in a dish and mix in some seasoning. Put the breadcrumbs and 
eggs in 2 more separate dishes. Take a rice ball and roll first in the flour, 
then in the egg and finally the breadcrumbs. Shake off any excess crumbs and 
set aside on a clean plate. Repeat with the remaining rice balls.

Preheat a deep-fat fryer or pan of oil to 180C. Gently lower the arancini into 
the pan in batches and cook for 3-4 minutes, or until golden brown. Remove with 
a slotted or wire spoon and drain on kitchen paper. Serve immediately.

Angela Hartnett's basic risotto

Serves 4

2 tbsp olive oil 
225g cold butter, diced
small onion 1, chopped or small shallots 2, chopped
350g risotto rice
200ml white wine
about 1.25 litres hot vegetable stock 
fresh Parmesan 100g, finely grated
salt and freshly ground black pepper

Heat the oil and 25g of the butter in a large pan over a medium heat. Add the 
onion and cook, stirring, until soft and translucent, about 2 minutes. Stir in 
the rice and cook for a further 2 minutes. Turn up the heat and add the wine – 
it should sizzle as it hits the pan. Cook for about 2 minutes to evaporate the 
alcohol.

Once the liquid has reduced, begin adding the hot stock a ladleful at a time 
over a medium heat, allowing each addition to be absorbed before adding the 
next, and stirring continuously. The rice should always be moist but not 
swimming in liquid. The process of adding and stirring should take about 16-18 
minutes.

Remove from the heat and stir in the remaining butter. Finish with the 
Parmesan, then season well and serve.

• Angela Hartnett's Cucina (Ebury Press, £25) 

Bryn Williams's leek and egg salad

4 new season leeks, washed
100ml vinaigrette
4 soft-boiled eggs
1 bunch chopped chives 
Halen Môn sea salt with organic celery seed
ground pepper 

Trim the dark green tops off the leeks. Cook the leeks in a large of salted 
boiling water for about 6-8 minutes until tender. Remove the leeks from the 
boiling water and leave to cool on a wire rack.

Place the vinaigrette in a bowl, peel the boiled eggs and roughly chop to a 
small bite size, making sure you keep all the yolk. Add the egg and chopped 
chives to the vinaigrette and season with salt and pepper.

Cut the warm leek in half lengthways and place on a large plate. Spoon the 
vinaigrette over the leeks, making sure you scatter the egg evenly over the 
dish.

Best eaten when the leeks are warm.

• Bryn Williams is chef/patron of Odette's (odettesprimrosehill.com 
<http://odettesprimrosehill.com>)
 