
Jaws dropped, but Venezuelan national pride soared, as a low-profile film from 
an unknown first-time director scooped the Venice film festival’s top prize the 
Golden Lion. Lorenzo Vigas’s film From Afar (Desde Allá) wasn’t considered by 
many as a front runner in a competition that included works from such 
high-profile names as Charlie Kaufman, Tom Hooper, performer turned director
Laurie Anderson <https://www.theguardian.com/music/laurie-anderson> and 2011 
Golden Lion winner Alexander Sokurov. But Vigas’s dark drama, about the 
relationship between a middle-aged gay man and a violent young street tough, 
was certainly one of the discoveries of the festival, and had plenty to 
recommend it – not least an audaciously minimalist performance from Alfredo 
Castro, the Chilean actor who in the last few years has become a cult star for 
his chilling presence in the films of director Pablo Larrain (notably Post 
Mortem and Tony Manero).

In From Afar - the first Venezuelan film ever to play in competition here - 
Castro plays Armando, a solitary dental technician who cruises the streets of 
Caracas offering money to young men to undress for him. He seems to have come a 
cropper when he runs into aggressive Elder – striking young newcomer Luis Silva 
– but the two form an unlikely rapport, although their relationship leads the 
story towards very sombre corners and a laconically troubling ending. Despite 
general admiration, Vigas didn’t entirely win over critics: many felt that the 
film’s moody visual style was too close to that of Chile’s Larrain, and indeed 
they share a cinematographer, Sergio Armstrong. From Afar certainly has some 
clout – the producers include Mexican novelist and screenwriter Guillermo 
Arriaga (21 Grams, Amores Perros), who co-wrote the story on which the film was 
based. And Far Afar was certainly a cinephile choice from a jury heavy with 
auteurs known for their seriousness – including president Alfonso Cuaron, Pawel 
Pawlikowski, Lynne Ramsay, Taiwan’s Hou Hsiao-hsien and Turkey’s Nuri Bilge 
Ceylan.
 Extraordinary ... Anomalisa. Photograph: PR 
Many bets were placed on the Golden Lion going to Anomalisa, the extraordinary 
stop-motion animation directed byCharlie Kaufman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/charlie-kaufman> and Duke Johnson, but 
instead it took the Grand Jury Prize – although it was by far the most 
innovative and artistically haunting film of the festival. And I’d have loved 
to have seen some recognition for Laurie Anderson’s very idiosyncratic Heart of 
a Dog, a poetic essay film that was one of the most personal things on show 
here.

Anomalisa review: sex and depression in Charlie Kaufman's superb stop-motion 
breakdown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/05/anomalisa-review-sex-and-depression-in-charlie-kaufmans-superb-stop-motion-breakdown>
Other prizes were equally mysterious. The Silver Bear for Best Direction went 
to Argentinian stalwart Pablo Trapero for El Clan, a true-crime thriller about 
a family who run a kidnapping racket: an efficiently nerve-racking piece, but 
not the best from this respected realist director.

Then there was the prize for best female performance, for which favourites 
included Tilda Swinton, Juliette Binoche or (my own, admittedly left-field bet) 
Jennifer Jason Leigh for her voice-only role in Anomalisa: instead, the winner 
was Italy’s Valeria Golino. As for the male award, while Eddie Redmayne in The 
Danish Girl will certainly have his spotlight at more mainstream awards event, 
and Ralph Fiennes was a popular choice for his boisterous Brit in Luca 
Guadagnino’sA Bigger Splash <https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-bigger-splash>, 
it seemed a slightly safe option to go for much-loved French star Fabrice 
Luchini, as a curmudgeonly judge in L’Hermine, which also won its director 
Christian Vincent the best screenplay prize.

No one, however, could have had qualms about the best newcomer acting prize 
that went to Abraham Attah. He is the 14-year-old street vendor from Ghana 
chosen to play an 11-year-old boy soldier opposite Idris Elba inBeasts of No 
Nation <https://www.theguardian.com/film/beasts-of-no-nation>, the 
much-applauded Netflix-produced drama about war in Africa, directed by Cary 
Fukunaga (Sin Nombre, TV’s True Detective).

Beasts of No Nation brings Netflix to Venice with beauty and horror
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/04/beasts-of-no-nation-brings-netflix-to-venice-with-beauty-and-horror>
Perhaps the evening’s biggest surprise, though, was the double success of a 
film that rubbed many critics up the wrong way. The Childhood of a Leader was a 
sombre, sometimes mystifying French-set drama based on a Jean-Paul Sartre 
story, and starring Robert Pattinson and Bérénice Béjo. Guy Lodge in Variety 
called it“a overweening, maddening but not inconsiderable directorial debut” 
<http://variety.com/2015/film/reviews/the-childhood-of-a-leader-review-1201587327/>
, but the film won two awards in the Orizzonti section, the Lion of the Future 
and the Special Orizzonti prize. The director and co-writer is Brady Corbet, a 
young American actor who has made a career in European art cinema, working with 
directors such as Olivier Assayas, Michael Haneke and Lars von Trier. Corbet’s 
was the only film screened in Venice on 35mm, and he said that using the medium 
“should be a film-maker’s right, not a privilege”. His film – with its 
hyper-intense string score by pop star turned avant-gardist Scott Walker – may 
not have pleased everyone, but Corbet offered the sound-bite of the night with 
his message to his young daughter: “Be patient, be radical, be free.”
 