
While all around her players are falling over or playing lame, Venus Williams 
is staging a miraculous recovery from the knee injury that had threatened to 
derail her progress at theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>.

The double Wimbledon and US Open champion has gone from a hobble to a sprint 
in the past week, and proved yesterday she is back to full speed with a 6-0, 
6-3 demolition of Magdalena Maleeva to book a quarter-final meeting with Monica 
Seles.

Williams's wounded knee, which appeared so crippled with tendinitis in her 
first-round match that she could barely bend or run, has staged a comeback to 
rival anything the women's event has seen so far. All the ice she has been 
applying has worked a treat.

Against Maleeva a large sticking plaster was the only sign that the injury had 
ever been there at all, and if Maleeva had expected to be playing an invalid it 
took Williams only 48 minutes to disabuse her of any such notion. "It felt very 
good," Williams said of her knee. "It was very good for me not to have not too 
much of a tough match going into the later rounds, especially seeing that I've 
been a bit injured."

Seles may be more adept at taking advantage of any physical frailty than 
anyone Williams has faced so far. She certainly would have had no problem 
spotting the injury to yesterday's opponent Anabel Medina Garrigues, who 
retired with Seles at 4-2 up in the first set. The unfortunate Spaniard 
suffered a spectacular fall, wrenching her knee on the way down, and spent the 
last few minutes of the match lying prostrate on the ground in considerable 
pain.

Seles might have preferred a little more match practice before facing 
Williams, who has not lost a match since July last year and has dropped only 
two sets in that time. That record would be even more impressive had Williams 
deigned to play a full schedule in the autumn, and by now she would doubtless 
have the world No1 ranking many feel she deserves. Williams sounded vaguer than 
ever yesterday about whether she intends to start playing enough tournaments to 
make it a realistic goal. "I'm not sure what the future will bring," she said. 
"I'm planning on playing a few more, but in the fall my schedule is really 
going to dwindle down because I have other things involved and I'm planning for 
my life, so those things come first."

Williams is taking courses in fashion studies and passing those appears to be 
much closer to her heart than reaching the pinnacle of her sport. "Tennis is a 
reality for me but to have a degree is like a dream come true," she admitted. 
"I want to do the best for the tour and myself so hopefully I'll find a happy 
medium."

There is no such ambivalence from Martina Hingis. She appears deadly serious 
both about recapturing the No1 ranking she held for so long and about breaking 
her losing run in grand slams, which stretches back to when she last won this 
event in 1999.

Hingis was in no mood to dawdle yesterday, brushing aside Amanda Coetzer 6-1, 
6-0. Standing in the way of a place in the semi-finals is the Italian unknown 
Adriana Serra Zanetti, who yesterday beat Martina Sucha 6-1, 7-5 to come 
through the quarter of the draw blown open by Serena Williams's withdrawal.
 