
Venus Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/venus-williams> began her 
bid for a record fourth gold medal in Olympic tennis Monday by beating Sara 
Errani of Italy, 6-3, 6-1.

It was an impressive showing by Venus, who is unseeded and drew a tough 
first-round foe. Errani has won four titles this year, was the runner-up at the 
French Open and is ranked a career-high world no 9.

But Venus was in fine form on the Wimbledon grass, where she has won five of 
her seven grand slam titles.

Twenty minutes after Venus won on Court Two, younger sister Serena closed out 
a second-round victory on Court One, beating Urszula Radwanska of Poland, 6-2, 
6-3. Serena defeated Radwanska's sister, Agnieszka, in the Wimbledon final 
ealier this month.

Andy Roddick <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andy-roddick> quickly took to 
Olympic grass, winning his first-round match over Martin Klizan of Slovakia, 
7-5, 6-4.

Venus Williams was diagnosed last year with an autoimmune disease that can 
cause fatigue, but she nonetheless began 2012 determined to make the Olympics 
for the fourth time. She won the gold medal in singles at the 2000 Games and 
teamed with sister Serena to take the gold in doubles in 2000 and 2008.

Because her opening match was delayed a day by rain, Williams will have to 
play six consecutive days if she reaches the final Saturday.

Relegated to Court Two for the first round, Venus served well against Errani 
and moved forward aggressively, winning 19 points at the net. When Errani 
double-faulted on match point, Williams trotted to the net with a grin, then 
shook her fist with glee as spectators chanted "U-S-A! U-S-A!"

Roddick converted only two of 13 break-point chances but dominated with his 
serve, as often happens at Wimbledon, where he's a three-time runner-up.

"I served really well," he said. "I would have liked to have converted more 
break points. But I got a couple and, thankfully, that's all I needed."

The Olympic match, delayed a day by rain, was Roddick's first in eight years.

He lost in the third round at the 2004 Games and skipped Beijing in 2008.

As a price for being unseeded, he'll face a daunting challenge in the second 
round: Novak Djokovic, the 2011 Wimbledon champion.

"The guy has been the best player in the world over the last couple of years," 
Roddick said. "It's going to be tough. But the situation, we've both been 
through it a million times. I'm going to have to serve well and take some 
chances on returns."

Top-seeded Victoria Azarenka of Belarus defeated Irina-Camelia Begu of Romania 
on Centre Court, 6-1, 3-6, 6-1.

Lleyton Hewitt of Australian and Nikolay Davydenko of Russia, both three-time 
Olympians, won their opening matches. Juan Monaco, Marin Cilic, Richard 
Gasquet, and the big-serving Canadian Milos Raonic also advanced.

American Varvara Lepchenko eliminated Veronica Cepede Royg of Paraguay 7-5, 
6-7 (6), 6-2. Their match was tied after two sets when suspended Sunday because 
of rain.

Roddick, a dedicated Davis Cup player for USA, took Court Two on a sunny 
morning looking particularly patriotic. He wore a blue shirt, white shorts and 
stars-and-stripes shoes.

"Posh sneakers, Andy," shouted a spectator with a British accent.

He lost only nine points in 11 service games, and the first break point came 
on the final shot of the opening set, which put him ahead to stay.

Roddick won with more than just his serve, hitting several improbable shots, 
including a back-to-the-net lob to help win one point, and a backhand as he did 
a belly flop behind the baseline.
 