
If you come from a town called Wayne (in Pennsylvania), as Lisa Raymond does, 
you should be expected to get off your horse and show a bit of true grit. Which 
is exactly what the 30-year-old did to toppleVenus Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/venus-williams>, the third seed.

Remaining steady when Williams counterattacked aggressively in the second set 
of the third-round match, Raymond held on for a victory that frankly - and no 
disrespect intended - was good news for the women's game.

It would have been a fine effort if Williams had managed to come back to win 
the first tournament she has entered since losing to sister Serena in last 
year's Wimbledon final. It would also have been a pretty poor reflection on the 
strength of women's tennis. Grand-slam tournaments shouldn't be won by players 
who are feeling their way back after long-term injuries.

William, 23, played at Wimbledon despite pulled stomach muscles and it took 
her the rest of the year to recover. Her lengthy convalescence was all too 
evident as she failed to match the 30-year-old Raymond's greater consistency 
and lost 6-4 7-6 (7-5). Having saved the first of two match points with a 
do-or-die backhand, Williams swiped a forehand wide on the second.

'I'm pretty much in shock. I still can't believe it,' said Williams, who was 
her family's one hope to win here with Serena still recovering from knee 
surgery. 'It's definitely going to settle in this evening. It will be like, 
"Noooooo!" That's the way I feel after every loss.'

Commendably, Williams, four times a grand-slam winner and runner-up to Serena 
in Melbourne last year, did not offer her long lay-off as an excuse. 'Lisa kept 
it coming. She had a lot of shots rockin' and rollin' today,' she said after a 
patchy performance in which she struck 14 aces but made only 56 per cent of her 
first serves. 'I definitely had a lot of high hopes to do well here and, of 
course, ultimately, to win. That's the way it is. You win some, you lose some.'

Raymond, better known as a doubles player having won three grand-slam titles, 
showed she could also play singles, using heavy slice to keep Williams under 
pressure. 'I stepped up to the plate and just believed I could win. That was 
the bottom line today,' she said after reaching the last 16 of the Australian 
Open for the first time in 11 attempts. 'As the underdog, you definitely feel 
like you can swing a little freer. I was getting the ball deep and I was really 
ripping my forehand.'

Raymond has an intriguing match tomorrow against Tatiana Golovin of France, 
who is the surprise player of the tournament. Golovin, who is 16 today, 
received a wild-card entry into the singles as part of a reciprocal agreement 
between the French and Australian federations. Yesterday she beat Lina 
Krasnoroutskaya of Russia 6-2 7-6 (7-4), her second victory over a seeded 
player after she beat Israel's Anna Smashnova-Pistolesi.

Golovin, who was eight months old when her parents moved from Moscow to 
France, is having to pull out of the junior singles because of her unexpected 
progress in the main event. 'I don't know her really very much, but she's very 
good in doubles, which means she's going to come to the net a bit,' Golovin 
said of her match against Raymond. 'So I'm going to need good passing.'

Still, though, the players to beat are the two Belgians, Justine 
Henin-Hardenne and Kim Clijsters, who both reached the last 16 without dropping 
a set. Clijsters, who feared an ankle injury would keep her out of the 
tournament, eased through yesterday with a 6-2 6-1 win over Russian teenager 
Dinara Safina.

You've read the piece, now have your say. Email your comments, be as frank as 
you like, we can take it, tosport.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:sport.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk>, or mail the Observer direct at 
sport@observer.co.uk <mailto:sport@observer.co.uk>
 