
Venus Williams progressed to the quarter-finals of the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>, overcoming an uncertain 
start to defeat qualifier Marta Domachowska 6-4, 6-4.

The American advanced despite being less than convincing in the early 
exchanges when her serve came under pressure from Domachowska, who took the 
lead in the third game by breaking Williams with a fine cross-court passing 
shot.

Williams, though, broke back in the sixth game only for Domachowska to reclaim 
her advantage by breaking the American's serve at the next opportunity.

However, Domachowska was unable to hold in her next game and Williams again 
pulled level before going on to break the Pole once more to take the set 6-4 as 
the pressure started to show on the qualifier.

Domachowska's serve held firm until the penultimate game of the second set 
when she finally succumbed to Williams but the American failed to consolidate 
her lead and Domachowska broke back in the next game.

But the former world No1 sealed victory in the next game when she broke 
Domachowska once more to book her spot in the next round.

Williams, who played with a heavily strapped thigh, will now take on Ana 
Ivanovic in the last eight. Ivanovic saw off the determined Caroline Wozniacki 
6-1, 7-6 (7-2).

Ivanovic said an improved strength and conditioning programme was behind her 
good form in this year's Open. "My fitness ... definitely needed improvement," 
said Ivanovic. "I wasn't a great mover and I had problems with injuries. So 
when I started working with [my fitness trainer] I got really fit. I lost some 
weight, and got really stronger, especially in my upper body."

Elsewhere, Agnieszka Radwanska became the first Polish woman to reach a 
grand-slam quarter-final as she came from a set down to beat Nadia Petrova 1-6, 
7-5, 6-0.

"I was losing 6-1, 3-0 and I was thinking, 'what am I doing wrong?'," said 
Radwanska. "It was so quick and she was using the wind very well, and I wasn't. 
I think that was the most important point in this match. Then I started to 
play, try to do something else. It was very long games and I won the second 
set. It was so close. In the third set, I don't know what she was doing, but 
it's not a question for me."

Radwanska will now meet Slovakia's Daniela Hantuchova in the last eight after 
the ninth seed came from a set and a break down to beat Russia's Maria 
Kirilenko 1-6, 6-4 , 6-4.

Women's results, fourth round

(9) Daniela Hantuchova (Svk) bt (27) Maria Kirilenko (Rus) 1-6, 6-4, 6-4
(8) Venus Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/venus-williams> (USA) bt 
Marta Domachowska (Pol) 6-4, 6-4
(29) Agnieszka Radwanska (Pol) bt (14) Nadia Petrova (Rus) 1-6, 7-5, 6-0
 (4) Ana Ivanovic (Ser) bt Caroline Wozniacki (Den) 6-1, 7-6 (7-2)
 