 Vere Bird, who has died aged 89, was almost the last survivor of the 
generation of unlettered populist leaders who pushed the islands of the eastern 
Caribbean to independence from Britain. He founded a family dynasty, which has 
controlled the twin-island state of Antigua-Barbuda for most of this century 
and turned it into something like a music-hall version of a Caribbean island. 
Inevitably, it became known as "the aviary."
By the mid-1980s, Antigua had become the scandal of the region as tales of 
corruption, arms and drug smuggling, family squabbles and womanising crippled 
Bird's government. He allowed two of his five sons to run the country, but 
fought with them as they vied for the succession and rejected their attempts to 
force him into retirement. When he finally stepped down in 1994, he had hung on 
a good 10 years longer than he should have.

A towering, former Salvation Army captain and trade unionist, he had had 
heroic beginnings, rising from poverty to lead Antiguans out of a harsh 
existence of toil in the canefields for absentee landlords into an enduring era 
of a tourist-based prosperity. The older generation gratefully called him 
"papa".

Bird helped found the island's first union, the Antigua Trades and Labour 
Union (ATLU), in 1939 and became its president in 1943. Two years later, he was 
elected to the colony's legislative council and a year after that was on the 
executive council, which ruled under the thumb of a white, British governor.

In 1951, Bird launched a long strike against the island's plantation owners 
and their leader, the English aristocrat Alexander Moody-Stuart. He and several 
hundred ragged workers famously met Moody-Stuart, who arrived on a white horse, 
and in the shade of a tamarind tree told him that Antiguans would "eat cockles 
and the widdy widdy bush, we will drink pondwater" until the field-hands were 
paid more than the pittance they were receiving. There was no sugar harvest 
that year.

Bird went on to form the Antigua Labour party (ALP), which won all the 
elective seats in the legislature in four elections over the next 14 years. He 
was named minister of trade and production, the post that Whitehall 
traditionally gave to a colony's leading political figure, in 1956. He 
graduated to chief minister when the post was created in 1961, and then premier 
in 1967, when the island was granted effective self-rule as one of the 
half-dozen Anglo-Caribbean "associated states."

Bird's main achievement in this period was to break the power of the large 
landowners, and turn the island from dependence on sugar towards large-scale, 
foreign-financed tourist development, which brought a relative prosperity 
envied by Antigua's neighbours. He introduced free secondary education and 
island-wide electricity.

But the dream turned sour as a rising black power movement spoke up against 
white domination, and what many considered the neo-slavery of the tourist 
industry. The rest of the economy was neglected as huge tax breaks for foreign 
investors limited government revenue. Bird also clamped down on the press and 
the opposition. The government's backbone, the ATLU, split in 1967 and Bird was 
decisively voted out of office in 1971.

Five years later he was back, thanks to a wild promise to abolish income tax. 
He duly engineered the trial and imprisonment for corruption of the man he 
succeeded, George Walter. From about 1980, Bird allowed his second son Lester, 
a US citizen and officially his deputy, to run the government and guide the 
country to full independence in 1981.

Since 1975 - until she fell out of favour in 1990 - Bird Sr had devoted 
himself to Cutie "Evita" Francis, who he had taken up with after spotting her 
as a 13-year-old contestant in a village beauty contest. The influence of the 
soon-wealthy Miss Francis over the old patriarch aggravated family tensions as 
corruption and scandal grew.

In 1978, the government was found to have allowed a Canadian company, Space 
Research Corporation, to secretly export arms to South Africa through the 
island. There was talk of mafia con trol, and Bird was accused of handing over 
Antigua to the US government and private interests. The fugitive financier, 
Robert Vesco, found refuge there. The sister island of Barbuda was disfigured 
as the Birds illegally exported thousands of tonnes of its sand.

From 1984, the cabinet split evenly into open factions around the old man and 
Lester. The prime minister favoured his eldest son, Vere Jr, the public works 
minister, as his successor and refused to sack him after he was implicated in a 
multi-million-pound scandal over modernising the island's airport. After new 
accusations in 1990 about Israeli arms shipments through Antigua to drug barons 
in Colombia, and a damning public inquiry by a British QC, Louis Blom-Cooper, 
Bird Sr agreed to drop him - but still insisted he was innocent.

Antiguans continued to vote for Bird - corrupt, clearly senile and barely 
functioning - because he and his family, by now hugely rich, kept the islanders 
prosperous enough to fear trying the mildly radical alternative offered by Tim 
Hector, the former black power leader who for nearly 30 years has run Antigua's 
most popular newspaper and been a one-man opposition.

But in 1993 Bird finally agreed to retire after Lester won the fight with Vere 
Jr for control of the party. He did not stand in the 1994 general election and 
yielded the premiership to Lester after the ALP won its fourth straight 
five-year term.

Though a keen advocate of a united Anglo-Caribbean, Bird was strongly 
pro-American, and in the 1980s allowed Washington, fearful of revolution in its 
backyard, to set up military and communications facilities on Antigua to help 
keep the region under surveillance. When the island airport changed its name 
from Coolidge Field, after the US base it once was, it became Vere Bird 
International.

Vere Cornwall Bird, politician, born December 9, 1909; died June 28, 1999
 