
US telecoms giant Verizon announced on Tuesday it was buying AOL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/aol> in a deal that will see one of the 
world’s biggest mobile players takeover the one-time king of the internet for 
$4.4bn.

Verizon, the US’s largest mobile player, said it was making the move to 
strengthen its position in mobile video and advertising. The all-cash offer 
will give Verizon access to AOL’s advertising technology and content businesses 
such as Huffington Post, MovieFone and TechCrunch.

When completed, the acquisition will end AOL’s independence six years after 
the company was split off from media conglomerate Time Warner. The company has 
long been seen as a takeover target and had previously been rumoured to be in 
merger talks with Yahoo.

In an interview with financial news channel CNBC, 
<http://www.cnbc.com/id/102670342> AOL’s chairman and chief executive Tim 
Armstrong said the company needed to get bigger to survive amid the 
consolidation of the media and technology sectors.

“If you look at AOL over the last five years ... we turned the company 
around,” he said. “But if you look forward five years, you’re going to be in a 
space where there are going to be massive, global-scale networks, and there’s 
no better partner for us to go forward with than Verizon.”

Time Warner and AOL entered an ill-fated $165bn merger agreement in January 
2000. The deal, effectively a takeover of Time Warner by AOL, has often been 
described as the worst merger in history and was a pivotal moment in the last 
tech boom. AOL continued to struggle as the phone subscribers who made up the 
bulk of its business drifted away to cable and was spun off from Time Warner in 
2009.

Under Armstrong AOL has built an advertising platform and bought content 
companies including Huffington Post. The price is high compared to content 
rivals like Vice, now valued at $2.5bn. But it is a fraction of the values 
attached too the latest generation of hot tech firms. Snapchat, a profit free 
disappearing message service, is currently valued at $10bn. Uber, a taxi app 
and would-be logistics company, is valued at $15bn.

AOL is still heavily reliant on fees from dial-up internet subscribers who 
last year contributed about a quarter of AOL’s sales. Those subscribers either 
live in areas too remote for cable access or have forgotten to cancel 
subscriptions.

AOL took 0.74% market share of the $145bn digital advertising market worldwide 
in 2014, according to eMarketer. Google was the worldwide market leader with 
31.4% share last year, followed by Facebook with 7.9%. While AOL remains a 
small player, the market is massive. Mobile advertising worldwide totalled 
$42.63bn in 2014, and is expected to increase 61% to reach $68.7bn in 2015, 
according to eMarketer.

Verizon’s offer values AOL at $50 a share, a 17% premium over Monday’s closing 
price. AOL shares rose 19% in morning trading to $50.61. Verizon shares dipped 
slightly.

“Verizon’s vision is to provide customers with a premium digital experience 
based on a global multiscreen network platform,” Lowell McAdam, Verizon’s chief 
executive, said in a statement. “This acquisition supports our strategy to 
provide a cross-screen connection for consumers, creators and advertisers to 
deliver that premium customer experience.”

In a statement Armstrong said he would remain at his position once the deal is 
finalized.

“Verizon is a leader in mobile and OTT [over the top – ie video services like 
Netflix and Hulu] connected platforms, and the combination of Verizon and AOL 
creates a unique and scaled mobile and OTT media platform for creators, 
consumers and advertisers,” Armstrong said.

The former Google executive, who took over as AOL’s chief executive in 2009 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/newsbysector/mediatechnologyandtelecoms/7437434/Tim-Armstrong-the-web-veteran-intent-on-restoring-the-fortunes-of-AOL.html>
, told staff that “AOL is back and now we are joining forces with Verizon to 
build the best media technology company in the world. Let’s mobilize”.

“AOL has once again become a digital trailblazer, and we are excited at the 
prospect of charting a new course together in the digitally connected world,” 
McAdam, said in a statement.

 