
The Jamaican sprinter Veronica Campbell-Brown was cleared of failing a doping 
test because of blatant flaws in the collection procedures and possible 
"environmental contamination" of her urine sample, sport's highest appeals body 
said on Tuesday.

The court of arbitration for sport released its full report explaining the 
decision to uphold the three-time Olympic gold medallist's appeal against a 
two-year doping ban. The runner was cleared by the CAS in late February.

In a 58-page ruling, the three-man arbitration panel outlined "deplorable" 
mistakes by Jamaican athletics and anti-doping officials in the collection of 
the first partial sample. The CAS said the errors could have led to the sample 
being contaminated by water or sweat containing a banned substance.

Campbell-Brown tested positive for the diuretic HCT after competing in a 
national meet in Kingston, Jamaica, on 4 May, 2013. Both the 'A' and 'B' 
samples came back positive.

The athlete, who denied intentionally taking a banned substance, was initially 
suspended provisionally by the IAAF and unable to defend her 200-metre title at 
the world championships in Moscow. In September, a Jamaican disciplinary panel 
ruled that she had not committed a doping violation and gave her only a 
reprimand.

The International Association of Athletics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> Federations contested the finding 
and ordered the Jamaican federation to impose a two-year suspension in 
February. Campbell-Brown appealed to the CAS and a hearing was held in London 
on 21 February.

The case centred on the handling of her sample after she failed to produce the 
required amount of urine in her first attempt. The CAS found that 
Campbell-Brown established a "credible" possibility that her positive test 
resulted from Jamaica's failure to comply with the international standards for 
partial sample testing.

The court said the Jamaican Athletics Administrative Association "has 
persistently failed to comply" with the global standards.

"That systematic and knowing failure ... is deplorable and gives rise to the 
most serious concerns about the overall integrity of the JAAA's anti-doping 
processes," the ruling said.

Among the mistakes listed in Campbell-Brown's case:

– the sample was not sealed in a special-purpose partial collection container.

– the partial sample was left in an unsealed container with a lid containing a 
small spout.

– the sample stayed in possession of the athlete, not the doping control team.

– when Campbell-Brown was ready to give another sample, she was told to use 
the same container, rather than a new one.

– the drug-testing officer failed to record any information about the partial 
sample in the doping control form.

The CAS said Campbell-Brown placed the unsealed container on the floor while 
she went to get water and do exercises in an effort to produce more urine. She 
also washed her hands in a sink in a nearby bathroom. It was up to an hour 
before she produced enough further urine.

The CAS panel ruled out deliberate spiking of the sample but said 
"environmental contamination" was possible.

The court relied heavily on testimony from Peter Sever, a professor of 
clinical pharmacology and therapeutics and head of the department of clinical 
pharmacology at Imperial College in London. He said the "most likely 
explanation" for Campbell-Brown's positive test was contamination of her sample 
through sweat or water containing HCT, a common medication for high blood 
pressure.

The CAS said Campbell-Brown could have come into contact with HCT when she 
touched bottles stored in ice and washed her hands in the toilet. Contaminated 
sweat or water also could have entered the sample through the container's small 
spout, it said.

Sever noted that three out of 100 athletes tested in the Kingston stadium over 
a two-month period in 2013 came back positive for HCT. At least two were 
partial sample cases, he said, suggesting a common environmental cause.

Campbell-Brown has won seven Olympic medals in all, including gold in the 200 
metres in 2004 and 2008 and the 4x100 in 2004. She also won the 100-metre world 
title in 2007 and 200m gold at the 2011 worlds. She was one of eight Jamaican 
athletes who failed drug tests last year, including the former men's 100 metre 
world record holderAsafa Powell <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/asafapowell>
, who was handed a backdated 18-month ban last week.
 