
The Vikings might have been fearsome, bearded and hardy but it seems that when 
it came to horses, they liked to travel in comfort.

Research has revealed that the genetic mutation for a smooth ride first 
appeared in horses in medieval England and was later spread around the world by 
Viking traders.

Described, for riders, as being akin to sitting in a comfy chair, ambling 
gaits are particularly suited to lengthy rides over rough roads. But while all 
horses can walk, trot and gallop, the ability to amble is only found in certain 
breeds of horses, among them the Icelandic pony.

The trait, as the scientists had previously discovered, is down to a mutation 
in a single gene, a genetic variant dubbed the “gait keeper”, which also allows 
horses to adopt another gait - the pace.

Now the team have discovered where and when the mutation first appeared.

“As far as we know today, ambling horses originated in early medieval England 
and spread around Eurasia within a few centuries,” said Arne Ludwig, lead 
author of the research from the Leibniz Institute for Zoo and Wildlife Research 
in Berlin.

Writing in the journal Current Biology 
<http://www.cell.com/current-biology/fulltext/S0960-9822(16)30752-7>, the 
international team of researchers describe how they looked at ancient DNA from 
90 horses that lived between 6000 BC and 1000 AD in countries across Europe and 
Asia. The researchers found that there was no trace of the gait keeper mutation 
in horses that lived before the 9th century AD, with its first appearance 
cropping up in two English horses that lived in York around 850-900 AD.

The genetic variant was absent in all horses from continental Europe, although 
it was found in 10 out of 13 Icelandic horses dating from the 9th- 11th century 
AD. But, says Ludwig, it is unlikely that it originated in Iceland, since 
Iceland had no indigenous horses, and the mutation is common in Icelandic 
horses soon after the island was settled in the late 9th century. That the 
mutation arose independently in more than one population of horses is 
improbable, the authors note.

How genetics can create the next superstar racehorse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/jun/22/horse-breeding-genetics-thoroughbreds-racing-dna>
Instead, they suggest that the trait first appeared in English horses which 
were then taken to Iceland and later distributed around the world, with these 
horses selectively bred because of their comfortable gait - a boon in the days 
of rough tracks and long journeys on horseback.

The spread of the trait, was most likely down to the Vikings, who not only had 
a strong presence in York and other regions in the north of England during the 
late 9th and early 10th centuries, but also settled in Iceland and had 
established trade routes to many other countries. “Thus ambling horses might 
have been introduced to Asia by Vikings during their journeys to the Caspian 
Sea and the Middle East,” the authors write.

David MacHugh 
<http://www.ucd.ie/conway/research/researchers/conwayfellowsa-z/professordavidmachugh/>
, professor of genomics at University College Dublin, says that the new 
research is a good example of how scientists can use DNA to look back in time 
and unpick the ways in which a genetic quirk was exploited by humans. “For an 
ancient DNA study, it’s quite a lot of samples,” he added.


But, he says, with only two coming from Britain, it is “a bit of a stretch” to 
conclude that the mutation for ambling gaits originated there. “It is not 
inconceivable that it could have come from Asia and that the Vikings then 
brought it to Britain and then onwards to Iceland” he said. But the simplicity 
of the authors’ conclusion makes it appealing. “Occam’s razor would suggest 
that what they are proposing is most likely to be correct.”

While Ludwig admits that the trait could have arisen in horses elsewhere and 
then been brought to Britain and Iceland, he believes it is unlikely. “Horses 
were very mobile - there was a lot of trade for horses,” he said. “If [the 
mutation had] arisen in China or in Asia somewhere we should find it somewhere 
in continental Europe - not only in England and Iceland, two isolated islands.”



Ernie Bailey <http://www2.ca.uky.edu/gluck/baileyef.asp>, of the Gluck Equine 
Research Center at the University of Kentucky, agrees that the data supports a 
British origin for ambling horses. “This is a highly significant observation 
about horse domestication, as well as the role of selection by breeders to find 
and breed animals most suited to their needs,” he said.
 