
Vince Cable, the business secretary, has put himself at the helm of a Liberal 
Democrat backlash over the autumn statement, accusing David Cameron of being 
frightened off a mansion tax by Tory donors and criticisingGeorge Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> for stigmatising welfare 
claimants.

His remarks came amid signs a co-ordinated assault on the coalition's 
macro-economic policy is starting to be mounted by parts of theLiberal Democrats
 <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats>.

Writing on the Guardian's Comment is free site, Gareth Epps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/dec/06/autumn-statement-lib-dems-toxic>
, a member of the Liberal Democrat's policy committee and chair of the 
influential Social Liberal Forum, warned: "Osborne asked us to judge him on 
deficit reduction. By all accounts, he has failed – because Plan A has failed. 
In circumstances such as these, why should a government not be tough on failing 
ministers?"

He warned "The party desperately needs to identify a clear official economic 
narrative in time for 2015. None appears forthcoming, and the economy is 
noticeably absent from the lengthy list of current Liberal Democrat policy 
groups. Until that voice is articulated, social liberal support will ebb away 
from the coalition and those at the head of it. Without the start of the 
inevitable exit strategy – yet – the choice for the Liberal Democrat leadership 
is stark. Find an authentic Liberal Democrat voice. They will find people who 
will listen".

Cable did not criticise the macro-economic strategy, pointing out the scale of 
the hit to the UK economy by the financial crash, but challenged the
Conservatives <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives>, especially 
Number 10, for failing to embrace Lib Dem plans for a new tax on homes worth 
more than £2m.

"I suspect what happened was some of their donors, very wealthy people, 
stamped their feet and said 'up with this we will not put', and it didn't 
happen and I very much regret that.

"We are going to make the case the Conservatives are very ill-advised in not 
going down that route, the public do expect the wealthiest in society pay their 
fair share."

Cable also distanced himself from the way in which the chancellor had sold his 
squeeze on welfare benefits in his autumn statement, saying he identified with 
those claimants who resented being regarded as a scrounger. "I think that kind 
of approach and language is completely wrong.

"I made it fairly clear that that stuff about people being unemployed at home 
with the curtains drawn is not the way, certainly, I would have addressed it. I 
think most people out there are looking for work, most people in this country 
are very conscientious, and we should do what we can to support them."

Lord Oakeshott, the former Liberal Democrat treasury spokesman, also attacked 
the autumn statement for "not filling the two black holes in the economy – 
Britain's zombie banks and lack of construction".

Oakeshott said "construction represents 7% of the GDP, almost as much as 
manufacturing at 10%. Construction output has fallen 10% in the last year, and 
it is pulling the economy back into recession. If construction is falling this 
fast there is no chance of the economy growing. There was nothing to lift 
housing in the autumn statement."

Oakeshott argued "every month net lending to business by banks is falling yet 
the coalition agreement supports net lending targets for nationalised banks. 
What has happened to that, for example in the case of RBS".

He added "a £5bn switch from current expenditure to long term capital 
investment does nothing to revive the economy".

Epps also criticises the welfare cuts announced in the autumn statement 
pointing out only weeks ago "Liberal Democrat leaders promised not to balance 
the books on the backs of the poorest, yet we are in danger of not living up to 
our own expectations. Serious attempts to introduce a suite of wealth taxes to 
ensure a fair spread of the load appear to have been negotiated away. More 
concerning is the disproportionate take from poorer households."

The Lib Dem leader and deputy prime minister, Nick Clegg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nickclegg>, insisted he had stopped many 
Conservative objectives including £10bn of welfare cuts, a freeze in welfare 
benefits and removal of benefits from large families.
 