
They have been bitter rivals for years - the broadcasting version of Montagues 
and Capulets – yetVirgin Media <https://www.theguardian.com/media/virginmedia> 
and BSkyB are tantalisingly close to a sweetheart deal that could presage the 
biggest shake-up in the commercial television sector for almost a decade.

In an era of commercial detente with echoes of the new political partnership, 
the broadcast industry is going through a time of rapprochement as companies 
work out ways to survive the digital age and the economic downturn.

And if romance between erstwhile enemies looks possible, it seems unlikely 
that Channel Five will remain single at the end of the year. Five was launched 
in 1997 after a decade-long gestation, and pitched, like a throwback, into an 
era of digital television; its German-based owner RTL has made no secret of its 
desire to sell off the UK's weakest terrestrial channel. Analysts believe it is 
all part of the hunt for scale and efficiencies, from merging commissioning and 
scheduling to reducing the number of advertising sales forces from four to 
three.

Premium content

The Sky/Virgin deal is expected to mean the Murdoch-controlled group taking 
charge of Virgin's small but feisty digital television business, which includes 
the flagship channel Virgin 1, plus the subscription channels Living, Bravo and 
Challenge, for a sum expected to be between £150m-£160m. In return Virgin gains 
a long-term deal for the premium content it needs from Sky to drive its cable 
TV business forward. It is likely to focus on its increasingly successful cable 
business – selling a package of superfast broadband, cable TV and on-demand 
content such as films – and to dismantle its small sales house, IDS.

For its part, BSkyB will take control of Virgin 1's valuable Freeview slot, a 
limited commodity, and niche basic entertainment channels that complement its 
traditional Sky sports, film and news channels. Living – with the likes of 
Dating in the Dark and Most Haunted – is aimed at young women while Bravo with 
Spartacus and Danny Dyer's Deadliest Men pulls in young men.

Although they began over a year ago, the negotiations have been eased by last 
month'spay television ruling from Ofcom, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/mar/31/ofcom-sky-sports-price-cut> 
forcing BSkyB to cut its wholesale prices for Sky Sports 1 & 2 but leaving its 
movie channels untouched. Terms for these are expected to be part of the VMTV 
sale deal.

The two companies have found common ground: both have futures that depend on 
pay models and HD and they have a shared common enemy in the Freeview platform. 
As the majority of Sky's entertainment subscription channels are outside 
Freeview, which in scale now surpasses Sky's 9.7m homes, the share of viewing 
is threatened. What is astonishing is that this ground has been found given the 
history of the two companies. Less than four years ago that James Murdoch, then 
the chief executive of BSkyB, blocked Virgin's groundbreaking takeover of ITV 
by buying a 17.9% stake. In another dispute BkyB stopped supplying Sky1 and Sky 
News to Virgin.

Virgin joined forces with BT, Top Up TV and the defunct sports pay operator 
Setanta, to demand Ofcom's pay TV investigation. Yet in the intervening years, 
both companies have changed management. BSkyB is now run by its former finance 
director, Jeremy Darroch, with Murdoch busy with all News Corp's businesses 
outside America, while Neil Berkett is the pragmatic new chief executive of 
Virgin Media. Despite this, one Virgin executive says: "You can imagine, we 
have really had to psyche ourselves up for this sale."

Such deal-making underlines the need for action, notably from the smallest of 
the heritage terrestrial broadcasters, Five. The underperforming channel is 
seen by RTL and its holding companyBertelsmann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bertelsmann> as an unsustainable loss-maker. 
After a series of meetings Gerhard Zeiler, the chief executive of RTL, is 
trying to sell in a narrow window of opportunity presented by new regimes at 
ITV and Channel 4, and a permissive coalition government. BSkyB is also allowed 
to buy it under the 2003 Communications Act, as are American companies, several 
of which have been approached.

In March, C4's new chief executive, David Abraham, and its chairman, Lord 
Burns, met Zeiler and Five's chief executive, Dawn Airey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/mar/26/gerhard-zeiler-channel-4-five>. 
They are understood to have received a warmer reception from Abraham than they 
expected. At the same time C4 is said to still be interested in BBC Worldwide's 
assets.

Lord (Clive) Hollick, who as an original Five shareholder first proposed the 
idea of a merger between C4 and Five in 2003, only to have it roundly rejected 
by the then chairman Luke Johnson and chief executive Andy Duncan, still sees 
synergies: "There could be savings of up to £100m for both parties, including 
dispersing its 200-plus staff."

Private capital

C4 insiders say the new regime is attracted by the opportunity to buy scale, 
stem the loss of audience share, and add in advertising, to take C4's 24.5% 
share to around 32.5%. Hollick says: "They could have avoided a lot of pain if 
my suggestion had been taken up. The coalition government is going to inject 
private capital into the Royal Mail. Why not private capital into C4?"

A new ITV management team, under chairman Archie Norman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/archie-norman>, has also expressed interest 
in Five. ITV, says a source, has raised the issue of whether RTL/Bertelsmann 
will throw in the crown jewels, the global TV producer Fremantle, which makes 
The X Factor, Pop Idol and Britain's Got Talent. But Bertelsmann is understood 
to be against this. It is hard to tell how imminent a deal is with Five talked 
about as the TV version of the Independent newspaper, costly to shut, difficult 
to price. Besides, Friar Laurence believed marriage would end the Shakespearean 
feud. And look at how that ended.
 