
Whenever I visit my mother, I always ask her to make carapulcra. It’s a simple 
stew of potatoes and whatever else you want to add: the traditional pork, maybe 
beef, or scallops, which I love. But you can serve it just plain, my favourite 
– and that’s how my mum makes it for me. What makes it so homely is that it is 
made with Andeanpapa seca, or dried potatoes. They are harvested, peeled, then 
left in the sun to dry, until they look like rocks. Then they come to Lima, 
where our restaurant is, on the coast.

To make carapulcra, you first have to dry-roast the potatoes and then soak 
them for a while. Then you make a kind of soffritto with olive oil, onions and 
garlic. In Peru, we have many differentaji (pimento chillies), and for 
carapulcra, you make a paste ofaji panca (a red, smoky chilli pepper), which 
you add to the soffritto. Then you add the potatoes and cook them for about an 
hour. Once they are cooked, you can add anything you want to the dish, as well 
as lots of herbs – mint, wood sorrel or rocket.

This dish has all the flavours of the Andean soil – there’s such a 
concentration of the mountain terroir in the potatoes. It’s a very easy dish to 
make and comforting to eat, and it’s a great dish to share. It exemplifies the 
Peruvian way of cooking. The soffritto is the Italian influence, the chilli 
paste signals an Asian influence and the potatoes stem from our native Peruvian 
heritage. The freedom of being able to add whatever you want is emblematic of 
the way we approach food. It goes with anything – you can eat it with meat, 
salad, avocados or just with bread. AtLima London 
<http://www.limalondongroup.com/>, head chef Robert Ortiz and I serve it plain, 
with lots of greens piled on top.

Miriam González Durántez’s recipe for Castilian chicken pot stew | A taste of 
home
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/05/castilian-chicken-pot-stew-apple-recipe-miriam-gonzalez-durantez-taste-of-home>
Drying the potatoes is crucial – it’s the native Peruvian way of preserving 
food. It’s not impossible to make the dish with fresh potatoes from somewhere 
else, but it would be different – and you would need to cook them a little less.

In Central Restaurante <http://centralrestaurante.com.pe/en/> in Lima, we have 
stopped using thickeners. Instead, we use a powder made from dried potatoes. 
Nowadays, there are so many additives and ingredients that people don’t know 
where they come from. This dried potato powder adds a sense of place, and that 
is something we really want to achieve.

Carapulcra

The dried potatoes and chilli pastes can be bought from the online Peruvian 
food shopvivaperu.co.uk <http://www.vivaperu.co.uk/>.


Serves 4-6
200g papa seca (Peruvian dried potatoes)
2 tbsp olive oil
150g red onion, chopped
1 tbsp garlic, minced

1 tbsp aji panca paste
2 tbsp aji mirasol (or aji amarillo) paste
½ cinnamon stick
¼ star anise
¼ tsp ground cloves
¼ tsp ground cumin
¼ tsp black pepper
½ tsp rock salt
1 litre vegetable stock 
30g peanuts, chopped
40g dark chocolate (80%)

 To serve
A sprinkling of mint, rocket and/or wood sorrel
White rice

1 Put a large frying pan over a mediumhigh heat. Dry-roast the potato flakes 
for 5 minutes until golden and aromatic. Transfer to a bowl and cover with cold 
water. Leave to soak for 30 minutes, then drain.

2 Put a large casserole over a medium-high heat. Add the olive oil, heat to 
medium and add the red onion and garlic. Saute until browned, about 5-7 
minutes. Add theaji panca and the aji mirasol pastes. Cook for 5 minutes, until 
caramelised.

3 Add the cinnamon stick, star anise, cloves, cumin, black pepper and salt. 
Saute for about 5 minutes more.

4 Add the dried potatoes and half of the vegetable stock. Reduce the heat and 
simmer for 1 hour, stirring occasionally, until the potatoes are tender, adding 
more stock as needed.

5 Finally, add the peanuts and the chocolate, stir to combine and simmer for 5 
more minutes.

6 Serve hot with the herbs of your choice and a helping of rice.

Virgilio Martinez is the chef and owner of Central Restaurante in Lima, and 
co-owner of Lima LondonW

 * Virgilio Martinez is the chef and owner of Central Restaurante in Lima, and 
co-owner of Lima London
 