
After a few relatively quiet days on the market, leading shares took a turn 
for the worse after disappointing US manufacturing data.

Vodafone was among the biggest fallers after a hefty downgrade by analysts at 
Bernstein, which moved its recommendation from outperform to market perform. It 
forecast continuing revenue declines in Europe - no surprise, given the 
economic crisis in the eurozone - and said Vodafone's shares were likely to 
slide in similar fashion, despite the "tantalising prospect" of a bid from US 
partner Verizon at some point.

Vodafone <https://www.theguardian.com/business/vodafonegroup> fell 4.75p to 
178.45p.

Overall, the day had seemed to be drifting lower - with investors nervous 
ahead of the European Central Bank meeting on Thursday - when an unexpected 
decline in US manufacturing pulled the rug from under the complacent attitude. 
The US ISM index dipped from 49.8 in July to 49.6, compared to expectations of 
a slight increase to around 50. An "inadvertently" leaked set of UK PMI 
services numbers - which seemed better than expected - did little to soothe 
market nerves. So theFTSE 100 finished 86.40 points lower at 5672.01, its 
biggest one day fall since 23 July.

Chip maker Arm continued its decline after this week's downgrade from Deutsche 
Bank, falling another 31.5p to 528p.

Royal Bank of Scotland fell 5.8p to 220.7p after a leading analyst effectively 
gave up on the business. Ian Gordon at Investec downgraded from buy to hold, 
saying:

The Labour Party adopted D:Ream's hit, "Things can only get better" as its 
campaign tune for the 1997 general election, but it heralded a false dawn. 
Investors in RBS have had too many false dawns – "underlying" operating profits 
performing broadly "in line with expectations" but continuing to be dwarfed by 
material negative one-off items, of which there are still more coming down the 
pipe. Reducing non-core drag softens the blow, but after another modest rally, 
we throw in the towel. Downgrade to hold.

In absolute terms, it remains speculative, and while it still appears 
moderately cheap as a long-term recovery play, we expect to see better entry 
levels emerge.

British Land, which announced a £300m convertible bond issue, dropped 14.5p to 
527p after UBS moved from buy to neutral following the shares' recent 
performance.

But oil field services provider Petrofac was one of just three FTSE 100 
companies to buck the downward trend, adding 2p to £15.18 after a positive note 
from Credit Suisse. The bank said:

After a period of weakness we upgrade Petrofac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/petrofac> to outperform from neutral, 
with our target raised to £18 from £17,50. We believe the stock has performed 
poorly on a lack of project awards over the summer period and elevated 
expectations for the integrated energy services business. We believe the next 
few months will be better: awards should step up, thanks to less instability in 
the Middle East, and the payoff of extensive marketing efforts in southeast 
Asia and amongst oil majors. There remain a number of risks. However, the stock 
is now the cheapest on enterprise value/earnings in the European sector, which 
we regard as extraordinary given the long term track record, and see limited 
downside.

Among the mid-caps Ashtead, which rents out small tools to construction and 
power generation equipment, added 33.4p to 315.9p after it said first quarter 
profits jumped 82% to a record £61.4m. A gradual improvement in the US, where 
it conducts some 80% of its business through its Sunbelt subsidiary, helped 
offset the difficult conditions in the UK.

Drycleaning to facilities management company Johnson Service Group closed 2p 
higher at 30p after an upbeat statement despite a £500,00 drop in half year 
profits to £6m as it closed 103 shops after a strategic review. House broker 
Investec was positive:

Johnson Service has delivered a satisfactory overall performance against a 
difficult trading background. The two main divisions have performed well and 
whilst dry cleaning has been impacted by a very difficult trading environment, 
a substantial restructuring of that business will reduce its costs 
significantly. Helped by recent acquisitions that have integrated well, we are 
raising our forecasts [with profits up from £14.65m to £15.8m] and maintain our 
buy recommendation on a business that is lowly rated and has good medium term 
growth prospects.

Finally, investors in Chariot Oil and Gas suffered a rocky ride. The company's 
shares fell sharply on worries about its Nimrod exploration project offshore 
Namibia. It had announced the start of drilling on the latest well, Kabeljou, 
at the end of July, and the market seemed to be unnerved by a lack of news. 
Analysts at Daniel Stewart said at the time of the July announcement that it 
would take 60 days to drill, and Chariot reacted to the day's share price fall 
by saying the results of the well were not yet known. Daniel Stewart, which put 
a buy recommendation on Chariot in its July note, did warn of the risks:

We see the [Kabeljour] results as being the number one upcoming catalytic 
event for Chariot's share price; in the event of a success we anticipate a 
dramatic upturn. However, in the event of the well coming up dry, a collapse is 
more than likely. Chariot ended 21p lower at 100.25p.
 