
It is little wonder Jason Koumas was paying compliments to Sam Vokes 
afterwards, the Wigan midfielder comparing the 18-year-old to John Hartson, 
another heavyweight striker, while talking up the teenager's prospects of 
leading the line forWales <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales> in the 
future. Without Vokes's intervention seven minutes from time, Koumas, who 
missed a second-half penalty, would have carried the responsibility for Wales' 
failure to defeat a team ranked 138th in the world.

It was not the contribution John Toshack had in mind when he decided that 
Koumas, whose ankle injury made it unlikely he would feature twice in five 
days, would be more beneficial to Wales againstAzerbaijan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/azerbaijan>, rather than facing Russia on 
Wednesday, where anything other than defeat would represent a major surprise.

Toshack had not given up hope the 28-year-old Koumas would be boarding the 
plane for Moscow in the wake of the painful victory over Azerbaijan, but those 
familiar with Koumas's attendance record were already marking him absent.

A reputation for staying at home when Wales are away precedes Koumas - three 
years have passed since he last played a competitive international game abroad 
- something Toshack admitted had crossed his mind when a needless yellow card 
was collected here. "Maybe [Jason] thought he already had a booking in a 
friendly and he thought he couldn't go to Russia," said Toshack, who is hopeful 
Gareth Bale will recover from a slight groin strain. "You may laugh, but that 
wouldn't surprise me."

Koumas's anticipated withdrawal appears more genuine, however, with the former 
Cardiff player revealing he had three pain-killing injections in his left ankle 
last week, including one 10 minutes before kick-off. He admitted he had been 
"struggling" during the game - as had many of his team-mates, although not 
necessarily because of fitness concerns - and claimed he "didn't feel 
comfortable" when he stepped up to take the spot-kick, after Chris Gunter was 
hauled down.

Toshack had is own reasons for feeling uneasy when Kamran Agayev saved 
Koumas's penalty before also smothering the rebound. The Wales manager had 
expected Azerbaijan to defend in numbers but he could not have imagined his 
side would be so clueless in their attempts to break down the Group Four 
minnows. The tactics did not help, with Robert Earnshaw an isolated figure in 
attack on an afternoon when there appeared no need to string five players 
across midfield.

The outcome was all too predictable. "We said before the game it might be 
ugly, it might be a crap game and it was, but the three points are all that 
matters," said Koumas, whose curling 30-yard shot was one of the few meaningful 
Wales attempts on goal in the first half. "The keeper was off his line for the 
penalty but no excuse, I still should have put it away. I was annoyed and I 
didn't think we were going to get another chance the way it
way going."

Hopes were raised when Fabio Luis Ramim picked up a second booking in the 68th 
minute, but it was not until Vokes partnered Ched Evans, another teenage 
substitute, up front that Wales unsettled Azerbaijan. The Wolverhampton 
Wanderers forward was unfortunate to see his looping header tipped over in the 
82nd minute but the breakthrough arrived seconds later when he used his huge 
feet to telling effect as he rammed home the loose ball following Bale's corner.

"I've been quite impressed with him all week," said Koumas of Vokes, who was 
playing for Bournemouth in League One last season. "He's a young lad and, as he 
gets older, he can become a right handful. He reminds me a little bit of John 
Hartson in his younger days."

Vokes, who was winning only his third cap for the senior side, was 
understandably ecstatic. "To score an important goal like that was a great 
feeling. I have size 12 boots and needed every bit of them to get on the end of 
that goal."
 