
W.E. (2012)
Director: Madonna
Entertainment grade: D+
History grade: D–

In 1936, King Edward VIII abdicated to marry his lover, Wallis Simpson. They 
became the Duke and Duchess of Windsor.

Style
 Still from W.E. 
Despite its critical panning, not everything about W.E. is terrible. The 
costumes are very nice. Andrea Riseborough gives a decent performance as Wallis 
– though admittedly the brittle, self-conscious dialogue is better suited to 
her character than to anyone else's. W.E. interweaves the story of the king and 
Mrs Simpson with the tribulations of a fictional New Yorker, Wally Winthrop 
(Abbie Cornish), who is obsessed with Wallis. She attends the1998 auction 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1998/02/28/arts/windsor-auction-brings-in-23-million.html>
 of the Windsors' belongings at Sotheby's, hallucinating Wallis's ghost as she 
idly fondles a pug-shaped cushion. Meanwhile, her marriage to a nasty doctor 
collapses and she falls for the auction's security guard. Regrettably, the 
modern characters are so facile that they barely qualify as two-dimensional. 
They're one-dimensional: a collection of straight lines resolutely failing to 
go anywhere except the way you already know they're going.

Royalty
 Still from W.E. 
Critics have noticed <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/jan/19/we-review> 
that W.E. has a radio announcer in 1936 announce the death of King George III. 
That's two whole Georges out, plus a William, a Victoria and another Edward. A 
small mistake, but slapdash – and it's not alone. The paparazzi are shown 
chasing Wallis and Edward on a Mediterranean cruise, provoking headlines in 
British papers like: "Royal Scandal!" Though a picture of Wallis touching 
Edward's arm during that cruise in August 1936 was published outside Britain, 
the British newspapers famously covered the king's affair up. The king's 
friend, Lord Beaverbrook, convinced all his fellow newspapermen to agree to 
complete discretion. All they printed about that cruise was a passenger list 
with Wallis's name on it. British censors snipped more lurid reports out of 
foreign newspapers at customs. Consequently, most Britons had no idea about the 
affair until it came to abdication the following December.

Politics
 Still from W.E. 
The film dismisses the allegation that Wallis and Edward had sympathies with 
the Nazis. "Most of it is based on rumours," snaps Wally to her nasty doctor 
husband. "I thought doctors were into empirical evidence." It's not clear that 
screenwriters Madonna and Alek Keshishian know what "empirical" means for, if 
Wally wants evidence gathered through observation, there's plenty. For 
instance, a 1933 report by the Austrian ambassador that Edward said to him: "I 
hope and believe we will never fight another war but if we do, we must be on 
the winning side and that will be Germany, not the French". A public speech to 
the British Legion in 1935 in which he advised his audience to "stretch forth 
the hand of friendship to the Germans". A 1936 letter from the German 
ambassador to Adolf Hitler saying "King Edward, quite generally, feels warm 
sympathy for Germany".British Foreign Office papers 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/britains-wouldbe-nazi-queen-1312830.html> 
suggesting that a Nazi plot to put Edward back on the throne when they invaded 
Britain was cooked up with Wallis's involvement.Wallis's notoriously dazzling 
smile <http://www.spartacus.schoolnet.co.uk/MONedward8c.jpg> on meeting Adolf 
Hitler in Germany in 1937. Edward's frequent Nazi salutes during that trip, and 
cheerful fraternisation with the likes of Josef Goebbels, Hermann Goering and 
Rudolf Hess. Edward's own admission in an article he wrote for the New York 
Daily News in 1966 that "along with too many other well-meaning people, I let 
my admiration for the good side of the German character dim what was being done 
to it by the bad". There you go, Madge: a whole heap of empirical evidence. And 
that's without even getting into the rumours, which go far further.

People
 Still from W.E. 
For this film, Edward (James D'Arcy) has been transformed into a brooding 
hunk. In real life, his relationship with Wallis was needy from his side, 
infantilising from hers. One close friend, Mrs Humphrey Butler, recalled a 
scene at a dinner party when the then Prince of Wales asked Wallis for a light. 
"Have you done your duty?" Wallis asked. "Little man gets on his haunches, puts 
up his hands and begs like a dog," remembered Mrs Butler. "She then lights his 
cigarette. Horrible to see." This wouldn't be cool, so instead the film shows 
them getting hopped up on champagne and Benzedrine before Wallis tucks her 
skirt into her knickers and dances with a shaven-headed black woman to the Sex 
Pistols' Pretty Vacant. Unlikely on several counts. Though Pretty Vacant would 
have made an apt title for this movie.

Verdict

Pretty, but vacant.
 