
Happy new year, Best Beloveds. I sincerely hope that all goes well with you 
and that you're not nursing a Public Service 90-day redundancy notice, or 
wondering if your children have a future, or wondering if you have a future, or 
wondering if you can pay your fuel bills, or sitting in a heap of recalcitrant 
snow. Or perhaps you just have flu. I have the distinct impression that being, 
if not happy, then grimly amused will be one of the lower-cost items we need to 
get us through the next 12 months of support slashing, book-burning, rioting, 
outrage and attempts to divert our attention with shiny things. Are there any 
more royalswho could get married 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/video/2010/nov/17/prince-william-monarchy-video>? 
Is there a long-running soap opera that hasn'tsuffered mass casualties and 
apocalyptic emotional trauma 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/the-archers?INTCMP=SRCH>? Could the 
few, loveable survivors get married? Could said survivors front populist 
campaigns to generate massivephone-in votes for new bills 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2010/dec/27/public-policies-coalition-x-factor>
 that favour the reintroduction of trial by ordeal, serfdom and the 24-hour 
projection of Sky News on to the surface of the moon? I suspect that if we 
don't laugh – and come up with some imaginative ways of saving ourselves – then 
our only other options will tend towards tears and self-loathing. And, as a 
Scot, I can confidently state that both become extremely tedious extremely 
quickly.

I have been as jolly as I get during the festive period. Those among you who 
are self-employed will be aware of how annoying public holidays can be: you 
want to get on, maybe you have to get on and yet everyone you deal with who has 
a Proper Job has suddenly disappeared ... or been fired ... it all seems very 
peculiar ... to pass the time you may even try resting ... something bound to 
induce the kind of felling medical difficulties that always appear when you 
stop working ... I duly ran a comb and mallet over the last paper rewrite of 
the novel, loaded the resulting stack of hope, fear, loathing and scribbles 
back into the computer and then consigned it to the ether (I'm with Talktalk; I 
wouldn't use the term "sent by email" with any kind of confidence) just before 
Christmas. As the last files disappeared – perhaps forever – I felt my body 
weaken, crumple and search about for some really trail-blazing infection. 
Oddly, all it could come up with was a mimsy little bout of sinusitis – perhaps 
I was tired. So I settled back with a box set of Basil Rathbone Sherlock Holmes 
movies and some mulled Ribena with no more than stabbing pains in my forehead 
and de-focused eyes preventing me from regularly exclaiming "God bless us, 
every one!" and wondering when our first new workhouses will be constructed.

I was, of course, also noticeably oppressed by the fact that I was waiting to 
hear. The research, the writing, the rewriting, the fretting and tinkering: 
they all end in this – waiting to hear. I have never met anyone who even 
remotely enjoys this part of the book-producing process. I've been writing 
professionally since 1989, but this will only be my 13th book. (And let's 
ignore the implications of 13.) This is only the 13th time that I have footled 
about, gone for walks, tried to start other things, sketched hollow-sounding 
plans for the coming months, stared blackly at the ceiling and generally failed 
to avoid the constant, low-level nausea generated by waiting to hear. I woke up 
in the morning and waited, I prodded at lunch and waited, I watched Holmes 
subject himself to a number of unfortunate triple comb-over options and still I 
waited. For those of you unfamiliar with the heady emotional tumble drier which 
is the post-handover-pre-verdict hiatus, try to imagine one of those 
insultingly-lengthy TV elimination round pauses which somehow elongates over 
days or weeks, blends with your driving test outcome, the announcements of 
every important exam result upon which you have ever relied, every time you've 
asked someone lovely to have a coffee, or hold your hand, or subject you to 
intimate forms of relaxation and every 
naked-on-the-roof-of-Sydney-Opera-House-while-your-parents-and-in-laws-and-primary-school-teachers-render-you-in-watercolours 
anxiety dream you've ever had. Only it's less pleasant than that.

Don't get me wrong, this isn't the same as waiting to hear if someone you love 
is OK, or if your scan came back clear. But waiting to find out if my book 
successfully scrapes past my editor does mean that three years of research, one 
year of full-on typing and a whole range of ideas, technical developments and 
experiments and personal commitments are being assessed simultaneously. The 
fact that things have gone well before doesn't mean they will again. And if 
they fail, then there will either be a mountain of additional and disheartening 
work to do – when 2011 is already looking very full – or the beast is past 
saving and I lose a significant portion of my income. And I'm a big, rubbishy, 
shameful failure in an area of which I am fond.

On a more personal note, the waiting-to-hear phase of things seems always to 
remove my ability to celebrate the completion of a book. The moment when I 
have, in many ways, done all I think I can bleeds effortlessly into the moment 
when I start to wait and when, if the outcome is good, the book begins to leave 
me and belong to a succession of other people. This time around I have a friend 
who has seen fit to cheerlead through all the stages of construction. In 
effect, he has done my celebrating for me and I have, in turn, been happy that 
he is happy. That's as good as it has ever got. Which is, perhaps, perfectly 
fine. The end of a book marks the point when my mind consents to become 
obsessively interested in whatever's next – and it's healthy and necessary to 
move on.

At which point, Dear Reader, I can confess to feeling slightly grubby for 
having kept you yourselves waiting. The many failings of the Christmas telly 
schedules (and the shocking preponderance of sofa ads, to say nothing of his 
devotion to the editorial arts) meant that my editor set to and read my 
offering with alacrity and an email recently arrived stating that the thing has 
been deemed acceptable. This doesn't mean that anyone else will like the book, 
that I won't tinker with it more, that the novel genuinely is any use, or that 
it will prosper. But I am not unrelieved to know that it will get a chance to 
go out and make its way in the world without me and I can see how it fares.

And – setting my friend aside for a moment – I would like to thank all of you 
who were supportive during 2010. It was very kind of you to take the trouble. 
And we are all in this together – trying to make things well for people we'll 
probably never meet, being in favour of creation rather than destruction. I 
hope, if you're writing, that all goes well. If you're thinking of writing, 
then a new year is as good place to start as any. And if you're reading, I hope 
that you have all you need and unlooked-for pleasures besides. There's nothing 
like writing a novel to get in the way of sustained reading, but now I can get 
back to the stacked volumes beside my bed and start enjoying the particular 
miracle of eloquent marks on paper pulp again. Onwards.
 