
Mark Hughes, who is running 26 miles around London on Sunday week, would 
probably relish a robust collision with the man who came up with the line about 
football being a marathon rather than a sprint.

But the cliché was worth another visit after a lop-sided affair in which his 
side extended their unbeaten run to 10 games. That sequence has included the 
first four of Wales's eight qualifiers for Portugal 2004 and at the halfway 
stage in this race they have played four, won four, scored 10, conceded one and 
top Group Nine with 12 points. Each time they have reached a wallWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales> have overcome it, not hit it.

And now Wales have a five-month pause until the next obstacle, Serbia and 
Montenegro in Belgrade, after the postponement of that fixture on security 
grounds this week. It is a moment to review progress and rarely has looking 
over the shoulder been quite so enjoyable for Welsh footballers.

In 127 years of playing, this was Wales's 150th international victory which, 
given breaks for wars, is still about one win every 11 months. Those wins were 
pockmarked by a lot of defeats and the way Hughes mentioned previous 
disappointments and humiliations - "flying back from Georgia with our tail 
between our legs after being beat 5-0" - the scars are still there.

But Wales have now won four games since last September. As they began Saturday 
with a forward line from Manchester United, Celtic and Newcastle - Ryan Giggs, 
John Hartson and Craig Bellamy - and had Premiership players of the quality of 
Simon Davies and Gary Speed behind them, they were expected to outplayAzerbaijan
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/azerbaijan>.

Bellamy was initially credited with the first goal after 13 seconds, though he 
never got a touch, and Speed, Hartson and Giggs netted the others.

Yet this was a victory won as much by Hughes's ability to weld those sprinters 
to more enduring personnel, like Mark Pembridge and Andy Melville. They are at 
Everton and Fulham respectively and have 104 caps between them. They know their 
way around.

But six of the seven Wales substitutes came from outside the Premiership. When 
Speed limped off with a groin strain he was replaced by Paul Trollope of 
Northampton, second bottom of the Second Division.

When Robbie Savage departed with an ankle injury, after only 18 minutes, on 
came Carl Robinson. Nominally with Portsmouth, Robinson is actually on loan at 
Walsall. Similarly, with Davies starting at right-back due to Mark Delaney's 
absence, John Oster began in midfield.

Remember John Oster? Once he was a next young thing, joining Everton from 
Grimsby for £1.5m as a teenager. He turned 24 in December but Oster was back at 
Grimsby by then, on loan from Sunderland after his career hit a very big wall.

It bottomed out the day Sunderland fans put him up for auction on the internet 
and received a bid of 50p. "Who knows why it went wrong?" Oster said. "I was 
only 18 when I went to Everton and maybe it was too much too soon."

Hughes hoped Oster's fine personal display would "kick-start" his career, and 
the agility and aggression Oster showed here, if repeated elsewhere, will do 
that.

Oster topped a wholesome afternoon for the Welsh. Robinson said that Speed, as 
captain, made a short speech of appreciation afterwards. "When he wants to say 
something, we listen. For him to thank the players from the lower divisions 
meant a lot to us."

Speed also said 19 points as a target "is obviously realistic with four games 
to go". But he fears Italy, who beat Finland 2-0 on Saturday night with a brace 
from Christian Vieri.

Three games in 22 days in August and September - Serbia and Italy away, 
Finland in Cardiff - will define Welsh qualification. "The hard work starts 
here," Speed said. "We've done nothing yet but given ourselves a really good 
chance." In a group with Italy and Serbia, though, that is an achievement in 
itself.

Wales also had the Italians in their Euro 2000 qualification group. Italy 
finished top, Wales fourth of five. Today Italy are second, five points behind 
Wales. That is a quantifiable advance, even if Hughes remains stubbornly 
cautious.

"Frankly I do not expect to win," he said. But Hughes was talking about the 
London marathon, not Group Nine.

 Wales (4-3-3):  Jones (Southampton);  Davies (Tottenham),  Melville (Fulham), 
 Page (Sheff U),  Speed (Newcastle;  Trollope , Northampton, h-t);  Oster 
(Sunderland), Pembridge (Everton),  Savage (Birmingham;  Robinson , Portsmouth, 
19); Bellamy (Newcastle;  Edwards , A Villa, 72)  Hartson (Celtic),  Giggs 
(Manchester United).

 Azerbaijan (4-5-1):  Hasanzade ;  K Guliyev (both Volyn Lutsk),  Ahmadov (K-A 
Agdam), E Guliyev (Alania Vladikavkaz;  Yadullayev , Neftchi Baku, h-t),  
Imamaliyev ;  Musayev (both Shafa Baku),  M Gurbanov (Fulad),  R Mammadov 
(Pecon), Hajiyev (Shafa Baku;  F Mammadov , Masinsazi, h-t),  Aliyev (Volyn 
Lutsk; Tagizada , Shafa Baku, 78);  G Gurbanov (Volga Astrakhan). 

 Booked: R Mammadov, F Mammadov, M Gurbanov. 

 Referee: P Leuba (Switzerland). 1616
 