
John Toshack finally received some good news last night as Jason Koumas and 
Robert Earnshaw both declared themselves fit for Wales's opening World Cup 
qualifying fixture at home toAzerbaijan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/azerbaijan> tomorrow. With Craig Bellamy, 
Danny Gabbidon, James Collins, Lewin Nyatanga and Freddy Eastwood all 
sidelined, the Wales manager was relieved to learn Koumas and Earnshaw have 
recovered from ankle and hamstring injuries in time to feature at the 
Millennium Stadium.

Although Earnshaw is expected to start on the substitutes' bench, Koumas is 
certain to be in the starting XI, with his impressive record of nine goals in 
his last 12 internationals underlining his importance to Wales. The Wigan 
midfielder is still feeling the ankle injury he picked up against Chelsea a 
little under a fortnight ago but, having trained yesterday afternoon alongside 
Earnshaw, Koumas will take his place in what is expected to be a callowWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales> side against the Group D minnows.

The absence of Nyatanga, Collins and Gabbidon means a hole has been blown in 
the centre of the Wales defence while the need for Bellamy to continue his 
rehabilitation work at West Ham, after returning from a pulled hamstring, has 
forced Toshack to rethink his attacking plans. Dean Saunders, the Wales 
assistant manager, admitted the injuries had dampened his mood initially but, 
with promising young talent now emerging, he insists there is reason to be 
optimistic.

"I was sitting in the hotel and you get the bad news first," said Saunders, 
who had hoped Bellamy would be declared fit after his goal against Blackburn 
Rovers last Saturday. "It puts you on a downer but within half an hour I was 
really excited; in walked Aaron Ramsey, behind him [Chris] Gunter, [Gareth] 
Bale and [Wayne] Hennessey. We've got some really good young players who are 
ready to start [tomorrow]. We have two years to qualify and they should be 
proud to be here."

Saunders harbours no fears about placing faith in such an inexperienced squad. 
"Sometimes it's a worry when you put young players in," he added. "If things 
don't go well, you lose them because of confidence. But because of the results 
we've had, it's worked out nicely. We went to Bulgaria [last year] and won so 
some of them will have come off the pitch thinking they can play at this level. 
The danger is getting hammered and you never see them again. Luckily it's gone 
well for us."

For all that, Saunders acknowledged it is imperative Wales start their 
qualifying campaign with a victory tomorrow. With a daunting trip to Russia to 
come on Wednesday, a positive result against Azerbaijan, who are ranked 138th 
in the world, 85 places below Wales, will ease the pressure before the Moscow 
trip. "We have to beat Azerbaijan," said the former Wales international. "If we 
win, we have some breathing space to say to the Russians, 'Come and beat us'."
 