
An eerie choking fog swirled dark and ominously as the visiting players left 
the field with their arms aloft but there were no clouds on Wales' horizon. The 
Azeri have gone the same way as the Azzurri; the startling renaissance in Welsh 
football is gathering pace.

Mark Hughes arrives back in Cardiff today with his side five points clear at 
the top of a once daunting Group Nine, peering down at the already beaten 
Italians and the much fancied Yugoslavs.

Where once they might have crumbled to ignominious defeat - Moldova, Belarus 
and Georgia have all proved too strong in the past decade -Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales>, patched up but polished, 
prospered against a side ranked 50 places below their 61st place in Fifa's 
world list.

Victory in the return fixture during March, when Italy play Finland, could 
stretch Wales' lead to seven points with four games to play and would certainly 
establish a best-ever run of eight unbeaten matches. Prior to that the team had 
statistically been the worst ever, labouring and demoralised without a win in 
12. These are heady days indeed.

"We came here under a bit of a cloud, with big players left behind, but my 
lads have come of age tonight," said Hughes, who was without eight injured 
regulars. "There is no fear in this squad, just a determination to go places. 
I'm proud of every one of them. They were immense, outstanding."

None was more so than Gary Speed. Returned to central midfield, the Newcastle 
man's tireless endeavour - all feverish tackling yet calm and classy in 
possession - freed up his less experienced team-mates and, an early storm 
weathered, ensured Wales' busy invention was rewarded. "He drives the team on 
and inspired those around him," Hughes added. "That was a captain's 
performance."

When Speed, unmarked between Ilham Yadullayev and Tarlan Akhmedov, rose to 
hammer a header from Simon Davies' corner beyond Djahangir Hasanzade in the 
ninth minute Wales might already have led. Darren Barnard had sent John Hartson 
away down the left and he barged beyond Aslan Kerimov, leaving Akhmedov in a 
sheepish mess on the byline, and pulled the ball back for the unmarked Ryan 
Giggs to belt a shot at goal. It forced Hasanzade to save and Giggs' follow-up 
was deflected wide. Speed made amends from the corner with his fifth 
international goal, albeit his first in two years.

There should have been more by half-time, with Hartson shooting against the 
crossbar after Speed had unsettled Hasanzade and forced him to paw at another 
Davies corner. As it was it took a free-kick from the Spurs midfielder, headed 
down and in by Hartson from inside the six-yard box, to double the lead and 
spare Hughes late anxiety.

Not that much anxiety was ever likely. The Azeri remain pointless, goalless 
and hopeless at the foot, with their domestic league a shambles and their 
supporters increasingly disillusioned. The team had whipped up a predictable 
nerve-jangling start, however, with Mahmud Gurbanov's midfield scurrying 
briefly perturbing his markers. But the burst, fuelled by adrenalin, yielded 
only Samir Aliyev's scuffed attempt, which was deflected wide of the diving 
Paul Jones's left-hand post.

By the time Aliyev sprinted on to Rashad Sadigov's pass and had his shot 
suffocated by the advancing Jones,Azerbaijan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/azerbaijan> were already trailing.

And, when Farukh Ismaylov sprung the offside trap but had a vicious attempt 
well saved at his near post by Jones, the deficit had been doubled. The Azeri 
were all but effectively beaten and the small pocket of Wales supporters had 
erupted in delirious celebration

"I was more worried going into this match than I ever was about the Italy 
game," added Hughes, who had kept his players on British time in a bid to 
nullify the four-hour difference. Their sprightly display suggested that 
tactic, like most of his others, had worked. "But my side are improving with 
every match they play. Their resilience is outstanding. It's now a case of just 
ticking the games off. We've had the best possible start: there may be anxious 
moments ahead but we can go close, I'm sure of that."
 