
There was a moment, during a lull in the second half, when you had to marvel 
at the sound of Welsh supporters wolf whistling at the inadequacies of their 
third-rate opponents and cheering warmly at their substitutes for the hell of 
it. How far, how fast, they have come. Before the revolution inspired by Mark 
Hughes, this demoralised team were on the brink of being statistically the worst
Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales> team in history. From 12 
games without a win to a phenomenal sequence of 10 unbeaten and the ever closer 
vision of Euro 2004.

Officially the world's most improved football team in 2002, Wales have entered 
2003 bold, brazen and hellbent on reaching their first major tournament for 
almost half a century. Azerbaijan were dispatched with training ground ease. 
One felt that the team possessed a couple more gears if necessary. With 
qualification at the halfway stage, Wales have maximum points, a healthy 
advantage over their closest challengers, and buckets of confidence. Hughes, 
though, remains cautious. He might be tempted to borrow theAzerbaijan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/azerbaijan> proverb: 'It is impossible to 
hold two watermelons in one hand.' Don't be complacent now. The route to 
Portugal is not yet assured. Autumn will hold the key, with trips to 
Serbia-Montenegro and Italy in August and September.

 Although the postpone ment of Wednesday's fixture in Belgrade interrupts 
Welsh momentum, Hughes was counting his blessings as a squad already weakened 
by injuries and withdrawals had to withstand Robbie Savage (who turned an 
ankle) and Gary Speed (aggravated groin injury) hobbling off before half-time. 
The manager suspects neither would have recovered by midweek.

 Wales were also playing without a single fit recognised full-back, Simon 
Davies utilised on the right and Speed on the left. Fortunately, their visitors 
were in no state to exploit any Welsh inconveniences, managing just the one 
meaningful effort, when Ruslan Musayev hammered against the woodwork. The 
domestic game has been frozen in Azerbaijan for the past year, as the clubs 
withdrew from the league amid a stink over corruption. All Asgar Abdullayev's 
men had to find new clubs abroad.

 Wales expected. And Giggs is not the only hero now, a fact underlined by the 
forgiveness granted to Bellamy after his crass misbehaviour at a nightclub 
earlier in the week. Bellamy, who had apolo gised to his manager, atoned in 
front of 72,000 by helping Wales into the lead after 13 seconds. From kick-off, 
Savage directed the ball to Giggs, whose canter down the left had the visitors 
rocking before they had even found their feet. His cross, floating just behind 
Hartson, frightened the life out of the Azeri rearguard. The ball bounced off a 
couple of confused defenders, with Bellamy in close attendance, and the ball 
trickled over the line. 'Wow, ladies and gentlemen! Wow!' yelled the PA 
announcer. 'Are you watching Engerland?' responded the masses in the stands.

 Two goals in quick succession just before half-time underlined the gulf 
between the two teams. In the 40th minute Speed arrived unmarked at the far 
post to nod in Mark Pembridge's arrowing cross from a short corner, before 
Hartson conjured a goal to savour. The Celtic hulk appeared to give himself too 
acute an angle in taming Giggs's whirling cross, but managed to rifle in a 
spectacular volley all the same.'It just gets better and better and better!' 
gasped Mr Zealous on the PA. Indeed it did, seven minutes after the break. Carl 
Robinson stole possession and fed Giggs, who coolly clipped the ball past 
Jahangir Hasanzade. The Welsh sang with gusto about going to Portugal. 'There's 
four games and a lot of emotion to go,' reminded the pragmatic Hughes.
 