
Professor Sir Al Aynsley-Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/alaynsleygreen> likes teachers. A lot. The 
children's commissioner for England, always an outspoken defender of children's 
rights, is loud and clear in his praise. "The workforce in education is our 
most precious resource and it needs to be nurtured," he says.

But he is concerned at the numbers of unhappy children and schools' ability to 
cope with them.Children <https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> in the 
UK are the least happy of 21 developed countries, a recent survey by Unicef 
found. Today the commissioner will be among those gathered for a conference 
organised by Barnardo's, the children's charity, to discuss the Unicef report.

According to Aynsley-Green, the reason British children are more unhappy is 
the constant pressure of school tests and a curriculum that does not engage low 
achievers or prevent children from dropping out of education or training. There 
is insufficient support for those with physical or emotional needs, and 
bullying has not been tackled effectively enough. In addition, children are 
disenfranchised because they are not involved in decision-making processes at 
school.

A lot of this unhappiness can be put down to stress. He cites the example of a 
15-year-old who wrote to him saying she spent a miserable Christmas because she 
was so worried about her exams, which started straight after the holidays. 
"Children feel under such pressure from endless testing, they do not feel they 
have the time to enjoy themselves," he says. "What is the purpose of education? 
Is it for the attainment of government targets, or is it to provide children 
with life skills to become confident adults?"

Yet he stops short of advocating that school tests be scrapped. "Of course we 
have to have measures of achievement, but to subject very young children to 
regular testing is a worry."

The stress of exams is exacerbated by a curriculum that does not always 
motivate children. Although many children do have a "burning ambition", he is 
worried by the 30% of 15- to 19-year-olds who are not in education or training. 
"If we are to extend the leaving age to 18, we must make sure the curriculum 
reflects pupils' interests and needs." Although pupils love sport and cultural 
subjects, they have tended to be squeezed by other pressures on the curriculum. 
Aynsley-Green says a priority for this year is to ask children what makes them 
happy at school - including their views on the curriculum. The commissioner 
will ask what would motivate them to stay on in school and what creates a 
barrier to doing so.

He strongly supports the government's Every Child Matters agenda, but says 
that although the Children Act stipulates that every child should enjoy and 
achieve, there hasn't been enough attention placed on enjoyment.

And schools are still failing the most disadvantaged groups. One in 10 
children and young people have a medically diagnosed mental health disorder. 
Autistic children and those with Asperger's syndrome feel they knew they were 
different quite early on, but nobody recognised it - and when they did, 
teachers lacked the support and resources to help.

Before becoming the independent children's commissioner in 2005, Aynsley-Green 
was national clinical director for children at the Department of Health, and 
Nuffield professor of child health at Great Ormond Street hospital.

He now wants teachers to be given training to help them recognise autism and 
know what to do. Having spoken with disabled children, he wants every teacher 
in training to spend 24 hours in a wheelchair, so they know what it is like. 
The commissioner also wants properly trained counsellors for schools, to help 
children with emotional problems. "There's a big opportunity for the NHS to be 
engaged in schools," he says. "Teachers already have a ferocious workload. We 
cannot expect them to shoulder more responsibility without more resources."

Counsellors would also help schools tackle bullying. "The greatest cultural 
change we want to see in the education sector is getting teachers to listen 
more."Schools <https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> do not do respect 
children's opinions enough, he says. "I am very concerned about the state of 
children's rights in this country. There is still so much resistance in the 
adult world to the idea that children have anything valuable to say."

So what is it like to be a child today? "You can only answer that question by 
getting off your butt to ask them. That means listening to what they have to 
say."

Aynsley-Green is a big supporter of Unicef's rights-respecting school award 
programme, being piloted in over 100 schools across the UK. The scheme promotes 
the UN convention on the rights of the child as the basis for enhancing 
teaching, learning, ethos, attitudes and behaviour. This means that pupils 
actively participate in decision-making in school. He cites King's Park school 
in Bournemouth - an "exceptional school in terms of ethos" - where rights and 
respect are not taught as an add-on to the curriculum but are embedded in the 
school's entire philosophy. Pupils understand they have the right to be 
listened to and the right to an education not distracted by bullies, he says.

But too few children in the UK are educated about their rights. In all they 
have 42 rights under the UN convention, including the right to education, 
protection from violence, equal treatment and to be involved in decisions that 
affect them. Not enough schools teach these rights, let alone include pupils in 
decisions beyond student councils. "We are not asking for them to make the 
decision, we are asking for them to be involved in decision-making processes."

One area where there are signs of greater participation by young people is in 
the design of school buildings. He cites new schools being built in Telford and 
Wrekin, Shropshire.

Although he has been in contact with over 4,000 children in England, there are 
more than 11.8 million children in the UK. He has hired 12 15-year-old 
assistant commissioners from Newton Aycliffe Woodham community technology 
college, County Durham, who help him to find out children's concerns. Their 
efforts range from speaking to other young people in supermarkets to appearing 
on local radio and television and organising conferences.

But the vast majority of the young people in England have had no contact with 
Aynsley-Green or his office. "Eighty per cent of children don't know we exist," 
he concedes ruefully. As a result, the organisation is going through a 
rebranding exercise. In May, it will relaunch with a new name and a new 
business plan. The first annual conference is planned for August with 100 
children expected to attend. Until then, he urges teachers and their pupils to 
get in touch.

childrenscommissioner.org <http://www.childrenscommissioner.org>
 