
Ten years ago, on a diving trip to Cocos Island, I got into a discussion with 
Rob Walton, the chairman of Walmart (and now also the chairman ofConservation 
International <http://www.conservation.org/Pages/default.aspx>'s executive 
committee), about how his company could impact global conservation efforts. A 
few weeks later, we flew to Bentonville, Arkansas where we met with Walmart's 
then-CEO Lee Scott. Together, we began talking about how Walmart could shift 
toward more sustainable business practices.

​​Those conversations came to fruition last month at Walmart's first 
Sustainable Product Expo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/walmart-sustainable-expo-environment-green-impact>
. CEOs of some of the world's most powerful companies stood on a stage in 
Bentonville and made commitments to green their supply chains. In the process, 
they publicly acknowledged that what is good for humanity is also good for 
business.

The Earth is currently out of balance. The combined impacts of climate shifts, 
ecosystem collapse and huge population growth require that we take a new 
approach to development.

As we have begun to see, development that does not take lasting environmental 
sustainability into account will fail. If we continue on our current 
trajectory, we won't meet the daily needs of the world's more than seven 
billion people. In the process, every business model we know will cease to 
function.

Last month's meeting represents a key milestone in the journey that started a 
decade ago – not just for Walmart, but also for the thousands of companies with 
which it does business. It also signals a shift in thinking at the highest 
levels of corporate America, as companies move away from focusing solely on the 
bottom line and toward a longer-term view of what's healthy for generations to 
come.

In this regard, Walmart has a big responsibility. As the world's largest 
corporation, with more than two million employees, there's no denying its 
tremendous power. It operates over 11,000 stores in 27 countries, and millions 
of people depend on income from products that they sell to the company. 
According to 2012 numbers, if Walmart were a country, it would be the 
26th-largest economy in the world.

And now, slowly but surely, sustainability is becoming part of its DNA.

A decade ago, largely because of the enthusiasm of Scott and other company 
leaders, Walmart began to examine the positive impact that shrinking its 
environmental footprint could have on its bottom line. It realized that 
reducing the amount of packaging and water consumption also reduces waste, and 
reducing waste brings down costs – not just for the company, but for the 
consumer, too.

The company is now working with its 100,000 suppliers to reduce their 
environmental impact and ensure their commitment to the cause of long term 
sustainability.

The sheer size and scope of the Walmart empire means that when it wants to 
make a change, other companies often have to follow suit. Walmart can convince 
truck manufacturers to make their vehicles more energy-efficient. It can 
influence the way that General Electric makes light bulbs. It can control the 
sourcing of fish like salmon. Given the millions of products carried by its 
thousands of stores, the possibilities for going green – and cutting costs – 
are almost endless.

Last week, following Scott's lead, Walmart's new CEO, Douglas McMillon, signed 
specific commitments for sustainability with the leaders of Coca Cola, PepsiCo, 
Monsanto, Procter & Gamble, General Mills, Kellogg and Cargill, among others.

We are making progress. In the past, NGOs had to fight to engage corporations 
in environmental discussions. Today, industries increasingly seem to recognize 
that recycling and saving ecosystems is in our collective self-interest.

I look forward to continuing this journey with its leaders. And I hope other 
companies rise to the challenge. All of us have a role to play in creating the 
next generation of sustainability.

• This article was amended 22 May to add that Rob Walton, chairman of Walmart, 
also is the chairman of Conservation International's executive committee.

Peter Seligmann is the chairman, CEO and co-founder of Conservation 
International <http://www.conservation.org/Pages/default.aspx>

The supply chain hub is funded by fairtrade foundation. All content is 
editorially independent except for pieces labelled advertisement feature. Find 
out morehere <https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>
 