
An often-ignored factor when examining environmental issues and climate change 
is the powerful role played by women. In the developed world, although women 
still struggle to achieve parity in issues of pay and opportunity, we typically 
hold the most sway in household decisions. According to theWall Street Journal 
<https://hbr.org/2009/09/the-female-economy>, women control nearly 
three-quarters of consumer spending in the US and two-thirds in the UK, 
including “making the decision in the purchases of 94% of home furnishings … 
92% of vacations … 91% of homes … 60% of automobiles”.

This massive buying power means that most of the time, women hold the reins 
when it comes to making large, environmentally friendly decisions like deciding 
to vacation close to home rather than taking another long-haul flight, buying a 
modestly sized dwelling rather than a McMansion, and choosing a compact hybrid 
car rather than a gas-guzzling SUV.

In the workplace, too, women are greener: studies show that businesses headed 
by women are more likely to make environmentally friendly decisions. Whether 
it’s buying local produce or organizing e-cycling on a corporate scale, women 
simply seem more concerned about our collective impact on the environment and 
more willing to make changes to mitigate this impact.

But the difference between men and women in environmental issues doesn’t just 
come down to who controls the purse strings. Women are statistically more 
likely to believe the science about climate change in the first place and, 
what’s more, believe it will affect thempersonally. In a 2015 study 
<http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2015/12/02/women-more-than-men-say-climate-change-will-harm-them-personally/>
 examining attitudes about climate change, Pew surveyed 11 developed nations 
and asked people to rate their agreement with the statement: “Global climate 
change is a serious problem.” In the US, 83% of women stated this was a 
somewhat or very serious problem, compared to just 66% of men. In the UK, the 
gap was smaller but still significant: 81% of women vs 71% of men.

It’s tempting to chalk women’s increased awareness and concern for 
environmental issues up to some innate caretaking instinct or womanly 
solidarity. Nature is almost always characterized as female, after all. In 
Mother Nature v the human race, the actions we take against her are almost 
always framed as male: raping, pillaging, conquering, plundering. Doesn’t it 
make sense that women would empathize?

It’s a nice thought, this global sisterhood, but I don’t think it’s quite as 
emotional as all that. I think it’s pure practicality. Even in 2016, in the 
most democratic nations, our equality stands precarious, subject to the whims 
of shifting political tides. It’s not hard to understand that in the event of a 
global climate crisis, women will be immediately rendered one of the most 
vulnerable populations.

At the 2014 UN Climate Summit, the Chilean president, Michelle Bachelet, noted 
that women and children are 14 times more vulnerable than men in a climate 
disaster such as floods or droughts, especially in developing nations. Women 
are more likely than men to die in natural disasters, we’re more likely to 
become caregivers for the sick or wounded, and we’re more likely become the 
victims in climate change-induced violent conflicts.

Put plainly, perhaps women care more about climate change because we have so 
much more to lose.

And while it may seem like women in the west have more power – making major 
household financial decisions while poor women in developing nations are 
already suffering the devastating effects of climate change – women the world 
over are united in waging a long and frustrating fight to gain access to one of 
the most immediate and effective ways to reduce our environmental impact: safe 
access to birth control, abortion and reproductive health services.


We’ve discussed it before 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/26/overpopulation-sustainability-environment-eco-friendly-initiatives>
, and although overpopulation isn’t the only problem (how much each population
consumes is almost equally important) it’s a big one. And unlike many issues 
related to climate change, it’s one which is incredibly simple to solve. David 
Attenborough states it plainly and often: “Wherever women are given political 
control of their bodies, where they have the vote, education, appropriate 
medical facilities and they can read and have rights and so on, the birth rate 
falls – there’s no exceptions to that.”

This is an issue in the developing world, but we’d be remiss if we acted as 
though it was a non-issue in western democracies. The United States is the 
largest democracy in the world, yet only18 states 
<https://www.guttmacher.org/sites/default/files/pdfs/spibs/spib_SE.pdf> and the 
District of Columbia require that information about contraception be taught 
where sex education is provided.
Unwanted pregnancies are the natural consequence of these oversights, and 
while abortion has been legal since 1973, individual states in the US have the 
ability to impose incredibly restrictive regulations on abortion providers, in 
some cases making it all but impossible to access a legal abortion.

Religion and morality are often given as reasons for denying women access to 
reproductive health services, but I think these justifications miss half the 
story. Sister Joan Chittister, a Catholic nun, says it perfectly when she 
states: “I do not believe that just because you’re opposed to abortion, that 
that makes you pro-life. In fact, I think in many cases, your morality is 
deeply lacking if all you want is a child born but not a child fed, not a child 
educated, not a child housed … That’s not pro-life. That’s pro-birth. We need a 
much broader conversation on what the morality of pro-life is.”
It’s ridiculous to deny women information and access to birth control and then 
also deny them the right to terminate an unintended pregnancy. Cruel to 
restrict a woman’s access to abortion and then leave her to the task of raising 
a child alone, vulnerable, and without support. And it’s incredibly 
shortsighted to believe that we can tackle overpopulation without also enabling 
women the world over to become educated and empowered about their own bodies 
and reproductive health.
We cannot simultaneously champion fighting climate change without also 
fighting for the rights of women. The two are inextricably linked; they stand 
hand in hand. It’s about time we all stood up with them.
 