
Australia's Ashes supremacy is so ingrained that it has become automatic for 
England to extol them as the nation of all cricketing virtues, and once again 
last night Nasser Hussain was proclaiming that, when it came to recognising the 
standards required, "there is no point looking anywhere else but the Baggy 
Greens".

But, just when England felt they had the ideal issue on which to parade their 
dedication to the cause - their uncompromising reaction towards Darren Gough's 
and Alec Stewart's refusal to tour India this winter - Australia displayed 
sensitivity towards the players' predicament.

Gough and Stewart have been ruled unavailable by the England management for 
the entire winter's Test series, even though they made themselves available for 
the new year tour to New Zealand, and their indignation was underlined on BBC 
Radio's Test Match Special yesterday as they insisted that England should have 
picked them.

Steve Waugh, Australia's captain, not noted as a soft touch, took the players' 
side, stating that it was "inevitable" that, in an international programme of 
such intensity, occasional tours off would "become the norm". He added: "It is 
a great honour to play for your country but I don't think cricket should rule 
your life."

Shane Warne <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/shane-warne>, celebrating an 
Ashes regeneration that was beyond his wildest dreams, shared Waugh's view. 
"With the big workloads coming up, I think there will be a lot more of this 
down the track," he said.

England's coach Duncan Fletcher offered sympathy but no change of heart, even 
conceding that Gough and Stewart were putting their Test futures at risk. "At 
the end of the day, if the youngsters we will have to take to India really 
perform, then maybe we will have to stick with them," he said. "In that case, 
to give Stewart and Gough contracts next season might be difficult. They 
appreciate that."

The fact remains that Gough and Stewart have volunteered for the easy option. 
For all England's "all-or-none" policy, the suspicion remains that, had the 
players toured India - arguably the most demanding tour of all - then requested 
release from New Zealand, that might well have been allowed. Instead England 
must manage without them and Michael Atherton, whose retirement will be 
confirmed today.

Warne's 31 wickets gave him his most productive series in his last 19, a far 
cry from the modest ambitions of the spring when, after a battering in India, 
he envisaged himself in a stock-bowling role.

"He was switched on from day one," Waugh said. "He wanted to show he was still 
a great cricketer. Today he was as good as he has ever been."

By the Oval Warne was even bowling the long, unbroken spells again that a 
succession of debilitating injuries seemed to have put beyond him.

Australia had one outstanding plot to hatch last night: the making of their 
alternative Ashes trophy in protest at MCC's refusal to allow them to take home 
the original. The Australian journalist Bruce Wilson had found an Aboriginal 
hardwood pot and Waugh had pilfered a bail. It promised to be quite a barbecue.
 