
The New South Wales leg-spinner Stuart MacGill, who took 27 wickets on 
England's last Ashes tour, will replace the injuredShane Warne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/shane-warne> for the Boxing Day Test at the 
MCG.

MacGill has taken 82 wickets for Australia but his career has been limited by 
the presence of Warne - the majority of his 17 caps being earned as Warne's 
replacement. This latest call-up, his first for Australia since the Sydney Test 
against South Africa in January, is down to the dislocated shoulder suffered by 
Warne here last weekend which cut short his series.

The 31-year-old MacGill was chosen ahead of Brad Hogg and Nathan Hauritz and 
now has an unexpected opportunity to play his way into the Australian World Cup 
squad.

MacGill broke into the Australian side against England four years ago when a 
shoulder injury ruled Warne out of the first four Tests of the series. He took 
12 wickets on his last appearance against England in Sydney four years ago and 
his liking for English batsmen continued with 40 wickets in six matches last 
summer for Nottinghamshire.

"I have gone on record that he's in the top couple of spinners in the world," 
said Australia's Test captain Steve Waugh. "He's a quality bowler who has done 
well at Test cricket."

For Waugh the next two Tests will determine his future as captain, with his 
selection for the tour to the Caribbean in doubt after poor form over the past 
12 months. He would like to remain captain of Australia for another 18 months, 
giving him the chance of victory in India, one of the few feats to elude him 
during his career.

The Australian chairman of selectors Trevor Hohns admitted yesterday that he 
had discussed the matter with Waugh and indicated a decision would be made at 
the end of the Ashes series. "We have had initial discussions," Hohns said. "At 
the moment Stephen has our support until the Sydney Test. The decision is then 
up to him whether he wants to continue or not. If he does he will be judged on 
form like any other player. He has our support for the time being."

Though England have been buoyed by two victories over Sri Lanka, Australia's 
one-day captain Ricky Ponting believes those results will have no bearing when 
the Test series resumes. "When the Test match comes around ... they will be 
feeling the pressure again," he said. "It has been a fairly ordinary tour for 
them so far and we'd like to think, if we play well in the first hour on the 
first day, that a lot of those bad memories and thoughts will come flooding 
back."

The final place in the Australian Test side will again lies between Andy 
Bichel and Brett Lee, after Adam Gilchrist was declared fit despite missing the 
Perth one-day game against Sri Lanka because of knee and groin injuries.

Australia XII: S Waugh (captain), A Gilchrist, A Bichel, J Gillespie, M 
Hayden, J Langer, B Lee, D Lehmann, S MacGill, D Martyn, G McGrath, R Ponting.
 