
Glenn McGrath returned to set the seal on a superb summer for Australia, 
removing the last two England wickets in three balls to take his side to 
victory by an innings and 25 runs.

An eight wicket partnership of 58 between Jimmy Ormond and Darren Gough had 
frustrated the tourists and raised home hopes that Australia would be at least 
asked to bat again, but McGrath put paid to that by collecting his 23rd 
five-wicket haul in Tests.

McGrath had Ormond caught behind by Gilchrist for 17, but it was fitting that 
the final act of a memorable summer was played byShane Warne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/shane-warne>, who caught Phil Tufnell at 
second slip off the bowling of McGrath to finish off the England innings.

It is Warne who has bowled Australia to victory here by taking seven wickets 
in the first innings, and he finished with 11 and the Man of the Match award, 
his fifth 10-wicket haul in Tests. Bowling in tandem with McGrath, he took 
Australia to the brink of victory in the morning session, as England lost four 
wickets in the first hour for just nine runs.

Headingley hero Mark Butcher fell to a classic leg break for 14, pushing a 
ball that spun into him to Steve Waugh at silly point, while Nasser Hussain was 
the victim of Warne's variation in his next over. Warne pushed the ball through 
quickly to Hussain, who lunged forward helplessly without picking the 
topspinner, giving umpire Willey no option but to raise his finger and send 
Hussain on his way for two.

In the intervening over Glenn McGrath picked up his 355th Test wicket, 
removing Marcus Trescothick with an unplayable ball. Trescothick had been 
dropped by Ricky Ponting at slip on the previous delivery, but there was no 
escape second time around as the ball lifted viciously from a good length and 
the Somerset opener provided McGrath with a simple caught and bowled.

His 356th followed soon after, and Usman Afzaal failed to replicate the manful 
resistance he showed on Saturday as Ponting made amends by taking a brilliant 
diving catch off the bowling of McGrath.

Alec Stewart and Mark Ramprakash offered more prolonged resistance, adding 40 
for the sixth wicket, but Warne removed both either side of lunch. Ramprakash, 
in good form and full of confidence following his first innings 133, had made 
his way to 19 with little trouble, but was undone by Warne's prodigious spin. 
Warne dropped the ball fractionally short outside leg stump, inducing 
Ramprakash to attempt a late cut, and he paid the price for disrespecting the 
master spinner, directing it straight to Matthew Hayden at gully.

Ramprakash's dismissal was the signal for Stewart to cut loose and he made 34 
in quick time, before two wickets in two balls looked to have wrapped up the 
match. Stewart, was bowled by a viciously turning leg break without offering a 
shot, while an inswinging yorker from Brett Lee removed Andy Caddick, giving 
Lee his first wicket of the match.

With only Phil Tufnell left to come and England still 83 runs behind, 
Australia's reserve players could have been forgiven for uncorking the 
champagne on the balcony, but Ormond and Gough combined to make sure it 
remained on ice.

The pair added 58 in 114 balls, and after defending valiantly Gough in 
particular began to have some fun. The Yorkshireman, smarting from his expected 
exclusion from all of England's winter engagements, showed his value with the 
bat with a quickfire 39, the first time he has passed 30 in 73 Test innings.

Ormond's batting was more obdurate, and he was fortunate to survive a good 
spell of bowling from Gillespie who twice found the edge of his bat, only to 
see the ball land just short of the slips and then flying well over.

With Warne tiring after bowling 26 overs without rest, Waugh turned to his 
talisman McGrath, but Gough, temporarily at least, proved his equal. His first 
over back in the attack cost 12 as Gough hit three fours, two through cover and 
an audacious flick to fine-leg as McGrath released a chest high bumper.

McGrath refused to be cowed by Gough's assault though, and, as he has done so 
often in his illustrious career, after losing the first mini-skirmish he 
returned to win the war.

McGrath has taken 32 wickets at a cost of less than 17 in this series, with 
Warne chipping in with 31, and against such high class bowling England have 
been powerless to resist.
 