
 The author:  Georges Simenon (1903-89) was born in Belgium, and published his 
first novel, Au Pont des Arches, in 1920, aged 20. Two years later, he moved to 
Paris, beginning a phase of creativity that would see some 200 books, under 
pseudonyms and aimed at the pulp market, in a decade. In 1931, he put out his 
first Maigret novel, The Strange Case of Peter the Lett, also the first under 
his own name. By 1934, he had completed 19 more Maigrets. Simenon's reputation 
suffered after he was named as a wartime collaborator, having done business 
with a Nazi-run film studio, and Simenon left France for the US. L'Horloger 
d'Everton (The Watchmaker of Everton) emerged from this period, published in 
1954. He returned to Europe in 1955, settling in Switzerland. Despite his 
complicated personal life (numerous affairs, a wife who ended up in a 
psychiatric hospital, a daughter who committed suicide), the books kept coming, 
as did the film and TV spin-offs.

 The story:  In the small US town of Everton, New York state, watchmaker Dave 
Galloway is told his son Ben - who has disappeared with his girlfriend, Lillian 
Hawkins - is wanted for murder. A bewildered Galloway is badgered by the police 
and the media to cooperate in the hunt, but is reluctant, remembering the 
difficulties of their relationship. Ben and Lillian are tracked down and tried; 
Galloway attempts to help his son, but realises he is very much a minor element 
in the boy's life. Galloway persists, however, and after Ben is jailed they 
make some kind of peace, as Dave reflects on the character flaw running through 
the Galloway family.

 The film-maker:  After 10 years working as a press attache for the likes of 
Jean-Pierre Melville and Jean-Luc Godard, as well as writing reviews for 
Positif magazine, Bertrand Tavernier (b1941) took on The Watchmaker as his 
feature film debut. He hired Jean Aurenche and Pierre Bost, a pair of retired, 
wartime-era writers (from the cinéma du papa generation thoroughly discredited 
by the nouvelle vague) to work on the script.

Veteran character actor Philippe Noiret, then best known for Zazie Dans le 
Métro (1960), stuck with the untested Tavernier through the 14 months it took 
to finance the film.

 How book and film compare:  Tavernier reset the story to his home city of 
Lyon. The script reshapes the story - principally by building a police 
investigator, Gilboud, into a major character and a foil to the watchmaker, 
renamed Descombes. The pivotal murder is also changed - no longer a random 
motorist as in the original, but a thuggish security guard named Razon. The 
film also fed into contemporary French concerns about political unrest: the 
killing could be motivated by "gauchist" concerns.

 Inspirations and influences:  In theme and style, The Watchmaker took a 
leading stand against nouvelle vague concerns. The "lovers-on-the-run" motif 
(as recycled from US pulp cinema) was a new wave favourite - eg Louis Malle's 
Lift to the Scaffold (1958) or A Bout de Souffle (1960). Tavernier chose to 
focus on the emotional repercussions for the older generation. Simenon's own 
career had been tarnished by association with the wartime film industry, and 
Tavernier's desire to restore its reputation resulted in Laissez-Passer (2002), 
in which Aurenche figures as a major character.
 