
Plans to x-ray the teeth of unaccompanied child asylum seekers to assess their 
age contravene medical ethics and may constitute assault, the children's 
watchdog for England warns today.

Sir Al Aynsley-Green <https://www.theguardian.com/society/alaynsleygreen>, the 
children's commissioner for England, says in a letter to the immigration 
minister, Liam Byrne, that there are "grave ethical reservations" surrounding 
the government's plans, as well as "severe limitations" to its effectiveness in 
identifying age. Young people who have never seen an x-ray machine will 
experience confusion and fear, but will be under pressure to consent because to 
refuse could reduce their chances of a successful asylum claim, he warns.

Aynsley-Green's concerns are shared by children's and medical organisations, 
including other UK children's commissioners, the British Medical Association 
and the Royal Colleges of Radiologists and of Paediatrics and Child Health. The 
government plans to change immigration rules by December 1 to allow medical 
examinations of children seeking asylum to try to determine their age.

This would permit not only dental x-rays - which the government said it wanted 
to introduce in a consultation paper on unaccompanied asylum-seeking children 
last February - but would also allow the use of x-rays of wrist and collar 
bones. Ministers want to assess children's age in order to identify what 
support and benefits they qualify for. There are concerns that some asylum 
seekers falsely claim to be under 18 because minors are given greater support 
and protection. There are nearly 3,000 age disputed cases each year.

Aynsley-Green, a consultant paediatrician for over 30 years, said: 
"Responsible medical authorities argue that since no dose of radiation can be 
entirely safe, then x-rays should never be used unless there is therapeutic 
benefit to the subject."

Many youngsters "may experience considerable fear of the procedure".

The Home Office said yesterday it was not committed to using x-rays, but had 
been consulting about changes to the system, including the possible use of 
x-rays, and would publish a summary of responses to the consultation in 
December.

In its February consultation paper, however, the Immigration and Nationality 
Directorate of the Home Office (now the Border and Immigration Agency) made 
clear it not only wanted to introduce dental checks "where there is a 
reasonable doubt about the claimed age", but also its view that an 
"unreasonable refusal to undergo an x-ray examination should strongly inform 
the final decision on age".

Aynsley-Green says: "Such explicit or, even worse, covert pressure is 
unacceptable, and could undermine the legality of any 'consent' so obtained. 
Furthermore, if such an investigation were to be performed without full 
consent, then it could possibly be judged to be an illegal assault on the 
child, exposing the practitioner to the scrutiny of the regulatory 
authorities." The children's commissioner also says that teeth and bone x-rays 
are inaccurate as a method of assessing age, with a margin for error of about 
two years.

Dr Hilary Cass, registrar at the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child 
Health, said: "There is no good research evidence for the use of x-rays for age 
assessment, and we would strongly urge that the Home Office review its 
position."
 