
Australia will go home with the Ashes, lauded by many as the finest team since 
the West Indies sides of the Eighties, and only fleetingly reminded of their 
vulnerabilities. However the sense of harmony, so assiduously cultivated by 
their captain Steve Waugh, has come under serious pressure in recent days and 
weeks.

Given the nature of the showdown between Waugh and Michael Slater last week, 
it says much for the professionalism of these and other principles involved in 
the drama that the team have performed so impressively on the pitch, both in 
this Test and throughout the series. To borrow his euphemism for sledging, 
Waugh would probably describe it as a triumph over 'mental disintegration'.

There are tensions that have been building up for weeks and boiled over at The 
Oval on Tuesday when Waugh brought his players into a huddle on the ground, 
away from any intrusion by the media. Everyone knew what was coming. Waugh 
turned to Slater and confirmed what the player himself had already revealed to 
the Sydney radio station that employs him: he was dropped. It had nothing to do 
with his lack of runs since the first Test; it had everything to do with his 
persistent refusal to curb his late nights.

Early in the tour, Waugh had indicated he did not want players using Test 
cricket as an extension to their parallel careers; Slater's burgeoning 
television and media work, while still playing, might have fallen into this 
category.

There was also concern about what some regarded as his eccentric behaviour. He 
had gone out drinking alone, he had taken up smoking at the age of 31, he had 
bought a red Ferrari and he had a Superman tattoo put on his left bicep. 
Although it is hardly outlandish behaviour but perhaps too much for the some 
times stuffy Australian cricket establishment.

In this context, the party line that he was being disciplined for missing the 
team bus however this looks very much like a smokescreen - and Slater was quick 
to point out that such a minor crime hardly justified the punishment if indeed 
it really was for 'non-cricketing' matters.

'You don't want to be putting people on notice all the time,' Waugh later told 
ABC radio.

'They are responsible for their own actions. They are grown-up people and you 
have to give them the freedom to make their own choices. If someone does step 
out of line you have got to make them aware of their responsibilities. It is 
not always about form. It's also about how you fit into the side. A lot of 
things go into selections.'

Slater's marriage, already under strain, was suffering. His wife, Stephanie, 
had tried to patch things up with him, but apparently things had not worked 
out. Last week, she turned to Adam Gilchrist's wife, an old friend, for advice 
in an emotional late-night conversation at the team hotel, before making the 
long journey home.

Waugh then warned Slater to tone down his behaviour and, last Tuesday, he made 
the hard choice. Once told he was dropped, Slater turned on his heel and walked 
away from what is perceived as the most tight-knit unit in international sport. 
As he headed for the dressing room, however, old loyalties and rivalries were 
tested to the full.

First to show his hand was Shane Warne, who went after Slater to console him, 
letting him know that he thought the captain was wrong. The rest stood their 
ground. Warne, whose own extra-curricular activities have often brought him to 
the attention of the headmaster, returned to the team gathering and expressed 
his misgivings loudly to Waugh. He was livid that off-field misdemeanours had 
cost Slater his place.

Warne once harboured hopes of succeeding Mark Taylor as captain, and briefly 
had the reins in one-day games, but the AustralianCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board would not risk such an 
appointment, and Waugh has been an outstanding leader.

If Warne had been in charge, though, Slater would have still been in the team 
and Waugh might not have been. Warne is thought to have believed it was folly 
for Waugh to risk his injured calf in what is a dead rubber. But Waugh's dogged 
century was a very loud riposte to that line of thinking.

Warne and Slater, along with Ricky 'Punter' Ponting, reside very much on the 
cavalier wing of what can often seem to outsiders to be a team too upright to 
be true. Owner of a fine cricket brain that lets him down once the sun goes 
down, Ponting's appetite for a boisterous night out also undermined his 
leadership ambitions. He was briefly mentioned as a possible successor to 
Waugh, but the safer Gilchrist was preferred as vice-captain. It was Gilchrist 
stood by his captain in the Slater showdown.

Yesterday's papers in Australia returned to the story, quoting Slater's NSW 
coach, Steve Rixon, as saying he thought the player 'needed two to three weeks 
rest and recuperation'.

The chairman of selectors Trevor Hohns admitted: 'There are people at the ACB 
who would be only too happy to help Michael but that's a personal issue.'

He confirmed it wasn't just Slater's batting that triggered his fall. 'There 
were also some internal issues within the team as well as other public problems 
which everyone is aware of.'

Two years ago, the Australian cricket team celebrated winning the World Cup by 
gathering in the middle of the pitch at Lord's well into the night and singing 
a lubricated version of their unofficial anthem, Under the Southern Cross . It 
was the captain Waugh who did much to build that camaraderie.

All summer, the tourists have presented a united front. Waugh took them to 
Gallipoli before the series to harness a sense of perspective and, each match 
morning, a team member has happily taken part in the ritual of reading out a 
favourite saying or poem, some times a song.

Last night in their dressing room, they sang along again with Paul Kelly, an 
Australian rock icon of recent years. For one player, the music will not have 
been so joyful as it once was.
 