
Justin Langer, having retired hurt on Thursday, was available to bat at the 
Oval yesterday, but within half an hour of play's commencement was about as 
likely to appear as Bernhard Langer. A day of utterly routine slaughter 
impended, and there was a sense in which even the bowlers and fielders could 
feel it coming.

Steve and Mark Waugh duly brought it all to pass. Steve was on one leg, but 
both were of one mind. They are playing what will probably be their last Test 
in England, and their hundreds yesterday were almost certainly their final 
innings. But there were no Bradman-like ducks to leave us toasting cricket's 
glorious uncertainty; there was lots of rather grinding certainty instead, and 
no breath left among the fielders for three cheers.

Steve Waugh's mood was immediately clear. In the first few overs, he played 
two extravagant slashes at Ormond. Both times, Australia's captain bowed his 
head penitentially, and cupped a glove to the side of his helmet visor, 
shutting out intruding thoughts and gearing himself for a long entrenchment.

The second time, Steve went down the pitch to talk to his brother, though only 
briefly. "Do as I say not as I do," may have been the message. It was almost 
certainly not: "Do you remember that time when we were nine years old that I 
stuck your head down the dunny?" The twins aren't conversationalists: 
Waugh-Waugh entails very little Jaw-Jaw.

About half an hour from lunch, Steve began feeling the tear in his calf 
sustained at Trent Bridge. He started limping a little. But there was no sign 
of strain when he went down on his haunches to slog-sweep Tufnell for six - the 
stroke with which he reached fifty - or drove inside out down the ground. He 
simply husbanded his energies and sauntered his singles, like a slightly gouty 
laird strolling round his estate.

In Adelaide five years ago, after he had made his usual fat hundred, two Sri 
Lankan players sought Steve Waugh out. "Do you meditate?" they asked. "Because 
you look like you are in a trance when you bat." Australia's captain sent them 
away disappointed - the closest he comes to meditation is chewing his gum a 
little harder - but there is no doubt he has reserves of concentration granted 
to few players in history.

In the early days of his career, Mark Waugh also suggested a trance-like state 
when at the crease, though more because his economy of movement sometimes 
implied an economy of thought. He batted as if for his own amusement. Dismissal 
was pleasure deferred rather than pleasure denied.

Nowadays he is more hardened. He knows he has received the selectors' 
indulgence in recent years, and is prepared to bat beyond the point where it 
has probably ceased to entertain him, for achievement and for the statistical 
exchequer.

Not everything has changed, as one saw yesterday. Mark still plays delightful 
strokes, including that signature flick to leg with a glance over his shoulder, 
like a teenager on his bike sneaking a look at a pretty girl.

He also retains some idiosyncratic weaknesses, particularly the ball on his 
body which he doesn't quite play yet also doesn't quite avoid.

He now usually manages, however, to fight off boredom, delaying it yesterday 
until after his 20th Test hundred had accrued. Only then did he gift Gough his 
wicket, his head as high in the air as the bowler's was low.

It's sometimes considered strange that the Waughs have not been more 
productive in harness, Sabina Park in 1995 and Sydney in 99 being notable 
exceptions to a pattern of fairly modest partnerships spaced over many Tests 
together. This may have more to do with the lore and mystique associated with 
twins than with cricket sense - it wouldn't occur to anyone to ask why Steve 
Waugh has not made more of his alliegances with, say, Justin Langer - but it 
does relate something of their differences as individuals.

There's a story attached to the world fifth-wicket record the twins share: 464 
in Perth for New South Wales just over ten years ago. It ended only when their 
captain declared. It's said that Mark was heard afterwards expressing his 
thankfulness, as he was quite tired, and Steve his annoyance, as he had thought 
them good for several hundred more.

As then, so yesterday: while Mark put his feet up, Steve's feet showed even 
less sign of budging than usual. Though Inzamam ul-Haq would have beaten him 
over a hundred yards, Australia's captain took his average against England to 
the far side of 60, and his average in England to the far side of 70. He 
received a smaller round of applause than Bradman after his last Test innings 
at the Oval, but spectators by then probably felt they'd applauded him enough.
 