
How many more times? You do not play mind games with Stephen Waugh. You do not 
bandy words with him, or offer a challenge. Jeer him as he leaves the field on 
a stretcher and he comes back on one leg and gets a hundred. Break his finger 
and he will likewise score a hundred, and then, just in case the point has not 
been made, another in the second innings as well. Above all, though, do not 
threaten him with the sack. Even the Archbishop of Canterbury has said Britain 
should have nothing to do with him, although he may have been talking about 
Iraq.

It is not England's fault, of course, but the constant debate on the future of 
the Australian captain is starting to rankle with him; it is all getting out of 
proportion, he feels. When he goes, sooner rather than later, it will be with 
his boots on, last man standing - as they have called the latest of his 
limited-edition memorabilia tat. So just for the hell of it he came out 
yesterday, shrugged off the standing ovation from the capacity crowd of almost 
65,000 and blazed the stuffing from an attack which had already suffered 
centuries from Justin Langer and, inevitably, Matthew Hayden.

Having reached a half-century in less than an hour and at more than a run a 
ball, Waugh might have had a hundred by the close yesterday, had the adrenalin 
level not subsided a little and given circumspection a shout. The captain took 
a couple more boundaries against the second new ball to go with the 10 he had 
already hit and picked his way gently to stumps to be unbeaten on 62.

With him Langer, unbeaten on 146, had batted the day through for what is 
already the third highest of his 13 Test centuries, the pair having added 91 
for the fourth wicket.

As much as anyone in the Australian side, Langer has needed runs because, 
prolific as his alliance with Hayden is proving, he is the straight man of the 
pair, struggling to keep up. So while the big Queenslander has been rattling up 
hundreds so readily that he has now taken to playing some strokes perched on 
one leg - like Jethro Tull in concert, so ridiculously simple has he made the 
game - Langer has been struggling for his own credibility. A wombat could 
partner Hayden at the moment and share a century stand.

Langer's joy, then, when he belted successive deliveries from the off-spinner 
Richard Dawson for four and then six into the ranks of the Barmy Army to reach 
his hundred, was almost as unconfined as had been that of Hayden half an hour 
earlier on reaching his own. Langer had made a big hundred for Western 
Australia last week so he was in the mood but this was his first Test century 
for almost a year, in which he had exceeded 50 only twice. Now the pressure is 
off again for a while.

Hayden was simply brutal, happily surfing one of the biggest waves of batting 
success the game can have seen. He might have been caught from his first ball, 
had Steve Harmison at long leg been on the rope rather than 10 yards in, but 
the hook dropped over his head. Another mishook later eluded John Crawley, who 
lost the ball against the crowd, and yet another dropped short of Andy Caddick 
to give Hayden his 13th Test hundred and his eighth in his past 13 Tests.

There were, besides, a couple of reputable lbw shouts which on another day, 
with more sympathetic umpires, might have been given out; and a wonderful 
wrong-handed run-out attempt by Michael Vaughan. Soon after the latter, Hayden 
slogged Caddick in the air to bring his innings of 102 and an opening stand of 
195 to a close.

As a pair Hayden and Langer have done enough since first they came together 
with 158 at the Oval two summers ago to stand with the greats. Their average of 
81.58 runs per part nership from a significant number of Tests, 17, is beaten 
only by Jack Hobbs and Herbert Sutcliffe, who could boast 88.71, and 
unquestionably in time the names will likewise be synonymously enscribed in 
cricket lore.

Curiously, England did not have a bad day of it. They made changes, enforced 
by the hand injury to Alec Stewart, bringing in a keeper, James Foster, and a 
batsman, Crawley, to replace someone who would like to think he did the job of 
two men.

It meant only four bowlers but they bowled tolerably well, especially in the 
pre-lunch session where the openers were kept on a short rein, and Harmison, a 
bowler whose confidence and standing are improving dramatically, got the speed 
up to 94mph - the fastest ever recorded by an England bowler. Despite the 
bowlers' efforts, in the afternoon session 147 runs came in 27 overs and the 
initiative, always with the home side, was wrenched out of reach. An extra 
bowler would have offered respite for those on duty, but probably not a 
tourniquet to stanch the flow.

The wickets of Hayden, Ricky Ponting and Damien Martyn in relatively quick 
succession lent England vague hope of making a comeback. Waugh, though, had 
other ideas, offering hope only when on 56 he edged the second new ball low to 
second slip, where Mark Butcher rolled over and may or may not have made a 
clean catch.

He shrugged his shoulders and expressed his uncertainty while Waugh, not 
surprisingly given the demeanour of the catcher, stood his ground. There the 
matter should have ended. These are uncharitable times, however: the matter was 
referred to the third umpire, whose replay showed that, yes, Butcher may or may 
not have taken the catch cleanly. On balance, he probably did.
 