
The people of Newquay are bracing themselves for another summer invasion. "Or 
several invasions, really," says PC Darral Mares, who is in charge of 
neighbourhood policing in the town. "Hen parties, stag parties, surfers, 
students. We get them all here. But the ones we fear most are the teenagers."

The teenagers, most of them aged 16, are due to descend from the beginning of 
July, fresh out of their final GCSE exams. They'll head for the campsites or 
the bunkhouses, they'll usually be in groups up to 20 strong, and they'll have 
one overwhelming ambition in mind: "They want to party," says PC Mares. 
"They've worked hard, they've finished their exams, and they want to celebrate."

No one is quite sure why Newquay came to be synonymous with end-of-GCSE 
celebrations. Rob Andrew, who is heading up Cornwall council's Newquay Safe 
campaign, says it dates back at least a decade, and is perhaps linked to the 
fact that the first youngsters who came here were the offspring of parents who 
owned second homes in the area.

And it was a tradition that grew and grew. Last year around 10,000 teenage 
revellers hit Newquay in July – but, not for the first time, the partying 
turned to tragedy. "Within the space of a month we had two lads die when they 
fell over the cliffs, and another two young people ended up with serious 
injuries," says Supt Julie Whitmarsh, who is in charge of policing across west 
Cornwall.

Time for change

There had been alcohol-related deaths in Newquay before, but the loss of two 
16-year-olds in such a short space of time was unprecedented. As far as the 
local population was concerned, things had to change.

And this year Newquay – whose beaches are some of the finest in the West 
Country – is squaring up to meet the challenge. "We've got lots of new measures 
in place," says Whitmarsh. "We're determined to do everything we can to make 
sure teenagers know the dangers of drinking too much – we've had people go into 
the schools we know the youngsters often come from, in Berkshire and the home 
counties, and we've tried to put the message out about how to drink 
responsibly, and to behave safely.

"Part of the problem is that the youngsters who come here have no idea of the 
dangers of the cliffs – and Newquay is a town full of sheer cliffs. If you jump 
over a fence in Berkshire, you land in the garden next door. If you jump over a 
fence in Newquay, you'll probably fall hundreds of feet."

Police officers in the town are armed for this year's invasion with alcometers 
– devices that youngsters will be asked to blow into if it's suspected they've 
been drinking. The police will use the machines to help stop "pre-loading" – 
the widespread teenage practice of drinking alcohol before going to a party 
venue if they're underage and therefore won't be served in a bar. And in pubs 
and bars around the town, posters are displayed prominently proclaiming "No ID 
– no Newquay." "The only ID that's accepted in our pubs and bars is a driving 
licence or a passport," says Whitmarsh.

There's also a campaign to encourage young tourists to enrol in sports 
programmes rather than heading for the pubs. "If we can get people signed up to 
the surfing in Newquay, our hope is that they'll come back throughout their 
lives to enjoy the surf here," says Rob Andrew. One of the main beaches, 
Fistral, will have an alcohol-free cafe sponsored by Drinkaware providing food, 
things to do and information to keep under 18s safe.

And in the centre of town there will be a Portakabin where youngsters who have 
had too much to drink can be looked after. "We get all sorts in there," says 
Supt Whitmarsh. "Sometimes it's girls who've lost their shoes, or who can't 
walk in high heels any more."

Recently two 15-year-old girls from Bristol were found drinking from a litre 
bottle of vodka, and very drunk, in Newquay town centre. They were holidaying 
without adults, and police searched their accommodation and seized more alcohol 
(not, Whitmarsh emphasies, bought locally).

"The girls' parents were contacted and they drove down to collect them and 
take them home," she says. "We hope this sends out a very strong message: 
parents will be called at any time to come and collect their children. We need 
to underline that underage drinkers are their parents' responsibility."

Parental dos and don'ts

• Don't give your child alcohol to take on a teen camping holiday

• Try to make sure there are activities planned, and that they're not just 
planning to drink alcohol

• Make sure you have the mobile numbers of all the young people in your 
child's party, and of their parents. Contact the parents ahead of the trip

• Make sure everyone knows the importance of staying together, and of looking 
after one another

• Warn your child about the dangers of the place they're visiting – for 
example, if it's Newquay, the cliffs

• Don't kid yourself that because it's a holiday in the UK, it's safe. The 
dangers are every bit as great in Newquay as in Greece or Spain
 