
England turned an apparent chore into a celebration of a fine year that, 
barring unimaginable feats by Belarus, leaves them three points short of 
qualification for the 2010 World Cup. By striking twice in the 45 minutes he 
was permitted Wayne Rooney alsoexploited the occasion to become the first 
person since Gary Lineker in 1991 to score 10 England goals in a season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/jun/11/england-andorra-wayne-rooney>.

Few passed up the opportunity to milk the match and Jermain Defoe, who took 
over from Rooney, also bagged a couple. Peter Crouch, who had endured 
frustration, persevered until, at last, he capitalised on confusion to put his 
side 6-0 in front. Opportunities, elementary as they were, were grasped and 
Fabio Capello's side have reeled off seven straight wins in Group Six.

It must be conceded that Andorra, 196th in the world rankings, have no 
prospect at all of becoming anyone's benchmark. At a pinch England might just 
have considered them a sort of time-trial. Capello's first competitive fixture 
had come against them and his side's two goals in Barcelona had not arrived 
until after the interval.There were no such delays at Wembley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2009/jun/10/worldcup2010-englandfootballteam?picture=348692631>
.

The severity of the tests in Group Six has fluctuated wildly but the common 
element has been the sense that Capello's plans are implemented with eagerness 
and application.Glen Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2009/jun/10/glen-johnson-england-andorra-richard-williams>
, for instance, can look unsure in more exacting matches but his zest and 
menace on the overlap were ideal to clear the congestion Andorra engineered.

Although the opener, from Rooney, came as early as the fourth minute, the 
visitors had shown fortitude to get as far as that without harm. Ildefons Lima 
made a fine tackle to halt Steven Gerrard while Rooney had seen an attempt 
tipped over and also struck the bar before he did score. After four minutes 
Johnson crossed deep and the Manchester United attacker headed home.

It helped that England did not seem to take the final fixture of a long 
programme as a chore. Call them bullies or professionals as you wish but they 
enjoyed tearing into Andorra. If anyone might have been exasperated it was 
Crouch, taking the centre-forward role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/jun/10/england-player-ratings1> 
while Emile Heskey had a night off. He should not have headed high from a David 
Beckham free-kick. The set-piece taker was enjoying a first competitive start 
for his country since June 2007 but he cannot have felt that this actually was 
an authentic qualifier.

There is a latent absurdity in the obligation to play matches against sides 
such as Andorra but mockery ought to be suppressed in these parts above all.
Andorra <https://www.theguardian.com/football/andorra>, it should be noted, has 
been a member of the United Nations since 1993.When it comes to statehood, 
England, like Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, is simply an element of the 
United Kingdom.

If international law were the decisive factor, Andorra, despite being a micro 
country with a population of 75,000, would have had more right to participate 
in this match than their opponents. On the pitch, of course, it was impossible 
for them to look as if they belonged at Wembley. Frank Lampard scored the 
second goal following a cross from the eager Johnson in the 29th minute. Ten 
minutes later the right-back centred again and Rooney slotted home.

It is no fault of Capello's that he has so far had a single fixture of real 
prestige in which to demonstrate his impact. That 4-1 victory in Zagreb is 
unforgettable. All the same he has not been extended fully in the other group 
matches. His mission now is to maintain animation and purpose all the way to the
World Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> finals.

It is hard to reproach Andorra for any ploys that might ease their predicament 
and there was comic cunning in letting the second half start before, within two 
minutes, stopping it again by bringing on a substitute, as Marc Vales took over 
from Antonio Lima.

Capello's changes had been made before the half began. He would hardly have 
been expected to demand a full 90 minutes from leading players but the 
withdrawal of Rooney and Gerrard had a dampening effect for a little while. By 
and large the crowd was merry, with 57,897 people glad that they had still gone 
to Wembley when London Underground was affected by a strike. Efforts were made 
to maintain a full service on the field but a certain amount of trundling was 
unavoidable.

Defoe could not initially demonstrate the appetite of a habitual scorer but he 
did not fail when meeting a chip from Johnson to head England's fourth. He 
pounced again to slot home a loose ball. Crouch, until his moment came at last, 
must have despaired of making any impact.

Little had gone his way and he simply got in the way when a Walcott drive 
cannoned off the Portsmouth attacker. By the end he was a figure of creditable 
perseverance. Crouch and the others worked hard out of pride rather that 
necessity. The Capello culture is unmistakable even in a game as insignificant 
as this.
 