
Q My partner and I are splitting up and we need to decide what happens about 
the house where I’m currently living.

We are each paying half the mortgage but since January, I have been paying for 
home insurance, repairs and other property-related costs. We bought the 
property for £235,000 and it’s now worth about £250,000. The outstanding 
mortgage is approximately £196,000 and we are tied into a two-year deal that 
expires in March 2017 and therefore have an early repayment charge of £6,000.
 How do I calculate how much it would cost to buy my partner out of the 
property? Who should pay ongoing housing costs such as home insurance and 
repairs until we’ve sorted out what should happen? Can the early repayment 
charge be taken into account? Do I have to appoint a solicitor or can I just 
agree terms with my partner?

I am worried if I take on additional costs I won’t be able to even consider 
buying him out.

A To be able to buy out your partner, you need to be able to take over his 
half of the mortgage and pay him cash for his half of the equity in the 
property.

 If the house is worth £250,000 and the mortgage is £196,000, your joint 
equity is £54,000 so you would need to pay him half of that, which is £27,000. 
If you don’t have that much spare cash, one option would be to increase the 
mortgage to £223,000 (£196,000 plus £27,000). However, you won’t be able to 
take over the mortgage and/or increase it to raise the cash to pay your partner 
without the agreement of your lender, who will need to be convinced that you 
are able to afford the mortgage on your own.

Your lender will also be able to tell you if taking the whole mortgage – or 
increasing it – would trigger the early repayment charge. I can’t see why it 
would as by taking on the mortgage, you are not repaying it early, but it makes 
sense to double-check. If you would have to pay the fee, it also makes sense to 
wait until after March to make any changes to the mortgage. If your lender 
won’t let you put the mortgage in your sole name, you will have to sell the 
property. If you sold before March, the early-repayment fee would have to be 
paid and it would come out of the sale proceeds.

As far as ongoing costs are concerned, it seems fair that you and your partner 
should split the cost of anything that directly affects the property such as 
repairs and building insurance, which protects the property in case of damage. 
However, it doesn’t seem fair to ask him to pay half of the contents’ 
insurance, for example, unless his belongings are still in the house.

Finally, you don’t need to use a solicitor to agree terms with your partner, 
but you will need one to deal with either the transfer of the property to your 
sole ownership or, if that’s not going to be possible, the sale of the house.
 