
From its very beginnings the BBC has had a mission to inform, educate and 
entertain audiences. Lord Reith, the BBC's first director-general, saw the 
power that broadcast, initially over the radio, could have on education. In his 
book Broadcast Over Britain, published in 1924, Reith identified how the BBC 
could be used to educate audiences of all ages through the broadcast of 
lectures for adults "at some convenient hour which will not interfere with the 
normal work".

And so the BBC's commitment to adult education began. During the 1920s and 
1950s, adult education lectures were broadcast on topics such as natural 
history, politics and music. Hundreds of listener groups were set up across the 
country to help audiences pursue education and training. By the 1960s adult 
education had made the leap on to television, with factual series such as The 
Science of Man, with content often supported with print resources, mailed to 
viewers once they had sent a stamped-addressed envelope. Drama was also 
developed as a tool for educating audiences. Perhaps one of the best-remembered 
educational dramas was On the Move, which starred Bob Hoskins and portrayed a 
man's journey back into education. Its impact was huge, with more than 125,000 
adults recruited back into adult education over a three-year period, and truly 
showed the effect that broadcast could have in inspiring adult learners.

The power of broadcast was again seen in 1992, when the BBC launched Second 
Chance to coincide with the first Adult Learners' Week. Over the course of a 
week, 35 short sketches were played out across the BBC, supported by 
documentaries, radio content and a telephone advice line. As with On the Move, 
the impact on audiences was massive. Fifty-seven thousand people rang the 
helpline, 350,000 support publications were requested and thousands more people 
attended local events at further education colleges.

Today's audiences have different lifestyles, with different needs, interests 
and demands, and the BBC has moved on from stamped-addressed envelopes to 
embrace new technologies. Online campaigns such as the People's War and First 
Click, and our adult skills sites Skillswise and Webwise have been extremely 
popular. The combination of online resources and new technologies, including 
mobile and iPTV, provide new and innovative ways of connecting with and 
inspiring audiences, and we are constantly exploring how we can use these in 
order to engage adults in learning.

But broadcast, whether on television or radio, still has an important place in 
adult education if we are to deliver our renewed vision to inspire a life full 
of learning for all our audiences. Earlier this year I announced a new 
partnership with BBC Daytime on a documentary and drama project on BBC1 around 
adult literacy. My hope is that through our work with internal and external 
partners we can create a multifaceted campaign, driven by broadcast and 
reinforced with online and face-to-face interactions – a campaign that will 
resonate with today's generation of adult learners with as much, if not more, 
power and impact as On the Move did in the 1970s.

Saul Nassé is the controller of BBC Learning
 