
As part of the Ashes celebrations I keep hearing I am about to get the Freedom 
of Droitwich. People are patting me on the back and asking me if I can drink 
free now in all the town's pubs. I have to tell them that I haven't heard 
anything and that I might be the victim of a terrible wind-up.

The freedom to drive my sheep down the high street would not be much use 
anyway. I'm away from home so much that, when it comes to pets, the Giles 
family does not own as much as a hamster.

But what I could really do with is a lifetime of spa baths. Droitwich owes its 
origins to its rejuvenating salt springs and, after the celebrations of the 
past few days, a pick-me-up is just what I need. Just think: a salt bath a day 
might mean that I can keep trundling in until I am 70. Maybe you have not quite 
seen the last of me yet.

The celebrations seem to have lasted almost as long as the Ashes series and, 
at times, they have been just as tiring. Open-top buses to Trafalgar Square, an 
official welcome at 10 Downing Street, a spot of hob-nobbing at Lord's and one 
or two bars or nightclubs. There were times when I thought of asking Vaughanie 
if he could bring on a substitute. Long before the end we would have been 
soundly beaten by a Droitwich junior school side.

I had problems sleeping throughout the Ashes series. I would often wake up at 
four in the morning with my mind churning about how I was going to bowl to 
Ricky Ponting. This time, several glasses of champagne after winning the Ashes, 
I was lying awake in my hotel room again, flicking through the memories of the 
summer and anticipating the open-top bus ride through Trafalgar Square.

The family were all with me so, once the kids woke up, there was no chance of 
sleeping. When I turned on the television the first thing I saw was a live feed 
from the hotel and the revelation that Freddie was still in the lobby. I did 
briefly wonder what state he would be in but, as always, he was very mellow and 
very relaxed. If he has a drink, I have never known him to get in anyone's face.

I think what has appealed to many people about this England team is that we 
seem to be normal blokes just getting stuck in. There was a comment in The Sun 
on the same day that they carried a picture of me and Kevin Pietersen tipping 
out of a nightclub in the early hours as the Ashes celebrations neared their 
close. It suggested that the England team had been on a 36-hour bender, and 
hadn't hit anyone or hadn't abused anyone, and that we had shown how to have a 
good time. The theory was that we were just normal members of the public having 
some good honest fun. I wouldn't complain about that image at all.

You can't please quite everyone, though. Another letter, this time in The 
Times, bemoaned the fact that we could not celebrate our Ashes win without 
turning to alcohol, and said that we had missed the chance to teach the nation 
that you do not have to get drunk to enjoy yourself. After the pressures we had 
gone through, perhaps that was asking a bit too much.

My mood as we took the bus ride to Trafalgar Square was one of sheer 
disbelief. We had packed the Test grounds all summer and we had read the papers 
and heard about the record television viewing figures but we couldn't quite 
believe that people would line the streets to welcome us. It all seemed a bit 
"football".

Then we turned the first corner and the crowd were standing six deep. Straussy 
was in the seat ahead of me and he kept turning around with a silly grin on his 
face. I thought a few would have a look but it just did not seem right for 
cricket. KP stopped the bus to go to the toilet and, after the innings he had 
played the day before, he could have got away with anything.

Trafalgar Square I just wanted to last for ever. There was just such a feeling 
of happiness. If we are realistic, we know that we will never see these scenes 
again. If England win the Ashes next time, there won't be the same craving. 
However proud people are, however hard the team works, there will be the sense 
that we have done it before.

Then it was Downing Street and an official reception. That is where KP 
excelled himself. He was chatting away with Cherie Blair in his usual extrovert 
fashion as if he had known her for years. Then, when she moved on, he turned 
around and said: "Who was she, then?"

By the time we reached Lord's that afternoon for some more hob-nobbing we were 
a bit spent. We walked into the pavilion as if it was the end of a wicketless 
session. After that the only decision remaining was when to call it off and 
return to real life. I have to admit that I didn't call it off for a while.

At the height of our triumph it would be wrong not to mention the Australians. 
They played their part in one of the great series. It had often been asked how 
they would handle the feeling of defeat, after being at the top for so long, 
and it has to be said that they handled it with decency and professionalism. 
Some people are saying they are a spent force but it didn't feel like that to 
us. I think they will roll the West Indies in Australia this autumn.
 