
Red-faced and shaking with anger, the man at the door could barely spit out 
his words. For this was the first weekend of theMPs' expenses scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/may/08/cabinet-expenses-detail> and 
I had trespassed on his doorstep to canvass for the local and European 
elections. "I work hard six days a week and can barely afford to keep this roof 
over my head," stormed my constituent, "while you lot go about abusing your 
tax-free expenses and do nothing for us in return."

No amount of protesting that I don't even own a second home was going to make 
the slightest difference. As far as this constituent – and numerous others I 
encountered that Saturday morning – was concerned MPs had blown it and nothing 
I could say or do would change a thing.

As the revelations kept coming day after day for weeks on end, I thought about 
this constituent a lot. Of course his palpable anger had been prompted by MPs' 
expenses but there was something else about his tirade that should have 
everyone involved in public service deeply worried.

For my constituent wasn't just upset about expenses. He was also crystal clear 
that politicians don't actually do anything worthwhile either – an even more 
explosive proposition.

Increasingly people ask, "What is the point of actually voting for anyone any 
more?"

Of course, politicians have heard that line before and usually fall back on 
the weak defence, "People fought and even died for the right to vote" but the 
reality is that there exists a much deeper public scepticism about the ballot 
box which is I fear – at least in part – justified.

After all, in so many ways power doesn't really rest with those of us who are 
elected any more. We write in our election literature, "Vote for me and I'll 
fight to defend your local post office, school or hospital". And we do try. But 
in reality these decisions are increasingly taken by distant bureaucrats who 
act in a void and are unlikely to be persuaded on the merits of an argument 
made by anyone – perhaps least of all a democratically elected representative 
who is automatically dismissed as having a vested interest.

This process of voter alienation has taken a long time to complete and 
successive governments have contributed to the trend. Reasons for Whitehall to 
intervene in local affairs have been numerous. In the 1980s it was loony-left 
councils spending your money like there was no tomorrow and therefore capping a 
council's ability to overtax made sense.

In the past 12 years Labour has increasingly stripped away local democracy. 
Ringfencing of budgets ensures that the desire of local people is permanently 
overridden by ministers' latest pet initiative. Detailed inspection regimes 
guarantee that your town hall ceases to be accountable to the electorate and 
instead spends most of its time satisfying central government. And the 
relentless creation of vast and expensive regional structures including 
regional assemblies, regional development agencies, as well as obscurely named 
regional spatial strategies and improvement and efficiency partnerships and… 
well, you get the idea. Each unelected quango sucking up powers to take 
important decisions about what happens in your own local neighbourhood.

Voters, of course, are remarkably canny and quickly conclude that power no 
longer rests with those who come knocking on their door for votes.

And so here we are with an unprecedented, even dangerous, disconnect between 
electors and elected. A game in which we've all perhaps willingly participated 
for far too long by encouraging people to believe that we really can 
successfully reverse unpopular decisions made by unelected bureaucrats – even 
though all the evidence stands to the contrary.

The past six months has been an uncomfortable time to be in public office as 
the extent of abuse and sheer rottenness of the system has became apparent. But 
out of this political crisis comes an opportunity – the catalyst for rebuilding 
our broken politics.

We must start by wresting control from the quangos and bureaucrats and making 
the ballot box relevant to the lives of our voters again.

That's why we will scrap the regional assemblies that starve local people of 
power. And it is the reason why we will allow the powers and funding of 
unelected regional development agencies over subjects such as housing and 
planning to go to local authorities. Then we will abolish the myriad of 
interfering government targets that focus on process rather than outcome and 
phase out budget ringfencing that currently ensures that your local authority 
does what the minister demands, not what the local electorate asks. These steps 
will be just the starting point for returning power to you.

We will introduce the concept of communities being able to grant themselves 
planning permission to build the homes they need on a realistic scale. We will 
give local people greater control over how central government funds are spent 
in their area. And we will put parents back in the driving seat by ensuring 
that popular schools are able to expand and allowing new schools to emerge 
offering more good places.

Incredibly, a typical town hall official spends 85% of their time satisfying 
ministers in Whitehall and a puny 15% of the day for local residents. We 
believe that this relationship is upside down. Our reforms will ensure that 
politicians and their officers are relentlessly focused on satisfying their 
electorate. And if they fail then the rejuvenated connection between voter and 
electorate will ensure they are booted out of power.

David Cameron has ordered the shadow cabinet to publish all our claims online 
in real time. This is the kind of transparency that will start to fix our 
broken politics. On reflection, the recent scandal wasn't just about MPs' 
expenses, it was instead a defining moment that laid bare our broken politics.

There is a dangerous chasm between what those seeking election claim they 
could do in office and the stark reality that once in power the real 
decision-making has long since been sub-contracted elsewhere.

As my furious constituent put it, it wasn't just the outrageous abuse of the 
expenses system that infuriated him – it was that politicians have become 
impotent to deliver change too.

This particular rotten parliament has lost its way. And our broken politics 
cannot recover without power being returned to voters through progressive 
localism. A reality that can only be delivered via a general election.
 