
Novak Djokovic <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic> is dragging 
his body to the starting line not far from the Greenwich meridian with his 
usual disregard for the weight of time. At 24, he is young enough to laugh at 
the burdens tennis has already imposed on his lean body, and old enough to 
recognise he will not be able to do so much longer.

Reminded that Bjorn Borg had said recently it was his own excellence in being 
able to reach so many finals that persuaded him to retire at 26, the world No1 
smiled. "It is a busy schedule, I'll tell you that," he said, as the second 
group of four players among the world's best eight gathered at the O2 Arena on 
the eve of the BarclaysATP World Tour Finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atp-world-tour-finals>.

"Players are having a lot of difficulties, especially towards the end of the 
year, to be fit and ready to perform 100% in each event. But, if I have the 
results that Borg had I might be stopping in a couple of years as well. I would 
be more than happy to have his career.

"For sure, it is a subject to be discussed. You could see at the US Open this 
year, many players complained. We have to understand how the tennis world works 
and how it has been working for many years. I think we need to be open for 
changes. It's a different time. With all the respect for the tennis 20 years 
ago, tennis today is much more physical and takes away lots of energy from our 
bodies. We don't get much time to recover."

The Serb was not a member of the militant faction of Andy Murray, Rafael Nadal 
and, to a lesser extent, Andy Roddick, who threatened industrial action in New 
York in pursuit of a kinder schedule, but said: "It's not that easy but, yes, 
most of the players agree to have a little bit shorter schedule."

As for Murray, who is in his section of this round-robin finale to an 11-month 
slog on the circuit, Djokovic views the Scot's striving for a first grand slam 
with more equanimity than those who write the stories and headlines agonising 
over the lack of British success at the summit of the game. Murray plays David 
Ferrer on Monday afternoon, while Djokovic goes against Tomas Berdych in 
the evening.

"It's very hard for me to speak for him," he said, "but I know the difference 
in my game was just that mental approach and maturity on and off the court, as 
a person as well – just figuring out things, how to do deal with the pressure, 
how to play the right shots at the right moment, using the experience I have 
had over the years playing Roger [Federer] and Rafa.

"My game is more or less the same, but it's that mental switch, the 
self-belief that I can win the matches I have been losing in past years. Andy 
has played a few grand slam finals already and he's been in the top four in the 
world the last couple of years, so I'm sure that he wants a grand slam title at 
this moment more than anybody. I'm sure he will make it because he has the 
quality to do it. He has won so many big events, he has won against all the 
best players in the world.

"He's a complete player. He can perform well on this surface as well as all 
the other surfaces. That gives him enough reason to believe he can do it."

But what about that right arm that has dangled painfully by Djokovic's side in 
recent months, not to mention strains on the rest of his body that have cut him 
down this season: is this a tournament too far? "A couple of weeks ago I had an 
injury of the abdominal muscles but it's all coming well now. I have been 
serving at 100% the last two or three days. So, for me, the shoulder is fine at 
this moment. I can say it's recovered and I'm ready to compete."

The key words, three miles down the road from the place the clocks start 
ticking, were "at this moment".
 