
Last Wednesday, the chancellor, George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/dec/05/autumn-statement-2012-key-points>, 
delivered a report card on a stuck society. The tally made grim reading: 
austerity extending into 2018, targets missed and, according to theInstitute 
for Fiscal Studies <http://www.ifs.org.uk/>, further cuts of £27bn to come, 
with growth possibly returning only in 2014. All bad news for UK plc. For 
millions on benefits, there was worse news about one of the remedies the 
chancellor has chosen, a strategy that also represents a trap set for Labour 
that could frame the battle for the 2015 election. It is a measure that has 
prompted protest across a swath of civic society, including leadingcharities 
and faith leaders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/dec/08/benefit-cuts-condemned-by-church-charity>
.

The device is simplicity itself. The chancellor has announced his intention to 
pass legislation in January to lock tax credits and social security benefits 
into an "increase" or uprating of only 1% for the next three years, saving 
£3.8bn. Recent surveys indicate that, while the welfare state is broadly 
valued, perceived abuses by "scroungers" and those who receive extensive 
support while making little or no contribution to the welfare pot are not. A 
consensus exists that the welfare state, moulded by theBeveridge report 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/ww2peopleswar/timeline/factfiles/nonflash/a1143578.shtml>
, 70 years old last month, is no longer fit for purpose, not least because it 
was conceived when full employment was assumed and when the majority died 
before many years of pension had been taken. The dominant Tory narrative is 
that the benefits side of the welfare state has become an incubator of broken 
Britain and fecklessness, much of it Labour's responsibility. It's a political 
tale that holds credence for many voters.

Labour's dilemma therefore is how to vote on the welfare uprating in January. 
Osborne's calculation is that, ifLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> votes against the measure, it 
could restore its reputation for reckless spending and wastefulness. But a vote 
in favour of effective cuts to some of the poorest people in the country, 
including millions within working families, would cost its reputation dear 
among its supporters.

However, there is a further possibility, one that Labour is now said to be 
exploring – that it tables a number of substantial amendments to the proposals 
that would allow it to articulate its hostility to the plan within the 
framework of a positive alternative. If the trap is successfully sprung, it 
could cause significant damage to the coalition and cement Ed Miliband's 
reputation for political courage and for speaking on behalf of a wide range of 
disadvantaged Britons. What is required to pull that off is a strategic fluency 
that Labour has yet to display and boldness, courage and imagination.

Make no mistake. The 1% uprating means that for the first time since 1931, the 
income of the poorest will fall as a deliberate act of government policy. 
Inflation for the period that the 1% cap lasts is expected to run at 2%. 
However, those on limited income spend more on food, fuel and water than the 
rest of the population and each is rising faster than inflation. Absolute 
poverty, the choice, say, between food and heating is already being reported in 
Glasgow, London and Birmingham. The financial ramifications go further. They 
also hit the squeezed middle. Working families will weather 60% of the cuts to 
come. According to the TUC, a family of four will see a cumulative real-term 
cut of £2,800 by 2015/2016. There is also the wound to the civic body. The 
Osborne trap shatters the social contract that mitigates risk and provides an 
adequate income to all. So how should Labour proceed?

First and urgently, it needs to challenge the toxic myths. The state can and 
should be a positive element, a catalyst for growth. Second, Labour must detail 
what a reconfigured social contract looks like and how to ensure a fairer 
redistribution of opportunities, incomes and resources. Third, it has to 
reclaim some of the more positive aspects of its time in power – working tax 
credit helped to lift more than a million children out of poverty – and lay out 
what it means by a One Nation welfare state.

Once the propaganda is stripped away, who truly gets what from the welfare 
state? Cameron has said that more than £5.2bn is lost in benefit fraud, but 
£4.2bn of that is due to government error. According to Professor Marjorie 
Mayo's research, intergenerational worklessness accounts for under 2% of the 
working population, too many but hardly an epidemic. A study by theNew Policy 
Institute <http://www.npi.org.uk/>says that as a share of national income, 
total spending on benefits and tax credits has never been higher at 13% of GDP. 
It's a sign of rising state dependency but not quite in the way that Iain 
Duncan Smith, the work and pensions minister, describes.

In 1948, the single rate of social assistance was worth 18% of earnings. Now 
it is worth 11%. Of the £53bn rise in spending after inflation, only £2bn was 
accounted for by unemployment benefit; £10bn pounds goes on housing benefit 
because too few affordable houses are built. Another £17bn is spent on family 
benefits and tax credits subsidising low wages, a situation that would have 
left Beveridge incredulous. And pensioner benefits take a further £24bn, the 
largest slice. Sixty per cent of children in poverty live in working households 
and four in 10 jobs are self-employed, temporary or short term. The original 
welfare state has morphed into one that props up a risky labour market, 
employers, corporations and landlords while a nation of strivers in too many 
instances works for less than it takes to feed a family.

There are those who fiddle the system, but that shouldn't deter Labour from 
mapping the true terrain of today's shambolic welfare state. The still tougher 
challenge is laying out what takes its place. Should a mansion tax pay for 
universal childcare? Should pensioners forfeit perks or Labour impose a higher 
corporation tax? In Sweden, in the early 90s, the deficit increased tenfold. 
Cutting the benefits bill was achieved through growth and employment. The 
richest paid most and more was invested in education rather than income 
transfers such as maternity and paternity pay and unemployment insurance. Now, 
Sweden has generous unemployment benefit but only for a period and employers 
have to help the jobless to reskill. Is that the kind of society Labour has in 
mind?

Labour's Liam Byrne said "working, saving, caring" were the principles of a 
One Nation welfare state. So how does that rhetoric transform into affordable 
policies? The bill allows Labour to reveal some of its grand design, one that, 
it's hoped, refuses to balance the books on the backs of the poor but instead 
sets radical new priorities so that a fair investment in families and children 
secures a decent future for us all.
 