
Ten years in the writing, Andrew Solomon's "monumental" book about parents and 
exceptional children,Far From the Tree 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jan/23/review-far-from-the-tree>, has 
won the £30,000 Wellcome book prize for a title on a medical theme.

Solomon interviewed more than 300 families for the book, which covers subjects 
from autism to prodigies as it tells the stories of parents who find profound 
meaning in their relationships with children who are unlike them. He spokeof 
how "the backdrop to the book, woven through its chapters, is my own experience 
as a child who was miserable about being gay and as an adult who has found joy 
with my husband and our children".

He said that winning the prize so soon after the UK passed gay marriage was 
"especially cheering". "My husband and I first celebrated our civil partnership 
in the UK in 2007, and we are overjoyed, as are so many other people enmeshed 
in love, to be able to assume that beautiful word for our relationship. That, 
like this prize, marks a more tolerant, kinder world. This is a rapturous day 
for me," said the author and journalist, who writes for publications including 
the New Yorker and the Guardian.

Solomon uses the book, which is subtitled "a dozen kinds of love", to 
investigate different types of family, including children born of rape, 
children convicted of crime, transgender people, deafness, dwarves, Down's 
syndrome, schizophrenia and disability. The author said he was accepting the 
prize on the behalf of the families he interviewed while writing the book, "who 
told me their stories with such bracing honesty and such unyielding passion", 
speaking of his admiration "for the human spirit that allowed so many of them 
to end up grateful for lives they would once have done anything to avoid, that 
allowed them to love and fight for children whom so much of society might have 
dismissed".

He has won rave reviews for his nigh-on 1,000-page tome: it's "a wise and 
beautiful book", said the New York Times, "an affirmation of what it is to be 
human," said the Guardian, and "a catalogue of astonishing tenacity and 
unexpected joy that inevitably expands both our sympathies and sense of wonder 
at the immense variety of human experiences," said the Financial Times.

Chair of the Wellcome prize judges, the former poet laureate Andrew Motion, 
said the choice of Far From the Tree ahead ofshortlisted titles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/feb/25/eat-pray-love-wellcome-book-prize-elizabeth-gilbert>
 including Eat, Pray, Love author Elizabeth Gilbert's novel about botany The 
Signature of All Things and Hallucinations by Oliver Sacks was "unanimous" for 
the judging panel.

"It's already been widely praised but I hope this lifts it to another level," 
he said of the book. "Anyone who has ever had anything to do with a family 
should read it - and that's everybody."

Motion called Far From the Tree a "very, very unusual" title. "It's written in 
an astonishingly sprightly way - it has that New Yorker blend of sprightliness 
and deep seriousness," he said. "It's very deeply learned as well."

The Wellcome prize is in its fifth year, and was set up to honour "the best 
new work of fiction or non-fiction released each year centred on medicine and 
health". One novel has won the award so far, Alice LaPlante's Turn of Mind, 
with other winners including Andrea Gillies' Alzheimer's memoir, Keeper, and 
Thomas Wright's biography of William Harvey, Circulation.

Motion said that the greatest strength of Solomon's winning title was "to 
combine proper scholarly objectivity with a sense of intimate connection – and 
to do so in ways that allow for the creation of distinct categories and clear 
conclusions, while at the same time admitting contradictions and exceptions. It 
is, in other words, a very well-organised book yet a very generous-minded one: 
a profound reflection on the family, and on the influence of medicine and 
science," he said.

"And not only that. It's also a book that is driven powerfully by an appeal to 
personal experience – by Solomon's recollections of growing up as a gay man, 
and by his exploration of the difficulties and opportunities this created for 
him. Taken all together, these things make it an exceptionally distinguished 
winner: startlingly intelligent, generously compassionate, memorably 
insightful, and courageous."

Solomon said he was "profoundly honoured" to receive the Wellcome book prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/wellcome-book-prize>, and "very grateful to 
the judges for their generous reading of my work".

"There sometimes seems to be an opposition between the social progress that 
allows us to accept the range of human difference and the medical progress that 
allows us to cure and eliminate many such differences," said Solomon. "My book 
is about the extraordinary stories of love and compassion that unfold around 
this duality. For such work to be recognised by a prize that is specifically 
focused on medicine and health indicates the increasing openness to the nuanced 
questions of what constitutes health, and what the appropriate parameters are 
for medicine."

Motion was joined on the judging panel by the writers Lisa Appignanesi and 
James Runcie, medical journalist and television presenter Michael Mosley and 
Guardian columnist Hadley Freeman.
 