
Western Australian police will no longer keep people arrested for unpaid fines 
in police lockups but will send them to prisonfollowing damning findings by the 
state coroner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/16/ms-dhu-endured-inhumane-treatment-by-police-before-death-in-custody-coroner>
 investigating the death of an Indigenous woman in custody.

The police commissioner, Karl O’Callaghan, said police would only execute an 
arrest warrant with a plan to transfer the person to a prison within eight 
hours. “This case highlights the unacceptable risk we take every day by holding 
people in police custody for long periods of time,” he said.

Ms Dhu endured 'inhumane treatment' by police before death in custody – coroner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/16/ms-dhu-endured-inhumane-treatment-by-police-before-death-in-custody-coroner>
Ms Dhu, whose first name is not used for cultural reasons, died from illness 
two days after being locked up at South Hedland police station in August 2014 
for unpaid fines totalling $3,622, stemming from charges including assaulting 
police.

O’Callaghan said policies and procedures had changed since Dhu’s death, 
notably moving unwell detainees to hospital in an ambulance rather than a 
police vehicle.

WA police will now further review policies and procedures regarding lockups 
and watch houses. “A police lockup or watch house is not a place for any person 
to be held for a significant period of time,” O’Callaghan said.

“You can’t sit down, there are no chairs, there are no beds, there’s nothing 
to do – it’s just a concrete slab. They are designed for processing offenders 
and releasing them to bail, or in extreme circumstances, holding them overnight 
for a morning court appearance.”

The coroner, Ros Fogliani, said in her findings that Dhu had been treated 
inhumanely by some police officers, who thought she was faking sickness, and 
her death could have been prevented had medical staff diagnosed her illness 
earlier.

Lack of progress on Aboriginal deaths in custody 'unforgivable'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/03/lack-of-progress-on-aboriginal-deaths-in-custody-unforgivable>
O’Callaghan said the footage of Dhu’s treatment was disturbing and police had 
basic obligations to people in custody. “We are the guardians of their safety, 
their welfare and of course, their dignity, and I accept that we failed Ms Dhu 
in this regard,” he said. “She was not treated with the right level of human 
compassion or dignity.”

Eleven officers had been sanctioned internally but no further action would be 
taken, O’Callaghan said. “Police breached procedures but there’s been no 
criminality identified,” he said.

The chairman of Deaths in Custody Watch Committee, Mervyn Eades, said no one 
had been made accountable and the family had no justice.

“That girl died, suffered at the hands of WA police and WA medical service,” 
he said. “They all let her down and they let her die.”

Ruth Barson from the Human Rights Law Centre said while the coroner made 
strong and important recommendations, the injustice could never be remedied. 
“She was treated in cruel and inhumane ways by those who had a duty of care to 
look after her,” she said.
 