
The Leveson inquiry revealed that Aidan Barclay 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/video/2012/apr/24/aidan-barlclay-leveson-video>
, the chairman of the Telegraph Media Group,sent a number of slightly 
overbearing texts to David Cameron 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2012/apr/23/telegraph-chairman-david-cameron-editor>
, both before and after the 2010 election. Only a few were read out at the 
inquiry, but the Guardian has obtained a further cache from a single week 
earlier this year.

▶ David, I'm sure you're aware that the credit markets are still reacting 
badly to the prospect of further regulation. Ergo the perfect time for some tax 
cuts for the wealthy. I hope you don't mind me bringing it up. Regards Aidan.

▶ Hi David – I think I had a missed call from you??? How can I help? All the 
best Aidan.

▶ David: No worries – HM the Queen once pocket-dialled me from a casino at 
4am, and I listened to her entire conversation with a ... sorry – too long a 
story for txt, but v funny! Will email the audio if you want. NSFW. Aidan.

▶ David, just checking to make sure you received the pdf of the Economist 
article. Fascinating about the Laffer curve, showing that increasing tax for 
high earners actually decreases revenue overall, and vice versa. Would love to 
hear your thoughts. And plans. Best regards Aidan.

▶ Morning, David! Did you get the package yet? Sent overnight so should have 
arrived by now. Very interested to hear what you think. Yours Aidan.

▶ David – Glad you like it!!! Yes, it's made of silicone, and it's the only 
oven glove I use these days. lakeland.co.uk. Best Adian.

▶ David. Sorry, misspelled my own name in that last text. Just wanted to make 
sure you knew it was from me. Cordially Aidan.

▶ Hi David, Good to bump into you the other day – I didn't realise we jogged 
in the same park! Do you need me to clarify my thoughts on the interim budget, 
re growth, revenue, tax cuts for high earners, etc? Sometimes when I'm out of 
breath I can be hard to understand. Hope all well Aidan.

▶ David. Just a quick text to let you know my secretary is biking over some 
graphs I made last night, which show tax cuts for high earners charted against 
the Telegraph's support for the Tories over time. Also, a copy of the BRAND NEW 
Lakeland catalogue. Check out the the pages where I stuck Post-its. Defrosting 
will never be the same! All the very best, Aidan.

▶ Hi David, Are you in? I've been throwing pebbles at your bedroom window for 
the last half hour, but nothing. Could you ring me as soon as you get this 
please, in order to explain to these gentlemen how we know each other? I 
haven't got any ID on me. Aidan.
 