
The al-Sweady inquiry was set up in 2009 under a former high court judge, Sir 
Thayne Forbes. Hearings began in March 2013 and lasted a year. The inquiry 
heard 282 witnesses, of which 222 were military, 56 Iraqi, and four were 
independent experts. It received 328 written statements and read 5,000 official 
documents. The inquiry cost £24.6m.

Why was the inquiry set up?

The judge-led inquiry was established after the Ministry of Defence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ministry-of-defence> declined to set up a 
proper investigation into claims that British soldiers murdered 20 Iraqis and 
abused nine others at their Camp Abu Naji base. The claims emerged after a 
fierce gunfight, between the soldiers and supporters of a Shia militia, known 
as the Battle of Danny Boy, at a UK checkpoint, north of Basra, on 14 May 2004.

In pre-inquiry hearings, high court judges accused the MoD of a “lamentable” 
failure to disclose information, including complaints made by detainees to the 
Red Cross.

What prompted the allegations of murder and abuse by British soldiers?

The bodies of Iraqis killed in the battle, and the wounded Iraqis, were taken 
to the base. The decision to do so – unprecedented after a firefight, according 
to British army witnesses – was to see whether the dead or the wounded included 
the ringleader behind the massacre of six British military police nearby a year 
earlier, the inquiry heard. A British army intelligence officer took pictures 
of the bodies, which were handed over to their families the next day.

Who made the allegations?

The families of the dead, and the captured insurgents, and staff at the local 
hospital, claimed the Iraqis were killed and abused in the camp, not shot or 
wounded during the battle.

What was the inquiry’s terms of reference?

To investigate the claims of unlawful killing and ill-treatment of Iraqis at 
camp Abu Naji and the Shaibah detention facility near Basra. The terms of 
reference do not include deaths and injuries that occurred on the battlefield 
itself.

What is the key evidence to have emerged from the inquiry?

Young and inexperienced British soldiers were unprepared for violent attacks 
by Iraqi insurgents, in this case Shia militia. An army chaplain told the 
inquiry: “I have never seen so many dead in one place.”

British lawyers for the Iraqis conceded a year into the hearings there was 
“insufficient evidence” to establish that Iraqis were unlawfully killed in the 
British camp. However, they did not withdraw the allegations of ill-treatment 
of Iraqis.

Lawyers for the MoD described the Iraqi allegations as “the product of lies”, 
and evidence that was deliberately fabricated. Those making them were guilty of 
a criminal conspiracy, the MoD says.

Could the £24.6m inquiry have been avoided?

Under the European human rights convention, governments have a duty to set up 
an independent investigation when faced with allegations of unlawful activities 
by agents of the state. MoD lawyers knew this but said commanders did not want 
to conduct a speedy investigation because they wanted to protect soldiers 
traumatised by the bloody gunfight.
 