
Fred the Shred could be at liberty to drive another bank into oblivion. Sir 
Fred Goodwin, the former boss ofRoyal Bank of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup>, has escaped 
any regulatory penalty over the near collapse of the once mighty Caledonian 
institution. To universal frustration, the nation's financial watchdog won't 
tell us why.

The Financial Services Authority (FSA) is fighting tooth and nail to avoid 
publishing details of its exhaustive investigation into RBS – a bank that had 
to be semi-nationalised two years ago at a cost to taxpayers of £45bn after 
running up vast liabilities on toxic loans.In a 12-sentence statement 
<http://www.fsa.gov.uk/pages/Library/Communication/Statements/2010/investigation_rbs.shtml>
, the authority declared 11 days ago that its supervisory probe was complete – 
and that it had found no "fraud or dishonest activity" by any RBS individuals.

This won't do. The business secretary, Vince Cable, has summoned the FSA's 
chairman, Lord Turner, for a chat. Questions have been tabled in the house. 
Unions have termed it a "whitewash" and an "outrage".

We have a rough idea why RBS went down the tubes. The bank's joint £49bn 
purchase of Dutch rival ABN Amro in 2007 was a disaster. And its aggressive 
push into investment banking was ill-fated. We don't, though, know how these 
decisions were made, what risk assessments were undertaken, whether dissenting 
voices were ignored and how personal incentives – including bonuses – may have 
influenced individuals. And we don't know enough about how, and why, regulatory 
oversight faltered so seriously.

The FSA points out that it would be illegal, under the Financial Services and 
Markets Act <http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2000/8/contents>, to publish 
details of an inquiry that cleared individuals of wrongdoing. And Goodwin can't 
be barred just because he's a figure of public opprobrium, or because he made a 
series of bad business decisions. He can only be penalised if he has broken the 
law. But Goodwin himself has said he's willing to countenance publication of 
the FSA's probe, as have several of his senior colleagues.

To date, Johnny Cameron, the former head of RBS's investment management 
division, has been the only person sanctioned by the FSA over the bank's 
difficulties.He agreed never to take a managerial position in banking again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/may/18/rbs-boss-cameron-never-take-bank-job>
, accepting a "share of responsibility" for the events that led up to the 
taxpayer-funded bailout. The bank itself was fined £5.6m. Its losses, at their 
peak, amounted to £24bn.

Insiders say the FSA's investigation, spearheaded by PricewaterhouseCoopers, 
isn't a single, concise document – but it should be possible to provide more 
than the mere 300 words that the regulator has made public on the subject.

The public deserve a deeper explanation of RBS's collapse – not least because 
the lack of transparency over RBS is part of a murkier picture. Banks are 
resisting pressure to reveal how many of their employees earn £1m or more. For 
years, customers have complained about unexpected fees and incomprehensible 
charges. And it was opaque trading of arcane derivatives that sent the industry 
spiralling out of control.

Transparency needs to be the banks' new watchword. Let's start with RBS.
 