
After all the speculation, we finally got the reality of the chancellor's 
autumn statement.

Among growth forecasts, borrowing figures and changes to tax allowances, when 
it came to welfare we mostly heard more rhetoric about benefit scroungers lying 
in bed while everyone else goes to work.

And when it comes to services, the new local government settlements will 
present huge challenges for the future.

But among this doom and gloom, there are also glimmers of hope and I see new 
opportunities for charities and councils to work together to genuinely 
transform and improve the lives of disabled people and their families.

We know times are tough for everyone but disabled people are being hit harder 
than most. They face a triple whammy of cuts to their benefits, cuts to local 
services as local authority budgets get squeezed and an ever increasing cost of 
living.

If the government is serious about a Paralympics legacy where disabled people 
can fulfil their potential, then it's time to strike a different tone when it 
comes to talking about welfare.

The fact is the vast majority of disabled people need support. It doesn't make 
them feckless, workshy or scroungers.

It sometimes feels like heresy to say it but benefits can be a good thing. 
They enable disabled people to live their lives and play a full and active role 
in society. We shouldn't shy away from this.

The chancellor announced that carers' allowance and disability benefits would 
rise in line with inflation. This will offer some relief to disabled people at 
a time of ever-increasing costs of living.

However, at the same time just a 1% increase in Employment and Support 
Allowance (ESA) was offered for disabled people who are looking for work, yet 
subject to the same spiralling living costs.

Let's not beat around the bush. A 1% increase is effectively a cut. And for 
people who already face huge barriers to finding work, it will be difficult to 
stomach.

But it's equally tough for councils.

While the autumn statement outlined the government's spending plans, it also 
sent a worrying message to councils who have been asked to deliver an 
additional 2% saving for 2014 on top of the 27% cut in grant funding they 
received last year.

We are living in an era of unprecedented cuts to public spending and for many 
the worst is yet to come.

Add to this all the pressures the social care funding crisis is placing on 
councils, and there are serious problems ahead. Many councils have already 
suggested that in the future they will only be able to provide social care 
support and very little else.

This is the challenge facing councils. But it's also a challenge for the one 
in three social care users who are of a working age and disabled and the 
organisations that represent them.

At Scope we genuinely believe that building better relationships with councils 
and working together with them to improve the lives of disabled people is the 
only way forward.

We want a really transformative approach that puts disabled people in control, 
ensuring they are treated as active participants and not just passive "users" 
of services.

Our recent report Doing Services Differently 
<http://www.neweconomics.org/publications/doing-services-differently> published 
together with the New Economics Foundation highlighted many ways that councils 
can work strategically with charities to make the little money they have go 
further, while also improving disabled people's lives.

One example of this is Activities Unlimited, a brokerage services service for 
families with disabled children developed together by Scope and Suffolk county 
council.

Suffolk, like many councils, had many families with disabled children who 
struggled to find accessible and inclusive leisure, short breaks and respite 
support.

Rather than adopting traditional commissioner (local council) and provider 
(charity) roles to develop new separate (and more expensive) services for 
disabled children, Scope and Suffolk worked together in a different way.

By tapping into the collective purchasing power of these families, Activities 
Unlimited was able to challenge local providers to change their services to 
make them more inclusive so disabled children and their families could use them.

By building better relationships between providers and families, Suffolk was 
able to make its existing services more lean, efficient and relevant to its 
local population.

This simple yet effective approach to supporting families has had far reaching 
consequences alongside helping families spend quality time together. In fact, 
since Activities Unlimited began, Suffolk county council has not had to provide 
any emergency respite care for disabled children, and says it has saved more 
money in the long-term.

So as individuals, charities and councils alike stop reeling after the autumn 
statement, where do we go?

In times of austerity, we believe changing services should be less about 
"cutting" and more about reframing the nature of the support offered to 
disabled people. It should be about improving the lives of disabled people, 
reshaping the communities they live in and increasing their independence.

This is the start of the conversation and the most important lesson we draw 
from our own experience is that you can only achieve better outcomes for 
disabled people by placing them at the centre and working together to create 
innovative, impactful yet cost effective services that can make this a better 
world for disabled people.

These are very challenging times we all face but they present a huge 
opportunity that might just lead to disabled people living the lives they want 
and deserve.

Richard Hawkes is chief executive of disability charity Scope. 

Why not join our community? Becoming a member of the Guardian social care 
network means you get sent weekly email updates on policy and best practice in 
the sector, as well as exclusive offers. You can sign up – for free –online here
 <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/>
 