
ITV is doing well – no question. Revenues up in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/feb/29/itv-profits-crozier-production?INTCMP=SRCH>
, profits up, earnings up and balance sheet cleared of troublesome debt.

But ITV – and its top team of chairman Archie Norman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/archie-norman> and chief executive Adam 
Crozier – are also lucky. They inherited a business on the rebound from the 
worst advertising recession in living memory, and, as anyone who has followed 
ITV's fortunes will know, difficult questions do not tend to be asked when 
revenues are rising. Those questions are about the degree to which the 
management's long-term aim of reducing ITV's near total dependence on fickle 
advertising revenues has been fulfilled. To what extent is ITV becoming a 
company less dependent on luck and economic cycles it can do nothing about?

The strategy – to diversify ITV's revenue streams, focusing on online, 
subscription services and especially production to drive growth is not new. 
Charles Allen and Michael Grade – the last two leaders of the company – offered 
investors almost word for word the same set of ideas. They just failed – 
admittedly in the face of much less benign commercial circumstances – to make 
any appreciable headway in delivering them.

By contrast the commentary accompanying last week's annual results from ITV 
was clear – there was evidence that the company's five-year transformation plan 
was working.

Growth was being driven by non-advertising revenues – up £93m year on year – 
"mainly due to revenue growth from UK and international studios businesses". 
But look a little closer and you will see that fully one third of the increase 
in non-advertising revenue (£31m) is accounted for by increased spending by ITV 
on its own productions – which might be a good thing in all sorts of ways but 
hardly signifies reduced dependency on advertising revenues overall.

And while there is no doubt that ITV Studios is doing better – as indicated by 
the fact it now supplies 55% of ITV's commissioned programmes (up from 50% two 
years ago) it is in reality some way off being the engine of future growth the 
company desires.

Take a peek at the profit numbers and that becomes even clearer. A total 
increase in international and domestic production revenues of £66m – 
notwithstanding that half comes from the company itself – adds only £2m of 
increased profit.

In fact the most significant contributors to the reported rise in profits are 
a 1% increase in advertising revenues (£15m), lower programming costs because 
of no football World Cup or equivalent tournament in 2011 (£29m) and company 
cost savings (£20m). All of which – in current earnings terms at least – leaves 
ITV still looking like the company it always was – a huge cash generator from 
advertising revenues when times are good.

In fairness the transformation envisaged by Norman and Crozier is bound to 
take time. The question is how much time have they got? With the exception of 
the soaps most of ITV's ratings juggernauts are still owned by other companies. 
And while the aim of creating winning content, showcasing it on ITV and cashing 
in as it is sold or re-licensed around the world is genuine enough, making it 
happen is still problematic.

Balancing any potential short-term drop in ratings – with the associated 
threat to revenues – if in-house commissions are favoured over outsiders was 
always going to be tricky. And as ITV's own commentary said they need to 
"further strengthen the collaborative process between broadcast and studios". 
For which you can safely read that although Norman and Crozier – both complete 
outsiders to the business – have recognised the problem, the age-old battles 
between commissioning and production are far from over.

And then there is the pace of change. To become a contributor to the company's 
future earnings of sufficient scale to significantly reduce dependence on UK TV 
advertising a step change will be required. And if that is to happen soon, in 
addition to taking bigger risks by putting more in-house production on air, it 
will probably mean a major acquisition. But time is of the essence. Currently 
the company's main source of revenue – advertising – is albeit somewhat against 
expectations stable, and having very little debt and free cash on the balance 
sheet gives the company plenty of freedom to act.

But history suggests that any downturn in advertising revenues is likely to 
reduce investor tolerance for big, new, profit reducing (even in the 
short-term) investments. Given the cyclical nature of these things and 
inclement economic times, Archie and Adam will need to get a move on for fear 
their luck runs out as they too fall foul of fickle advertising revenues.
 