
Just after becoming the culture secretary last week, Jeremy Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-hunt> was asked what his 
priorities would be. He looked surprised and said that the first thing he had 
asked the department's civil servants to do was to work out how to help meet 
the £6bn of public sector savings required. Cuts of about £66m are expected in 
a newly reintegrated department, which gives Hunt responsibility for the 
Olympics as well as oversight of sport, media and the arts.

Yet, while the subsequent headlines focused on his comments that Olympics 
funding was not automatically protected, there are many more questions to 
answer. With such pressure to cut the deficit, it is unlikely that the 
Department for Culture, Olympics, Media and Sport will be high on the new 
coalition's agenda. It is still unclear how the Tory-led team will approach 
media issues in coalition with their Lib Dem partners, who perhaps 
significantly failed to join the departmental team.

Hunt was tantalisingly silent on the issue of his media policy ambitions 
following his appointment and there is also little to go on from the joint 
coalition manifesto, beyond a firm commitment, endorsed by all parties, to 
reform libel law. One adviser indicated last week that policies and a timetable 
for the implementation will have to be gone through, line by line. But if we 
take the pre-election statements as a guide there is common ground but also 
significant differences between the parties.

As shadow culture secretary, Hunt was notably hawkish on the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>, keen on a deregulatory regime for 
commercial television, while showing a real dislike of a public subsidy for 
local TV news pilots and, along with other senior Tories, Ofcom's policy-making 
power. Will these views translate into the new administration?

The BBC

The Tory election manifesto promised to "support a strong and independent BBC 
that continues to make great content", yet the party has made no secret of its 
desire to reduce the size and scope of the corporation. Over the five-year life 
of the parliament it seems fair to say that the BBC faces major challenges – 
the level of the licence fee is up for negotiation from 2011/12. A Cameron 
proposal to freeze the licence fee, instead of waving through an agreed annual 
rise, was defeated by parliament last year.

The Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats share a view that the BBC's 
finances require external scrutiny by the National Audit Office. The NAO is 
overseen by the hawkish Public Accounts Committee, which is composed of several 
MPs who view the licence fee as a tax.

The cabinet's decision to cut members' own pay by 5% is a signal that 
executive pay scales are a target. The BBC Executive's strategic plan, Putting 
Quality First, puts the case for limited reform with cuts to BBC Worldwide and 
overall budgets. Consultation ends on 25 May, with the BBC Trust chairman,Sir 
Michael Lyons <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sir-michael-lyons>, due to 
make a statement on 30 June.

Likelihood of an attempt to freeze the licence fee: 8/10 

The BBC Trust

Neither party supports the BBC Trust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-trust>, the governance body created by 
Labour in 2007, which is both the corporation's regulator and its champion.

Hunt wants to create a licence fee payers' trust. As the Lib Dems also favour 
some form of external public service regulator, the trust's days look numbered. 
The issue is what can be done within the terms of the existing BBC charter, 
which runs until the end of 2016. Anything else could provoke a charge of 
overtly political interference in the governance of the BBC.

Halfway house changes could include a new role for a non-executive chairman to 
run the BBC executive board, alongside the director general,Mark Thompson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/markthompson>. A trigger may be the deadline 
on whether to renew Lyons's appointment after April 2011.

Likelihood of action on the BBC Trust: 9/10 

Ofcom

This was the ultimate New Labour creation in 2003 and the regulator is likely 
to lose some of its policy-making powers under a Lib-Con coalition. 
Broadcasting policy is now likely to originate in the DCOMS.Ofcom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom> has already adopted a lower profile 
during the past year under its chair, Colette Bowe, with less frequent press 
conferences and speeches by its former No 10 policy adviser, Ed Richards.

Ofcom's ruling that BSkyB cuts its wholesale prices for premium sports and 
movie channels is subject to appeal to the Competition Appeals Tribunal, and 
the new government is unlikely to want to wade into such a politically charged 
area. Hunt said on 31 March that: "Competition issues should be decided at 
arm's length of government, which is why we support an independent Ofcom."

The Digital Economy Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/digital-economy-act>, passed in April, 
allows Ofcom to introduce lightertouch regulation across radio and commercial 
television, which would allow the commercial broadcasting sector to operate 
more freely, and lessen the public service broadcasters' burdens. Ofcom has 
already moved to allow more regional hubs for local commercial radio, relax 
local programming quotas, and encourage digital stations. It is also consulting 
on allowing commercial broadcasters to decide whether or not to sell all their 
advertising airtime. The new government is not expected to change rules on 
taste and decency, increase advertising minutes, or drop impartiality, and one 
flashpoint, restricted product placement in programming, was agreed under 
Labour.

Likelihood of Ofcom being abolished: 2/10

Commercial TV

ITV's shares have risen since the election, partly because the fate of 
commercial television is thought to be very close to the heart of Cameron, who 
once worked at Carlton TV.Ed Vaizey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ed-vaizey>, the new culture minister, 
told the annual ISBA conference of advertisers that "we are extremely keen to 
deregulate the broadcasting industry". Hunt suggested on the same day in the 
Financial Times that government could use override powers in the 1978 
Interpretation Act to usher out the Contract Rights Renewal system. The 
Conservatives and Lib Dems have both supported the ending of CRR.

However, last week the Competition Commission confirmed its decision that the 
system should stay, but suggested a full review of the television advertising 
sales market. Both parties are firm supporters of Channel 4, which has dropped 
its pleas for public support.

Likelihood that commercial broadcasting will be deregulated: 10/10

Local media

The potential for a real clash. The Lib Dems were strong supporters of IFNCs, 
(independently financed local news consortia), a red line to Hunt. Up for 
debate must be any future sharing, or top slicing of the licence fee, but the 
Conservative instinct is to dispense with subsidy.

ITV chairman Archie Norman <https://www.theguardian.com/media/archie-norman>, 
who is close to the Tory party, is thought to have offered a deal: if ITV is 
given a more relaxed regulatory remit it will consider a U-turn and reinvest in 
both national and regional news. The Conservatives also favour reforming the 
rules relating to local media enterprises, with a view to allowing local 
newspapers to merge and establish "cross-platform networks" to protect their 
commercial viability.

Hunt is a passionate advocate of local city television, and has been advised 
by YouGov chairman Roger Parry on how to encourage commercially viable local 
television networks, not just through relaxing media ownership rules, but also 
by innovation in raising revenue.

Likelihood of subsidised local news pilots: 0/10 

With the Olympics likely to take up much of Hunt's time, it may be left to 
Vaizey to march into other areas. On 6 May, he tweeted his relief that he had 
remained gaffe-free during the month-long campaign period. It remains to be 
seen how long that lasts.
 