
“So what’s your field, postcolonial literature?” It’s a question I’ve been 
asked several times recently. I’m actually a recent PhD graduate in English and 
Russian literature, specialising in Vladimir Nabokov – and, like the majority 
of PhD graduates, I’m in the middle of the tricky task of trying to find an 
academic job.

I am also Asian. I never really thought my background had any bearing on what 
I want to do, but there have been numerous subtle moments in my academic life 
that have made me question the assumptions that are made about me.

People seem surprised to find that I’m not a scholar of postcolonial 
literature. The reaction is never malicious, but it has made me feel like an 
outsider for the first time in my life.

One well-meaning academic spent a long time advising me that it might be a 
better idea to write about literature from my own cultural background. Another 
said that I should apply for a job teaching postcolonial studies because I’d be 
in with a good chance. I replied that, although I may be “postcolonial”, I’m 
not qualified to teach it.

I do have a great deal of admiration for postcolonial studies, but it isn’t my 
speciality. And given that I’m a second-generation immigrant, with little 
knowledge of my parents’ culture and no knowledge of their language, I found 
the suggestion troubling.

I was born in Sri Lanka. My father, a lawyer who fought against police 
corruption, was forced to flee with his young family in 1990. I came to 
Scotland at the age of 4 and grew up in modest circumstances in Aberdeen, 
Dundee and Edinburgh. My father is Catholic and my mother is Buddhist, but I 
didn’t have a religious upbringing.

I was raised among almost exclusively working-class Scottish kids from Irish 
Catholic backgrounds. A good friend of mine once joked to me that I had “pretty 
much grown up white”. I laughed it off, but felt uncomfortable.

I know that the few incidents of racism which I encountered in my life are 
negligible compared to the experience of others. But nothing can change the 
fact that they occurred, even if in many ways my upbringing was typical.I was 
not comfortable with the idea that, just because I did the things that any 
typical Scottish kid would do, my experience was simply “white”. A preference 
for The Jesus and Mary Chain and Lou Reed over hip-hop or bhangra doesn’t 
change that fact that I’m not white. And I am experiencing similar feelings now 
when people are surprised to discover that I specialise in Nabokov and Wyndham 
Lewis, not Arundhati Roy or Chinua Achebe.

It has been said that the sons and daughters of immigrants become doctors, 
lawyers and accountants so that their children can someday become artists, 
poets and scholars. My parents probably thought I was jumping the gun when I 
told them that I wanted to study literature instead of a profession. Their 
reaction? “How will you get a job?”


I was headstrong and stubborn, but I don’t regret my decision. It’s no 
question that less people from ethnic minority backgrounds choose not to study 
these subjects. But understanding the reasons for this is important.


A cursory look at the teaching staff of any British humanities department will 
most likely reveal a lack (or complete absence) of people from ethnic 
minorities. Those that do appear – particularly in English literature 
departments – will almost inevitably specialise in postcolonial studies. These 
are important subjects, and I don’t believe that such a situation is 
intentional, but the inevitable impression given is that these appointments are 
somehow tokenistic.

The whiteness of university humanities departments wasn’t too much of a shock 
to me – my friends and teachers were all white. But others from ethnic minority 
communities, who may have aspirations different to those of their parents, may 
be discouraged from pursuing their ambitions.

This issue is relevant to our wider political situation, where more 
discussions about cohesion and integration are frequent. It is understandably 
sensitive – how can a supposedly liberal and cosmopolitan intelligentsia, who 
strive to improve society with education and ideas, really speak with any 
authority and conviction if people from minority communities are so 
underrepresented within its ranks? When they are – or at least appear to be – 
restricted in their ambitions and aspirations?


I’ve never had much reason to feel marginalised in my life, but if the measure 
of a successful society can be judged by the quality of its education and 
cultural output, then perhaps we need to do more to encourage all peoples 
within that society to contribute equally and on the same terms.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
 