
United Nations reports on climate change are not usually required reading for 
business managers. But the University of Cambridge is making the case that they 
should be: it has come out with a series of briefings that translate climate 
science for a business audience.

The university’s Institute of Sustainability Leadership, in partnership with 
the European Climate Foundation, developed13 reports 
<http://www.cisl.cam.ac.uk/ipcc> that explain how climate change is expected to 
impact several industries, including agriculture, buildings, defense, 
transportation and energy. As it prepares to release parts of its fifth 
assessment report, the UN’sIntergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
<http://www.climasphere.org/#!article/Invaluable-briefing-series-unpacks-climate-change>
 (IPCC) is highlighting Cambridge’s briefings at Climate Week, which began 
Monday in New York City.

The briefings, which were vetted by experts from the IPCC and industry, paint 
a future filled with widespread disruption, even for industries that are not 
normally considered vulnerable to environmental hazards. By making climate 
change relevant to business people, the authors hope to clarify its risks, as 
well as its potential benefits.

According to Eliot Whittington, the climate change director at the Institute 
for Sustainability Leadership, the report’s authors aren’t deliberately pushing 
an agenda. “There’s no explicit goal in prompting anything other than a better 
understanding of the climate science,” he explains. “However, we think once you 
understand the climate science, then it creates more impetus, more fertile 
ground for action.”

Making climate relevant for business

Some industries – notably insurance and healthcare – have been studying the 
effects of climate change for years. But the University of Cambridge’s 
briefings delve into less-researched industries.

In agriculture, for example, the reports note 
<http://www.cisl.cam.ac.uk/Resources/Climate-and-Energy/Climate-Change-Implications-for-Agriculture.aspx>
 that climate change is already starting to make its impact felt through 
falling crop yields. In coming years, harvests are expected to decline even 
further in several food-producing areas, which will likely drive up food 
prices. Although warming global temperatures could benefit some parts of the 
world, the report notes that Africa and Asia are particularly vulnerable and 
that global temperature increases of 4C (7F) or more “would pose large risks to 
food security globally and regionally”.

Seafood production will also be affected. The reports project that yields will 
initially decrease at lower latitudes and increase at higher latitudes, setting 
up potential conflicts among countries over fishing stocks. Aquaculture, 
particularly in low-lying areas in the tropics, is vulnerable to flooding. And 
ocean acidification puts commercially important fish and shellfish at risk, 
according to the analysis.

Increased ocean acidity will also affect tourism, the report finds. Combined 
with rising sea levels, increased acidity could threaten the infrastructure and 
natural attractions on which coastal tourism relies. And sunny beaches aren’t 
the only tourist attractions affected by climate change: rising temperatures 
could also shorten winter sports seasons. “There are mitigation things that 
could and need to be done, but fundamentally there’s a limit to what the 
industry can do. It’s a canary in the coal mine and is going to really struggle 
to adapt,” Whittington says.

Regulatory costs increase


The energy sector, which can greatly affect the global picture on greenhouse 
gases, will also face increased costs from climate change 
<http://www.cisl.cam.ac.uk/Resources/Climate-and-Energy/Climate-Change-Implications-for-Energy.aspx>
. Part of this is regulatory: because energy production is responsible for 35% 
of direct emissions, energy professionals need to be prepared for policy 
changes and higher costs. It’s estimated that meeting the target of increasing 
global average temperatures by 2C will cost, on average, between $190bn and 
$900bn per year up to 2050.

But energy producers will also face the costly effects of climate change. Like 
other industries with heavy infrastructure investment – such as transportation 
– the energy sector will be adversely affected by storms and extreme weather, 
the University of Cambridge report finds. For example, weather events are 
likely to result in production shutdowns at oil and gas facilities and power 
plants. Thawing permafrost and rising sea levels also risk hurting critical oil 
and gas pipelines.

Cities, meanwhile, will be on the front lines of adapting to climate change as 
more people move to urban areas around the world. Rising temperatures threaten 
to increase health problems, such as heat stroke, and decrease the amount of 
available freshwater. The value of economic assets damaged by extreme weather 
and flooding in cities is projected to go up from 5% of GDP in 2005 to 9% in 
2070.

Looking at a longer timeline

One of the key implications of the reports is that businesses need to look 
beyond quarterly profits and consider medium and long-term trends. Álvaro 
Echániz, CEO of the real estate division of Spanish infrastructure construction 
company Ferrovial, said the reports were valuable because the IPCC data is 
“reliable input for identifying the risks and, of course, the opportunities 
behind those (climate) trends”.

The University of Cambridge reports represent a shift in the discussion around 
climate change. Instead of focusing on the policy implications of climate 
science, economic-based reports are turning the attention to the vulnerability 
of infrastructure, food production and other risks.

Earlier this year, the Risky Business project <http://riskybusiness.org/>, 
which was co-chaired by former US Treasury secretary Henry Paulson and former 
New York City mayor Michael Bloomberg, spelled out the risks of climate change 
on US businesses and property. Similarly, theStern Review 
<http://mudancasclimaticas.cptec.inpe.br/~rmclima/pdfs/destaques/sternreview_report_complete.pdf>
 (pdf) in 2006 argued that the benefits of early action on climate change 
outweigh the costs in economic terms.

But seeing climate change as a drag on future prosperity is not the only way 
businesses can frame the issue, Whittington argues. “In many businesses, the 
thinking is that the response to climate change, whether its building more 
resilient infrastructure and systems or being more energy and resource 
efficient, creates new businesses and market opportunities,” he says. For 
example, building equipment providers are already trying to earn money with 
products that improve energy and resource efficiency.

Neither the corporate sector nor government can address climate change 
independently, but there’s a growing body of evidence that demonstrates how 
important businesses are when it comes to responding to climate change. That 
perspective – which the Cambridge briefings help clarify – makes it clear that 
the climate change narrative is as much an economic story as it is 
environmental one.

Martin LaMonica is a Boston-based reporter covering energy, technology, 
business and the environment. Follow him@mlamonica 
<https://twitter.com/mlamonica>.

The Science Behind Sustainability Solutions blog  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/series/science-behind-sustainability-solutions>
is funded by theArizona State University Walton Sustainability Solutions 
Initiatives <http://sustainabilitysolutions.asu.edu/>. All content is 
editorially independent except for pieces labelled advertisement feature. Find 
out morehere. <https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>



 