
Female entrepreneur - a cause for celebration or an oxymoron? Certainly there 
are plenty of men in management positions who subscribe to the view, despite 30 
years of attempts to convince them otherwise, that women cannot cope with the 
confrontations that come with buying and selling.

Trying to come up with the names of high-profile British businesswomen is a 
frustrating experience. Back in the 1980sAnita Roddick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/anita-roddick> was a role model for 
female entrepreneurs as head of The Body Shop. More recently Scottish 
businesswoman Michelle Mone took the lingerie world by storm with the launch of 
the Ultimo bra - but the list is woefully short.

A recent report by the London Business School, the Global Entrepreneurship 
Monitor (GEM), shows only 3.8% of women start their own business compared to 
8.5% of men. Over the last two decades despite significant social and cultural 
change in Britain, the proportionate increase in the number of women setting up 
their own business in the UK has been half that of other countries such as the 
United States. It is estimated only 12-14% of businesses in the UK are 
majority-owned by women compared to 28% in the US.

Erika Watson, executive director of Prowess, a trade body for female 
entrepreneurs, says the business culture continually fails to address the needs 
of women. "Most women who are thinking of starting up a business want to do so 
on a part-time basis," she explains. "They are usually the main care providers 
in a family and the idea of working from home is attractive, but the structures 
to support part-time work don't exist - adequate childcare, for example."

Around 40% of all start-ups by women are run on a part-time basis and Prowess 
would like to see start-upgrants extended to these companies. It's not just a 
question of flexible work practices. GEM also found women see fewer 
opportunities and rate their abilities lower than men. Ms Watson says female 
employment is still concentrated in the service and retail sectors where women 
trail men in pay, training, qualifications and promotion. They are 
under-represented in management and in the boardroom. So the average female 
entrepreneur has less managerial experience and less access to business 
networks and finance.

The reasons why women choose to start a business also determine the success or 
failure of an enterprise. Gwenda Stone, chief executive officer of the Aurora 
women's network, has identified two kinds of female-owned firms. "There is the 
'lifestyle' business which is seen as a fun, sexy thing to do, usually 
one-person operations run from the spare room," she explains. "They are 
revenue-capped and provide a modest income. And there is the 'value creation' 
business where a woman wants to see a business develop and grow as a 
seven-days-a-week undertaking." She believes that where men have the edge over 
women is their greater financial savvy. Women tend to set up a company from 
personal savings or credit cards and fund growth from sales. Men go out and 
seek finance with banks and institutions. "Reinvesting profits back into a firm 
is a slow way to grow," she says. "Women forget a business is about making 
money and that money makes money grow. They need more financial education."

Ruth Goodmaker Brown, 40, speaks from personal experience when she describes 
her attempt to strike out on her own. She set up the Perfect Team, a 
Watford-based re cruitment agency three years ago with no formal training or 
experience of running a small business. So far, it has proved to be a good move 
with a turnover of £110,000 in the first year. She admits she's had to fight 
male prejudice. "I've met men who have said to me, 'I know what you women are 
like, at the end of the month you'll put on your sexy gear and to try and do 
business with me'," she says. "I also had one man who rang and asked to speak 
to the managing director. When I told him I was, he hung up."

She insists she couldn't have made a go of the business without sound 
financial advice. She had no savings of her own to put into the business and no 
knowledge of financing one. Eventually she opened an account with the Royal 
Bank of Scotland, one of a number of banks to offer services to female 
entrepreneurs. She talks glowingly of the support and advice the bank has 
offered over the past three years. "I've found it vital to have a good contact 
within the bank." she says. "I suddenly found I was handling all this money and 
writing big cheques and the bank listened to what I had to say and worked with 
me."

Jayne Williams has a different story to tell. She is a lone parent looking 
after two small children who left school at 16 and moved around the north of 
England for a number of years. She moved back to Liverpool and then heard a 
dilapidated launderette was up for sale.

She was on income support and had no money to invest in a business. Banks 
refused to give her any financial backing because she had no previous credit 
history and had never registered on the electoral role. After running into 
numerous financial brick walls, she decided to go ahead and open the 
launderette using the only working machine and operating as a cash business. 
She fixed the other machines herself and eventually went to Train 2000, an 
organisation which offers advice for women en trepreneurs in Merseyside. By 
then she had three working machines but was still on income support and still 
without a bank account.

Ms Williams says it was extremely difficult to get the business off the 
ground. "As a woman on benefit with small children I already felt I was in a 
trap," she explains. "Running my own business was a way for me to get back on 
my feet but no-one gave me any help. All the schemes set up to establish small 
firms are useless unless you have your own money to put in. It's a real Catch 
22 situation."

An independent benefits advisor enabled her to move from income support to the 
Working Families Tax Credit (WFTC) and Easylivin' began trading in 2002. She is 
still angry at the way she was forced to take risks to pull herself out of the 
poverty trap. "It seemed the banks were laughing at me and my grand scheme to 
run my own business," she seethes. "I had to work it all out for myself, 
running costs, accounting, the lot. The people who were supposed to know about 
government grants and loans didn't have a clue." Over the last three years, Ms 
Williams has seen annual turnover nearly double from £8,000 to £13,000. Last 
March she won the Train 2000/Barclays Bank Women in Business Award and with her 
£1,000 winnings bought a van to pick up and drop off cleaning. As soon as the 
business makes a profit she wants to come off the WFTC and has plans to expand 
Easylivin'.

Erika Watson agrees the UK benefit system UK is against female entrepreneurs 
because it is geared towards the traditional model of male unemployment. "There 
are structures in place which discriminate against lone parents on benefit who 
tend to be women," she says. "The amount you can earn on benefit is minuscule, 
which discourages anyone from trying to start a business. If you move from 
income support to tax credit the time delays can be enormous which leaves 
families with no money when they're trying to start a business."

The government has taken steps to encourage more women to set up in business. 
Nine months ago, the DTI's small business service, with help from Prowess, 
launched the Strategic Framework for Women's Enterprise. This aims to increase 
the number of women starting a business in the UK to match levels in the US. By 
2006, the initiative wants women-owned businesses to account for between 18 and 
20% of the UK total.
 