
There are some books that will probably never be written. Here's one. It might 
be called "Oh What (Another) Lovely War!" Its subject? The second world war. 
This global crisis saw not only the enslavement of millions but also, worst of 
all, the slaughter of more than 60 million men, women and children, often in 
circumstances of unique and unspeakable horror.

I'm not denying that for a moment. Nor are the historians – experts such as 
Antony Beevor (Stalingrad), Max Hastings (Armageddon) and Ian Kershaw (The End 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/sep/16/ian-kershaw-the-end-review>). 
Together with many others, these popular scholars have exposed the full horror 
of the Third Reich, the massacres, the torture and the rapes perpetrated on a 
continent that has been the cradle of western civilisation. Millions worldwide 
have read these books, from which they derive the global view of the last world 
war.

But here's the thing. If you were fortunate enough not to get blitzed, 
tortured or raped in the war, what did you do? You had the time of your life, 
that's what. I don't say this in any light or flippant spirit, but on the basis 
of historical record, or at least memoir. The point about the historiography of 
the second world war is that it comes in two, contrasting instalments.

First, there's the heart of darkness, such as the Russian front, where Hitler 
and Stalin's troops fought what the Germans calledrattenkrieg, "the war of the 
rats", from ruined house to bombed-out basement. Elsewhere, in Normandy, 
Dachau, Guadalcanal and Monte Cassino, we have, like Macbeth, supped full of 
horrors, with masterchefs Kershaw, Hastings et al.

But before that, in the 1940s and 50s, there was another generation of books. 
In quite a different spirit, titles such asIll Met by Moonlight 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ill_Met_by_Moonlight> and Appointment With Venus 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Appointment_with_Venus> celebrated the – shall we 
say? – more sporting side of the conflict.

Before everyone writes in to complain about the tasteless tone of these 
remarks, let me direct the gentle reader towards a remarkable second world war 
memoir I was recently sent by a friend.Train to Nowhere, published by the then 
independent Hutchinson in 1948, was praised in theObserver for its "calm, 
youthful candour, its forthright acceptance of the whole duty of war service".

Its author, whom I'd never heard of, was Anita Leslie, a young Irish woman who 
turns out to have been distantly related to Winston Churchill. Miss Leslie was 
an ambulance driver on no fewer than four battle fronts (the Western Desert, 
Italy, France and Germany).

You might imagine that her story would be harrowing. Inevitably, it is, in 
parts. But – and here's the interesting bit – it's also a hoot, not least 
because Miss Leslie has an irrepressible eye for the absurd. Posted to Naples, 
after Monte Cassino, it's her duty to look after the injured. "As the hundreds 
of pitifully wounded men passed by," she writes, "I felt it was like trying to 
run a canteen in Dante's Inferno with the Marx Brothers as assistants."

She does not flinch from horror. Her description of a French peasant avenging 
the death of her son by shooting two German POWs in cold blood is a masterpiece 
of reportage. On the next page, however, she's having a candlelit dinner in a 
dug-out, debating French fashion with a former shop assistant, who declares 
that "only shoes, stockings and gloves really matter..."

Anita Leslie's ambulance corps advances towards Berlin. "We crossed a great 
line of fortifications without realising it was the Siegfried Line – the very 
one where we had, unfortunately, not hung our washing five years before..." 
Finally, she ends up having lunch in Potsdam with Churchill.

Train to Nowhere speaks of another mood, a different time and a grittier 
generation. I note thatDouble Cross, Ben Macintyre's forthcoming book about the 
"D-Day spies", celebrates one of the oddest military units ever assembled – "a 
bisexual Peruvian, a Serbian seducer and a Spaniard with a diploma in chicken 
farming, directed by an intelligence officer in tartan trousers". This, surely, 
is the second world war we want to rediscover in print.

Glittering literary prize seeks kindly sponsor

The literary prize season has kicked off with the annual nervous breakdown 
better known as the Costa book of the year award. This is shaping into a 
straight fight between a biography of Edward Thomas, some poems by the poet 
laureate and a novel calledPure. The odds, as usual, give no clue about the 
outcome. Meanwhile, the Literature prize, launched by the literary agent Andrew 
Kidd last year, is still pursuing sponsorship. I'm told that the funding search 
has accelerated and will continue for as long as it takes. In the present 
climate, this might be a while. But Kidd and his posse should be heartened to 
know that it took Kate Mosse two years, in much more propitious times, to get 
the Orange prize off the ground. The Literature prize has already attracted a 
lot of publicity. Here's hoping it can defy commercial gravity and find the 
money it needs to get airborne.

Why true mudslinging requires a little digging

The Omnivore and the promoters of the Hatchet Job of the Year award, sponsored 
by the Fish Society, are inviting the literary world to "contemplate the future 
of book reviewing" with a snippet from Henry James's review ofOur Mutual Friend 
in which he describes this great novel as "the poorest of Mr Dickens's works… 
dug out as with a spade and pickaxe". But is this the best they can do? As a 
hatchet job, it falls some way short of the classics. Why not, for instance, 
Henry James on HG Wells, who "throws information at the reader as if emptying 
his mind like a perpetual chamber pot", Mark Twain on James Fenimore Cooper – 
"Cooper hadn't any more invention than a horse" or Robert Graves on Dylan 
Thomas – "A Welsh demagogic masturbator who failed to pay his bills"?
 