
When I realised exactly what George Osborne's announcements earlier this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/nov/30/osborne-autumn-statement-fawlty-towers>
 will mean for poor and less well-off families my heart sank. When it became 
clear that the government was delivering a double whammy by reneging on the one 
feeble commitment it had made to tackling child poverty andscrapping the 
previously proposed increase in the child tax credit <> as well as taking its 
ruthless scythe to the working tax credit, well the sinking feeling just kept 
coming.

Estimates from the Resolution Foundation put the total combined value of these 
new cuts at £1.2bn in 2012 
<http://www.resolutionfoundation.org/blog/2011/Nov/29/so-who-pays/>. Changes to 
the child tax credit alone will wipe £110 a year – per child – off the 
household budgets of more than 5 million lower-income families already 
grappling with falling living standards, stagnating wages and the looming 
uncertainty of unemployment. For the hundreds of thousands of families already 
without work and struggling to bring up children on state benefits the 
situation is even bleaker. That many more children will be thrust into poverty 
is – whatever the prime minister might say – inevitable.

A few months ago, before this latest tranche of dismal statistics but after 
the drive to austerity had begun in earnest I was asked to write a foreword to 
Professor Danny Dorling's latest book on social inequality,Fair Play 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2011/oct/18/danny-dorling-education-data>
. With the prospect of double-dip recession hanging over the country I was 
eager to learn more about the evolution of social inequality and the 
consequences of denying the most deprived in our society of a fair start in 
life. As I began the process I thought back to my own recession-scarred 
childhood growing up in poverty during the 1980s. It reminded me that behind 
all the regressive policies, behind all the statistics and all analysis, are 
actual children and young people being told by very rich men that their already 
struggling families are about to struggle even more. Statistics, while 
illuminating, do not begin communicate the reality of the lives of children 
from poor families. The effects of child poverty run deep and last long and my 
own experience is just one of far too many.

In the early 1980s, during the brutal years of Thatcherism, my proud 
bricklayer father became unemployed. He would never work again. On many 
occasions my six siblings and I were painfully aware of what it felt like to 
have no money for basic provisions. We were aware, too, of the fact that 
receiving free school meals placed us in a particular category of people 
somewhere towards the bottom of an already deprived community. And we were also 
conscious of the humiliation of borrowing money from the "tick man" who visited 
weekly to collect what he'd lent us at extortionate rates of interest. All so 
we would have some presents at Christmas.

We had no washing machine. We were often envious of our friends whose fathers 
had jobs and we were certainly envious of the middle-class people we never got 
to meet because they lived in "better" areas and didn't send their kids to the 
same schools as us. Many people can't understand this.

The concept of relative poverty – measured according to people's inability to 
live a comparable standard of living to most of the population – is often 
wheeled out by the right as evidence that real deprivation doesn't actually 
exist. Compare today's poor with the genuinely impoverished of decades past or 
with those in developing countries, the argument goes, and really, they are 
pretty well off. Look how many poor people own mobile phones, they say, or a 
television. The attitude is that the modern poor and marginalised should stop 
their whingeing, get off their backsides, accrue multiple low-paying jobs, and 
grin and bear it.

Of course millions of children in developing countries live in appalling 
conditions and yes, the "urchins" of Victorian England who spent their days in 
poorhouses, roaming streets or working for a pittance in hazardous factories 
endured enormous hardship. Only a fool would suggest otherwise.

But all of this is missing the point. Poverty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/poverty> – absolute or relative – 
diminishes people. It takes away their pride. Worst of all it takes away their 
hope. Don't think for a moment that a child in a poorer household doesn't 
absorb what is going on around them. Try going to the shops with a parent who 
has to hand something back because they are a few coins short. Try living in a 
community where its commonplace for mothers to borrow from one another to buy 
bread when the family allowance runs out and there is still a day until 
unemployment benefits are due.

Earlier this year when the BBC ran its documentary Poor Kids 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b011vnls> in which we heard first hand from 
children currently living in poverty I could immediately identify with them. 
Even though my childhood is long behind me their words were painful to hear. 
Like when eight-year-old Courtney, a young girl growing up on a council estate 
in Bradford said: "We're a poor family. We're different. People with money, 
they have more stuff to play with in the garden. They have things in the 
house." Or when 11-year-old Sam from Leicester who says: "We only get a small 
amount every month and that goes on what we need and not what we want."

For some children, their homes become unstable as parents crumble beneath 
multiple pressures. Some kids end up taking on the adult roles of parents who 
can't cope. The children whose parents, like mine, go into debt to have a TV so 
there is something resembling a normal life at home or who by hook or by crook 
find a way for their teenager to have a decent pair of trainers so they aren't 
embarrassed to go to school, know these things come at a huge price – financial 
and emotional.

So what if some poorer families manage to accumulate a few consumer durables. 
They're cheap compared with a few decades ago for a start. But don't think for 
a moment that people on the poverty line can easily afford them. At the extreme 
end thousands of poorer families turn to loan sharks to pay for such things. 
Being in possession of a few "luxuries" is not the same as being able to afford 
them.

And before someone says "oh well then if they can't afford them they shouldn't 
buy them" try telling that to the parent who simply wants their children to 
have something more than nothing. Try walking in their shoes.

Our politicians talk the talk on social equality and "poverty of opportunity" 
as some like to refer to it, but they merely tinker with the damaging effects 
of actual poverty. Under New Labour there were some encouraging developments of 
which the minimum wage, a calculable focus on child poverty, improved maternity 
rights and progressive projects such as Sure Start are just a few. But to their 
great shame, their "progressive" era also shepherded in the conditions that 
cultivated a jump in wealth inequalities between the very top and very bottom 
of our society. If you were born poor under the New Labour government you can 
bet you are probably staying poor. In a decade's time, who knows what poorer 
children's prospects will be?

There are many studies that document the social attitudes, structures and 
political forces including the ideologies espoused by the Tory government in 
the 80s under Thatcher, that brought Britain to a place where it ranks 
disgracefully high among wealthy nations on income and health inequalities. 
That any government in 2011 does not have (asa new report published this week 
by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation and The New Policy Institute, Monitoring 
Poverty and Social Exclusion 
<http://www.jrf.org.uk/publications/monitoring-poverty-2011>, concludes) a 
comprehensive poverty strategy, is simply unacceptable. Despite David Cameron's 
rebuttals that more children will be thrown in to poverty, as chief executive 
of Child Poverty Action Group, Alison Garnham, says: "Warnings of a bleak 
future of rising child poverty have not just been ignored, the government has 
actively decided to let child poverty rise."

Who knows where we will be by the time the coalition is done? And who knows 
how much children from poor backgrounds will have had to endure by the time we 
reach that point? As Dorling says: "The prejudice that preserves poverty 
remains stronger in Britain than in most of the rest of the rich world." The 
heart sinks.

• This article is an edited version of the foreword to Fair Play by Danny 
Dorling <http://tinyurl.com/6p54yta>, published by Policy Press
 