
Much as I enjoyed Black Swan (tutus, blood, evil ids – what's not to like?), 
I thought it was a shame Natalie Portman couldn't do all her own dancing. Don't 
get me wrong – the girl done good. She nailed the bun, achieved a creditable 
facsimile of the neurotic thoroughbred physique, and managed OK with the 
expressive arm-flapping.

But anyone can dance with her arms. What I would call the "proper dancing" had 
to be performed by a professional with Portman's face overlaid using CGI. It's 
not her fault she didn't have the technique; she's an actress, not a ballerina. 
To pull off the highlight of the Odette/Odile double-role – the 32fouettés en 
tournant – you would need to have practised 25 hours a day, from birth, on a 
diet of Silk Cut, and with no time to do fun things like go to Harvard or make 
The Phantom Menace.

I suppose if you're going to have a stand-in, it might as well be in a movie 
set during a production of a ballet that hinges on a doppelganger. But 
Portman's arm-flailing stirred memories of Anne Bancroft posing her way through 
the role of Anna Karenina in The Turning Point, and Jessica Harper as a ballet 
student whose one big dance scene in Suspiria requires her to stagger around 
and fall over.

Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger were indeed fortunate when they were 
able to cast Moira Shearer, a professional dancer, as their lead in The Red 
Shoes, since Shearer could both act and dance, unlike poor Leslie Browne, whose 
Oscar nomination for The Turning Point must have been for her dancing, since 
there's no way on earth it could have been for her acting. It's a pity Mikhail 
Baryshnikov didn't find his Powell and Pressburger and had to make do with the 
likes of Herbert Ross and Taylor Hackford, since there are moments in both The 
Turning Point and White Nights when his gravity-defying jetés or 
multi-pirouettes take your breath away.

When did stars stop doing their own dancing? I first started getting 
distracted by stand-ins during 1980s bopsicals such as Flashdance, in which 
Jennifer Beals clearly wasn't doing her own bum-spinning (in fact it was 
uncredited Marine Jahan, who finally got a credit of her own in Walter Hill's 
Streets of Fire), or Footloose, when Kevin Bacon clearly wasn't turning his own 
mid-air somersaults, or Girls Just Want to Have Fun, in which Sarah Jessica 
Parker clearly wasn't … you get the picture. Instead of surrendering to the 
spectacle of the dance, I became obsessed with pinpointing the precise moment 
when the actor was replaced by the substitute, whose features would be obscured 
by tricksy lighting and camera angles.

There's something to be said for movie stars earning their spurs in 
vaudeville, where they were obliged to dance and sing as well as crack jokes. 
Not long ago a friend showed me a marvellous clip of Bob Hope and James Cagney 
tapdancing on a table in The Seven Little Foys; neither was chiefly known for 
his dancing (though Cagney's best actor Oscar was for the musical biopic Yankee 
Doodle Dandy rather than one of his more famous gangster roles) and they 
wouldn't measure up to Fred Astaire, yet both display a skill and panache that 
wipes the floor with, say, Richard Gere's effortful hoofing in Chicago.

Nowadays we have Neve Campbell and Julia Stiles, who draw on their own early 
dance training for The Company and Save the LastDance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/dance>, but with results that are 
respectable rather than soul-stirring. The true heirs to Hope and Cagney are 
probably multi-taskers such as Christopher Walken and Hugh Jackman, whose 
terpsichorean skills have been displayed on stage, in Fatboy Slim videos and 
iced-tea commercials more than in cinema, though Walken fans have long 
treasured his pimp striptease in the 1981 film version of Pennies from Heaven.

But why has no one yet built an entire movie around Jackman's dancing? Or 
better yet, why not scan the ranks of bona fide ballet dancers for one who, 
like Shearer, might turn out to have screen presence as well as flawless 
technique? Then maybe next time a movie like Black Swan comes along, the 
leading lady can do her own fouettés.
 