
20s: Tony Parsons

 Tony with son Bobby Kennedy Parsons: ‘The good news was I could run about 
with my son without worrying about my knees or my ticker giving out.’ 
It felt natural. That is what I remember most about becoming a father halfway 
through my 20s. As if Mother Nature was giving me the big thumbs up.

On a sensible, educated, middle-class level, of course, becoming a dad so 
young was a dumb move. You are poor. You know little of the world. And even if 
you really love your partner – as I loved my then girlfriend,Julie Burchill 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Julie_Burchill> – you are both very likely to 
discover someone you like a bit more if you go round the corner and wait for 10 
minutes.

The most convincing argument against early parenthood is that you are in a 
relationship that is likely to fall apart before that child grows up. Julie and 
I got married when she became pregnant, and it was over before Bobby started 
school. So I can understand why bringing a baby into the world when you are 
little more than a kid yourself seems dumb. But it did not feel remotely like 
it.

When he was born, I looked at my little boy and felt an unconditional love I 
never knew was inside me. As he grew, and I watched him stagger about, squeak 
his first words, and turn into a beautiful little boy, that feeling did not 
change. Even when his mother and I split up, and I found myself a single dad at 
not quite 30, even then, becoming a dad so young felt completely right.

Bringing up Bobby taught me how to love someone, apart from myself, to take 
responsibility, to be selfless. Staying childless would have kept me a lad. It 
would have made me more selfish, shallow, obsessed with my own pleasures and 
fulfilment.

And he was so lovely. He robbed my breath with his pale beauty. This little 
blond moppet, gentle and kind and interested in the world.

Friends and colleagues had years of childlessness ahead of them. They were set 
to do it the middle-class way – get the university education, map out the 
career plan, sigh over relationships for 15 years or so… and then wheel out the 
fertility treatment on the cusp of their 40th birthdays.

Becoming a parent so young was primarily a class issue. Yes, Bobby's parents 
were both journalists. But both of us had left school at 16. Julie's parents 
were factory workers, mine were a greengrocer and a dinner lady. Untouched by 
the transforming powers of university, we were products and prisoners of our 
class. And the working class can't wait to do a bit of breeding.

It was hard. Even before Julie and I broke up, money worries dragged us down. 
When we were hip young gunslingers on the NME, we'd take back lemonade bottles 
for the deposit and use the change for the tube fare to work. When you have a 
kid, money matters.

The good news was I could run about with my son without worrying about my 
knees or my ticker giving out. I said good riddance to the wild years of my 
early 20s. I was sick of watching people I loved wreck themselves with drugs. I 
had done it all, and fatherhood made me put it all behind me.

Then I was suddenly a single dad. But I had years to burn. I had time to get 
the whole relationship thing right. The love thing. The family thing. Even the 
fatherhood thing. I met Yuriko when I was still in my 30s, and we have been 
married for 18 years.

All these people knocking out kids with the menopause on the horizon better 
hope they got it right, because they will never get another chance.

In the end, it is not complicated. What made becoming a young dad such a 
wonderful thing was Bobby. He is the reason I have no regrets. That beautiful 
baby who became a Star Wars-obsessed boy, then a difficult teenager with a Liam 
Gallagher scowl, and now a fine young man of 30, whose presence on this planet 
makes it a better place.

Sometimes people are shocked that I became a parent in my 20s. But isn't that 
when we are meant to do it?

30s: Blake Morrison

 The Guardian Hay Festival 2007, day seven Blake Morrison, author, at 
Hay-On-Wye These images are medium res as they were originally sent in for GU 
Photograph: Martin Godwin 
"I'll never have kids," my younger son said the other day, after a week spent 
with his girlfriend's nephews and nieces, "not till I'm 40, anyway." 
I understood the sentiments. At his age I'd have felt the same. Yet by the time 
I was 30 I was ready to be a father.

It wasn't that everyone in my peer group was having kids. In fact, I'd 
succeeded in spending my 20s almost entirely insulated from children. That I'd 
no idea what parenthood meant was doubtless a spur to feeling ready for it, but 
there were other reasons, too. I'd met my wife at university, and we got 
married alarmingly early, at 25. Life was busy: postgraduate degrees, jobs, 
spells abroad in Canada and the US, pubs, long-distance walks, camping trips, 
weekends with friends, art galleries. But by the time I was 30, I'd grown tired 
of independence. My 20s were over. Time to get real.

We started trying for a baby. Or rather I started trying: my wife, who'd just 
had a promotion at work, was in no hurry, but we thought that getting pregnant 
might take a while. When we succeeded within a month or two, she was shocked. 
Did she even want kids? I remember us going to an Italian restaurant, after the 
GP had confirmed she was eight weeks gone. We were nervous with each other – 
pleased but scared. It was like a first date, a new phase, the start of being 
proper grown-ups.

In my naivety, I imagined we would go on living much the same life as before, 
with three of us instead of two. For a time, during the pregnancy, we 
succeeded. There was a walk in the Pyrenees where we got lost and didn't get 
back down to the campsite till 10.30 at night: Kathy was six months pregnant by 
then, but it didn't seem to affect her. A few days later, though, on a beach, I 
noticed a man sneaking furtive looks at her bulge, which was finally beginning 
to show. No more denial. When we got home, we started buying baby things and 
immersing ourselves in childcare books:Dr Spock 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Benjamin_Spock>, Penelope Leach 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Penelope_Leach>, Hugh Jolly 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/s/ref=nb_sb_noss?url=search-alias%3Dstripbooks&field-keywords=hugh+jolly&x=0&y=0>
.

Spock warned that the partner of a pregnant woman might feel grumpy, 
resentful, left out, but that wasn't my experience. I'd been a student till the 
age of 28 and fatherhood was my new programme of study. We enrolled forNCT 
<http://www.nct.org.uk/home> classes: four or five couples sitting round on 
bean bags, all questing for the perfect birth. Some of the classes were helpful 
– sociable, too. But it was hard not to feel patronised. "You probably think of 
your partner's breasts as your exclusive plaything," we men were told, "but 
they do have another function." Gosh, really? At another class we were invited 
to perform a Chinese rope burn on our partner's arm, to simulate the pain of 
childbirth: "There, that wasn't so bad, was it?" The NCT mission to remove the 
fear of labour succeeded spectacularly for one member of the group. "Is it true 
that giving birth is like having an orgasm?" she asked with a straight face.

Naive though we were in most other respects, Kathy and I were under no 
illusions about that one. Which was just as well, since her labour lasted 
26 hours and ended with a specialist team being drafted in to perform an 
emergency delivery. Having been with her throughout, I was indignant when asked 
to leave. "The sight of forceps will make father faint," the consultant 
explained. When I pleaded my case, he relented a little and agreed that once 
the baby's head had been turned, I could come back in to witness the birth. 
Outside I paced up and down, like a 50s cliché, till they called me back in. I 
still feel a tinge of bitterness about the five-minute ejection.

So out came our first child: he was 8lb 14oz, and I was 31 years one month. 
Two more children followed, the second when I was 38: for me being in my 30s, 
and having small children around the house, are synonymous. Was that the right 
age to be a father? Not in the sense of the zeitgeist: paternity leave, staying 
overnight when a child is in hospital, being able to take a child on to 
licensed premises – such privileges were still being fought for then. In terms 
of my own age, or my own circumstances, probably, yes. At 20 or 25, I'd have 
felt cheated of my youth. At 45 or 50, I'd have been more set in my ways – more 
selfish and less energetic.

Energy was much in demand for the first year of fatherhood. Our son didn't 
sleep through and cried for several hours most nights, either from colic or the 
aftereffects of the brutal forceps delivery. I often walked with him, wide 
awake and screaming on my shoulder, in the small hours – it seemed only fair 
that Kathy get some sleep. There was an ideological imperative, too: the need 
to be prove myself a willing partner, a co-equal, a new man. If I couldn't 
actually breast-feed, I could share the rest – nappy-changing and spoon-feeding 
as well as buggy-pushing; teatime and bathtime, not just bedtime stories. Kathy 
still did the bulk of the childcare, but my office job was only three days a 
week, so I could be around more than most of the other dads that we knew.

As to my career, such as it was, I didn't see why fatherhood should be an 
obstacle. ForCyril Connolly <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyril_Connolly>, the 
pram in the hall posed a threat to any aspirant writer, but there'd been 
writers before him (William Cobbett 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Cobbett>, for example) for whom it was an 
inspiration. Several male novelists and poets in my generation –Ian McEwan 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2008/jun/12/ian.mcewan> and Craig Raine 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Craig_Raine>, for example – wrote a lot about 
children. We were more domesticated than our fathers had been, and parental 
experiences and emotions (love, pride, fear, frustration, rage) formed a 
natural part of our work.

There's no right time to be a father. And 31 now seems to me a young age to 
start, just as 25 was young to get married. But I loved the sense of discovery, 
of working it out as we went along – despite our best intentions, nothing had 
really prepared us for the different challenges, tribulations and pleasures. 
Perhaps the only downside was stopping when we did. It's not that we wanted a 
fourth or fifth. But now my youngest is at university, and we're going through 
empty nest syndrome. And if you start at 50 or 60, chances are you'll never 
have to experience it.

40s: Antony Beevor

 Antony Beevor with daughter Nella: 'Feeling unjustifiably young for my age, I 
felt rather awed by the responsibility of having children.' 
"Well, well, well," I said, shaking my head in bemusement when Artemis told me 
she was pregnant. "I suppose we'll have to grow up." This may seem strange, 
since I was 43 at the time. I was also feeling rather jet-lagged. She had just 
collected me from RAF Lyneham. I had landed after a flight back from the 
Falkland Islands, where I had been carrying out research for a book on the 
British army. It was the early summer of 1989.

We were late starters in every sense. I was 38 when I met Artemis and 39 when 
we married. We had both felt we were slightly on-the-shelf by then, and had 
half-resigned ourselves to bachelordom, so it was an even more wonderful 
surprise to fall in love with a fellow writer who had similar tastes in 
people and found the same things funny. I apparently qualified as almost 
perfect in her view because I disliked sport, both on television and on the 
field; I did not like pubs; and I ironed my own shirts. Having never imagined 
that these would count as virtues, I was surprised but did not complain.

Feeling unjustifiably young for my age, I felt rather awed by the 
responsibility of having children. As struggling writers, we had postponed the 
decision with a policy of books before babies. And even though things were 
still rocky, we could not wait much longer. Artemis, aged 36, was already 
classified as an "elderly primigravida".

Having babies in early middle age was an exhausting business, as we soon 
found. Everyone warns you how tiring the first six months are, and we nodded 
earnestly in agreement when told, but the reality never sinks in until it hits 
you. Perhaps as a typical man, I had never looked at a baby before, except out 
of politeness. But having your own child provokes an astonished wonder at the 
miracle of life even in an old cynic. I also found myself becoming irritated 
when somebody feels compelled to say of a child that they have their father's 
eyes or their mother's nose. They mean well, but do not seem to realise that 
they are in a sense undermining the development of the child's individuality.

We both adored Nella, and doubly so when she very nearly died at the age of 
eight months. The doctors could only define her sudden and devastating illness 
as "necrotising enteritis". They told us to prepare ourselves for the worst and 
offered us counselling, but we were able to refuse it on the grounds that we 
had each other. Against all odds, Nella proved herself a real fighter and 
survived, yet we knew that what she had endured was traumatic.

Artemis was completely drained from the stress of Nella's illness, so there 
was no question of having another child for some time. Eventually, three years 
after Nella, Adam was born. We brought them both up with firm boundaries 
because we had seen that, without set limits, children felt compelled to push 
and push to achieve a reaction. And this was bound to make them insecure and 
perhaps egotistical at the same time.

My greatest dread about having a son was that I might have to take him to 
football matches. But to my intense relief I was spared that form of paternal 
bonding. Adam turned out to have as little interest in spectator sports as me. 
In fact, he developed a love of chess, art and history. And his school reports 
all urged him not to work so hard. Oh, where on earth did we go right? Having 
failed my A-levels at school out of teenage rebellion, Nella and Adam knew very 
well that I was never in a position to criticise their scholastic performance. 
And this comes to the point of having children a little late in life. They 
keep you young by teasing you. They are also taller, so they can pat you on the 
head.

I learned to scuba-dive with Nella when she was 12, because that was her 
dream. (She has of course left me far behind.) And I rediscovered fishing with 
Adam (who now always catches more than me). Apart from watching with admiration 
the development of their own character, the greatest joy comes in their 
company. I may have been a late starter, but it was well worth growing 
up finally in my 40s.

50s: Ken Livingstone

 KEN LIVINGSTONE LABOUR LONDON MAYOR CANDIDATE ADDRESSES THE LABOUR PARTY 
CONFERENCE 2010 AT MANCHESTER CENTRAL #SAR Photograph: Geoff 
Newton-Sportsphoto/Geoff Newton 
As a child, you always think your family is quite normal. It's only later in 
life that you realise it wasn't, or perhaps there is no such thing as a normal 
family. Anyhow, my sister and I had completely different reactions to our 
slightly dysfunctional upbringing. At the age of 16, she started her own 
family, and created for her four children the kind of warm and loving 
environment that we hadn't had ourselves. This isn't a damning indictment of my 
parents, because they raised us in the only way they knew how, which was with 
the rather cold Victorian values that lingered throughout the first half of the 
20th century.

My reaction to childhood was that I didn't want to inflict it on anybody else. 
When I left school, I threw myself into zoology and natural history, and then, 
at the age of 23, got involved in the Labour party, which took over my whole 
life, electioneering and campaigning the perfect outlets for my workaholic 
personality.

Even at 44 I had no intention of having children and would have laughed at 
anyone predicting I would have five in the next 14 years. The three children I 
then had are now in their late teens and early 20s, and by the time I was 
elected London mayor in 2000, I didn't expect to have any more.

But relationships don't come along in a planned way, and when Emma and I 
decided to have a family, I was already 56. Starting a family this late, I knew 
there was the real risk I wouldn't be around to see the children start work and 
have their own families, and this was a problem for me. My own father died 
unexpectedly when I was just 26 and he was 56, and I felt the pain of that loss 
for more than 20 years.

The only thing to weigh against this is the fact that as Tom and Mia (who was 
born 15 months after Tom) grow up, their older siblings will always be at least 
10 years ahead and able to advise and guide them. These sibling relationships 
have turned out to be even stronger than I expected, with Tom and Mia adoring 
their older brother and sisters. Every summer the whole family goes on 
holiday together, and now that the older kids are bringing their friends, it's 
like running a youth camp. There's also the added advantage of sibling 
babysitters.

My own sister, who is two years younger, had been my best friend in early 
childhood, so Emma and I wanted our children to be born as close together as 
possible. Many of our friends with just one child spent much of their time 
effectively substituting as a sibling, which always seemed to make the child a 
little bit more serious than if they were with someone their own age.

Twenty years earlier I would have found the demands of sharing childcare 
impossible to reconcile with my political career and ambitions. The pressure to 
be at every meeting and the insistence of the House of Commons whips that 
voting takes priority over family would have left me torn, but fortunately the 
mayoralty is an executive role and organised around sensible hours, so I was 
often able to be home before Tom and Mia went to bed. But even with that I was 
still out most nights, so I made up for it at weekends, allowing Emma to catch 
up on sleep. From two weeks after Tom's birth, every Saturday and Sunday 
morning, except at Christmas, we were out of the house before 10am. I hated 
struggling with a buggy on public transport, so I carried Mia in a sling across 
my chest and Tom on my back. As they got older, these weekends became full-day 
events at museums in bad weather and at the zoo and in parks when it was sunny. 
As well as taking a bit of weight off me, this has the added advantage of 
reducing time for television and electronic games. Having grown up at a time 
when attitudes towards children were stricter, I sometimes balk at today's 
indulgence.

Given how the media would have turned it into a circus, Emma and I decided not 
to get married while I was still mayor, so when we did finally marry a year 
ago, Tom and Mia were old enough to play a part along with my older children. 
As weddings can be a bit dull for kids, we held it at London Zoo, which brought 
all the strands of my life together.

60s: John Simpson

 John Simpson with son Rafe: 'I realise, of course, that I may not see Rafe 
grow to full manhood, or marry, or have children.' Photograph: Philipp Ebeling 
for the Guardian 
Recently I was walking down the street with my four-year-old son Rafe on my 
shoulders. Gripping my hair with both hands, his own long hair blowing in the 
wind, he rode me like amahout <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mahout> rides a 
baggy old elephant. "Oh, Mr Attenborough," said a passerby, "what a beautiful 
granddaughter you've got." It was kindly meant, so I didn't correct him; though 
it occurred to me that no one probably ever callsSir David Attenborough 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Attenborough> John Simpson. As for Rafe, 
having a father old enough to be his grandfather must also create problems of 
identity. Are there any compensating advantages?

When he was born, various Fleet Street harridans wrote that having a child at 
61 was selfish and irresponsible of me; what made it their business, I'm not 
sure. But four years later, I think it's actually helped him. I am much less 
irritable and pernickety than I was with the two daughters from my first 
marriage, 30 years ago. When Rafe wipes his runny nose on his sleeve or blurts 
out a rude word, it never upsets me. My experiences in unpleasant places have 
shown me there are worse things than sniffing or saying "bum".

Rafe must be one of the best-travelled four-year-olds on Earth. Paris and Hong 
Kong, which he calls "Hong Tong", are his favourite places. He is civilised, 
self-reliant and friendly, confiding details about his life and toys to 
everyone he meets. He loves his mother's native South Africa, and occasionally 
recalls the beauties of Siberia in winter. Travel being one of the comforts of 
my late middle age, Rafe shares the pleasure of it.

He is certainly a contented little boy. Recently, as I hoisted him on to my 
shoulders yet again, he called out, "How happy are we!"

Shortly afterwards, we bumped into my physiotherapist, and I thought she was 
going to do a citizen's arrest on me. But I told her I couldn't give up 
carrying Rafe, no matter how much it may harm my bomb-damaged shoulders. As 
long as I can take the weight, it's too enjoyable.

He is noisily enthusiastic about Spitfires and the Battle of Britain 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battle_of_Britain>, but he's also gentle and 
thoughtful, tender to the feelings of insects and pigeons, and careful not to 
wake us in the mornings if he has crept into our bed during the night. He is 
puzzled, rather than vengeful, when other children snatch things from him or 
push him around.

I see my own childhood in his. He looks very like I once did, and sometimes, 
when he's being photographed, he sucks in his lip out of shyness, exactly as I 
used to do. Still, he's much less angst-ridden than I was; he has no fears that 
his parents' marriage might break up. He's wittier, too. Once, sharing the bath 
with me, he got annoyed that I was reading the newspaper. "Havin' a poo," he 
called out. My explosive reaction must have been hugely satisfactory – water 
everywhere, newspaper destroyed. "Makin' joke," he giggled.

But if I'm him, I'm my own father, too. I understand the old boy so much 
better now: why he read me bits of Dickens and Lambs' Tales from Shakespeare, 
why he told me about the Romans and Normans and Elizabethans, why he sometimes 
looked at me so intensely. Like my father with me, I show Rafe selections from 
theMarx Brothers <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marx_Brothers>, and am breaking 
him in toWC Fields <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/W._C._Fields>. He has the run 
of the , where the staff are charming to him. At night, I repeat the prayers to 
him that my father once said to me, sing him the same corny 1930s songs, kiss 
his forehead just as my father kissed mine. It brings a particular peace, a 
gentle end to my own turbulent relationship with my father.

Rafe gets all my time and attention when I'm not travelling, but when I'm away 
he sometimes goes noticeably quiet. "Say, 'How happy are we!' " I asked him 
recently on the phone from Kabul. "Can't if you're not here," he answered. We 
all screw our children up somehow: I may not lose my temper or withdraw my love 
or fill him with guilt, but I go away a lot, often to places that aren't very 
safe. "You wait till he's 10," my cameraman said to me grimly, "and stands 
there with tears in his eyes, begging you not to go."

For four years his influences, his thoughts, his expressions, have all been 
picked up from us. He has, admittedly, added his own idiosyncracies: when he 
had chickenpox, he called it, logically enough, "chicken-spots". Motorway cones 
he calls "road-stoppers". Now all this will end. For the past few days he has 
come home at 3.30pm tired, mildly stressed and smelling institutional: he 
has started at school. The charming little mistakes will be knocked out of him. 
He'll be cruelly mocked if he goes on calling theDaleks 
<http://www.google.co.uk/images?q=Daleks&um=1&ie=UTF-8&source=univ&ei=INSlTLGlNZC64Qa_5fXRDQ&sa=X&oi=image_result_group&ct=title&resnum=8&ved=0CE8QsAQwBw&biw=1920&bih=1008>
 from Doctor Who "Garlics", but I haven't yet found the heart to correct him.

The road stretches out ahead of us. Along it somewhere he will ask me not to 
drop him right at the school entrance, and he'll stop correcting people who 
think I'm his grandfather. He will grow sophisticated, and reject my 
enthusiasms and ideas as stupid. And then, at some stage, he'll come back to 
the things we share now, just as I have come back to the things my father 
shared with me; and the cycle will start all over again. But just at present, 
now he's started school, the change is painful. When Rafe said the other day, 
"I wish I could stay four for ever", I agreed fervently.

I realise, of course, that I may not see him grow to full manhood, or marry, 
or have children. When he goes to university, I shall be 80 – if I'm still 
around. I'll try to stay as alert, mentally and physically, as I am now; not 
hugely, that's to say, but moderately. Fingers crossed, I may see as much of 
Rafe's life as my father saw of mine before he died, unfairly early, in 1980. I 
was 35 then, and he was 65; I've had to make do without him a long time. Yet 
life can be merciful as well as cruel. The pain of loss does fade, and with it 
those memories that were less than happy. With luck, long after I've gone, 
Rafe's recollections of a loving, full, quirky childhood will remain.

No kids...yet: Chris Waitt

 Features.Omega Males..Film maker Chris Waitt who has had a string of failed 
relationships. .Pictured here at his home in Bethnal Green. London...Pics by 
Dan Charity .dancharity@mac.com.www.dancharityphotography.com.00447870553537 
Photograph: DAN CHARITY 
I never felt that comfortable with babies. They have a tendency to throw up on 
me. Or scream. So when, in my early 30s, my long-term girlfriend said those 
three magic words – "Let's have babies" – I admit, I squirmed. Maybe I wanted 
to live a little more, maybe I wanted to pursue my career, maybe I was just an 
emotional midget – whatever it was, I simply didn't feel ready. She understood, 
though, and subsequently dumped me.

For a couple of years, I retreated into a life of bohemian bachelorhood. I 
began to wonder if, perhaps, I could avoid having kids altogether. Maybe I 
could mature into a kind of George Clooney figure, an eternal bachelor, 
childless but not in a way that makes women uncomfortable. All evidence pointed 
to the contrary – probably I was going to wind up as one of those slightly 
balding, middle-aged sweaty guys who still goes to nightclubs and roams the 
dancefloor lewdly dancing with young women. Or maybe I'd end up like my Uncle 
Ted, a peculiar man who preferred breeding toads to breeding children.

Meanwhile, my friends and family were quietly stockpiling babies. Every few 
months another text, another email, another badly taken photo by a hospital bed 
– all communicating one message: "We are spawning." Even my ex had now found 
herself an older guy who was willing to knock out two kids with her in no time 
at all. By my mid-30s, everyone I knew was having babies except me.

I started to feel left behind, but took some comfort in the fact that these 
newfound parents seemed to be going through a living hell of belching, vomiting 
and random defecation. Conversations with friends were now underscored with an 
incessant squeaky wailing from their little human vuvuzelas. Despite everyone's 
insistence that babies were the cutest thing on Earth, I just couldn't see it.

Maybe having kids just wasn't compatible with the prestigious career I still 
had planned for myself, I thought. While other people made babies, I would make 
films (including A Complete History Of My Sexual Failures, a documentary about 
why none of my relationships worked). Somewhere along the way, my lewd dancing 
caught the eye of a Russian woman in her early 20s and we promptly got married. 
I was a step closer to fatherhood, though on paper it still looked a little 
disturbing: male, late 30s, young foreign wife, no kids. Was I becoming "one of 
those guys"?

Finally, the moment came. This summer I attended a large family gathering. 
Despite being the eldest in my generation of brothers and cousins, I was now 
officially the only one without babies. Except that now most of them weren't 
babies any more. Gone was the skull-crushing wailing. These kids were vibrant, 
charming and funny. They said clever things, they played games, they even 
laughed at my jokes. They were great fun to be with. Yes, they seemed like the 
cutest things on Earth.

The babies had grown up, and I realised it was time I did, too. I had a great 
day and enjoyed being the "funny uncle", but I wanted more. On the train home, 
I turned to my wife and finally said the three magic words – "Let's have 
babies." She looked at me in horror. "Are you crazy?" she said. "I'm 25! I want 
a career, I want to live a little. I'm not ready for babies!"

Sometimes I wish I'd had my revelation a few years earlier, sometimes I wish 
I'd married an older woman and sometimes I long to be able to send one of those 
badly taken photos from beside a hospital bed. Until then, I'll have to make do 
with being a "funny uncle" – and just hope I remain more ha-ha than peculiar.
 