
Speculation that Conservative backbencher Adam Afriyie is mounting a serious 
challenge to uproot David Cameronabounded over the weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/jan/27/adam-afriyie-david-cameron>. 
But Afriyie's denial that he is plotting is not the end of this curious affair. 
For while I am prepared to bet that the multimillionaire MP for Windsor will 
never become Tory leader, the fact that this generally uninspiring figure, who 
has never made the slightest impression as a debater, could even be dreamed of 
as a challenger is indicative of the state of near mutiny that exists in the 
parliamentary Conservative party.

As one Tory said to me this morning: "It's Cameron's fault for having so many 
talented people on the backbenches and so many untalented people in the 
government."

One may argue about exactly how talented the Tory backbenches are. There is no 
doubt that the 2010 intake is of exceptional quality (Afriyie was part of the 
2005 intake). It contains a considerable number of men and women who might 
reasonably hope to be given the chance to show what they can do as a minister.

Of course, the backbenches contain even larger numbers of men and women who 
might unreasonably hope to be given the chance. For just as an aspirant 
footballer may fantasise about scoring the winning goal in the World Cup final, 
and an aspirant novelist about writing a bestseller, so the aspirant politician 
is in most cases unable to avoid dreaming of high office, or at least of 
getting a lowly job that may lead to higher things. Anyone who doubts whether 
MPs suffer from a craving for humdrum ministerial office should read the 
diaries ofAlan Clark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2000/oct/15/politicalbooks.politics> or 
Chris Mullin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/nov/25/walk-on-part-chris-mullin-review>
.

Afriyie is from a humble background in south London, his mother white and his 
father black, and made a fortune in business. Entering parliament in 2005, he 
had a head start on the 2010 intake, and must have hoped that both as a result 
of his own talents, and because he would diversify a government that is open to 
the charge of being excessively posh, he would be given his chance.

Instead of which he has been spurned, both in May 2010, and in last 
September's reshuffle, when some members of the 2010 intake took their first 
steps on the ministerial ladder. Like most backbenchers, Afriyie has taken the 
trouble to get himself elected to the Commons, only to discover on arriving 
there that he faces a life of relative insignificance. No wonder he dreams of a 
new leader, and is susceptible to the suggestion that it might be him.

I do not mean to imply, by this, that in my opinion the only point of becoming 
an MP is to become a minister. But it is an unfortunate characteristic of most 
of the people who actually get in to the Commons that they are more ambitious 
to join the government than to hold it to account.

Tory backbenchers complain with much bitterness that ever since Cameron gained 
the leadership at the end of 2005, he has ignored them. The same complaint is 
made against George Osborne.

But the more severe problem is the lack of jobs, which has itself been 
exacerbated by the failure at the 2010 election to win an overall majority. 
Instead of forming a minority administration, and fighting a second election 
six months later, Cameron opted to form a coalition with the Liberal Democrats, 
who were rewarded with a substantial slice of the jobs on offer, which in turn 
meant that for the next five years there would be many fewer for Tories.

Cameron's fate does not now depend on Afriyie. It depends on the economy. If 
over the next two years the economy expands, the prime minister will have a 
fighting chance of gaining an overall majority in 2015 that eluded him last 
time. But if it continues to contract, panic will set in and Cameron will 
perish, as so many of his predecessors have perished, at the hands of the Tory 
tribe.
 