
Nasser Hussain's England side might be facing the calamity of a 5-0 Ashes 
whitewash, but at least they can console themselves that, should the worst 
befall them, they will not have to suffer the final, interminable indignity of 
the only team previously to have endured such a fate.

When Johnny Douglas's MCC side, as it was then, lost the final Test in Sydney 
82 years ago, there was no quick flight from Australia to release them from 
their misery, but a one-month boat journey back to Toulon, and endless 
insufferable games of deck quoits against the same Australian opposition that 
would torment them again in England the following summer.

The MCC had declined to tour Australia the previous year - the first world 
war, with its destruction of the nation's youth, had been ended only a few 
months - but it felt obliged to accept the following year. The misgivings 
proved justifiable.

Douglas, who had skippered the MCC to victory in Australia a decade earlier, 
was the third-choice captain. After a sightseeing visit to Pompeii en route, 
the MCC barely staved off defeat against Ceylon in a stop-over in Colombo. On 
the passage from Colombo to Fremantle, typhoid demanded that the team spent a 
week in quarantine after docking.

The Test series was to prove equally debilitating. JWHT Douglas, 
over-initialised even for an England captain of that era, was dubbed "Johnny 
Won't Hit Today" by the Australians because of his stubborn resistance as 
England's batting, the great Jack Hobbs apart, proved wanting, and their 
bowling was easy prey on firm, dry Australian pitches.

If Douglas means little to most English observers, Australia has a much keener 
sense of cricket history; his counterpart, Warwick Armstrong, was celebrated 
yesterday by the Sydney Telegraph in their top 50 Australian cricketers of all 
time. They draw up such lists constantly.

It was Armstrong, dubbed the Big Ship, whose 158 in the second innings in 
Australia's second innings in Sydney paved the way for a 377-run win. 
Australia's scores in that series bear comparison with this winter's outcome: 
267, 581, 499, 354, 582, 389, 211-2, 392, 93-1. Sound familiar?

England lost by an innings in the second Test in Melbourne; they rued the 
absence of Jack Hearne, missing for the rest of the tour, not because of a 
ruptured cruciate ligament, as is the modern curse, but because of lumbago.

Only in the third Test, in Adelaide, did England glimpse victory. They led by 
93 on first innings, but then conceded 582, Armstrong making another hundred, 
to lose by 119 runs, and excuse themselves by bemoaning "odd" umpiring 
decisions. Even an attack of malaria could not prevent Armstrong making another 
centruty during victory in the fourth Test in Melbourne.

Back to Sydney for the fifth and final defeat: Charlie Macartney's 
freewheeling 170 virtually equalled England's first innings single-handed and 
Arthur Mailey's indefatigable left-arm spin finished with 39 wickets for the 
series, an Australian record for a five-Test series.

The following correction was printed in the Guardian's Corrections and 
Clarifications column, Thursday January 9 2003

We were adrift in references to the late AA Mailey. He was not a left-arm spin 
bowler nor did he take 39 wickets in the 1920/21 Test series. He bowled 
right-arm wrist spin, and his record in that five-test series was (and still 
is) 36, not 39, wickets.
 