

Ann Patchett with her Orange Prize-winning novel Bel Canto. Photograph: Martin 
Argles

As a writer, Ann Patchett <http://www.annpatchett.com/> is many things. Lucid, 
perceptive, gentle are the first adjectives that spring to mind - but then, I'm 
a fan. Others are less positive. Several of my friends have never "got" her and 
many were surprised thatshe won the Orange Prize in 2002 
<http://books.theguardian.com/orangeprize2002/story/0,,735865,00.html> for Bel 
Canto. Yet it's a big step from not feeling any interest in a writer to 
actively hating her, or professing that you do. Especially if you're an 
18-year-old college student embarking on your degree.

Nevertheless, such hatred is precisely what Patchett experienced when invited 
to lecture on her memoir Truth and Beauty last year at Clemson University, 
South Carolina. She has written about inThe Atlantic 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/doc/200707u/ann-patchett>. It makes chilling 
reading for anyone who cares about how books are read and taught.

Truth and Beauty, which details the intensity and tragedy of her friendship 
with fellow writerLucy Grealy <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucy_Grealy>, was 
assigned to Clemson's freshman students. Such assignments- where everyone in 
the same year is expected to read the same book, discuss it and write papers 
about it - often involve the author being invited to the college to talk about 
the book.

In Patchett's case, shortly before she was due to go, she realised that not 
everyone at Clemson was happy about her upcoming visit. In fact, there was a 
group of alumni, students (though very few) and parents actively campaigning 
against the book, and against her. Excerpts from her book, at least those 
excerpts considered profane, had been posted on a website and the leader of 
this protest, Ken Wingate, said that the "explicit message that [Truth and 
Beauty] sends to students is that they are encouraged to find themselves 
sexually".

Nothing wrong with that you might think. At least here in Britain. But in the 
Bible belt that is South Carolina, writing, and reading, about normal life, 
which in many people's eyes includes sex, was understood to be "pornographic". 
Her friendship with Grealy was far too intense, so intense that they had to be 
lesbians, didn't they? Despite being untrue, this assumption was more than 
enough cause for censure for some of the open-minded young women at Clemson, 
since, obviously, it was "not normal".

Patchett gave her talk, along with a bodyguard to protect her from angry 
parents and righteous 18-year-old boys - asking how often she'd cheated on her 
husband - and defended the students' right to read anything and not to be 
protected from supposedly "corrupting" texts. For, as she pointed out, if you 
start with her book, where do you stop? She mentioned, among others, Anna 
Karenina (adultery and suicide), The Great Gatsby (adultery, alcoholism, 
murder) and One Hundred Years of Solitude (incest). As I read the piece, I 
realised (having once taught a course entitled From Romeo and Juliet to 
Sleepless in Seattle, about the representation of love) that most of the books 
I had once studied, and taught, would be off-limits to the protesters at 
Clemson. Going to my bookshelves, I racked my brains about what I had studied 
as a teenager. I started Shakespeare with Othello (all that tupping), studied 
The Outsider in French (murder and nonchalance, which is probably just as much 
of a sin to some) and learnt all I needed to know about Freud and families by 
reading Sons and Lovers (where do I start?!). In fact the more I looked, the 
more I realised that in a world that considered Patchett's book as offering a 
"deviant sexual agenda", most of my secondary school and undergraduate syllabus 
would have to be banned. As would most of the books taught in the US.

Which brings me to my question. At Clemson, the minority did not win. Patchett 
still gave her talk, despite her friends urging her to cancel, despite the 
unfriendly newspaper and TV coverage and despite the fact that her book had 
been described as a "sewer". But, if Clemson, in the supposedly free US, can 
try to ban a writer and her work on this basis, how is it any different from 
those who imposed a fatwa on Salman Rushdie, or tried to imprison Orhan Pamuk? 
If bigots and the religious right can make the most mild-mannered and 
uncontroversial of writers think twice about discussing her work in public, 
what hope is there for those whose writing is far removed from either of those 
descriptions? And what hope is there for education, if teachers hesitate to 
include titles that may cause offence? I wonder now if I would still blithely 
choose to teach Madame Bovary (adultery), or Orlando (transsexual, or 
transgendered main character depending on your perspective), or even Ulysses 
(all those yesses...) what happens to our education system, and to our freedom 
to read, if, and when, those decisions are hampered by fear?
 