
As a studio full of Beatles fans sits down to watch A Hard Day's Night in 
Abbey Road on March 19, every single person present will be aware of the 
studio's legendary status. What they might not realise is that, 50 years ago, 
Abbey Road already inspired an almost religious reverence.

Norman Smith worked on the Beatles' first sessions and introduced Pink Floyd 
to the studio in 1967; he still recalls his induction in 1959: "You were made 
very aware of the respect required for this tradition. You had to wear a lounge 
suit. The technical engineers all wore white coats. And it wasn't until you'd 
enjoyed some success that you were allowed to call people by their first name."

Abbey Road established its reputation with recordings by Elgar, Yehudi Menuhin 
and Pablo Casals. Even Winston Churchill, who popped by in 1940 when it was 
being used for propaganda recordings, was struck by its formality. "He said 
there were so many white coats, he thought he'd ended up in a hospital," says 
Ken Townsend, the studio's former general manager.

But it was the men in white coats who would ultimately enable the Beatles to 
realise their sonic fantasies - and incidentally establish Abbey Road as one of 
London's foremost destinations for rock tourist.

For many years the recording followed a strict rota - three sessions a day, 
10am till 1pm, 2pm till 5pm and 7pm till 10pm. Once the Beatles started 
recording there in 1962, the hits arrived in a similarly regimented fashion, at 
a rate that would be unthinkable today. The recording of A Hard Day's Night - 
the title track of the movie and the soundtrack that would confirm the Beatles' 
total musical dominance of the US - was typically brisk, says Smith: "They'd 
made the film but had no title - that came from Ringo. He was at a party 
ensconced in a comfortable armchair, the worse for a few drinks. Someone asked 
how he was. Ringo said, 'It's been a hard day's night.' John went home after 
the party and wrote the song. Then they came in the next day and recorded it."

The Beatles worked mostly in Studio 2, but moved to Studio 3 when 2 was 
booked, while the much larger Studio 1 was called into play when recordings 
were augmented by string sections or orchestras. By 1966, they were using the 
recording studio as an instrument in itself. It became, says Townsend, "a 
haven. They could sit in Studio 2 and be at peace, experimenting, with nobody 
bothering them."

In the early days, residents complained about comings and goings late at 
night. Later, having the Beatles turn up for work down your street gave the 
area an enviable kudos. Annette Hopstein, then 15, lived nearby at Randolph 
Avenue, and would stand outside the studio every day after school. "Usually 
there were at least 12 of us," she says. "Every now and then the police would 
turn up and tell us, 'if you don't go home now, we'll take you down to the 
police station and your parents will have to come and collect you'."

In the early days, the Beatles were regarded as a passing fad (in 1962 there 
were only three "pop engineers"), but eventually they changed the way the 
studio operated and inspired a succession of technical innovations. Ken 
Townsend invented a new way of recording the bass guitar, as well as ADT, a 
technique to double John or Paul's voices. His finest hour came with A Day in 
the Life, when producer George Martin realised EMI's four-track tape machines 
were inadequate for recording the song's huge orchestral crescendo.

"George asked me only a few hours before if there was a way we could link two 
four-track machines together," says Townsend. "I said, I think so." A 41-piece 
orchestra was packed into Studio 1 to record what would be the climax of Sgt 
Pepper. Each instrumentalist was instructed to go from the lowest note possible 
to the highest, over 24 bars. As Townsend monitored his jerry-rigged machines, 
his perception was of "anarchy. Absolute anarchy, you had your own bit to do, 
but no one knew what on earth would happen."

A Day in the Life and The Magical Mystery Tour's I Am the Walrus, both 
recorded in Studio 1, represented the summit of the Beatles' achievements. 
Soon, of course, their unity splintered irrevocably during the recording of Let 
it Be at Twickenham. Fittingly, when they reunited one last time at Abbey Road, 
they named the resulting album after the studio that had nurtured them, and 
posed for a photo shoot on the zebra crossing outside. It would make Abbey Road 
famous worldwide.

London tour organiser Richard Porter calculates he's conducted 100,000 
tourists over the crossing. Ken Townsend has walked across with Margaret 
Thatcher, Ted Heath (who spent the afternoon chatting in the studio with XTC) 
and Helmut Schmidt. Schmidt collected his Abbey Road T-shirt, looked around the 
studio, and - remembering that it had been officially opened by Elgar in 1931, 
summarised the Beatles' impact. "Well," he said, "the pomp has all gone. And 
circumstances have changed."
 