
Soon after the brutal Muammar Gaddafi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/muammar-gaddafi> met his savage and 
ignominious end, David Cameron spoke of his pride at the UK's role in the 
dictator's overthrow. But was he as proud of the almost €120m-worth of weapons 
that Britain had sold to the dictator since 2005, which helped to keep his 
despotic regime in power?

The uprising against Gaddafi was initially repelled by a range of heavy 
weapons, including the use of cluster bombs in civilian areas. These were drawn 
from the dictator's massive stockpiles of arms, many of which now sit in poorly 
maintained bunkers and buildings. The Nato bombings, which helped the rebels 
sweep through the country, were aimed at destroying the weaponry that, at least 
in part, many of the Nato countries had supplied. Such blowback – the 
unintended consequences of arms sales – is common to the global trade in 
weapons, which is driven by a combination of geopolitics, greed, a profound 
lack of morality, and a marked absence of meaningful regulation and oversight.

Arms deals – undertaken by governments, their intelligence agencies, large and 
small manufacturers, middlemen, dealers and financiers – stretch across a 
continuum of legality and ethics from the official, or formal trade, to the 
grey and black markets, which I call the shadow world. In practice, the 
boundaries between the three markets are fuzzy, with significant intertwining. 
They are, to a large degree, dependent on each other. With bribery and 
corruptionde rigueur there are very few arms transactions that are entirely 
above board. One study estimates that the trade accounts for almost 40% of all 
corruption in world trade.

Libya and Gaddafi's history reflects much of what is wrong with the global 
trade in arms. Its legacy in the recently liberated country is threefold. 
First, if Gaddafi's demise is not followed by democracy but, instead, by 
in-fighting, those who would wage war for control will have a seemingly 
limitless supply of weapons to do so. The experience of Iraq and Afghanistan 
illustrates, although in different circumstances, how the overthrow of a tyrant 
can beget a long-running insurgency or civil war. Second, even if the 
resistance movement inLibya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> results 
in a peaceful democracy, the country will have to deal with the rotting 
stockpiles. And last, but not least, there is the deep and abiding fear that, 
in the aftermath of chaos, Gaddafi's stockpile of conventional and biological 
weapons and explosives (including 10 tonnes of mustard gas and 1,000 tonnes of 
uranium) may enter the region's black market, falling into the hands of the 
very people who would threaten some of Gaddafi's most important suppliers: the 
west.

Since taking power in 1969, Gaddafi had become a totemic figure for some, 
spouting the fire and rhetoric of anti-colonialism while, all the time, 
crushing opposition at home and abroad. Factions that became strategically 
threatening frequently disappeared into the darkness of military tribunals, 
torture and death.

Gaddafi's monomaniacal desire to influence African affairs has left 
criss-crossing scars across the continent. Providing training, supplies and 
arms (many taken from stockpiles purchased from the west and Russia), Gaddafi 
contributed to horrors such as Charles Taylor's NPFL and the brutal RUF in 
Sierra Leone. By invading neighbouring Chad, Gaddafi escalated tensions between 
the north and south, fuelling a long-running battle for control of the country. 
Janjaweed forces that committed genocide in Darfur were frequently linked to 
Gaddafi: many had once been Islamic Legion members, the rag-tag mercenary army 
he had created to fulfil his vision of a pan-Arabic band across north Africa.

Libya's involvement made weapons ubiquitous in the region. By 1990, it was 
possible to purchase an AK-47 in a Darfurian market for $40. A popular jingle 
at the time captured the spirit of the new weapons culture and its impact on 
politics in the region: "The Kalash brings cash," the jingle promised, before 
warning that "without a Kalash you're trash".

Those looking for explanations for his ability to hold on to power for so long 
must examine the ease with which Gaddafi was able to purchase billions of 
dollars' worth of arms since 1969, fuelled by Libya's massive reserves of oil. 
From 1970 until 2009, and even with a long-term UN arms embargo in place 
between 1992 and 2003, Libya spent around $30bn on weapons. Most of this was 
sourced from the USSR (and, more recently, Russia): a total of $22bn. But 
equally important were sources of sophisticated Western weapons, which Gaddafi 
used as major force multipliers. France and Germany made the most hay while the 
arms trade sun shone, earning $3.2bn and $1.4bn respectively.

The sheer quantity of weapons purchased is both absurd and frightening. From 
Russia alone, Libya imported more than 2,000 tanks, 2,000 armoured fighting 
vehicles, 350 artillery weapons, dozens of ships and fleets of aircraft. So 
many weapons were bought that there were doubts that the majority of them would 
ever be used. Anthony Cordesman, a military expert at the Center for Strategic 
and International Studies, reported that Libya's "imports vastly exceeded its 
ability to organise, man, train and support its forces. These imports reached 
farcical levels in the late 1970s and 1980s, and involved vast amounts of waste 
on equipment that could never be crewed and operated." Because of its 
ridiculous weapons-to-manpower ratio, Libya had been forced to keep most of its 
aircraft in storage, along with more than 1,000 tanks.

All of this occurred despite long-running disputes with the west that 
threatened to derail Gaddafi's access to international arms markets: a tale of 
arms embargoes put in place only after the horse has bolted. In 1986, Gaddafi, 
powered by his commitment to anti-colonialism, focused his attention on the US, 
supplying weapons, funding and training to a range of anti-US entities. On 5 
April 1986, Libyan terrorists planted a bomb that ripped through the La Belle 
discotheque in Berlin, killing US servicemen who were known to frequent the 
venue. The US responded by bombing Libya and imposing an arms embargo partnered 
by EU countries. Two years later, Libyan operatives planted explosives in the 
hold of a Pan Am flight between Germany and America. The plane exploded over 
Lockerbie in Scotland, killing 270 people. Only a few months later, explosives 
tore through the body of a French UTA airliner, plunging 171 to their deaths 
over the Chadian Sahara.

When it also became clear that Gaddafi had secretly been developing nuclear 
and chemical weapons, retribution was swift. In 1992, a "mere" 23 years after 
Gaddafi took power, he was slapped with his first UN arms embargo and 
widespread sanctions.

It marked an 11-year period of isolation for the dictator. Sanctions bit into 
oil revenues and the arms embargo seemed surprisingly effective: reports 
suggest that Gaddafi imported less than $10m-worth of arms every year from 1992 
to 2003. This confident assertion, however, may be undermined by more recent 
revelations. In 2010, the Institute for Security & Development Policy claimed 
that Belarus – home to Europe's last true dictator, President Alexander 
Lukashenko – had admitted to exporting $1.1bn in arms to Libya between 1996 and 
2006. The tiny landlocked country in Eastern Europe is known for consistently 
supplying some of the world's rogue states. Sitting on a massive stockpile of 
Soviet-era weaponry, and blessed with one of the more modernised of former 
Soviet economies, it has sought export markets around the world following a 
drastic reduction in Russian purchases. It has consistently thumbed its nose at 
international treaties. Belarus is suspected of having salted away what 
remained of Gaddafi's estimated $70bn to $100bn personal fortune, thus offering 
a one-stop arms, banking and transportation hub for Libya's dictator. 
Unsurprisingly, Belarus was also the last nation to fly in supplies to Libya – 
assumed to be mercenaries – prior to the imposition of a fresh arms embargo in 
2011.

Largely as a result of economic woes – Libya estimates it lost $33bn in 
revenues as a result of economic sanctions – Gaddafi started to make all the 
right noises by the early 2000s. In 1999, he embraced free markets and 
globalisation, flamboyantly proclaiming that "no more obstacles between human 
beings are accepted. The fashion now is free markets and investments." More 
concretely, he pronounced that he had formally abandoned his search for 
chemical and biological weapons and agreed to allow those associated with the 
Lockerbie bombing to be tried. In 2003, he finally consented to pay 
compensation to the families of the victims.

It marked the end of Gaddafi's isolation. In 2003, the UN arms embargo and 
sanctions were lifted, followed a year later by those of the EU and the US. 
Little was said then about his persistent human-rights violations in his own 
country or his involvement in other African conflicts.

Instead, he was eagerly embraced by businessmen and politicians in Europe with 
what some saw as distasteful haste. In 2009, the Libyan prisonerAbdelbaset 
al-Megrahi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdelbaset-al-megrahi>, 
incarcerated for his alleged role in the Lockerbie attack, was released from 
Scottish prison on compassionate grounds and returned to Libya. Many suspect 
that the deal was a political sop to open up key Libyan markets to the UK. 
Indeed, shortly afterwards, BP signed a $900m deal with Libya to explore the 
country's oilfields.

Of course, it was not just oilmen who took advantage of the newly opened 
desert markets of Libya. Arms-makers, especially those from Europe, pursued 
deals with vigour. In 2009, only weeks after Megrahi was released, Richard 
Paniguan of the UKTI DSO (UK Trade & Investment Defence & Security 
Organisation) announced that "there have been high-level political 
interventions, often behind the scenes, in places like Libya, Oman, India and 
Algeria", presumably to aid the DSO in its campaign to market British arms. 
Downing Street clarified the statement by laconically pointing out that "it's 
hardly surprising that UKTI DSO are seeking to promote defence exports – that's 
their job". Other political figures also rushed into Libya's arms. Nicolas 
Sarkozy, for example, flew to Libya to promote French exports and business, 
while in 2010 Russia announced that it had agreed to a $1.8bn arms deal with 
Libya that included tanks, fighter jets and air defence networks. Only two 
years earlier, Russia had agreed to cancel Libya's $4.5bn debt incurred on old 
arms deals.

The size of the deal was not that different from the total EU arms exports to 
Libya between 2005 and 2009, the most recent years for which figures are 
available. In these years, EU countries reported exports of just over €834m to 
Libya. Italy did particularly well with €276m in exports between 2006 and 2009, 
which included a €110m deal to supply helicopters that were reportedly used to 
attack rebel forces. France came in a close second, at a total of €210m, while 
UK sales reached €119m.

Of course, Britain's arms deal behemoth BAE Systems was in on the action, in 
the form of 200 Milan anti-tank missiles – made by MBDA, of which BAE owns a 
third – that were sold in 2007 and delivered in 2009/10. Interestingly, the 
same Milan anti-tank missiles were transferred to the Libyan rebels from Qatar 
in April 2011. EU supplies to Libya also included riot control gear, small 
arms, ammunition, electronic equipment (such as jammers from Germany that it is 
presumed were used by Libya to try and block mobile phones and internet access 
in order to deny rebels access to social networking sites and organisational 
tools), military planes and ammunition.

In total Libya imported military planes worth €278m, just under €100m in small 
guns and €85m in electronic equipment from the EU between 2005 and 2009.

BAE was due to benefit from a US deal to sell fifty armoured personnel 
carriers to Gaddafi. The Pentagon deal, estimated at $77m and approved just 
months before the country imploded, was to have been contracted to BAE and 
Turkey's Nurol. The project was reportedly cancelled in late February 2011. 
Despite this latter action, when a fresh arms embargo was imposed on Libya in 
2011, it was difficult to take it seriously: by then, the horse had already 
bolted and Libya's new stocks of weapons were being used – in the end 
fruitlessly – against the rebel advance. When Nato forces were compelled to 
intervene in Libya, they faced the common arms trade problem of having to 
negate the very arms they had exported to the country.

Joy at the demise of Gaddafi needs to be tempered with pragmatism. The 
significant weapons stockpiles, largely unguarded and unwatched, from which 
arms could easily be pilfered, provide the temptations of war for anyone who 
may see Gaddafi's overthrow as an opportunity to advance their agendas in 
non-democratic ways.

These stockpiles include chemical and biological weapons and heat-seeking 
anti-aircraft missiles that are worth thousands of dollars and can be used 
against civilian airliners. Earlier this month the Washington Post reported 
Egyptian military officials and arms dealers claiming that large caches of 
weapons, including these missiles, are already flooding the country's unstable 
Sinai Peninsula. The nature of the arms trade suggests that they will soon be 
circulating in the intricate webs of the shadow world, available to any 
insurgent force; any "terrorist" group; any madman with a plan.

At the very least, those who supplied weapons to Gaddafi should explain 
themselves to Libya's new rulers who suffered under the dictator's reign of 
terror. And they should commit to their own citizens, who subsidise their 
domestic weapons' industries, to cleaning up and properly regulating this 
business that counts its profits in billions and its costs in lives.
 