
Every time I open a magazine these days it's telling me to get the look of 
some celebrity or other. Is there any celebrity who I must absolutelynot get 
the look of?

Sarah, by email

Well, in a world in which Jools Oliver is held up by a certain type of 
publication as a "mumsy fashion icon", and in which Shane Warne is described in 
tabloid newspapers as a "stylish metrosexual", the question of what doth and 
doth not make a celebrity look which one should get is a relative one, a 
sliding scale, even. Where some people see a rejected 1995 Jane Norman 
advertising campaign, others see "style icon" Kim Kardashian.

It's all subjective, one man's trash is another man's treasure, de gustibus 
non est disputandum, etc and so forth. Except in one instance.

Perhaps you have heard about a certain novel that claims to be a love story 
but is actually another example of a book written by a man in which the woman 
is not a person but a fantasy object and therefore must necessarily be killed 
off when the hero finally lands his idealised quarry. God forbid he should then 
have to deal with such unromantic things as daily conversations, occasional 
irritations, bodily functions and all that icky humanity. Kill her quick before 
she has a period!

I am speaking, of course, of One Day by David Nicholls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jul/04/one-day-david-nicholls-review>. 
This predictably and depressingly successful novel, which was found by every 
sun lounger occupied by a British person this summer has, you may also have 
heard, recently been made into afilm starring a certain young lady who goes by 
the name of Anne Hathaway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/aug/24/one-day-film-review>. There are 
really only two things to say about this and neither of them involve her 
accent, about which it is best to do what Hathaway unfortunately did not: 
remain silent.

First, one can only assume the film's casting supervisor mixed up the phone 
numbers of Anne Hathaway's agent and Rebecca Hall's agent because Nicholls so 
clearly wrote the part for Hall, inspired, perhaps, by the fact she appeared in 
an adaptation of another novel, Starter for Ten, which was, as chance would 
have it, written by one David Nicholls.

The other thing is that this role is unquestionably a plum part. Object to the 
novel as much as you like (and heaven knows I do) but to be cast as the female 
love interest in a film adaptation of a massively popular book – well, it's not 
Vivien Leigh getting Scarlett O'Hara, perhaps, but let's call it potentially 
the watered down version of Renée Zellweger getting Bridget Jones. The fact 
they gave it to Hathaway, who is so ridiculously wrong for the part and thus 
pretty much sinks the film, confirms what I have long suspected: Hathaway is 
the newAndie MacDowell <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Andie_MacDowell>.

MacDowell (who herself was the new Penelope Ann Miller, but that might be 
getting too historical for younger readers), is a woman who cannot act, cannot 
apparently focus her eyes on the correct person and has never been able to vary 
her voice beyond a monotone. And yet she starred in two of the most successful 
comedies of the 90s, Groundhog Day and Four Weddings and a Funeral.

Who was her agent? And is that agent now working for Hathaway? It would 
explain much as she, too, cannot act, cannot focus and, judging from my very 
scientific straw poll, causes nowt but irritation to the masses.

So in short, Sarah, do not get the look of Hathaway. It will only prolong her 
career. Anyway, any woman who thinks "wearing glasses" is synonymous with 
"looking dowdy" clearly has no sense of style.

Many of the autumn/winter trends this season require a svelte build. Can you 
recommend a diet that will help me achieve this body shape for life?

Sonya, by email

Have you considered being starved by the Nazis? Honestly, it's even better 
than the GI diet! According to a fascinating article that was published in the 
Daily Mail's consistently hilarious "Health" section, Audrey Hepburn's "slight 
figure" did not come from a "celeb-style fad diet" (of the kind usually 
promoted by the Daily Mail) but from "suffering starvation as a teenager in the 
Nazi-occupied Netherlands" 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-2031505/Audrey-Hepburn-Is-key-stopping-obesity-epidemic.html>
.

Leaving aside the small quibble that my relatives suffered similar Nazi-based 
deprivations and, well, let's just say no one ever described great-aunt Sonia 
in her later years as "slight", this is marvellous news. Easy peasy, Mail 
readers! No more faffing about with Goji berries and flax seeds – just get 
yourself some Nazis. Does Ocado deliver them or must one go to Whole Foods?

Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 
90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Emailask.hadley@theguardian.com <>

• This article was amended on 5 September 2011 because the original 
incorrectly named a David Nicholls book as Fifteen to One.
 