
In a country rife with corruption, criminality and abuse – and where saying 
the wrong thing in earshot of the wrong people can get you killed – Mexican 
journalists can have a hard time obtaining the kind of solid information 
required to sort out rumour from reality.


Now an alliance of eight Mexican media outlets and civil society groups is 
courting potential whistleblowers with a new digital platform that promises to 
protect the anonymity of sources with the help of sophisticated encryption 
software.

Mexicoleaks <https://mexicoleaks.mx/> describes its mission as the 
construction of a “Transparent Mexico”, and participants say they hope it will 
help them document political corruption, human rights abuses and other misuses 
of institutional and economic power.

“It is a tool we hope will facilitate independent journalism that is critical 
of institutional and de facto powers,” said Homero Campa of the leading 
investigative weekly magazineProceso <http://www.proceso.com.mx/>. “Lots of 
sources are frightened of reprisals.”

Campa said that within a day of the website’s launch on 10 March, his magazine 
had received 10 tips, which were waiting to be evaluated with the help of a 
code of ethics designed to ensure only information that is in the public 
interest is used, and any investigations triggered are carried out with 
particular rigour.

But the launch of Mexicoleaks has already highlighted the daily challenges 
facing even the country’s most high-profile journalists. Leading radio 
presenter Carmen Aristegui, whose reporting team has helped expose a string of 
alleged abuses of power, was fired from her morning news show on Sunday after 
executives from the MVS radio station objected to her team’s participation in 
the Mexicoleaks alliance without its authorisation.

The project began as an initiative of the Amsterdam-based group Free Press 
Unlimited. It relies on software provided by a group called Global Leaks that 
is partially based on Tor encryption technology, and promises that uploaded 
information cannot be traced back to its source, even by participants in the 
alliance.

Albana Shala, of Free Press Unlimited, says the Mexican members of the project 
have received training in how to avoid inadvertent revelations that could lead 
to the identification of contributors, once they have the information in their 
possession. The project also urges sources not to make themselves vulnerable 
by, for example, using a computer that can be traced to them in any 
investigation launched to identify where leaks originated, or making an 
indiscreet comment to a colleague or friend.

“The system might be foolproof, but people are not,” Shala said. “What is at 
risk is the life and trust of the whistleblower.”

It is not only sources who are potentially at risk: the Committee to Protect 
Journalists has documented the murder of at least 25 journalists and the 
disappearance of 13 since 2000. The death toll is closer to 100 if laxer 
criteria are used that do not require confirmation that the journalists were 
targeted because of their work.

Lucía Vergara, of the press freedom group Article 19, said that the number of 
murders has reduced in recent years. But, she added, other kinds of attacks 
such as threats and harassment have grown dramatically to reach a total of 326 
in 2014.

Twitter feeds and blogs tell hidden story of Mexico's drug wars
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/sep/26/twitter-blog-mexico-drug-wars> 
“This means the zones of silence are growing,” said Vergara, referring to the 
areas of the country where local media regularly self-censor. “It means people 
are increasingly turning to anonymous posts on websites.”

But even these are not always secure.

In late 2011, the Anonymous hacker collective posted a YouTube video 
threatening to release hacked information about taxi drivers, police officers 
and journalists working for the Zetas cartel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/oct/31/anonymous-hackers-mexican-drug-cartel>
, unless a kidnapped hacker was released. Within days, Anonymous called off the 
project – dubbed #OpCartel – out of concerns that it could result in the murder 
of any participants.

The aborted operation came shortly after the dismembered body of journalist 
Elizabeth Macías was dumped in the state of Tamaulipas, where local media long 
ago stopped publishing even basic information about shootouts for fear of 
reprisals.

A message left with her body said she had been killed for social media posts 
she had made under an assumed name. The newspaper where she worked as an editor 
did not report her death.

Three years laters, in the same state, gunmen kidnapped Rosario Fuentes, a 
doctor and citizen journalist who contributed to a local blog warning of cartel 
activity. Hours later,photographs of what appeared to Fuentes’s dead body were 
posted on her own Twitter account 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2014/10/21/she-tweeted-against-the-mexican-cartels-they-tweeted-her-murder.html>
.

Though Mexico’s many brutal drug gangs are regularly blamed for the terror 
that muzzles traditional and citizen journalism in many parts ofMexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico>, Article 19 says that organised 
crime has only been directly involved in around 10% of all the attacks on 
journalists. Public officials, meanwhile, account for about 40%.


The national organisations involved in Mexicoleaks are less vulnerable to 
physical attacks than journalists in the provinces, but they can still come 
under intense pressure apparently designed to curb criticism of entrenched 
interests.

That kind of pressure was illustrated last Thursday, two days after the 
Mexicoleaks launch, when MVS Radio fired two reporters from the popular morning 
news show presented by Aristegui. The station said the inclusion of MVS’s name 
within Mexicoleaks without express authorisation was “an affront and an 
offence”.

Arestegui has won large audiences thanks to her dogged interview style, 
critical monologues and a string of high-profile investigations, including the 
revelation that a favoured government contractor had paid for a 
multimillion-dollar modernist white mansion that wasbuilt to measure for the 
family of President Enrique Peña Nieto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/10/mexico-president-enrique-pena-nieto-mansion-explain>
.

The “white house scandal” remains unresolved, feeding a deep credibility 
crisis neither the president nor the government appear willing to seriously 
address.


The use of an apparently minor violation of trademark protocol to launch an 
attack on Aristegui’s team prompted a protest outside the station’s offices 
denouncing censorship on Thursday night. It also triggered an online petition 
that obtained over 100,000 signatures by the time Aristegui described the 
situation as “a battle for our freedom” during her show on Friday.

MVS responded by firing Aristegui herself on Sunday, in a move described by 
the station’s ombudsman as “a sad night for journalism”. By Monday morning, the 
hashtag #IndefenceofAristegui was within the top worldwide trending topics.
 