
As the market makes a tentative recovery after two days of heavy losses, 
leisure groupWhitbread is leading the way with a near 8% gain.

The owner of Premier Inn, Beefeater and Costa Coffee said in a trading update 
that like for like sales in the second quarter rose 4.8%, despite the current 
uncertain consumer climate. Proving Britons can't get enough coffee - to help 
perk them up in dismal times? - Costa was the star performer with sales up 
9.7%. Premier Inn sales rose 7%, helping offset a 1.6% dip in the restaurant 
division. Chief executive Andy Harrison said restaurant customers were 
particularly price sensitive at the moment and added:
 On a month by month basis, trading continues to be variable with the second 
quarter benefiting from a strong June, whilst the first quarter was held back 
by a poor April. This variability is not surprising in the continuing uncertain 
economic environment.

The company has also raised £156.4m in a debt private placement. The news has 
helped liftWhitbread <https://www.theguardian.com/business/whitbread> 114p to 
£15.71. Nigel Parson at Evolution Securities said:
 The UK consumer outlook may be stuttering but there is no evidence of the 
malaise affecting Whitbread, which released an excellent trading statement this 
morning. Whitbread's strong value propositions make it compelling for consumers 
and its modest valuation makes it attractive for investors. 
Despite a drop in Asian markets overnight on worries about a global recession 
and the continuing chaotic financial situation in Europe, investors have dipped 
their toes back in the market in search of bargains. TheFTSE 100 is currently 
57.27 points higher at 5159.85, with banks recovering a little after 
yesterday's wipeout.

Ahead of the Independent Commission on Banking's report on Monday, and 
following last week's news of US subprime related litigations,Royal Bank of 
Scotland has risen 0.59p to 22.37p, Lloyds Banking Group is up 0.965p to 
31.615p andBarclays is 2.25p better at 156.4p.

Simon Denham at Capital Spreads said:
 The FTSE has opened much higher than we expected and I have to admit myself 
that I though a call of 60 points lower in the early hours of the morning, just 
on the back of the moves in Asian markets seemed a little farfetched. The index 
has shrugged off the negative mood in Asia and started a little perkier this 
morning up some 20 points and this little bounce could conceivably carry on 
especially when US investors return to their desks from their extended week end 
to see that Europe has driven their Dow futures down over 200 points and the S 
& P over 25 points. Sometimes US traders get back to their desks in such a 
situation and go "hey, why the market so much lower" and give us a bit of an 
uplift.

Gold is on a bit of a rollercoaster, moving sharply higher then losing ground 
after news the Swiss National Bank said it would intervene to dampen down the 
rise of the Swiss franc.

Elsewhere Ashtead has added 17p to 129p after the industrial equipment hire 
group said full year figures would be ahead of expectations, whileBetfair has 
also benefited from a trading update, climbing 22p to 650p.

But retailers are suffering after the latest gloomy British Retail Consortium 
survey 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2011/sep/06/high-street-closures-retail-sales>
.Marks & Spencer is down 1.7p at 300.7p, while Halfords has fallen 6.6p to 
285.5p andCarpetright is 7p lower at 525p.
 