
In classic Thatcherite fashion, the coalition government has decided that what 
Whitehall really needs is a bunch of business chiefs to drip ruthless corporate 
wisdom through the ranks of the civil service. Who could possibly be better to 
supervise swingeing cutbacks in the public sector than battle-hardened 
industrial and commercial titans?

The cabinet office minister, Francis Maude, last week produced an impressive 
line-up of business figures who have agreed to become non-executive directors 
of government departments. Among those answering the call to serve Queen and 
country are GlaxoSmithKline's boss Andrew Witty, the Rio Tinto chief Jim Leng, 
former Tate & Lyle head Iain Ferguson, Centrica's Sam Laidlaw and Sara Weller 
of Argos.

This is a pretty straightforward ideological initiative: it's down to a belief 
that all things private are superior to the public sector. The government wants 
to recreate the structure of corporate boardrooms in Whitehall.

The exact role of the new non-executives (or Neds, as they are widely known) 
is unclear. They will advise and support government ministers for a stipend of 
£15,000 annually, and if they think that a top civil servant isn't up to the 
job, they can recommend dismissal. But they'll only pop in for the occasional 
board meeting and certainly won't be giving up their day jobs.

It's a bit counterintuitive to add to the ranks of civil service leadership at 
a time when the rank and file is facing 400,000 job losses. And it's deeply 
debatable whether a Whitehall recreation of the clubbable atmosphere of 
Britain's boardrooms is really a positive.

Non-execs have a mixed reputation in the City. They're supposed to be an 
independent safeguard against executive excess, but at their worst they're 
disengaged members of the great and the good who pick up a fee to supplement 
their pensions, but lack the expertise or patience to dig deeply into the 
books. The late Tiny Rowland once dismissed part-time directors as Christmas 
tree baubles. And the supermarket boss Sir Ken Morrison quipped that for the 
price of a Ned, he could hire two checkout girls – who would provide much 
better value.

Peter Hahn, a corporate governance expert at Cass business school, points out 
that over the past two decades, as non-executives have taken a pre-eminent 
role, they have singularly failed to prevent an explosion in executive pay. And 
there are plenty of examples of failure. Where were the non-execs when RBS and 
Lloyds went on their binges of reckless lending?

Particularly puzzling is the criteria for selecting these government 
directors. The cabinet office says it advertised the roles and headhunters 
helped identify candidates. But the search was spearheaded by the former BP 
chief executive Lord Browne, who has been thumbing through FTSE 100 index in 
search of credible characters. The coalition's fixation with Browne is 
remarkable. Let's remember that the former oil boss, who drew up government 
policy on tuition fees, has a spotty ethical record – he was slammed by US 
authorities for presiding over a lax safety culture at BP and subsequently lost 
his job for lying to a court about his private life.

The FDA union, which represents senior civil servants, says that, in 
principle, it welcomes a degree of business expertise at the big spending 
ministries. But there's concern that Maude may be too keen on big-name 
signings. Witty, for example, is widely considered to have done a good job at 
Glaxo, where he presides over a drugs company of 99,000 people in 100 
countries, generating turnover of £28bn. No doubt he'll turn up for quarterly 
board meetings at Vince Cable's department of business.

But is he really going to have time to scrutinise whether the permanent 
secretary's latest cost-cutting wheeze is extracting all the fat that it ought 
to be? Or is he just an impressive name to add to the government's monogrammed 
letterhead?
 