
One sports a magnificent glossy mullet that wouldn’t look out of place on a 
golden retriever, while the other is as bald as a coot. Other than that,JD 
Wetherspoon <https://www.theguardian.com/business/jdwetherspoon> 
founder-chairman Tim Martin and comedy character Al Murray the Pub Landlord are 
two peas in a pod.

Both of them rail against the iniquities of the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/02/wetherspoon-boss-eu-leaders-brexit-talks-tim-martin>
, both could pull the perfect pint with their eyes shut, and neither is shy 
about expressing their opinion. So, time to sort the wheat from the hops. Who 
said the following, Farage-baiter extraordinaire Al Murray, or the biggest 
landlord in Britain, Tim Martin?
Who said: “One of the greatest things about having a drink that is all too 
often overlooked is the sweet solace and calm it can offer the drinker.”  Al 
Murray  Tim Martin Asked what his most extravagant possession is, who replied: 
“My wife, and even she’s a bit mean.”  Al Murray  Tim Martin Whose 
philosophical musings include: “You’re only as good as your next pint.”  Al 
Murray  Tim Martin Who displayed their talent for diplomacy by saying: “Germany 
has been too quiet for too long. Just saying.”  Al Murray  Tim Martin Who 
reassured an anxious British public: “Crisps will remain at the current price.” 
 AL Murray  Tim Martin Whose quip?: “I’m with Warren Buffett, when he said he 
wants to retire five years after his death.”  Al Murray  Tim Martin Whose mind 
produced this wisdom?: “If you try and judge fluctuations in prices day-to-day 
all that will happen is you’ll go completely mad and need a heavy dose of 
valium.”  Al Murray  Tim Martin Who thundered: “The euro is going to fuck up 
the country and I really do mean that.”  Al Murray  Tim Martin Which ale 
enthusiast said: “I’m not an alcoholic, I am a freedom fighter against the 
teetotal taliban.”  Al Murray  Tim Martin Two extremes of haircut here, but who 
said: “I’ve got a French hairstyle.”  Al Murray  Tim Martin Whose pre-Brexit 
economic analysis is this: “If a currency represents a state or institution’s 
worth, the pound proves the UK is worth more than the whole of Europe put 
together.”  Al Murray  Tim Martin Who described their civic responsibility 
thus: “When it comes to something as monumental as the issue of remaining or 
leaving the EU, I have to step out from behind the pumps [...]”  Al Murray  Tim 
Martin Who said of Strictly Come Dancing star (and former Chancellor) Ed Balls: 
“You wouldn’t trust him with any numbers, not even changing the sell-by dates 
on the peanuts.”  Al Murray  Tim Martin Who is the pugnacious publican who 
said: “I’m ashamed to say I hit him. He went flat on the floor, poleaxed.”  Al 
Murray  Tim Martin And who said this about Brexit: “We were told it would be 
Armageddon from the OECD, from the IMF, David Cameron, the chancellor and 
President Obama who were predicting locusts in the fields and tidal waves in 
the North Sea.”  Al Murray  Tim Martin  You got…  Challenge your friends Submit 
answers 


 