
Janet Suzman claims that theatre is a white invention and only in the DNA of 
white people (Report, 9 December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/dec/08/actor-janet-suzman-criticised-calling-theatre-white-invention>
). The Tricycle Theatre is my local theatre in the middle of a multicultural 
area. When there is an Irish play the theatre is full of Irish people, when 
there is a black play with black actors (such as the recent The House That Will 
Not Stand) it is full of black people, and so on. I also go to the National 
Theatre, where there is a nearly exclusively white (and middle-aged) audience. 
But put on a play such as Elmina’s Kitchen by Kwame Kwei-Armah and suddenly 
there are lots of black people in the audience. When the subject matter is 
relevant, and when there are black or other minority ethnic actors and 
directors involved, you find audiences of all backgrounds.
Sean Baine
London

• Working in Leicester schools with Indian (Hindu, Muslim, Sikh) students, the 
immediacy of theatre presented few problems. Audience was a different matter. 
Taking productions into local theatre attracted few parents. Years ago the 
(then) HaymarketTheatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> employed 
the poet Mahendra Solanki to encourage bookings from our new and growing Indian 
population with scant result. A beautiful new theatre was incorporated in the 
Peepul Centre located in the “Cultural Quarter”. Despite that, even Tara Arts 
and specially adapted productions attracted few local residents.

And so it appears to continue at the recently built Curve. Janet Suzman’s 
analysis of why theatre fails to attract a wider audience may be challenging 
but in my experience she certainly speaks from fact.
Peter Worrall
Leicester

• As a white, middle-aged man, I have always regarded drama as an invaluable 
means of increasing my appreciation of our diverse society. But if ethnic 
minority communities don’t relate strongly to theatre as an art form, let’s 
just admit it and get over it. There are many other ways in which people can 
express themselves and try to understand each other better. And what’s the 
point of the Arts Council threatening sanctions against theatre groups who 
don’t do sufficiently “diverse” work if it’s not very likely to put bums on 
seats? Running a theatre is tough enough already.
Alan Clark
London

• I recently went to see Rudy’s Rare Records at the Birmingham Rep and felt 
like I was the only white person in the audience.
Roger Halford
Solihull

• The salient point is not whether black people go to the theatre – but that 
all British citizens are taxed so that the government and councils can pour 
subsidies into theatres for a liberal elite to put on plays that no one 
(regardless of ethnicity) wants to go and see.
Paul Brazier
London

• As a teacher I regularly used to take my sixth formers – most of whom were 
Asian – to the London theatre, opera and ballet. As well as encouraging them to 
love the arts, I was also trying to dispel the myth that such places were not 
for the likes of them. But I couldn’t help noticing that even in productions 
likeAthol Fugard <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/athol-fugard>, John Kani 
and Winston Ntshona’s The Island – a South African play about Robben Island 
with black actors – and a production of Twelfth Night set in India with Indian 
actors, the audience was still overwhelmingly white and middle class.

By all means let’s commission more Asian, Chinese and African-Caribbean 
theatre, but getting a more diverse audience to see it is another story.
Stan Labovitch
Windsor

• Janet Suzman <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/janet-suzman> makes the 
elementary mistake of assuming that whatever she doesn’t happen to know about 
doesn’t exist . She asserts that all theatre comes from the ancient Greeks. 
Many sophisticated plays were written in Sanskrit in India from about 200BC to 
500AD, and are available in English translation. Many more are thought to have 
been lost.
John Wilson
London

• I am no expert on the origins of theatre, but if it is not free to examine 
critically our beliefs, customs, ideas and institutions, it is neutered. So my 
response toMeera Syal <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/meera-syal> is to 
wonder whether some of the Asian ethnic and religious minorities are willing to 
accept this critical freedom. I am reminded of Behzti, the play which depicted 
a rape in a Sikh temple at the Birmingham Rep in 2004. Violent demonstrations 
forced it to close and the playwright fled into hiding.

Similarly, I doubt whether seriously critical drama involving Islam can be 
tolerated. As long as artistic freedom is compromised, it is not theatre that 
has a case to answer but those who are unable to entertain ideas that conflict 
with their beliefs.
Colin McCulloch
Reading
 