
When something bad happens, it takes me a few days to recover. And always at 
the back of my mind is the knowledge that there are certain things that I will 
never recover from.

I will never recover if I lose contact with either of my daughters and I will 
never recover if something terrible happens to either of them. And that is most 
likely with my younger daughter.

I knew things were going wrong when Georgia reappeared in her life and on her 
Facebook timeline. Whenever Kelly goes through a bad patch, and feels she 
cannot cope, or feels inadequate, Georgia pops up – and the course of action 
she advocates for Kelly is entirely detrimental.

The weekend before last, Kelly stayed at the house of a girl called Beth. This 
I can cope with. Just. Beth is a known troublemaker but seems to have reformed 
– or at least I am holding on to the hope that she has reformed.

The weekend goes OK, but Kelly catches a bad cold. There are jokes about who 
gave the cold to who on Facebook. All normal teenage girl stuff.

But as the week progresses things deteriorate. There are reports of Kelly 
wandering round town with £600. On Wednesday, when she should be at the 
much-hated functional skills lesson (basically maths and English classes) at 
college, she lies to me and does not go.

The rumours of the £600 are, Kelly assures me, a mistake. Her sister Jess, 
from whom the reports emanated, was given this information by Georgia. Georgia 
later tells me that her friend, referred to as "Pieface", told her that Kelly 
had £600 and she thought she meant my Kelly, but it was another Kelly. I feel a 
familiar sense of dread.

And Kelly has turned up with new clothes. A white pair of Nike trainers. The 
last time Georgia appeared in our lives, she stole from us. Among the things 
she pilfered were a pair of white trainers belonging to Kelly. Kelly says 
Georgia has simply returned them. Why am I not convinced? And why am I not 
convinced that the new jeans and top and hairdo and nails and tattoo are all 
gifts. I brace myself for a visit from the police.

I am normally very good at hiding my wallet from Kelly, and my husband is 
getting better at hiding his. We have given Jess a key and her room is 
permanently locked.

So I was shocked to discover that Kelly had stolen my bank card, obtained my 
pin and taken out £110.

But she did not take this money out until the Friday. How did she get the pin? 
Was she paying someone back? Is the matter now over?

I challenge Kelly and her behaviour reverts back to the sort of debilitating 
anger of a couple of years ago. She quickly becomes unstable. And I mean 
unstable.

I know if I go to the police, one of two things will happen. She faces a 
custodial sentence and most likely will not come out, or not come out in a 
functional state. Or she will be fined. And as she has no money that will mean 
me paying it off.

She used to have some savings – but we took them all to pay previous court 
fines. Just one of the many lessons in consequences that are singularly 
pointless if a disturbed child is not being supported in a more positive way to 
deal with their trauma.

And support is not something our local authority does, not unless it's the 
youth offending team with the most wonderful people trying to turn around lives 
with insufficient resources.

My husband has a plan for dealing with the latest issue. As ever, it involves 
sanctions and boundaries that will impact on Kelly but not damage her. She is 
furious but knuckling under. We are exhausted.
 