
"Want to go for a spin?" the poet and maestro of Italian cinema asked the rent 
boy, according to the latter's confession to the police. "Come ride with me, 
and I'll give you a present."

So began the events leading to the murder of Pier Paolo Pasolini 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/pier-paolo-pasolini>, brilliant intellectual, 
director and homosexual whose political vision – based on a singular 
entwinement of Eros, Catholicism and Marxism – foresaw Italian history after 
his death, and the burgeoning of global consumerism. It was a murder that, four 
decades later, remains shrouded in the kind of mystery and opacity Italy 
specialises in –un giallo, a black thriller.

The encounter occurred in the miasma of hustling around Roma Termini railway 
station at 10.30pm on 1 November 1975. And it marks the point of departure for 
a film tipped to win the Golden Lion at theVenice biennale 
<http://www.labiennale.org/en/Home.html> festival this week – Pasolini, 
starring Willem Dafoe and directed by Abel Ferrara, Bronx-born of Italian 
descent. The film deals with the last day of an extraordinary life. Ferrara 
says: "I know who killed Pasolini," but will not give a name. But in an 
interview withIl Fatto Quotidiano, he adds: "Pasolini is my font of 
inspiration."

At 1.30am, three hours after the station rendezvous, a Carabinieri squad car 
stopped a speeding Alfa Romeo near the scrappy coastal promenade of Idroscalo 
at Ostia, near Rome. The driver, Giuseppe (Pino) Pelosi, 17, sought to run, and 
was arrested for theft of the car, identified as belonging to Pasolini. Two 
hours later, the director's body was discovered – beaten, bloodied and run over 
by the car, beside a football pitch. Splinters of bloodied wood lay around.

Pelosi confessed: he and Pasolini had set off, and he had eaten a meal at a 
restaurant the director knew, the Biondo Tevere near St Paul's basilica, where 
he was known. Pino ate spaghetti with oil and garlic, Pasolini drank a beer. At 
11.30pm they drove towards Ostia, where Pasolini "asked something I did not 
want" – to sodomise the boy with a wooden stick. Pelosi refused, Pasolini 
struck; Pelosi ran, picked up two pieces of a table, seized the stick and 
battered Pasolini to death. As he escaped in the car, he ran over what he 
thought was a bump in the road. "I killed Pasolini," he told his cellmate, and 
the police.

Pelosi was convicted in 1976, with "unknown others". Forensic examination by 
Dr Faustino Durante concluded that "Pasolini was the victim of an attack 
carried out by more than one person".

On appeal, however, the "others" were written out of the verdict. Pelosi had 
acted alone and the master was dead in a squalid tryst gone wrong and best 
forgotten, perhaps even deserved. But fascination with Pasolini and his films 
(inItaly <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy>, his writing too) increased 
– as did that with mysteries that still hang over his last hours.

The renown of his work is manifestly on merit: New York's Moma mounted a 
retrospective <http://www.moma.org/visit/calendar/films/1338> in 2012, the BFI 
in 2013 
<http://londonist.com/2013/02/preview-pier-paolo-pasolini-season-at-bfi-southbank.php>
. In April this year the Vatican, which had once pursued Pasolini and helped 
secure a criminal conviction for blasphemy, declared his masterpiece,The Gospel 
According to St Matthew, "the best film ever made about Jesus Christ". This 
expression of Pasolini's radical faith portrays Jesus as a revolutionary "red 
Messiah", according to the Franciscan doctrine of holy poverty, which in part 
influences the current pontiff, Francis.

But the compulsion of his death is less explicable: in 2010 the former mayor 
of Rome and leader of the centre-left Democratic party, Walter Veltroni, 
demanded that the case be reopened on the basis of a convergence of strange, 
and politically charged, circumstances.

Pasolini was killed the day after his return from Stockholm, where he had met 
Ingmar Bergman and others in the Swedish cinematic avant-garde, and given an 
explosive interview toL'Espresso magazine. In it, he addressed his favourite 
theme: "I consider consumerism to be a worse form of fascism than the classic 
variety."

Pasolini's view of a new totalitarianism whereby hyper-materialism was 
destroying the culture of Italy can be seen now as brilliant foresight into 
what has happened to the world generally in an internet age. But his critique 
had been, for months before the murder, more specific. He had singled out 
television as an especially pernicious influence, predicting the rise and power 
of a type such as media-mogul-turned-prime minister Silvio Berlusconi long 
before time. More specific still, he had written a series of columns for
Corriere della Sera denouncing the leadership of the ruling Christian 
Democratic party as riddled with Mafia influence, predicting the so-called
Tangentopoli – "kickback city" – scandals 15 years later, whereby an entire 
political class was put under arrest during the early 1990s. In his columns, 
Pasolini declared that the Christian Democratic leadership should stand trial, 
not only for corruption but association with neo-fascist terrorism, such as the 
bombing of trains and a demonstration in Milan.

Again, a spine-chilling vindication: these were the so-called "years of lead" 
in Italy, culminating in the bombing of Bologna station five years after 
Pasolini's death by neo-fascists working with the secret services, killing 82 
people.

I was a student in turbulent Florence in 1973, returning every year thereafter 
and affiliated to a radical organisation called Lotta Continua (Struggle 
Continues); and I well remember Lotta Continua's newspaper taking contributions 
from Pasolini, though his relationship to the radical movements spawned by 1968 
was ambiguous. He had identified with police officers against student rioters 
because, he said, they were "sons of the poor" attacked by bourgeois "daddy's 
boys".

So it was that, in the wake of the murder in 1975, those close to Pasolini saw 
the hand of power behind his killing. It would not have been a first: prominent 
leftists were often attacked or killed; feminist Franca Rame, who would marry 
the anarchist playwright Dario Fo, was gang-raped by neo-fascists, urged by the 
Carabinieri.

Members of Pasolini's family and circle of friends, and the writers Oriana 
Fallaci and Enzo Siciliano raised possible political motives for the killing 
and produced evidence that contradicted Pelosi's confession, such as a green 
sweater found in the car that belonged neither to Pasolini nor Pelosi, and 
Pasolini's bloody handprint on its roof (there were barely any bloodstains on 
Pelosi). Motorcycle riders and another car had been seen following the Alfa 
Romeo.

In January 2001 an article appeared in La Stampa that turned conspiracy theory 
into a hard lead. It concerned the death in 1962, in a plane crash, of Enrico 
Mattei, head of the ENI energy giant, made into a famous film by Francesco 
Rosi, with whom Pasolini had worked.

The article's author, Filippo Ceccarelli – one of Italy's expert political 
journalists – cited inquiries by a judge, Vincenzo Calia, into political 
intrigue within ENI, which found the plane had been shot down. Judge Calia 
implicated the man who succeeded Mattei, Eugenio Cefis, in cahoots with 
political leaders. The report cited a journalist who had worked onThe Mattei 
Affair film with Rosi, Mauro di Mauro, who was kidnapped and disappeared 
without trace.

Long before Calia's investigation, published in 2003, Pasolini had worked on 
the posthumously released bookPetrolio, featuring barely disguised versions of 
Mattei and Cefis, and revealing knowledge of how the ENI scandal and murder 
went to the heart of power and the P2 Masonic lodge, of which Cefis was a 
founder member. "With 25 years' foresight," wrote Ceccarelli, "Pasolini the 
writer had been aware of the outcome of a long investigation."

Then, in 2005, the floodgates opened. Pelosi, interviewed on television, 
retracted his confession, saying that two brothers and another man had killed 
Pasolini, calling him a "queer" and "dirty communist" as they beat him to 
death. They frequented, he said, the Tiburtina branch of the MSI neo-fascist 
party. Three years later, Pelosi gave further names in an essay called "Deep 
Black", released by the radical publisher Chiarelettere, revealing connections 
to even more extreme fascist cells tied to the state secret services, saying he 
had not previously dared to speak, after threats to his family.

One of Pasolini's closest friends, assistant director Sergio Citti, then came 
to the fore to say that his own investigations had produced evidence entirely 
overlooked: bloodied pieces of the stick dumped close to the football pitch, 
and a witness ignored by the official investigation who had seen five men drag 
Pasolini from the car.

Citti introduced a new theme: the theft of spools from Pasolini's last film, 
Salò, the return of which he had tried to negotiate. The gang of thieves 
frequented, it emerged, the same billiard bar as Pelosi, and had called 
Pasolini on the last day of his life to organise a meeting. Another 
investigation by the writer Fulvio Abbate tied the killers to the famous 
Magliana criminal gang on the coastal outskirts of Rome.

Yet the case remains closed, and there are those within Pasolini's circle as 
well as in the political class who prefer it so. Author Edoardo Sanguineti 
calls the death "delegated suicide" by a sado-masochist bent on his own 
destruction. Pasolini's cousin Nico Naldini – also a homosexual poet – wrote in 
the ambiguously entitledBrief Life of Pasolini about the director's 
"fetishistic rituals" and "attraction for boys who made him lose his sense of 
danger".

Pasolini had died, so history insists, as though in a scene from one of his 
films. "It is only at the point of death," Pasolini had said in 1967, "that our 
life, to that point ambiguous, undecipherable, suspended – acquires a meaning."
 