
In the pre-internet age, the Glastonbury festival was famously a hive of 
bizarre rumours about what was going on in the outside world. For a period in 
the early 90s, a story seemed to be passed around every year that Cliff Richard 
had died, while in 1995, the news that John Redwood was launching a leadership 
challenge to then-prime minister John Major somehow got mangled into a report 
that the entire Tory government had resigned en masse.

The rise of the web and the smartphone was supposed to have done for that kind 
of thing, but this year the spirit of the unlikely Glastonbury rumour seems to 
be abroad once again, although this time the stories are concerned not with the 
sad demise of the tennis-loving Peter Pan of Pop, but with a plethora of secret 
guest appearances. Lady Gaga is supposed to be turning up. Almost nowhere in 
the festival is safe from an imminent guerilla gig by Daft Punk. And David 
Bowie, we are earnestly informed, is going to appear on stage with the Rolling 
Stones, giving rise to the flatly horrifying thought that he and Mick Jagger 
might favour us with their cover version of Dancing in the Street.

None of them are true: in reality, the secret guest appearance comes from Liam 
Gallagher'sBeady Eye, who take to the Pyramid stage at an improbably early hour 
on Friday. "Tonight I'm a rock'n'roll star," says Gallagher, "at 11.30 in the 
fucking morning."

Still, even without them, there's enough variety on offer. If you find Alt-J's 
performance on the Other stage a little bookish and opaque for a festival crowd 
– they perform an unrecognisable cover of Kylie Minogue's Slow, decorated with 
the keyboard riff from Dr Dre's Still Dre – then the Pyramid stage appearance by
Dizzee Rascal provides a striking counterpoint: certainly no one in their right 
mind is going to protest at the opacity of his approach to live performance. 
"This one's dedicated to all the ladies with fat arses!" he bellows, by way of 
introduction to a new song, apparently called Arse Like That. When he plays his 
debut single, I Luv You, it's hard not to be struck by the contrast between his 
early material – which still sounds challenging and avant-garde a decade on – 
and the Day-Glo Club 18-30 pop-house that he now deals in and to conclude that 
something has been lost along the way. But it's equally hard not be perversely 
charmed by his crowd-pleasing shamelessness.

Friday night's headliners offer an equally arresting study in contrasts. 
Complete with an improbable but nonetheless lovely orchestrated version of 
Mardy Bum, theArctic Monkeys' performance eradicates memories of their previous 
attempt at topping the Glastonbury bill in 2007, which fell surprisingly flat, 
not least because their insouciance looked troublingly like indifference. Those 
who opt to seePortishead, meanwhile, come back looking slightly shell-shocked 
by the harrowing intensity of Beth Gibbons's performance and the fact that the 
accompanying visuals climax in a giant image of David Cameron's face with red 
lasers shooting out of his eyes.
 Nile Rodgers of Chic adds to the party atmosphere. Photograph: Jim 
Dyson/Getty Images Europe 
Noticeably more conducive to a party atmosphere are Chic, whose irresistible 
set is almost comically stuffed with hits: hits by Chic; hits that Chic's 
mastermind,Nile Rodgers <https://www.theguardian.com/music/nile-rodgers>, wrote 
for Sister Sledge, David Bowie, Madonna and INXS; and cover versions of hits 
that sampled Chic, including the Sugarhill Gang's Rapper's Delight. All this is 
rapturously received: even Rodgers seems slightly taken aback. He invites the 
audience on stage to dance during the closing Good Times. When their set ends, 
the PA plays Daft Punk's Get Lucky: Rodgers stands alone, watching the crowd 
sing it back to him. The famously loquacious songwriter looks momentarily 
dumbstruck.

Indeed, one of Glastonbury's unique pleasures is seeing artists authentically 
moved by the audience's reaction: for some reason, perhaps one of scale, it 
seems to have an impact above and beyond a normal gig. The bass player fromHaim 
calls their Friday-afternoon performance "the greatest moment of my life" and 
demands someone come on stage and take a photograph of her with the cheering 
audience behind her.Jagwar Ma, whose sparkling take on early 90s Balearic pop 
unexpectedly packs out the John Peel Stage at Saturday lunchtime, announce 
"this means everything".Disclosure, whose set not only fills the Sonic tent, 
but brings the entire area around it to a complete standstill, look close to 
tears.Foals frontman Yannis Philippakis is so moved by the reception that he 
flings himself into the audience at the front of the Other stage, while playing 
a guitar solo: as the crowd struggle to keep him aloft, the screens at the side 
of the stage show him wearing the unmistakable expression of a man rapidly 
reconsidering the wisdom of his actions.

On Saturday, Laura Mvula's set fits perfectly with the weather, which has 
turned scorching: listening to the complex vocal harmonies and weird string 
arrangements of Is There Anybody Out There? wafting around the supine and 
increasingly sunburnt crowd, you are struck again by how charmingly odd her 
music is. Equally peculiar isAzealia Banks's choice of stage wear, which is 
both fluorescent green and covered in what appear to be inflatable spikes: it 
looks like something sported by a reveller staggering, bug-eyed, around the 
Stone Circle in the small hours. It has to be said that Banks is not an artist 
overburdened with charm, as anyone who follows her constant bickering with 
other artists on Twitter might have guessed, but her music makes up for it. 
Hip-hop's ongoing obsession with four-to-the-floor house beats and 
rave-inspired synthesisers is wearing a little thin, but somehow Banks's take 
on it works. It sounds more propulsive and less generic – one track samples 
Underworld's Born Slippy, another is audibly influenced by the New York vogue 
scene, complete with a sample of a gay man reflecting on the relative 
fierceness of the queens he knows – than a lot of her peers. Her biggest hit, 
212, brings with it the bracing sound of a vast field of people screaming along 
to a hearty endorsement of cunnilingus.
 Azealia Banks opts for practical stagewear. Photograph: Dave J Hogan/Getty 
Images Europe 
Still, it's not the most unfeasible lyric you can hear on Saturday afternoon. 
Anyone chancing upon the Leftfield stage – famed for its mix of music, 
political debate and talks from Tony Benn – might be surprised to see its 
curatorBilly Bragg duetting with comedian Phill Jupitus on a version of his hit 
Sexuality, with the titular lyric changed to "bestiality". It segues into a 
similarly themed version of the Smiths' Heaven Knows I'm Miserable Now: "I was 
looking for a dog," offers Jupitus, "and then I found a dog."

Presumably unaware that, elsewhere at Glastonbury, one of his most celebrated 
songs is being reworked into a paean to zoophilia,Johnny Marr appears on the 
John Peel stage. His set suggests that his recent album The Messenger has been 
slightly undervalued: if the most vociferous audience reactions are reserved 
for his occasional dips into the Smiths' back catalogue – Stop Me If You Think 
You've Heard This One Before, Bigmouth Strikes Again – the tracks he plays from 
The Messenger sound punchy and exciting. Meanwhile, on the main stage,Elvis 
Costello deviates from the hits – Pump It Up, I Don't Want to Go to Chelsea, 
Oliver's Army – to prove that his ire hasn't left him. He plays Tramp the Dirt 
Down, the song in which he famously offered to dance on Margaret Thatcher's 
grave, suggesting that "it's not about burying someone underground, it's about 
burying an idea in the ground".
 Bobby Gillespie of Primal Scream performs on the Pyramid stage. Photograph: 
Ian Gavan/Getty Images Europe 
He is followed by Primal Scream, whose performance initially seems to wobble. 
Bobby Gillespie clearly thinks the audience are showing insufficient interest 
in their new material. Those who have camped out at the front of the stage all 
day in order to catch a glimpse of the Rolling Stones seem a little nonplussed 
by their support act performing a brooding song about familial abuse called 
River of Pain, complete with a cacophonous free-jazz interlude, nor – more 
surprisingly – are they much moved by the blaring sirens and relentless 
bassline of Swastika Eyes. "Has somebody dosed you with valium?" he snaps. 
"Come on, you fuckers." For a moment, it looks as if things might go the way of 
Primal Scream's 2005 Glastonbury appearance, where things got so 
confrontational between band and audience that their set ended with Gillespie 
being manhandled offstage by security. Instead, however, the band win the crowd 
around, by the simple expedient of playing the hits, withHaim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/haim> as guest backing vocalists: Loaded, 
Rocks, Come Together.

By the time the Rolling Stones arrive, the crowd in front of the Pyramid stage 
has swelled to 100,000, something you might have predicted had you noted the 
sheer number of people walking around the site in Stones T-shirts: it's hard to 
think of another Glastonbury that's been so conclusively overtaken by a 
solitary headlining act. As U2 discovered a few years back, parachuting a 
hugely successful band in to headline Glastonbury doesn't always work, 
something of which Jagger at least appears aware. For someone with a reputation 
for lofty diffidence, he seems to have been on a charm offensive for weeks: no 
sooner had their headline slot been announced than he took to Twitter to claim, 
a little implausibly, that he was going to stay on site in a yurt. The charm 
offensive carries over into their set. Just as he joked about the cost of the 
seats at last November's O2 performance, he jokes about Glastonbury's dogged 
pursuit of the band over the years: "So, they finally asked us."

If mention of his actual sleeping arrangements is conspicuous by its absence, 
Jagger mentions having spent the previous night at the festival: "I went to 
Shangri-La!" he says, sounding as ever, exactly like a man doing an 
impersonation of Mick Jagger. "I saw theArctic Monkeys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/arcticmonkeys>." Indeed, so keen is he to 
underline his awareness that this show is more than just another stop off on 
the Stones' 50th Anniversary Tour, he has reworked the song Factory Girl for 
the occasion: Glastonbury Girl makes reference to wet wipes, inhaling nitrous 
oxide, camping and ecstasy.
 The Stones: thrillingly ramshackle. Photograph: Anthony Devlin/PA 
What's striking about the other songs they perform is how thrillingly 
ramshackle the Stones sound. In contrast to most of their stadium-filling 
peers, you can hear the imperfections, the occasional fluffed notes. They sound 
like a real band, rather than bored multimillionaires going through the 
motions, which adds a genuine edge to the big hits: Wild Horses should be 
dulled by overfamiliarity, but it packs an emotional punch. It's a sense 
heightened by their evident delight at having former guitarist Mick Taylor back 
on stage with them – a delight not shared entirely by the audience, which thins 
out a bit during the lengthy versions of You Got the Silver and Midnight 
Rambler – and the set's occasional surprises: they perform a fantastic version 
of 2,000 Light Years From Home, from the most reviled of their 60s albums, the 
psychedelic folly Their Satanic Majesties Request.

As they play Sympathy for the Devil, the scrap-metal phoenix at the top of the 
Pyramid stage begins to slowly rise up and belch out fire. In the crowd, people 
are letting off flares and red smoke billows around. It's incredibly exciting: 
one of those much-vaunted Glastonbury moments.
 