
Words cannot describe the disappointment that strikes when you discover that 
your freshly minted copy of the new Bridget Jones novel is not one of the batch 
that rolled off the printing press with a wodge of Sir David Jason's 
forthcoming autobiography accidentally included in the middle. Not vg at all: 
in his quest for a golden ticket, Charlie Bucket himself could not have known 
such bitter bathos. But don't imagine this is mere schadenfreude – because who 
doesn't think that the more colossal the cock-up, the less likely it is that 
we'll get fired when, inevitably, we too stuff it up at work? – or even a bid 
to make a killing on eBay. Let me reassure you: it's far more highbrow than 
that.

For let us not forget that the cut-up has a noble artistic lineage, from the 
dadaist Tristan Tzara to William Burroughs and Brion Gysin to David Bowie, all 
of whom decided to allow an element of chance into their work by dividing and 
recombining its individual elements at random. It is a method of relinquishing 
control – or the illusion of it – over the text, of allowing language to find 
its own rhythms and meanings, of disrupting the hierarchy of creator and 
created to produce subversive new artworks. Or something like that.

I confess I hadn't had Helen Fielding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/helenfielding> down as a reincarnated BS 
Johnson, the experimental novelist whose workThe Unfortunates was published as 
a series of pamphlets in a box, to be read in the order the reader chooses. 
Neither had I thought of David Jason as a clandestine member of the 
game-playing Oulipo movement, whose proponents included Georges Perec, the 
French writer who wrote an entire novel without using the letter "e". But that 
merely shows me up for the blinkered stick-in-the-mud I really am. For there's 
no doubt that Fielding and Jason were in on it, plotting secretly for months to 
sneak a few copies out there to test the waters. Dead Darcy? More like Decoy 
Darcy.

The publishing industry is in crisis, or so we read in several-thousand-word 
pieces devoted to telling us that people no longer have the attention span to 
read anything longer than a Snapchat caption or a WhatsApp message 
(translation: I have no idea what these things are. But I think they are not 
big on lengthy descriptions of the brooding sky).

Its big cheeses, therefore, are quite interested in finding ways to engage 
with their market, to underline that reading a book needn't be boring snoring, 
but really good fun. And imagine how much fun you could have if you got two 
books for the price of one, not in some totally tedious old-school bookshop 
promotion but actually between the same covers!

It's a stroke of genius. On the small scale, the Jones-Trotter mash-up also 
gets Bridget off a few hooks, especially in the department of finding a new 
bloke and being a bit on the posh side; a little bit of Peckham grit to the 
Primrose Hill oyster, a little sip of Lambrini in the cocktail of life. But the 
wider implications are huge. Consider this: last week saw the book industry's 
Super Thursday, the day on which the biggest celebrity autobiographies, 
lavishly illustrated cookery books and the like are released to give us an 
early steer through the hell of Christmas gift-giving; among the treats on 
offer this autumn are books by Alex Ferguson, John Bishop, Sharon Osbourne and 
our very own Nigel Slater. Meanwhile, in a corner of your local bookselling 
emporium, should you still have such a thing, is an unlit shelf, on which 
tremble some volumes of poetry, a couple of novels in translation and the 
memoirs of someone not very famous. Couldn't – shouldn't – one arm of 
literature help out the other?

I fear it won't catch on, but I'm not giving up. My most thrilling idea thus 
far is to form a hybrid from the autobiographies of Harry Redknapp, entitled
Always Managing, and Morrissey, entitled with admirable concision Autobiography
. What on earth could go wrong with a book calledHeaven Knows I'm Not England 
Manager Now?

Munro bagging


Back in the real world, the Canadian short-story writer Alice Munro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alice-munro> has won the Nobel prize for 
literature. She is greatly loved by her fans, many of them high profile writers 
such as AS Byatt and Colm Tóibín, but there are those who are less captivated 
by her talents. Bret Easton Ellis, never one to risk being accused of 
diffidence, described her on Twitter as "so completely overrated" and the prize 
in general as "a joke'", though since the tweet that preceded these apercus 
revealed the news that he had seen an American football player in cargo shorts 
at a restaurant, we can perhaps safely assume that the spirit of FR Leavis 
remains untroubled.

Also cited was a long piece in the London Review of Books by Christian 
Lorentzen <http://www.lrb.co.uk/v35/n11/christian-lorentzen/poor-rose>, which 
took detailed issue with the critical consensus that has built up around Munro. 
I saw Lorentzen's piece described in a national newspaper as "savage", but it 
wasn't; it was negative, but it was also thoughtful and carefully argued. There 
is an important point here. We are allowed to speak about writers, and consider 
their work, and come to different conclusions; and that they win prizes should 
not influence in any serious way that discussion. I declare myself a fan of 
Munro, but I don't believe a consensus is the same as a conspiracy, nor an 
assessment the same as a savaging. That way lies us all reading the same book, 
over and over again.

Earlier this year, I interviewed the wonderful novelist Claire Messud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/aug/02/claire-messud-interview> and at 
one point I asked her about the business of becoming a writer; about the 
curious, mysterious intersection of finding the confidence, and consequently, 
the voice, to put pen to paper. In response, she cited something that Munro had 
said many years ago: "I went ahead and wrote because I didn't know that some 
small-town girl from a no-account place in Ontario was not allowed to be a 
writer. I just went ahead and did it."
 