
At 12.17pm yesterday the England team walked on to the field, arrived at 
approximately the same position that Karl Power reached during his Friday 
cameo, turned and walked off. Could it be that this series had been a con all 
along, played by cunning impostors impersonating an English cricket team?

In fact, the retreat was rain-inspired - one of several, disenchanting all but 
the hardiest spectators. And the charge of imitation, in all fairness, would be 
hard to sustain: while they have never had better than a fingernail's grip on 
the Test, this has been England's most convincing performance of the series.

There has, however, been a sense of the artificial about this game, that 
Headingley 2001 has been a game masquerading as an Ashes Test. While Australia 
and England have been the contestants, the destiny of the urn has already been 
determined, and the rubber is decidedly dead.

To stave off the inescapable sense of anti-climax, both sides have had to 
plumb different motivations. Inevitably, England have been said to be 
"competing for pride", a hackneyed phrase with the uneasy implication that 
pride was not an issue in the first place. The Australians, meanwhile, have 
found a rather more uplifting objective: Adam Gilchrist's challenging 
declaration last evening shows how deeply the Australians covet the possibility 
of a 5-0 whitewash, accomplished only once in Ashes annals by the Australians 
of 80 years ago.

In fact, this was never much of a secret. The Aussies have shouted it from the 
modern equivalent of the rooftops: the cheery columns with which English 
newspapers have this summer been festooned. They crave their piece of history 
and, as Brett Lee put it with youthful glee in the Sunday Times, "nothing less 
will do".

The chance to compare the whitewash-that-was with the whitewash-that-may-await 
is tempting. Although the series in question are 80 years apart and took place 
in different countries, there are some piquant coincidences. In both cases, 
Australia was led by a rugged veteran cricketer whose captaincy culminated a 
distinguished career: Warwick Armstrong in 1920-21, Steve Waugh today.

The Australian attacks of both eras depended on intimidating pace (Jack 
Gregory, Glenn McGrath) and befuddling wrist spin (Arthur Mailey, Shane Warne). 
Both teams were complemented by fielding of elastic excellence ('Nip' Pellew 
and Johnny Taylor being the antecedents of Ricky Ponting and Damien Martyn), 
and comprehensively outcaught their opponents. Charles Kellaway was on two when 
Percy Fender missed him in Adelaide in January 1921, and made 147: which should 
make another Surrey slip catcher, Mark Butcher, feel better.

In some respects, in fact, Armstrong's team created the formula by which later 
Australian XIs have lived: pace, leg-breaks and smart fielding, buttressed by a 
first-rate all-rounder. Eighty years ago, this was Gregory, with 442 runs at 
74, 23 wickets and 15 catches; today, it is Gilchrist, with 315 runs at 79, 15 
dismissals, and counting.

Yet one would expect this. The best sides have balanced attacks, reliable 
fielding and all-round strength in depth: all the qualities England presently 
lack. And on other levels the comparison is not quite so straightforward.

Pitches in Australia 80 years ago were uncovered: it was this that cost 
England the second Test in Melbourne. Tests in Australia, too, were then played 
to a finish: once a team were in a losing position, time limits afforded no 
refuge. Had Douglas's team played under current conditions - to a maximum of 
450 overs spread over five days - it would have drawn two of its matches. Steve 
Waugh's Australians play a different game. The speed of their victories has 
been as striking as their scale. No innings in this series has yet lasted four 
hours; England's first innings in this match was their first to require a 
second new ball.

On Saturday, England's batsmen showed a commendable willingness to entrench in 
order to retard that progress. Unfortunately, well-made scores of 40 no more 
establish Test batting careers than Karl Power has become entitled to a Price 
Waterhouse Coopers ranking.

The performance of the English tail was a mixture of dash and desperation; it 
was magnificent, as it were, but not war. Rather, it seemed a confession of 
weakness; if death-or-glory is to become English policy once the sixth wicket 
falls, then death more often than glory should be anticipated. Time rather than 
runs may be material today, and Darren Gough might have rendered his side 
better service on Saturday by trying to hold out for half an hour rather than 
making a spritely eight from six balls.

This has been an entertaining, sometimes dramatic, sometimes frustrating game 
in search of a purpose. Gilchrist's declaration has now given it one, and we 
have entered a different competition: not so much between Australia and 
England, but between Australia and themselves.
 