
In Dream Home, the owners of the flat on which Josie Ho is about to exchange 
contracts suddenly jack the price up beyond her reach, so she goes on a killing 
spree in the apartment block. Who can blame her? As anyone who has ever been 
gazumped, gazundered or gaziddled can attest, being cheated out of the property 
on which you've set your heart is enough to make anyone think bad thoughts, 
though I'd like to believe not many of us would go as far as Josie in the 
disembowelling and penis-lopping stakes.

I'm surprised there aren't more slasher movies set in flats. Tenants or 
flatmates can bring out the psycho in all of us simply by using electric drills 
in the middle of the night (Michael Keaton in Pacific Heights) or by doctoring 
our phone messages and stealing our hairstyles (Jennifer Jason Leigh in Single 
White Female). It's almost an afterthought when Keaton and Leigh up the ante by 
brandishing nailguns or pushing puppies out of windows; the damage has already 
been done.

When we think of property in horror movies, our thoughts naturally turn to old 
dark houses, possibly built over ancient Native American burial grounds, or 
more modern though no less haunted homes such as the one in Paranormal 
Activity. But I contend that flats can be even spookier than houses. Living in 
a flat means never being more than a few yards away from the neighbour you 
can't see, but whom you can all too often hear loud and clear, to maddening 
effect.

And, of course, if there's one thing worse than being disturbed by neighbour 
noise, it's being disturbed by neighbour noise and then being told you don't 
have neighbours, which is what happens to poor Cristina Raines in The Sentinel, 
a Michael Winner film that looks battier with each passing year. Raines plays a 
supermodel who rents, for the sort of piffling sum that ought to have made her 
suspicious, a magnificent apartment in Brooklyn Heights, only to discover 
there's more to her fellow tenants than meets the eye. Which is saying 
something, since they include John Carradine as a blind priest, Burgess 
Meredith throwing parties for his cat, and Sylvia Miles and Beverly D'Angelo as 
evil lesbians in leotards who, when asked what they do for a living, say, "We 
fondle each other." This movie is surely ripe for a remake with Kate Moss in 
the lead role.

It's bad enough hearing footsteps over your head, as Raines does, or seeing 
spreading damp patches on your ceiling, like Hitomi Kuroki in Dark Water, even 
before such phenomena are revealed to be of supernatural provenance. Another 
way in which flats can be scarier than houses is they can all be mysteriously 
linked via their bathroom cabinets, like the ones in Candyman, which provide 
portals through which hook-handed bogeymen can gain access to your home, though 
I do think the architect has some serious explaining to do there.

In the worst-case scenario, you could find yourself the sole remaining 
resident of your luxury block of flats who hasn't been turned by parasites into 
a sex-crazed zombie, which is what happens to the occupants of the Starliner 
complex in David Cronenberg's Shivers. Or, like estate agent Carmen Maura in La 
Comunidad, who takes a shine to one of the flats she's supposed to be selling, 
you could end up with everyone in the building ganging up against you and 
baying for your blood.

The king of apartment horror has to be Roman Polanski 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/romanpolanski>, who has given us the ultimate 
flat-dweller's nightmare trilogy. Anyone who has lived on their own and 
forgotten to throw away food past its sell-by date will find Catherine 
Deneuve's mental disintegration in Repulsion too close for comfort. Anyone 
whose privacy has been breached by busybodies can relate all too easily to Mia 
Farrow's predicament in Rosemary's Baby – and that's even before the satanic 
chanting starts up next door. And Polanski's degenerating relationship with his 
neighbours in The Tenant – the masterpiece of apartment horror – is liable to 
bring anyone out in a cold sweat. Hell isn't old dark houses – it's other 
people.
 