
So. Last Year at Marienbad. Sublime meditation on the nature of time and 
memory or, in Albert Steptoe's words, a "load of old boots"? I think it belongs 
with The Shining as one of the scariest haunted hotel movies ever made. But 
that's just me, seeing ghosts where there probably aren't any, and I'm aware 
some people find it boring. We all bring different things to a film, but the 
schism between love it and loathe it seems to be getting wider with every year 
that passes – and not just for Alain Resnais's film.

"I doubt," wrote Kenneth Tynan some 55 years ago, "if I could love anyone who 
did not wish to see Look Back in Anger." Most of us will have experienced that 
pang of disappointment when someone we care about dismisses our filmfétiche as 
drivel, or declares a piece of dross we've always despised to be their sainted 
talisman. There was a time when we filed this sort of misalignment away under 
"difference of opinion", but these days we seem to be increasingly intolerant 
of views diverging from our own. The more forums there are for us to express 
our opinions in public, the more we turn into Beavis and Butt-head decreeing 
that something "sucks" or is "cool".

Since when did liking or not liking become the standard by which a film should 
be judged? Many's the time I've shared my feelings about a movie with friends, 
only for them to come back with, "Yes, but did you like it?" As though that 
were the only criterion! I've probably learned more about film-making from 
incompetent, badly written rom-coms than from any amount of perfectly 
constructed masterpieces. I've glimpsed extraordinary visions in otherwise 
awful films (one of my all-time favourite scenes is the upside-down severed 
head used as a slide projector in Wild Wild West), and cringe-making missteps 
in otherwise wonderful movies. But the signs are that we increasingly prefer 
criticism reduced to thumbs-up or thumbs-down. Star ratings, I'm told, are 
massively popular, though I can only goggle with disbelief as internauts throw 
tantrums because the reviewer on a film website has awarded Thor three stars 
instead of four.

And with the polarisation comes the invective. It reminds me of one of my old 
boyfriends, who would never be content with saying that he didn't much care 
for, shall we say, Black Book. No, he had to ensure that I knew he considered 
Black Book unfit to wipe his bottom on. It's as though holding a viewpoint is 
no longer enough – a film's detractors need to pour scorn on its admirers and 
belittle their taste and intelligence as well. Winning the argument is no 
longer enough: the opposition must be annihilated!

On the other hand, just try making a critical comment about someone's pet 
movie and see what happens. When I blogged about Avatar with, among other 
things, some mildly disrespectful apercus about the plug-in plait of power and 
Roger Dean, one visitor chose to ignore my more positive observations and 
chided me with, "People who don't like something should just be quiet." I have 
no beef with this commentator in particular, who is obviously welcome to write 
what he thinks, but I wonder if he sincerely meant that with regard to every 
film ever released – or just the one that happened to be his favourite.

I'm steeling myself for another round of Molesworth versus Peason argument 
("am not am not etc") with The Tree of Life (personally, I think it both sucks 
and is cool – simultaneously) and then the new Harry Potter. Maybe it's because 
cinema has become the new religion, with its own sacraments and doctrines, and 
high-profile hits such as The King's Speech or Inception inspire followings so 
devoted that disparaging remarks are seen as heresy. To criticise is to cast 
aspersions on someone's fundamental beliefs, the very core of their existence; 
it's like a religious war in which neither side will tolerate the other's gods, 
or lack of them. As Samuel Fuller once observed in another context: "Film is 
a battlefield." I know it is – I've seen the corpses. But hey, can't we all 
just get along?
 