
This is my last column on the experience of raising two adopted daughters. I 
would like to thank all those who have commented, in particular those who have 
shown sympathy and understanding towards the girls. I have decided to stop 
writing because the experience is stressful. In fact, it is nerve-wracking. I 
worry about my daughters stumbling on the articles. Although they are not great 
readers of the Guardian, they are great users of the internet.

So why have I written them and what have I achieved, if anything?

Children <https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> who have suffered 
trauma, abuse and neglect at a young age are often abandoned by society as they 
grow older and all too often end up unemployable, in struggling relationships 
and in prison. This is a tragedy. It seems to me that if a child suffered a 
serious leg injury in infancy, and forever walked with a limp, we would support 
them and not expect them to walk as fast as other children. We would certainly 
not punish them.

Yet this is exactly what happens with these children, many of whom are adopted 
or end up in care. I think much of the problem is ignorance. By this I mean 
profound ignorance of the formation of the brain in early years and the effects 
of neglect and trauma.

There is tremendous investment in neuroscience at the moment, but our 
understanding of the brain is in its infancy. As my articles have made clear, 
it has been difficult for us to get access to support, particularly mental 
health services. After going through our MP, we did get some support for our 
younger daughter but it was limited and did not help her. Our older daughter 
has gone through assessments with the adult mental health team only to be told 
that there is nothing they can do.

Local services have been at pains to say that the girls have "behavioural" 
rather than mental health problems. This is in marked contrast to the Maudsley 
hospital where we attended theMichael Rutter centre 
<http://www.slam.nhs.uk/our-services/service-finder-details?CODE=SU0470>. We 
managed to get a referral through a paediatrician who was extremely concerned 
at the lack of support for our daughters. The Maudsley's approach was 
evidence-based, serious and positive. They diagnosed my eldest daughter with 
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) – our local services had missed 
this totally – and offered therapy to my youngest daughter to help her deal 
with nightmares. The latter worked. Sadly, we could not keep making the long 
journey to south London and there was a question mark over the funding of our 
visits. The therapies recommended by the Maudsley were not available locally.

School has also been an issue and was particularly difficult for my younger 
daughter who was permanently excluded six months before she was due to take her 
GCSEs. The school had no consistent policies for a child with her difficulties 
and there was a marked contrast between the attitudes of different teachers. 
The stronger teachers, who had no problem keeping discipline, found her a 
pleasure. The minute there was disorder in a class, my daughter became unstable 
and she became the problem. We tried hard to get our children statemented but 
again fell outside required definitions.

Some of their friends, notably those with more recognised learning 
difficulties, were able to get help and many have thrived.

We have paid for counselling, tried boxing, football, drama, music and pets – 
including a horse. All these have helped and there have been times when the 
family has been stable and content.

So what do I think would improve things? Firstly, there should be more places 
like the Maudsley or at least a more serious attempt to spread best practice 
nationally.

Secondly, more resources should be put towards understanding the developmental 
damage these children have suffered. It is not good enough to say, as people 
frequently do of both my daughters, that they are "wired wrong". As a parent, I 
want to know more. Indeed, my daughters want to know more. My youngest daughter 
is tortured by her angry and impulsive nature and really wants to understand 
why she is as she is. Wouldn't you?

Thirdly, I firmly believe that work is the way forward for both of my girls 
and I think they would be good employees with the right support. Work is, after 
all, more productive and cheaper than prison or idleness.

If my articles manage to achieve that, they will have been worth the stress of 
writing them.


 