
Suffering. Now there's an artistic word. Or so you'd think.

Let me first break off to apologise again for irregular filing. The long gap 
in communications has been caused by excessive travel and my catching up with 
the work I didn't do last year, because I was ill. Time was, I would have 
battered through my days of travel and typing and then filled my nights with 
more typing. But now I can't. I have the stamina of a Thermidored lobster, and 
this limits how much I can do in any 24-hour period, on pain of – well, pain. A 
harpooning headache will cheerily let me know when I have to down tools.

Which is to say, I have been doing my best to avoid suffering.

I have been trying to write for at least a quarter of a century, and I can say 
very firmly that in my experience, suffering is largely of no bloody use to 
anyone, and definitely not a prerequisite for creation. If an artist has 
managed to take something appalling and make it into art, that's because the 
artist is an artist, not because something appalling is naturally art.

Just try kicking your bare foot really hard against the nearest wall. In your 
own time – I can wait … And now tell me how creative you feel. Just bloody sore 
and mind-fillingly distracting, isn't it?

I mention this because I was recently in the company of a film producer. (I 
know, that doesn't bode well for the avoidance of suffering.) We had no 
professional relationship at all, so he was simply chatting about life and art 
in the way that I find people genuinely involved with either never do. And as I 
quietly clenched my teeth more and more tightly against the rim of my coffee 
cup, the producer told me all about how necessary it was that creative people 
of every type should have as awful a time as possible.

You would have been proud of me – I didn't punch him even once. Because it is 
wrong to punch people. It makes them suffer and suffering isn't nice.

To his way of thinking, comfort and success are poison, the Stones 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/therollingstones?INTCMP=SRCH> never did 
anything good after they'd got money,Van Gogh 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/van-gogh?INTCMP=SRCH> prospered because 
of mental distress, obscurity and ear mutilation and, actually …

The producer hadn't got any other examples, but he was convinced: if you 
weren't hurting, you couldn't be working.He is not alone in his beliefs. TV and 
film representations of real and fictional artists always go heavy on the 
torment. Press coverage of the arts is never more enthusiastic than when it has 
managed to ferret out a "battle with demons", or at least a suicide attempt. 
This is partly because of the media's steadfast assumption that the arts aren't 
interesting – hence all those galleries, concerts, songs, poems, novels, 
cartoon strips, museums and T-shirt designs. Doom is apparently fascinating: 
all of us can recall how much we've enjoyed spending time with people who are 
heartbroken and/or depressed, finding them stimulating, generous and 
emotionally supportive by turns. Assuming that making a sculpture would be 
assisted by despair or hunger in a way that, say, plumbing wouldn't be is 
absurd and insulting. There's no reason to believe a plumber might be less 
sensitive than a pianist, or that someone who you're assuming is more than 
averagely sensitive couldn't be broken into sand and teeth by grief. It's 
simply cruel to assume that any human being will somehow benefit from 
punishment. And the cultural white noise that links having a job in the arts to 
the threat of punishment cuts the arts off from people who could enjoy them, or 
produce them.

If we follow this kind of thinking to its logical conclusion, we are about to 
encounter a tsunami of art from pensioners. They will be inspired by living 
below the poverty line and dying during cold winters. That, or their rage at 
having, perhaps, been part of the generation who saved the country from Nazism 
and created the welfare state, only to be screwed over when they're at their 
most vulnerable by a parliament filled with self-obsessed looters. Maybe 
they'll even have illnesses: arthritis, or the risk of a nasty fall. The 
producer's merrily sociopathic thinking could, if we allowed it, imply that if
CS Lewis <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/author/cs-lewis> was 
productively devastated by his wife's death, or Eric Clapton by the loss of his 
son, or Britten did well after his mother died, then bereavement (the closer 
the better) should guarantee a thriving career. I'm a writer and greatly admire 
bothChekhov <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/author/anton-chekhov> and 
Robert Louis Stevenson 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/author/robert-louis-stevenson> – maybe I 
should try to contract TB. That would, of course, be insane – at which point we 
have to deal with the cliche that a spot of mental illness is supposed to be a 
good thing if you fancy knocking off a poem, or a tune everybody can hum.

The myth of the suffering artist is part of the wider myth that sinking into 
abjection will somehow cleanse and elevate the poor and/or unconventional, 
eventually leading them on to glory. Those who are not led on to glory will be 
unworthy and deserve to fail. Economic Darwinism will crush them as they should 
be crushed. This kind of pressure can't, naturally, be applied to nice people 
David Cameron might meet at parties or have gone to school with, because they 
would find it unpleasant. And might be crushed. This kind of thinking divides 
human beings into categories, as more and less human.Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> almost inevitably does the 
reverse – hence, I have to assume, the established insistence on extra-special 
suffering, just for artists. Because suffering keeps artists quiet, just as it 
can weaken and muffle anyone else.

As I've mentioned elsewhere, artists have access to a creative way of life 
that can sustain them through dark times. They have used, and will use, their 
crafts to transform what they can of life's pain and loss and fear into 
something communicative and alive. This can be a generous and lovely thing for 
all concerned and can produce healing, as can anyone's triumph over adversity. 
It doesn't mean anyone needs to be rendered abject – by others, or themselves.

The rather more personal problem I have with the myth of the suffering artist 
arises when I meet young and new writers and find they are intent upon 
suffering, rather than writing. It can seem that wearing black, moping, 
engineering car-crash relationships and generally being someone nobody wants to 
sit beside on the bus could be a shortcut to writing success. Surely, when so 
many writers seem bathed in fascinating disasters and have such wonderful 
scars, then scars and disasters would save us effort, focus and the development 
of our craft? Well, no. In fact, without effort, focus and development, we 
won't have the skills to present even rosy sunsets and charmingly eccentric 
families with saleable adventures to the waiting reader, never mind the kind of 
stuff that wracks the soul and is personal and precious and must be handled 
with care and precision and respect.

Apart from anything else, I hate to see people being unhappy, and people being 
self-inflictedly unhappy is doubly sad. A writer being purposely unhappy when 
writing provides such a glorious and unpredictably rewarding path through life 
… well, that's borderline criminal. If the budding writer just settled down and 
wrote, then he or she would become more and more who they are happy being, and 
might make things other people can like and feel happy about, too. Better 
still, the sheer effort of getting better, of pushing sentences to shine 
brighter, of fumbling about in the dark of half-formed ideas and feeling 
foolish and lonely and scared – that's more than enough suffering to be going 
on with. And, even better than that, when you've taken your exercise for the 
day, you'll feel great. You'll be tired, but you'll have dignity. You tried 
your best and maybe learned something and if not today, then tomorrow – who 
knows how good you might get. Onwards.
 