
It started with a pair of shoes. The dainty kitten heels looked sensible at 
first, until closer inspection revealed that they were odd. Literally. One was 
pink, the other purple. Amal Alamuddin, human rights lawyer and now George 
Clooney's fiancee, had only been famous a couple of weeks and she already had 
the gumption to break one of fashion's most entrenched rules. That was the 
moment I became fascinated.

Becoming interested in Alamuddin's style has been an odd experience. Usually, 
I enjoy fashion when it is unpredictable - give me Cher in a nylon bodystocking 
or Jared Leto in a tie-dye vest over perfection any day. Yet somehow I found 
myself scrolling down the Daily Mail's sidebar of shame, looking for just one 
more picture of Alamuddin in a pastel-coloured shift dress.

Clearly, she differs from other so-called style icons by possessing a feature 
most of them lack: a staggering CV. As thousands of bloggers and columnists who 
have written about her style point out, she is an Oxford graduate, fluent in 
English, French and Arabic, and a human rights barrister. Onededicated blog  
<http://amalalamuddinstyle.wordpress.com/>features highlights from her resumé 
<http://www.doughtystreet.co.uk/barristers/profile/amal-alamuddin> and pictures 
of her representing Julian Assange and her appearance on Channel 4 news, 
alongside pieces urging readers to "get the look".

Perhaps Alamuddin's intelligence makes grown-up women feel a bit better about 
admitting she is their style crush. Certainly, I found myself considering her 
key motifs, from Prada sunglasses worn on the top of the head to huge handbags 
by Balenciaga and Miu Miu. She wears the big designers - including Oscar de la 
Renta and Stella McCartney - but she also likes sensible, affordable shift 
dresses by Paule Ka. Off duty, she has a penchant for slightly comedic shoes – 
black and white spats-style flats, ormetallic brogues by Prada Linea Rossa 
<http://www.polyvore.com/prada_linea_rossa_bicolor_brogue/thing?id=88665827>, 
and she often looks surprisingly quirky. Once she paired an eccentricFrida 
Kahlo-style necklace by Tatty Devine 
<http://3.bp.blogspot.com/-llO_NkM4MdU/UXQfwx6k9CI/AAAAAAAAFxo/XyaZ8eMzW0w/s1600/bloomzyfridakahlo.jpg>
 with a floral jumpsuit and silver shoes.

Alamuddin wears tights as the temperature dictates and won't suffer goosebumps 
in the name of high fashion. She breaks rules by pairing summery outfits with a 
big black handbag, and looks wonderful doing so, because she's a successful 
person who can't be bothered to transfer her keys and wallet to another bag as 
she is too busy preparing for a landmark trial or going on a date with Clooney. 
This is not stylist-approved dressing, and all the better for it.

Though Vanity Fair and US Vogue have no doubt pursued her, Alamuddin has 
chosen not to do any interviews yet. The only clues we have to her character 
are embedded in how she dresses, and those take us only so far. What seems 
clear is that, unlike so many other personalities, she has not rallied a team 
of personal assistants, stylists and seamstresses to face the challenge of 
becoming famous overnight. Her wardrobe is compelling because it is, on 
occasion, imperfect; expensive but genuine, put together by a human being, not 
a princess.

Her achievements were in place long before Clooney; her CV makes her the 
anti-Kardashian. She cares about style, but has a brain, suggesting those 
qualities are not mutually exclusive. For all my shame about visiting that 
sidebar, that feels like a tiny bit of progress.
 