
Vast crowds in Trafalgar Square, a reception at Downing Street, football 
knocked off the front and back pages - cricket has never had it so good. 
Insurance companies report a 200% rise in cricket-related damage caused by 
children smashing balls through windows and greenhouses, orders for the 
official DVD of the Ashes summer have increased by 1,000% at Amazon a month 
before it is released and Hitwise, the internet monitoring service, reveals 
searches for Andrew Flintoff are 78% higher than for Wayne Rooney.

The extraordinary surge in popularity created by the Ashes victory has 
produced an extraordinary opportunity to reinvigorate the game at the 
grassroots. "We have to grasp it," said a spokesman for the England and Wales
Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board. "It is a 
once-in-a-lifetime chance."

But what will happen when memories of the ticker-tape parade begin to fade? 
The closest parallel is with England's rugby union success in 2003: there were 
similarly jubilant scenes in Trafalgar Square and Jonny Wilkinson, whose 
last-minute drop-goal secured victory in the final in Sydney, was a heroic role 
model in the mould of Flintoff or Kevin Pietersen.

One year on from the triumph English rugby was able to boast some successes: 
33,000 new players, with a 16% growth across all ages. The biggest increase of 
32% was in the seven-to-11 age range, while attendances in the Premiership 
increased by 17% and season-ticket sales climbed by 43%. The Webb Ellis Trophy 
was taken on a nationwide Sweet Charity tour of more than 400 events and seen 
by more than 250,000 people.

So one side of the equation was fulfilled as Richard Caborn, the sports 
minister, backed the Rugby Football Union's impact strategy designed to 
increase participation. Rugby was introduced to 200 more secondary schools and 
2,600 links between schools and clubs were established.

But the momentum is proving difficult to sustain as the England side's form 
declines. The World Cup-winning side never played again, Wilkinson was plagued 
by injuries and in last year's Six Nations England were defeated by Wales, 
Ireland and France. The ECB is hoping its relatively youthful side will stay 
together, to ensure continuing momentum created by success on the pitch.

Tessa Jowell, the culture secretary, who described the Ashes series as one of 
the "great moments of national exhilaration and excitement", said it was 
crucial to build on the success. "What is important is to make sure that there 
will be thousands of young people who for the first time will have lifted a 
cricket bat or had their first game of cricket in the park. The ECB deserves 
credit for the way they have sought to rebuild grassroots cricket over the last 
seven years - and of course we want to go further."

Roger Draper, chief executive of Sport England, said: "We believe sporting 
success can help inspire people to get active and to reach their sporting 
potential. This doesn't happen in isolation - we also need the right structures 
alongside high-quality multi-sport facilities, coaches and volunteers." Cricket 
has received £100m in lottery funding since 1994 and £18m has been promised 
over the next four years.

Earlier this month figures from the department for education and skills 
revealed 85% of schools offered cricket, compared with 97% offering football 
and 82% rugby.

But Nick Gandon, the director of the Cricket Foundation, the ECB's charitable 
arm, said the 85% figure was unreliable. "We need an unfudgeable definition of 
what is a cricket school - one that offers youngsters an opportunity to play at 
least five organised games of cricket a year." He said fewer than 10% of state 
schools currently achieved that and the foundation's Chance to Shine campaign 
has set a target of increasing it to a third of schools.

"We planned the launch in May because it was an Ashes summer and we expected 
strong interest, but what happened has taken everyone by surprise."

The foundation has run 12 pilot programmes, in which 12 cricket clubs have 
been charged with reaching six schools each. "Sceptics said you will not get 
access for four hours a week, schools are not into competition and summer terms 
are for exams - but all 72 schools are on board with coaches working alongside 
teachers."

The campaign is trying to raise £25m over five years, and has had pledges of 
£7m-8m but wants matching funding from the government. David Collier, the chief 
executive of the ECB, told Sky Sports News yesterday: "If we can get four or 
five really class corporate sponsors to support the Chance to Shine programme 
and the government matches that funding, then I think we have a major 
opportunity."

The ECB launched its building partnerships strategy in April, designed to 
establish foundations for the growth of cricket from "playground to Test 
arena". A spokesman said: "We were not in a position of waiting for the Ashes - 
we set down the plans and initiatives six months ago."

On Wednesday at Edgbaston, England's Ashley Giles and Ian Bell began a series 
of roadshows, taking the Ashes trophy around the counties. Yesterday, the 
wicketkeeper Geraint Jones took to the bus in Canterbury. "I think the whole 
county system will get a huge boost," he said. "Kent are getting cold calls 
from people trying to find out how their children can learn how to play 
cricket. That is what we need for the future of the game."

With no terrestrial TV exposure next summer, critics of the deal say it will 
hit attempts to get children trying to emulate Flintoff and co, but the ECB 
insists it means an extra £96m investment over the next four years, which can 
guarantee a restoration in the sport's fortunes.
 