
The Daily Telegraph <https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailytelegraph> has 
been acting rather strangely in the past couple of weeks, making it unclear 
exactly where it stands on the European Union referendum.

For years, it has been the natural home of Eurosceptic thought and its readers 
could be forgiven for thinking it will opt for Brexit.

But there has been a disconnect of late between the choice of news content, 
which appears to have favoured the Brexit cause, and its wavering leading 
articles.


Rather than full-throated support for Brexiteers, urging people to vote to 
leave the EU, it has chosen to talk about the need for a debate

On 22 February, it acclaimed Boris Johnson’s decision to back Brexit with a 
poster-style front page and a big show for his Telegraph column, with a giant 
headline, “Vote Go.”

Its editorial was more measured, arguing that the leave campaign now had a 
leader. The following day, it called for the debate “to be conducted amicably 
to avoid the Tory party ripping itself apart” and welcomed David Cameron’s call 
for “a gigantic democratic exercise in accountability.”

On 24 February, a leading article headlined “Voters need the full facts for EU 
debate”, expanded on what has since become a Telegraph theme. In pleading for 
Cameron to allow the civil service to provide data to the anti-EU side, it 
reiterated the importance of the debate without saying where it stood.

Similarly, today’s (Thursday’s) issue was odd. A large front page headline, “
Wages to rise if we quit EU 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newstopics/eureferendum/12181385/Wages-for-British-workers-will-rise-in-the-event-of-a-Brexit-head-of-in-campaign-says.html>
”, based on a claim by Lord (Stuart) Rose, contrasted with a leading article, 
taking Rose to task for “ambiguity” and accused “both sides” in the debate of 
indulging “in a barrage of hints, threats, obfuscations and obstreperous 
confrontations that have proved occasionally explosive but rarely enlightening.”

What the voters deserve, said the editorial, is “a great deal less heat, and a 
good deal more light” 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newstopics/eureferendum/12181459/The-EU-referendum-campaigns-are-failing-to-provide-Britons-with-hard-facts.html>
 because “the public is hungry for serious debate.”

Some people may think that the Telegraph itself has spent years publishing a 
barrage of hints, threats and obfuscations that was anything but enlightening. 
The Telegraph has been consistently hostile to the EU and all its works.

Why then is it being so reticent now? Have the owners, the Barclay brothers, 
changed their minds? Has the chairman,Aidan Barclay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/aidanbarclay>, had second thoughts? Or is it 
a case of the editor, Chris Evans, striving to be impartial despite the paper’s 
historical stance?

If the Telegraph’s letters page is any guide, then it is abundantly clear 
where the readers stand. My survey shows that the overwhelming majority are for 
Brexit.

Since 22 February (Boris day), the referendum has been the main topic on every 
day’s letters page. In that period, the paper has published 78 letters about 
the EU. Of those, 49 favoured Brexit with only seven arguing that Britain 
should remain in the EU. The other 22 were either neutral or made comments that 
did not reveal the writers’ viewpoints.

I also noted that at least 18 letters made references that were specifically 
ill-disposed to Cameron.

Almost every lead letter was from a Brexiteer, as the headlines illustrate: 
“Cameron’s approach to the EU puts the political elite before his party”... 
“Having gambled all to stay in the EU, Cameron could never bring us out”... “To 
help its nearest allies, Britain would be better placed outside the EU”... 
“Voting to remain in aEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> set 
on further expansion is the real ‘leap in the dark’”.

Only one headline favoured the opposite point of view: “In an unstable world, 
Britain can’t afford to lose the military security provided by the EU”. That 
was over a letter written by a collective of assorted generals.

I am sure the choice of letters by the page’s meticulous editor, Christopher 
Howse, is a pretty accurate reflection of the overall daily postbag, so we can 
be sure that the bulk of Telegraph’s more activist readers want Britain to quit 
the EU.

In such circumstances, dare the Telegraph do other than support Brexit, the 
logical outcome of its historic antagonism towards Brussels?

If it should do otherwise, or even maintain its new fence-sitting line (you 
decide, rather than us), then it could well face a readership backlash.
 