
Another day and no one beyond the perimeter of the inner circle is really any 
the wiser or, indeed, better informed. The bland statement on behalf of the
England and Wales Cricket Board, and the equally tepid one from Kevin Pietersen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/04/kevin-pietersen-england-ecb>, 
were clearly part of the severance agreement and those licking their lips at 
the prospect of books might be doing so for a considerable while, such are 
gagging clauses.

Tuesday's meeting would have involved little debate. By the time Paul Downton, 
Alastair Cook <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alastair-cook> and Ashley 
Giles met at Lord's, the outcome, reached with the participation of the 
Professional Cricketers' Association, would have been a good way down the road. 
This was about rubber-stamping and finalising statements. Of the three 
participants, it is Downton, fresh into the role of managing director of 
England cricket, who would have been able to approach it unencumbered by the 
baggage of previous encounters, and Cook, whose evangelical zeal was 
instrumental in Pietersen's so-called rehabilitation into the side in the 
autumn of 2012, who would have carried the heaviest axe to grind.

Those who know Downton will recognise not only a high achieving cricketer, but 
an unflappable individual with proven high-level management skills. Neither 
Cook's cricket CV nor his mental toughness require any embellishment. Clearly 
he is immensely angered by what he must feel is a professional slight by 
someone who hitherto had received his backing.

But the influence of Giles within this trio is hard to gauge. Giles is in 
possession of several hats to wear, as selector, head coach of the England 
one-day sides for the past year or so, and now, pro-tem since Andy Flower's 
resignation, team director. If Downton was not directly privy to all that went 
on within the England dressing room during the Test match part of the tour, or 
indeed what may have gone on in private beyond that, he will have heard at 
first hand. But, in point of fact, Giles's dealings with the man he described 
recently as "a million-pound asset" have amounted to no more than nine ODIs and 
a single T20 match, in which he did not bat, of the combined 36 games England 
have played in that time.

According to the ECB <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ecb> statement, 
though, the decision to dispense with Pietersen was unanimous, which must have 
brought mixed feelings for Giles in particular. Already Giles has announced 
that he would like to be the person to succeed Flower, and to many his interim 
appointment for limited-overs games pointed to Flower's heir apparent. The 
trouble is that no one really saw this as becoming an issue until the back end 
of 2015 at the earliest. Meanwhile, Giles has scarcely been compiling a 
compelling case, with 11 wins and 14 losses in ODIs and three wins against six 
losses in T20.

In that context, the forthcoming warm-up trip to the Caribbean, in which his 
side will play three ODIs and three T20s, and the World T20 in Bangladesh which 
follows, carry an extra significance. Emerge from that with the books more than 
balanced and his chances would certainly be enhanced. Oversee a debacle on the 
same scale as we have witnessed in Australia and that could, or should, see the 
end of his hopes for now.

So it would have been hard to swallow, as he must have done, the idea that he 
must take his side without a batsman regarded as one of the most explosive in 
the world game. But then the question arises as to just how potent Pietersen 
remains as a batsman. His Test form has slumped substantially in the past 12 
months, the argument that he is indispensable because he scored more runs than 
anyone in the last Ashes series a fallacious one: he was, perhaps, the least 
poor of the batsmen. In ODI cricket since Giles took over, he has not produced 
anything like his best, with an average of 28 in that time against a career 
average of 40.7, only two half-centuries and a strike rate of 83 runs per 
hundred balls.

Seven England batsmen – Ian Bell, Eoin Morgan, Cook, Joe Root, Jonathan Trott, 
Jos Buttler and Ravi Bopara – average more in that time, four of them at a 
higher strike rate. As to T20, there is no recent evidence to draw any real 
conclusion, for it is almost two years since last he batted in the shortest 
format for England. It would be reasonable to argue that one reason for 
England's mixed success in that time is quite simply Pietersen's absence. Giles 
could counter that by pointing out that their progress in the Champions Trophy 
was without Pietersen. There is a judgment to be made, in other words, (or, 
rather, one appears to have been made) as to whether Pietersen is in a batting 
slump or terminal decline.

In both formats of limited overs cricket, though, Giles and the England team 
are used to working without Pietersen. Even allowing for the results in 
Australia, it is unlikely that he and his co-selectors – who include the new 
national selector James Whitaker and, now the Pietersen decision has been 
taken, Andy Flower, a selector still until such time as successors are 
appointed – will stray far from the squad of players who were in Australia, 
different conditions nothwithstanding.
 