
Alan Pardew <https://www.theguardian.com/football/alan-pardew> does not really 
do sheepish but if and, almost certainly when, he comes face to face with David 
Meyler on Saturday Crystal Palace’s invariably assured manager will surely look 
a little uncomfortable.

There might be a slightly awkward handshake and, perhaps, a rueful smile as 
Pardew returns to the scene of the ‘crime’ and relives the awful afternoon of 1 
March 2014when he inexplicably head-butted the Hull City midfielder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/01/hull-city-newcastle-united-premier-league-match-report-alan-pardew-headbutt>
.

Then in charge of a Newcastle United side 3-1 up at the KCom Stadium – the 
visitors ended up winning 4-1 – Pardew took exception as Meyler brushed past 
him in the technical area, hoping to take a quick throw-in.

Alan Pardew has chairman’s backing before critical fixture at Hull City
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/06/alan-pardew-crystal-palace-steve-parish-chairman>
Affronted, he squared up to the Irishman, his forehead making clean, if hardly 
robust, contact with Meyler’s face. Profusely apologetic, Pardew was fined a 
collective £160,000 by Newcastle and the FA, banned from the touchline for 
seven games and accepted still ongoing counselling from Jeremy Snape, a sports 
psychologist.

Saturday marks his first return to Hull’s home since a ridiculous, entirely 
uncharacteristic incident which arguably reflected both immense frustration 
with working for Mike Ashley, Newcastle’s owner, and the job insecurity that 
went with it.

A sense of deja vu will swirl in the east Yorkshire air as Palace’s manager 
again finds his career at the crossroads and, just as back in 2014, Hull strive 
to remain in the Premier League.

The parallel lines do not end there. Almost three years ago Pardew was 
struggling to cope without Yohan Cabaye, the £20m playmaker Newcastle had 
recently sold to Paris Saint-Germain; now he must decide whether to recall an 
underachieving Cabaye to Palace’s midfield.

Although Newcastle finished the 2013-14 season 10th, their campaign featured 
sequences of extremely disappointing results and increasing hostility from a 
mutinous Tyneside public.

Behind the scenes, Pardew’s relationship with Ashley had never quite recovered 
from a bitterly regretted aside following Newcastle’s dalliance with relegation 
the previous spring when he claimed that, as an owner,the sports retail tycoon 
had “underachieved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/may/10/newcastle-united-alan-pardew>
”.

Given the considerable fallout from that comment, it was surprising to hear 
history broadly repeat itself last weekend. Following six straight defeats,last 
Saturday’s 3-0 win against Southampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/03/crystal-palace-southampton-premier-league-match-report>
 should have pacified Palace’s influential American backers but inunwise 
post-match comments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/04/alan-pardew-criticises-crystal-palace-owners>
Pardew referred to “serious investors at the club who perhaps don’t know a lot 
about football”.

Alan Pardew headbutts David Meyler - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2014/mar/01/alan-pardew-headbutts-david-myler-in-pictures>
That appeared a criticism of the major shareholders David Blitzer and Josh 
Harris who, a year ago, each purchased an 18% stake in Palace to match that 
held by Steve Parish, the chairman. Although Pardew and Parish are close, he 
still needs to convince the two key Americans that he remains the right man for 
the job.

Parish has since insisted the manager’s words, although “not the smartest”, 
were aimed at other minor shareholders but Blitzer and Harris are acutely aware 
of Sam Allardyce’s availability for hire.

Accordingly victory at Hull seems imperative for Pardew and may entail further 
reversion to the pragmatic, counterattacking-based, tactical default mode which 
has often served him well and prompted victory against Southampton. Again, 
there is a certain symmetry with his Newcastle days, where sticky spells 
frequently coincided with attempts to introduce a more expansive passing style.

The return of Joe Ledley and Damien Delaney against Southampton signalled a 
back-to-basics approach and it will be interesting to see whether the now 
available Cabaye replaces Ledley. Perhaps coincidentally, the Frenchman did not 
start three of Palace’s four League victories this season and was substituted 
in the other.

Hull, although only three points behind Palace, are second from bottom and the 
manager, Mike Phelan, has his own midfield dilemmas for a game likely to unfold 
against a soundtrack of dissension horribly familiar to Pardew from his St 
James’ Park days.

“Allams out” is a common refrain but, much as Hull’s Egyptian owners want to 
sell, serious buyers are elusive. Moreover their failure to properly strengthen 
a newly promoted squad prefaced Steve Bruce’s close-season resignation and has 
left Phelan managing what many regard as a hopeless cause.

The bulk of the former Manchester United No2’s skinny summer spend was 
invested in recruiting Ryan Mason from Tottenham Hotspur for a club record £13m 
but Mason has disappointed and may forfeit his place to Meyler on Saturday.

Tom Huddlestone, like Cabaye at Palace, can dictate games but the former 
England international’s latterly indifferent form has seen him regularly 
relegated to the bench from where he surveys a side very low on attacking 
firepower and overly dependent on Robert Snodgrass’s creative incision.

Richly gifted, Snodgrass offers Phelan reason for optimism and, like Meyler 
and Pardew, is one of football’s great survivors. Whereas the Hull pair have 
overcome horrendous, career-threatening, knee injuries – indeed Meyler’s 
attempt to avoid jarring his knee partly led to that fateful collision with 
Pardew – Palace’s manager proved an expert at dodging dismissal during the low 
points of five largely successful, always challenging years on Tyneside.

As the second anniversary of his defection south to Selhurst Park approaches 
it would be ironic were his final act as Palace manager to take place at the 
ground which staged a moment that indelibly stained his CV.

Allardyce would be unwise to count on it. Pardew has extricated himself from 
tighter situations than this and history suggests he is capable of 
body-swerving any bullets aimed by Blitzer and Harris.
 