
Q Last year a door to door salesman from npower persuaded us to switch energy 
supplier with the promise of a dual fuel reward of £60 if I bought both gas and 
electricity from them for a year, and paid by direct debit. The promotional 
material said "your discount is shown annually in arrears from your final 
electricity bill in that period".

My supply began on 07/03/06, yet my fourth quarterly bill for the year did not 
carry the £60 as promised. I phoned npower to ask why not, and they told me it 
was because my last bill was dated 03/03/07. On 23/03/07, and on further 
occasions over the past month, I have again asked for the £60 back since I had 
fulfilled the conditions laid out in their promotion, and was repeatedly told 
it would come on the next bill, which is at the end of May.

What is more, a member of their customer services team told me that they 
couldn't do anything since the system was fully automated, and their quarterly 
bills are automatically generated every 87-91 days. By my calculation, this 
implies that four quarterly bills will never cover an entire 365 day period, 
and therefore that all npower customers signing up to this deal have to wait 
till their fifth bill for their reward, therefore having to stay with the 
provider for 15 months rather than 12.

To me, this makes npower's promotional material both highly misleading and 
disingenuous. I notice the same company is making the same offer again this 
year, with a £80 reward for anyone mug enough to sign up. Please could you 
advise me on who I can usefully complain to, and how to get my £60 before the 
end of May?
AH

A Npower's failure to provide you with the dual fuel discount in your fourth 
quarterly bill goes against what you were told by their door to door salesman. 
Moreover, the promotional material is very misleading as any reasonable person 
would assume from this that you get the discount in the final bill within the 
12-month period.

As a result you should write to them by recorded delivery explaining that they 
must pay you £60 immediately on the basis of their breach of contract and 
misrepresentation. It is no excuse that they have a fully automated system. Ask 
for a copy of npower's complaint handling standards of service - this will help 
you know if your complaint is being handled effectively.

If this has no effect then complain to  energywatch 
<http://www.energywatch.org.uk>. As the independent gas and electricity 
watchdog they can take up your case for you if they think you have been treated 
unfairly.
 