
Tony Gallagher's appointment as editor of the Daily Telegraph is analysed by 
the former Telegraph man,Stephen Glover, in today's Independent. 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/media/opinion/stephen-glover/stephen-glover-telegraphs-new-hardman-finishes-barclay-revolution-1830970.html>
 In his view, the ex-Daily Mail  executive is a good news man but lacks "much 
hinterland or a world view" and "for this reason he was not marked out for the 
highest office at the Mail."

Glover, who writes also for the Mail, presumably bases that opinion on 
knowledge picked up in the Mail office. He certainly seems to know a lot about 
him.

He is not a deep thinker. I doubt he could even be described as a Tory, though 
he is certainly right-wing. Unlike his predecessors, he appears to have no 
great respect for institutions such as the monarchy, parliament and the Church 
of England... In short, Mr Gallagher is not a "Telegraph man" as the term might 
be understood by anyone who cherishes the paper...

With the anointing of Mr Gallagher, the paper's old culture – traditionalist, 
seldom hectoring, and dependably respectful of our institutions – has finally 
been swept away.

If Glover is right about Gallagher (and I'm not so certain he is), it implies 
that his appointment is A Bad Thing because it runs counter to the ethos of the 
Telegraph.

But I wonder if his view of the Telegraph is, or ever was, as he believes. 
There was always a disconnect between what the Telegraph's senior writers of 
the 1950s-80s erathought of their paper and what they imagined to be its 
culture, and thereason that people actually bought it.

Glover reminds us of the peculiar split that existed between the opinion pages 
and the rest of the paper, in which the editor oversaw the former and the 
managing editor, the latter.

But look back at those papers and what strikes one forcibly is the 
preponderance of "the rest." The space allocated to opinion (and whimsy) was 
relatively small. As good and high-minded as the writers were, I do not believe 
they were the major reason for the paper's huge readership over a 35-year 
period.

It was the comprehensive news coverage and the rest of the package, including 
the crossword, that drew much of the audience. And I'd wager that few of them 
bothered to read the leaders or op-ed articles let alone pick up on the deep 
respect they held for our institutions.

Just as importantly, in the last 25 years, I think the Telegraph audience has 
not only declined in number but its composition has also changed. I'm sure it 
remains overwhelmingly committed to the Conservative party, but the High Tory 
element has certainly withered away.

This change is part of the profound overall change in British political and 
cultural life. Some may regret it (and Glover clearly indicates that he does), 
but it is the new reality. The aberration of a Tory shadow cabinet peopled by 
so many products of public schools does not imply a switch back to the past 
either because they too are very different from their forebears.

It is clear from everything David Cameron and his shadow team say they intend 
to do that they are much more pragmatic, less hidebound and less ideological, 
than their equivalents from the 1950s and 60s.

Similarly, they are aware that the British population, even if the reality of 
social class remains as intractable as ever, can no longer be addressed in the 
old terms. That change has also destroyed the old institutions, so it would be 
foolish to uphold their supposed virtues.

It strikes me that the whole of the top echelon at the Telegraph - chairman 
Aidan Barclay, chief executive Murdoch MacLennan, corporate affairs director 
Guy Black, editor-in-chief Will Lewis and Gallagher - represent this changed 
reality and, therefore, they much more closely identify with the current 
readership of the Telegraph titles thanLord Hartwell and his crew ever did.

In that sense, Gallagher's appointment is entirely rational, is it not?
 