
In Monday's Guardian 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/aug/30/fugard-attacks-modern-dramatists>, 
political playwright Athol Fugard voiced a concern that dramatists are "failing 
to confront issues of injustice, writing instead for attention spans of 10 
minutes between adverts". Monday was also the first day of rehearsal for my 
play Ugly, which deals frankly with the issue of climate change – it's set in a 
future where food and water are scarce – and is the most political work I've 
ever done. So part of me wants to disagree with Fugard. Only, in my heart, I 
think he's got a point.

I don't think there is enough seriously engaged or oppositional theatre being 
made. But why does it feel so difficult to do political work when we're living 
through one of the most critical periods of human history? I suspect the answer 
may have something to do with a desire (of audiences and theatre-makers alike) 
to look for distraction rather than reflections of our frightening reality. 
And, I recognise an urge to self-censor, too. I found writing Ugly difficult 
because, while I've come to a point where I believe that the only way to 
confront climate change is to work for radical, systemic change, I'm fearful 
that by admitting this, I'll be closing my writing career down – that I'll be 
suspected of being too intense, and not a good laugh. I guess other writers may 
also sense the prevailing mood out there is: "Keep it light: if you must be 
informed, be ironic, and most importantly be non-committal about everything, 
other than the fact that paedophilia is evil." Writing Ugly became a battle 
against those self-censoring urges.

How to talk about issues without preaching? No audience wants to be handed a 
manifesto when they come to the theatre. But if political theatre doesn't 
produce some kind of action, what's the point? I had to remind myself that I 
don't have to have the answers: writing a play is about creating a drama, which 
in its unfolding makes space for questions. The stage is one of the few places 
left where it is still possible to inspire challenging and exciting 
conversation. Writing this play became about attempting to chew on some big 
questions, while hoping that I wouldn't choke during the process.

But isn't theatre about giving people a smashing night out? Shouldn't writers 
entertain? Is it possible to do that when you're writing a dark-as-night comedy 
about – among other things – a disgraced home economics teacher who survives by 
selling her body and her memories of the meals she once cooked, when food was 
not scarce? After a lot of soul-searching, I realised the answer is yes. The 
bar is not lower when we make political work, it is higher. Entertainment and 
engagement is my aim for Ugly. As for finding hope in all of this? I believe 
that lies with the audience. One of the things I love about working withRed 
Ladder theatre company <http://www.redladder.co.uk/> is that their shows always 
have a forum for discussion after the performance. During these, I hope people 
will feel inspired to share their thoughts. I also hope that some will feel 
inspired enough to take those thoughts back into their lives and turn them into 
action. But, I have no interest in telling people what to do. For me, the show 
has done its job if it gets people thinking and discussing.

I think Athol Fugard <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/athol-fugard> has a 
good point, for all that he overlooks plenty of examples of provocative and 
political work. For writers and theatre companies everywhere, perhaps his words 
are a wake-up call. Not only do we need to do this work, but maybe we need to 
get better at letting people know about it.
 