
The confidential cable was written poetically and revealingly. Harnessing all 
the drama of a Mills and Boon novel, the US ambassador pulled out every stop 
when describing the impact of a B-list celebrity on the tropical Caribbean 
paradise of theBahamas <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bahamas>.

"Not since Wallis Simpson dethroned a king and moved to Nassau has an American 
femme fatale so captivated the Bahamian public and dominated local politics 
than Anna Nicole Smith did during her time on the island,"according to a leaked 
memo titled "Hurricane Anna Nicole wreaks havoc in the Bahamas" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/us-embassy-cables-documents/85746>.

The "titillating details" of the "sordid affairs" of the Anna Nicole saga 
"enticed" Bahamians and changed the face of the island's politics, two 
confidential memos sent by the embassy in Nassau reveal.

But the scandals and chaos that followed in the wake of the former Playboy 
model and reality TV star also had a positive impact on the island, the memo 
concedes: revitalising its media and leading to a more democratic society.

The wording of the 2006 memos could hardly be more colourful. "Not since the 
Category 4 Hurricane Betsy hit the island in 1965," it says, "has one woman 
done as much damage in Nassau."

Less than a year after the memo was written Smith died from a prescription 
drug overdose in a squalid Florida hotel room, aged 39. Howard Stern, who was 
her lawyer as well as her boyfriend, and Khristine Eroshevich, her former 
psychiatrist, were found guilty of writing or seeking prescriptions using false 
names to provide Smith with the cocktail of painkillers, muscle relaxants and 
antidepressants that killed her.

Before then, the ex-wife of an 89-year-old billionaire had caused "havoc" in 
the Bahamas, the cable excitedly exclaims. In September 2006 the media were 
highly critical when Smith allegedly provided a $10,000 (£6,477) cheque 
directly to the immigration minister, Shane Gibson, after her residency 
application was approved in one month. According to Smith, Gibson had 
personally approved her application. Critics pointed out that the process 
typically takes at least a year.

Gibson's claims that Smith had been treated like any other applicant were 
"shattered" when photos were published after the model's death on 8 February of 
Smith and Gibson "in a bedroom embrace".

The photographs were published in the island's main newspaper "in the intense 
media frenzy following Smith's death".

Combined with further evidence that Gibson and his family had financially 
benefitted from their relationship with Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/us-embassy-cables-documents/99278>, the 
once-popular minister was forced to resign. "The Anna Nicole scandal has recast 
Gibson as puppet of the privileged rather than defender of the common people of 
The Bahamas," one of the two memos notes.

The government immediately promised a review of immigration procedures, but 
the saga left Gibson's ruling Progressive Liberal party government "lying in 
disarray in her wake". Gibson and his party were not the only victims of 
"Hurricane Anna Nicole".

Following her son's death in September 2006 Nassau's highly-regarded Doctors 
Hospital "came under fire for its treatment – or more pointedly its complete 
lack of treatment – of Anna Nicole's son"was criticised over his treatment.

But "the criticism of the hospital was nothing compared to the criticism of 
the Bahamas Coroner's Court", the memo says. The court had been unable or 
unwilling to provide a cause of death for Smith's son so when a US pathologist 
found the death had been caused by a toxic cocktail of drugs there was 
widespread "speculation that the government was protecting Anna Nicole from 
embarrassment by delaying its findings".

The scandal forced the government to fire the coroner and disband the court. 
The litany of disasters had a positive side, however. The memo says the 
scandals "revitalised" local media to take on a system that "too often rewards 
the privileged".

At the same time, the cable adds, the "titillating details of Anna Nicole's 
sordid affairs have enticed the Bahamian public to give renewed focus to 
government indiscretions".

The PLP government "fir[ed] back in self-defence" and promised reform. But it 
was too late: in May 2007 it lost the election to the Free National Movement 
party.
 