
Andy Murray and his coach, Brad Gilbert, will surely have allowed themselves a 
wry smile or two after Chile's Fernando Gonzalez pulverised Rafael Nadal, the 
world No2 and French Open champion, in straight sets to reach the last four of 
theAustralian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>. Gilbert 
and Murray provided the template for this comprehensive 6-2, 6-4, 6-3 defeat, 
with the Scottish teenager, a set and 4-1 up in the fourth round, not quite 
having the intensity or experience to carry it through.

Gonzalez is Mr Intensity, the wild man from Santiago, the raging bull. Show 
him patience on a monument and he would obliterate the monument. But last night 
here he was prepared to bide his time, cut down his errors and fire his rockets 
at the most strategic moments. Nadal, who complained afterwards of a leg 
injury, rarely if ever looked comfortable, and by the third set was making 
forehand errors of the most basic kind.

In the Chilean's corner these days is Larry Stefanki, who has coached John 
McEnroe, Marcelo Rios and Yevgeny Kafelnikov, all of them awkward characters, 
and all of them former world No1s. Previously, for all his power and talent, 
Gonzalez, 26, was the loosest of cannons whose mission in life was seemingly to 
destroy the covers of tennis balls.

Stefanki, with his California coast long hair and laid-back approach, has 
instilled a calm into Gonzalez's game that had previously seemed impossible. 
Not all have benefited from his coaching, notably Tim Henman, who became more 
and more confused. But Gonzalez, the world No9, has clearly listened and 
inwardly digested.

Understandably there were occasions against Nadal when he let rip and sent the 
ball fizzing and leaping way out of anyone's reach, but for the majority of the 
time he was prepared to play the waiting game. He also served superbly, with 
Nadal unable to cope with those swinging, sliced deliveries that took him wide 
and left the court at the Chilean's mercy, much as Murray often managed.

Nadal may still be king of the clay and he did reach last summer's Wimbledon 
final, but on hard courts he is starting to look vulnerable. Russia's Mikhail 
Youzhny adopted similar tactics in last year's US Open quarter-finals, while 
Murray sowed further seeds of self-doubt. The young Spaniard, as Andy Roddick 
has done to great effect, will need to get closer to the baseline to receive 
serve.

Gonzalez, by defeating Lleyton Hewitt in the third round, and then crushing 
James Blake, the No5 seed, had served notice he was in top form, while in their 
previous three meetings he had defeated Nadal twice, albeit in the Spaniard's 
very early days as a professional. Until Stefanki took over last May he was 
struggling and becoming more and more frustrated by his relative lack of 
success.

He did not change overnight, but gradually his new coach has curbed his 
excesses and made him much more tactically aware. "I used to hit, hit, hit," 
beamed Gonzalez after this victory, and there was still something in his eyes 
that made you suppose that he would still very much love to be felling trees at 
one blow. But he knows better now and, more importantly, the change is bringing 
success.

"He was playing at a very good level. It wasn't good for me," said Nadal, who 
apparently injured himself against Murray. "I have it in my famous arse," he 
smiled, the size of which and, more specifically, his constant picking of his 
shorts, has caused much comment here. Certainly his movement appeared to be 
limited, though Gonzalez's placement and power might have made anyone appear 
slow.

Gonzalez now plays Germany's Tommy Haas, who reached his third Australian Open 
semi-final eight years after his first. Haas saved a match point in defeating 
Russia's Nikolay Davydenko, the world No3, over five fluctuating sets and was 
ecstatic in victory. Twice his career has been imperilled by shoulder problems 
so there was real feeling in his words: "These are the moments you train for, 
work so hard for. So I let my emotions out. It was a great, great feeling." The 
same for Gonzalez, with Santiago bells on.
 