
As a new season dawns, a fresh chapter opens on Jonny Wilkinson's fitness 
problems. Since helping win the World Cup in 2003, the England fly-half has 
been cursed by injury problems to such an extent that he has not played for his 
country since, and he found himself back in hospital yesterday.

Wilkinson, who is in Japan on tour with Newcastle, was taken to hospital in 
Tokyo after complaining of feeling unwell. An inflamed appendix was diagnosed 
and he was prescribed medicine with the need for surgery initially ruled out.

The Falcons are playing their first match today in the Japanese capital before 
taking on Toyota Verblitz in Nagoya on Tuesday, but Wilkinson is likely to 
return home without playing. A Japanese Rugby Football Union spokesman said 
last night that the player's condition was being closely monitored.

Wilkinson has had injuries to his neck, arm and knee since his last appearance 
for England. Though he survived the Lions tour to New Zealand this summer, he 
missed the final Test after suffering a shoulder injury having struggled to 
justify his selection in the opening two.

Wilkinson was named as England's captain despite being injured at the time, 
and his immediate predecessor, the Wasps No8 Lawrence Dallaglio, is hoping to 
be playing again in November after breaking his ankle less than 20 minutes into 
the first match of the Lions tour in June.

"I do not want to set a specific comeback date because that would open the 
door for disappointment," said Dallaglio. "I have started running in the 
swimming pool and at this stage everything is going as well as could be 
expected.

"Long-term injuries are always a test of character for a player and his club. 
You have to work hard and make sure that you come back in the right shape.

"It is not the first time I have been in this position and the prognosis at 
this stage is that I should be back during November."

Wasps are bidding for their fourth Premiership title, but Dallaglio believes 
the title will be harder than ever to secure this season. "A number of teams 
have recruited well and quality players from all over the world will be taking 
part in what is a fantastic competition," he said.

"The likes of Leicester, Sale, Saracens and Bath will be challenging at the 
top while Gloucester are putting a good squad together. Every team will be 
competitive and we will not be resting on our laurels.

"The important thing is that we are there or thereabouts going into the new 
year because a top-three finish is again our ambition, together with an 
improved showing in the Heineken Cup."

Australia take on South Africa in Perth today knowing that defeat may end the 
four-year reign of their coach Eddie Jones after a run of poor results and 
off-the-field indiscretions by some of his players.

The former Harlequins scrum-half Matt Henjak, who was sent home from South 
Africa this month after a late-night drinking session, was recalled to the 
squad yesterday as cover for the 112-cap George Gregan, who damaged a calf 
muscle in training.

The Springboks also have their problems. The South African Rugby Union faces a 
government inquiry into its affairs after a scathing report by two lawyers that 
claimed the governing body was being badly managed.
 