
England fly-half Jonny Wilkinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jonny-wilkinson> has been admitted to 
hospital in Japan suffering from an inflamed appendix.

Wilkinson, currently on a pre-season tour of Japan with the Newcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/newcastlefalcons> Falcons, was admitted to 
hospital after complaining of feeling unwell.

The 26-year-old is on medication to counter the inflammation and will continue 
to be monitored.

The Falcons are due to play their first tour match against NEC Green Rockets 
in Tokyo tomorrow before taking on Toyota Verblitz in Toyota City, near Nagoya, 
on Tuesday.

It has been an eventful tour for the 26-year-old, who has struggled throughout 
the past two years with injury. Earlier this week the Falcons squad escaped 
injury when an earthquake rocked the team hotel in Tokyo.

The epicentre of the quake, which measured 6.8 on the Richter scale, was 200 
miles from the team's base in the Japanese capital - but the tremors still 
shook their 33-storey hotel.

Wilkinson has only made fleeting appearances for his club since England's 
famous World Cup win in 2003 because of injury. Neck and shoulder problems 
ruled him out of all but 48 minutes of the 2003-04 club season and last season 
arm and knee ligament injuries kept him sidelined again.

He did return for the tail-end of the season, sufficiently proving his fitness 
to earn himself a place on the disastrous 2005 British and Irish Lions tour to 
New Zealand.

Only last week, Wilkinson insisted he could not wait for the rugby season to 
begin. "I'm hugely excited about this season," he said. "It's been another 
funny year, I suppose you could say.

"I now have the attitude that a player who has recovered from an injury is 
exactly the same as a player who never had the injury in the first place. 
There's no reason to say that just because I had a knee injury last year that I 
now have a dodgy knee, or that because I got a bang on the shoulder in the 
summer I'm injury-prone. I've recovered, and I'm now going out there as if I 
was 18 again, only with eight or nine years more experience."
 