
One of the few certainties of life is that all of us will endure loss; the 
experience of grief – one of the most painful of all – is at the core of being 
human. I and my colleagues in mental health often receive referrals for people 
who bear all the hallmarks of being depressed – sadness, social withdrawal, 
sleep disturbance – only to discover that they have recently experienced a 
grave and significant loss, be that through death, redundancy or divorce.

While it would be cruel to downplay the effects of episodes such as these on a 
person’s life, professionals are often reluctant to intervene, at least early 
on: it is natural to experience difficult emotions in those contexts and to 
pathologise these feelings is unhelpful. Usually, grief resolves itself and 
life continues, albeit perhaps in a very different way. In the first month 
following bereavement, about 40% of people meet the criteria for depression; by 
two years, this drops to around 7%. It may not feel like it at the time, but 
the pain does lessen.

Unsurprisingly, sudden bereavement, or that which is accompanied by violence, 
is often much more traumatic for those left behind. The loss can be compounded 
by reminders of the person who is no longer there, and it is common for 
previously neutral objects and locations to begin to hold extraordinary power. 
Sites where acts of violence have been committed, such as25 Cromwell Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2004/feb/15/ukcrime.prisonsandprobation>, the 
home of Fred and Rose West, can become almost iconic in their significance.

Recently it seems there has been an increase in the practice of tearing down 
buildings that act as emblems of horrific crimes, as has been the case withthe 
home of Mark Bridger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/nov/17/april-jones-family-demolition-house-ceinws-murder-mark-bridger>
. The parents of April Jones have said quite openly that they wanted the house 
destroyed, and understandably so – it was a constant reminder of their loss and 
an invitation to think about what their daughter’s final moments must have been 
like. Similarly, following the Soham murders, a Cambridgeshire county council 
spokesman stated that it would have been “wholly inappropriate” to have allowed
Ian Huntley <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2003/dec/21/britishidentity.soham>
’s home to remain, and there was the suggestion that its demolition would allow 
the community to “move on”. Can the destruction of a house truly lessen the 
impact of such trauma?

It’s tempting to think of these actions as a means of attaining closure. But 
this suggests that a person can “get over” the appalling events they have 
experienced in one fell swoop. As with all grief, recovery is a gradual 
process. The emotional response is likely to vary over time, and may well be 
intensified by moments such as birthdays and anniversaries. There is increasing 
evidence that the ongoing effects of trauma are strongly dependent on the ways 
in which communities respond collectively. “Post-traumatic growth” refers to 
the positive changes that can result following an individual’s struggle to 
recover from a highly traumatising event. Despite the devastation that they may 
experience initially, research has found that positive gains can be made in 
several areas, including deeper relationships with others, feeling personally 
stronger and developing a greater appreciation for life.

Family and community support are key to this recovery. The murder of April 
Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/april-jones> will have affected the 
entire village in which she and her family lived, and it is likely that their 
grief is collective. An acknowledgement of the reality of their community’s 
loss – which could indeed include the demolition of Bridger’s cottage – may 
serve to strengthen the bonds, and give rise to something positive. Adversity 
changes us all; those who experience events such as these are irrevocably 
altered, but together, they can recover something of themselves. Lives and 
relationships can be repaired, painful though the process is. Hope for the 
future can be renewed.

It is often difficult to believe that any good can come from terrible events. 
The impulse to destroy that which reminds us of them is one most of us can 
empathise with. But a truer solace can be found away from the rubble – in our 
relationships with others and our ability to acknowledge, communicate and share 
our grief.
 