
Ilona, 20, came to Britain from Hungary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hungary> two years ago to make a better life 
for herself, and has worked as a hotel chambermaid. An attempt to get a late 
abortion brought her to the attention of children’s social services. She told 
social workers that she and her partner did not have the financial means to 
look after their daughter and were prepared for her to be taken into care and 
adopted in Britain.

The parents wanted nothing further to do with their child, Annuska, but they 
did want the best for her and opposed the local authority’s plans to return her 
to Hungary for adoption or to be looked after by another family member. They 
didn’t want relatives in Hungary to know about their child or for her to know 
about her origins and history.

Latvia complains to UK parliament over forced adoptions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/mar/09/latvia-complains-to-uk-parliament-over-forced-adoptions>
They firmly believe the better life they sought for themselves in Britain 
should be available to their child. But Hungary regards all children born to 
Hungarian parents as its nationals and demands the right to decide the fate of 
those who may be subject to care proceedings or adoption in Britain.

Annuska’s case is far from unique. Across the UK, children’s services have 
seen growing numbers of complex child protection issues among families from 
eastern European countries since their accession to the EU.

“Free movement of workers and their families within the European Union has led 
to many children living, permanently or temporarily, in countries of which they 
are not nationals. Inevitably, some of them will come to the attention of the 
child protection authorities because of ill-treatment or neglect, or the risk 
of it,”Lady Hale said in the supreme court 
<http://www.bailii.org/uk/cases/UKSC/2016/15.html> this year in a case of two 
young Roma girls over whom Hungary wanted jurisdiction.

Until a few years ago, cases of migrant parents voluntarily giving up their 
children were virtually unknown. Frank Feehan, QC, a barrister and family law 
specialist, issupporting Ilona’s case to have her daughter adopted in Britain 
<http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWHC/Fam/2016/440.html>. He says: “Relinquished 
baby cases number about 20 or 30 a year. We had never heard of these cases a 
few years ago.” Cross-border care and adoption cases now number hundreds a 
year, he adds, “almost always from EU accession states”.

Poverty is a common factor. Migrant workers come to escape poverty but find 
they cannot do so even when they find work. Karen Goodman, professional officer 
at the British Association of Social Workers, says she is seeing more child 
protection cases among children of eastern European parentage as a result of 
poverty and domestic violence, as well as cases like Annuska’s where parents 
are actively giving up their children to UK authorities because they do not 
wish them to grow up in their home country.

Cultural and religious concerns are also a factor. Alexandra Conroy Harris, 
legal consultant for child placement charity CoramBaaf, says social workers 
became aware of “relinquished children” cases at the time of the first wave of 
migration from Poland in 2004. If women had unwanted pregnancies, “as Catholics 
they would not go for terminations. This way [putting them into care] they did 
not have to tell their families back home”, she explains

Anthony Douglas, chief executive of Cafcass, which provides legal guardians in 
care cases, warns against the “charged implication that parents come here to 
offload their children for adoption” as a misuse of EU migration arrangements. 
He says “relinquished children” are a small proportion of foreign child 
protection cases. Still, he concedes that the growth in cross-border care 
proceedings poses big problems for the local authorities concerned. Should 
children taken into care be fostered or adopted in Britain, or returned to 
their parents’ home country?

The idea that states own their citizens and have the right to make decisions 
about them is old-fashioned

Latvia and Slovakia also take a similar stance to Hungary. They consider they 
should have the right to decide the fate of all children born to Latvian or 
Slovakian parents. Relations with all three countries are “highly charged”, 
says Douglas.

British courts are having to decide whether it is in the child’s best 
interests to agree to the demands of these countries and allow care decisions 
to be taken there. According to EU regulations 
<http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:32003R2201:EN:HTML>
, the best interests of the child are the priority, and the “best placed” 
jurisdiction for those interests to be decided is usually where the child is 
habitually resident, unless they have a particular connection with another 
member state (such as their homeland). Best interests may include considering 
ethnicity and ensuring children maintain links with their cultural background.

The regulations require British courts to recognise other EU courts and child 
protection services as not inferior in “competence, diligence, resources or 
efficacy”. Yet, of course, there are differences, hence the tensions between 
Britain and some other EU nations. In particular, some of the EU authorities 
use orphanages more than Britain does and object to Britain’s use of fostering 
andadoption without parental consent 
<http://childprotectionresource.online/tag/cross-border-cases/>. “We in Britain 
think foster care is better but we can’t use that as a reason for not sending 
children back,” says Conroy Harris.

In the case that went to the supreme court, Hungary wanted jurisdiction over 
two Roma girls aged three and four 
<http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWCA/Civ/2015/1112.html>, who have been 
fostered in Britain for three years. The foster carers are not an ethnic match 
and the girls are not learning Hungarian. Their parents, now back in Hungary, 
have been trying to have them returned to the country.

The case <http://www.bailii.org/uk/cases/UKSC/2016/15.html> went all the way 
to the UK supreme court where Lady Hale ruled that from a best interest point 
of view, the English family court was where the decision about the girls’ 
future should be made. It would be able to choose from a range of options, 
whereas a Hungarian court would always exclude care in Britain and reject 
non-consensual adoption in the UK – even though that might be in the girls’ 
best interests.

Not all eastern European countries take the same view as Hungary, Latvia and 
Slovakia. Inanother case <http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWHC/Fam/2016/440.html>
, an Estonian department of children and families official, Ly Ruus, wrote to 
the English family court: “We are very happy for the baby finding new parents. 
For a child growing up and being responsible and a good person, it does not 
matter where you are born and where you live – all that matters is the love and 
care you get from your parents who will be around you.”

That view is supported by Andrew Webb, the lead on family justice at the 
Association of Directors of Children’s Services. <http://adcs.org.uk/>Cultural 
roots are important, he says, but babies can develop perfectly well in 
different circumstances. They should know their life story so they can look for 
their roots, “but I don’t think that’s the same as making a decision on the 
basis of the nationality of the child”.

But Feehan believes there is a fundamental problem in Hale’s approach in terms 
of relations with other EU states. “Courts must be careful when exercising this 
jurisdiction. It cuts across the traditional principle that legal status should 
not change unless all parties agree.”

In contrast, Nuala Mole, founder of the Aire Centre, a charity advising on 
European legal issues, finds Hungary, Latvia and Slovakia’s stance outdated. 
“The idea that states own their citizens and have the right to make decisions 
about them is old-fashioned,” she says. Under international law, states are 
signed up to the primacy of the best interests of children. “The home territory 
is the EU – not individual countries.”

And if Britain leaves the EU? “British courts wouldn’t have to decide on which 
jurisdiction is best placed to hear the cases,” says Mole. But she assumes 
Britain would try to sign up to agreements such as the European Free Trade 
Association and so the EU legal regime would remain in place.

In Annuska’s case the high court ruled 
<http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWHC/Fam/2016/440.html> that, despite the EU 
regulations, her parents had given valid consent for an adoption, so the 
English family court, not a Hungarian court, can make decisions in her case.


The family court has now heard her case and dismissed the local authority’s 
application for a care order, which would have resulted in her return to 
Hungary. Mr Justice Baker said that “such a plan would not be in [Annuska’s] 
overall interests”. The local authority has therefore confirmed that she will 
be adopted in England, in accordance with her mother’s wishes.

Baker said: “A move to Hungary would in my judgment be far more disruptive and 
damaging than an adoptive placement in this country which will involve only one 
change of carer, no language difficulties, and a transition that can be 
arranged at a pace and in a way that best meets [Annuska’s] needs.” He accepted 
those needs included being brought up with an understanding of her background 
and cultural heritage, and said that “those who arrange her adoption should 
look carefully to ensure that any proposed adopters are aware of this factor 
and have the ability and commitment to bring her up with such an understanding”.

As for the two Roma girls, they have been fostered for so long in Britain and 
have not learned Hungarian, so it seems unlikely they will go back to Hungary 
even if the UK votes to leave the EU.

• Some names have been changed 
 