
Serena Williams bravely fought back from the brink of defeat to beat Maria 
Sharapova <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/maria-sharapova> in a thrilling 
Australian Open semi-final in Melbourne.

Sharapova twice served for the match on Rod Laver Arena, on the second 
occasion Williams saving three match points.

The 2003 champion then broke Sharapova's serve in the 14th game of an epic 
66-minute final set to claim a 2-6, 7-5, 8-6 victory in two hours 39 minutes.

"It definitely lived up to everyone's expectations and it was a lot of fun. I 
am really happy to get through," said an ecstatic Williams, without a Grand 
Slam title since Wimbledon 2003.

"I am so excited to be in another final, it has been such a tough 12 months 
for me. I want to thank everyone for supporting me."

Sharapova was the only active player to have met Williams at least twice who 
held a winning record against the American.

All three previous meetings took place last year, Williams winning the first 
clash in Miami but Sharapova emerging victorious in the Wimbledon final and 
season-ending tour championships in Los Angeles.

And the 17-year-old Russian looked certain to make it three wins in succession 
when she raced through the opening set and broke to lead 5-4 in the second.

The fourth seed chose that moment to serve her worst game of the match so far 
however, Williams breaking back and winning the next two games as well to level 
the match.

After an early exchange of breaks at the start of the decider, Sharapova again 
gained the upper hand as both players struggled to cope with the heat and 
demands of a match dominated by long rallies and punctuated by a collection of 
grunts, shrieks and screams from both players.

The Wimbledon champion broke in the seventh game and came out at 5-4 to serve 
for the match again. This time she forged three match points, but each time 
Williams refused to concede defeat and eventually broke back for 5-5.

The former world No1 then saved three more break points to crucially keep her 
nose in front and finally Sharapova, who had spent eight hours on court in the 
previous rounds, cracked under the pressure.

Sharapova was disappointed to lose from such a dominant position but knows she 
has many years ahead of her at the top of the game.

"I gave it all I had," said the teenager. "I played from my heart but I didn't 
take my chances and that's what this game is about. If you don't take your 
chances you lose.

"I thought it was a great match. I gave it all I had and so did she. The match 
could have gone either way. I think she got better as the match went on. She 
started to pick up her level.

"Of course I'm sad and it's a tough one to lose but I have a long way ahead of 
me. I'm 17 and I got to the semi-finals of the Australian Open. Nothing is 
negative.

"She is one of the best competitors out there. She knows how to turn it around 
and that comes from experience. Hopefully I will learn and improve."

Williams will face world No1 Lindsay Davenport in Saturday's final after the 
American finally overcame Dechy in three tough sets.

Davenport looked completely out of sorts, and perhaps struggling with her busy 
schedule after playing both a singles and doubles match yesterday, as she lost 
the first set 6-2.

The 28-year-old Californian then twice failed to serve out the second set and 
had to come back from 4-1 down in the tie-break to keep the match alive.

Davenport had won all of the pair's previous five matches for the loss of just 
one set, but was having real trouble finishing off the 19th seed, making her 
first semi-final appearance in her 37th grand slam.

She broke for a 4-2 lead but was broken straight back after a 10th double 
fault, and finally scrambled over the line with another break in the 10th game 
for a 2-6, 7-6, 6-4 victory.

"It's been a long two days," admitted Davenport, who will have played on four 
straight days by the time of the final. "It was not my greatest day playing 
tennis but I was able to pull through.

"Again I think I was a bit lucky but I will take it."
 