
Watching Venus Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/venus-williams> 
dispatch Shuai Peng 6-3, 6-1 and waltz into the third round yesterday, it would 
have been easy to dismiss the belief, widely held on the women's circuit, that 
she is no longer committed enough to tennis to be a serious contender for major 
titles.

She was focused enough to cope with the Chinese girl's more dangerous shots 
and send down a series of stinging winners, and if it was not quite the Venus 
Williams who won two Wimbledons and two US Open titles during 2000 and 2001 it 
was a passable imitation.

Her post-match press conference, though, showed exactly why she is no longer 
the imperious force she was during those two years. She admitted she was 
routinely late for practice and seemed to hint that this was something of a 
contentious issue with her father, Richard, who controlled every facet of his 
daughters' careers when Venus and her sister Serena were in their pomp.

"When I'm late for practice I feel real guilty," she said. "My dad hates it 
when I'm late but now that I'm an adult it's harder for him to say. You know, 
there's a fine line between dad and coach. I think sometimes he doesn't say as 
much as he wants to."

When asked what she had to do to play better she resorted to the kind of 
mantra that was once a Williams speciality and which sounded far more 
impressive in those distant days when she was winning enough matches, let alone 
tournaments, to back it up.

"You just continue the battle, prepare better, play better, think better, be 
better," she said. "Always better."

Doing better than going out in the third round of the Australian Open - which 
she did last year - would be a start, and to achieve that she will have to get 
past the talented Israeli Anna Smashnova, who has a game which has been good 
enough to put her as high as No15 in the world. Williams also has Lindsay 
Davenport in her section of the draw as a potential quarter-final opponent.

The good news for Williams, who failed to get past the last eight of any of 
the four grand slams last year, is that Davenport looked grumpy and out of 
sorts during her 2-6, 6-2, 6-2 win over the Czech Michaela Pastikova and may 
still be feeling the effects of a pre-tournament bout of bronchitis.

Davenport, however, always a wily reader of the game around her, probably 
regards the French Open champion Anastasia Myskina or another Russian, Elena 
Dementieva, as greater threats than Williams, and well she might.

Russia's hegemony in the women's game was confirmed by the emergence of three 
new major champions last year in Myskina, Maria Sharapova and Svetlana 
Kuznetsova, and few would be surprised to see a Russian lift the trophy here in 
eight days' time.

It would be a far greater shock if it were Williams who had her hands clasped 
round the silver cup.
 