
Serena Williams continued to make a mockery of such notions as lack of fitness 
and match play when she reached the last 16 of theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> with a 1-6, 7-5, 6-3 
victory over Russia's Nadia Petrova, supposedly the fifth best player in the 
world.

This is only the sixth tournament Williams has played since the beginning of 
last year, and she is ranked No 81. In essence she is a part-timer, which must 
be doubly galling to all those she beats, and in Petrova's case little short of 
insulting.

The Russian had only herself to blame. Having dominated the American in the 
first set, and held a 5-3 lead in the second, all her innate mental frailties 
surfaced, leaving her to clutch at the usual excuses afterwards. Petrova has 
many gifts, and is a fine athlete, but faced with the sort of raw determination 
that Williams, for all her lack of conditioning, summoned up when facing 
defeat, the Russian crumbled with distressing ease.

For the first time since 1976 there are no American seeds in the women's 
competition. Lindsay Davenport is pregnant while Venus Williams has a wrist 
injury. So Serena has been left to fly the stars and bars, though she might be 
hard pressed to find an Old Glory big enough to wrap around her if she were to 
win the title. This was her first victory against a top-10 player since she 
defeated Davenport in the 2005 final here, her second Australian Open title. 
"My God, that's a terrible stat," she laughed.

Deep inside her ample frame there still lurks the indomitable spirit of 
champion within, which is more than can be said for Petrova, despite the fact 
that she won five WTA Tour titles last year, and is working hard to quell the 
demons that rise within her, notably at grand slam level, when matters run 
against her. The eyes turn wild, and the muttering begins, closely followed by 
such a sagging of the spirit that it is as well to avert the gaze.

Williams was almost out for the count midway through the second set, and there 
was a haunted, painful look in her own eyes - the look of a seven-times 
grand-slam title winner who knew that her body was not responding to her 
driving will. But then Petrova wavered and, smelling blood, Williams was on her 
with the snarl and savagery of a born winner. She reeled off six successive 
games, and although Petrova regrouped briefly in the third set, the damage was 
done.

There is little doubt that should either of the Williams sisters commit 
themselves to a full season - and for them that would mean 11 or 12 
tournaments, including the grand slam events - they could both get back into 
the top 10. All of last year Serena made the right noises in that direction, 
but it was like smoke in the wind. It is all very frustrating, as women's 
tennis is all the poorer for being without the Williams, yet their dilettante 
attitude does neither them nor their sport any favours. "Disrespectful" is the 
word most used against them, both by officials and players.

Next up for Williams is the Serbian Jelena Jankovic who reached the 
semi-finals of last year's US Open, her breakthrough tournament. Jankovic has 
flair and a wide range of shots, and has been in excellent form this month, 
reaching the final of the Sydney event where she lost to Kim Clijsters. Whether 
she has the mental fortitude to halt Williams is debatable. "If it goes to 
three sets I think Jelena will win," said Petrova. Unfortunately she might not 
be the best judge.
 