
Brian Baker, a 27-year-old American qualifier, is causing quite a stir at his 
firstWimbledon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon>. After years spent 
battling various injuries, Baker is on the comeback trail and demolished 
Finland's Jarkko Nieminen, an experienced grass-court player, in straight sets. 
The American dropped only six games on his way to a 6-0, 6-2, 6-4 victory to 
reach the third round, something he would not have dared believe was possible 
at the start of the week.

It his best result at a grand slam event and no wonder – before being given a 
wildcard at this year's French Open, the last time he had appeared in a major 
was at the US Open in 2005. He was only 20 then and the future looked so bright 
when he beat the then world No9 Gastón Gaudio in the first round. However then 
came the injuries, a host of operations on his hip, and his career hit a 
roadblock. From November 2008 to July last year, he did not even hold a world 
ranking. Now he is back, he is making up for lost time.

"I don't know why I've been able to just come back and have so much success," 
said Baker. "It's tough out here. Not a lot of people do this. If they could, 
it wouldn't be as prestigious."

He is not used to the grass, having grown up on hard courts. "It did take me 
some time," he admitted.

"And now I'm really excited to be where I'm at." Next up is a meeting with the 
world No55, Benoît Paire, after the 23-year-old Frenchman surprised the No22 
seed, Alexandr Dolgopolov, 7-6, 6-4, 6-4.

One of the more intriguing matches in the third round will be Andy Roddick's 
meeting with David Ferrer. Roddick saw off Germany's Björn Phau in straight 
sets, while Ferrer was comfortable against Kenny De Shepper.

Roddick, a three-time finalist at Wimbledon but never a winner, has the 
superior grass-court pedigree. But Ferrer, beaten in the semi-final at the 
French Open by Nadal, is the man no one wants to meet this year.

"I think he's won an insane amount of matches this year," said Roddick. "I 
think it's 44 or something, so I was reading last week. It will be a high 
level. You have to play well to beat David. He just doesn't give you anything.

"I have a ton of respect for him, the way he goes about his business, and what 
he gets out of himself is pretty impressive. You have to take a more aggressive 
line against him, for sure. You have to execute. You have to be really rock 
solid."

Roddick has struggled to replicate the form of old lately, but is quietly 
satisfied with his performances this week. He rattled down 13 aces and kept the 
unforced error count low, hitting only 11 over the course of a 6-3, 7-6, 6-3 
stroll.

"I feel like I'm probably playing better than the last two years," he said. 
"I've put myself in a position to have a huge battle and a huge test in the 
third round. That's great, but it's going to have to be a high level to get 
through."

The No5 seed, Jo-Wilfried Tsonga, survived losing a first-set tie-break to 
Guillermo García-López, fighting back to win 6-7, 6-4, 6-1, 6-3. The Frenchman 
is showing no signs of being hampered by the finger injury he suffered at 
Queen's; similarly Juan Martín del Potro's troublesome knees appeared to be in 
fine working order during his 6-2, 6-3, 1-6, 6-4 win over Japan's Go Soeda.
 