
Watching Venus Williams's first‑round exit, at a tournament where the 
five-times champion once dominated, was uncomfortable viewing. It was sad to 
see a player of her stature lose to Elena Vesnina, an opponent she would have 
beaten easily in the past. Since the 32-year-old was diagnosed with Sjogren's 
syndrome, an incurable auto-immune disease which causes chronic fatigue, she's 
not the player she once was. In one respect it's great that she's still even 
competing, but it must be so frustrating for her no longer to be able to play 
at the standard she wants. There comes a point as a player when you start to 
wonder whether it's worth it.

It's very difficult to know when to retire, because there's still this belief 
that made you such a great player in the first place, but it gets harder and 
harder every time you lose. Mentally it's unbelievably tough. You ask yourself: 
"Why am I doing this? What's the point of turning up and going out in the 
opening rounds when I'm used to winning events or getting deep into 
tournaments?" You inevitably start questioning yourself. You're trying to get 
the most out of your game; however, on the other hand, you've got to think 
maybe it's time to hang up my tennis shoes. But the only person who can do that 
is the player themselves.

If I take the example of myself, in the end it became a fairly easy decision. 
I'd had too many injuries and I'd just had my first child with my wife. It was 
a case of: "OK, the body is not doing what I want it to do, I've been as high 
as No4 in the world and I'm struggling to beat guys I'd normally defeat 
easily." I was putting in twice as much work, but not getting the results I 
wanted.

It all came to a head in March 2007. The then Davis Cup captain, John Lloyd, 
suggested I went to play a $25,000, no-hospitality Challenger tournament in 
Sarajevo. I was drawn against my buddy Kenneth Carlsen, who I'd beaten six 
straight times. I couldn't lose to him. But I did in the first round, and the 
next month I retired after the Davis Cup. I knew it was time to go. It made my 
decision to retire quite easy.

The most difficult part of getting older as a player is dealing with the 
increasing number of injuries. You need good physios, doctors and 
nutritionists, and it's a case of how long they can keep you going. Take 
Lleyton Hewitt, like Venus a formerWimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon> champion and first-round 
casualty. The 31-year-old is a walking miracle in some respects, after his hip 
and foot surgeries. It's quite remarkable he's still playing at all. On top of 
that, Hewitt has three children. Add being married into the equation and it's a 
big ask to carry on playing.

That's why Roger Federer <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer> is 
so amazing. His streak of 32 consecutive quarter-finals at grand slams – he 
keeps on doing it year in, year out, and I expect him back in the Wimbledon 
semi-finals this year. I can't remember any top sportsman who's had so few 
injuries.

Most players, by the time they get to 26 or 27, they get a few niggles and 
then it becomes difficult. Once they turn 30 they're usually out of the very 
top of the game.

The only thing I see with Federer now is a chink mentally. Having been on the 
cusp, holding those four match points against Novak Djokovic in the last two 
US Open semi-finals and not getting through to the final, not winning that 17th 
major – overcoming that mental hurdle, that's the biggest challenge for him at 
the moment. But at 30, I don't think I've seen anyone better. If Federer was 
playing among my generation then he probably would have won No17 by now.

Having said that, I don't think he'll do an Andre Agassi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andre-agassi> and carry on until the age of 
36. What Agassi did with his body over the last few years of his career, he 
beat it up. He was having injections in his back just to keep going, he could 
barely touch his kneecaps. I think Agassi needed the adulation, he needed to 
walk out there and have the whole crowd behind him, and he basically destroyed 
his body doing so. Though he did win a major beyond the age of 30, and there 
are very few players who have done that.
 