
Andy Roddick <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andy-roddick> enjoyed his 
customary tête-à-tête with the press here but that was about all the No8 seed 
enjoyed as he was beaten 7-6, 7-6, 6-4 by Feliciano López of Spain in the third 
round. Having gone out in the fourth round last year it is another blow to the 
American's hopes of one day winning the title. Given that he turns 29 in 
August, time is hardly on his side.

Three-times the runner-up and never the champion, the American was out-aced 28 
to 23, out-passed and simply outplayed. He admits he has not played well for 
more than a year now but, ever the optimist, he believes things can get better. 
"I don't think I've played my best since probably April of last year," Roddick 
said. "I think I can improve. Have I over the last year? Probably not. I've 
been up against some stuff. But it has to get better, there's no doubt."

Last year's defeat by Lu Yen-hsun of Taipei was the low point of Roddick's 
year but even though Friday's result was a round worse, he said it was not as 
difficult to cope with. "He beat me," Roddick said. "It's easier for me to walk 
out of here and move forward than, let's say, 2008 where I lost to [Janko] 
Tipsarevic and I felt like I completely choked or last year where I had a 
million opportunities and kind of gave it away. Those are tougher to take now, 
I think."

Roddick had won all seven of his previous meetings with López, now ranked 44 
but who has been inside the top 20. The left-hander is one of the streakier 
players around but when it all gels, as it did against Roddick, he is world 
class. López played two superb tie-breaks to take command and then an early 
break in the third was enough to seal victory and a fourth-round clash with 
Gaël Monfils of France or the Pole, Lukasz Kubot.

"I have probably played like shit in third rounds and won before, too," 
Roddick said. "The thing you guys have to understand is there's no script. Some 
days you're going to play well and lose and some days you're going to play like 
crap and win. What do you do? You keep moving forward until you decide to stop. 
At this point I've not decided to stop so I'll keep moving forward."

Roddick's next assignment will be next month against Spain, and probably López 
again, in the quarter-finals of the Davis Cup in his home city of Austin, 
Texas. But López will now have to gather himself as he tries to equal his 
best-ever performance here, having reached the last eight in 2005 and 2008.

For now, though, the Spaniard said he was happy just to enjoy one of his best 
days. "I beat a couple of great players atWimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon> in the last 10 years but to beat 
Andy on this court is very special, of course," he said. "I would say maybe the 
best. I was surprised that I didn't miss anything, almost. It's definitely a 
great win. I played solid all three sets. When you play Andy Roddick here, you 
never expect to win two straight tie-breaks against him so I'm really happy 
with my performance."

López is a popular figure on the tour, especially with his female fans, who 
include Andy Murray's mother Judy. Her nickname of "Deliciano" has taken hold 
on Twitter lately and López admitted he likes it. A little. "She's so funny," 
López said. "It's just something that everybody knows now because somebody 
posted it on Twitter. I have to like it. It's kind of funny. I mean, it's OK."
 