
Andy Roddick <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andy-roddick> declared 
pre-tournament that this could be his Wimbledon swansong. He cannot do what 
Roger Federer or Rafael Nadal manage with the racket, the Nebraskan admitted, 
and about to turn 30 in August, the former world No1's body is "banged up".

After going down 6-2, 6-7, 4-6, 3-6 to David Ferrer, the question of whether 
he returns to south-west London again for the Championships is still to be 
decided – there was a kiss to the crowd as he departed – though Roddick will 
definitely play singles here again when he represents the US at the Olympics in 
a few weeks.

"No" and "No" were his replies when first asked if he knew his plans for next 
year yet. Pressed on whether too much might be read into his closing kiss, 
Roddick said: "Yeah. That's just another way of going about it. I understand 
that journalistic ploy and that's what you're supposed to do and stuff. I 
certainly appreciate the softball questions in between. But, again, I don't 
have an answer for you. I'm not going to be able to give you much else. If I 
don't have a definitive answer in my own mind, it's going to be tough for me to 
articulate a definitive answer to you."

Perhaps there was a clue in the positive way he spoke about his game. 
"Honestly, going into Eastbourne I was hoping I'd win a match because I hadn't 
won a match in so long," Roddick said. "So you tell me I win seven straight and 
have a chance to move on against a guy that is five [actually six] in the world 
and played a pretty good match; that's some progress in a short period of time."

Roddick's three finals on the SW19 lawns all ended in the anguish of having to 
watch Roger Federer lift the trophy. But he can be proud of the treasure chest 
of memories given to fans that include the 2009 showpiece the Swiss won 16-14 
in the closing set of a classic showdown.

Roddick's career has been built on a bullet serve that once flashed past 
Vladimir Voltchkov in Charleston at a record 155mph in a Davis Cup tie. Eight 
years have passed to find a 29-year-old veteran whose tentative play – and 
serve – against Ferrer was the continuation of a season in which mind and body 
have told him the clock now ticks on his career.

Before his Eastbourne victory last week Roddick had not won a match since 
March, and after losing in the first round at Queens he was forced to use a 
late wildcard to enter the tournament on the south coast where his five 
victories convinced him he may yet have a late career renaissance.

Roddick had little problem securing the first set 6-2 against Ferrer but 
struggled to maintain the zip to his ground strokes and positive forward 
movement that allowed him to establish this lead. While that opening stanza 
took only 22 minutes, the second was a far longer affair, clocking in nearly 
three times that length at 64 minutes.

Ferrer turned the contest around by drawing Roddick into longer rallies. The 
seventh-seeded Spaniard instantly broke his serve in the second set. At 30-30 
Ferrer manoeuvred the American around before a gliding volley into open court 
won the point.

Ferrer took another, this time via a two-handed backhand, as the juice from 
Roddick's play slowly drained, his opponent compounding the ability to move him 
into position with far better execution than the 29-year-old could manage.

The set was finally decided on a tie-break after back-to-back love service 
games. Ferrer claimed it 10-8 during a contest that featured the odd – yet 
somehow unsurprising – sight of a Roddick first serve that measured only 96mph.

Ferrer closed out the final set and match in 36 minutes and now faces the 
Argentinean Juan Martin del Potro in the fourth round on Monday. "It's going to 
be so difficult," the 30-year-old US Open, French Open and Australian 
semi-finalist said. "To beat him I will have to play very consistent. It is 
very important my first percentage with my serve. I will have to play very, 
very good. I have with great confidence because I won one tournament last week 
[in Holland] and my performance is good for the second week."
 