
Hundreds of enthusiastic competitors travelled to a small river in the 
Oxfordshire countryside hoping to win one of the world’s most coveted sporting 
titles – World Pooh Sticks Champion.


The river Windrush, in Witney, played host to the 33rd World Pooh Sticks 
Championships on Sunday, with more than 500 sportsmen and women of all ages 
taking to the bridge to drop their twigs.

Tactics varied between players – with some aiming for the sides of the stream, 
while others propelled their sticks into the middle.

Spectators watched the coloured twigs float along the five-metre course from 
the bridge, near St Mary’s Cogges, and under the rope finish line.

The overall champion of the individual Pooh Stick race was Charlie Roman from 
Stonesfield, Oxfordshire. He came third last year, but managed to beat his 
previous record in the 33rd World Pooh Sticks Championships on Sunday. Second 
place went to Simone Wilson and Tom Harding, both from Witney.

Winners of the group stage, The Hundred Acre Edwardes, admitted they did get a 
bit nervous before the race.

The family team, comprising Alexander, five, Fleur, 11, and their father Ben, 
40, had to draft in a last-minute replacement before the race in the form of 
Megan Harrison, 11. Despite not having joined the family during training, she 
helped the team speed to victory.

Ben Edwardes said the family heard about the championships last year and 
decided to try their luck. “We thought we might win,” he said. However, some 
players were left dejected after getting knocked out of the individual round.

Adam Peart, 35, from Oxford <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/oxford>, was 
competing in his third games and was certain his loss was “a fix” despite 12 
months of training. “I think that my stick actually won, but the judges just 
didn’t see it,” he said.

But his friends, Rhea Draguisky, 32, and first-timer Steph Avis, 27, both from 
Oxford, believed he was a loser. Avis, who won the round, said: “A poor workman 
blames his tools.”

Peart later conceded: “I didn’t get the stream very well.” But he said he 
would be back again next year to fulfil his lifelong ambition of winning the 
championships.

Pooh Sticks came to life in AA Milne’s The House at Pooh Corner, published in 
1928. In the book, Winnie the Pooh played the game with his friends – and, 
once, the group mistook the character Eeyore for a large grey stick.

Luckily, the Pooh Sticks races in Witney went without a hitch.

The event, which was organised by the Rotary Club of Oxford Spires, raised 
around £3,000 for local charities. David Cameron, the prime minister and MP for 
Witney, was not there.
 