
We live deep in the Hundred Acre Wood in our house these days. My daughter is 
finally old enough to enjoy – to love, actually – AA Milne’s stories of Winnie 
and Piglet and Owl. I, alongside other classics from my own childhood such as
Clever Polly and the Stupid Wolf <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catherine_Storr>
, The BFG, Pippi Longstocking and My Naughty Little Sister, am delighted to 
read them to her. (I love picture books, but wow, these are much more fun.)

So I’m both happy and anxious to hear that Egmont is planning an “official 
anthology sequel” to 2009’sReturn to the Hundred Acre Wood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jan/10/pooh-bear-sequel-david-benedictus>
, by David Benedictus, itself the first authorised sequel to Milne’s tales. The 
publisher announcedon Wednesday that, to coincide with the 90th anniversary of 
the first Pooh book in October 1926, the adventures of Christopher Robin and 
Winnie-the-Pooh would be continued by four “outstanding writers with a real 
understanding for AA Milne’s characters and world”. Out next year, the book 
will be illustrated by Mark Burgess, who also worked on Benedictus’s sequel.

I’m intrigued because I love Pooh, I love the fact that according to a poll 
cited by Egmont, his adventures “remain the nation’s favourite children’s book” 
– and, well, if there’s life in the old bear yet, I’ll certainly be reading it.

I’m anxious because Egmont have yet to reveal who the authors of this new 
anthology will be – they say they’re holding off until closer to publication – 
and I’m desperate for them to do Milne’s creations justice. We’ve a while to 
wait until then, so let’s pass the time by speculating about who the best 
authors writing today would be to pick up Milne’s baton.

I‘m going to rule out my personal literary hero, Stephen King, on the grounds 
of suitability for children. And I’m still too upset about Terry Pratchett to 
make a joke about how he’d have undoubtedly come up with a brilliant Pooh.
So how about Judith Kerr, whose animal creations are up there with Pooh (I 
read Mog in the Dark to an obsessed one-year-old most evenings), or Neil 
Gaiman, whose Chu picture books are genuinely charming and joyfully surreal? 
There’s no chance it’ll be either of them, but in the absence of any names, a 
reader can dream …
 