
The trouble with people from Blaenavon is that, faced with rude questions from 
outsiders, they are instinctively courteous.

Even the furious nuclear physicist behind the counter in the Railway 
Preservation Society shop, who scowls with loathing at the view from the door 
of newly greened mountain slopes and plans to write a book called How Black Was 
My Valley, will go no further than "Hmm... not at critical mass yet" when asked 
whether the booktown experiment is good for the whole town or just good for the 
new booksellers.

So it was a great relief to come upon the five women in Howlers - perhaps a 
slightly thought provoking name for a pet shop - whose views poured out in 
great gusts of cigarette smoke. Years of pent-up bitterness against the council 
which they felt had left them to rot, nearly a year of bitterness against the 
new shopkeepers seen to be treated like royalty by the same council.

Local people would have rented the empty council property, they insisted, but 
the council had turned them down, and now the incomers were even being let off 
rent in the start-up period. A stuck-up lot, they thought, the incomers.

"When the proper shopkeepers in Blaenavon are opening up in the morning, we 
all say hello to one another; you'd shout hello across the street. We're all 
neighbours, we all know one another. But they never do that, so now we don't 
bother with them at all."

"I like books, but we've got too many bloody bookshops, last thing we need is 
another bookshop. One bookshop would be fine, but we don't need all these 
bookshops, it's ridiculous," one said.

"I hate books," another said firmly.

"No you don't," her friend protested, "you like true crime, you're always 
reading them."

"They're not like real books," she insisted.

"It's not better in the town, it's worse," said the teenage girl dismally, 
"There's nothing in Blaenavon now. You used to see everybody coming out in the 
evenings, now there's nobody. The pubs are empty, you can walk down the street 
and I bet you, you won't see five people on the street."

"We don't need another bookshop, we need a supermarket," one said, and all her 
friends nodded. "We want an Asda."

James Hanna, the American who started it all, finds it hard to understand that 
in Blaenavon, a man from down the road in Newport is a foreigner; a man from 
High Wycombe, like the new owner of the Corner Bookshop, an alien from outer 
space.

James was hurt at the report of the pet shop conversation, though slightly 
comforted that the women adamantly refused to give their names and speak on the 
record. All the rest of the day, like a dog fetching sticks, he kept dragging 
along local people to avow their unwavering love of books and the booktown.

If the Pet Shop Girls had gone down to Broadleaf Books, they might have 
slightly revised their view of the council's kid-gloves treatment of the new 
shopkeepers. Lata and Jo rent only the ground floor from the council. They 
haven't even a connecting staircase to the first floor, which is nominally a 
flat though it has been empty for years.

Weeks ago, in torrential rain, water came pouring through their ceiling. They 
put out buckets in a panic, removed the books sodden beyond redemption, dragged 
the heavy, free-standing bookshelves out of the way, and phoned the council. 
The following day they phoned the council again. And the following day.

As the weeks passed several different lots of council people came. They looked 
at the room upstairs, they looked at the walls, and they looked at the roof. 
Each time they went away without doing anything, and each time it rained the 
water poured through. Part of the problem is that the building is now both 
commercial and residential - though nobody lives there - and those are dealt 
with by separate units, with separate budgets.

In another part of her hectic life, Lata works part-time for the council. 
"Part of me knows just how tight budgets are and what the demands are. But the 
part of me that's here just thinks I want this to go straight to the top of the 
queue, I want it done, now, today."

The town's first ever literary festival was generally judged a tremendous 
success - a closing day text message from Jo Wyborn at Chatterton's read: 
"Brilliant day! Town packed, books flying off the shelves!"

The flying volumes included an enormous new book by Billy Bodman, a small man 
with a big history. Paper Round is a sort of Welsh Mrs Robinson, starring a 
paperboy instead of a college kid, with sex scenes equally startling for 
explicitness and skilful writing. It weighs in at just under 400 pages, and he 
has already finished the sequel. His biog says: "He lives alone, having 
curtailed a hedonistic life style in order to concentrate on his writing; 
however he has a very large family spread all over Wales."

Mr Bodman had a book signing in the newsagents at the top of the town - a 
tremendous success, with customers pausing on the way out of the shop to start 
reading. The book is dedicated to his father, who died after 50 years 
underground of the dust which clogged and rotted miners' lungs.

The Guardian's copy of the book included a free gift, his touching poem about 
his father, "an ordinary hero", of a kind the women in the pet shop would 
instantly recognise.

"They don't make 'em like him anymore

Bone-hard of head, and butter-soft of heart

Hewn from a clay that now is all but spent

A tribal chief, and yet a man apart.

There is no measure for a man like this

The only hero that we ever knew

Carrying those thin, blue, coal-cut scars

The hard-earned badge of all his crew." Mr Bodman also starred in the quiz 
night which filled the hall of the imposing Workman's Institute, and was 
universally proclaimed an experiment worth repeating regularly.

The locals who came, including a team of regulars from Butterflies restaurant 
and almost the entire staff of the small bank branch, were hugely relieved that 
all the questions weren't about literature. The bookshop teams were hugely 
relieved that quizmaster David Bishop's knowledge of cutting-edge pop music 
seemed to peter out around 1985.

Both sides were joined in a ripple of indignation at a semi-pro pub quiz team, 
which travels around south Wales and the borders hoovering up prize money and 
trophies, and in rapture that the Guardian representative could not pinpoint 
the date when Manchester was dropped from the masthead.

James Hanna hurtled over to interrogate the winning team: where were they 
from? Newport. "See" he said triumphantly, "locals!"

Er ... ish.
 