
Confidence: everyone wants it. It’s what gets people jobs, relationships and 
friendships, right? And at uni, away from your existing networks, perhaps it 
matters more than ever.


University life can be a challenge to even the hardiest people. Some students 
leave school, where they were always top of the class, and are unnerved to find 
themselves a small fish in a big pond. Others suffer from low self-esteem 
already, and the pressures of being an undergrad compound this.


“Living away from home, learning independently, coping with financial 
pressures and social inclusion can play a huge part in self-esteem,” says Chris 
Bale, senior lecturer in psychology at the University of Huddersfield. “How 
students cope with these demands can have long-lasting consequences for their 
self-confidence.

“Most people adapt to their environments and successfully meet challenges – 
and this helps to built up their self-confidence for the future.”

So, with this in mind, whether you’re a first - or final - year student, 
here’s a myth-busting guide on how to make the most of your university years 
and not let low self-esteem get in the way.

Myth one: No-one will support you


If you’re worried about the future, there are people there to help. 
Universities have welfare officers and careers advisers who work hard to 
identify people’s strengths and to reassure students that they have the skills 
and attributes that employers want.

“Our job is to say, ‘hey listen you’re good enough and we’re going to help you 
work out what’s best for you’. We’re there to help students think about their 
future job prospects and get them prepared,” says Bob Athwal, director of 
student experience at the University of Leicester.

Being the loudest doesn’t always mean being the most confident

Myth two: You need to have a plan 

Try and enjoy the moment. Tony Chapman, professor of policy and practice at 
Durham University, believes that students are more anxious about their choices 
than they were 20 or 30 years ago, and that this is partly down to pushy 
parents.

“Before they’ve even started their course, some parents are saying, ‘what is 
this degree going to lead to, what are you going to become?’”

Uni can become a hot house, especially in final year and around exam times. 
But there’s no need to have it all mapped out. Even if you’re in your final 
year, it’s OK not to know where you’re heading.

Myth three: You need to fit in – and you don’t


Social inclusion, such as nights out and sports societies, can play a huge 
part in boosting your self-confidence. But if sinking pints, getting naked in 
public places and distributing exquisite banter isn’t your idea of fun, then 
don’t stress.

Universities offer extracurricular activities for those who enjoy being a team 
player and those who prefer a solo environment. Student freshers’ fairs are 
there to embed people quickly, but even if you’re in your second, third or 
fourth year, it’s never too late to join a team or a society. “There are ways 
to meet people and have a good time, whether it be through halls, sports, 
debating competitions, theatre and cinema club,” says Athwal.

Social media is having an effect on how young people see and feel about 
themselves.

Myth four: If you lack confidence, you won’t make friends


Confidence is something most people develop as they go through uni, and it’s 
unlikely you’ll be the same person at the end as you were at the start.

“People are often leaving established friendship groups at home, and, 
potentially, intimate relationships. You are suddenly thrown together with a 
huge number of other individuals from all kinds of backgrounds,” says Bale. 
“Some people will thrive in this environment, others may struggle more with 
forming these new relationships, especially given they’re more distant from 
previous sources of support.”

Change is often a good thing. And as Chapman points out, there are different 
factors at play that can affect self-esteem, whether students live at home or 
in halls or houses. “It can be hard work being away from home. But it can make 
you break out of your comfort zone and can challenge you socially and 
behaviourally.”

Myth five: You need to be perfect

How to have a healthy exam term
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/apr/30/students-healthy-exam-term> 
Social media <https://www.theguardian.com/media/social-media> is effectively 
supersized peer pressure. A quick stroll though your Instagram feed is enough 
to make anyone feel miserable. Those photos of people out partying or getting 
the perfect selfie can be unbearable, even when you know they carefully chose 
the shots that best depict the absolute blast everyone was having.

Social media is almost certainly having an effect on how young people see and 
feel about themselves. According to Bale, to judge their own attractiveness, 
self-worth, social status and success, people are unhelpfully comparing 
themselves with others. “Social media allow people to compare themselves with a 
much larger number, and wider range, of people than they would have access to 
through face-to-face communication,” he says.

If you find yourself doing this, remind yourself that social media also gives 
people the chance to present as more attractive, popular and successful than 
they really are. Don’t compare yourself to unrealistic portrayals.

Myth six: The louder you are, the better

If nothing fills you with dread more than than being singled out in a lecture, 
try not to fret. Being the loudest doesn’t always mean being the most 
confident, or the person with something worth saying.

“Many people learn to project a sense of self-confidence despite feeling 
insecure. It’s about how you appear,” says Bale.

Overstretched at uni? Use yoga to sweat out your study stress
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/sep/30/overstretched-at-uni-use-yoga-to-sweat-out-your-study-stress>
Choose your time to contribute carefully. Nothing will make you feel more 
confident in a lecture or tutorial than knowing the subject well, and being 
able to back up your points.

“People don’t want to put their hands up because they worry they will look 
silly - this even happens in the world of work,” says Athwal. “Confidence is 
the key factor here and welfare teams are able to help and support students to 
make them feel they have a contribution worth making.”

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 