
When Gabrielle Hamilton was heavily pregnant with her second son, Leone, her 
to-do list read roughly like this: tell brunch crew vinaigrette too acidic; 
pick up white platters; have baby; figure out pomegranate syrup. As chef-owner 
of the highly lauded New York restaurantPrune <http://www.prunerestaurant.com/>
, Hamilton had planned to let the birth take its natural course. Then two of 
her small team of cooks quit abruptly. The birth would have to be scheduled and 
induced. As she writes in her bestselling memoir,Blood, Bones and Butter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/food/9780701179946/blood-bones-and-butter-the-inadvertent-education-of-a-reluctant-chef>
, she felt "in the moment, like the only thing Icould control was the birth of 
my second son ... With nothing more than Pitocin in your IV drip, you can 
sooner control the date and time of the birth of a human being – the gushing 
entry into the great blue world of a whole new person – than you can the 
scheduling of a few line cooks in your operation."

Hamilton's memoir charts her chef's progress, from the smell of lamb roasting 
over apple-wood coals at her childhood home in rural Pennsylvania, her desire 
as a nine-year-old to get in among the tongue-lolling carcasses in the 
butcher's cooler, her teen years as a snot-nosed, coke-snorting waitress 
charged briefly with grand larceny (the charges were dropped), then a staunch 
Marxist feminist college dropout. Her path winds through temporary, 
20-hour-a-day jobs in catering, a diversion through a fiction-writing degree, 
and on to the moment she opened Prune. It is a tale filled with indignities – 
she once had to clear human shit and a maggot-filled rat from the outside 
stairs of the restaurant – as well as triumphs. Last year she was named Best 
Chef in New York City at theJames Beard awards <http://www.jamesbeard.org/>.

Hamilton also describes the particular circumstance of being a woman chef. On 
her way to a panel discussion about the paucity of women in the restaurant 
industry, she wonders why they're still having this "draining, polarising 
conversation". After all, as she says to me, as salty and straightforward to 
speak to as she is in her memoir, "the kitchen is pretty merit-based. There's 
nothing in a kitchen that either gender can't do. It's not like sumo wrestling. 
You don't actually have to be physically larger." Yet, as that panel gets 
underway, she finds herself thinking about the "second job" she has been 
holding down while working in male-dominated kitchens, "that of constantly, 
vigilantly figuring out and calibrating my place in that kitchen with those 
guys to make a space for myself that was bearable and viable", she writes. 
"Should I wear pink clogs or black steel-toe work shoes? Lipstick or chapstick? 
Work double hard, double fast, double strong, or keep pace with the average 
Joe? Swear like a line cook or giggle like a girl? Meanwhile, the parsley needs 
to be chopped, and the veal chops seared off. There is, still, the work itself 
to do."

While home cooking is still associated primarily with women, the restaurant 
industry remains heavily male-dominated. Figures from theOffice for National 
Statistics <http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/index.html> show that of the UK's 187,000 
chefs, 37,000 are women, making up just under 20% of the total. And at the very 
top, in the ranks of executive and head chefs, women seem even more anomalous.
The Best New Chef lists <http://www.foodandwine.com/best_new_chefs> created by 
US magazine Food & Wine have featured 92 men and 11 women in the last 10 years 
(89.3% male, 10.7% female); and while there were celebrations whena 
record-breaking 11 women won Michelin stars in the UK at the start of 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/jan/21/angela-hartnett-women-michelin-stars>
, that was out of 143 Michelin-starred restaurants altogether.

It was partly this lack of women that led Angela Hartnett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/jan/21/angela-hartnett-women-michelin-stars>
, chef and owner of the Michelin-starred restaurantMurano 
<http://www.muranolondon.com/> – and arguably the best-known woman chef in the 
UK – to set up Girls' Night Out, a celebration next month of those rare women 
at the very top of the industry. She and her fellow organiser, food and wine 
writerFiona Sims <http://www.the2fionas.com/fiona-sims.html>, decided to stage 
an event where three British-based chefs would cook with three from restaurants 
overseas, two a night, for three consecutive nights, starting with Hartnett and 
Hamilton on 11 March. They are followed byClare Smyth, head chef at Restaurant 
Gordon Ramsay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2007/dec/16/foodanddrink.features10> 
– the first and only woman in the UK to run a restaurant with three Michelin 
stars – cooking withHelena Rizzo, one of the best chefs in South America 
<http://www.nowness.com/day/2010/11/15/1129/helena-rizzo-brazils-queen-chef>, 
at the forefront of Brazil's burgeoning food scene with her restaurantMani 
<http://www.manimanioca.com.br/site.html>.

The third night features Anna Hansen, chef-owner of the highly lauded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/jan/03/modern-pantry> London 
restaurantThe Modern Pantry 
<http://www.themodernpantry.co.uk/archived_mailers/2011-10-24.html>, cooking 
with Margot Janse, executive chef ofLe Quartier Français <http://www.lqf.co.za/>
, which isamong South Africa's best restaurants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/apr/18/worlds-50-best-restaurants-2011#36>
, and specialises in food firmly rooted in that country's natural ingredients. 
The £200-per-head, five-course menus include Hamilton's buttered brown rice 
with rock shrimp, roasted mushrooms and duck crackling; Janse's loin of 
springbok, African grains, fermented garlic nougatine and celeriac puree; and 
Rizzo's ice-cream of egg yolks with coconut foam and crispy coconut.

Speaking to these women, the reasons for their success emerge quickly. They 
are all direct, down to earth and driven by their love of food. Hansen 
describes how, as a trainee, she would go into work even on days off, lured by 
the rabbits that were being brought in to be gutted and skinned. Smyth realised 
she wanted to be a chef in her mid-teens, and immediately started reading about 
grand chefs, learning classical sauce bases, saving money from her school 
holiday restaurant job, before packing up and moving from her parents' farm in 
Northern Ireland to take up an apprenticeship in England straight after her 
GCSEs. Her parents weren't especially pleased.

The reasons there are so few women at the top also become clear: a sticky mix 
of kitchen machismo, punitively long hours, benevolent sexism and a culture 
that still sees women as cooks, men as chefs; women in the home, men in the 
professional kitchen. When I go to meet Hansen at The Modern Pantry, her staff 
gliding gracefully through the final hour of lunch service, I ask whether she 
thinks women in the industry get enough recognition. "No, I don't, overall, 
frankly," she says. "People are fascinated with male chefs, not female chefs, 
because female chefs are doing what females are supposed to do: cook. But males 
are seen as doing something extraordinary … When you think about food, it's 
often seen as a female domain, but as soon as it becomes something where you 
can win a crown then the boys move in, right?"

Hansen grew up in Auckland, New Zealand, and started her career unexpectedly 
in her early 20s, when she came to the UK and took up a dishwasher position at 
The French House Dining Room in Soho, London. It was a tiny kitchen, and she 
was soon promoted to trainee, working with the two chefs, married couple Margot 
and Fergus Henderson. They were friendly, encouraging, and she loved it. Hansen 
has only ever worked in one fairly macho kitchen "and I've never hated going to 
work so much in my life", she says. Had she started out there, she adds, she 
doesn't think she would have become a chef.

Some professional kitchens are legendarily tense. The turning point in 
Hartnett's career came when she went to work for Gordon Ramsay at his 
restaurant Aubergine in the mid-1990s – when the kitchen there was referred to 
as "Vietnam" and she was the only woman. There were bets she wouldn't last much 
more than a week, but she persisted. "At the time you felt like you were in a 
war zone," she says, "because you were being screamed at, but when you relaxed 
you could laugh. There was one Easter I think, when every single person seemed 
to do something wrong, to the point where we were all wondering who would be 
next to screw up. Another time, I'd gone into the fridge, and the pastry chef 
had put all these souffle moulds on a tray, and as I turned around I clipped 
it, and of course you could just hear Gordon going: 'What the fuck's she done 
now? What's Dizzy' – he used to call me Dizzy Lizzy – 'done now?'"

It was suggested that Smyth wouldn't last long in Ramsay's kitchen either, but 
within three years, aged just 29, she was appointed head chef. Smyth has taken 
only half a day off for sickness in 17 years, and says when she was younger she 
always felt she had to prove herself. "If I was tired, or I cut myself, or I 
wasn't strong enough to do something, I used to think people would be saying: 
'Oh, it's because she's a woman.' I would be the first one in, the last one 
out. But I don't think anyone else put that pressure on me but me."

On one occasion in her 20s, when a less established chef was about to be 
promoted above her to the sauce section, she threatened to quit on the spot. 
The tactic worked. "It wasn't that the chef was sexist – he wasn't – but the 
sauce section in this restaurant, and in many restaurants, is the most 
difficult. It's dirty, not very pleasant, and it wasn't the fact he thought I 
couldn't do it, but no woman had ever done that here before. He just didn't 
want to see me doing it really. And obviously I wanted to do everything."

Being a chef is "not a very feminine job", says Smyth. "Especially when you're 
coming up through the kitchen. It's hard work, you get cuts, you get burnt, 
you're working on the sauce, and you're working day and night." She made a 
decision early on that she would have to succeed young, so she could have a 
family later. "Women haven't got a choice," she says. "If you want to have it 
all, you need to achieve it young, because I couldn't do this and have a 
family. When I do have a family I want to do that well also. I don't want to 
drop them off and be working 90 hours a week. I remember years ago, when I 
wanted to go and train in France with Alain Ducasse, and Gordon took me out for 
dinner with Marcus Wareing, and they said: 'OK, where do you want to work, what 
do you want to do?' And I was a senior sous chef, I was 25, and I was saying to 
Gordon: 'I want to go here, I want to go there, and I need to do it now.' They 
said: 'Why are you in such a hurry?' And I said: 'Because I am. I'm a woman, 
Gordon. I need to do this now.' And they were like: 'Calm down.' And I said: 
'No. I don't have time.'"

None of the women I speak to has ever had a problem presiding over a 
male-dominated kitchen. I ask if the Prune kitchen is as macho as some of those 
Hamilton has worked in, and she says she doesn't "scream and shout, but I do 
groan. And I think I make more sexual jokes than anyone — we like good, 
healthy, dirty banter going on in the kitchen. That keeps us all going".

In 2002, when Hartnett became head chef at the Connaught, and some customers 
reacted with horror at the idea of a woman running a professional kitchen (one 
used to ring up to ask, malevolently, if she was still there), the atmosphere 
was more macho than it is at Murano, she says. "There were a lot more chefs, 
and they'd always be mucking around and joking. There was a butcher who they 
said was so rude, and I'd say: 'Oh no, not George, he's very polite,' and they 
said: 'Oh yeah, when you're around. As soon as your back's turned it'sdisgusting
 the things he comes out with.'"

Janse's approach to managing her kitchen isn't at all punishing; rather than 
pushing her staff to their physical limits, she tries to encourage them to 
relax a little. "You have to be strict," she says, "but I don't want people to 
shudder when I walk in, because I don't think you're going to cook nice food if 
that's how you feel ... I don't have a starting time for my team. They tend to 
come too early, and then I have to say, no, you can't come at this time every 
day. It's not good. You get too tired. It's not healthy. I don't think it's 
right to start at nine in the morning and go home at midnight, without a proper 
break or split shift. I think you need to work smart, and I expect you to work 
hard, but I really am over the feeling that you need to kill yourself in this 
job."

Hartnett says that being one of the few top female chefs has helped her 
career, rather than hindered it, made her more likely to receive publicity, 
more likely to be asked to appear in magazines and on TV, just generally more 
prominent. And while some chefs would guard that exceptional status, she's 
using it to draw attention to her equally brilliant female peers. Ramsay once 
suggested women couldn't cook to save their lives. What does Hartnett think of 
that? She laughs, as she has in the past at so many macho kitchen shenanigans. 
"I think he said it," she hoots, "but I don't think he meant it."

• Girls' Night Out, sponsored by American Express, is on 11, 12 and 13 March 
at 1 Lombard Street, London EC2. To book, emailel@jessen.co.uk 
<mailto:el@jessen.co.uk> with the subject line Girls' Night Out or call 020 
7929 9511
 