
Not since Alastair Campbell cleared customs in Auckland has spin emerged as 
such a talking point before an England sporting tour. And this time, it 
presumably will not involve midnight meetings in hotel bars. Spin, in the case 
of Michael Vaughan's cricketers, will almost certainly be the weapon of choice 
employed by Pakistan as they attempt to halt England's post-Ashes progress and 
thwart their push for the world No1 ranking.

Pakistan's coach Bob Woolmer suggested as much yesterday, predicting a 
succession of traditional, turning wickets throughout the series and 
foreshadowing the recall of the veteran leg-spinner Mushtaq Ahmed after almost 
two years, to accompany Danish Kaneria. "I think most teams these days need 
five bowlers," Woolmer said. "Mushtaq has a lot of experience. Even if he is 
not in the squad, we would be keen for him to work closely with Danish. But 
[Pakistan captain] Inzamam [ul-Haq] was keen that we should look at the option 
of bringing him back."

It has no doubt occurred to Woolmer, a former England batsman, that Vaughan's 
side hardly spun Australia into submission - Ashley Giles claimed only 10 
wickets at 57.80 in the series - nor did they doggedly bat their opponents out 
of matches. Rather, England's was an Ashes victory secured through fast-paced, 
aggressive strokemaking and the performances of a four-strong pace attack, 
often rewarded for pounding the ball into the wicket - tactically sound ploys 
on the quicker wickets of England, though rarely on dusty Pakistan surfaces.

Woolmer, accordingly, hopes spin will work to Pakistan's advantage on two 
fronts. By recalling the 35-year-old Mushtaq, who has taken 75 wickets at 26.21 
for Sussex this season, the coach could use the conditions to full effect by 
exposing England's batsmen to a dual wrist-spin assault, given that few of 
Vaughan's men mastered Shane Warne (40 wickets at 19.92) during the Ashes.

Though Giles was not exactly destructive against the Australians, save for the 
first innings at Edgbaston, his record in Pakistan of 17 wickets at 24.11 in 
three Tests should comfort Vaughan. But what if he was to suffer an injury? 
That would leave Shaun Udal, uncapped at 36, and Alex Loudon, uncapped at 25, 
as England's only specialist spinning options - a troubling scenario, if ever 
there was one.

"I am a great fan of Ashley Giles," Woolmer said. "I am not taking an England 
spin attack with him in it lightly. But there will certainly be more of an 
emphasis on spin here. [Given] the heat and the time of the year we are 
playing, the ball will definitely turn.The Ashes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ashes> were a totally different experience 
to what England will face over here. There was hype everywhere so it wasn't a 
hard series to get yourself up for. Coming over to Pakistan there will be a 
very different atmosphere and the wickets will be slower and turn a bit which 
will make it harder for the batsmen to play their shots."

Imran Khan, Pakistan's former captain, is among those who believe England will 
never dominate world cricket like West Indies of the 1980s and Australia of the 
1990s without a better spinning attack. "So much of Australia's success was 
achieved around Warne," Imran said. "Ashley Giles is not the answer. You need 
someone more reliable than that if you are to win consistently on the 
subcontinent."

It could also be argued that Pakistan need someone more reliable than Shoaib 
Akhtar to lead their pace attack. Woolmer admitted Shoaib's fitness and 
commitment would be major factors in determining Pakistan's success in this 
series, given that both were found wanting in Australia last summer when 
Pakistan slumped to a 3-0 series defeat.

"To me, Pakistan cricket is still very much a work in progress," he said. 
"Shoaib is important to us. We have talked with Shoaib about getting into the 
kind of shape that will not only allow him to get through Tests, but also to be 
a force right the way through them. From all accounts he has started to work 
hard."
 