
As a student of architecture, I have always been passionate about modern and 
historical buildings, which in the architectural realm seem to be at two 
opposite ends of the spectrum.

I began my journey into architecture through working for a conservation 
practice. Within months, I knew I wanted more so I embarked on a seven-year 
course to become an architect. I really wanted to be part of something great.

However, I was quickly disillusioned with what architecture schools actually 
perceive as architecture. I recall attending a few open days and first projects 
included a fashion show and some kind of photography study. I was soon to find 
out that this was the norm. How does one go from historical classicism to 
modernism to a fashion show? Personally, I couldn't quite get my head around it 
but I found a university that seemed to offer the best of both worlds: 
construction detailing and design.

I spent my first year creating things that were partly "designer" but didn't 
quite make the cut. By my second year, I was falling into the branded 
"classicist" type. However, after many arguments with a tutor about how I 
shouldn't bother about the fact that my site was in a conservation area, or 
that there were tree preservation orders, I decided to try something new.

I spent the better part of my second year creating objects that made no sense 
– even to me. I bought a load of plaster, screws and other sharp objects and 
moulded them into something that looked like it belonged in a Saw movie. The 
result: a security dog compound on the stunning estate of Castle Howard. In 
real life, it would never get planning permission, nor would anyone want it to 
be built, but to my surprise I got a first.

I'm not the only one who has found architectural education a bit of a mind 
boggle. With a lack of structural knowledge taught at universities, it is easy 
to see why we create so many terrible buildings. We were hardly taught anything 
about the progression in architecture or, for example, about how to create real 
homes that were comfortable.

In fact, I don't recall one person studying or designing homes in our final 
year; the topic was "too small to count".

We're now in a position where houses are among the most common structures 
being built and the government is hoping to see a huge increase in the number 
of new homes, yet the people meant to be designing them aren't taught how to do 
this at university. This seems absolutely bizarre to me.

Today, architecture is often about who can create the most obscure egotistical 
building – the ones that win the awards. Schools of architecture seem keen to 
produce the newNorman Foster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/norman-foster> or Zaha Hadid, not the 
new hybrid of intellectual, sensitive designers that we are meant to be. I must 
admit that I find buildings such as the Shard particularly impressive – but who 
really wants, or can afford, to live there?

I will soon join a practice that works with local vernacular design in Kent. 
Hopefully, there will be chance for innovation and for using local materials to 
create homes that people actually love.

Louise Priestman is holds a degree in architecture from the University of 
Lincoln <http://www.lincoln.ac.uk/home/> and is studying for a masters in 
sustainable urbanism at theUniversity of Wales 
<http://www.wales.ac.uk/en/Home.aspx>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. Join the housing 
network <http://www.guardian.co.uk/housing-network> for comment, analysis and 
best practice direct to you
 