
A well-established writer more known for his humorous travelogues and a 
first-time author's humane book about mutants and monsters feature in the 
shortlist for this year's Aventis prize for science writing.

From Bill Bryson's A Short History of Nearly Everything, a straight-talking, 
everyman's introduction to the secrets of the universe, to Armand Marie Leroi's 
Mutants and Andrew Brown's In the Beginning Was the Worm, a book which 
celebrates the humble nematode worm, the six books explore a wide spectrum of 
scientific endeavour.

The shortlist was plucked from a longlist of 15, which had been whittled down 
from 106 entries, up almost 20% on the previous year.

Chair of the judging panel, Professor Robert Winston, said that the judges had 
been particularly pleased by the broad coverage of the entries and the fact 
that the shortlist included famous as well as debut authors.

This year's jury also comprises authors Terry Pratchett and Sunetra Gupta, 
neuroscientist Daniel Glaser and Emma Read, commissioning editor for Discovery 
Channel Europe.

The winner of the Aventis prize gets a cheque for £10,000, but none of the 
shortlisted authors will go home empty-handed: each one gets £1,000. The prize 
will be awarded at the Royal Society in London on June 14.

Last year, Chris McManus's Right Hand, Left Hand scooped the prize from 
favourite Steven Pinker's The Blank Slate. Other winners in the prize's 16-year 
history include Stephen Hawking for The Universe in a Nutshell, Brian Greene 
for The Elegant Universe, Steve Jones for The Language of the Genes and Roger 
Penrose for The Emperor's New Mind.

This year's shortlisted books 

In the Beginning Was the Worm by Andrew Brown 
 The book maps the scientific elevation of a hitherto lowly organism - 
Caenorhabditis elegans, otherwise known as the nematode worm - which eventually 
led to the human genome project. This tiny brainless organism, less than a 
millimetre long, was chosen by Sidney Brenner in 1965 as a suitable subject on 
which to investigate the secrets of life. It was some 30 or so years before its 
DNA was successfully mapped in 1998. The book provides a biological history and 
documents the work of the scientists who struggled to decode its DNA. Brown 
also speculates on the next stage in what has become known as the Worm Project.
www.thewormbook.com <http://www.thewormbook.com>

A Short History of Nearly Everything by Bill Bryson
 The bestselling American humorist documents his latest journey, which takes 
an unexpectedly ambitious direction - through space and time - to uncover the 
secrets of the universe. He brings his own inimitable style to the science 
genre and attempts, through humour and straight talking, to make subjects such 
as geology and particle physics accessible to the scientifically sceptical. In 
his words, he only wants to know "...how we went from there, being nothing at 
all to there, being something, and then how a little of that something turned 
into us, and also what happened in between and since."
www.randomhouse.com/features/billbryson/home.html 
<http://www.randomhouse.com/features/billbryson/home.html> 

Mutants by Armand Marie Leroi 
 This debut effort asks what new molecular genetics tell us about the human 
condition, and crucially, what happens when things go wrong. The book, in a 
kind of humane freak-show style, contains illustrations of ancient engravings 
and stories of physical mutations, using our ancestral past to explore the 
science of 'monsters' in contemporary society. But the evolutionary biologist 
shows that we all have our own form of mutations - unseen, perhaps, but ever 
present in our insides.
www.armandleroi.com <http://www.armandleroi.com/>

Nature via Nurture by Matt Ridley This is a substantial contribution to the 
ongoing debate on what makes us who we are. Since the discovery that the genome 
contains only a third of the number of genes that we thought it did, several 
experts have been arguing that nurture must then account for the many different 
types of human behaviour and personality traits. Ridley's book asserts that 
genes and environment mutually interact, so the truth is far more complex and 
exciting.
www.mattridley.net <http://www.mattridley.net/>

Magic Universe by Nigel Calder Drawing on an accumulated knowledge and 
experience of the subject, and utilising interviews with over 200 researchers, 
Calder confronts the breadth of discovery, from Pythagoras's theory of musical 
pitch to the science behind migration. Undaunted by the immensity of his 
project, he illuminates how the modern sciences intermingle, finding 
connections between different scientific disciplines and highlighting and 
explaining the latest discoveries.

Backroom Boys by Francis Spufford This surveys British technological 
endeavours since 1945, taking in the early rocket scientists, the development 
of Concorde and more recently, the voyage of the ill-fated Beagle 2. Spufford 
writes with humour and enthusiasm of the very British boffin - the classic type 
who belonged to the British Interplanetary Society - and his (it was almost 
invariably a he) modern-day equivalent. While he demonstrates a real affection 
and knowledge of the nation's past achievements, he is equally at ease 
discussing computer games, mobile phone technology and the future of invention 
in Britain.
 