
Would you like to visit Pakistan <https://www.theguardian.com/pakistan>? It's 
a question that is most likely to raise immediate interest, though not always 
of the kind that is ordinarily relished, when posed in the lower middle-class 
refugee resettlement colonies in Delhi. These colonies - Lajpat Nagar and 
Kingsway Camp, for example - were established from 1947 onwards when around 20 
million Hindus, Sikhs and Muslims were forced to move across the newly carved 
India-Pakistan borders in Punjab and Bengal provinces. An estimated million 
deaths augured and spurred the world's largest ever single event of forced 
migration. Overnight, millions of ordinary people in India and Pakistan became 
refugees in overcrowded camps, struggling to cope with their multiple losses. 
Many of the camps were later converted into permanent accommodation while new 
housing colonies were constructed for the teeming millions.

It was in some of these colonies that in 2002 I asked the residents if they 
would like to visit their former homeland. Though, in diaspora literature, 
migrants are normally expected to have a nostalgic relationship with their 
homeland, in this case, too many complications barred any instant nostalgic 
outpourings. Incidentally, a large number had never set foot in Pakistan since 
they had left half a century ago. The violent circumstances of their departure 
aside, the land these Hindu and Sikh refugees had left behind now belonged to 
India's supposed arch enemyPakistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan>
, against which India had fought four fully fledged wars in 1947, 1965, 1971 
and 1999, a long standing low-intensity conflict over Kashmir, frequently 
levelled charges of supporting terror acts and a far-from-over nuclear race 
since 1998. Through these years, boundaries between the two states, 
particularly on Punjab side, had been reified both symbolically and physically 
through a barbed wire fence. How does one relate to one's native place that is 
now officially considered home to national enemy?

My question, posed two months after the 2001 terror attack on the Indian 
parliament <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/south_asia/1708853.stm>, opened a 
range of responses - never a simple yes or no - from serious deliberations of a 
possible journey and practical queries about travel documents, to questioning 
the very wisdom of travelling to Pakistan. Many asked if they were "allowed" to 
go to Pakistan since it was an enemy state that sponsored terror against India.

Clearly, the nationalist discourse and Indian state's general hostility 
towards Pakistan had had an impact in the way people imagined, an otherwise 
non-existent, bar on travel. Many others tiptoed uncomfortably to keep balance 
between a deep-seated curiosity to see their former homes and the risk of being 
labelled unpatriotic. It was a label few could afford in Delhi where large 
sections of the Punjabi Hindu population inhabit the core constituency of 
ultra-rightwing Hindu organisation Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) known for 
its rabid anti-Muslim, anti-Pakistan views. Any personal wish to see one's old 
home was therefore expressed tactically, wrapped in a ritualistic critique of 
Pakistan's birth and the ensuing losses - of one's home, livelihood and lives 
of dear ones. Some had too many unresolved bitter memories of the place they 
now associated with personal sorrow and destruction. Why go back, I was told 
several times, when there is nothing - no relatives, no friends, no business 
obligations - to go back to.

In 2004-5, I repeated my question amid the changing India-Pakistan relations 
at the height of successful cricket diplomacy - an amicable test series between 
the two mostly warring neighbours. This time hostilities were put on hold as 
cricket visas were distributed generously and a general air of bonhomie took 
over Delhi. The earlier reluctance and ambivalence was replaced by more 
forthright admission that once, just once, many would like to see their old 
homes. Since the two states were cooperating, there was little risk of being 
called anti-national if one travelled to Pakistan after all. So, a thoughtful 
yes was the answer once emotional-strategic hurdles had been overcome.

A few months later, I was curious to find out if they had indeed visited 
Pakistan after all these decades. Surprisingly, only a few from these colonies 
had managed to do so - to bring back tales of open-armed hospitality and 
goodwill. A large number had failed to make use of this political opportunity. 
But this time it was not the international politics that was responsible for 
barriers, it was their financial resourceslessness that had kept them from 
seeing their old homes. The non-elite had once again been bypassed in the 
India-Pakistan politics, this time due to their social class reality rather 
than any political design.

Read more about India and Pakistan 60 years after partition here 
<http://commentisfree.theguardian.com/category/after_the_raj/>
 