
Venus Williams came perilously close yesterday to adding her name to the long 
list of seeds who have fallen out of theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>. Her 3-6, 6-0, 6-4 
third-round win over the 18-year-old Slovakian Daniela Hantuchova was less a 
statement of intent than a re-enactment of The Great Escape.

Williams has been hampered by tendinitis in her left knee and, though she 
seems to think it is getting better, the peculiar combination of hobbling and 
sprinting she had to do against Hantuchova did little to allay fears that her 
days here are numbered.

Williams began the match moving at about a quarter of her usual speed, clearly 
unable or unwilling to bend the suspect knee and limping from one ball to the 
next. Hantuchova may lack Williams's experience but she is a rising talent and 
a quick learner.

For the first set she strung Williams along, moving her this way and that, and 
for a while that looked more than enough for Williams to cope with. Then the 
suspect knee staged a miraculous recovery in the second and third sets.

Suddenly drop shots were chased down, groundstrokes were pummelled and 
Hantuchova was beaten into submission from the baseline.

The third set was none the less a struggle, with Williams dropping her serve 
twice, and even she had to concede it was a close shave. "I kept telling myself 
that I'm just sitting there and not doing anything about the situation; chances 
are I'll be on the flight home, too," she said.

Williams now has a day off to recover and try to keep the swelling down before 
her next match against the experienced Bulgarian Magdalena Maleeva, who in the 
past has beaten a fully fit Williams.

"Ice is my best friend now," joked Williams dryly. She may need more than that 
to beat Maleeva, let alone Monica Seles and Martina Hingis, who also lie in 
Williams's half of the draw.

Both cruised through to the fourth round comfortably enough. Seles stuttered 
slightly in beating Italy's Francesca Schiavone 6-4, 6-4 but Hingis wasted 
little time in dispatching the German Barbara Rittner 6-1, 6-0. With Serena 
Williams removed from her path before the tournament began and Venus looking 
less than convincing, Hingis will fancy her chances of taking her first grand 
slam title since winning here in 1999.

There was bad news for Australia when Lleyton Hewitt announced that he will 
not be fit for their Davis Cup first-round tie against Argentina early next 
month. Hewitt is still suffering from chickenpox and now also has a throat 
infection. With Mark Philippoussis unwilling to play and Patrick Rafter on 
holiday, the Australian squad is beginning to look threadbare indeed.
 