
So I'm walking along a railway platform in Lancaster and it's all good. The 
rain falling is not heavy rain. My train should have gone clear through to 
Glasgow and has nevertheless decided to end things here, but there'll be 
another option along any time. I have been assured. The bag I am carrying is 
light and comfy and I am not ill. I am not even a bit ill. Last night I did my 
one-person show in Liverpool – first gig in a couple of months, since the 
labyrinthitis took hold. I didn't fall over, or blank out, the audience seemed 
pleased and my hotel for the night was very cool in the nice way, not the way 
that means I had to break out the emergency foil blanket which, yes, I do carry 
with me in case of nocturnal freezing. And my iPod is – Dum-dah-dum, da dah-dum 
dah-dum – playing me"I Want You" 
<http://www.mojvideo.com/video-bob-dylan-i-want-you/21bc069e99f90cc5b59c>, 
because this is a morning for being cheery, yet mellow. I tend to play Elvis 
Costello on the way to events for a touch of drive. Mr Zimmerman is more suited 
for occasions when the work is done and I need to walk slightly slowly and even 
with a minor drag step because this is one of those days when I can appreciate 
my job.

Yesterday I spent an hour-and-a-half talking to an audience about what I love, 
which is working with words. I am, in fact, paid to keep words around, tend 
them, and give them to other people. My performance was happening as part of the
Writing on the Wall festival <http://www.writingonthewall.org.uk/>, so I was 
pretty much singing to the choir, but still it's always great to be in a big 
room full of human beings who are exploring alternatives to what can often 
appear to be the Standard Issue Way of Thinking: What happens if we don't agree 
that TV was invented to let us hear strangers yelling about having sex with 
relatives or how we are constantly threatened by dangerous scum? What if we 
don't believe our newspapers, or do maintain an affection and respect for our 
own species not currently shared by many with power in public life? What 
happens if we have free imagination?

Before my Liverpool trip, I was up in the highlands – Dum ... Dah-dum ... 
Dah-dum ... Dah-dum ... – saying hello to my godchildren. Among all the other 
people I would see more often if I didn't work like a fool, the godkids would 
rank among the top five. If not four. Or three. They are excellent people, as 
are their father and mother. I turn up at their house like a guilty, 
custody-granted realparent with too many disreputable presents and mumbles of 
"I know, it's been a year ... I was thinking about you ... And I was ill. And 
did you get my postcards?" And they behave like normal individuals who have 
been getting on with their lives. Apart from the Dr Who-watching, dog-walking 
and eating portions of our days, we spend a good amount of time talking 
nonsense, because we have all – in spite of, or because of, our educations - 
been encouraged into alternative thinking.

Dah-dah-dah-Dum ... And the next train isn't the Glasgow train ... it's now 
for Edinburgh ... then it'll be the Glasgow train ... No, Windermere next ... 
Then Glasgow ... Dum. Dah-dum, Dah-dum ... That's not so bad. Always wanted the 
easy parts of travelling: the strolling, the bass line lolloping along and the 
other layers lighting up, winking in.

Among the godchildren's presents, I hadn't included a bespoke story, partly 
because I wasn't sure if they might not have outgrown such things and partly 
because building one for them would still have knocked me over a couple of 
weeks ago – it was either dealing with the train journey or dealing with the 
pages, I couldn't have done both. One of the children is, in fact, happily 
typing (on a typewriter) her own stories now and so I got read to instead of 
the other way around. Her brother and I enjoyed ourselves immensely – and we're 
a tough crowd. And if this sounds twee, or middle-class, or dated, I would 
point out that both children are computer-literate also, that our fun cost us 
nothing, did us good and came from well-exercised minds that could have 
belonged to any class, colour or orientation. The stories made us happy and why 
not have a corner in life that's gentle, where people give each other things 
they have made? And why not keep your head nimble and feed it, especially if 
you're young? Eventually, the world will nip in and give you a kicking, so 
you'll need all the imaginative resilience you can get. (We won't go into the 
fact that the child's stories are scarily good and I will have to kill, or at 
least hobble her a bit to prevent competition. She has been warned.)

And here I can mention that there is nothing like writing for those you love. 
Building something out of words, an intensely personal medium – something for 
someone you respect, someone for whom you care – that's both a pleasure and a 
properly testing exercise. I have long argued that the writer's relationship 
with the putative reader should probably be one of loving respect: it's a way 
of maintaining a correct form of address. Having a literal someone out there 
for whom you would like to do more than your best, someone to please, can be 
helpful. There are risks, of course. Writing for children is splendid, but they 
will eventually grow up; things will, and should, move on. If you've ever tried 
writing for a lover, that can be intoxicating and wonderful, but it can also 
lead you into self-indulgence and, should the relationship founder, your 
deathless lines may end up all over the kitchen wall. Still, if you want to 
have a go ... well, I wouldn't be able to stop you. Writing from love and for 
love – love of the words, love of your species, love of specific joys – that's 
a fine remedy for ills.

And it's a reminder – Dum-dah-dum, da dah-dum dah-dum – of a deep pleasure in 
being a writer: the permanent music it provides. Sometimes having the benefit 
of a free head full of words offers as clear and complex a melody as any track 
I'll ever play to cheer me. Sometimes the words are background noise, sometimes 
they can feel like being a kid again and simply happy, sometimes they're an 
excuse for nearly dancing on a railway platform, sometimes I get paid for 
trying to put them down on paper, sometimes they'll end up in a letter with a 
readership of one. And this is something we all have: it takes negative 
intervention – illness, fear, threat – to damage our music, muffle it. But it's 
still there, waiting, singing inside. Onwards.
 