
I began my literary career with short stories. Or rather, I began with 
monologues. I wrote them for myself and my friends so that we could trot off 
and perform in auditions without exhausting the, if I recall correctly, 12 
available bits for women that were in any way kind and supportive to the 
would-be thespian. Once I had become a permanently resting 
ex-drama-and-theatre-studies student (easily done) I also became someone who 
sat up in bed to keep warm and made small, voice-based things which eventually 
became short stories. There was a lot of becoming – that often happens with the 
arts. And eventually, way back when there were barely Amstrads, I banged 
together my first anthology of short stories and a publisher actually inflicted 
it on a waiting world, rather than asking me to save it until after I'd managed 
to produce something more financially prudent like a novel, or some porn.

This was all good news. Someone trapped in a recession with an odd skill set 
had discovered a way to be useful and, indeed, fulfilled. Given that short 
stories are so horrifyingly demanding technically, the anthology was an 
opportunity to give my prose its initial experience of proper training. I had 
earned myself a chance to take my voice to its next level. I won some prizes. 
My work came to the attention of the wider literary scene and was able to 
shamble further forwards and discover some more opportunities. The first novel 
was treated gently and coddled probably more than it deserved to be. This 
wouldn't happen now. The short story anthology as a first book is rarer than 
unicorn pie. (May contain traces of horse.) The hope of making even 50% of your 
income as a published author any more in the UK has probably also gone – unless 
you are lucky enough to produce a bestseller, preferably involving porn. This 
may change when UK publishers discover that the production of ebooks reduces 
overheads as well as cover prices. Who knows – it does tend to take a while for 
UK publishers to notice most things. I worry in case, for example, their 
offices catch fire and they all burn to death over a period of weeks, coming 
and going, sadly unable to realise that their coffees are boiling away to 
nothing in their melting cups. And this is, of course, a hard time for all 
industries, from the sprightly to the moribund.

So why do it? To be rather more specific, why do we write? Why do we choose to 
work in forms like the short story, the literary novel, the essay, the sonnet – 
forms which have very little commercial value? It's easier to say why we don't 
write. It can be really very easy to say we don't write for money and, of 
course, I hope we don't. We produce writing, we produce art, because we love 
to, because it feels good, because we can't help it, because it rewards us in a 
self-perpetuating cycle with varieties of emotional and even spiritual 
contentment. The money we earn is what we use to have more time to do what we 
love to the best of our ability. And we have bills and possibly loved ones who 
depend upon us for food, clothes, floorboards, bus fares – money is handy for 
that stuff, too.

Being clear about the primacy of quality over money, rather than money over 
quality, is practical – as well as moral, if you want to get into that area – 
because it means we can't be bought and can continue to improve our craft. The 
usual conversation you may have with employers, patrons and the like (you have 
to do this, say this, compromise horribly here, lie down and let us get away 
with this in your name there) becomes – it's that verb again – pointless. You 
do the work for the sake of the work and if the money, or the prestige, or 
whatever shiny toys are on offer won't help the work, then you skip them and 
arrange to work elsewhere.

Do I always remember this? No, not always. Am I always happy about this? No. 
There are times when – like everyone, particularly now – I would like to be 
able to rest more and work less, when I'm tired of endlessly touring and typing 
and folding the timetable into origami so I can manage everything (everything, 
that is, but seeing the people I love and giving them proper care and 
attention). This can make me forget to appreciate the fact that I have a very 
wonderful job and still get to do it. Every day. I can forget how very 
wonderful this job is.

But people remind me. Not so long ago, I was on the usual type of panel 
discussion at a literary festival, far from home and the people whose hands I 
prefer to be holding. The format was the fairly standard: four authors and a 
chairperson chat about something vaguely to do with the event title. Over the 
years, I have slid from being one of the token new writers to being one of the 
token scraggly old ones. The young novelist sitting beside me began a 
description of how he had efficiently and effectively planned his first book to 
be commercially successful, adaptable for movie purposes and generally a 
money-making machine. The plan worked. He made money. (I quietly began to 
dislike him.) And then he talked about writing his second novel and the way 
he'd written that one for his friends. He'd cared about it. At which point he 
cried. Right out on stage, he wept big authorial tears of sheer bloody 
happiness. He had accidentally done something which had made him deeply happy – 
he had written for love. The only thing better than sitting next to that level 
of joy is having it yourself. Every day. Onwards.
 