
One key aspect is missing in the discussion on polyclinics. Ara Darzi's dream 
for high-quality primary care services is purely GP-based. It does not take 
into account community pharmacy, which supplies the prescribed medication and 
helps the public with minor ailments and health advice. Community pharmacists 
will be particularly badly hit if these proposals go ahead because dispensing 
is closely aligned with prescribing. Most dispensing income is likely to be 
swallowed by the centralised pharmacies in polyclinics, leaving local chemists 
to struggle on selling over-the-counter medication and self-care products. As 
many as 70% of local pharmacies could face closure. With GP surgeries and 
chemists' premises empty, local communities will lose two more vital resources. 
Surely this conflicts with the government's healthy communities and sustainable 
communities targets? Where are the interests of the patients in all this?
Dr Neil de Reybekill
Dr Jill Jesson
MEL Research, Birmingham 

Ben Bradshaw defends polyclinics by suggesting that local and rural GP clinics 
will not be at risk (Response, May 14). Unless he is proposing to create 50 new 
GPs in each area, in addition to existing GPs, this policy will inevitably lead 
to the closure of clinics. As a group of patients, we are particularly 
concerned about continuity of care. The chances of seeing your regular GP will 
be much less likely in a clinic of up to 50 doctors. In a patient survey by 
Londonwide LMC, 93% of people surveyed would prefer to keep their NHS GP 
surgery in the neighbourhood and for any additionalNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> funding to be spent on developing the 
services local surgeries already provide.

The contracts to build these clinics will not be as independent as Mr Bradshaw 
hopes, purely on the basis of cost. The voluntary, charity and independent 
sectors are unlikely to bid for polyclinics that will cost millions to build. 
It will be the large corporations who will own our GP surgeries and make a nice 
profit out of our NHS. Surely it must be possible for Mr Bradshaw to find a 
different policy where GPs are available out of hours without the corporate 
privatisation of polyclinics. This policy will be disastrous for our 
communities and for the local NHS care that we rely on.
Catherine Gosney
campaignagainstpolyclinics.com <http://campaignagainstpolyclinics.com> 

I read Ben Bradshaw's response to George Monbiot with interest. If Tamsin 
Dunwoody loses the byelection at Crewe one of the factors will be the new 
polyclinic recently opened. For people who live in the south of the town the 
old surgery was only a walk away, perhaps a bus ride. Now they have to get out 
their car or catch two buses. And I am at a loss to find any improvements that 
the polyclinic provides over the old surgery.
Martin Bond
Nantwich, Cheshire
 