
With Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> about to announce 
iOS 6, the next version of its mobile operating system, it's useful to look 
back at what was introduced in iOS 5 – and, more importantly, whether anyone is 
actually using it. It's easy to announce software features that nobody really 
uses so you can bulk up the marketing blurb. But does it stand the real-life 
test?

So here's what was announced in iOS5.

Notifications

Before this, iOS notifications were primitive - and easily outdistanced by 
Android 2.x's set of information in the menu bar (which told you that there 
were new emails, calendar events and Twitter or Facebook information).

iOS 5's Notifications changed that dramatically: every app could now put 
information – such as the content of tweets or the sender, or the subject line 
and some content from an email, or the level of a stock, or the weather 
forecast – into the menu bar, in your lock screen or only after the phone is 
unlocked. It's a colossal improvement on the previous, intrusive iOS 
notifications, which weren't were modal (ie you had to get rid of them) and 
interrupted other tasks. The only place they now survive is in Mail, where if 
there's no connection, you'll be told – even if you know and don't care.

The granularity of iOS 5 notifications puts them miles ahead of anything 
presently in Android; you can get an idea of what's going on without having to 
jump between different apps, because only the latest information is brought to 
the surface. In many ways, it's like Windows Phone's tiles, though that is 
intended to give more of an "at a glance" view of what's happening. (I do like 
Windows Phone's display of your next calendar appointment in the lock screen, 
though it would be good to be able to configure whether that appears.)

One thing that's annoying about iOS 5 notifications: if you unlock the phone 
and go to an app, a procession of notiications will appear at the top, rolling 
over the menu bar. If you're trying to do something with a menu item, it can 
feel like swatting flies.

How useful? 10/10

How much used? 10/10

Over-the-air (OTA) software updates

An enormously important step forward - again, bringing iOS to the place where 
Android already was. Except that Apple, because it controls the handsets, has 
been able to push updates out much more aggressively than the combination of 
handset makers and carriers – so that iOS 5 adoption leapt almost overnight 
from zero to more than 80%, according to app developer statistics, and even 
point updates (from 5.1.0 to 5.1.1) can gofrom zero to 30% in a matter of days 
<http://david-smith.org/blog/2012/05/11/ios-5-dot-1-1-upgrade-stats/>.

How useful? 10/10

How much used? 10/10

iCloud, iTunes Match, Photo Stream

While iCloud is subtly different from OTA updates, it is part of the overall 
shift away from the "PC tether" that moving into mobile means. Again, Android 
was ahead with this, so that you could configure a new phone by signing in with 
your Google account - upon which apps and calendars and email would all be 
available. Apple matched that by letting you backup your phone to the cloud, 
though you can still choose to sync it to a computer if you prefer. Meanwhile, 
Photo Stream could sync photos taken on the phone to your Mac, via Wi-Fi. And 
iTunes Match, while not part of the official WWDC announcements, is another 
part of iCloud, using a music-matching service to let you get your music on any 
signed-in iOS device. Android hasn't got that outside the US because of 
licensing problems.

Is iCloud popular? Well, by April, six months after launch, it had 125 million 
users. A fresh number will probably be announced in the coming week at WWDC.

How useful? 10/10

How much used? 10/10

iMessage

This was Apple getting into the WhatsApp/BlackBerry Messenger field. It's like 
SMS, but runs over the data connection, so it can be free and cheap. (A packet 
data connection will often work slightly better than SMS.) It only works 
between iOS 5 devices, and one puzzle is whether an iMessage gets sent to a 
phone number, or to a login. It doesn't seem to have the world on fire in 
Europe (iPhone penetration is far higher in the US), but it's difficult to 
evaluate quite how much iMessage is actually used, especially when huge numbers 
of SMSs are bundled into both PAYG and contract deals these days, and apps like 
WhatsApp offer cross-platform "over the top" message sending.

How useful? 7/10

How much used? 3/10

Newsstand

A place for all your magazine and newspaper subscriptions to automatically 
download and be kept together – in effect, a pre-prepared folder for 
pre-prepared content. You may reply "what magazine and newspaper 
subscriptions?" and for many people that might be the block. Perhaps if it came 
pre-populated with content (a slot that no doubt would see publishers falling 
over themselves to bid for) it might be more useful. Instead, Newsstand can be 
confusing: you download something like the New Yorker app, and then wonder 
where it is. Answer: hiding in plain sight in Newsstand.

How useful? 3/10

How much used? 3/10

Reminders

These sync with iCloud (on which more later), iCal and Outlook. You can also 
set location-based reminders for the iPhone 4 and 4S. This latter is a good 
idea, until you realise that it's going to suck your phone battery dry checking 
your position as it waits for you to hit the location "fence" so it can remind 
you. Generally, it's easier just to set a reminder for a particular time. The 
Reminders app in general is functional, but the world is full of to-do lists, 
as is the App Store. There's no golder bullet for it, which is why there will 
always be reminder apps.

How useful? 7/10

How much used? 5/10

Twitter integration

iOS lacks (until this coming week?), while Android and Windows Phone do have, 
the ability for apps to communicate between themselves and say what they can 
do. So on Android the camera function can pass pictures to any apps that say 
they can work with pictures – whether that's Facebook, Twitter, Flickr, a photo 
editor, or whatever.

Building in Twitter integration (notably to the camera app, but also to 
Photos, Maps, Safari and YouTube; names in the Contacts could also pull in 
Twitter avatars) is an important step forward. The fact that this was Twitter 
rather than Facebook limits the breadth of its appeal (rumour is that the two 
couldn't agree terms, not least on privacy settings), but it was also a 
significant move to build the API for an outside company directly into the OS, 
right down to the extent of including a hash tag on the top level of the 
keyboard. For Twitter, it's certainly been all to the good.

How useful? 8/10

How much used? 9/10 (for things like tweeting photos)

Camera

Before iOS 5, if you wanted to take a photo, you had to unlock the phone and 
then navigate to the Camera app and then take the photo. Result: lots of missed 
photos. In iOS 5, you could access the camera directly from the lock screen by 
pressing a camera icon (later revised to sliding the icon upwards). This put it 
on a par with Windows Phone, which implemented the "pictures direct from lock" 
first. Apple also grabbed the neat idea from the Camera+ app of letting you 
take a photo with the "volume up" button – something that Camera+ was 
previously banned from the App Store for doing.

The camera app also got grid lines for composing shots (other OSs do that 
too), pinch/pull to zoom out/in when composing, and tap-and-hold for focus and 
exposure lock. For editing you also got crop, rotate and red-eye removal. The 
changes to the Camera app were hugely important in getting the best use out of 
the phone's camera.

How useful? 10/10

How much used? 10/10

Mail updates

Mail got text formatting, text indentation, message flagging, mass message 
flagging (starred, read, unread) and custom mail sounds. If anybody was gasping 
to be able to bold or underline mail messages, we certainly never noticed them.

How useful? 5/10

How much used? 5/10

Calendar

The iPad got a year view, while the iPhone/iPod Touch got a new week view. You 
could also tap to create an event, and view and add event attachments. While 
calendars are the bedrock of corporate life – where would people be if they 
didn't know about their next meeting? – it's hard to make them enthralling, 
sexy or easy to view when you're dealing with them on a mobile screen.

How useful? 4/10

How much used? 6/10

Game Center improvements

You could use personal photos; compare achievement scores with friends; find 
new friends via their recommendations and their friends' recommendations. This 
may be the sociai network Apple built which actually works, though it's very 
hard to know quite how many people are on Game Center. The feeling from 
developers is that in fact people use Facebook as their real game centre, so 
this isn't so revolutionary as it might have seemed.

How useful? 4/10

How much used? 5/10

There were a ton of other little things, principally of interest to developers 
(unsurprisingly). But those are the headline ones. So if we tally them, we get 
– in this totally subjective view of what iOS 5 brought to the experience:

Overall, how useful? 78/110 (71%)

Overall, how much used? 76/110 (69%)

Is that good or bad? You decide.

(Updated: corrected modal <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modal_window> to 
non-modal in Notifications.)
 