
"For a company that was never gone, Apple sure is back." So tweeted technology 
entrepreneur Aaron Levie. Spoiler alert: on Monday at WWDC,Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> won back the majority of our 
hearts at The App Business. So this review of the Keynote news will err on the 
side of optimism. Also, it won't discuss the new (gasps) app icons.

1. Say hello to Jony Ive, Editor in Chief of Apple


If you hadn't figured that this is now the Jony Ive show from the pre-Keynote 
soundtrack (Daft Punk, not Bob Dylan), you sure as heck knew two minutes later 
after viewing Apple's opening 'motivational video'. In it, Ive elegantly framed 
what innovation means at Apple, reminded us of Apple's enduring values, and 
made us all feel a lot better about owning [Apple] products that do a lot less 
than the competition – all with a few simple words and a beautiful animation. 
This set up a keynote that was to be about simplification, unification and 
integration, and – crucially – the collaboration required to execute this.

2. Apple wants to enable *its developers* to take the 'moon shots'


Apple has been heftily criticised for its failure to take wild moon shots like 
Google's self-driving cars. But Apple's message was clear – its gift to the 
world isn't going to be a stream of wild experiments. Apple's gift to the world 
is a platform that lets you – the developer community – take the moonshots
yourselves, at low cost, and with the chance of incredible reward. That's why 
the first demo on Monday wasn't by Apple. It was by a relatively small studio 
which had developedits own self-driving cars which run on iOS.

3. "Can't innovate any more my ass!"


Thus declaimed Apple marketing boss "Big" Phil Schiller as he provided a rare 
sneak peak of a forthcoming Apple product: the new Mac Pro. This is the meanest 
looking computer I've ever seen and Apple's unveiling was more akin to the E3 
gaming conference which was taking place down the road. And while I know I 
don't need one, I dang sure know I want one. My Twitter stream was filled with 
people looking for a justification to buy. Take-out: Apple can still innovate 
and Apple can still generate irrational lust out of thin air.

4. iOS 7: hardware and software are finally at peace

Forget the icon design hoo-ha. The breakthrough here is how Ive is 
constructing an experience in which the software and hardware work in perfect 
harmony. A device on which the customer doesn't separate the hardware and 
software experience.

How's he doing this? Ive and his refreshed user interface (UI) now consider 
the phone as a singular object, with a universal law of physics governing its 
hardware and software. The phone now consists of panes of content, stacked 
vertically, that can come to the top and into view. He's added translucency to 
the panes not for design flourish, but to give you a sense of location. And 
he's added parallax effects so that the UI moves as you move the hardware, in 
perfect harmony. Even the apps now run to the screen edges to erode that 
division between hardware and software.

Ive is clearly working towards a vision of a device that is simply a singular 
pane of glass that really is just all content. This is an awesome vision for 
app developers on a mission to create delightful, engaging experiences.

5. Apps, apps, apps

Apple clearly continues to believe that, for now, superior experiences are 
delivered via native app software rather than via a web browser. And so, Apple 
introduced new and updated apps for the Mac including Maps, iBooks and 
Calendar. Each integrates deeply with internet services, much in the same way 
Google does, but not via a browser. I don't think Apple is trying to keep 
people away from Google per se. Rather, Apple (like us at The App Business) 
understands that native experiences are superior experiences.

6. The web is a wormhole to Google and PC audiences

There was one big exception to Apple's native app strategy. Apple introduced a 
web-based experience to patch Apple's continuing Enterprise weak spot: 
businesses continue to prefer to do their work via Microsoft Office and Google 
Docs. And while executives on the move might be armed with iPads, they had no 
way to effortlessly work on docs between theiriPad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ipad> and PC. Well, until now. 
Yesterday Apple introduced iWork for iCloud enabling iOS users to continue 
working on iWork documents in the browser, on their PCs.

7. Apple is in the mobile payments game, big time. It's just not playing ball 
yet


Make no mistake, Apple is putting in place all the ingredients necessary to 
make your iPhone a wallet. On Monday it announced it now have more accounts 
with credit cards on file than any other internet store, shared data showing 
that people are more than twice as likely to spend money via iOS devices than 
Android, and unveiled a new e-commerce service,iCloud keychain 
<http://www.apple.com/osx/preview/>. The latter enables iOS devices to securely 
store and automatically input your credit card details when shopping via your 
phone.

8. Archaic filing systems are going away

A lot of Mac OS X software was introduced, but one significant thing stood out 
for me: the introduction of a tagging system for folders, like Gmail or 
Evernote offer. Why is this so important? Well, Apple is trying to crack a new 
filing system that throws out folders and branches and lets people quickly find 
files via just search or tags. And that's exactly what Apple needs to crack in 
order to realise mobile devices as true productivity devices that let people 
find files fast when they don't have time or the space to browse extensive 
filing systems. We can expect to see lots of this stuff coming to iOS soon.

9. The final piece of the puzzle: integration with you

Tim Cook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/tim-cook> talks repeatedly 
about the integration of hardware, software and services. But there is a fourth 
unspoken component to this puzzle: you. On Monday, Apple announced a range of 
enhancements to improve the phone's understanding of you and the value of its 
help. For example, the phone learns which apps you use most and keeps them 
updated for you (so no more refreshing Instagram); and the phone now knows 
where your meeting is and marks 'travel time' in your calendar (so no more 
being late). With wearable computing just around the corner cracking 
integration with you, and indeed the organic-body, is critical for Apple and a 
final piece in the puzzle.

10. One more thing: "does it deserve to exist?"

I just want to leave you with one final thought. Apple's executives said a lot 
at the Keynote. They also said something pretty profound about what not to say, 
or rather what not to do. I think it was Tim Cook who said this as one of his 
more casual remarks during the event: "Does it deserve to exist?" Wow. That's a 
pretty brutal question, a brutal filter for what gets signed off at Apple. And 
it's a pretty sweet question to ensure you focus on the stuff that matters. Ask 
it the next time you review, curate and cull ideas.

An original version of this article first appeared at The App Business website 
<http://www.theappbusiness.com/10-things-apples-keynote-can-tell-us-about-the-future-of-the-company-and-technology/>
.

Daniel Joseph, founder of The App Business, was previously European planning 
director for Apple's private ad and media company, Media Arts Lab. He was there 
for three years from 2007-2009, with responsibility for the launch foriPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone>, App Store and hundreds of 
apps, and interacted with Steve Jobs on a weekly basis
 