
Apple's Mac OSX software has had a radical design overhaul, bringing its 
desktop and smartphone software closer together, and introducing a new feature 
called "Continuity" that lets users easily switch between the two.


Continuity includes an expansion to the company's AirDrop software, allowing 
users to send files back and forth between iPhones and Macs. But it also lets 
users move work back and forth between the two at the click of a button, as 
well as automatically tether Macs to iPhones to use mobile internet on the move.

Users of both Macs and iPhones will also be able to use their computers to 
send and receive text messages and phone calls – even to non iPhone users.

Craig Federighi, Apple's software chief, demonstrated the feature by making a 
live call on stage to the "new Apple employee" Dr Dre, who joined the company 
whenApple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> bought Beats for $3bn 
last month.

"New employee orientation starts at nine, and you don't want to miss the free 
T-shirt," Federighi joked.

iCloud Drive - directly competing with Dropbox

 Federighi also demonstrated updates to the Mail, Spotlight and Safari apps, 
as well as a whole new cloud syncing service called iCloud Drive, at Apple's 
annual conference for developers in San Francisco.

An expansion of iCloud, Drive is a direct competitor to services like Dropbox, 
letting users share files and folders directly in Finder, the file manager on 
Apple's computers. The change marks a step away from the company's app-focused 
cloud services, allowing users to share files regardless of the application 
that created them.

Federighi also demonstrated an overhauled version of Spotlight, the built-in 
search tool.

In Yosemite, users will be able to not only use Spotlight to launch apps and 
search for files on their computer, but also to search the web, and for 
locations in the real world. But the app will use Bing for its web search by 
default, further stripping integration with Google from Apple's operating 
systems.

The changes to Mail include a new feature that lets users send attachments via 
Apple's servers, if their recipient can't take the file directly. Apple will 
allow attachments up to 5GB through the feature, which works when emailing 
non-Apple users as well as Apple users.

50% of Mac users on Mavericks

For the first time, Apple is offering a public beta version of its new OS, 
meaning all users will be able to give it a try this summer.

 Federighi and Tim Cook, Apple's CEO, shared statistics on the adoption of the 
previous version of Mac OS X, Mavericks. More than 50% of users have upgraded 
to Mavericks, which was made free last year.

"That's the fastest OS adoption in history," Cook said. That would put it on 
slightly under 40m computers worldwide, based on Apple's own data of 72m users 
given last year.

Cook compared it to Windows 8, which shipped a year before Mavericks: "It's on 
about 14% of PCs," Cook said.

The name "Yosemite" was finally chosen as the codename for the next version 
after various suggestions based on place names "OS X Oxnard", "Rancho 
Cucamonga", and "Weed," joked Federighi.

Originally codenamed "Syrah", OS X 10.10 is the 11th version of Apple's 
operating system, and the second to use its new naming system based on 
Californian place names.

• Apple previews new mobile software iOS 8 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jun/02/apple-previews-new-mobile-software-ios-8-at-wwdc-2014>

• Apple reveals 'Health', its data-tracking app 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jun/02/apple-reveals-health-its-entry-into-fitness-tracking>

• Apple unveils its smarthome program at WWDC 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jun/02/home-apple-unveils-its-smart-home-program-at-wwdc-2014?view=desktop>
 