
We are alarmed by the children's commissioner's latest revelations about 
children's suffering by arrest and incarceration at Yarl's Wood immigration 
detention centre (Yarl's Wood children face 'extreme distress' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/feb/17/yarls-wood-children-extreme-distress>
, 17 February). Disturbing cases unearthed by Sir Al Aynsley Green – reports of 
children forcibly separated from their parents, delays in treating a child 
suffering from a fracture – reflect the disregard for children's welfare that 
underpins the very existence of the government's detention policy.

There is no need to detain families with children. As UK Border Agency 
executive Dave Woodlet slip last year in evidence to a parliamentary committee 
<http://www.parliament.the-stationery-office.co.uk/pa/cm200809/cmselect/cmhaff/970/09091604.htm>
, the detention policy's true purpose is deterrence: "Whilst issues are raised 
about absconding, that is not our biggest issue. It does happen but it is not 
terribly easy for a family unit to abscond."

Along with hundreds of doctors 
<http://www.gopetition.co.uk/petitions/stop-the-administrative-detention-of-children-and-families/signatures.html>
 who have called upon the government to stop detaining children, we believe the 
administrative detention of children is simply too harmful to be accepted in a 
civilised society. We join thousands of fellow citizens calling upon Gordon 
Brown to End Child Detention Now:petitions.number10.gov.uk/NoChildDetention/ 
<http://petitions.number10.gov.uk/NoChildDetention/>

Sir Nicholas Hytner, Colin Firth, Emma Thompson, Joanna Lumley, Juliet 
Stevenson, Miriam Margolyes, Lenny Henry, Terry Jones, Tindy AgabaMA Law 
student, former child refugee, Anthony Browne Children's laureate 2009-11, 
Carol Ann DuffyPoet laureate, Michael Rosen Children's laureate 2007-09, 
Jacqueline WilsonChildren's laureate 2005-07 Michael Morpurgo Children's 
laureate 2003-05, Anne Fine Children's laureate 2001-03, Quentin Blake 
Children's laureate 1999-2001, Philip Pullman, Sandi Toksvig, Nick Hornby, 
Michael Bond, Benjamin Zephaniah, Roger McGough, Matthew Bourne, Kamila 
Shamsie, Michelle Magorian, Beverley Naidoo, Lynne Reid Banks, Esther Freud, 
Henry Porter, Livia Firth, Natasha Walter, Emma Freud, Melly Still, Jamila 
Gavin, Mariella Frostrup, Anna Home, Vicky Ireland, David Wood

• How many more appalling medical reports about the psychological damage to 
children in detention must we read before the Border Agency puts an end to this 
shameful and inhumane practice?

Which one of us would not be horrified if it was our child who had seen her 
mother and father arrested at dawn by police, been separated from both parents 
for many hours, taken in a car by uniformed men to a building surrounded by 
barbed wire, and locked up? And that's without even considering what traumas 
this child may have already experienced before coming to the UK.

As a community with a history of being refugees to Britain, we feel the plight 
of these families intensely. Other countries manage their asylum controls 
through community-based arrangements for children. For a civilised country and 
a modern state in 2010 to be treating children in such a cruel and cavalier way 
is simply unspeakable. It seems Every Child Matters – except the most 
vulnerable.

Dr Edie Friedman Director, Jewish Council for Racial Equality, Hannah Weisfeld 
Chair, Jewish Social Action Forum,Rabbi Alexandra Wright Senior rabbi, Liberal 
Jewish synagogue,Sarah Kaiser Director, CCJO RenéCassin, Rabbi Jeremy Gordon 
New London Synagogue,Rabbi Mark Goldsmith North Western Reform Synagogue
 