
Children <https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> held at an immigration 
detention centre face "extremely distressing" arrest and transportation 
procedures, and are subjected to prolonged and sometimes repeated periods of 
detention, according to a damning report by the Children's Commissioner.

In a report that prompted an angry response from the UK Border Agency (UKBA), 
SirAl Aynsley-Green <https://www.theguardian.com/society/alaynsleygreen> 
highlighted concerns over "significant areas" of healthcare for the 1,000 
children held in the Yarl's Wood centre every year.

They include a failure to assess "even at an elementary level" the general 
psychological wellbeing of a child on arrival and a failure to recognise 
psychological harm when faced with dramatic changes in a child's behaviour. The 
report highlighted the cases of one four-year-old boy who appeared withdrawn, 
wetting when previously dry, and an eight-year-old previously happy boy who had 
become sad, skipped school, lost his appetite, slept poorly and screamed in the 
night.

Aynsley-Green concluded that the poor care and unacceptable delays in the case 
of a three-year-old child with a fractured arm was symptomatic of a failure to 
provide a standard of NHS care that any British citizen could expect. The child 
had been examined by a nurse hours after a fall, but was not seen by a doctor 
until 15 hours later and, five hours after that, was taken to hospital. The 
report also highlighted an allegation, disputed by the UKBA, that a 10-year-old 
girl had her head banged against the wall by an officer to wake her up and then 
attempted self-harm by swallowing shower gel.

Aynsley-Green welcomed the ending of the transportation of children in caged 
vans, but expressed concern over his subsequent findings that children, some 
very young, were separated from their parents when transported to the centre, 
in Bedfordshire. He concluded that further work had to be done to make arrest 
and transportation "less distressing for and harmful to children."

Dave Wood, head of criminality and detention at the UKBA, hit back, saying 
that the report contained "factual inaccuracies" and that in some areas, it was 
"misguided and wrong."

He dismissed its conclusion that there was no psychological assessment of a 
child on arrival. He said he accepted there was a failure on the part of the 
nurse who examined the girl with a broken arm, but added: "I entirely reject 
that this is symptomatic of the healthcare. The standard of healthcare is equal 
to the care in the community."

He said that initial assessments were not carried out by a psychiatric nurse 
because not all children need psychological assessment. "If there is any sign 
of mental health difficulties identified then appropriate referrals are made. 
To suggest that every single one needs psychological assessment is exaggerated."

Commenting on the allegations of violence towards a 10-year-old girl, Wood 
said: "We don't believe it happened. There was no complaint by her mother or 
her mother's legal representative. We will investigate it."

He said that the child had tried to swallow shower gel, was stopped by an 
officer who followed her into the toilet, but that no medical intervention was 
necessary because the next day, she had been "playing happily" with other 
children.

Wood said he did not believe detention was "necessarily traumatic" for 
children, but admitted that arrest could be.

A growing body of medial evidence, including a recent report from the royal 
colleges of paediatricians, GPs and psychiatrists, has found that the detention 
of children in the asylum system is linked to serious physical and 
psychological harm.

Aynsley-Green's report welcomed improvements made by the border agency, 
including better facilities for feeding babies, and an improved, less 
institutional environment, with fewer prison-style uniforms, fewer locked 
doors, and new classrooms.

Medical records detailed in the report showed that the mother of the 
four-year-old boy who had begun wetting had taken an overdose of 
antidepressants on her arrest and his father had been removed to another 
detention centre. The notes recorded that the child did not know where his 
father was and missed him, but stated, "continued playing, mood not affected". 
Regression due to psychological trauma was not considered as a possible 
diagnosis, the report said.

Welcoming the report, Dr Rosalyn Proops, officer for child protection at the 
Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health, said: "These children are among 
the most vulnerable in our communities and detention causes unnecessary harm to 
their physical and mental health. The current situation is unacceptable and we 
urge the government to stop the detention of children without delay."

At a glance

• Standards have improved, but "significant areas" need attention.

• UKBA staff fail to assess the psychological wellbeing of a child on arrival.

• Failure to recognise psychological harm.

• Failure to provide a standard of NHS care available in the community.

• Concerns over the failure of the Borders Agency to ensure preventive 
healthcare on a child's return home.

• Children report finding transportation and arrest extremely distressing, 
including use of force by officers.

• Children, some very young, separated from their parents during 
transportation to the immigration centre.

• The length of detention experienced by significant numbers of children was 
"unacceptable". Call for greater clarity over recommendations that detention be 
"kept to a minimum" as required by UN convention on children's rights.

• Other areas of concern included the lack of any assessment of children's 
needs when deciding to continue detention.
 