
Even in the good times, there is no bleaker time than the days approaching 
Christmas to dredge up a sporting memory of the year. Who am I? That's just 
about manageable. What day of the week is it? At a pinch. Where are the 
aspirins? You used the last one this morning, dear. To summon up a gift-wrapped 
image of English cricket after the events of the past few weeks - let alone 
yesterday - is the most melancholic task of all. Every shining note of optimism 
has been buried under another Ashes avalanche. There are no uplifting 
recollections. Not in this head. Not today anyway.

The likelihood remains that you will insist upon something pleasurable 
something traditional. A hale and hearty yeomen-of-England image. English 
cricket as depicted on those particularly irritating Christmas cards: children 
playing cricket on a frozen lake, perhaps. What you are never told is that they 
would have preferred to be playing on the local rec but it has been sold off 
for development.

Buck up, man, you scoff. Shake yourself to the task. What about England's Test 
series victory against South Africa? There is drum-banging aplenty there. Roast 
the chestnuts, mull the wine, a quick chorus of Good King Wenceslas and our 
cricketing life will be wonderful again. It is just a matter of perspective and 
positive thinking.

Why, it was only in midsummer that the stalwart figure of Angus Fraser, 
cricketing yeoman supreme, stirringly staved off a defeat at Old Trafford which 
would have left England two down with two to play. Every ball that Fraser 
stoically repelled was cheered throughout Lancashire. And, at the completion of 
his task, a faintly embarrassed smile from a diligent seamer who went on to 
take more than 50 Test wickets in the year.

That took some capping. But capped it was on a sunlit summer's evening at 
Trent Bridge with a wonderful duel between Michael Atherton and Allan Donald. A 
tenacious opening batsman pitted against the fastest of bowlers, both at the 
peak of their powers. A confrontation to make the hair stand on end - or at 
least make the scalp quiver. England came out on top there, too. And, finally, 
the glories of Headingley on a Monday morning, two South African wickets to 
get, 30-odd needed (that's as good as memory gets), and the celebrations which 
greeted England's first major series win for 11 - or was it 12? - years. No 
matter, one heck of a long time.

That Headingley Monday morning has all the hallmarks of a comforting Christmas 
memory: a tense and desirous crowd, thousands of them skipping the morning off 
work trailing haphazardly down Kirkstall Lane as they used to in the old days 
light-heartedly treating their Yorkshire favourite Darren Gough as some kind of 
sporting god freely wandering upon a Headingley ground that some had never set 
foot in before and remarking quite contentedly that it was smaller and much 
more run-down than they had ever imagined.

And there was Goughie, good, stout-hearted Goughie, announcing on the balcony 
to broad grins and rousing cheers that 'they call me, Gus and Corky the dream 
team', and how we were going to go to Australia and bring back the Ashes. Oh 
well, it felt good at the time.

If that is your reality, stop now. Because my abiding memory of 1998 is none 
of these. Mine is an optimistic remark by Mark Nicholas on Sky Television - oh, 
not much more than a week ago - a cup of tea excitedly made on a dark winter's 
morning, and a realisation that Australia had regained the Ashes.

Nicholas is developing into a fine broadcaster but even he is afflicted by 
that strange form of Sky-speak which arises from the doctrine that viewers 
cannot absorb more than half a dozen words at a time without a lengthy pause.

So it was that M C J offered (as accurately as memory serves) something akin 
to the following observation: "Now it does not do. To be too optimistic. But if 
Hussain and Ramprakash. Can bat out the 20. Minutes or so to the close. Then 
maybe. Just maybe. England can save this Test."

One swirl of the teabag in the pot, and a dash of milk, and the Ashes were as 
good as Australia's. In that time Hussain and the nightwatchman, Dean Headley, 
had been dismissed. Four wickets down at the close, it was a matter of awaiting 
the inevitable on the final day. To wake up around four o'clock the next 
morning was to see Alec Stewart, England cap defiantly planted on his head, 
seeking to explain the inexplicable.

Yes, that is the overriding memory of English cricket in 1998. The memory of 
an England side who, for once, had gone to Australia sensing themselves 
competitive, but who had been brushed aside like so many of their predecessors. 
The memory of a game only now beginning to come to terms with decades of 
complacency and neglect. The memory of a game that for too long has preferred 
to live in the past.

If you must wrap yourself in a few comforting Christmas memories, then by all 
means carouse by a crackling log fire and give thanks to Gus's Great Year, to 
Atherton's unyielding batting, to Goughie's irreverent smile. But don't expect 
you will make things better.

To protect the future, the only choice is to fling open the windows, coach the 
kids, improve the grounds, restructure the leagues, sell the raffle tickets, 
oppose the racism, communicate the enjoyment, demand proficiency strive for 
both technical excellence and mental strength. Because, if you care at all, 
English cricket's failure is your failure.

Those involved in Australian cricket deserve to dream a little over Christmas, 
because, in their thousands, and by their commitment, they repeatedly prove 
they care. But in English cricket, the traffic still queues down memory lane. 
And memory lane is a road to nowhere.
 