
Well, they say it comes in threes. But even in a week where sport's finger of 
suspicion has come down with repetitive strain injury, I am shocked to the 
point of ague by news emanating from the United States. To wit: an anonymous 
online poster has correctly predicted the past 38 WWE results and vows to 
continue divulging their inside information in the interests of restoring what 
they have repeatedly referred to as "the integrity of the product".

So entirely accurate have the spoilers to World Wrestling Entertainment's 
noble contests proved that the WWE has been moved to issue a statement: "We may 
have a modern-day Nostradamus on our hands," this runs. "We might have to 
monitor these posts in advance of our next pay-per-view to see how good he or 
she really is."

Whether Nostradamus prognosticated on the credibility of the Tour de France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tourdefrance> or the Jamaican sprint 
programme is typically a matter of debate: there might be a quatrain that 
refers obliquely to a poisoned wheel or five titans falling; then again those 
might actually be references to a plot to sabotage the Top Gear Christmas 
Special or to the Spice Girls musical going down the pan. I know the great 
seer's followers like to keep things flexible.

What has gone past the point of debate, however, is that some sports have 
become so wholly tainted that even the cleanest athlete might reflect that the 
only way to avoid uncomfortable inquiries is to offer up an adapted version of 
Augustine's prayer: "Lord, make me good – but not too good."

The unavoidable message of the past few days is that sporting isolation is no 
longer splendid. If it meansreaching the summit of Mont Ventoux before everyone 
else after a staggering burst of acceleration 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2013/jul/14/tour-de-france-2013-chris-froome-stage-15>
, or if it means sitting atop a list of the nine men in history to have run the 
100m in less than 9.8 seconds – when all bar one of the others has been linked 
to doping – then the victorious athlete might feel more exposed than thrown 
into glorious relief. Now that Tyson Gay and theJamaican Asafa Powell 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2013/jul/17/asafa-powell-trainer-denies-doping>
 have tested positive, the only unimpugned one of Usain Bolt's fellow 
sub-9.8ers is his countryman Nesta Carter –though the latter's agent was forced 
to deny fevered speculation that he was one of the Jamaican athletes to test 
positive 
<http://www.stabroeknews.com/2013/sports/07/17/nesta-carter-failed-no-drug-test/>
 who still remains nameless. It's lonelier than ever at the top.

"It's quite sad that we're sitting here the day after the biggest victory of 
my life talking about doping," declared a frustrated Froome in response to 
questions as to how his victory could be believed. "My team-mates – we've slept 
on volcanoes to prepare, we've been away from home for months, training 
together, just working our arses off to get here, and here I am basically being 
accused of being a cheat and a liar. That's not cool."

No, but them's the breaks in broken sports. So corroded have cycling and 
athletics become that many critics evidently don't believe that the choice is 
between putting up and shutting up. Years of scandal have given rise to a third 
way, and making veiled accusations appears to have become acceptable.

What is an athlete to do in the face of such overwhelming and unignorable 
cynicism? Even if the worst suspicions that are voiced about Froome and Bolt 
were ultimately to be proved right, it is obvious that neither man is possessed 
of the same pathological aggression asLance Armstrong, whose approach to even 
the mildest inquiry was famously to kill or be killed 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2013/jun/28/lance-armstrong-tour-de-france-doping>
. So instinct suggests our isolated world-beaters will have only one option: to 
wear it.

Suspension of disbelief is such an essential part of sport – we want to 
believe the unlikely and amazing possible – that it is almost the last thing to 
go. But when it has gone, or only the tiniest sliver of it remains, the real 
mountain to climb is the proverbial one. As one USA Today writer pointed out 
this week, track stars used to grace the cover of Sports Illustrated several 
times a year, with Mary Decker even named the publication's Sportsperson of the 
Year in 1983. "Picture it," the paper marvelled. "A middle-distance runner 
honoured by SI in a non-Olympic year." This week, the gravest crisis in 
athletics since Balco barely made the cut into the scores of stories on front 
page of the SI website, edged out by reads including a story about anew 
sandwich unveiled at the Atlanta Falcons 
<https://twitter.com/Atlanta_Falcons/status/356819076150091777/photo/1> 
training camp. While in significant part that demise can be attributed to the 
commercial explosion of big-time sports, track and field's journey toward 
embarrassing obscurity has been hastened by the collapse in its credibility.

But that's what cheats do: they ruin it for everyone else – participants, 
spectators – in many and diverse ways. They ruin it for years, for everyone. 
They turn expert observers into pained inquisitors; they make kids who should 
be dreamers into cynics; they retain the power to turn age-old human contests 
into an irrelevance.

And ultimately, as the increasingly distrusted spectacles of cycling and 
sprinting are showing, they pervert the very desirability of being victorious. 
Many sports – and who knows how many more to come – are now so tainted that 
athletes must be careful what they wish for. The questions have become such a 
barrage that winning could almost look not worth it. Lord, make me good – but 
not too good.
 