
To hell with Don Draper: Greg Foyster is a real-­life ad man gone rogue.

After five of years writing ad copy to sell everything from toasters to 
condiments, he just couldn’t take it anymore. So he started writing a magazine 
column about environmental issues, one of his passions, as a side ­gig. He 
spent his 9­-to-5s coming up with pitch-­perfect tag lines for big brand 
products, and his weekends writing about the devastating toll over­consumption 
was taking on our world.

One evening at an advertising awards ceremony, Foyster broke down in tears. 
The cognitive dissonance between his two jobs was killing him.

“Disproportionate resource use is linked to climate change,” he told the 
Guardian. “The director of the Princeton Environmental Institute has calculated 
that the richest 500 million people in the world emit half the world’s fossil 
fuel carbon [...] People who consume the most place the greatest demand on 
natural resources, and therefore cause the greatest destruction.

 It’s advertising that helps to create desires to drive this overconsumption.”

With this knowledge and the crisis of conscience he experienced because of it, 
Foyster made the decision to quit advertising. He didn’t just change jobs, 
either. Instead, he began a cycling trip up the east coast of Australia to 
explore the­ the idea of simple living. He eventuallywrote a book 
<http://gregfoyster.com/most-recent-book/> about his journey.

Foyster left because he was fed up: disheartened by the process of pushing 
products, horrified by the ecological toll of constant consumption, and longing 
for a way to get out of the job he hated to support a lifestyle he wasn’t sure 
he even wanted. Sound familiar?

It should. We all live amid similar contradictions. We tend to think buying 
begets contentment. We believe that a new lipstick or a new coat or a new car 
will make us happier. Better. And, as Foyster explains, this is no accident.

“This is now advertising’s role in the economy – to convince people that 
non­material happiness can be gained through material belongings,” he told the 
Guardian.

Desires for material things have limits – most people really only want or need 
one dishwasher, or one or two cars – but desire for emotional needs like 
status, love, acceptance and autonomy are bottomless. Tying material goods to 
nonmaterial desires ensures people are never satisfied with what they have. 
It’s how we’ve convinced some of the most materially rich citizens in history 
that they don’t have enough.

The promise of happiness, connection and privilege convinces us to open our 
wallets again and again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/20/consumption-consumerism-americans-buying-stuff>
. This message is so effective that we remain perversely determined to consume, 
even when study after study shows that it leaves us saddled with debt, drowning 
in our possessions and stressed beyond belief. And, perhaps more troubling, we 
over­consume because we live in a society that relies upon it.

In an interview, Foyster quoted prominent retail analyst Victor Lebow, who in 
1955 wrote in the Journal of Retailing:

Our enormously productive economy demands that we make consumption our way of 
life, that we convert the buying and use of goods into rituals, that we seek 
our spiritual satisfactions, our ego satisfactions, in consumption ... We need 
things consumed, burned up, worn out, replaced, and discarded at an ever 
increasing pace.

This message sums up the advertising world of the last half­-century. It’s 
insidious, pervasive, and deliberate – and it’s consuming us.

Our current buying behaviour has very little to do with what we need and 
everything to do with how having something will make us feel.Advertising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/advertising> points out a problem you never 
knew you had, makes you feel bad for having it, and then sells you a solution. 
The end result of this twisted process is lower quality of life, more time 
spent working, and horrific environmental damage due to over­consumption.

Buying begets buying: how stuff has consumed the average American's life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/20/consumption-consumerism-americans-buying-stuff>
Foyster explains: “The root cause of ecological destruction from resource use 
isn’t overpopulation, but over­consumption. Over­consumption isn’t some vague 
term I made up – it refers to a level of consumption beyond what the Earth can 
sustainably replenish. For example, if everyone on the planet wanted to live 
the lifestyle of the average Australian, we would need 3.7 Earths to supply 
resources.”

So where does it end? Where do we stop? How do we stop? Especially those of us 
unwilling or unable to quit our jobs and bike around Australia’s gold coast?

For Foyster, the first step is acknowledging that we’re all in this together. 
He says: “We all live in this consumer capitalist world, we all over­consume, 
it’s totally normal and we shouldn’t feel guilty about it. We should just 
acknowledge that sometimes buying a lot of stuff is a distraction from the 
things we really want in life, the things that really make us happy.”

How does one do that? I chose to cancel cable, thus reducing the sheer volume 
of ads I was exposed to every day. I chose to evaluate needs versus wants, and 
shop secondhand. I chose to turn consuming from a habit to a choice.

Likewise for Foyster, the answer lies in mindfulness. “For me, the answer is 
to ask myself a very commonsense question: do I want to buy something because 
it will be useful in my life? Or because it will help me feel like a smarter, 
better, more popular or successful person? If the answer is the second reason 
then there’s a good chance I’ve been duped by the marketing.”

He adds: “The antidote to wanting more, more, more is to take great pleasure 
in the wonderful life you already have.”
 