
Today, on the International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women 
<http://www.un.org/en/events/endviolenceday/>, Amnesty International's Write 
for Rights campaign focuses on Young Women for Change (YWC), a movement of 
young Afghan women and men advocating against sexual discrimination and 
inequality. Founded in March 2011 by two inspiring young Afghan women, Norjahan 
Akbar, 21, and Anita Haidary, 20, the organisation is committed to improving 
the lives of women across Afghanistan, where they continue to suffer gross 
discrimination, through social and economic participation.

According to Amnesty International's 2012 report, Afghan women and girls are 
subjected to various forms of discrimination, including domestic violence, 
forced marriage, trafficking and being traded to settle disputes. A recent 
report by UN Women and theAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> Independent Human Rights 
commission found that 56% of Afghan brides were under the age of 16.

Allegations of beatings and sexual violence against women are rarely 
investigated by the Afghan authorities, and women who try to flee abusive 
marriages or report rape are often detained and prosecuted for alleged offences 
such as "home escape" or "moral" crimes.

Young Women for Change is playing a crucial role in providing a platform for 
the debate about women's rights and gender equality. In July this year they 
held an anti-street harassment march, the first in Afghan history, and they 
have also conducted the first large-scale study of sexual harassment in 
Afghanistan.

The organisation also opened Afghanistan's first internet cafe exclusively for 
women in Kabul, where women are free to study and socialise away from the 
surveillance of men, and are able to learn computer skills and develop their 
literacy skills. The cafe – named Sahar Gul after a 15-year-old Afghan bride 
who was imprisoned and abused by her husband and in-laws after she refused to 
be sold for sex – has also become a refuge for women and girls in Kabul.

The Sahar Gul centre is just one of the courageous endeavours undertaken by 
Young Women for Change. For more information, and to show solidarity for this 
inspiring organisation, visitamnesty.org.uk/ywc 
<http://www.amnesty.org.uk/content.asp?CategoryID=12394>.
 