
If anybody had wanted to cheer up Andy Roddick, beaten in the fourth round of 
the Australian Open by the unseeded Cypriot Marcos Baghdatis yesterday, then a 
whisper in his ear that it took Pete Sampras a further 10 grand slam events 
after his inaugural US Open success in 1990 to win his second major title, at 
Wimbledon in 1993, might have served the purpose.

Roddick, the second seed here in the absence of Rafael Nadal, has now gone 
nine majors since, as a 21-year-old, he beat Spain's Juan Carlos Ferrero on the 
final Sunday at Flushing Meadows in 2003. But there such comparisons must be 
cut short. For, whereas Sampras developed into one of the greatest players 
ever, with a record 14 slam titles, Roddick seems destined to be remembered as 
the player crushed by the force of US tennis history.

The ferocity of his serve, and the whip crack of his forehand, will continue 
to make him a threat on fast surfaces, particularly over three sets, but the 
weakness of his two-handed backhand remains a block to progress, as does his 
volleying. What makes matters worse is that in the last two majors younger 
players have defeated him. At the US Open it was Gilles Muller of Luxembourg in 
the first round.

There have been suggestions that Roddick, only too aware of his inability to 
match the world No1 Roger Federer, who has beaten him in 10 of their 11 
meetings, including the last two Wimbledon finals, has been over-indulging in 
his celebrity status in the United States. Roddick will have none of that. 
"There are no unanswered questions in my eyes as far as preparation is 
concerned. So I'm kind of left searching a little and that's an uneasy 
feeling." Uneasy indeed - the American public has little time for serial losers.

Baghdatis, like Roddick a former junior world No1, followed the tested 
template to beat the American: return his serve as frequently as possible and 
feed his backhand. By beating Roddick the 20-year-old Baghdatis reached his 
first slam quarter-final at only his sixth attempt and he added a telling 
variation. One of the American's major weapons is his "inside-out" backhand 
which, on this occasion, the Cypriot swept back past him down the line. "You 
know, I haven't experienced that before and I was surprised," said Roddick.

To date the Cypriot has reached only one final. While Britain was getting 
excited about Andy Murray defeating Tim Henman in the first round of the Swiss 
Indoors in Basle last October, Baghdatis was achieving his best ATP run before 
falling to Chile's Fernando Gonzalez. That saw him finish the year just outside 
the top 50, off and running towards his avowed aim of becoming world No1. 
Tomorrow he plays Ivan Ljubicic, also in his first slam quarter-final, having 
beaten the Croatian in the second round here last year.

However, Ljubicic, who defeated the former Australian Open champion Thomas 
Johansson of Sweden in straight sets last night, has become an altogether 
better player than he was 12 months ago, having led his country to their first 
Davis Cup final victory. It is certain to be a noisy encounter. Baghdatis has 
his own fan club, most of them connected with the south Melbourne soccer club, 
Hellas, while Ljubicic will also have loud support.

Poor Roddick, as well as losing, saw his previous fans - a bevy of scantily 
dressed young women - fail to show up on another day of intense heat, the 
temperature rising well over 100F, which saw the roof closed on the Rod Laver 
Arena, transforming the seventh day into an indoor tournament. "They close the 
roof and my fans couldn't sit and sunbathe for me," said Roddick laconically. 
He was somewhat less sanguine when questioned about the absence of American men 
in the last eight. "You guys are always bitching about something," Roddick 
snapped, before conceding the disappointment. "But it's a long year, so I 
wouldn't pass judgment on one event."

Judgment on Roddick, who rose to the top of the pile for 13 weeks before 
Federer took over as No1 in February 2004, should perhaps be similarly 
tempered. Roddick found himself following the lineage of Jimmy Connors, John 
McEnroe, Jim Courier, Andre Agassi and Sampras and, as his former coach Brad 
Gilbert said yesterday: "He wants to be like those five guys. He wants to win 
slam titles and he wants to be No1 again. He didn't set out to be famous, he 
set out to be the best tennis player in the world."

He looks a long way off being that. But then so do all those chasing Federer.
 