
The Ospreys <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ospreys> player-coach Filo 
Tiatia praised his young team after grinding out a 21-17 victory over Leeds at 
the Liberty Stadium in Swansea. The Welsh side, who included the teenagers 
Hanno Dirksen and Tom Prydie, who is also in the Wales squad for Saturday's Six 
Nations opener, outscored their opponents three tries to two in the LV Cup 
contest to prevent a whitewash in Pool One.

"I don't know if you can use the cliche game of two halves, but it was a game 
full of positives but also frustrating to watch," said Tiatia. "The positive we 
can take out of it is that it was a win, but we know there are plenty of things 
we can work on behind the scenes.

"The real positive is in terms of a lot of kids having their debuts. There 
were two starts: Hanno Dirksen [Swansea], who went well, scored a try and 
popped up in the action a lot, and young Ben Breeze [Aberavon] at hooker, and 
Ben John [Aberavon] is still in the under-18 system but came on on the wing 
before the end.

"So all in all it was exciting to see some young talent out there showing 
their wares and hopefully they will be involved [in the Magners League match 
against] Connacht later in the month. The luxury of this competition is that we 
can try different combinations with a lot of players away on international 
duty."

The Leeds coach, Andy Key, hoped his side would be able to take some positives 
out of the match despite the defeat. A late rally saw Leeds earn a converted 
penalty try in injury time, but Ospreys came through a nervy finale.

"It was one of those games where we have made unforced errors throughout the 
game, but in the end at 21-17 it could have been a game that we could have 
won," said Key.

"But the important thing for us now is setting the platform going back into 
the Guinness Premiership. Things have gone well for us in some sense over the 
last four games [in the LV Cup] going back into the Guinness. Our scrimmaging 
was really strong and that was proved with the penalty try, which was given 
rightly in our view. We will look back at the positives but we'll also look 
back and know we have to eliminate some of the errors in our game."
 