
In a Cape Town office block, 50 or so young people are studiously learning the 
rudiments of computer technology. Until a week ago, most didn't know how to use 
a mouse. Across the hallway, another 50 are surfing the internet and honing 
their touch-typing skills. A month beforehand, most couldn't use a mouse either.

"It's important to understand just how far behind our education system is in 
giving young people the kind of key skills that will allow them to survive in 
corporate work going forward," says Tamera Campbell, managing director of the 
South African non-profit,Harambee <http://www.harambee.co.za/>.

Skilling up today's youth in digital literacy is not just about surviving, but 
thriving. Take South Africa. In the next five years, the business process 
outsourcing market (read, "call centres") is expected to generate between 
30,000 and 40,000 new jobs. The demand is there, employers insist, but not the 
skills to match it.

That's where outfits such as Harambee come in. Describing itself as a "youth 
employment accelerator", the South African charity provides an eight-week 
intensive course to help low-income young people become technologically 
competent – and, more than that, employable.

"It's becoming increasingly obvious that these kids can leapfrog in their 
learning," says Alfie van der Zwan, a consultant at Harambee. "They can bypass 
all the learning that we [older generations] had to go through and immediately 
slot into the new technology. It's just a question of providing access and a 
little bit of framing about how you use that technology."

It's not just young people who are alert to the opportunities inherent in 
digital technology. (Harambee has a database of 30,000 applicants for its 2,700 
training slots this year.) Employers are jumping in, too. Harambee counts UK 
brands such as Serco, Capita and Teleperformance among its growing portfolio of 
corporate supporters.

"Because of some of our limitations around education and low levels of 
employment, they realised that they were going to have to do something 
themselves," Campbell notes.

Digitally literacy: a modern day must-have

The link between digital technology and employability is one that the world's 
biggest tech companies instinctively understand and actively promote.

"Digital literacy is definitely a 21st-century skill. That means that, in 
order to be able to succeed in the modern world, you need to have those skills. 
It's pretty much a given," says Danny Arati, education manager for Europe at 
Intel.

With that in mind, Intel offers a range of project-based education initiatives 
for young people between eight and 25 years old. The approach, which runs under 
the multi-prongedIntel Learn 
<http://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/education/k12/intel-learn.html> 
programme, focuses on basic competencies, such as word processing, graphics, 
the internet and multimedia.

However, Arati stresses that functional ability in digital technologies is not 
the be all and end all. Better to see it as a stepping stone. Knowing how to 
use Excel is great, but, in isolation, it's a ticket to a data-entry job and 
little else. The real breakthrough comes when young people can combine digital 
nous with the "soft skills" that modern employers are looking for – 
problem-solving, inquisitive thinking, collaborative problem-solving, and the 
like.

To that end, Intel Learn's pedagogical philosophy focuses on encouraging 
learners to apply technology to solve practical problems in community or 
workplace settings. "They learn how to tackle a problem, how to present it, how 
to develop a solution and how to market that solution as well," says Arati. To 
date, 1.2 million young people have participated in Intel Learn.

The social impact of such project-based digital training is 
"disproportionately advantageous" in the developing world, according to Allison 
M Glinski, a development specialist at the Washington DC-based International 
Center for Research on Women. Not only is digital technology more limited in 
such markets (she recalls seeing pupils in rural Egypt who learned about 
computers from a textbook for want of a PC), but learning methods are more 
likely to be rote-based, too.

Just being able to access information can hugely increase a young person's 
life chances, argues Glinkski, who co-authoreda research report <> on Intel 
Learn. "In developed countries, we have multiple methods for accessing 
information, from well equipped education institutions to TV, while people in 
the developing world often lack the basic infrastructure to access information, 
either because of physical restrictions or financial ones."

Opportunities for inclusion

It's not just developing-world youth who stand to benefit. Digital literacy 
promises to improve young women's employment opportunities, too. Traditionally, 
the tech industry tends to be "majority male dominated", concedes Ian 
Foddering, chief technology officer in the UK and Ireland at Cisco.

Much comes down to the way jobs in fields related to engineering and computer 
science are presented. Cisco recently reworded the application for its in-house 
apprenticeship scheme to stress the relational aspects of the IT profession. 
The scheme's intake now comprises 60% women – a "stark difference" from the 
industry at large.

In a similar way, Cisco has been working with the employer-led group e-Skills 
UK <> to help integrate job-relevant technological competencies into tertiary 
education. The group's focus has concentrated mostly on refining the 
Information Technology Management for Business (ITMB) degree, which is on offer 
in more than a dozen UK universities. Almost every ITMB student walks into 
employment on graduating, Foddering notes, and the gender mix is "much more 
representative" than a typical computer science course.

The employment opportunities for the UK's most excluded young people increase 
dramatically through the acquisition of even the most basic digital skills. The 
difference between job and no job, for example, can be as simple as learning 
how to fill in an online application and mailing it off.

Through its Get On <> programme (part of Microsoft's global YouthSpark 
initiative), Microsoft is funding the purchase of computers and other digital 
hardware for 30 youth centres around the UK. The initiative, which is run with 
charity UK Youth, also includes training in essential software programmes as 
well as mentoring from Microsoft employees.

"At every level, there is work to be done to support the teaching of computer 
science, both in school and out of school… We are in an age of austerity. No 
one can expect government and schools to do this all on their own," says Hugh 
Milward, Microsoft UK's director of corporate affairs.

Business not only needs to contribute, but is "very keen" to do so, he adds. 
"There's a lot of scepticism about the motivations behind [the private sector] 
doing it. But, in many respects, we're helping young people, we're helping the 
economy, and we're helping ourselves as well."

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become GSB member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/> to get more stories 
like this direct to your inbox
 