
A group of juvenile offenders will spend Christmas in Victoria’s maximum 
security adult jail despite a court ruling that their transfer to Barwon prison 
was illegal.


A judge initially ordered the 15 teenagers be moved to a youth facility by 
Thursday afternoon but later changed his mind after the government argued it 
had nowhere else to house them.


The juvenile offenders were first transferred to the Grevillea unit at Barwon 
in November after they trashed the Parkville and Malmsbury youth detention 
facilities during riots.


Victorian supreme court Justice Greg Garde on Wednesday ruled the transfer was 
unlawful because it “failed to give proper consideration to their human rights”.


Victoria says it won't hold Indigenous children in adult jail but 15 others to 
remain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/29/victoria-says-it-wont-hold-indigenous-children-in-adult-jail-but-15-others-to-remain>
But after the government argued it had nowhere else to send the teenage 
offenders, Justice Garde granted a stay on their removal.


“My decision is that the best thing possible for the young persons, at this 
point in time, is unfortunately to remain where they are,” he said on Wednesday 
afternoon.


“Simply because there is nowhere else that is satisfactory or safe for them to 
go.”


The stay is in place until December 28 pending further orders by the court and 
the government’s intention to appeal Wednesday’s judgment.


The Grevillea unit at Barwon prison is being operated as a youth remand and 
custodial centre by the Department of Health and Human Services.


Up to 40 youths were transferred to the prison in November after riots damaged 
the two youth detention facilities.


The Andrews government in late November agreed to move Indigenous teens out of 
Barwon after a legal challenge was launched by the Victorian Aboriginal Legal 
Service.


Lawyers for the remaining non-Indigenous youths then challenged their transfer 
on the basis it was unlawful and breached their human rights.


Youths detained in maximum security adult jail 'held in solitary confinement'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/27/youths-detained-in-maximum-security-adult-jail-held-in-solitary-confinement>
In his judgment on Wednesday, Justice Garde found the Grevillea unit had not 
been lawfully established as a youth remand centre under the relevant 
legislation.


He said the government had transferred the youths for “an improper and 
extraneous purpose” of emergency accommodation.


The government has been ordered to pay the costs of the teenagers’ legal 
challenge.


The opposition leader, Matthew Guy, said youth affairs minister Jenny Mikakos 
should lose her job following Wednesday’s legal defeat.


The Greens argue Labor should abandon its “race to the bottom” on law and 
order issues inVictoria <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria>.


“That the government postured over their breach of the human rights of 
children in the youth justice system is sickening,” the Greens MP Nina Springle 
said.
 