
Zelzal continued the remarkable big-race run of success for Jean-Claude Rouget 
in the Prix Jean Prat at Chantilly on Sunday. Owned by Al Shaqab, the unexposed 
colt was an impressive winner. Ed Walker’s Stormy Antarctic in second fared 
best of the strong British contingent but he was no match for Zelzal.

The winner’s pacemaker, Positive Vibration, set a strong gallop but Zelzal 
still refused to settle in the hands of Gregory Benoist.

Stormy Antarctic, who won the Craven Stakes this spring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/14/stormy-antarctic-foundation-craven-stakes-newmarket>
, and Spectre were the only other two who could get anywhere near the son of 
Sea The Stars but in truth they never looked likely to get the better of the 
winner. Clive Cox’s Zonderland dropped away tamely while First Selection cut 
little ice.

Roger Varian very relaxed ahead of Postponed’s King George double bid
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/10/roger-varian-postponed-king-george-ascot>
Walker said how relieved he was to get his stable star back on the track and 
see him run such a big race but said: “We were probably beaten by a very good 
horse.” The Newmarket trainer indicated that the colt could return to France 
for his next race in either the Prix Guillaume D’Ornano at Deauville or the 
Group One Prix Jacques Le Marois at the same venue.

Jeremy Noseda’s Nemoralia was returned the 11-10 favourite after strong 
support in the market but she had to make do with fourth place having attempted 
to come from last. Rouget is enjoying a fine season in France again and this 
was his fifth Group One of the year there.

Aidan O’Brien was out of luck in his attempt to win a first German Derby as 
Landofhopeandglory finished unplaced behind Isfahan at Hamburg.

After twice finishing behind his stablemate Sword Fighter recently, he headed 
to Germany with solid claims of giving the Ballydoyle handler yet another Group 
One. However, he was unable to make any impact as Andreas Wohler’s Isfahan beat 
Savoir Vivre and Dschingis Secret.

In Ireland Queen Catrine caused a bit of an upset in the Irish Stallion Farms 
European Breeders Fund Brownstown Stakes when holding off the sustained 
challenge of Most Beautiful at Fairyhouse. The second choice of Ger Lyons’ two 
runners in the Group Three, Queen Catrine, was sent off at 14-1 among a field 
of only six.

Gary Carroll set out to make all on the former Charlie Hills-trained 
four-year-old, who had been out of sorts so far this season. When Most 
Beautiful loomed up alongside her with over a furlong to run, David Wachman’s 
charge seemed likely to score. However, Queen Catrine knuckled down to great 
effect to add to her Listed win at Naas last season.

Dermot Weld’s odds-on favourite Raymonda never looked like striking a blow 
while Ainippe, a stablemate of the winner, finished out of the frame.
 