
Veteran Scottish television presenter Andrew Neil has been enjoying warm 
congratulations across social media this weekend after revealing he quietly 
married in France last week at the age of 66. His bride, Susan Nilsson, is 20 
years his junior and was described by her new husband as “the Swedish engineer” 
as he posted pictureson his Twitter feed  <https://twitter.com/afneil>on 
Saturday morning with the caption: “Secret’s out!”

They couple were married near Neil’s villa in the south of France, attended 
only by neighbours in the town of Grasse,Deal Or No Deal presenter Noel Edmonds 
and his wife Elizabeth Davies. The newlyweds’ dog, Molly, also featured 
prominently in the photographs.

Neil, once nicknamed the “bachelor of Fleet Street”, started out in journalism 
at theEconomist and went on to edit the Sunday Times for 11 years from 1983 to 
1994, overseeing the controversial move to Wapping in 1986. While still working 
for the Murdoch empire, he broughtThe Simpsons to the UK as one of the founding 
pillars of Sky TV.

He now presents the BBC’s live politicial shows – Daily Politics, Sunday 
Politics and This Week – and chairs the media group that owns the Spectator.

In earlier days he made regular appearances in the gossip columns thanks to 
his love of celebrity nightclubs, including Tramp in London’s West End, where 
he met his short-lived girlfriend, Pamella Bordes, a former Miss India and 
Westminster researcher, in 1988.

Private Eye enjoyed parodying Neil as “Brillo”, a reference to his hair, and 
it became a running joke to seek pretexts to publish a photograph of Neil and 
Bordes on a night out together. As their affair came to a difficult end, Bordes 
was exposed by newspapers as a £500-a-night sex worker and became embroiled in 
a sex and security scandal involving Tory MPs, and a Libyan intelligence 
officer.

Neil said at the time: “I regard myself as quite savvy for getting out after 
12 weeks, because she was the kind of woman men become besotted with and do 
really stupid things with.”

He went on to sue Peregrine Worsthorne for libel, and won, after the Sunday 
Telegraph editor wrote that “playboys” should not edit newspapers. Neil had not 
known that Bordes was an occasional call-girl. The court victory was portrayed 
as a triumph of classless new Britain – the Paisley grammar school boy seeing 
off a public school grandee.

Neil and Nilsson have been together for almost five years. A polo enthusiast 
and economics graduate, she is the director of communications of engineering 
and environmental consultancy the Waterman Group. Soon after they met, Neil 
said: “She is wonderful, beautiful and intelligent. She keeps me in check.”
 