
I'm in room 133 of the Linden Row Inn, Richmond, Virginia. I probably don't 
need to remind you that Richmond was the home of the confederacy, the capital 
of the slavery-supporting American south, the first to stand and the last to 
fall. At least, that's what my guide informed me on a city-wide canal trip I 
took yesterday afternoon. It was a well-worn speech, but something in it 
aggressively grabbed my attention. It was the fascinating story of Henry "Box" 
Brown, an enslaved African who, on hearing that his wife and children had been 
sold away from him, had a friend nail his 5ft 8in frame into a cargo box and, 
posing as railway freight, posted himself to the north and, of course, freedom. 
The railroads being new and prone to delay, Brown arrived, having travelled 
sometimes upside down on his head, 36 hours later, barely alive. He went on to 
be a leading light in the abolitionist movement, travelling the length and 
breadth of the country in pursuit of freedom for his people.

As I listened to this story, I thought how easily Henry "Box" Brown could have 
been a character in a play byAugust Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/augustwilson>. If he had cropped up in one 
of Wilson's cycle of 10 plays recording the black experience of the 20th 
century, though, Brown would probably still be alive - much like Aunt Ester, 
the 300-year-old matriarch who starred in Gems of the Ocean, chronologically 
the first of those 10. The nails from the box might be the only communication 
tool acceptable to the ancients gods of the motherland; they would use them to 
pull a lost soul back to the fold, make them once more the true emancipated 
soul he or she should be.

That was yesterday. Twenty minutes ago I picked up a text message that read: 
August Wilson has died. I suspect I shall never forget where I was and what I 
was doing when I read those four words.

You see, alongside Malcolm X and the rap band Public Enemy, August Wilson 
walked me into manhood. I didn't know these people personally, you understand, 
but they made me, intellectually, the man I am today. More specifically, if it 
were not for August Wilson, I would not be the writer I am today. My play 
Elmina's Kitchen was directly inspired not, as you might suspect, by his plays 
(although I borrowed from them heavily in terms of cultural approach), but by 
my one experience of hearing the man speak.

I had travelled 3,000 miles to see his play King Hedley II and it so happened 
that Wilson was making a speech a few hours before the performance. Had I only 
managed to shake his hand - this was momentarily possible but I blew it - I 
would have sworn that he metaphysically passed a message into my spirit. What's 
certain is that, directly after the show, a road, a path, became clear to me 
that hitherto was not. The idea? The path?Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> as a transformative art form. For 
all.

In his eulogy for John Osborne, David Hare wrote: "Of all human freedoms the 
most contentious is the freedom not to fear what people will think of you." In 
June 1996, at a theatre conference at Princeton University, Wilson displayed 
such freedom. "In one guise," he said, "the ground I stand on has been 
pioneered by the Greek dramatist - by Euripides, Aeschylus and Sophocles - by 
William Shakespeare, by Shaw, Ibsen, Chekhov, Eugene O'Neill, Arthur Miller, 
Tennessee Williams. In another guise, the ground I stand on has been pioneered 
by my grandfather, by Nat Turner, by Denmark Vessey, by Martin Delaney, Marcus 
Garvey and the honourable Elijah Mohammed."

I marvelled at how Wilson gave Sophocles and Marcus Garvey equal billing. To 
anyone vaguely involved in African-American academia, these philosophies 
wouldn't have been anything new. But Wilson embedded them, not just in a speech 
or a book to be read by a handful of the franchised, but in a work of art. 
Interactive art. Art that people had to speak, experience, interpret and feel.

This was dangerous, almost subversive, stuff: black people don't speak like 
that and expect to survive. But to the surprise of those less honest, less 
bold, less revolutionary, his work was doing more than surviving: it was being 
accepted, downright celebrated. Not that Wilson cared about acceptance. 
"Summoned to the BIG HOUSE to entertain the guests, the slaves began a 
tradition of theatre as entertainment for whites," he said later in the same 
speech. "This entertainment for whites consisted of whatever the slave imagined 
or knew that his master wanted to see and hear. This tradition has its present 
life counterpart in the crossover artists that slant their material for white 
consumption." This was a man who was neither afraid of what people might think 
of him nor emasculated by the need to succeed - and reached the highest 
literary level as a result.

It was Lorraine Hansberry who taught me that it is only through cultural 
specificity that one can achieve universality. But it was August Wilson who 
showed me that you could not only be culturally specific, but positively 
political, and still fulfil your potential, still touch people on either side 
of the racial divide. He would describe himself in very political terms: his 
phrase "I am a race man" deliberately echoed the words of the then 
much-maligned Marcus Garvey. Aside from James Baldwin, Wilson was the first 
celebrated artist who spoke my language. It was thrilling.

Although he began writing in the 1960s, it was Ma Rainey's Black Bottom, which 
opened on Broadway in 1984, that alerted the world to Wilson's talent. Set in a 
recording studio in the 1930s, it is a story of pain, emasculation and the 
violent results of dehumanisation - and it has Bessie Smith blues all over it. 
A few years later, he wrote Joe Turner's Come and Gone, my personal favourite 
of Wilson's plays. Reading it, it comes as no surprise that Wilson began his 
writing career as a poet. It is the poetic, sympathetic yet challenging way he 
portrays survival and survivors that I find most striking in his work. I'm told 
that to hear him speak one-on-one is to understand why he never stopped seeing 
himself as a poet. His final play, Radio Gulf, premiered at the Yale Rep in New 
Haven this year, and is making its way around the US before inevitably arriving 
on Broadway. It is sad to think that Wilson will not be there to greet it.

His death from liver cancer at the age of 60 deprives us of probably the 
greatest, certainly the boldest, US writer of the 20th century. Not even Eugene 
O'Neill's achievements surpass Wilson's, in my opinion. But what a legacy he 
has left behind. In centuries to come, when people, all people, want an 
understanding of how a subjugated people fight and struggle to reconnect with a 
stolen past, when a generation who may long have forgotten the stories of their 
forebears want to chart their history, there will be a place they can go: the 
complete works of August Wilson. And when I want inspiration, encouragement and 
a place to hide, that's where I go, too.
 