
The former international development secretary, Andrew Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrew-mitchell>, has joined forces with 
radio presenter Paul Gambaccini and comedian Jimmy Tarbuck to press for greater 
protection for people under investigation over historical sex abuse allegations.

Mitchell has personally lobbied the justice secretary, Michael Gove, over the 
issue and said that Gove – who also holds the title of lord chancellor – was 
giving “serious consideration” to the mounting concerns about the way in which 
high-profile figures have been wrongly accused of paedophile acts.

“I think the treatment of Paul Gambaccini by the British justice system was a 
disgrace,” said Mitchell, who accompanied the veteran DJ to a meeting with Gove 
shortly before Christmas, when Tarbuck’s concerns were also aired. Both 
Gambaccini and Tarbuck were arrested and questioned by police investigating 
historical child abuse allegations, only to be told months later that no case 
would be brought against them.

After his arrest, Gambaccini described the allegations as “total fiction” and 
added: “I knew the so-called file on me wouldn’t have anything in it.” 
Appearing before a House of Commons select committee in 2015 to give evidence, 
he said he believed he had been used as ahuman “flypaper” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/03/paul-gambaccini-police-flypaper-for-almost-a-year-abuse-mps-bail-limit>
 to encourage other people to bring similar allegations against him, adding 
that he had lost more than £200,000 in earnings and legal costs.

Tarbuck was arrested by North Yorkshire police over claims that he had 
assaulted a boy in Harrogate during the 1970s. After his arrest he was later 
investigated over six separate allegations. After the case against him was 
dropped on the grounds of insufficient evidence, Tarbuck expressed his distress 
at the accusations. “The real thing that annoys me is these people can remain 
anonymous,” he said, adding that the experience had shown him “who your friends 
are, your real mates”.

The two are among a number of high-profile figures, both living and now dead, 
who have been accused of sex abuse. Allegations against Edward Heath, the 
former Tory prime minister, have been rejected by his friends. “We had a new 
low for the British justice system when a police officer stood outside the 
house of a most distinguished former prime minister and effectively labelled 
him as a paedophile,” Mitchell said.

There is growing disquiet about the way Sir Cliff Richard has been 
investigated, with policetipping off reporters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/feb/24/bbc-and-police-heavily-criticised-over-sir-cliff-richard-raid-coverage>
 before the singer’s home was raided. “It’s hard to comment on Cliff Richard 
because at the moment there are, I believe, ongoing state inquiries,” Mitchell 
said. “But on the face of it it’s already clear he has been treated in a most 
inappropriate way.” Richard has denied the allegations of abuse.

Mitchell, who was at the centre of the Plebgate affair – a row that hinged on 
what he had said to police on duty at Downing Street – said calls for changes 
in the law were being heard by the Ministry of Justice. “There is huge and 
widespread concern on all of these counts, and we went to see the lord 
chancellor to express those concerns. The lord chancellor listened. Clearly, 
there is forthcoming legislation and the lord chancellor undertook to give 
serious consideration in framing that legislation to what we had said to him.”

Concerns about the way police investigate historical sex abuse allegations 
resurfaced last week when the former head of the army,Lord Bramall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/20/metropolitan-police-lord-edwin-bramall-offer-explain-abuse-inquiry-operation-midland>
, 92, was told by the Metropolitan police that he faced no further action after 
it had investigated claims against him. Bramall, a D-Day veteran, was never 
arrested and denied the allegations. His son, Nicholas, said the man who 
accused his father, known as “Nick”, had been “peddling unsubstantiated and 
uncorroborated information” and called for him to be investigated.

“The treatment of Lord Bramall adds a new tier to all of this that should 
shame every one of us,” Mitchell said.
 