
In the noisy populism routinely distorting our public debate, there is always 
plenty of talk about the shadowy “establishment” and that tedious cliché, the 
unaccountable “Westminster elite”. So it’s worth noting, before our gnat-like 
collective attention moves on, just how many direct hits this supposed citadel 
has sustained in the past few days.

There’s Ukip’s second byelection win at Rochester, of course, and Emily 
Thornberry’s helpful flag tweet on polling day. Both were useful to Nigel 
Farage, the public school-educated, tax-efficient ex-City trader turned EU 
employee who claims to speak for middle England. Like Rupert Murdoch, another 
child of privilege whose fortune rests on the bank of mum and dad, he has 
craftily changed sides to lead the populist crowd.

On Thursday, Andrew Mitchell lost his libel case. As I wrote back when 
“Plebgate” broke in the Sun in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2012/dec/18/andrew-mitchell-plebgate-leveson>
, Mitchell can be a cocky fellow and the coppers’ dodgy trade union, the Police 
Federation, was in industrial dispute with the reformist Theresa May: both were 
probably wrong.

As level-headed retired PC Ian Richardson, one of the officers who witnessed 
the fateful exchange at the Downing Street gates, said on Radio 4’s Today 
programme, this was a trivial incident blown out of all proportion by the 
media, badly handled by the Metropolitian police as well as the federation and 
politicians. Praised by Mr Justice Mitting for his testimony, Richardson was 
gently critical of the force he served and even managed to feel sorry for the 
fallen cabinet minister and foolish colleagues who cooked up a yarn and were 
punished.

Good for Richardson, an old-fashioned copper of the decent kind: there are 
still plenty of them. Few others come out of the affair well. Mitchell’s 
persistent rudeness to police and security staff around Westminster – lovingly 
detailed by theDaily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2851889/Former-Government-whip-Andrew-Mitchell-loses-High-Court-libel-action-judge-decides-DID-call-police-f-plebs.html>
 on Friday – reflects badly on him. It is not how people in authority should 
treat subordinates doing a gruelling job. But, as we so often see, character 
flaws can overwhelm talent: Mitchell had been a good development minister.

The so-called establishment took another kicking this week when the Sun 
published the recorded exchanges between ex-cabinet minister David Mellor and a 
taxi driver whose job he was trying to do for him – shades ofAndrew Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrew-mitchell> you might say.

In the “good old days” the word of a cabinet minister, past or present – 
especially a Tory one – would probably have been taken against that of a London 
cabbie or bobby by most judges or magistrates. Many a miscarriage of justice 
doubtless occurred as a result. So the ability of a phone camera to capture and 
publicise such abuses is progress.

But the crucial point in the Mitchell case seems to have been that Mitting 
decided the cabinet minister was less reliable than PC Toby Rowland who was 
counter-suing him. Wow! That is quite a moment.

Don’t go away yet. I haven’t quite finished.

On Wednesday, Clodagh Hartley, the former Sun political correspondent, was 
acquitted of making unlawful payments to a Whitehall official for government 
secrets, the official having already pleaded guilty to receiving £17,475. I’m 
glad she was cleared: why should Hartley (whom I know slightly) take the fall 
for the boss class at the Sun and News of the World, who created, funded and 
sanctioned dodgy chequebook journalism as well as hacking on a grand scale?

I was not in court at the Old Bailey and unless you were you probably do not 
understand why the judge and jury did as they did. Even the best newspaper 
reports – such asLisa O’Carroll’s account 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/nov/26/sun-whitehall-not-guilty-clodagh-hartley>
 – cannot convey all the nuances. Hartley’s lawyers argued that the payments 
were not a secret and that she had acted in the public interest, always an 
important defence in journalism. Roy Greenslade, who was a tabloid editor 
before he was a professor of journalism,agreed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2014/nov/26/why-im-delighted-that-clodagh-hartley-has-been-cleared>
.

I’m not so gung-ho as Roy or so convinced by the defence line. But that’s not 
the point here. A society where judges and juries sometimes take the side of 
ordinary people – cabbies, coppers, reporters – and the rich or powerful can 
come a cropper is not one controlled by mystery and unaccountable elites who 
despise the rest of us. Some elitists do and several of them have been caught 
out this week, though remember the court testimony: the populist Sun execs are 
very rude about its readers in private and allegedly bullied Hartley.

Untrammelled corporate power in many forms is a threat to the good society and 
constantly needs to be challenged. The same goes for state power. But the 
traffic is not all one way and beware populists, especially powerful ones, who 
try to persuade you otherwise.
 