
The following correction was printed in the Guardian's Corrections and 
clarifications column, Friday 24 July 2009

Most of us will end our days in an old people's home, said the subheading – 
though not the text – on a feature piece. In the hospital or at home is 
actually where most of us die.



6-9am

The 26 residents at Raglan House can very crudely be grouped into the living 
and the dying. The dying remain in private rooms, in bed, barely aware of night 
and day, their dwindling existence regulated by four-hourly nursing checks, 
changes to their incontinence pads, a few kind words from the care assistants 
as they smooth the pillows.

The living start their day shortly after six when staff begin hoisting them 
from their beds with crane-like machines, remove their night clothes, wash them 
with a sponge, dress them, transfer them to their wheelchairs and push them 
into the day room.

One by one, six widows in their 80s and 90s arrive to sit together at the 
central table, rolling into the places they occupy every morning. Peggy Dunn 
drives herself in an electric wheelchair, a highly sought-after piece of 
equipment provided by the NHS wheelchair services to those deemed sufficiently 
mentally agile to be safe.

Elsie Stone, 89, who has had both legs amputated, wheels herself in, slowly, 
her chair creaking as she makes her way across the room. ("Come on Speedy," 
Peggy says. "I can't. My arms hurt this morning," Elsie replies.) Lois Kettly 
and Violet Grove arrive and wait for someone to bring them breakfast. No one 
says anything.

Sometime after 7.30, Peggy, who has been here for eight years, breaks the 
silence to ask: "What shall we do today?" Her companions do not reply.

"Let's do something different today," she persists. "Let's go on strike."

"On strike?" Elsie replies with a pale smile. "On strike from the monotony? 
It's the same every day. Every day."

Monmouth Court on the outskirts of Ipswich is a nursing home run by Bupa, with 
150 beds shared out between four one-storey units, of which Raglan House is 
one. The gardens are lovely; the 1980s brick buildings are reminiscent of a 
Welcome Break motorway cafe. The home has two stars, which ranks it as good and 
makes it representative of the vast majority of Britain's care homes, where 
around 394,000 elderly people are currently housed. This is not a home for 
people who have paid for Bupa health insurance; 90% of the beds are paid for by 
the state rather than private contributions.

The government will today publish a long-awaited green paper into how care and 
support for the elderly should be reformed. It is not an area that the 
government has successfully focused on recently – there have been four 
ministers for care in the past five years – but it is a subject that requires 
urgent attention. Over the next 20 years, the number of people over 85 will 
double, the number over 100 will quadruple, and officials expect that 1.7 
million people will need care and support. Funding is already thin and expected 
to get sparser still, as local authorities see their budgets slashed.

More of us will end our lives in these institutions, about which (unless we 
have admitted family members to one) we know so little. They remain shut away, 
forgotten about, only the focus of occasional media attention when something 
scandalous happens.

9.30am

A few newspapers arrive.

One of the frailer residents of the day room needs to go to the loo, so two 
care assistants fetch the electronic hoist and slip nylon straps beneath her 
bottom, fastening them into a sling between her legs, hiking her skirt down as 
she is winched up to stop her naked thighs being exposed to the scrutiny of her 
companions, at pains to ensure the clear plastic oxygen tube running from her 
nose does not get tangled in the mechanism.

She moans and cries out in fright throughout the process. "Ow ow. My left 
foot. My left foot. My left foot. Am I doing all right? I'm very uncomfortable. 
Sorry, sorry, sorry. Ow. It hurts. It hurts. Bless you, bless you. Sorry."

"You're no trouble at all," the carers reply. The staff are accustomed to her 
cries and they know the hoists feel awkward. "It's a horrible sensation. We've 
all tried it," the unit's senior nurse Chrstine Driscoll says.

To be fair to the valiant efforts of the home's staff, life here is not quite 
the same every day, given the constraints of looking after a group which 
includes many who are confused, immobile and incontinent (a triumvirate of 
conditions known in this sector as "the unholy trinity"). On Wednesdays, after 
breakfast is cleared away, there is bingo. On Thursdays, there are visits to 
the on-site hairdresser.

Everyone has a shower and a hair wash once a week. Once a year a few of the 
more physically able residents are taken for a trip to the market in nearby 
Bury St Edmunds. It is a highlight much anticipated.

The six widows spend their days at the central table where they eat their 
meals, grouped together because their physical and mental state is about the 
same. Three more women, in feebler condition, spend the day in armchairs pushed 
against the wall. Another woman, profoundly deaf, prefers to sit at a table by 
herself; she feels frustrated when people try to talk to her. There is also a 
separate table for a man whom nurses describe as a naturist. "He gets a bit 
upset that he can't sit here with no clothes on; I tell him it's fine to do 
that in his room with the door shut," a nurse says.

This morning he is sitting with his hand clapped to the right side of his 
face, as if he has just remembered some terrible news, but his hand stays there 
for five minutes, and after a while it becomes clear that he is not in shock 
but simply asleep. A nurse strokes his back to wake him up. "Have you got pain, 
my love?" she asks, and fetches him something from the medicine trolley.

Medicine is distributed four times a day. About a third of the residents are 
on antidepressants to help them cope with being here. One apparently cheerful 
and well-settled woman is on a heavy dose to counter her suicidal tendencies. 
Before she started taking them, she tried to hang herself using the assistance 
bell cord in her room.

If you ask them how they like it here, most of the six widows, born during the 
first world war or the 1920s, will insist that they are all right, that they 
can't complain, that the food is lovely and the nurses wonderful. It is hard to 
determine whether this is stoicism or a self-protective determination not to 
focus on the reality of their situation: that they have been sent here by their 
family or doctors because they can no longer look after themselves, and they 
are unlikely to go anywhere else before they die.

It is only when they move away from the group, and talk quietly with a care 
assistant or a visitor, that the guard begins to come down.

"I think I'd like to go to my daughter. I suppose so," Lois, a mentally sharp 
woman, forced into a wheelchair by a stroke, admits with some reluctance. When 
she arrived here two years ago, the plan had been that her daughter would 
convert her garage into a granny flat, but nurses say the subject is no longer 
raised and a two-week stay has stretched into two years. Lois understands the 
decision: "They've got their own life. I don't want to put a burden on her."

Violet has recently been obliged to sell the flat where she had lived with her 
husband for 30 years in order to pay fees of around £3,000 a month for the 
home. She has been here for two years since she fell downstairs and hurt her 
knees. Anyone with assets of more than £23,500 may (depending on their medical 
state) find themselves obliged to pay their own way until the money runs out. 
Residents who do not have any savings are paid for by the state, contributing 
their pension and receiving an allowance of around £21 a week to buy whatever 
extra they might need – clothes, presents, shampoo. Those who have been frugal 
and saved for their retirement see the means-tested system as an unfair 
punishment for thriftiness.

Violet shrugs. "I did feel emotionally attached to [the flat]. I did," she 
concedes. "But I have got to the point now where I have given up worrying about 
it. I'm comfortable here. When you get here you don't worry about the future."

The most content residents are those like Miranda Waits, 92, absorbed in 
detailed memories of a distant happiness. She has delightful recollections of 
her time in the 1930s as a teenage shop assistant in Woolland Brothers, an 
upmarket stocking shop in Knightsbridge, London. "Once I travelled up in the 
lift with the Queen of Holland. She had two bodyguards in with her and I 
thought, cor, they look nice. We had a lot of royalty come in," she says.

"Woolland Brothers," she adds, rolling the R in Brothers unexpectedly, giving 
the word the status it once had by her careful articulation. "I rather think 
they have gone now."

Life here is another era preserved. The names are from the 1920s (Ethel, 
Alfred, Dot, Winifred, Gladys), the accents are a thicker Suffolk than heard 
anywhere now, the residents are all white, and talk about jobs they had that no 
longer exist (seamstresses, drapers), using defunct exclamations ("Cor 
blimey"). No one here has a mobile, and the only electronic chirping is the 
alarm to say that someone needs to be taken out of the loo.

In a corner, Elsie is suddenly made sad by the memory of her mother, who lost 
two children during the diphtheria epidemic of 1915 and had two more late in 
life to replace them (Elsie and a brother). "But she was too old, well over 40, 
and she was never well. She died soon after," she says. And then she begins to 
weep suddenly about her own missing legs. "I used to have terrible ulcers on 
the front of my legs. When I first went to work when I was 14, I used to cycle 
to work in all weather. I don't know if I got frostbite, but my legs used to 
break out in ulcers," she says. "It is very heartbreaking at times, to go 
around and see everybody else has got legs and you haven't got any."

11am

The windows of the day room are flung open, and the air is fresh, but in the 
enclosed corridors the smell of urine is distinct, more intense by the doors of 
some rooms. The home is impeccably clean, but these smells are inevitable in a 
unit where only one of the 26 residents is able to go to the loo independently.

Many are so resistant to the notion of being in a home that they refuse to 
spend time in the communal areas, choosing instead to sit in their own rooms 
365 days a year.

One woman arrives to visit her husband who can no longer speak after a stroke 
to the right side of his brain. They are both 83. She looks cheerful after a 
week abroad with her children, but her jauntiness fades as she talks about the 
family's decision to move her husband here.

"He has to be hoisted everywhere. My family said, 'Mum – there's no way you 
can possibly do it.' Len, you do understand don't you?" she says looking at his 
face. "I couldn't do it, darling. There was just no option. He comes home 
sometimes, but it is very difficult.

"It's not bad here Len, is it? It could be worse." His response is 
unintelligible, and his wife strains to interpret some expressive eye 
movements, eyes thrown up to the sky in apparent frustration. He abandons the 
attempt.

Along the corridor is Annie Price, another woman who has refused to sit in the 
communal room since arriving in February 2007, so has spent approximately 900 
days of near-solitude alone in her room, the peace disturbed only by periodic 
checks from the care staff and the occasional visit from her nieces.

Being transported here, when her doctors and nieces decided she could no 
longer cope at home, essentially represented the end of life, but she won't 
quite allow herself to say so. Like most of her companions she expresses her 
reservations with her life here in a deadened, muted understatement accompanied 
by a defiant stare through watery green eyes.

"It's not home here. It's a different sort of life to what I was used to. To 
give up your home . . . it's a loss of everything really. Every day in here . . 
." she says, frowning at the knitting she is doing for babies in Africa. "If I 
hadn't got knitting to do, I don't know what I'd do. I'd go barmy," she says, 
holding up a pale blue baby cardigan, smiling in satisfaction. "Imagine a 
little dark baby in that."

Someone has tried to sweeten her existence by putting a bird table outside the 
window, and inside there are other attempts to mitigate the misery of her life 
in this shoe-box shaped room – photos of relatives' weddings, framed pictures 
of her long dead, bricklayer husband, looking handsome in a soldier's uniform.

11.30am

In room one, an 82-year-old woman has arrived by bus to spend the day sitting 
alongside her 87-year-old husband, as she has done six days a week for the last 
year and a half, ever since he was paralysed by a stroke and moved here. She 
passes the time in an armchair next to his wheelchair, watching television, 
holding his hand, sometimes sleeping.

"You want me here, don't you?" she asks.

"Definitely," he replies and squeezes her wrist.

"He's been such a good husband and father. It does get a bit tiring. I will 
say that. Just sitting here," she says, and begins to cry. "But we've been 
married 63 years. I just don't want to leave him."

Midday

Beer and sherry are served in the day room and lunch comes about an hour 
later. Most of the six widows have barely moved from their places at the table 
since being wheeled here sometime between 6am and 9am. Little has been said.

An anxious woman in the corner cries out: "Dropped me sherry. What can I do? 
Dropped me sherry. What can I do? Dropped it all now."

The unit's "hostess" comes over to clean up and to ask what she'd like for 
lunch tomorrow; they discuss and she decides. "That's what I'll have if I'm 
alive," she mutters.

The care staff huddle in the corner, wearing yellow plastic aprons, waiting 
for the food to arrive, laughing over magazines together. Most of them are very 
young – these are their first jobs out of school; some are thinking of becoming 
nurses. Rachel Durham, 20, started here six months ago after working for 
Primark. "With shop work you're just putting stuff in a bag or rearranging 
hangers. At the end of the day here, you know that you've done something good," 
she says.

Among the widows, there is a desultory attempt at conversation.

"They're not dancing these days like we used to," Peggy says. "They don't go 
to dances."

"They call them hops today," Elsie replies.

White paper disposable bibs are tied around the women's necks by care staff, 
in a curiously undignified procedure, applied equally to the frail and the 
capable alike. No one protests.

1pm

Matron Claudette Lyons comes in, rubbing her hands together, advancing briskly 
through her lunchtime inspection. "How is everybody?" she asks. There is a 
muted, to negligible, response.

Residents spend less time in nursing homes now than they did a decade ago, and 
those who are here have many more needs than they did a decade ago. Staff 
remember how, until relatively recently, people would request a car parking 
space when they arrived. Now they tend to arrive in an ambulance, and there is 
no prospect of them ever driving themselves around again. Most residents now 
sleep on air mattresses or hospital beds, rather than normal beds – another 
sign that they are iller now when they turn up.

Government policy has increasingly been directed at providing more nursing 
help for people in their own homes. Although funding for more home visits has 
increased, the experience can be very isolating for the most sick, who are 
unable to do anything during the long stretches when they are alone. Those who 
are admitted now are much older, frailer, and sometimes traumatised by the 
prolonged effort of coping for themselves at home.

Staff estimate that most of the residents here (because it's a nursing home, 
which also specialises in palliative care for the dying) last for months, not 
years. "We have some people who come in who can't accept being here. They don't 
like it. They don't stay with us for long," Driscoll says.

But Lyons refuses to see death as failure. Under her direction, nurses strive 
to give residents a "good death", pain-free, with minimum disturbance at the 
end. She is well-liked by her staff and the turnover is low – one of the key 
things people searching for a home are advised to look out for. Gold taps and 
chandeliers are nothing if the home doesn't have dedicated leadership and 
friendly carers.

3pm

Coming into the day room in the afternoon from the outside world, it is hard 
not to feel a surge of shock at the whole arrangement. Six of the room's nine 
occupants are asleep in their chairs. One fragile 92-year-old woman looks as 
though she is being swallowed by her armchair, her spindly elbows barely poking 
up over the arm rests, her head flopped over her chest, her leg bones skewed 
uncomfortably, her knuckles twitching.

The scene of torpid, joyless inertia is very dispiriting – but it isn't really 
the fault of the nursing home managers. The staff here are kind, the rooms are 
bright, the care is thoughtful and attentive – and yet none of this compensates 
for the home's unspoken function: a place where elderly people are left by 
their families to die.

The strangeness of the situation is felt more acutely by foreign staff. A 
young Iraqi student nurse (who began training in dentistry at Baghdad 
University before fleeing the war) dances around the issue at first, unwilling 
to criticise his newly adopted country, before resolving to speak out.

"I had never seen this kind of place before – it was a new experience for me. 
In Iraq, as part of our culture we look after our grandmothers and grandfathers 
at home until they pass away. We say, you looked after us, you dedicated your 
life to us and then we pay you back. We believe that as much as we do, we have 
done nothing compared to what they have done for us," he says.

He is dismayed by the number of residents who get only occasional visits from 
their family. "If they had the chance to go back home, this place would be 
empty tomorrow. But they have got no one to go to. Their homes have been sold."

The English staff also admit readily that they can imagine no worse future for 
themselves.

"Depressing isn't it," one care assistant says, eating chips in the garden. 
"They don't complain too much because they've been here a while. I'd never want 
to end up here with someone else wiping my bum. The same thing, day-in day-out."

Even a visiting Bupa manager says: "Who wants to be in a care home? I don't. I 
don't suppose anyone does, to be honest."

5pm

In the neighbouring unit, a 74-year-old man with a serious lung condition has 
been admitted by his wife for a month, because she needs to have an operation 
to treat her bowel cancer and will not be able to give him the constant care he 
needs. It is not clear whether she will be well enough to look after him once 
she returns home, so what appears to be a short-term stay could likely become 
permanent. Because they have savings of more than £23,000, they will have to 
pay £918 a week for an ensuite room. Their life savings will be rapidly eaten 
away if the stay becomes long-term. "It does seem unfair that you put aside a 
bit of money for your family and that all goes," the wife says.

But these complaints about funding seem really to be the more acceptable focus 
for anxiety, because the enormity of the underlying situation – a wife leaving 
her husband in an nursing home, perhaps for ever; that this is perhaps the end 
of their lives together – is too unbearable to discuss. The two sit in the 
empty room, facing each other blankly, waiting for a meal to arrive.

5.30pm

A nurse is trying to give medicine to Betty, a tangled skeleton of a woman in 
the corner.

"This is your new tablet," the nurse says.

Betty, who has said virtually nothing all day, refuses it, commenting: "I know 
what it will do to me. It's a nasty one. I'm not taking it."

She refuses to eat. "It's yoghurt, Betty, it's yoghurt. Betty, you don't want 
yoghurt?"

"I don't want it."

The other 10 people in the room are served sandwiches.

"My daughter brought me two new jumpers. They hung all the way down, like 
this. She said, 'Whatever I buy you, it's never right,'" Peggy says. There is 
little acknowledgement that she has spoken.

The fitter residents pull off their own white bibs at the end of the meal and 
crumple them up; the others wait to be cleaned up by the workers. One by one 
they are wheeled out to their rooms and undressed by staff who work in pairs, 
because the hoists require two people.

Meals are given individually to the sicker residents in their rooms. Arms 
immobile by her side, Diana Beech submits to being fed by a young carer. The 
television is showing Wimbledon but her eyes are focused, unmoving, on the door 
and the corridor beyond.

There is a selection of pureed food, some of it green, some brown. "Some sort 
of meat as well," the carer says scrutinising it and spooning it into Diana's 
mouth.

Diana groans and coughs and the feeding stops.

"All right? Go down the wrong hole? DO YOU WANT ANY MORE?" the carer asks, 
shouting to be heard. There is a feeble, whispered yes.

The dance between carer and patient is not always in time. Sometimes the spoon 
arrives too early, and the green sludge hovers by the mouth for a few seconds 
until the cavity opens. Sometimes the mouth is open and waiting, tongue 
drooping out, before the spoon has left the plate.

The process takes 45 minutes. When Diana no longer has the energy to whisper 
yes or no to offers of food, she raises a long and elegant manicured finger on 
the bed to indicate when she is ready for more. The bright carmine red nail 
polish is incongruous – it's the fingernail of a 1940s femme fatale, not a 
dying woman in a flowered nightdress.

7pm

The unit nurse decides that a woman sleeping in an end room should now 
formally be classified as dying, and begins to fill out paperwork accordingly: 
is she bedbound? (tick); only able to take sips of fluids? (tick); 
semi-comatose? (tick); no longer able to take tablets? (tick). She is placed on 
the Liverpool Care Pathway, a clearly demarcated care plan for the dying, which 
means that from now on she will only be moved for essential procedures and 
drugs will only be administered to ease her pain. Staff estimate that she has 
two, perhaps three days, and her relatives are informed, but since she has been 
at death's door several times before, they decide not to come immediately.

Given that everyone is sent here to die, it's peculiar how infrequently the 
subject is brought up. "The elderly in general don't like talking about death. 
It's a taboo," the Iraqi nurse observes. Violet will only reluctantly address 
the subject. "We have one or two passers-on. We're not really involved in it 
here. We don't see much of it."

It is true that the dying is done, largely, out of sight of the occupants of 
the day room. "Those who are mentally quite aware will see us rushing about, 
and will notice the relatives crying," Christine Driscoll, the unit manager, 
says. "When the funeral people arrive, we usually shut all the doors along the 
corridors to give the family some privacy."

Christine does not find the process upsetting. "When I first started nursing, 
I worked in a burns unit and seeing younger people die, that made me sad. But I 
feel with this, at least they have lived their lives. As long as we keep them 
comfortable and they have a pain-free and dignified death – that's what we aim 
for."

8.30pm-midnight

Yomi Owalabi, the unit nurse on duty for the night, makes his rounds of the 26 
rooms where residents are almost all in bed, watching television in their 
rooms. He has a different style for everyone, playful with some of the more 
lively women, tender and kind with the sick.

He spoons water into Diana's mouth. "How are you today? That frog is still in 
your throat? You need to drink. Please now," he says, adding approvingly when 
she accepts some liquid, "Lovely girl."

In the corridors there is the sound of a choking cough, and the blended noise 
of televisions broadcasting different channels at high volume.

"How are you today?" Yomi asks at every room. "Not too good," many reply. 
"Very, very poorly." "Don't worry," he comforts them. "Don't worry."

"Are you all right, Madam?" he asks, as he fits a bag of liquid beige food to 
a pipe that is inserted into the stomach of a woman who has recently given up 
eating. He measures out several liquid medicines, which are also fed down the 
wires to her stomach.

She tries to push the tube away. "I don't want these wires on me any more. I 
don't want no more. Can you take it out?"

Some of them get pills to help them sleep, others have another antidepressant, 
some have strong painkillers that they drink with orange squash. Yomi and the 
two care assistants on duty will return to check discreetly at everyone's door 
every hour through the night.

"Ageing is a natural thing but sometimes it is very nasty," Yomi says when he 
sits down to fill in paperwork.

Later, he spends a long time tending to the woman who is at the brink of 
death, massaging her shoulders and stroking her hair. "Never mind," he says 
gently, and cleans her mouth with a small pink medical sponge attached to a 
cotton bud. She has no teeth, and her face has fallen inwards where her mouth 
used to be. Her eyes don't open, but there is a noise which could be a sigh or 
a moan.

"I'll be back," he tells her. "You wait for me."

This article is a compressed account of a series of visits, over four days, to 
the Monmouth Court nursing home in Ipswich. Names of residents have been 
changed and some details have been altered to obscure identities.
 