
Demographic change is reshaping British society in an unprecedented way. There 
are now more people aged 65 and over in the UK than children under 16 which has 
never occurred before. Social change of this type and magnitude is difficult to 
comprehend, particularly because it is continuous rather than sudden. We see it 
in many of our own families, of course, with older relatives living until their 
late 80s and beyond, but extrapolating this to the whole of society is no easy 
task. Moreover, Britain has long emphasised youth over old age. Negative 
portrayals of ageing and older people are unfortunately familiar.

We need to foster a new idea of old age, as a time of opportunities, and to 
replace its current, largely passive, dependent and discriminatory associations.

To achieve this, we must first clear some barriers. Some believe the baby 
boomer generation, having pioneered the greatest social and sexual revolutions 
of the last two centuries and confounded countless prejudices, will transform 
later life in their own image. But waiting for the boomers to spring into 
action neglects all of those already in old age. It discounts the ageing 
process itself, which is likely to impinge on attitudes and capacity, and it 
ignores the huge diversity among the boomer generation – as in the current 
older generations – according to gender, race, ethnicity and social class.

Ageing diversity

Another popular myth is that an ageing society will vote as a block. There is 
no evidence to support this contention, which is an example of the general 
ageism rooted deeply in society. In political terms, old people are as 
heterogeneous as any other age group. This does not mean that their potential 
voting power can be ignored – far from it – but it is erroneous to stereotype 
the old as either set in their political ways or only interested in themselves. 
The media has an ill-informed tendency to focus on ageing in apocalyptic terms: 
the "rising tide of dependency", "inter-generational war" and the "burden of 
pensions" are the sorts of headlines perpetuating the dependent stereotype of 
later life. There is a need for the media to act more responsibly and help in 
educating the public about what it means to be an ageing society.

We are all in the same boat, as far as ageing is concerned, and we share the 
same goal: to prevent or delay for as long as possible all of the negative 
associations with later life – physical, mental and financial. We all want to 
live longer, then decline and die faster.

What would a society more equal for all ages look and feel like? It would 
definitely not mean a regimented ageing process: diversity in both later life 
and the paths towards it would continue and be celebrated. Policy makers, 
practitioners and retailers would respond to the challenge of diversity and 
cater for it. Ageing would not be regarded as inevitable or immutable, rather, 
a malleable process. Both scientific research and direct engagement with older 
people would provide a constant flow of new ideas to improve the support 
necessary for active and independent ageing.

Transforming society

Age discrimination would be determinedly rooted out of all corners of society 
and school children would be taught about its damaging consequences. Job 
prospects for all ages would be enhanced by the universal availability of 
lifelong education and training for a working life with regularly changing 
skill requirements. Young people will realise the need to update their skills 
and knowledge and be aware of major health risks. Employers and service 
providers would emphasise age management, maximising wellbeing and reducing the 
incidence of disabling life events.

As they age, most people would have a choice about key aspects of their lives, 
which only a minority enjoy at present, such as retirement and full- or 
part-time working. The stigma of being an older jobseeker would be removed and 
a range of part-work part-pension options become available. Preventative health 
measures in employment would increase the job prospects and proportion of older 
workers.

A social pension would remove the risk of poverty, while individual pension 
savings would still afford higher levels of comfort. Advanced old age services 
would be individually customised and be available in people's homes. A range of 
housing options would maximise independence and interdependence within the 
family and lifelong communities.

In short, this is an outline of the ideal ageing situation: free from 
discrimination and as full as possible with opportunities. While it cannot be 
delivered overnight, it is not a utopian dream, because many experience this in 
other European countries and in parts of the UK where it is affordable. 
Consequently the government's forthcoming ageing strategy should seek to enable 
the majority to age in this way – actively and rewardingly.

• Alan Walker is professor of social policy and social gerontology at the 
University of Sheffield
 