
You have to pay attention at Amsterdam's Rijksmuseum to realise it is inviting 
the public to witness the death of oldEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. The Dutch don't know it. They 
have spent €370m refurbishing its 19th-century halls and the museum now shines 
as one of the world's great cultural centres. Nor do funereal sentiments greet 
the millions of visitors. They are welcomed instead by two over-confident 
English philosophers, who have splattered their thoughts over gallery walls 
like middle-brow graffiti artists.

It is as if the culture ministry of a totalitarian state has taken control. 
The curators allowAlain de Botton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alain-de-botton> and his collaborator, John 
Armstrong, to boom that art is a therapy that can make you a better person from 
150 signs, designed as super-size Post-it notes. Slogans and instructions blare 
at the visitor in every room. You are told how art can heal and ennoble, if and 
only if, you look at it in the right way.

The critics have been unrelenting. In the Dutch press, Bianca Stigter put it 
best when she said the Rijksmuseum was presenting art as cod liver oil: the 
nastier it tasted the more good it did you. Her colleague Wieteke van Zeil made 
the essential argument that the job of a gallery was to give people the space 
to think, not to tell themwhat to think.

The British press has been no less condemnatory. I am not disagreeing. The 
moral exhortations and cautionary tales the Rijksmuseum offers are historically 
ignorant, visually illiterate and brazenly propagandistic.

From Michael Gove to radical feminists, the old dream persists that if only 
you censor everything from the history curriculum to classical texts, you can 
produce a new model citizenry.

The late Robert Hughes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/aug/07/robert-hughes> had the best 
reply. He gave the purveyors of moral uplift of his day the story of Sigismondo 
Malatesta, Lord of Rimini. Malatesta was without doubt a prince of exquisite 
taste, who patronised the finest artists of Renaissance Italy.

Art <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> did not exalt him, however, 
for he was so famed for his cruelty that the Catholic church made him for a 
time the only man apart from Judas Iscariot officially listed as being in hell 
– "a distinction he earned by trussing up a papal emissary, the 15-year-old 
bishop of Fano, and publicly sodomising him before his applauding army in the 
main square of Rimini".

Yet despite the justifiable criticism, the Rijksmuseum still performs a public 
service. It is presenting a recognisable moral philosophy: the philosophy of 
the Protestant middle class, which for all its setbacks and changes, has 
dominated northern Europe for centuries. Here is its sermon, condensed for 
reasons of space – and because I find a little of Mr de Botton goes a long way.

There is nothing wrong with being rich, as long as you are just, wise and 
generous. You should value your friends – this next to Rembrandt'sThe Night 
Watch – because they bring out the best in you. Don't worry if you are not 
beautiful or distinguished – this appears by Rembrandt'sThe Jewish Bride 
<http://www.rembrandthuis.nl/en/rembrandt/belangrijkste-werken/het-joodse-bruidje>
, a portrait of a not particularly good-looking couple holding each other with 
great tenderness. If only one person loves you, you can ignore the rest of the 
world.

A 17th-century still life of a succulent lobster surrounded by fruit and pies 
prompts the thought that modern consumerism has dulled our senses because it 
gives us luxuries on the cheap. We no longer enjoy a feast as our 17th-century 
ancestors did, because our greed is too easily satisfied and we take high 
living for granted. A picture of the worthy men who sat on the board of 
Amsterdam's women's prison in the 1690s brings forth the lesson that we should 
not be cynics. If you assume the worst of people in power, you will get the 
worst people taking power.

Warnings are dotted through the museum like slow down signs near a busy 
junction. You should not give way to rage and despair whatever troubles life 
brings. You should not let familiarity with your partner breed contempt and be 
grateful that he or she loves you. You should not celebrate artists or rock 
stars but demand portraits of "accountants, tram drivers and IT managers" in 
order to recognise the importance of their efforts to keep society functioning.

Think what you will about the quality of the writing, but there is much to be 
said for taking pleasure in what you have and who you are with. Better to be 
modest and realistic than to lust after unattainable dreams. In Britain, we 
assume that this old morality still holds; that north Europeans are prudent and 
thrifty. We think of them valuing education and manufacturing, unlike we 
Americanised Brits with our funny-money men, celebrity obsessions and desire to 
have it all and have it now.

We haven't noticed the death of that Europe. The Dutch have borrowed to an 
extent that would make the most greed-driven Anglo-Saxon shudder. They have 
more debt than the Portuguese, the Irish or Greeks and much more than the 
British. Only the Danes from supposedly sensible Scandinavia can compete with 
theiraverage household debt 
<http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424052970203752604576640662346325544>
 of 240% of disposable income.

The property market they threw money at has been stagnant since 2008 and no 
one knows what to do. Once the solid men and women who staff the Dutch state 
might have been able to help their fellow citizens. Holland's national debt is 
modest and it has a current account surplus. But it has joined the euro and has 
given away control of the economic tools that might help it in a crisis. 
There's little a supposedly democratic society can do to take charge of its 
destiny.

As the old order fails, new forces replace it. Optimists say that Geert 
Wilders will perform poorly when Holland's European election results come in 
today. He went too far even for the Dutch far right when he cried to acrowd in 
the Hague <http://www.economist.com/blogs/charlemagne/2014/03/dutch-far-right>: 
"In this city and in the Netherlands, do you want more or fewer Moroccans?"

"Fewer! Fewer! Fewer!" the mob roared.

"Then we'll arrange that."

But however he fares, elsewhere in Europe the far right and far left are 
prospering because, in the name of federalism, the descendants of those 
moderate and cautious burghers whose stern portraits hang in the Rijksmuseum 
went wild and let their countries take part in a disastrous economic experiment.

I don't know what art will come from the new Europe, but I am certain that pat 
philosophers will not be able to tell comforting children's stories about it.
 