
So cherished are the elderly in Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>
 that an annual national holiday is held in their honour. Respect for the Aged 
Day, on the third Monday in September, serves to remind everyone of their 
obligations to a grey section of society that is growing at an alarming rate.

Getting the government to do its bit, however, can prove surprisingly hard and 
the responsibility for looking after pensioners lies closer to home.

Martin Foster, 53, lives with his wife Yoko in Minami-Senju, in Tokyo's 
northern suburbs. Yoko's parents cared for her 90-year-old grandmother and the 
family had to make a direct appeal to the authorities to increase the level of 
state help her grandmother needed as she became more frail. "If you want more 
help from the state you have to stand up and fight for it, which is something 
the Japanese are not used to doing or are very good at," says Martin.

It is usual for extended families – youngsters, parents and grandparents – to 
share living space in Tokyo's notoriously cramped apartments. About two in 
three pensioners live with their children.

Four reasons spring to mind: the social stigma attached to packing off your 
old folk to a nursing home; a lack of places; cost; and the basic tenet on 
which Japanese society operates – sacrifice of the self for the greater good.

Takio Wada and his wife, Meiko, lived in the US for seven years. They dreamed 
of retiring to Hawaii but instead selflessly returned to Japan to care for 
Takio's mother, Aki. Still, Meiko can't say she wasn't warned. When they first 
met in Italy in 1972, he told her: "I will have to look after my mother when 
she is old."

It is Aki's 96th birthday on the day I visit their house in Soka City, 
Saitama. He jokes: "In Japan, it may be easier for a woman to get married to a 
man who has no mother to take care of. Having a live-in mother-in-law can be 
quite tough."

Apart from hearing difficulties, Aki is in rude health and can still climb the 
stairs to her bedroom. But Takio is 66 and his wife 68. How will they cope when 
she can no longer do this, or needs help with even basic tasks?

"First we will build a bedroom on the ground floor. Then if we still can't 
take care of her anymore we will move her to a nursing home – one of the more 
reasonably priced ones. That would be a last resort, but my mother wouldn't 
want to be taken to the toilet by my wife or for us to have to bathe her."

Tradition dictates it is the eldest son who should take care of the parents. 
"The younger generations don't want to do this but my generation has to," says 
Takio. "It is up to the eldest son – I truly believe that. I think my son is 
thinking about this care issue now. I hope he will look at our family, how we 
look after my mother, and that he will take care of us. We won't request this 
but we live in hope."

For her part, Aki has no doubt where she is best off: "I prefer to live with 
my son than go to the nursing home. A bus comes to take me to the community 
centre every day, and I enjoy the company there."

Junichi Umeda and his wife Mayumi are neighbours of the Wada family. Junichi's 
mother is in a nursing home. He and his sister contribute 25,000 yen (£170) a 
month each towards the 200,000 yen fee. The other 150,000 yen is covered by his 
mother's state pension and savings.

"It was my sister's decision to send her to a nursing home," says Junichi. 
"Then she had to find a facility, but there were no vacancies. My niece had 
once worked at this particular care home so it was a very rare case of being 
able to get in through the back door. Normally you have to register and go on a 
long waiting list, maybe for a year."

Time is one thing Japan doesn't have. The country is sitting on a geriatric 
faultline of seismic proportions. In the past six years, the number of people 
living to 100 has doubled from 18,000 to 36,000.

By 2040, there will be a staggering 1 million Japanese centenarians while the 
population will have plunged from 127 million to 100 million, according to the 
UN. It's a simple equation: one in 100 will be at least 100.

With a shrinking population – the birth rate is 1.23 – it is difficult to see 
who is going to look after them.
 