
Belly dancing lessons in Morocco


The prize Riad El Fenn (riadelfenn.com) and bmi, British Midland International 
(flybmi.com), are offering a three-night stay at the beautiful Riad El Fenn 
which is situated in the centre of Marrakech. Renovated from an historic 
property, this traditionally-styled boutique riad has 21 individually-designed 
suites and rooms, but all the facilities of a large luxury hotel. As well as 
learning to bellydance, guests will be able to relax on the spacious roof 
terrace, enjoy the three swimming pools, take in a film at the private cinema 
or be pampered at the traditional hammam spa and treatment rooms. Should they 
want to explore the city, the main square of Jemma El Fna, the heart of 
Marrakech, is just a five-minute walk away.

The prize comprises of a three night stay for two adults at Riad El Fenn on a 
B&B basis with afternoon tea, two belly dancing classes for both guests, 
airport transfers and direct return flights from London Heathrow with bmi, who 
offer five flights a week to Marrakech. The prize is valid for departures 
throughout 2012, subject to availability and excluding 29 February to 4 March 
2012.

• For details about how to enter, and for the general rules that apply to this 
prize draw, see theTerms and Conditions section at the bottom of this page.

Horse riding lessons in Dubai


The prize Al Maha, A Luxury Collection Desert Resort and Spa (al-maha.com) are 
offering a four-night stay at their luxury hotel. Built in the style of an 
ancient Bedouin settlement, it sits nestled in the sand dunes of the Dubai 
Conservation Desert. Each of the 42 suites is elegantly furnished with unique 
and rare regional artwork and comes with its own private swimming pool. Horse 
riding lessons will be taken in the dramatic landscape of the Arabian desert. 
Other activities available at an additional cost include nature walks to spot 
oryx, gazelles, sand cats and some of the 100 species of birds that can be seen 
in this area, safari drives and camel trekking. At night dine alfresco on the 
veranda of the Al Diwaan Restaurant, on the private deck of your suite, or 
enjoy a candlelit meal amongst the dunes.

The prize comprises of a four night stay for two adults at Al Maha Desert 
Resort & Spa sharing a suite with all meals provided, one hour per day of 
one-to-one tuition for novice riders, between four to ten hours in total for 
more experienced riders (there is a weight restriction of 85kilos per rider), 
airport transfers and return international flights from any London airport. The 
prize is valid for departures throughout 2012, subject to availability.

• For details about how to enter, and for the general rules that apply to this 
prize draw, see theTerms and Conditions section at the bottom of this page.

Quad biking, or glacier hiking and ice climbing in Iceland

The prize Discover The World Ltd (www.discover-the-world.co.uk) are offering a 
day and a night in Iceland's exciting capital city Reykjavik, and then a 
further three night stay at the cosy Minniborgir cottages, located in the 
spectacular natural beauty of south-west Iceland. Choose between the 
opportunity to drive through the lava fields and black sand beaches of the 
Reykanes Peninsula on quad bikes, or join a guided glacier excursion on 
Solheimajokull, one of Iceland's most impressive glaciers. Explore a frozen 
world of crevasses and sink holes, jagged ridges and ice walls. All the 
necessary equipment is provided and no experience is needed.

The prize comprises of a four night holiday for two adults with Discover the 
World Ltd; one night in Reykjavik on a bed and breakfast basis and three nights 
at the self-catering Minniborgir Cottages, car hire for five days on an 
unlimited mileage basis and semi-comprehensive insurance (no charge for 
additional driver) and and return international Icelandair flights from London 
Heathrow, Manchester or Glasgow (no airport transfer necessary as the hire car 
will be picked up at the airport). The prize is valid for departures throughout 
2012, subject to availability. Discover the World Ltd's normal booking 
conditions will apply.

• For details about how to enter, and for the general rules that apply to this 
prize draw, see theTerms and Conditions section at the bottom of this page.

Surfing lessons in France

The prize Star Surf Camps (starsurfcamps.com) are offering a week of surfing 
lessons at the popular beach town of Moliets, which is situated 30 minutes 
north of Biarritz. Guests will camp in a beautiful pine forest which backs 
directly onto the beach, and a chef will be on hand to daily cook up a buffet 
breakfast, packed lunch and hot evening meal. A team of professional surfers 
and lifeguards will give ten hours of lessons for both guests and all the 
necessary equipment will be provided. Surf boards can be used outside of lesson 
times for those who want to practise. There is also the option of beach cruiser 
bikes which are free to borrow, and yoga lessons and massages which are 
available at an additional cost.

The prize comprises of a seven-night stay (Saturday to Saturday) for two 
adults with Star Surf Camps, either in a couples tent, or single compartments, 
with all food included, airport transfers and return international flights from 
any UK airport. The prize is valid for departures throughout 2012, subject to 
availability.

• For details about how to enter, and for the general rules that apply to this 
prize draw, see theTerms and Conditions section at the bottom of this page.

Waterskiing or wakeboarding lessons in Crete

The prize Daios Cove Luxury Resort and Villas (daioscovecrete.com) are 
offering a seven-night stay at their stunning five-star resort, which overlooks 
its own private beach. The hotel will provide a two-hour waterskiing or 
wakeboarding lesson during the stay. Guests can lounge by the infinity pool, 
take advantage of the luxurious spa and enjoy delicious meals at any of the 
hotel's three gourmet restaurants, though 24-hour room service is available for 
those who would prefer to dine on their balconies. If you wish to explore 
further, the charming town of Agios Nikolaos is only a few minutes walk away. 
Crete has continual sunshine making this an ideal holiday destination for any 
time of the year.

The prize comprises of a seven-night stay at the Daios Cove Luxury Resort and 
Villas for two adults in a Deluxe Sea View Room on a bed and breakfast basis, a 
two-hour lesson in waterskiing or wakeboarding and return international flights 
from Birmingham or London Luton (airport transfers are not included). It is 
valid for departures throughout 2012 (excluding 20 June to 28 August), subject 
to availability.

• For details about how to enter, and for the general rules that apply to this 
prize draw, see theTerms and Conditions section at the bottom of this page.

Terms and conditions


1. The Guardian Weekend travel competition (the "Competition") is open to 
residents of the UK aged 18 and over.

2. The Competition is not open to employees or agencies of Guardian News & 
Media Limited ("GNM"), their group companies or family members or anyone else 
connected to the Competition.

3. Entry into the Competition is acceptance of these Terms and Conditions.

4. To enter the Competition, you must send a postcard or email enclosing your 
name, address and daytime phone number (postcard entrants must provide an email 
address, too) to Guardian Weekend Travel Competition, Kings Place, 90 York Way, 
London N1 9GU orweekend.competition@theguardian.com 
<mailto:weekend.competition@theguardian.com>. You must mark on your entry the 
holiday you want the chance to win. You can submit one separate entry for each 
competition, but you will not be eligible to win more than one prize.

5. If you have any questions about how to enter or in connection with the 
Competition, please email us atweekend@theguardian.com 
<mailto:weekend@theguardian.com> with 'Travel Competition' in the subject line.

6. Only one entry per holiday per person. Entries on behalf of another person 
will not be accepted and joint submissions are not allowed. You are responsible 
for the cost (if any) of sending your Competition entry to us.

7. No responsibility is taken for entries that are lost, delayed, misdirected 
or incomplete or cannot be delivered or entered for any technical or other 
reason. Proof of delivery of the entry is not proof of receipt.

8. The Competition closes at 23.59 on 11 February 2012. Entries received after 
that date and time will not be considered.

9. The winners will be chosen from a random draw of entries.

10. Five winners will receive one holiday each. GNM accepts no responsibility 
for any costs associated with the prize and not specifically included in the 
prize.

11. The winners will be notified by phone or email on or before 17 February 
2012 and given details of how to claim their prize. If a winner does not 
respond to GNM within 28 days of being notified by GNM, then the winner's prize 
will be forfeited and GNM shall be entitled to select another winner (and that 
winner will have to respond to the phone call or email from GNM within 28 days 
or else they will also forfeit their prize). If a winner rejects their prize, 
then the winner's prize will be forfeited and GNM shall be entitled to select 
another winner.

12. The winners must hold valid passports (with required time before expiry 
for the relevant travel destination), have their own travel insurance and 
obtain any necessary visas at their own expense prior to travel. The winners 
are responsible for all other costs and expenses associated with the prize.

13. Details of the winners will also be published on theguardian.com 
<https://www.theguardian.com/international> on 20 February 2012 or (at GNM's 
sole discretion) at a later date.

14. Details of the winners can be obtained by sending a stamped addressed 
envelope to the following address: Guardian Weekend, Guardian News & Media 
Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU.

15. The prize is non-exchangeable, non-transferable, and is not redeemable for 
cash or other prizes.

16. GNM retains the right to substitute the prize with another prize of 
similar value in the event the original prize offered is not available.

17. The winners may be required for promotional activity.

18. By entering the Competition, you agree to receive marketing from GNM, and 
from the suppliers of the holidays available as prizes in this Competition.

19. No purchase necessary.

20. Nothing in these terms and conditions shall exclude the liability of GNM 
for death, personal injury, fraud or fraudulent misrepresentation as a result 
of its negligence.

21. GNM accepts no responsibility for any damage, loss, liabilities, injury or 
disappointment incurred or suffered by you as a result of entering the 
Competition or accepting the prize. GNM further disclaims liability for any 
injury or damage to your or any other person's computer relating to or 
resulting from participation in or downloading any materials in connection with 
the Competition.

22.. GNM reserves the right at any time and from time to time to modify or 
discontinue, temporarily or permanently, this Competition with or without prior 
notice due to reasons outside its control (including, without limitation, in 
the case of anticipated, suspected or actual fraud). The decision of GNM in all 
matters under its control is final and binding and no correspondence will be 
entered into.

23. GNM shall not be liable for any failure to comply with its obligations 
where the failure is caused by something outside its reasonable control. Such 
circumstances shall include, but not be limited to, weather conditions, fire, 
flood, hurricane, strike, industrial dispute, war, hostilities, political 
unrest, riots, civil commotion, inevitable accidents, supervening legislation 
or any other circumstances amounting to force majeure.

24. The Competition will be governed by English law.

25. Promoter: Guardian News & Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London, 
N1 9GU.
 