
Afghanistan reached the main draw of the World Twenty20 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/worldtwenty20> with an emphatic 59-run 
victory over Zimbabwe in their first-round Group B match. Mohammad Shahzad (40) 
gave Afghanistan a flying start before Mohammad Nabi (52) and Samiullah 
Shenwari (43) added 98 runs off 64 balls to power them to 186 for six, their 
highest total in this format. The associate nation then bowled out Zimbabwe for 
127 to register a memorable victory over a full-member nation and join England, 
South Africa, West Indies and Sri Lanka in Group 1 of the Super 10 stage of the 
tournament.

“This was a very important match for us. People in Afghanistan are crazy about 
cricket. They love the game, so it [winning] was very important for us,” the 
victorious captain, Asghar Stanikzai, said.

With a place in the main draw at stake, Stanikzai opted to bat and was 
vindicated as Shahzad impressed with his swashbuckling batting at Nagpur’s VCA 
Stadium.

The 28-year-old hit Tendai Chatara for four successive boundaries after a 
quiet opening over, forcing the pace man out of the attack.

Donald Tiripano was pressed into service but there was no respite from Shahzad 
who hit him for three successive fours.

Shahzad greeted left-arm spinner Sean Williams by hitting his first delivery 
for a six but fell in the same over after a 23-ball blitz attempting a reverse 
sweep.

His dismissal triggered a mini-collapse as Afghanistan, cruising at 49 for no 
loss in the fifth over, slumped to 63 for four in the eighth. Nabi then joined 
forces with Shenwari to first steady the innings before accelerating.

Beneficiary of a missed stumping opportunity, Nabi hit Wellington Masakadza 
for two sixes in the same over and brought up his maiden fifty in 30 balls 
before falling in the final over.

Zimbabwe’s erratic bowlers conceded 25 extras, including 17 wides, to make 
things difficult for themselves.

Chasing a daunting target, Zimbabwe lost their top half for 65 inside 12 overs 
and Tinashe Panyangara’s unbeaten 17 was the top score in the innings.

Leg-spinner Rashid Khan was the pick of the Afghan bowlers, claiming three for 
11 in his tidy four overs but Nabi, who also got a wicket with the ball, was 
named man-of-the-match.
 