
Perhaps the statue of Robbie Burns in the middle of the city shed a tear as 
Afghanistan, in one of cricket’s greatest heists, snatched a stunning victory 
over Scotland by one wicket with three balls to spare. Needing 211 to win they 
were 97-7, but thanks to Sami Shenwari, the grittiest of the Afghan batsmen, 
who hit 96, and a magnificently calm last-wicket partnership – except when they 
were running between the wickets – between the charismatic pace bowlers, 
Shapoor Zadran and Hamed Hassan, Afghanistan prevailed in an epic contest.

There was a combination of relief, disbelief and unfettered jubilation as 
Shapoor struck the winning boundary. Briefly his team-mates tried to carry 
Shapoor off the field – he’s over six and a half feet tall and about 17 stones 
– before sanity finally prevailed on a madcap day. For the Scots there was only 
despair. After 11 World Cup matches since 1999 they are still seeking their 
first victory, and they know that they will never have a better chance than 
this. Afterwards a stunned Preston Mommsen, their captain, said, “It’s hard to 
see how we have not won that game.”

Andy Moles, Afghanistan’s coach, who has coached Scotland as well as New 
Zealand in recent years, said, “I’ve seen some strange things in cricket but 
that was one of the more remarkable. We played some irresponsible cricket but I 
told them to drag it out to the end. I’m really proud of them; they are so 
passionate and they have worked immensely hard. I’m not entirely pleased by the 
way we played but I’m delighted by the result. If we play the full nations more 
often we can only get better.”

“I know the Scottish players”, said Moles, “and I understand how difficult it 
is for them to lose that game. Afterwards I told my team to make sure they win 
with humility”. It is a win that will prompt great celebrations back in 
Afghanistan as well as in Dunedin. Shenwari, the man of the match, such a cool 
customer in a frenetic run-chase, said, “Ten years ago there was nothing. Now 
in the street, in the schools, everywhere there is just cricket”.

Yet again in this World Cup the Associates had provided a far more compelling 
contest than the senior citizens have so far managed. Throughout the tournament 
there have been several examples of the rapid improvement in Associate cricket. 
But this match was not one of them. It was a magnificently tense game but it 
was also one of moderate quality – especially among the vast majority of the 
batsmen. But by the end no one at the University Oval cared a jot about that.

Once again the Scots looked fragile at the start of their innings. The Afghan 
pace bowlers, probably the most potent among the associates, were a challenging 
proposition on another lively Dunedin pitch. But after the loss of three 
wickets, Matt Machan and Preston Mommsen were recovering the situation without 
too many problems. Then Machan, arguably Scotland’s most dangerous batsmen, 
lost concentration. His risk assessment was poor and he stepped away to leg to 
crack an off-spinner from Mohammad Nabi through the off-side. He missed and was 
bowled – with 28 overs still remaining.

Mommsen fell in the next over and soon Scotland were eight wickets down. Now 
Majid Haq, the stately off-break bowler, and Ali Evans, released by Derbyshire 
18 months ago, forged an unlikely alliance. They scraped together a vital 62 
runs in 13 overs. They had given Scotland a chance.

But Afghanistan were 85-2 in the 19th over of their response. Game all but 
over. Then Javed Ahmadi, who had struck 51 in 50 balls, skied a catch. Within 
six overs Afghanistan contrived to lose five wickets and they were 97-7. Game 
all but over.

Now Shenwari showed his mettle. Afterwards, with rare candour, he explained 
his thoughts at the carnage at the other end. “I did my job and stayed at the 
wicket. Some of the others didn’t take responsibility. To the tail-enders I 
just said, “Stay. Wicket doing nothing”.

Shenwari gave one chance. On 20 he edged a straightforward slip catch to Haq. 
It was spilt and as a consequence Haq, who had the topsy turviest of days, will 
not forget his experiences here in a hurry. Haq also bowled economically. But 
in his last over with 38 runs needed off 24 balls he opted to go around the 
wicket. Shenwari seized his chance. There were three sixes over mid-wicket and 
a wide before Haq went back over the wicket. This time Shenwari could not clear 
Josh Davey on the boundary. He was devastated, not for falling four short of 
his century, but because he had not won the match for his country.

Now 19 were needed from 19 balls with just the two mighty pacemen left at the 
crease. They can bowl alright but could they bat? The Scots painfully learnt 
that they could. Fourteen off 12 balls became five off the last over, which was 
to be bowled by Iain Wardlaw. A direct hit would have finished Shapoor, who 
turns like a tanker, but Machan’s under arm throw missed the stumps. Now 
Wardlaw attempted the yorker; the ball was slightly over-pitched on leg-stump. 
Shapoor played the sweetest stroke of his life, the ball sped to the square leg 
boundary and the celebrations of a staggering cricketing journey could begin.

“As Muslims there is no danger that they will be out late tonight,” said 
Moles. “But I’m not so sure about the coaching staff”.
 