
If Alan Pardew were a betting man, he would back an English team to win this 
season's Europa League. "Outside of Manchester United, the Premier League has 
not been the same standard as last year and that's been reflected by Champions 
League performances," said Newcastle United's manager. "But our three teams 
left in theEuropa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> – Chelsea, Tottenham 
and Newcastle – are all strong, all capable of winning it."

Newcastle, without a trophy since 1969 – when they lifted the old Fairs Cup – 
are desperate to collect some silverware and Pardew believes that, provided 
they see off Guus Hiddink's expensively assembledAnzhi Makhachkala 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/anzhi-makhachkala>, this can be their 
season.

"We're in it to win it," he said. Yet with the tie poised at 0-0 from last 
week's first leg in Moscow, Thursday night's Russian visitors know that a score 
draw would allow them to reach the quarter-finals on away goals.

"We're in a great position, 0-0 is not precarious," countered Pardew. "We need 
to win but Anzhi lost 1-0 at Liverpool last autumn and this match will be tough 
for them. I've looked at the other teams left in the Europa League and I 
believe we can win it. I really do. We've got enough quality."

His good friend Brendan Rodgers, Liverpool's manager, has offered a few tips. 
"I spoke to Brendan about the two fixtures they had against them and we've 
studied and analysed Anzhi's games, so we know all we need to know about them. 
They've got one of the best managers from the last three decades and we've a 
tough agenda. But we're going into it on the back of three home wins.

"Anzhi have real quality. Jucilei is outstanding – he sits in front of the 
back four. Then there's Samuel Eto'o and Willian up front who will cause us 
trouble. Anzhi are pacey and a threat on the counterattack. They can also take 
the sting out of games but we're in form and our crowd can make it very 
difficult for them. Brendan was complimentary about Anzhi and he came up with a 
couple of warnings but he also had a couple of ideas he felt we could benefit 
from."

Hiddink will be relieved that a slight setback in Hatem Ben Arfa's recovery 
from a long-term hamstring injury means he will not be involved. "We're having 
a specialist look at it; we don't want to take any risks," said Pardew. "But 
the alarm bells aren't ringing. We can beat Anzhi without Hatem."

Shola Ameobi faces a late fitness test on an ankle injury before potentially 
making his 50th European appearance for Newcastle, which would eclipse Alan 
Shearer's tally of 49.

"Shola's immensely important to us," said Pardew. "He's a fabulous footballer 
and a fabulous person and we're very lucky to have him."

Newcastle United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited> 
(probable, 4-2-3-1): Elliot; Simpson, S Taylor, Yanga-Mbiwa, Santon; Tioté, 
Cabaye; Marveaux, Sissoko, Gutiérrez; Cissé.

Anzhi Makhachkala (probable, 4-1-3-2): V Gabulov; Yeschenko, João Carlos, 
Ewerton, Zhirkov; Jucilei; Diarra, Ahmedov, Shatov; Eto'o, Willian.
 