
Pawnbroker Albemarle & Bond (A&B) is in rescue talks with its banks after an 
attempted rights issue failed on Wednesday.

Britain's second-biggest pawnbroker admitted that after four months of talks 
it had been unable to persuade its biggest shareholder, US pawnbroker EZ CORP, 
to underwrite the proposed £35m cash call.

The company is now close to breaching its banking covenants and is "focusing 
its efforts on constructive discussions with the banks". Without an agreement 
by 30 October its net debt - £51m at the end of last month – will come 
perilously close to breaking its agreed borrowing threshold of £53.5m.

The news knocked 59% off A&B's share price, sending its shares to 28p and 
valuing the company at £15.6m. Little more than two years ago its market value 
was £224m.

The company also announced a new chief executive, Chris Gillespie, who left 
doorstep lender Provident Financial last month, and said it would appoint a 
"chief restructuring officer" to the board.

The reason for A&B's problems is simple. It has been battered by the falling 
price of gold on international markets. The drop in the gold price – more than 
20% this year – has hammered the company's finances as the value of assets on 
its books has fallen.

Managers at two A&B branches in London said they were not allowed to talk 
about how their businesses had been affected. "If I could, I would," Ali at the 
store in Caledonian Road, north London, said.

Most of the items on display there were gold, including chunky bracelets 
costing as much as £562 and a "fancy cross and necklace" for £464 – all selling 
for about half their valuations.

Things looked different two years ago when A&B announced ambitious expansion 
plans to capitalise on what it declared was "the age of the pawnbroker".

The industry has existed in the form recognised today since half of the noble 
Italian Medici family started trading as pawnbrokers in the 15th century. 
Customers borrow money secured on the items they deposit with the pawnbroker, 
which charges interest on the loan.

The financial crisis created ideal conditions for pawnbrokers. Banks tightened 
lending to indebted households and the price of gold rocketed as investors 
sought to protect their money from the threatened global meltdown. People in 
need of cash went in droves to A&B and its rivals to pawn or sell their 
jewellery – and the price kept rising.

There was a boom in pawnbroking after years when the industry's size had 
barely grown. Between the start of the crisis in 2007 and this year the number 
of stores more than tripled to more than 2,000 since 2007 and total revenues 
surged to £865m from £300m, according to the National Pawnbrokers Association.

With some fanfare, a pawnbroker called Nikolas Michael opened in the gilded 
City of London – the first to do so in about 100 years. The shop's owners said 
they were making typical loans of £1,000 – 10 times the average at mainstream 
pawnbrokers – secured on Rolex watches and diamonds. But a visit to the store 
on Bishopsgate found Nikolas Michael gone. It moved up the City Road to 
Islington about a month ago because of a problem with asbestos, an assistant at 
the new shop said.

Pawnbrokers bet that continuing crisis in the financial markets would keep the 
price of gold high. The eurozone crisis and unrest in the Middle East drove 
investors to put their money into the perceived safe harbour of gold. And the 
sheer amount of money pumped into major economies by central banks raised fears 
that runaway inflation might erode the value of cash.

But the situation has not developed as the pawnbrokers had hoped. Tom Pugh at 
Capital Economics said: "The eurozone is out of recession and is going to hold 
together, inflation fears have reduced and the situation in the Middle East 
looks a lot better. There has also been weak physical demand from China and 
India, which are the two big buyers of gold, so pawnbrokers have been tanked 
all round."

A&B and its bigger rival H&T opened new shops focused heavily on gold, landing 
them with fixed costs that gave them little scope to scale back when the 
post-crash gold rush ended. A&B has closed its 33 "pop-up shops", which were 
really just tables set up in shopping centres to entice people into cashing in 
their gold items.

Owen Jones at Shore Capital said: "They both effectively used debt to expand 
their store networks far and away beyond what in my opinion was necessary. 
Instead of paying the revenues and cash flows from gold purchases to 
shareholders they put it back into the business in fixed costs."

He said that pawnbrokers would still be doing well if they had not bet so 
recklessly on the price of gold staying high. Wonga, the payday lender, serves 
the same cash-poor customers but is still booming.

"Wonga doesn't depend on someone bringing back the same pair of earrings each 
month. People with jewellery to sell have already done so on the back of the 
rising gold price – there is a finite supply."

A&B's store in Finsbury Park, north London, has a sign boasting: "The UK's 
largest gold buyer – best rates paid." And that was the problem all along.
 