
Albemarle & Bond has resorted to melting down and selling gold jewellery from 
its stores to avoid breaching debt covenants, as the crisis-hit pawnbroker 
issued its second profit warning in two months.

The company said it had kept within its £53.5m borrowing limit by curbing 
lending and "a programme of exceptional smelting of retail stocks". Albemarle & 
Bond has been battered by the plunging price of gold and

has started melting down its inventory of jewellery and other gold items that 
were not likely to sell before Christmas, giving it an immediate release of 
cash to prop up its finances.

The company came close to breaking lending agreements with its banks in 
October and was forced to delay announcing its annual results. The smelting 
spree was revealed in a gloomy trading update warning that its plight was worse 
than investors believed.

The shares slumped on the news, closing down 33.5%, or 12.5p, at 24.75p, 
compared with a 52-week high of 240p.

"The board believes that market expectations are significantly more optimistic 
than its own," the company said. Albemarle & Bond suffered a loss in the first 
five months of its financial year despite efforts to cut costs. The 
Reading-based group, which includes Herbert Brown jewellery and pawnbroking 
stores, said this came despite slashing costs and closing 33 pop-up gold buying 
stores out of its 230-store estate. The company was founded in Bristol in 1983 
with a single shop.

The profit warning followed a dire update in late September that saw Chris 
Gillespie announced as the new chief executive, joining from doorstep lender 
Provident Financial.

The firm has been hit by heavy falls in the price of gold after expanding 
rapidly when people were cashing in their gold items to take advantage of 
soaring prices. Two years ago it declared "the age of the pawnbroker" as it 
launched "pop-up" shops specialising in gold.

The drop in the gold price – more than 27% from the average price in March – 
has hammered the company's finances as the value of assets on its books has 
fallen. A&B and its bigger rival H&T opened new shops focused heavily on gold, 
landing them with fixed costs that gave them little scope to scale back when 
the post-crash gold rush ended. Gold is seen as hedge against inflation but 
fears of a global rise in pricing pressures have receded, amid a calming in the 
eurozone crisis and signs that the US central bank will pare back its 
$85bn-a-month stimulus programme.

Albemarle & Bond said there had been no signs of recovery in the market. Its 
"pledge book" of customer items secured against loans has fallen 12%, hit by 
the falling gold price and competition between pawnbrokers. The group also said 
its woes were compounded by a bill for its failed attempt to secure a £35m cash 
injection from its biggest shareholder EZCORP last month, when talks on a 
deeply-discounted rights issue were aborted.

Gillespie said: "Tough trading conditions have continued to impact our results 
but we are making progress controlling costs and managing within our 
constrained banking facilities."

The company said it planned to post its annual results around 9 December and 
was in continuing talks with its banks.

In the financial crisis, banks tightened lending to indebted households and 
the price of gold rocketed as investors sought to protect their money from the 
threatened global meltdown. People in need of cash rushed to pawn or sell their 
jewellery but signs of economic recovery and receding fears about runaway 
inflation sent the gold price on international markets falling.
 