
Pawnbroker Albemarle & Bond said it would appoint administrators on Tuesday, 
after its lenders declined to support any rescue plans for the lossmaking 
business.

The company, which said on Monday its shareholders would see no return on 
their investment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/mar/24/albemarle-bond-suspemnds-share-lenders>
, said that without the support of its banks it would shortly be unable to 
meets it liabilities. The shares were frozen at 6.65p on Monday, 97% less than 
they were worth a year ago.

"In such circumstances, the appointment of an administrator is the most 
appropriate course of action," it said.

It said it would file notice of intention to appoint four insolvency 
practitioners fromPricewaterhouseCoopers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/pricewaterhousecoopers> as joint 
administrators to Albemarle as soon as is practically possible.

Lenders to the troubled pawnbroker Albemarle & Bond have pulled the plug on 
its turnaround plan, leaving investors little chance of getting their money 
back. The company has experienced a sweeping reversal of fortunes since it 
boasted of "the age of the pawnbroker" in 2011 and launched pop-up shops 
specialising in gold dealing.

Following two profits warnings last autumn, it parted company with five of its 
six directors, saw its share price crash and was forced to melt down its gold 
reserves to raise emergency cash.

In January, the board abandoned plans to sell the business, admitting the 
shares held little attraction. The company had been struggling to find a buyer 
since private equity veteran Jon Moulton of Better Capital dropped out of the 
bidding in December.

The pawnbroker, founded in 1983 with a single shop, expanded rapidly during 
the recession as people cashed in their gold to take advantage of rising 
prices. But a recovery in the global economy – making gold less attractive 
against rising stock markets – drove the price of gold down 28% last year, 
leaving Albemarle with big losses. The precious metal is expected to continue 
to shed value in 2014, darkening the outlook for the pawnbroker.

Retail analyst Jonathan De Mello suggested not all Albemarle's troubles could 
be pinned on gold prices. He said much of the company's income had been based 
on its loans business, an area subject to increasing competition from payday 
lenders such as Wonga.

The pawnbroking sector had also been hurt by the pick-up in the economy, with 
"a return of quality retail" on the high street, he added. "[Pawnbroking] is a 
market that is a sign of the times. It tends to be dominated by independent 
stores and a lot of the smaller players have closed.

"There is a structural change going on. People are less inclined to use 
pawnbrokers because they are not getting rid of products."
 