
Auction house Christie’s has been ordered to pay more than $100,000 after it 
failed to tell a barrister that a painting it sold her might be a fake.

Louise McBride launched legal action against Christie’s Australia for 
misleading or deceptive conduct after she discovered there were serious 
questions about the authenticity of a painting titled Faun and Parrot which she 
bought from the auction house in May 2000.

McBride had paid more than $75,000 for the colourful piece, believing it had 
been painted by the late Australian artist Albert Tucker in the 1960s.

But when she was arranging to sell it and other artworks a decade after 
purchase, she discovered there was more to the work than met the eye.

She then took Christie’s, vendor Holland Fine Art (HFA) and art adviser 
Vivienne Sharpe to court claiming damages.

In a decision handed down on Thursday, New South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> supreme court 
Justice Patricia Bergin upheld McBride’s claim against them for misleading and 
deceptive conduct.

She also found McBride’s claims against Christie’s for deceit and 
unconscionable conduct had been made out. “I am satisfied on the balance of 
probabilities that the painting is a forgery,” she said.

While none of the parties involved in the sale of the painting knew at the 
time of the 2000 auction the painting was a fake, Bergin said it wasn’t long 
before Christie’s caught wind that something was not right.

“By August 2000 Christie’s had been advised by a group of eminent art experts 
that there were ‘real concerns’ about the authenticity of the painting,” she 
said. “Christie’s remained silent. It failed to inform its principal, HFA, the 
plaintiff or Ms Sharpe.”

In circumstances where Christie’s conditions of business entitled McBride to 
seek a refund if the painting was discovered to be a forgery within five years 
of purchase, Bergin said it was “misleading or deceptive” for the auction house 
to say nothing.

She ordered Christie’s pay 85% of the $118,788 she awarded to McBride. HFA 
will pay 10% of the loss while Sharpe will pay the remaining 5%.
 