
 Jitney  Lyttelton, London SE1 
 The Danny Crowe Show Bush, London W12
 Over the Moon The Old Vic, London SE1 

 There aren't many plays as exhilarating as August Wilson's  Jitney, first 
performed in Pittsburgh in 1982, but only now receiving its British premiere. 
And there aren't many productions with the rolling ease of Marion McClinton's. 
Floating on a raft of music, its action is by turns casual and ferocious - and 
always expressively choreographed.

This drama makes most plays look puny. Wilson, the winner of two Pulitzer 
Prizes and most famous in the States as the author of Ma Rainey's Black Bottom, 
is a playwright with a purpose. An ardent supporter of black theatre and a 
fervent opponent of colour-blind casting (of the kind recently practised by the 
National Theatre), he has set himself to chart the experience of 
African-Americans. He plans to write a play for each decade of the twentieth 
century. He is creating an impassioned and important chronicle.

In summary, Wilson's work sounds straightforward, even conservative. He 
documents lives; he tells stories; he's clear and outspoken, not elusive or 
oblique; he makes you want to know what will happen next. But in performance, 
his project is a radical one: the idiom, the structure and the assumptions of 
his plays are entirely their own.

Consider the hero of Jitney (the title means 'taxi'): it's not an individual 
but a group. The play follows a few days in the lives of some Pittsburgh cab 
drivers: the survival of the firm is threatened and there's a sudden death, but 
most of the action is given over to the bickering, companionship and minor 
crises of the men as they rub along together. Consider the distinctive movement 
of the play: not one grand arc, but a series of small scenes snaking around 
each other, in which no one drama is subordinate to another. Watching it is 
like listening to a series of jazz solos. Consider the rich use of music - from 
Marvin Gaye to 'Willow Weep': it doesn't merely drift moodily, but continues 
the action by other means. In the closing moments, the men, their quarrelling 
silenced by grief and anxiety, lounge around for long, mute minutes, with the 
soundtrack taking over from dialogue.

Wilson's street talk (hard to grasp for the first few minutes) is terrifically 
rendered by an excellent New York cast which contains not one limp actor. Among 
a chorus of great, growly voices and agile movers, Anthony Chisholm is 
outstanding as the laid-back drunk, and Yvette Ganier (in a part which was to 
have been played by Linda Powell, daughter of Colin) beautifully judged as the 
one woman - given a forceful shout - in an all-male cast. David Gallos's design 
sets the cab office in front of a huge, transparent window through which you 
glimpse black chimneys and crumbling warehouses; long lean cars are slewed up 
at the sidewalk. It is, as the entire production is, both naturalistic and 
evocative.

David Farr, author of Elton John's Glasses , has written a perceptive though 
too gentle satire about trash television in The Danny Crowe Show. A zealous 
pair of television producers, digging out agonised subjects to appear on shows 
with Danny Crowe, 'the pope of pain', alight on a gothically underprivileged 
family. A teenage boy (the very convincing Mark Rice-Oxley), so depressed that 
he sounds like an elf with laryngitis, lives with his slump-shouldered sister 
and ghoulish dad in a flat-cum-ossuary draped in black cloth and decorated with 
an inverted crucifix.

Just as you think it's all too much, The Danny Crowe Show swivels dexterously; 
it turns out that, avid for stardom, the sad siblings aren't related and have 
invented their plight. The mockery, which develops a truth-is- 
stranger-than-fiction side-line, turns not on the exploitation of the innocent 
but on the well-founded notion of the exploiters' gullibility.

It's nimbly directed by Dominic Hill; Tom Piper's design, admirably economic 
and effective, executes one of those regular Bush origamic feats, but it's too 
cautious. The striking thing about TV agony shows is that they are literally 
theatrical. Where would Ricki or Oprah be without a live and baying audience. 
Or Kilroy deprived of his tame congregation? Richard Thomas's brilliant, 
scabrous Jerry Springer the Opera , which treated the genre as the nearest 
thing the modern world has to a religious experience - a mass Mass - captured 
this dimension.

 The Danny Crowe Show is on a smaller scale, with a shorter reach: it's the 
sort of play, in fact, that you used to be able to see on the television when 
it wasn't brimful of trash.

It's just possible to dredge up some postmodern irony from the fact that in 
Ken Ludwig's Over the Moon Joan Collins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/joan-collins> and Frank Langella are 
playing are over-the-hill touring actors who long to be snatched away for movie 
stardom: 'I wanted to be rich and famous,' bleats Miss Collins.

It's much easier simply to count the underwear opportunities. There's the 
corseted caper when JC appears, wielding a sword and strapped into whalebone 
stays with powder-blue lace trim and peach suspenders. Her rigid - and dazzling 
- smile is so divorced from the rest of her body that she gives a new meaning 
to basque separatism. There's the more unexpected appearance of Moira Lister - 
10 years older than the 68-year-old Collins but playing her mother - ditching 
her dowdies for a French maid's fishnets to flash a dazzling pair of pins. 
There's the moment when Langella eschews his trews.

All of which - alongside Ken Ludwig's laborious jokes about deafness and 
drunkenness - prove what a thin line there is in farce between hilarity and 
desperate boredom. Ray Cooney, who has recently directed his own farce so 
brilliantly, hasn't saved this one. You watch people freezing as they wait for 
the doors to slam in their faces or to be beaten on their bums.

As if to compensate for Collins's burnished plank of a performance, Frank 
Langella goes in for fruitiness and flutterings: no action is allowed to pass 
without a roll of his shoulders, a flourish of his wrists. Over the Moon? Sick 
as a parrot.
 