
My friend Lucy’s new flat is light and airy and full of lovely things 
beautifully placed, but once I know there’s a garden, my true interests 
are impossible to hide. “Look at that lovely tree,” I say, pointing out of the 
window and grinning a little too eagerly.

The garden is small, but so full of promise, with many walls to cover with 
foliage and flowers, and two good-sized beds, one in sun, the other in shade. I 
love this beginning bit, the thought of softening all that hard material, of 
coaxing a garden out of the solidness.

All gardens work best if there’s a variety of heights; it breaks up the space 
and adds intrigue. The quickest way to get height in a garden’s first year is 
to grow annuals: sweet peas, morning glories, thunbergia (black-eyed susan), 
climbing beans, nasturtiums (not all nasturtiums climb, so check it says so in 
the varietal description), cucumbers and climbing courgettes, and squash such as
red kuri 
<https://www.sarahraven.com/veg_fruit/seeds/veg_seeds/climbing_onion_squash_red_kuri.htm>
 (it may need tying in to persuade it to climb initially) are perfect. In a 
small bed, a wigwam or tripod can take up rather a lot of valuable space, so it 
makes sense to use the edges for climbers instead.

If you have beds opposite with a pathway between, maximise space by creating 
archways, using them to grow your climbers up. Put a pole in each of the four 
corners of the beds that border the path, crossing them in pairs and lashing 
them together with twine to make a structurally sound archway (you may need a 
cross-piece if the path is wide). This also gets around the issue of one bed 
being cast in shade, because plants can be encouraged to climb; in fact, they 
will actively seek the light.

If it’s not possible to make an archway, at least use the back of the beds to 
encourage climbers upwards by leaning two or three canes against the wall and 
stretching pea netting over them to create a frame. Plant the climbers inside 
the A frame, against the edge of the bed or wall, to leave space for other 
things in front.

There are also a number of vegetables that don’t mind shade. Rhubarb is happy, 
as long as it is not kept dry; good thick stems come from well-fed plants, so 
mulch with homemade compost or well-rotted farmyard manure in autumn and again 
in early spring, just before growth starts.

Alys Fowler: think begonias are uncool? Think again
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/23/alys-fowler-bringing-out-cool-in-begonias>
A number of leafy greens can survive shade, too, though expect these leaves to 
be smaller than any grown in sun. One way around this is to grow annuals as 
baby leaves, and resow regularly for fresh supplies. Rocket, swiss chard (you 
won’t get nice, crisp stems in deep shade, mind), lettuce, mustard greens and 
kale can all survive shaded conditions, provided they get around three hours of 
sun a day. Root vegetables such as beets, turnips and carrots, as well as peas 
and beans, need around five hours for decent production.

However, for anything where sugar is key – tomatoes, peppers, raspberries, 
strawberries and blueberries, say – sun plays a crucial role in creating ripe 
fruit. That said, raspberries grow happily with their feet in deep shade.
 