
When it was announced that AMC, the channel behind Mad Men, was making an 
American version of The Killing, my first reaction was: Why? Even if they 
believed Americans incapable of watching a subtitled a show, surelyUS television
 <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/us-television> bosses couldn't hope 
to capture the spirit of Forbrydelsen, with its lengthy pauses and satisfyingly 
complicated, slow-burning storylines, Wouldn't a US version soften Sarah Lund's 
sharp edges, trying to make this most dysfunctional of heroines more likeable? 
And – most importantly of all – what would happen to the knitwear?

Fans of the latter can rest assured. The jumpers are still present – although 
Lund has become Linden, the murdered girl is now Rosie Larsen and we're are in 
Seattle, the only place in America as wet as The Killing's Copenhagen. There 
are other changes too – Veena Sud, the show's executive producer, has compared 
the US version to jazz: "We get to riff off a really beautiful piece, but we 
tell our own story" – the biggest difference of all being that the killer and 
the motive are apparently completely different.

That's perhaps understandable in our spoiler-ridden internet age. But it's 
also a pretty risky move, as anyone who sat through the US remake of Life on 
Mars, only to be confronted with an ending so laughably ridiculous that it 
practically induced retinal bleeding, could tell you. The US Killing is 
unlikely to collapse in quite the same way, although its worth noting that one 
of the most satisfying things about the original was that the killer not only 
made sense, the clues as to why had been carefully sewn from the beginning.

There is one other change, which concerns Linden's character: according to 
Sud, Linden is hiding a secret. It's a tired plot device that seems unlikely to 
illuminate the character. Much of the power of Forbrydelsen lay in Lund – a 
tightly wound woman unable to communicate with those closest to her – and how 
she differed from the standard TV cop. By contrast Linden, although still 
contemplative and aloof, is much more like the driven female cops on US TV that 
we're used to seeing from The Closer to Saving Grace. It comes as no surprise 
to discover that Sud was also executive producer of Cold Case.

So given the differences, is the remake actually any good? It's been 
ecstatically reviewed in the US and it's true that the first episode is 
compelling, clever television with a good performance from Big Love's Mireille 
Enos as Linden and a particularly powerful turn from Michelle Forbes as the 
missing girl's mother, now named Mitch.

That said, it's hard to judge the show as an original piece of work, not least 
because the first two episodes stick pretty closely to the original, 
establishing the story and introducing us to the different, interconnecting 
strands.

It's also arguable that, good as the Danish version is, at least half of the 
joy of the programme derived from it being set in a world that was alien to 
British viewers, who enjoyed pronouncing the names, staring at the gloomy 
scenery and attempting to unravel the intricacies of a different political and 
police system.

By contrast the American police procedural is so ingrained in our cultural 
experience that AMC's version has to work twice as hard to capture its audience 
and make them believe they are seeing something we haven't seen countless times 
before. In this it is largely successful: the pace is slower than your average 
US cop drama, the dialogue less forced, and the characterisation strong. If I 
hadn't seen the original then I would be phoning people up to speculate as to 
who the killer might be – which is just what the Americans with whom I watched 
the first episode were doing.

The problem is that, like everyone else who has been glued to BBC4 for the 
past few weeks, I have seen the original and it's impossible not to think of it 
when watching the new version. And while Sarah Linden is a smart, interesting 
and pretty believable cop, at this (admittedly early) stage in the game she's 
no Sarah Lund.
 