
The US cable TV broadcaster behind shows including Mad Men, Breaking Bad and 
The Walking Dead has acquired a 49.9% stake inBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> America for $200m (£125m).

BBC Worldwide <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-worldwide>, the 
commercial arm of Britain’s public broadcaster, which owns BBC America, will 
cede operational control of the cable channel to AMC.

AMC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/amc> will take over the affiliate and 
advertising sales of BBC America, which broadcasts shows including Doctor Who, 
Luther and Broadchurch, but will run the channel in line with the corporation’s 
editorial standards.

The two companies have previously collaborated on dramas including Top of the 
Lake, featuring Mad Men actor Elisabeth Moss and spy thriller The Honourable 
Woman, starring Maggie Gyllenhal, which aired on the BBC in the UK.

Tony Hall, the director general of the licence-fee funded arm of the 
corporation, said that the deal “brings together the whole BBC”.

“This will help us reach new audiences in the US, strengthen BBC America’s 
position for the long term and create opportunities for the UK creative 
community,” he said.

As part of the deal, AMC will represent the US distribution and TV advertising 
sales of BBC World News. AMC will also jointly invest in a range of future BBC 
productions.

“The BBC is one of the most recognised, trusted and respected brands in the 
world and we are proud to partner with it to create a content offering 
unmatched in the industry,” said Josh Sapan, chief executive of AMC Networks. 
“A combined AMC Networks-BBC America channel group creates a powerful 
collection of networks that are among the most critically acclaimed, with 
distinct dramas and other potent content that creates a deep connection with 
viewers.”

Tim Davie, the chief executive of BBC Worldwide, said that AMC was an “ideal 
partner” for the BBC in the US.

“Like us, they are committed to the kind of high-quality, unmissable content 
that has already gained BBC America one of the most educated, affluent and 
tech-savvy audiences in all of US television, with a powerful social media 
following.”

BBC America is available in about 80 million households in the US. It was 
established in 1998 and airs some BBC-produced shows such as Doctor Who and Top 
Gear, and original productions such as Orphan Black.

In the year to the end of March, BBC Worldwide generated headline profits of 
£157.4m and headline sales of £1.04bn and returned £173.8m to the BBC.
 