
In the Mecca Café, one of Seattle's most magnificently grungy diners, August 
Wilson <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/augustwilson> is trying to 
communicate the rush of adrenaline that surges through mind and body when a new 
work is completed. Just hours earlier, in his basement study across town, he 
had finished the final draft of his latest play, Gem of the Ocean, set in 
Pittsburgh in 1904. The main characters include a 287-year-old matriarch named 
Ester, who has already cropped up in two of Wilson's plays, an escaped slave 
called Solly, who scrapes dog shit from the city pavements not for the sake of 
public hygiene but, Wilson explains, because "back then it was used in tanning 
hides", and Citizen Barlow, who is unsuccessfully trying to claim the 
citizenship promised in the 1865 proclamation on the emancipation of America's 
slaves.

"It's all structured around the conflict with the law, how the law is a weapon 
to oppress people," Wilson says. "Blacks wanted to leave the south and go north 
to seek their fortune, but the south was trying to hold on to its cheap labour 
and wouldn't let them go. Despite emancipation, you essentially have a 
situation that is like slavery."

Acting out great chunks of dialogue in the café, Wilson illustrates the 
various plot twists, including a journey on a magic paper boat to a city of 
bones in the Atlantic where slave ships run aground - a kind of Bermuda 
Triangle of African-American enchainment. In the final scene, Solly, pushed to 
the brink by thwarted hopes, tries to wreak revenge by burning down the local 
mill and the municipal jail: "That last scene has been running around in my 
head for over a year," Wilson says. "I've known how it ended, so it was simply 
a matter of writing it. Now I look at the script and there is something on all 
those pages that used to be blank. It's like you've just given birth. It's 
painful but it's a joyous process."

When Gem of the Ocean premieres in Chicago next April, it will form the 
penultimate chapter of August Wilson's decade-by-decade chronicle of 
African-American history in the 20th century, a grand theatrical cycle that has 
established Wilson, according to Time magazine, "as the richest theatrical 
voice to emerge in the US since Tennessee Williams and Arthur Miller". So far, 
instalments have included Fences, a towering family drama of generational 
conflict set in the 1950s; Ma Rainey's Black Bottom, a blues-infused story of 
session musicians in the 1920s; and King Hedley II, a tale of criminal survival 
on the Pittsburgh fringes set in the 1980s, which had its UK premiere at the 
TricycleTheatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> in London this week.

What is perhaps most remarkable about Wilson's work is that it has translated 
this uncompromising picture of disenfranchised African-Americans, profoundly 
influenced by the Black Power movement and the radicalism of the 1960s ("the 
kiln in which I was fired", he has said), into mainstream success and two 
Pulitzer prizes. The first black playwright to succeed on Broadway - with Ma 
Rainey in 1984 - since Lorraine Hansberry's A Raisin in the Sun 25 years 
previously, he has transformed himself into a one-man theatrical tradition. "He 
has created a body of material for black actors and black theatre people to 
look to," says black director and producer Lloyd Richards, who has nurtured 
Wilson's career. "There has been a lack of material on the library shelves on 
black theatre and a lack of theatre by blacks. All that is beginning to change. 
Having August's body of work in there leads people to an examination of theatre 
and an examination of themselves in theatre."

Wilson has come under sustained attack by pundits - predominantly white - who 
accuse him of prescriptiveness and grandiosity: "This single-minded 
documentation of American racism is a worthy if familiar social agenda," claims 
the New Republic's Robert Brustein, Wilson's most vociferous critic, "and no 
enlightened person would deny its premise, but as an ongoing artistic programme 
it is monotonous, limited, locked in a perception of victimisation." In a 
characteristically defiant reply, Wilson has labelled Brustein "a sniper, a 
naysayer, and a cultural imperialist". Others counter that the undeniable 
dramatic breadth of Wilson's writing both sustains and transcends any political 
message: "It's August's language," says director Marion McClinton, who has 
staged Wilson's recent works, "the rhythm of hurt, of pain, of ecstasy, the 
rhythm of family sets him apart."

This is a sentiment that would certainly be echoed by the new generation of 
Wilson-influenced black dramatists, including British writers such as Tanika 
Gupta, Roy Williams and Kwame Kwei-Armah, whose new play opens at the National 
Theatre in London next year and was directly inspired by King Hedley II: "There 
is nobody in this country in my experience who can be a celebrated artist in 
mainstream culture who can remain, as August has said on a number of occasions, 
quintessentially 'the man that he was when he entered into manhood'," says 
Kwei-Armah. "August is unapologetic for the politics that he has now, which are 
the same politics that he had when he first listened to Malcolm X, to Martin 
Luther King, and when he first spoke with James Baldwin."

In a jaunty peaked cap, Wilson comes across as both thoughtful and ebullient, 
a good listener but also a great talker, overflowing with ideas. His 
conversation is peppered with quotations, including from his own work. 
"Sometimes I think he has a photographic memory," says Wilson's friend, the 
writer and director Rob Penney.

According to poet Chawley Williams, the source of this restless energy is his 
background in a family with a black mother and a white father, and with five 
brothers and sisters varying in appearance from white, in the case of his 
sister Linda Jean Kittel, to black in August's own. "In all the time I've known 
him, August has been a very driven person," says Williams. "His vitality is 
enormous because he continues to delve within himself and his surroundings to 
connect with who he is. There was a major dilemma within him to resolve his 
being bi-racial. August will tell you and everybody else that he has always 
lived in a black world and he has always identified that way, but if you listen 
to his art, you'll hear the bi-racism." Wilson denies this, insisting that he 
"never felt anything other than black", and his sister Linda Jean agrees that 
he "was not torn with the bi-racial issue at all".

Wilson believes that black communities were better off under segregation: "I 
can only speak about what I know - Pittsburgh, the Hill District 1940. There 
were nine drug stores all within five minutes walking distance of each other, 
there were three wallpaper and paint stores, there was a fish shop, whatever 
the community needed. If that had been allowed to continue to develop 
economically and culturally, separate from the mainstream, blacks would be in a 
much stronger position today. But that was destroyed, and I'm not sure if it 
wasn't purposeful." In many ways he believes the lot of black Americans has 
worsened: "There are approximately a million black men in jail," he says. "The 
assumption is that they are criminals, but a lot of them are in for drugs 
violations. Again the law is being used against you. When you have somebody in 
jail that means there is a woman without a husband, there are kids without 
fathers. So the break-up of the family is part of the continuation of public 
policies and practices going back to the emancipation proclamation."

Wilson hasn't been afraid to pique black opinion, particularly in his 
opposition to "colour-blind" casting in the theatre: "It's the idea of 
obliterating yourself. Take an all-black Death of a Salesman - that's not the 
way black folks deal with their problems, it's not their language, it's not 
their relationship from father to son. We have a different history, different 
necessities. A guy can't go round and be a travelling salesman in the 1940s and 
be black. He'd get lynched. What is the point of putting black folks on stage 
as if they didn't have any stories of their own to tell?"

Wilson lives in a rambling, turn-of-the-century house on Seattle's Capitol 
Hill with his third wife, the Colombian costume designer Constanza Romero and 
their five-year-old daughter Azula. Despite being one of the most successful 
playwrights in America, he has strenuously avoided being sucked into the 
mainstream, and has turned down offers to write screenplays about Muhammad Ali 
and Louis Armstrong. When he started writing plays, he had never seen any by 
Chekhov, Ibsen, Eugene O'Neill, Arthur Miller or Tennessee Williams. He still 
rarely goes to the theatre and has seen only a handful of Shakespeare 
productions. Creatively, his life is devoted to exploring the buried history of 
America: "Blacks in America want to forget about slavery - the stigma, the 
shame. If you can't be who you are, who can you be? How can you know what to 
do? We have our history. We have our book, and that is the blues."

August Wilson was born Frederick August Kittel on April 27 1945 in the 
African-American Hill District of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, the son of a white 
German baker and a black cleaner named Daisy Wilson. Among black members of the 
Hill community, Linda Jean Kittel says, this was rarely an issue: "I always 
found there was more sincere acceptance among the blacks." The Kittel family, 
however, was a salient illustration of American racial values, with white 
neighbours, after the family moved to the predominantly white suburban 
neighbourhood of Hazelwood in the late 1950s, often treating the dark and 
light-skinned children very differently: "My brother's pain was always my 
pain," says Linda Jean. "It pained me also to know that I would receive 
privilege where he didn't."

All the children gravitated towards their African-American heritage, 
encouraged by the fact that their father was, as Wilson recalls, "a sporadic 
presence", largely due to alcoholism. But it was mostly due to Daisy who, 
despite financial worries, worked hard to maintain stability in the family. "We 
were what you would call a poor family," says Wilson, "but we were rich in so 
many things. We did family things together. We always had dessert even if it 
was just Jell-O. So, I never knew I was poor." In 1958, Daisy married an 
African-American man named David Bedford, a promising young athlete who had 
turned to crime, killed a man during a bungled robbery and served 23 years in 
prison. He died in 1969.

August - known as Freddie - was an intelligent and inquisitive boy: "He had a 
lot of natural ability," says Linda Jean, "at 10 he wrote what I'd consider his 
first poem." Daisy hoped that her brightest child would become a lawyer. 
However, he was forced to leave the all-white Central Catholic High School by 
increasingly vicious prejudice: "Every single day he would receive a note on 
his desk saying 'Nigger go home'," his sister Linda Jean remembers. Freddie's 
enthusiasm for formal education was finally killed off at his new school, 
ironically, by a mistrustful African-American teacher. "We were given this 
writing assignment on a historical personage of our choice," he says. "I liked 
Napoleon and I went to the library and I read six or seven books and turned it 
in. The teacher said he wanted to see me about my paper, and he showed it to me 
marked with an A+ and an E. And he says to me, 'I'm going to give you one of 
these two grades, depending on whether you can prove you wrote this'. And I 
said, 'If I hadn't written it I wouldn't have put my name on it'. To him that 
was a smart answer, so he circles the E. I tore it up, threw it in the 
wastepaper basket and walked out of school."

For the rest of the year, Wilson hid his decision to drop out by leaving the 
house every morning as usual and spending his days in the Pittsburgh Public 
Library. When he was 16, he took a succession of menial jobs: dishwasher, 
gardener, delivery boy, cook. However, inspired by his continued reading in the 
"Negro Section" of the library, where he first encountered the work of Ralph 
Ellison, Langston Hughes and James Baldwin, he nurtured an ambition. "These 
books were a comfort," he says. "Just the idea that black people could write 
books. I wanted my book up there too, I used to dream about being part of the 
Harlem Renaissance."

After a year in the army, in 1965 he moved into the basement apartment of a 
rooming house on Bedford Avenue and, with $20 from his sister Freda, bought 
himself his first typewriter: "I didn't have enough for the tax, but the guy 
gave it to me anyway. Then I didn't have enough for bus fare and had to carry 
the damn thing up the hill."

Now calling himself August Wilson, he began writing poetry, occasionally 
sending the results off to literary magazines, but mostly reciting his work to 
anyone who would listen at impromptu readings in bars, restaurants, jazz clubs, 
even in the street. "Some people asked if I had heard of this young man who was 
walking around with a pipe stuck in his mouth reciting poetry in the street," 
remembers Chawley Williams, another Hill District poet. "A lot of restaurant 
patrons thought he was crazy. Not many black people were involved in poetry 
then."

With other black Pittsburgh poets such as Carl "Dingbat" Smith, Rob Penney and 
Nick Flournoy, Wilson and Williams formed the Center Avenue Poets Workshop, 
which put on events in various Pittsburgh venues, much in the manner of the 
Slam Poets of the 1980s: "Sometimes we would have drummers, conga and bongo 
players and we would have jazz for the intro," says Williams, "and then each 
poet would come in and do their own thing. Sometimes we had 'free-for-alls', 
where everyone would free-associate and say whatever connected to what they 
were hearing, straight out of their hearts." The poetry was rough, raw and 
colloquial, betraying influences such as Dylan Thomas, the Beat poets and the 
ideas of black radicals such as Marcus Garvey and often dealing with the 
poverty and drug problems that afflicted the Hill District community. Though 
most of Wilson's poetry has disappeared, a few verses such as this, "Theme One: 
The Variations", appeared in anthologies:

lost niggers breathe again holy
 niggers breathing out power 
 where we lie spirited again 
 where life is ours in our ever 
 moving breathing the real 
 in the catechism of the spirit 
 teaching and believing the dance 
 the shape the stars the real 
 nigger hands the real nigger 
 voice where it screams in life

It was at this point that Wilson took his first decisive step towards the 
theatre. Rob Penney also had an interest in playwriting and in 1968 formed the 
Black Horizon Theatre Company with him. The primary inspiration had been the 
visceral, politically charged work of Amiri Baraka, in particular his Four 
Black Revolutionary Plays. Penney also contributed two of his own plays, 
entitled Deeds of Blackness and Dance of the Blues Dead. "I became a director 
because no one else wanted to do it," remembers Wilson. The learning curve, 
however, was steep: "August didn't know anything about doing theatre before 
this," says Penney. "He went to the library and learned about theatre and about 
directing. It was on-the-job training and he was an extremely good director." 
Wilson made his playwriting debut with Recycle in 1973. Of this and other early 
efforts, Penney says: "They were sort of avant-garde, experimental plays. He 
hadn't really found his voice. They were much more poetry than drama."

Recycle was interesting primarily for its autobiographical subject matter, it 
dealt with Wilson's first marriage in 1969 - to Brenda Burton, a member of the 
radical black Muslim group the Nation of Islam - which had broken down in 1972: 
"My first wife is a good woman, I still can't say nothing bad about her other 
than the fact that we had a difference on religion," he says. "She wanted 
someone who was a Muslim who shared those values. And I was like a heathen. I 
had to stay home on Sundays and watch the football game." They had one 
daughter, Sakina Ansari, born in 1970.

The first discernable indication of Wilson's power as a dramatist came in 
1976, with The Homecoming, an early version of Ma Rainey's Black Bottom, in 
which Wilson examined the exploitation of black talent in the music business. 
Jitney centred on the Pittsburgh Gypsy Cabs who were willing to venture into 
black neighbourhoods, while Black Bart and the Sacred Hills, which began as a 
series of poems, was expanded into a play for the Penumbra Theatre in St Paul, 
Minnesota. It was during one of his trips to work on the production that Wilson 
met social worker Judy Oliver. In 1978, he moved permanently to St Paul and, 
three years later, she became his second wife. The marriage ended in 1990. 
There were no children.

In previous years, Wilson had submitted plays to the O'Neill Theater Centre in 
Waterford, Connecticut, only to be greeted with polite rejections. Beginning 
with Jitney, his writing had begun to undergo a revolutionary change: "I came 
across a quotation by Sekou Touré: 'Language describes the idea of the one who 
speaks it'. Once I discovered that, it was just a matter of letting people 
speak." This approach bore fruit, in 1982, with Ma Rainey: "We's the 
leftovers," says piano player Toledo. "The white man knows you just a leftover. 
'Cause he the one who has done the eating and he know what he done ate."

This time, the supple characterisations and fluid dialogue made an altogether 
different impression on the O'Neill judges: "I read the piece and I found the 
characters were very alive to me," says Lloyd Richards, who was then artistic 
director, "I recognised them, I knew them from their words, I knew their faces 
almost. So I decided to include him in the national playwrights' conference." 
After the conference, Williams approached Wilson with an offer to produce Ma 
Rainey at the Yale Repertory Theatre in Connecticut, where it premiered in 
April 1984 before moving on to the Cort Theatre on Broadway. Reviews were 
mixed, with John Simon of the New York Post complaining of weak structure and 
"intermittent drama". However, it was the all-powerful Frank Rich of the New 
York Times who deemed the show a hit, and it duly picked up a New York Drama 
Critics' Award: "Mr Wilson's style is all his own," Rich concluded. "He has 
lighted a dramatic fuse that snakes and hisses through several anguished eras 
of American life. When the fuse reaches its explosive final destination, the 
audience is impaled by the impact."

By this time, Wilson had already written Fences, which premiered at Yale in 
1985 and, after intensive revisions, on Broadway in 1987. The story of a former 
baseball hero who kills a man and spends 15 years in a penitentiary, it was 
inspired less by Wilson's stepfather David Bedford than by Pittsburgh boxing 
hero Charley Burley, who had lived across the road from the Kittels. "The 
strongest, most passionate American dramatic writing since Tennessee Williams," 
Clive Barnes wrote in the New York Post, pronouncing the production "one of the 
richest experiences I have ever had in the theatre". James Earl Jones picked up 
a Tony best actor award for his portrayal of Troy.

After Fences, Wilson remarked that each of his plays had dealt with a 
different decade. He continued the pattern with Joe Turner's Come and Gone 
(1988), about a Pittsburgh boarding house in 1911 still haunted by the ghosts 
of slavery. The Piano Lesson (1990), a piece about a young man named Boy Willie 
who returns to Pittsburgh in the Depression era to buy up the land his enslaved 
ancestors once worked, cemented Wilson's reputation by winning a second 
Pulitzer. He followed up with Two Trains Running (1992), about the threatened 
redevelopment of a Pittsburgh restaurant in the 1960s, Seven Guitars (1996), a 
story of buried shame and dreams of retribution told through the reunion of 
five friends, and rewrites of Jitney (1996) and King Hedley II (2000), which 
together present a harrowing picture of drug-ridden slum life in the 1980s that 
supports Wilson's central thesis that, despite the hopes of the 1960s and the 
civil rights movement, the lot of African-Americans has not improved throughout 
his century of plays: "When you look at black America, yes we have Colin 
Powell, we got Clarence Thomas and we got the head of Time Warner," he says. 
"That comes to about 10 people out of 35m. The majority live in dire poverty in 
housing projects without any avenues for participation in the society."

Now that Wilson's magnum opus is reaching its conclusion, the question arises 
of what he will do next: "I'm going to start over," he says, "I've got a couple 
of ideas for plays that didn't fit into my cycle. And I want to go back and do 
some of those." One sure indication that he could never retire, he says, had 
come that same morning when he finished Gem of the Ocean: "I immediately got 
depressed. I walked around totally disheartened, not knowing why. It's like you 
have temporarily lost your reason for living and the only thing to do is to 
start another. So, I will write down a title or a line of dialogue or an idea 
for a character or something. So, if someone asks me what I am doing, I can 
say: 'I'm working on my new play'."

Frederick August Kittel: Life at a glance

Born: April 27 1945, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. 

Education: 1959 Central Catholic High School, Pittsburgh; Connelley Vocational 
School; '60 Gladstone High School.

Married: 1969 Brenda Burton (one daughter, Sakina Ansari '72) divorced '72; 
'81 Judy Oliver, divorced '90; '94- Constanza Romero (one daughter, Azula 
Carmen '97).

Dramatic Writings: 1973 Recycle; '76 The Homecoming; '77 Black Bart and the 
Sacred Hills; '82 Jitney; Ma Rainey's Black Bottom; '85 Fences; '88 Joe 
Turner's Come and Gone; '90 The Piano Lesson; '92 Two Trains Running; '96 Seven 
Guitars; '99 King Hedley; 2002/3 Gem of the Ocean.

Awards include: 1984-85 Best Play (Ma Rainey's Black Bottom) New York Drama 
Critics Circle; '87 Pulitzer Prize for drama (Fences); '88 Best Play (Joe 
Turner's Come and Gone) New York Drama Critics Circle; '90 Pulitzer Prize and 
Best Play (The Piano Lesson) New York Drama Critics Circle; '92 American 
Theatre Critics' Association Award (Two Trains Running); Bush and Guggenheim 
Foundation fellowships.

· King Hedley II, produced by the Birmingham Repertory Theatre, is at the 
Tricycle Theatre, Kilburn, until February 8. Box office 0207 328 1000
 