
The running joke is an ignoble device, beloved of TV comedy. You won't find it 
described in dictionaries of literary terms (despite the fondness for running 
gags of highly literary novelists such as Sterne and Nabokov).American Psycho 
relies on running jokes, being all about repetition. Its narrator Patrick 
Bateman, a 26-year-old Wall Street operative (his activity at work is left 
unspecified), dedicates himself to pleasure and conspicuous consumption. The 
novel is a sequence of restaurant meals, parties and clubs – interrupted by 
episodes of psychopathic violence (for which the novel has become infamous) and 
bouts of heartless sexual athleticism. Narration is in the present tense, 
dramatising Bateman's obsessive dedication to a lifestyle. This is a character 
deliriously doomed to repetitive self-indulgence. The best running jokes are 
evidence of human helplessness – the inability to stop doing certain things, or 
escape the same situation. Sometimes things are only funny because they are 
always happening. So when we catch a running joke we see the mechanical human 
behaviour behind the mere surface of variety.

The restaurant meals in American Psycho are never the same twice, but the 
business of detailing those meals is solemnly repetitious. "For dinner I order 
the shad-roe ravioli with apple compote as an appetiser and the meat loaf with 
chèvre and quail-stock sauce for an entrée". Bateman may despise his dining 
companions, but he dutifully records their menu choices too. "Price orders the 
tapas and the venison with yoghurt sauce and fiddlehead ferns with mango slices 
. . . Van Patten has the scallop sausage and the grilled salmon with raspberry 
vinegar and guacamole." There are recognisable foodstuffs, but mingled in 
compositions that flout credibility – can there be such a thing as "cold corn 
chowder lemon bisque with peanuts and dill", or "kiwi mustard"? Sometimes it 
dizzies the characters themselves: Bateman finds himself arguing with his 
fiancée, Evelyn, about whether someone ordered tuna carpaccio or tuna 
cappuccino. The joke seems all the better almost 20 years on from the book's 
first appearance, with a lexicon of inherently improbable dishes now familiar 
to us fromMasterchef et al.

Bateman is dedicated to his appetites: food, alcohol, drugs, sex, violence. 
But he also has to dignify his vanity with a language of propriety. So one 
running joke involves him being questioned by a male acquaintance about what 
items of clothing can be worn together. "'Hey Bateman,' Craig says in a voice 
that suggests this is not his first martini. 'Is it proper to wear tasselled 
loafers with a business suit or not?'" A weird etiquette attaches itself to 
dedicated hedonism.

Bateman's endless lists of the items in which he and others are clothed are 
supposed to proclaim his taste, but some of the novel's running jokes keep 
displaying his tastelessness. He is addicted to a TV programme calledThe Patty 
Winters Show, which jumbles triviality (Princess Di's beauty tips, talking 
animals), sensationalism ("Teenage Girls Who Trade Sex for Crack", shark-attack 
victims) and real horror (toddler murderers, Nazis). He always has to tell the 
reader, in an interested fashion, about the latest episode. His favourite 
cultural phenomenon isLes Misérables – which seems Manhattan's favourite, too. 
It is everywhere. When Bateman collapses with nausea on a New York street, he 
finds himself "leaning against a poster forLes Misérables at a bus stop". A 
muzak rendition of the score fromLes Misérables plays in DuPlex "the new Tony 
McManus restaurant in TriBeca" (Bateman is always going to somebody's "new" 
restaurant). When a fellow guest at Evelyn's Christmas party (waldorf salad 
handed round by dwarves dressed in elf costumes) suggests putting on a CD ofLes 
Miz, Bateman is ready with a probing inquiry. "'American or British cast 
recording?' My eyes narrowing. I'm testing him." The narrator's pride in the 
discrimination is characteristically absurd.

The novel's running jokes are about replication – the satirical reduction of 
narration to a crazed pattern. Which is why one gag concerns the apparent 
interchangeability of the twenty-something Wall Street brokers and dealers with 
whom our narrator consorts. "Someone who I think is Charles Fletcher walks over 
. . . I make my way slowly through the dining room, waving to someone who looks 
like Vincent Morrison, someone else who I'm fairly sure is someone who looks 
like Tom Newman." Of course, just once in a while it could happen to anyone; 
the joke – the running joke – is that it happens to Bateman all the time.

He gets misrecognised himself – a joke because it is always happening, often 
unremarked by the narrator. A colleague who was at school with him gets his 
name wrong. Supposed friends (though there are really no such creatures in this 
book) casually address him as "Taylor" or "Kinsley", and the narrator casually 
records them doing so. When he does notice, Bateman can even be rather pleased 
to be taken for another. "Owen has mistaken me for Marcus Habelstam . . . but 
it seems a logical faux pas." Marcus works in the same place, wears the same 
clothes and glasses, "and we share the same barber at the same place, the 
Pierre Hotel, so it seems understandable; it doesn't irk me". This is satire, 
and in satire there are no individuals, only types.

John Mullan is professor of English at University College London. Join him and 
Bret Easton Ellis <https://www.theguardian.com/books/breteastonellis> for a 
discussion at 7pm on 14 July at Hall One, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1. 
Tickets are £9.50 online (www.kingsplace.co.uk) or £11.50 from the box office: 
020 7520 1490.
 