
André Villas-Boas <https://www.theguardian.com/football/andre-villas-boas> has 
refused to be drawn on any progress over the signing of Willian. The Brazilian 
midfielder landed in London on Tuesday and it is understood that Tottenham 
Hotspur hope the player completes a medical and signs before the weekend.

"I can't really confirm anything regarding Willian. There is interest in the 
player and there have been conversations," Villas-Boas said before Tottenham's 
Europa League play-off at Dinamo Tbilisi.

Villas-Boas declared his appreciation for the Anzhi Makhachkala player on 
Monday and has moved quickly for him following interest from Liverpool. Should 
Willian pass his medical and sign for a fee of around £30m, Tottenhamwill break 
their transfer record for a third time this summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/aug/20/tottenham-andre-villas-boas-willian>
.

Spurs have spent £60m on players but hope to strengthen the squad further. "We 
will see some new players in defence and attack," Villas-Boas said but he 
declined to comment on the prospect of signing the Roma midfielder Erik Lamela 
and the Real Madrid defender Fábio Coentrão.

"They have not signed for Spurs. Both of them are great players but I cannot 
extend myself," he said.

One coach who was willing to talk about Willian was René Meulensteen, late of 
Anzhi. "I've worked with him for a short time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/aug/07/rene-meulensteen-anzhi-makhachkala>
 but I really like him. He will be an asset for whoever's going to get him," 
the former Manchester United coach told Sky Sports News.

"If it's Spurs that's going to get him they'll get an excellent player. He's 
very versatile, he can play in different positions, he's a very creative player 
and an excellent professional with a very good personality. He's going to be a 
trump card for Spurs if they can get the deal to go through. He can beat a 
player, he can score a goal. I thought he was an absolute delight to work with."

Gareth Bale, a target for Madrid, has not travelled to Tbilisi because of a 
foot injury while Sandro, Jan Vertonghen and Aaron Lennon will also not feature 
because of injury worries. The midfielder Lewis Holtby (knee) is also out, as 
are Benoît Assou-Ekotto (knee) and the striker Emmanuel Adebayor, who is not 
fit following his spell of compassionate leave.

Tottenham provisional squad Friedel, Lloris, Archer, Walker, Kaboul, Naughton, 
Dawson, Fryers, Fredericks, Stewart, Rose, Paulinho, Capoue, Townsend, Dembélé, 
Chadli, Sigurdsson, Carroll, Dombaxe, Soldado, Defoe, Kane, Coulthirst, 
Lancaster.
 