
Former Conservative cabinet minister Andrew Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrew-mitchell> has been hit with 
further legal costs on top of the £300,000 he has already paid after turning 
down a settlement in his failed Plebgate libel action.

The former chief whip had sued News Group Newspapers over a September 2012 
story in the Sun that claimed he had called Downing Street police officers 
“fucking plebs” after they refused to allow him to cycle through the main 
vehicle gates. He lost his legal battle in November, after a judge ruled that 
he probably had said those words, despite the politician’s protestations that 
he had not.

In a hearing on Friday it emerged that the Conservative MP could have avoided 
the huge legal bill he has now been hit with if he had taken a settlement two 
months before the case started.

Mitchell has already paid £300,000 in costs – shared between the Police 
Federation <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/police-federation>, which 
funded one of the police officers, PC Toby Rowland, and NGN – after an interim 
order, but another ruling on Friday means he is facing a further bill.

At the high court in London, Mitchell was ordered by the judge to make further 
interim payments of £15,000 to NGN and £10,000 to thePolice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Federation. Another judge will make a 
detailed analysis on total costs at a later date.

The hearing was related to an application by Mitchell’s counsel, James Price 
QC, who said that the double representation was unreasonable and 
disproportionate, so his client should only have to pay one set of costs.

The judge said the cost of PC Rowland’s legal team was reasonably and 
necessarily incurred – but NGN should have foreseen that a full team was not 
required to protect its interests.

“If Mr Mitchell had accepted that offer, then he would have got that which he 
now in effect seeks,” he said. “There would have been a trial of the 
preliminary issue between him and PC Rowland only and only one set of costs 
would have been incurred and payable by him if, as was the case, he lost.”

He added: “Although I have concluded that NGN should have foreseen that their 
interests were fully protected if the preliminary issue had been substantially 
derogated to PC Rowland’s team, nevertheless they were entitled to protect 
their own interests in any reasonable manner which they saw fit.

“They made an offer which would have eliminated all risk of an adverse costs 
finding both for themselves and Mr Mitchell at the trial of the preliminary 
issue. Parties should be able to make such offers and encouraged to do so 
because, if sensible offers are accepted, the costs of litigation, which in the 
end do nobody any good, are avoided.

“To give effect to that policy, it is necessary that, when an issue such as 
this arises, a reasonable offer made should result in a legitimate benefit 
accrued to the party which makes the offer.

“In my judgment, the making of that offer, and the failure to accept it by Mr 
Mitchell, is ultimately determinative of the issue of whether or not it was 
reasonable to incur the costs of two legal teams at the trial of the 
preliminary issue, subject of course to the costs judge determining whether 
there was unreasonable duplication or that costs have been unreasonably 
increased.”

“Accordingly, I decline to make the expression of the view I otherwise would.”

The question of what damages Mr Mitchell should pay PC Rowland, for claiming 
that the officer had fabricated his allegations, will be assessed at another 
hearing, unless the two sides reach a settlement. The judge stayed that claim 
for 28 days to allow negotiations to take place.
 