
'On a visit to the British Museum, while sitting on the steps of an interior 
staircase, the rapperAngel Haze <https://www.theguardian.com/music/angel-haze> 
makes a startling revelation. She tells me how her father died. "He was shot in 
the stomach," says the 22-year-old American. Haze's slender arms, poking from a 
loose shirt, clutch her legs. A Versace pendant hangs low, to the waist, as 
does her parted black hair, coloured a kind of blue at the tips. "He shot 
himself. Trying to pistol-whip someone in a fight."

It's a disclosure so sudden, so wildly out of keeping with our environment – 
museum browsers, school kids, Benugo outposts – that I have to stifle a laugh. 
Haze does, too. The instinct is inappropriate and I'll shiver to recall it 
later; but perhaps it's understandable. Parts of Angel Haze's story are 
appalling and the mind wants to compensate, make light.She often does, 
revealing that detail about her father's death as if it were a punchline, or 
chuckling discordantly while telling me about her toxic relationship with her 
mother.

Raised in poor, sapped Detroit and now a resident of prospering New York, 
Angel Haze produces hip hop that's remarkable for its crunching collision of 
tones. Lyrics express sorrow as often as swank, vulnerability admitted a rhyme 
away from concrete nerve. Meeting Haze in person there are comparable jolts and 
switches to contend with. She is someone who can talk with lacerating frankness 
about childhood trauma and within minutes be giddily describing her crush on a 
fictional character from a computer game. Cheeking museum guards, then saying: 
"I'm fun, right? I'm fun."

She's fun, she's troubled, she's a puzzle. I'd suggested we meet at the museum 
for fairly leaden reasons. Haze's new album (a follow-up to 2012's 
reputation-establishingReservation) is titled Dirty Gold. And casting about for 
somewhere to take her while she visited London I'd noticed the British Museum 
had on an exhibition about gold… No doubt I'd imagined a clever parallel could 
be drawn in my article. In fact, shortly after meeting Haze, the choice of 
location seems wrong. Too frivolous. On the steps, surrounded by the happy 
clatter of lunching kids, Haze tells me: "I won't ever go back to Detroit. I 
won't step foot in that city. I don't know if Ineed to go back, for some sort 
of redemption, but I can't bring myself to. I'm terrified – I feel like inside 
me a very, very young girl is still trapped there, scared to fucking death."

Angel Haze - Battle Cry 
<http://www.muzu.tv/angel-haze/battle-cry-music-video/2172083/> on MUZU.TV 
<http://www.muzu.tv/>. 
Long before she merged her middle name with the sobriquet of a porn star to 
become Angel Haze, Haze was Raeen Angel Wilson, born in Detroit in 1991. Her 
father, an African American, was mixed up in what Haze now calls "very ratchet 
shit" – gangs. He died when Haze's mother, a native American Cherokee, was 
pregnant with her. "I don't acknowledge my father as anything in my life," Haze 
says.

When Haze was still very young, her mother "met this guy. He told her, 'God 
wants you to drop out of college.'" The man was a preacher in the Greater 
Apostolic Faith, a cult-ish religion with the standard structures in place to 
ensure that the man in the middle of it all got to behave outrageously. In this 
case the preacher was already married with kids. But God, he said, wanted the 
Wilsons to move into his home, with the vague idea that he would one day take 
on a new wife. Haze's mother, "in a state of severe vulnerability", went along 
with it.

Life with this preacher was a mix of the abusive and the mundane. Haze 
remembers being told that she would die, spontaneously, if she didn't behave 
correctly. There were interminable church gatherings. She had happier times, 
though, with the preacher's children. They liked to play a trivia game on the 
computer and Haze was fought over: everyone wanted her on their team because 
she was extremely intelligent.

"At school I was one of those kids who wanted to know more than anyone. The 
second youdon't know more than people, they have the ability to manipulate you. 
I suppose my entire life has been built around my desire not to be manipulated. 
Not to go back to where to where I came from.'

By the time she was 14, her mother had left the religion and the family were 
living in Virginia. Haze was beginning to write – first poems and, later, raps. 
She made some rough-spun hip hop on a computer and distributed it online, where 
a small fanbase formed. On her newest album Haze recalls discovering rap as an 
outlet:

"I was nothing

Then all of a sudden I'm a volcanic eruption."

Her first manager, a New York impresario called Le'Roy Benros, approached Haze 
by email. Together they spent hard months tightening her material and planning 
how best to launch her career. In interviews Benros has described this period 
as one of "tough love… I spent a whole year telling Angel that she wasn't 
ready, that the songs weren't good enough." The 14-trackReservation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/jul/12/angel-haze-reservation-review> 
was put online for free in summer 2012 and its lead track, "New York", became a 
viral hit. Haze was quickly signed by Universal Records in the US and Island 
Records in the UK.
 Rappers Angel Haze and Iggy Azalea pose with fans after performing at Scala 
on 7 May 2013 in London. Photograph: Joseph Okpako/WireImage 
A year of "tough love" had undoubtedly strengthened the music: critics adored 
Reservation. On a personal level, however, Haze had endured more than her share 
of tough love already. She tells me now: "I have a hard exterior, I seem to be 
desensitised, but Ido have emotion." According to Haze, she sacked Benros in 
early 2013 after an argument over a music video. Haze, who now has a new 
manager, believes their problems ran deeper. "He treated me like I was a boy. 
And I'm all for the ambiguity. But I'm still fragile, at the end of the day. If 
you know me in the ways he claimed to know me, you know I break" – she clicks – 
"like that. I feel like I give people an entire blueprint into who I am. And 
what they choose to do with that blueprint is their choice."

The blueprint is her music. As a rule, Haze puts everything in. Grudges. 
Traumas. Incongruous references, fromCasper the Friendly Ghost 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0112642/> to self-harming. She brags, plenty, 
though not without wit. (How about this for a lyric? At once a hard nut of 
economic writing and pure, playground silliness: "I been the shit since shit 
been poo.") Haze's mother gets mentioned a lot.

"My mom knew, when I said I wanted to make this my life, that I was going to 
tell everything. Because if I lie, then what does that make my story?" In early 
tracks Haze hinted at a specific ordeal in her youth. ("It's hard to cope with 
a kiss that you can't tell/And a word that you can't spell.") Then, in a track 
released in late 2012, a reworking of Eminem's "Cleanin' Out My Closet", she 
was more explicit, telling how she'd been raped as a child: "Imagine being 
seven and seeing cum in your underwear."

Her attacker was a man close to the family, and "It happened in a home where 
everyone fucking knew", as Haze raps on the track. This home, she tells me , 
was the one in Detroit they shared with the preacher. He wasn't the attacker. 
That was a man called Daniel, Haze says, linked to the family because he had 
fathered a child with one of her mother's cousins. I ask Haze whether she has 
ever discussed this with her mother. Often, says Haze. Recently: "My mom sat in 
the kitchen and told me, 'I'm sorry that you were touched.'"

Haze pauses, glaring with an eyebrow arched. "Touched? Really? Is that how 
you're going to sum it up? My mom was fully aware of how bad I had it." Has she 
ever thought of pressing charges? Haze says she raised the idea, once. "And my 
mom told me the only thing I could do was forgive him. Because by then my 
little brother was living in our house."

This was a complicated development. The young son of her attacker had been 
more or less abandoned. Haze's mother took him in and he came to be thought of 
within the family as Haze's sibling. Another impossible contradiction in Haze's 
life – this blameless and cheerful kid a constant reminder of the man who had 
assaulted her. "That first year I had a really hard time connecting with my 
little brother," she says. "He looked so much like the guy who raped me."

We've been crouched on the museum's marble steps for almost an hour and a 
security guard has been hovering. Finally we're told we have to move on, which 
I can see makes Haze bristle. We decide to look in on that exhibition about 
gold after all. "This is cool," she says, admiring a breastplate from ancient 
Colombia. A museum attendant won't allow any photographs. "Bitch," mutters Haze.

Walking around the displays, Haze reminisces about school, where a kind 
teacher took an interest in her, and noted: "You don't doreally well with 
direction, do you?" It's something she still wrestles with. Last December, 
frustrated with her label's release plans forDirty Gold, Haze leaked some 
tracks from it online. Peeved, her label bosses brought the release forward to 
the week after Christmas – not a good time of year to sell an album. "I knew 
what to expect," says Haze ofDirty Gold's poor initial sales. She's confident 
that the quality of the record, "a great piece of artwork", will tell 
eventually.
 Angel Haze photographed at Asylum, London Photograph: Katherine Rose for the 
Observer 
She has decided that being blunt – about what she wants, and what she's been 
through – is therapeutic. "Two years ago it was very difficult to be in the 
same room as me. You could feel everything, all the trauma, weighing me down. 
Through music I've let go. Projectile-vomited my demons all over the place."

Being in love has helped, too. Haze is two years deep into an on-off affair 
with somebody "huge in the fashion world", who she first met online. Somewhere 
out there, she admits, a horribly public first chat-up line is still available 
to view on Twitter… "I think it's a for-life thing," says Haze, contorting her 
sentences to avoid using a gender pronoun while discussing this because "I'm so 
not about categorising things".

It was on a track released last summer that Haze made plain her feelings on 
the fluidity of sexual attraction:

"No I'm not gay

No I'm not straight

And I sure as hell am not bisexual

Damn it I am whoever I am when I am it"

Before that, on "Cleaning Out My Closet", she wondered whether the experience 
of being raped had influenced her in this regard:

"I was extremely scared of men

So I started liking girls."

Gay, straight – whoever she is when she is it – Haze tells me she's "probably 
the worst person in the world to be in a relationship with". The Detroit years 
have left their legacy. "If you spend time with me, you're choosing to enter 
the lion's den. I'm gonna be extremely cuddly at times. And at other times I'm 
gonna want to bite your fucking head off."

The staff of the British Museum have absorbed Haze's lion-like tendencies 
today. As we leave the gold exhibition she's in cuddly mode, chatting about a 
self-help book she's been writing in her spare time. She promises to send me 
some chapters and when I ask if she has a title yet, Haze answers dryly, 
half-smiling, teasing I think."Get The Fuck Over Yourself," she says.

Dirty Gold is out now on Island Records/ Republic Records. The new single 
"Battle Cry", featuring Sia, is out on 17 March
 