
Adrian Wootton: It's wonderful to welcome you here to the National Theatre. In 
a minute, I'll be asking you about The Dead, which we've all just seen. But 
before that, I'd like to ask you a bit about your father,John Huston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/john-huston>, and rewind to the very 
beginning. You grew up in Ireland and I've read interviews where you talk about 
your early memories of Ireland and your very early memories of going on to your 
father's sets, on things like Heaven Knows, Mr Allison. Can you talk a little 
bit about that, about growing up in what I imagine to be quite a bohemian 
environment, and your first memories of knowing your father as a film-maker?

Anjelica Huston: I was born during The African Queen and my father was making 
Moulin Rouge when he was invited to Ireland on a fox-hunting holiday. He went 
over to Kildare and fell in love with the whole thing and decided that was 
where he wanted to raise his children. It was sort of in the immediate 
aftermath of the witch-hunts and he'd stood on the Committee for the First 
Amendment, and that had been a heartbreaking ordeal for everyone involved. I 
think it was important to him at that point to forge a life for himself outside 
the confines of Hollywood and also to provide his family with a healthier 
setting.

So that's how we first came to Ireland. Certainly among my first memories was 
going to the set of Moby Dick, entering a sort of strange bar with sawdust on 
the floor, people in costumes and an actor, who I later recognised as Gregory 
Peck in a big tall top hat as Captain Ahab, and being slightly frightened by 
everything but also very turned on. I think that started me on my course.

AW: Sets are pretty noisy and intimidating places, particularly for children, 
so do you think that experience of seeing what your father did meant that you 
became comfortable very early on with the whole film-making process?

AH: I don't like going on sets that I'm not involved in. I never liked it. 
Even from a very early age I don't remember them as tremendously hospitable 
places to be in. Particularly as my father often worked with a first assistant 
director, Tom Shaw, who was a bit of a merchant marine: beloved but tough. One 
was so threatened with all kinds of mayhem if one moved or spoke. Actually, 
sets were prohibitively horrible places to be in, in terms of feeling like the 
odd man out, or the uninvited guest.

AW: But in contrast to that, you're part of a very well-established family in 
Hollywood and American cinema, because of your father and grandfather. So was 
it an advantage, growing up in Ireland, that you weren't mixing with lots of 
other film-makers' families but led an isolated life?

AH: I don't really have a basis for comparison. I have to speculate about how 
life would have been if I'd grown up in Beverly Hills as opposed to the west of 
Ireland, but I know for sure I'm happy that it was the west of Ireland. It 
didn't necessarily equip me for later life, but it gave me an enchanted 
childhood and all kinds of outlets to imagine. I was speaking to a friend - by 
the way, I love coming to London because so many of my oldest friends and their 
mothers are here and I get to see everybody. I was saying that The Wizard of Oz 
wasn't a movie that tremendously moved me in its time, and she said, "Well, you 
had Ireland." And it's true, Ireland was my playground and the source of my 
imagination. Like that line in The Dead, "We used to go out walking, Gabriel, 
the way they do in the country." That was my childhood, and it was fantastic, 
bucolic, quiet, emotional and romantic, and also exciting because of horses and 
country pastimes and pursuits that I still love.

AW: As a teenager you made a film with your father in 1967, and I understand 
it was a difficult experience making the film. Do you think that experience put 
you off making movies?

AH: No. That movie was called A Walk with Love and Death, I was sort of 15 
when the thing was conceived and 16 when we shot it. Not that I necessarily 
didn't know what I was doing or was too young or all the reasons that I could 
come up with to explain why it didn't work out, but the main reason for that 
was because Franco Zeffirelli was casting a wide net for a Juliet for his 
Romeo. And there was a school search that was going on. He expressed some 
interest in me, and his producer Dyson Lovell had called me back a couple of 
times to see me and I was pretty excited about that. Meanwhile my father had a 
three-picture deal with Fox, the first of which was Sinful Davey and the second 
was A Walk with Love and Death. And he pretty much decided that since I'd shown 
such enthusiasm about acting and declared myself ambitious to be an actress 
that he was doing me this great favour. Ultimately, he wrote a letter to 
Zeffirelli to say that I wouldn't be doing Juliet, which infuriated me, and 
that instead I would be working with him. I wasn't crazy about the part. I was 
a big snob at the time: I felt that the script was a bit saccharine, and my 
character was the daughter of a nobleman, and a young student, played by Assaf 
Dayan, son of Moshe Dayan, was travelling the land in 15th century France, 
looking for the sea. This struck me as being incredibly corny.

So, when I was called to Paris to undergo hair and makeup tests - Leonor Fini 
did the costumes, and Alexandre of Paris, who did Liz Taylor's hair on 
Cleopatra, put all these gold braids on my hair and I just felt like it was all 
too much. And Dad wouldn't let me wear makeup, which was seriously problematic. 
So the whole thing was a bit of a debacle. As it happened, it was on that visit 
to France that the revolution broke out. Students were rampant on the Left Bank 
and I couldn't leave Paris, so I was literally in a hotel room for four days 
without a hairbrush, seething. I finally got back to London but it was 
inevitable that we made that movie together, but I don't think it got any 
better than that, it was not a happy journey.

AW: Then, for a variety of reasons, you moved back to the US and your life 
changed. You ended up living in California and modelling, and through the 
1970s, although you had small roles in a variety of films, it didn't seem that 
you really wanted to be an actress after that first experience. Did you kind of 
put that aside?

AH: Well, yeah, and also, I was really badly reviewed. I think the critic John 
Simon said I looked like an exhausted gnu. And you know, I was sensitive. 
Meanwhile, people seemed to like to take my photograph somewhat. I'd worked 
with David Bailey here, my mother was a good friend of Richard Avedon, and he 
was kind and photographed me for Vogue. So I started to think that maybe I 
could have a bit of a career as a model and not come up against the hard 
criticism. And I had a good time, I travelled, I learned a lot, I worked with 
great people, I had a modicum of success and it bolstered my ego.

AW: But through that period, you were in a relationship with Jack Nicholson 
and you appeared in small roles in his films. Did your relationship with him, 
because he was doing film after film, help prompt you to want to go back to 
acting?

AH: No, I'd always wanted to act, but it was a question of whether acting 
wanted me and whether the movies wanted me. I was always kind of recalcitrant 
when that idea would come up. For instance, Mike Nichols wanted me to test for 
a movie that Jack did, called The Fortune. I refused to test, not because I 
wanted to be given the part, but because the perception as far as I could gauge 
would be that everything was coming to me because of him. Because of him or 
because of my father. And I was clueless enough at the time not to realise that 
of course everything comes from people you know, everything is a handout, 
really. Especially in this kind of work, it's all about who you are, who you 
know, what you can do and how you can prove yourself. It took me a while to 
understand that. But at the same time, I went to acting classes and worked with 
a really great teacher, Peggy Feury, who gave me a lot of my confidence back. 
She taught Sean Penn, Michelle Pfeiffer; she had a lot of good people. She sort 
of changed my life and was a wonderful friend to me.

AW: While that was going on, your father was having something of a renaissance 
in the 1970s - he was making a series of great movies: The Man Who Would Be 
King, Fat City and Wise Blood. Did he come to you at any time during that 
period and talk to you about working for him again?

AH: No, I came to him. I was asked to host an evening that the American Film 
Institute put on and introduce clips from his films for that evening and also 
people that he'd worked with. At some point over the course of that evening, I 
said I'd like to try again. And I guess he was fool enough to try again. He was 
working on The Man Who Would Be King with a producer called John Foreman, who 
turned out to be a great friend to me and a great believer in me. And after Man 
Who Would Be King, he was making a film called Ice Pirates at MGM, and he 
offered me to test for the role of Maida, the greatest swordswoman in the 
universe. I am eternally grateful, it was a great part. I liked it a lot, I got 
to wear cool armour and monkey heads and stuff like that. And it was during the 
course of that movie... Also, I had John Matuszak as my lover in the film. I 
don't know if any of you know John Matuszak, but he was a linebacker for the 
Raiders; he was a fun romantic interest.

But anyway, during the course of that movie, John brought me a Richard Condon 
book called Prizzi's Honor, and said, "Read it and tell me what you think of 
Maerose." So I went away and read it, and of course it was fantastic. It was 
tongue-in-cheek and ironic and all the things I really like. So I came back and 
said, "John, it's fantastic. Were you thinking of me for Maerose?" And he said, 
"Yeah, and what about Jack opposite you as Charley Partanna and your dad to 
direct?" [drops head in hands, laughs] And then he kind of engaged me on this 
pursuit of getting Dad and Jack together. Which might sound simple - two people 
who quite liked each other at the time - but it was an ordeal because Dad lived 
in the jungle, [at Las Caletas] south of Puerto Vallarta, which was then a lot 
more remote than it is now. He lived on the coastline, only accessible by boat, 
with CB radio, no telephones, no electricity, nothing. And Jack, well, Jack 
likes to be in his den, it was the Olympics and he was not going to move. So 
John Foreman was saying that I had to go out there, and I knew full well that 
if I got Jack out there I would hear nothing but everything that wasn't right 
about the trip, so I refused. And John was furious at me. He showed up at six 
o'clock in the morning at my door and said, "We're going to the airport." I 
said no.

Anyway, eventually he gets to Vallarta, and he finds Jack there, buying shoes. 
And he said, "Jack, what are you doing in Vallarta? You should be with John, 
working this out." And Jack said, 'I'm going to do it." And obviously, what had 
happened was, he'd gotten out to the jungle - and Dad had satellite out there - 
so they'd sat and watched girl gymnasts together. And at one point, Jack had 
turned to Dad and said, "I don't know about your idea for the toupee, John. Are 
you trying to tell me it's supposed to be a comedy?" And Dad said yes. Up to 
that point, Jack hadn't known it was a comedy. Anyway, we then all found 
ourselves in New York making this movie.

It was great, it was a really fantastic experience. I went to church and Jack 
went to the gaming parlours. Dad was trying to find the voice of the movie. 
Finally he located this actress called Julie Bovasso, who was dying to play in 
the movie but Dad was also determined that his ex-secretary, who was now the 
rather ancient and gambling-addicted Ann Selepegno, would play the part of my 
aunt, and she couldn't act at all. So there would be these terrible sessions 
where I would try to loosen up Ann Selepegno. But Julie Bovasso gave him the 
voice of the movie - he got very excited one day and called Jack and I up to 
his hotel room to hear a recording of Julie reading the Aunt Amalia part. She 
was not to get the part but she was the voice of the movie, and she was the one 
who gave us the accent.

AW: This was 16 or 17 years since the last time you worked with your father. 
You've said it was fun and a great experience, but what was it like being 
directed by your father compared with that first time when you were a teenager? 
Did you find it a more rewarding experience?

AH: We had such a good time on that movie. For a start, I realised it wasn't 
personal. That sounds like a very obvious thing but it was huge. So I was able 
to actually learn as opposed to this defensive stance that I'd taken for all 
those early years. I think that had to do with being insecure and never being 
all that crazy about criticism, and he could be quite liberal with criticism. 
But once I learned that it was part of my job and not to take it personally and 
to try and please him as a director, then our professional life changed a lot, 
and actually our personal life changed a lot.

AW: Obviously, the film had tremendous success and you received an Academy 
Award for your performance. And then your whole professional life seemed to 
change dramatically with an incredible array of parts. And less than two years 
later you made The Dead with your father - it's such a marvellous movie and 
such a masterpiece. So could you speak about the making of this film, because 
your father was very ill. And it wasn't all shot in Ireland, was it?

AH: Only the last sequence, the exteriors of Dublin and the countryside were 
shot in Ireland. For the rest we were in a factory in Valencia, which is 
outside Los Angeles. It's an amusement park, for those of you who don't know. 
There were a number of warehouses that were going up there in the 70s and 80s, 
and a few independent television stations found their homes there. I think we 
were one of the first films to shoot in Valencia; there was no sound-proofing 
on the stage or anything. Stephen Grimes, who was his dear friend and 
production designer, did all the sets inside this warehouse. We were a unit. 
The Irish came over expecting Hollywood. They were staying at the Black Angus 
Hotel, we called it the Black Anguish. And they all learned line-dancing on 
Thursday nights. But they were pretty happy, just so long as the gin and tonic 
flowed. We had a great time and they were a fantastic group of people, 
beautiful actors. Donal McCann was just a dream to work with.

While we were there, we all got sick and we all missed a day, except for Dad. 
I had mononucleosis, everyone else got pleurisy and flu, but he was seamless. 
We didn't start until 10 in the morning and we didn't work after five at night, 
and I think we came in under our allotted time, on schedule. I remember one 
day, and this would never happen now, it was after that shot in the carriage 
scene. [Production manager] Tommy Shaw called lunch, and we'd already done this 
shot. Tommy came to Dad and said, "All right, John, so we'll go in close, 
right?" And Dad said, "I don't think there's any reason for that. Let's call 
Roberto." Roberto Silvi, the editor. Roberto was working upstairs in the 
warehouse, cutting while we were shooting. So the phonecall goes up, "Roberto, 
do you think we need close-ups here?" Roberto goes, "John, if you don't want a 
close-up, then don't do one." And Dad said, "Well, that's a wrap." And we all 
went home.

AW: You've suggested how much fun you had, but was it a difficult experience 
with your father being so ill?

AH: It was very painful to watch him sick, but on the other hand, if ever 
there were a brain that you wanted to keep throbbing on a mantelpiece, it was 
his. He was just this fantastic brain. As a matter of fact, the first time I 
read the script for The Dead - it all kind of happened undercover. My brother 
Tony had been in a huddle with Dad for a few months and I wasn't quite sure 
what it was about. I heard whisperings of Joyce and I knew Fionnnula Flanagan 
was interested. She was circling the campfire. Dad had to go into hospital for 
an eye operation for cataracts, and I went to visit him after the operation. 
His eyes were bandaged and he said to me, "See that script on the bedside 
table? Will you read it to me, honey?" So I sat and I read him the script and 
of course I was sobbing at the end. And he said, "Shall we do it?" And I said 
yes. And that was the inception of The Dead, for me anyway.

AW: There are lots of marvellous things about the film, but one great thing is 
the fact that it's such an integrated ensemble piece. There aren't many scenes 
but for the majority of the time, you get the impression that all the actors 
were either in shot or just about to be in shot. Is that something that's more 
difficult to do? How does it feel? It certainly looks like you're working much 
harder in that sense.

AH: It was almost like a stage play in that the choreography was very fluid. I 
think at this point in his life, things had gotten really simple. Things had 
gone through their hugely complicated stage and had kind of been taken down to 
a wonderful Zen smoothness in this film. He worked with one camera, Freddy 
Murphy. And... God, we were forever in that dining room, though. With goose. 
And I don't know what they'd been feeding that goose but it smelled like fish. 
I think it was just tremendously beautifully choreographed by a lot of people 
who had worked together and were old hands together, like Stephen [Grimes] and 
his assistant Josie [MacAvin] and Tommy [Shaw], and everyone was looking out 
for Dad, and everyone wanted to make it easy for him. The actors were primed. 
It was usually his method, before we started, to have not rehearsals really but 
round-table readings. And often he'd look like he'd dozed off, but he was just 
listening to the rhythms. One of his sole comments to me at that point of 
rehearsal was, "Be careful honey, you're out-Irishing the Irish." Which is 
okay, I understood that. It's my kind of method that I have to take it a bit 
further and then pull back. It's better that I make a fool of myself early on 
and then pull back a little. He said the same to me as Maerose; he said, "Watch 
out, don't out-Italian the Italians."

He was a great modulator, particularly for me, because I start out big. I 
remember particularly the last scene in the hotel room. This movie was hard for 
me because it was all about that scene. And there were whole days where I 
didn't have anything to say, while that scene was just looming on the horizon. 
When it came to that day, I'd worked myself up into a bit of a frenzy and I was 
very emotional from the moment I arrived on set that morning. So we went into 
rehearsal, and I was extremely emotional, crying profusely throughout that 
scene. And he obviously saw the need to take me down a bit. He said, "How's 
your horse, honey?" [miming sobbing] "It's fine, it's fine." But then, it 
finally came to it, and he said, "Don't play the end, play the beginning." So 
we achieved a nice balance there. I like this scene. I like the movie.

AW: From that, you've gone on to work on a whole variety of films, including 
working with young directors such as Wes Anderson. But the other major thing 
that's happened in the past 10 years is that you've begun directing yourself, 
with Bastard Out of Carolina, Agnes Browne, and I believe there's a new film in 
the pipeline, Give Us a Kiss. Is that a working title?

AH: No, that's the real title. It's from a book by an author called Daniel 
Woodrell, who writes self-described Ozark noir - country noir.

AW: He wrote Ride with the Devil, that Ang Lee filmed.

AH: Yeah, and also a really good new book called Winter's Bone. But this is 
about kind of crazy people in the Ozarks. I don't know why I always wind up 
doing white trash. I grew up in an estate in Ireland and now I do southern 
white trash.
 