
Wednesday morning in New York: outside it is drab and drizzly. Inside the Good 
Morning America studios at ABC it is brighter than ever –Ann Romney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ann-romney> is here! And not just for a 
quick interview, but to host the show! Well not thewhole show, we are told at 
7am – but she would be "coming in in our second hour!"

GMA is on a roll at the moment, beating NBC's the Today Show on a regular 
ratings basis. Ann Romney is on a roll, too, as one of the more popular faces 
of her husband's campaign. Her poll numbers currently outdo her husband's by 
nine points. Like all political spouses on the campaign trail, her duties fall 
into the intellectually light, but warm and fuzzy category. This means that GMA 
and Ann Romney are a perfect match.

At 7.30am, we were told that among other things Romney would be doing was 
"sharing a family recipe." The Romney family is particularly partial to Welsh 
cakes – or "a kind of English scone".

There's something of the Martha Stewart about Ann Romney's tall, strong, 
slightly intimidating presence. Both seem to stride through the oversized, 
well-equipped kitchens of life taking their blows firmly on their unflinching, 
upraised chins. "Tough" is a word you could use to describe them both. Also, 
"middle-class" and "white". So baking seemed a reasonable morning gig for Ann 
Romney to undertake on national television.

"After raising five boys, I'm ready for anything!" cried an enthusiastic 
Romney, catching a football and wearing a hot pink jacket as the camera 
announced her presence at 8am. But the best thing about live television is you 
can't always follow a script.

"They're burning," she muttered through clenched teeth to an unseen minion, 
seconds later, not realizing she was on camera. "You can turn the griddle down."

That was the first and last we saw of the Welsh cakes.

Instead her first segment is a forgettable interview with the losers of last 
night's Dancing With the Stars. DWTS is not having a good season on ABC, so if 
the wife of a residential candidate can help get the show some viewers – great. 
I'm not sure Romney sitting formally in her signature red shirt-dress asking 
singer Drew Lachey: "How did you like your scoring on the cha-cha?" will really 
bring it home. But she tried.

Romney might be very wealthy, but she's also a wife and a mother with health 
issues. Which means she falls nicely into the GMA demographic. The show 
tailored itself around those similarities creating a segment where she petted 
the horse Lord Ludger while its rider, Becca Hart, who had competed in the 
London Paralympics, was briefly interviewed.

"It's so extraordinary what horses do for us. For me, it's balance, it's love, 
it's joy," said Romney, who has famously used equine therapy to help deal with 
multiple sclerosis. "Horses are a gift from God and they are a partner in our 
life's journey and they can bring such joy."

(Brief pause while I pictured Jason Sudeikis playing Mitt Romney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/mittromney> as a horse on this week's 
Saturday Night Live.)

Finally, with only 10 minutes of the show left, she began cooking. Well, 
actually, she watched as Stanley Tucci, who is promoting a new cookbook, began 
cooking. "I think our butter is burning, sorry," said Tucci in a relaxed 
manner, taking a saucepan off the heat.

"They burnt my Welsh cakes, too," said Romney, throwing up her hands.

"This show's a disaster," said Tucci.

"Yeah," said Romney.

"This is really burning!" said Tucci as sparks started flying off the butter.

"Every time I don't know," said Romney, laughing. "My plane almost goes down – 
now I'm going to catch on fire."

But she never did – in any sense of the word.
 