
She will meet prime minister David Cameron on Thursday, attend the Olympics 
opening ceremony on Friday and, in January, she hopes to enter the White House 
as the first lady. This weekend, however,Ann Romney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ann-romney>, will be the warmly welcomed 
guest in a far more humble home in the seaside resort of Porthcawl, on the 
south coast of Wales.

The wife of a man who made more than $200m (£128m) from slashing jobs and 
asset-stripping, she has raised five children and never had a career outside 
the home. She has been criticised for enjoying a lifestyle far removed from 
those of the ordinary American people whose votes her husband is seeking.

Gone are the days, however, when she was seen as superficial and too 
deferential to her husband, ridiculed by the American media as a 'Stepford 
wife'. Instead, she has been subtly but successfully recast into one of the 
strongest cards in the Republican bid for presidency.

Some of her appeal – or so her husband's campaign team must hope – largely 
lies in her journey from the granddaughter of a coalminer and the second cousin 
of a Welsh rugby star to, potentially, the powerhouse of western democracy. 
Romney, it is being implied, is the acme of the American dream: an inspiration 
to the US electorate.

"I am very proud of my Welsh roots and very tied to them," the 63-year-old 
Romney has said. "They are an extremely important part of who I am. I am a 
coalminer's granddaughter. I feel I am just one foot away from where that mine 
was and how close we all are, all of us, to the sacrifices of our parents and 
grandparents who tried to make a better life for us."

Ann Romney - nee Davies - was raised in Michigan and first met her 
husband-to-be in primary school. The couple began going out together when she 
was 16. A year later, she converted to his Mormon religion. The following year, 
her brothers followed suit.

Almost four years to the day of their first date, the couple married, flying 
to Utah the day after the civil ceremony for a wedding ceremony inside the Salt 
Lake Temple. Her parents, as non-Mormons, could not attend the celebration, 
although her mother converted just before her death in 1993.

Romney's father never followed the rest of his family into the Church of Jesus 
Christ of Latter-day Saints, but the family nevertheless baptised him a year 
after his death in 1992.

Seeking to play down her Mormon religion, Romney has instead flagged up her 
Welsh heritage in recent months, frequently drawing attention to the real-life, 
rags-to-riches story of her grandfather David Davies, a miner who emigrated 
from Nantyffyllon in Bridgend to America in the 1929 after losing a kidney in a 
colliery accident.

Arriving in the same year as the Wall Street Crash, Davies managed to raise 
enough money for his wife Annie, daughter and three sons – including the 
15-year-old Edward Davies who would go on to become Romney's father – to join 
him in Michigan.

Mitt has hailed the struggles of his wife's family: "They couldn't afford to 
send four kids to college," he has said. "They decided to choose one, the 
smartest, and all work to send him to college. Thankfully for me, that was my 
wife's father."

Romney is not afraid to use her Welsh roots to charm campaigners and 
journalists travelling on the campaign bus, serving home-baked Welsh cakes on 
long journeys. She has posted a recipe on her husband's website and, 
campaigning with Mitt on St David's Day in Georgia, wore a dress detailed with 
daffodils and publicly delighted in a 'care package' of the griddle cakes, sent 
to her by her daughter-in-law, also of Welsh descent.

Far from the hectic campaign trail, Romney's relatives back in Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> dismiss suggestions that she is anything 
but genuine in her enthusiasm. In his clifftop house overlooking Rest Bay and 
the Royal Porthcawl golf club, Roddy Evans, Romney's 77-year-old second cousin, 
said she is "just a lovely Welsh girl."

The families have shared a close friendship over many decades, he said. The 
Romneys make frequent visits to their relatives in Wales, on one occasion 
taking their five sons and Romney's brothers down a mine to see for themselves 
the working conditions the family had endured.

"You couldn't meet a nicer family," said Evans. "Mitt and Ann are incredibly 
warm and loving. It is a hugely romantic story that this little Welsh family in 
despair get up and go to America.

"Ann's father was always extremely conscious of his Welsh connections," he 
added. "I think it was important to him because it must have been such a big 
thing to him when he emigrated at such a young age. It would be an 
extraordinary event for Nantyffyllon if that happened [Mitt's election]. It 
tickled me pink just to think about it.

"I can remember we were down in Florida and Ann and Mitt discovered we were 
there and they got on a plane and flew down for lunch," he added.

Romney's life has not been uniformly gilded, however. Diagnosed with multiple 
sclerosis in 1998 and with cancer in 2008, she has fought off both illnesses, 
crediting her symptom-free life from MS on conventional medicine and 
alternative treatments: a prize-winning equestrian, she says horse riding 
"saved my life".

"I was losing most of the function of my right side and I decided I needed to 
go back and do what I loved before I couldn't do it anymore," she has said. 
"Riding exhilarated me; it gave me a joy and a purpose. When I was so fatigued 
that I couldn't move, the excitement of going to the barn and getting my foot 
in the stirrup would make me crawl out of bed."

• This article was amended on 25 July 2012. The original said Ann Romney hoped 
to enter the White House as first lady in November. The presidential election 
is in November, but the inauguration takes place in January.
 