
Short of mocking Shetland ponies over their lack of stature or laying into 
zebras for their failure to make a significant contribution to the world of 
equine culture,Ann Romney's horse Rafalca 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jul/31/armchair-olympics-day-four> was 
always going to struggle to match the sheer incredulity that her husband 
managed to provoke onhis recent overseas trip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2012/jul/31/mitt-romney-gaffes-poland-video?INTCMP=SRCH>
.

And in the event – the event in question being the individual dressage – the 
15-year-old bay Oldenburg mare acquitted herself rather well. True, she and her 
rider, Jan Ebeling, may have been left well behind byBritain's Carl Hester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/aug/19/carl-hester-dressage-britain-gold>
, Germany's Dorothee Schneider and Denmark's Anna Kasprzak but, by Romney 
standards, her performance was a positive triumph.

Never for a second during her seven-minute performance did a hoof stray 
dangerously mouthwards, nor did she do anything at all to offend or upset the 
host nation. From the moment she entered the Greenwich Park equestrian arena at 
12.15 on Thursday afternoon, the most famous political horse since Caligula 
toyed with making a consul of Incitatus seemed in her element.

She bowed her neatly plaited head on cue, trotted diagonally across the sand, 
did the jogging-on-the-spot thing, the skipping thing, the rhythmic boogying 
thing, the controlled trotting thing: in short, Rafalca did everything that the 
occasion and the peculiar rules of the dressage demanded of her.

At one point, she appeared to give a snort of exhilarated delight, although, 
to be fair, it's not easy to say precisely what emotion a huge horse is aiming 
to convey; it could equally have been a snort of ennui or a snort of 
frustration at the Obama administration's glee over Mitt's gaffe-spree. Perhaps 
it was just her way of telling the predominantly British crowd that, like the 
Romneys, she was just happy to be in the UK.

Her part-owner seemed equally delighted. Ann Romney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ann-romney>, who was in the VIP section of 
the equestrian arena, rose to give Rafalca a standing ovation and a wave. "She 
was consistent and elegant," said Mrs Romney. "She did not disappoint. She 
thrilled me to death."

It was left to Ebeling to offer a more personal psychological profile of his 
mount. "She was amped up," he said. "She was definitely amped up. You can feel 
it: she felt a bit stronger than usual ... It's better, because she has more 
expression, but it's also a little bit harder to control the whole thing. She 
gets a little bit amped up and the trick is to manage that."

To calm her down and help her deal with the crowd noise, said Ebeling, he had 
talked to her and scratched her neck with his finger.

And how had he dealt with the pressure of riding such a high-profile horse?

"There certainly was a lot of media attention going on, but I think it really 
ended up being a good thing for the sport, and I don't really get distracted by 
these things," he said. "I have a pretty good way of focusing, and if I don't 
want to talk to anybody, then I just don't answer my phone."

While he chose not to impart any information about Rafalca's voting 
intentions, the 53-year-old US rider did confirm that Ann Romney had given him 
"many words of encouragement" before the Olympics.

She had not been in touch on Thursday morning, he added, but her last message 
had been full of good counsel: "Do what you know to do and do what you do best. 
Just ride like it's a normal day."

Fine advice indeed. If only her husband had heeded it.
 