
Had you read The Fault in Our Stars 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141345659>
 book before your audition?
I hadn't read it before I was going to audition. I wasn't aware of the book 
until I was auditioning for it, but yes I read it before I auditioned.

How affected were you by the book?
I was very affected. I cried a bunch. I really, really liked it. When I read 
it I didn't see myself as Gus… yet, which is a good thing. I think that when 
you first read material or you first read a script or story and know you might 
be playing a part it's important not to see yourself because it should be a 
challenge enough that it doesn't come easy. I think Gus was always going to be 
a challenge and that's important. Characters I want to play are challenges to 
me.

How much of you is in your portrayal of Gus?
There are aspects of myself. I think Gus is very theatrical, and over the top 
and I do that as well. I have an aura of theatricality but at the same time Gus 
is a regular guy, he's vulnerable and he's sensitive and so am I underneath it 
all, that's what makes him real. Any real person has a front and a real part to 
themselves.
 Falling more deeply in love in Amsterdam: Gus (Ansel Elgort) and Hazel 
(Shailene Woodley) Photograph: 20th Century Fox 
Were you nervous taking on the role of Augustus knowing there is such a strong 
fan base for the book and readers have such a strong image of the character in 
their heads?
Yeah a little definitely. Because of fans but also because of me because he's 
a tough character to bring to life, he's very complex. Also fans definitely 
have an expectation of this guy, people are in love with Gus and I didn't want 
to mess that up, I wanted to bring him to life the way people had imagined him.

Did the expectations of The Fault in Our Stars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-fault-in-our-stars> fans affect you or 
even intimidate you in any way?
A little bit, but it's healthy to find it intimidating. But at the same time 
once I was on set I didn't think, oh I should do this or I shouldn't do that 
because the fans might think it's bad. John Green who wrote the book was also 
there on set a lot so he made us all feel more comfortable because if he liked 
something we knew that you guys would like it.

What was it like to work with John Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/john-green>? And how involved was he in 
making the film?
It was great to have him around. First of all John is an awesome person he's 
one of my good friends now and in terms of involvement a movie isn't made by a 
writer ever, but he was a co-producer on it which means he gave his support. 
The screen writers were Michael Weber and Scott Neustadter, who also wrote the 
famous movie 500 Days of Summer. They did a great job of adapting the book. I 
think one of the things that is so great about the movie is it is so close to 
the book. If it wasn't that would be sad because the book is so good already. 
It's about preserving the tone and the feeling of it; I knew if they could do 
that in the movie version the movie would be a success and it is.

What did you think about how the movie turned out? Did it meet your 
expectations?
Yes definitely. I'm very, very happy with the way it turns out. I knew it 
could be this good, but you never know until you see it.

What would you say was the most challenging scene to film?
Well for me there are a few very emotional scenes which are tough. The scene 
at the gas station was very tough for me, very emotional and difficult having 
to go to that emotional place. Sometimes there's pressure because you think "oh 
no if I can't do it, this is going to suck". I am happy with how it turned out 
but it's definitely a challenge. The most challenging part of becoming Gus was 
capturing his theatricality but then also how he breaks down and becomes the 
vulnerable boy.

Did you have to meet any teens who had cancer to understand Gus's character 
better?
We did spend time with kids who did have cancer or had had it. And all the 
kids in the support group in the film are real kids with cancer, they weren't 
extras. That was really interesting having them there. But the thing about this 
story, and the way it represents cancer which means it so special, is that the 
way John writes it is they are regular kids who happen to have cancer. You 
wouldn't even know the kids in the film had cancer if I hadn't told you, they 
are not their disease, they don't let their disease become them. And that's how 
I wanted to approach Gus and how Shailene wanted approach Hazel because we knew 
people don't love this book because it's a story about cancer – they love it 
because it's a love story and that's the most important thing.

What is the one thing you want fans to take away from this film?
I want people to take away hope from this movie. Nat who plays Issac said 
someone came up to him after the movie and said I want to call everyone who I 
love and tell them I love them. That's the message: to appreciate what's in 
front of you. The love that you have or the people in your life. Also Gus's 
challenge is he wants to be remembered. Then he learns at the end that that's 
not the most important thing. Hazel is worried about what's going to happen to 
people after she dies but she realises that they'll go on, they'll live with 
pain but they'll survive and that's OK. Don't worry about that. I think that's 
a challenge all of us go through, whether it's a parent knowing they are going 
to have to die and leave their kids behind or it's a young person saying I 
haven't left my mark yet, I lived for no reason – but that's a stupid way of 
thinking because as Hazel says in the book there will come a day when Mozart 
isn't remembered so don't worry about it!

What was your favourite book when you were growing up? Did you have a book 
that made a real impact on you like The Fault in Our Stars has on so many 
people?
I'm only 20 so still in the bracket for The Fault in Our Stars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/the-fault-in-our-stars>, and that's had a 
big impact. But for me it was more movies that influenced me, particularly On 
the Waterfront and East of Eden. In On the Waterfront Marlon Brando's character 
is a boxer and he's brought down by his family and he ends up not living the 
life he could have but at the end of the movie he ends up standing up for 
himself. I love that movie. East of Eden is an important story for me. It's 
about a kid that's misunderstood and feels like he's not loved by his father. 
It's a very father-son kind of story and it's not until the end that they sort 
of make up. I like that because every boy has trouble with his father so it's 
very relatable.

Did you want to be an actor when you were growing up?
Yeah and it's those movies that made me want to be an actor, ones that told 
special and important stories that made you think and learn about life before 
you need to do it.

Was it at all weird going from being Shailene Woodley's sibling in Divergent 
to her boyfriend in TFIOS?
No it really wasn't because we became close on Divergent which was important 
and helpful because then when we came to do this movie we were comfortable with 
each other. And the friendship you see between Gus and Hazel, which in it's 
real love is friendship, when you see that, it's real. Me and Shailene are very 
close in real life.

After Shailene's announcement that she's done with making teen films, do you 
think you'll stop anytime soon?
For her she was saying this is probably the last time she'll play a teenager; 
that's a big chapter of an actor's life but there comes a point when you are 
too old for it. Hopefully I'm not going to play anyone younger than 18 from now 
on and after that I'll be playing parts in their 20s.
 Being interviewed for the Guardian children's and teens' books site, this 
thumbs up is for the members! Photograph: Emily Drabble 
If you could live as any one book character for a day, who would it be and why?
Guys I'm a bad example: you should all read, but I'm such a film guy, I watch 
films all the time. But my favourite movies are The Lord of the Rings and they 
are also books, so that works. I haven't read the books but I NEED to and I 
will. I'd like to be Gandalf for a day he's so wise, he's so powerful and he's 
so caring. I love Gandalf. When they remake Lord of The Rings maybe I'll play 
it.

Would you really be so interested in reading a book like An Imperial 
Affliction and would actually use your wish to meet an author in real life? 
If John Green wrote An Imperial Affliction I'd read it. I don't think he ever 
will. I would use my last wish to meet him. And if you guys have a last wish 
you should use it to meet him, he's awesome. I need to read his other books, 
I'll probably start withLooking For Alaska 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007523160>
 h and thenPaper Towns 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408848180>
. It's being made into a movie and I'll probably be in it!

What is one thing you are passionate about other than acting?
Music right now. I produce electric music or house music under the name Ansølo 
<https://soundcloud.com/ansolo>. Actually while I'm working on a film I do the 
most work as I end up being alone in a city, and my downtime I spend on the 
computer making music.

Do you find yourself saying "OK" a lot more since playing Gus?
I say it as much as anyone else I guess, but now when I say it I catch myself 
and say 'that's funny I just said "OK"'.

Thanks to Lydia, The Book Thief, The Book Addicted Girl, Jessie, Tashtastic12, 
Oreosandlemons, Emybot, Khadija, Crazy Maisie Moo, Ellam, Noumana, Amy, 
BakingQueen, MollieBookWorm, Ayesha, Themilelongbookshelf and all the other 
members of the Guardian children's books site who sent in their questions for 
Ansel.
 