
At one point in his new book Medium Raw, the American chef turned food writer 
Anthony Bourdain <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/anthonybourdain> 
imagines a cussing contest with a critic of his work. If somebody really wanted 
to put the boot in, he says, they could call him "a loud, egotistical, one-note 
asshole who's been cruising on the reputation of one obnoxious, 
over-testosteroned book for way too long and who should just shut the fuck up". 
Ah yes, the over-testosteroned book, orKitchen Confidential, as it said on the 
cover. Published a decade ago, it was a rollicking, boisterous read which gave 
voice to a once-silent tribe: the tattooed madmen and drug fiends, the 
knife-wielding obsessives and compulsives and cutthroats who work the kitchens 
of a great city's great restaurants, in this case New York. It has been 
credited with freeing food writing from the confines of the genteel and the 
prissy; with giving itcojones and a racing pulse.

What it did was free Bourdain, then a whip-thin fortysomething ex-junkie, from 
the gruelling life of the kitchen that he had written about. He was lauded for 
his authenticity. He was the man who had swapped his blade for a pen. (The fact 
that he had already written a couple of rather good, jaunty kitchen-based crime 
novels with names such asBone in the Throat was conveniently overlooked, 
because it diluted the tale of breakthrough and arrival.) Even though there has 
been a whole bunch of Bourdain books sinceKitchen Confidential – travel 
writing; a cookbook from Les Halles, the New York French brasserie where he was 
last employed; collections of journalism – it is the new one, subtitled A 
Bloody Valentine to the World of Food and the People Who Cook, which is being 
sold as the sequel. Certainly the original casts a hugely long shadow across 
it. A lot of the time the new volume reads as nothing less than an apologia for 
the first. Or at least an apologia for the success it brought him.

"I am apologetic, no question," Bourdain says when he talks to me by phone 
from somewhere unglamorous in Southern California where he is on tour. It is in 
the nature of what he does now that he is often on tour these days. "It's 
something I feel compelled to be upfront about. I've become a privileged, 
well-travelled, overindulged foodie – and that gives me if not a sense of guilt 
then a sense of discomfort." It seems a curious response to the situation in 
which he finds himself: famous and widely liked, reasonably well off, fully 
employed. As well as the writing, he has made a succession of well-received TV 
shows, first for the Food Network and now for the Travel Channel, for which he 
has just completed the 100th episode of his showNo Reservations, a freewheeling 
global travelogue based around food. The problem, Bourdain says, is the nature 
of that employment. "I feel uncomfortable with the fact that a day's work used 
to be something that made you feel worn down. It was 12 hours working with your 
hands. I feel apologetic about how easy my life is now."

I suggest this places him in an interesting crew within American writing, 
alongside the likes of Ernest Hemingway and Norman Mailer, who regarded writing 
as somehow unmanly, even sissy, and who therefore needed to bolster their macho 
credentials in some other way, be it shooting big animals or playing at boxing. 
Bourdain, who is more than well-enough read to argue the toss on this one, 
dismisses the point. "But Hemingway was only ever a writer. He didn't ever do 
another proper manual job. Whereas I was a cook for 25 years and I will always 
look at the world from that point of view."

Not that he could do it now, he says, and he knows because he's tried. He went 
back to do a few double shifts in kitchens. "I was able to squeak through. But 
I'm not that guy any more and I wouldn't be any good at being that guy. And in 
a way I feel I need to remind the old tribe, the new generations that read
Kitchen Confidential every year. They need to know it's been 10 years since I 
really did that. I can't go out and do tequila shots until three in the morning 
with them any more."

Ah yes, the tribe. I met them once, at a book event we did together. There was 
an audience of about 200 – 199 for Bourdain, and my wife, which was nice. It 
was terrifying. I was the restaurant critic. They were Bourdain's crew, 
bed-haired at 8pm, wild-eyed and adoring, but only of him. I felt like a lump 
of tuna belly waiting to be portioned. I ask Bourdain if he misses being with 
these people in their kitchens. "I don't miss the heat and the pain. The 
success ofKitchen Confidential came at a very good time for me. Clint Eastwood 
always says a man should know his limitations – and I found mine. The truth is 
I don't miss cooking, but I do miss having cooked, that feeling afterwards."
 Anthony Bourdain. Photograph: Barry J Holmes 
The new volume finds him reflecting on all this and much, much more. At times, 
as he describes drink-soaked adventures on Caribbean islands with 
high-maintenance, high-class coke fiends, or tangling with the sort of 
dead-eyed corporate television executives he has to work with these days, or 
firing off barbed insults at food writers he hates, the modern Bourdain seems 
like a very angry, pissed-off man. "If anything, I think I'm much less angry," 
he says. "I really and truly believed I was writing a philosophical look back 
at who I am from the position of being a more comfortable guy." It is true that 
he has a new (Italian) wife and a new daughter which, cliché though it may be, 
has softened him. The chapter on his attempts to stop her ever tasting a 
McDonald's is one of the more invigorating. But there is no ignoring the acrid 
stench of vented spleen across most pages. If you're a big-name food writer in 
America, or a big-time TV exec, you have a serious chance of feeling Bourdain's 
literary stiletto between your shoulder blades. "Any passionate writing about 
food by people who actually like it is useful and good," he says, "but it also 
creates an overindulged class of people who resent their jobs and the people 
they have to deal with, and it would be all too easy for me to become a part of 
the mouldering heap." Plus, he says, he has always made the best decisions in 
his life when he has closed as many doors as possible. He lists his targets in 
the book. "That's an awful lot of parties in New York I can no longer go to."

The curious thing is that he is far less dismissive of the celebrity-chef 
world than he once was, accepting that the business of professional 
endorsements is just what people do to turn a buck, and admits that it was 
naive and precious of him to be critical of such things. So could we see him 
endorsing cookware? "Nooooo! I just couldn't. Not that. It would be wrong 
because I'm not that guy any more." He tells me that Imodium, the antidiarrheal 
brand, did "reach out" to him. I suggest, given the arduous overeating regime 
of the professional food writer, that the medication might have been the 
perfect fit, endorsement-wise. He laughs. "If Aston Martin wanted me to endorse 
its product I could probably manage that."

So what of the restaurant world that he has left behind? How does he think 
it's changed in the past decade since his original book was published? "It's a 
much better place, a more hopeful and professional and civilised place. It's 
easy to romanticise the days when we used to sit in the kitchen smoking and 
scratching our nuts, but things have moved on." The reason: the rise of the 
celebrity chef. "It's a fortunate side effect. People now care about chefs, 
give them respect, and are willing to try new things because of that respect. 
Hey, you might even let your daughter marry one."

But Bourdain is no longer a chef, and anyway he is off the market. These days 
he travels for his TV show 175 days of the year, a process he adores. "But the 
thing that really makes big bucks? I'll tell you. Public speaking: audiences of 
2,500 will pay Ticketmaster prices to see me and a chef sit on a sofa chatting 
to each other about food, cooking and restaurants. I do that 40 days of the 
year." Is it as arduous as service in a busy kitchen? Absolutely not. It 
doesn't even bear comparison. But it is a lot better paid, and there are very 
few people who could pull it off. Doubtless that's another thing Bourdain feels 
the need to apologise for. Meanwhile his fans don't care. They can't get enough 
of him.

Anthony Bourdain's Medium Raw: A Bloody Valentine to the World of Food and the 
People Who Cook (Bloomsbury, £18.99) is out now

Jay Rayner is the Observer Magazine's restaurant critic
 