
There were two big stories in Belarus in the last week of July. On the plus 
side, their premier,Alexander Lukashenko caught a catfish bigger than the pike 
Vladimir Putin had landed in Siberia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/31/lukashenko-catfish-putin-rivalry>
 a few days earlier. More difficult to comprehend, though, was the news that 
Uralkali, a Russian firm run by Suleiman Kerimov, had broken off a business 
agreement with a Belarusian company that effectively fixed global potash 
prices. It's hard to say precisely what the consequences will be, but pressure 
has already been placed on the Belarusian rouble, while a surge in the supply 
of potash should lead to a decrease in the cost of fertiliser (and thus perhaps 
food). It could also lead to thesale of Samuel Eto'o to Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/aug/08/the-rumour-mill-chelsea-samuel-etoo>
.

Quite why Uralkali have ended what was effectively a cartel is unclear, but in 
the day that followed the announcement, £5.5bn was wiped off the company's 
stock market valuation, with Kerimov himself losing an estimated £325m. The 
share price has since recovered and a direct link between the end of the 
agreement and what is going on atAnzhi Makhachkala 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/anzhi-makhachkala> has been denied, but 
that Uralkali felt compelled to take such a drastic step hints at the 
turbulence behind the scenes.

What has happened at Anzhi is a warning to all clubs who rely on external 
investment. The club, which had been founded in 1991, had worked its way into 
the Russian top flight when, in January 2011, it was taken over by Kerimov. He 
was born in Derbent in Dagestan and studied accounting and economics at 
Dagestan State University and has always insisted he took over the club for 
reasons of local pride, although it's no secret that Putin encourages oligarchs 
to invest in sporting ventures as a way of returning some of their wealth to 
the people. Kerimov's investment in a club in such a troubled region fitted 
exactly into Putin's more general policy of decentralisation. There has been a 
conscious attempt, in all spheres, to reach out to the regions and it is no 
coincidence that after years of Moscow domination, there were five Russian 
champions in a row from outside the capital before CSKA's success last year.

Anzhi, despite eyebrow-raising deals to sign Roberto Carlos, Eto'o and 
Christopher Samba, and the appointment of Guus Hiddink as manager, never really 
threatened to join Zenit St Petersburg or Rubin Kazan on the provincial roll of 
honour. So Kerimov did what oligarchs usually do and spent some more. Around 
£50m was invested this summer, bringing the Russia captain Igor Denisov from 
Zenit, Aleksandr Kokorin from Dynamo Moscow and Samba back from Queens Park 
Rangers. Hiddink left to be replaced by René Meulensteen, who had limited 
experience as a No1 but who had gained a glowing reputation in his time at 
Manchester United.

The season, though, began badly. Anzhi took two points from their first four 
games. Denisov, a fine player but never the easiest character, fought with 
Eto'o and Lassana Diarra on the training pitch and was exiled to train alone, 
with rumours he could be sold to Dynamo. And then, last week, came the shock 
announcement that Kerimov was changing tack, slashing the club's budget from 
£116m per season (second only to Zenit in Russia) to between £32m and £45m.

It was portrayed initially as though Kerimov had grown tired of squabbling 
stars and was choosing to switch philosophy and start focusing on youth 
development – which even for a capricious oligarch would have been a bizarrely 
whimsical response to a few bad results at the start of the season. Clearly 
there are deeper reasons. Kerimov's spokesman has insisted that rumours the 
47-year-old is in ill health are unfounded but it's hard not to see 
significance in the fact that the announcement of Anzhi's budget cut came just 
a week after the end of the Uralkali deal with Belarus that guaranteed a steady 
stream of income.

In practical terms, a £35m budget should still be enough for Anzhi to 
challenge for European places, but it has meantthe end for Meulensteen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/aug/07/rene-meulensteen-anzhi-makhachkala>
, laid off after 16 turbulent days in the job (presumably soon to be the 
subject of a David Peace-Danny Boyle collaboration, 28 Days Shorter), and it 
also means that the highest-paid stars are likely to be offloaded. The 
querulous Denisov, who spent a substantial part of last season training with 
Zenit's youth team after protesting against the signings of Hulk and Axel 
Witsel, will surely go, and so too will Eto'o, who had previously demonstrated 
a clear reluctance to work for Gadzhi Gadzhiev, who has returned to the club to 
replace Meulensteen.

Eto'o's move to Russia has meant him disappearing from view in western Europe, 
and leading to the widespread assumption that he is over the hill. He certainly 
is not quite the player he was three or four years ago, but at 32 he still has 
much to offer, the intelligence that always underlays his game beginning to 
emerge as his pace diminishes. He has a year left on his contract so presumably 
wouldn't be overly expensive, although he would probably have to accept a pay 
cut to move to the Premier League and the fact his world record salary was paid 
in full in advance complicates matters.

Chelsea's interest in the forward is logical. The courting of Wayne Rooney 
suggested José Mourinho wasn't happy with his striking options – Fernando 
Torres, Demba Ba and Romelu Lukaku – and he has worked successfully with Eto'o 
before. The Cameroon striker himself makes no secret of his admiration for 
Mourinho and perhaps fancies one final crack with a major western European 
team. And if agreement can be reached on wages, it may be that, for all 
Lukashenko's and Putin's angling exploits, it's Mourinho who ends up landing 
the really big fish.
 