
6.52pm BST 

Full-time: Anzhi Makhachkala 0-2 Tottenham

That's your lot! Tottenham win, goals from Jermain Defoe and Nacer Chadli 
meaning they're sitting pretty at the top of their group with six points from 
two matches. Hurrah for them. Anything Arsenal can do. Anzhi were and are 
rubbish. Thanks for reading. Bye.

6.49pm BST 

90 min: There will be three additional minutes.

6.49pm BST 

90 min: Chadli releases Defoe, who can't quite take the ball round the 
goalkeeper or tee up Chadli for an open goal. He's not used to passing.

6.47pm BST 

88 min: The referee was so bored he ended the first half early. What's he got 
up his sleeve this time?

6.44pm BST 

85 min: Lloris is forced into his first save, pushing away a bouncing volley 
from Solamatin from 20 yards out. That's a good save, especially from someone 
wearing his dressing gown. "2 questions…" says Jon Proudfoot. "1. How does 
Defoe consistently strike the ball so much harder than other strikers despite 
smaller than most of them? Perhaps there is a sexcrazedphysicist who could 
explain this. 2. If (31 min) Walker can “run at literally supersonic speed”, 
surely he doesn’t need any positional sense, since he can basically recover 
from anywhere on the field? Misuse of the word ‘literally’ seems to be on the 
up – last week I saw a player described as coming off the field “literally 
shattered”, which I can’t imagine a magic sponge would help with."

Actually there's a new meaning. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/shortcuts/2013/aug/14/language-literally-losing-its-meaning>

6.42pm BST 

84 min: You'll be hard pressed to watch a less intense game of football this 
week.

6.41pm BST 

83 min: Defoe tries to wake everyone up by quickly shifting the ball to his 
left foot and wafting a shot over the bar from the edge of the area.

6.39pm BST 

81 min: I wonder how Paul Robinson would have fared on this pitch.

6.37pm BST 

78 min: Tottenham replace Lewis Holtby with Christian Eriksen. Anzhi bring on 
Gadzhibekov for Angbwa.

6.36pm BST 

77 min: Eastern European football expert, Scott Murray, has live coverage of 
the other Europa League matcheshere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/oct/03/europa-league-clockwatch-swansea-wigan-live-mbm>
.

Updated at 6.36pm BST

6.34pm BST 

75 min: Traore, who's proving a handful when he gets the ball, wins a corner 
off Dawson on the left. Nothing happens.

6.32pm BST 

74 min: Chiriches has a regal air about him. He plays with his chest out and 
his head up and he likes the ball. I predict he's going to be very good and 
also give away a couple of horrendous goals by overplaying this season.

6.30pm BST 

72 min: And Gylfi Sigurdsson replaces Erik Lamela.

6.30pm BST 

71 min: Now this is a blow for Tottenham: Michael Dawson is on for the 
luckless Younes Kaboul, who has picked up another injury. This pitch can't have 
helped the Frenchman, who just can't catch a break at the moment. 

6.28pm BST 

69 min: "Re: Lamela, actually that does make sense as the surface area of the 
hand is far greater than the surface area of the forearm (unless you're Popeye, 
of course) so covering his hands would be much more important in terms of 
preventing heat loss," says David Wall. "It also seems as though all of the 
Spurs players are wearing short-sleeves (though some have long-sleeve vests on) 
so perhaps the kit man packed the wrong shirts for the trip. Either that or 
Villas-Boas is just trying to toughen them up or motivate them to get 
Champions' League football next year so that they're less likely to have to 
travel to far Eastern Europe (although I can think of a number of reasons why 
that might not work out for him)."

6.27pm BST 

68 min: Tottenham are busy taking the sting out of the match. Though Solamatin 
is soon scampering into the Tottenham area, trying to turn past Kaboul, failing 
and instead winning the Oscar for a stupendous dive. Credit to him for his 
pained look at the referee.

6.24pm BST 

65 min: Traore accidentally leaps on a prone Kyle Walker and treads on his 
left calf. "Yaroo!" yelps Walker. "My left calf! Oh, it's ok now."

6.23pm BST 

64 min: Alex McLeish says he sees no problem for England getting through their 
final two World Cup qualifiers. 

6.21pm BST 

63 min: Tottenham have fallen asleep in this half; perhaps Anzhi's drummer is 
somehow subliminally transmitting Alex McLeish's commentary around the stadium.

6.20pm BST 

61 min: Ahmedov's low cross from the right is put behind for a corner to 
Anzhi. The ball is cleared as far as Jucilei, whose shot drifts wide. "I often 
do that when cycling on cold mornings!" says Chris Wright. "Your fingers get 
cold way quicker than the rest of your arms!" 

6.18pm BST 

59 min: Tottenham have eased off in the last few minutes and are giving Anzhi 
a bit of hope. From a preposterous angle on the right, Solamatin cuts across a 
fierce banana shot and forces Lloris to push it away. 

6.17pm BST 

58 min: "Is Alex McLeish making a bid for least interesting co-commentator 
ever?" says David Wall. "He's making Mark Lawrenson sound wide awake and 
enthusiastic about what he's watching. I appreciate that with the different 
time zone it's a bit later in Russia (assuming that they're in the stadium) 
than it is here but surely someone could have got him a coffee at half-time. 
Was everyone else booked or is this some ploy by ITV to make Andy Townsend seem 
good by comparison in the later game?"

I'd actually take Michael Owen right now.

6.16pm BST 

57 min: Traore holds off Sandro, which is no mean feat, and charges towards 
the Tottenham defence, which backtracks at a fair old pelt. He finds Solamatin 
on the overlap but his driven cross from the byline is diverted away by Lloris.

6.14pm BST 

56 min: Anzhi bring on Yeschenko for Serderov.

6.13pm BST 

54 min: Lamela is wearing short sleeves and gloves. That makes no sense.

6.10pm BST 

51 min: Chadli goes close to adding his second of the evening. Lamela comes 
alive on the right, winning a tussle with an Anzhi defender before powering up 
the right flank. He cuts inside and finds Chadli, who drops a shoulder and 
bends one not too far wide of the left post from the edge of the area.

6.08pm BST 

50 min: A loose ball falls to Agbwa on the edge of the Spurs area and he drags 
his shot wide, before pretending to be anguished.

6.07pm BST 

48 min: Holtby is down rubbing his ankle after being caught. He might need 
some special spray. That'll solve the problem.

6.05pm BST 

47 min: Anzhi took the kick-off and now Tottenham have the ball.

6.05pm BST 

46 min: We've got some saucy second half action for you right here! Can Anzhi 
muster a shot on target? I, for one, cannot wait to find out. They're bringing 
on Lacina Traore to help them achieve that aim, the big Ivorian, all 6ft 7in of 
him replacing Abdulavov. We swiftly learn that Alex McLeish, who already had 
Nikola Zigic on the books, thought about bringing him to Birmingham a few years 
ago. He's then off to pick up his gong for Least Surprising News Ever. Smile 
for the cameras, Alec! Show everyone your shiny gong!

5.48pm BST 

Half-time: Anzhi 0-2 Tottenham

With seven seconds of the half still to play, the Turkish referee decides he 
has seen enough and blows his whistle. Tottenham have a commanding lead thanks 
to goals from Defoe and Chadli. See you in 15 minutes.

5.47pm BST 

45 min: Holtby play Walker in again. Good lord, Anzhi are dismal down their 
left. He cuts it back to Defoe, whose airkick sees the ball run to Lamela, who 
can't make the most of his good fortune.

5.45pm BST 

44 min: "Good to see Chadli doing well, he's been getting some stick from 
Spurs fans the last few games," says Simon Charles. "Doesn't seem to be all 
that fast or creative." I'm not entirely sure what he does. In the Arsenal 
game, he had Jenkinson's number in the first 10 minutes and then totally 
disappeared.

5.44pm BST 

43 min: "Defoe could score fifty goals this season and still not get in the 
team for the big games because he's clearly not the player AVB wants, but he 
still seems to just enjoy scoring," says Ethan Dean-Richards. "That kind of 
optimism in the face of futility is either admirable or the opposite of 
admirable."

5.43pm BST 

41 min: Anzhi look for an instant response to Tottenham's second goal. 
Solamatin makes a nuisance of himself in the Tottenham area and Ewerton diddles 
his way past a couple of challenges, but sees his shot deflected wide for a 
corner which comes to the square root of eff all.

5.41pm BST 

GOAL! Anzhi Makhachkala 0-2 Tottenham (Chadli, 39 min)

This is breathtakingly simple. Holtby is again at the heart of the move, 
popping a pass through to Walker on the right, with the left of the Anzhi 
defence dozing again. Walker cuts it back to Chadli, who deftly guides his 
right-footed shot low into the right corner.

5.39pm BST 

38 min: Solamatin takes the corner himself and scoops it high to the far post, 
where Lloris confidently claws it away.

5.38pm BST 

37 min: Chiriches steps in to tackle Solamatin, but at the expense of an Anzhi 
corner on the left.

5.37pm BST 

GOAL! Anzhi Makhachkala 0-1 Tottenham (Defoe, 34 min)

Jermain Defoe, king of the Europa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league>. He's only gone and 
scored again in this competition, his seventh in four matches this season. It's 
a clever goal, too. Holtby was given too much time outside the Anzhi area and 
was able to spot Defoe on the right of the area and pick him out with a 
slide-rule pass with his left foot. Defoe took a touch and although there was a 
slight bobble as he drew back his right foot, it didn't matter - he just 
hammered a rising drive past Pomazan, who didn't have a hope of saving that 
one. Emphatic.

Updated at 5.37pm BST

5.34pm BST 

32 min: Tottenham almost do a goal. Holtby cuts in from the right, mistakes 
himself for Gareth Bale and lets rip with a left-footer towards the far corner 
which Pomazan punches away in showy fashion. "I would say the sex-crazed bit 
defines me more than the mathematician part," says my new friend SCM. "I won't 
say why. I will reveal that there is NO last name. Just like Cher, Moses and 
Jo."

5.32pm BST 

31 min:The good thing about this match for Tottenham is that there will only 
be another 872 to go if they want to win the Europa League. "If Kyle Walker 
could pass the ball and had some kind of positional sense he would be a monster 
of a right-back," says Jonas Carlsson. "Now all he does is run at literally 
supersonic speed for 90 minutes. Does that make him a good football player?" I 
suppose it makes him better than people who can't match those speeds.

5.31pm BST 

30 min: Solamatin skedaddles down the left flank and turns a cross into the 
area to Serderov, who somehow bundles his way past Sandro but fouls Lloris as 
he tries to smuggle the ball past the Tottenham goalkeeper. "I can't help but 
feel that 'sat alone in a bar at midnight (Chinese time)' and 
'sexcrazedmathematician' are somehow linked," says Simon McMahon. "A bit like 
my own 'stood alone in a kitchen at tea-time (Scottish time) and 
'overweightdrunkwaster'."

5.29pm BST 

28 min: Lamela gifts possession back to Anzhi and Serderov spins adroitly 
before reversing a pass through to Abdulavov. It's just got too much pace on 
it, though, and the speedy Lloris is quick off his line to smother.

5.28pm BST 

27 min: CHRISTIAN ERIKSEN PLEASE.

5.27pm BST 

26 min: Tagirbekov kablammos a cross miles over the Spurs bar. Blame the 
pitch. "Worried about Alex McLeish - what if he falls asleep?" says Stuart 
Hamilton. "Sounds like it won't be long..." I almost fell asleep in the office 
this afternoon.

Updated at 5.28pm BST

5.26pm BST 

24 min: "It's a suprisingly good conversation starter," says 
sexcrazedmathematician of his/her name. "However Jacob, I still wish to know if 
this game is worth leaving the bar for!" It's not. Now then, back to your name. 
Is there a surname? What defines you more, the sex-crazed bit, or being a maths 
whizz? And how do the two things combine?

5.23pm BST 

22 min: This cabbage patch of a pitch really is terrible. It must be hard to 
play quick football on it. When they get to the final third, it's too slow and 
laborious.

5.21pm BST 

20 min: Just another 70 minutes to get through.

5.20pm BST 

19 min: I've just realised I'm listening to the dulcet tones of Alex McLeish. 
He sounds like he's having a great time.

5.19pm BST 

18 min: There's a man with his drum and he won't stop banging his drum, so at 
least they're doing their best to make Spurs feel as welcome as possible.

5.17pm BST 

15 min: "Sat alone in a bar at midnight (Chinese time)," says 
sexcrazedmathemetician. "I won't bother you with further depressing sentences 
about my social life and get straight to the point; is watching this game 
better than what I am doing now?"

That name - I have to ask, how does it manifest itself in social occasions?

5.15pm BST 

14 min: Sandro is allowed to saunter through the middle by the Anzhi midfield. 
And why not? He'll only send a tame shot straight at Pomazan.

5.14pm BST 

13 min: Defoe has Tottenham's first shot but it dribbles a few yards wide from 
20 yards out. That probably won't be his last shot of the evening, will it.

5.13pm BST 

12 min: Lamela, who has been quiet so far, drops a lovely pass down the right 
channel for Walker to chase. He looks offside but the flag stays down and he 
reaches the ball before it crosses the line for a goal-kick, managing to hoick 
it back into the area where Defoe tries to fasten on to it. No luck.

5.12pm BST 

11 min: After that early Tottenham dominance, Anzhi have got a foothold in 
this game now. There's a lack of quality on show, though. Neither goalkeeper 
has had anything to worry about yet, although Hugo Lloris is being allowed to 
take a free-kick now - he boots a sublime high kick into Anzhi's half. It's 
flicked on and Anzhi get the ball again. Good stuff.

5.11pm BST 

10 min: "Genuinely shocked Spurs sent any players to Moscow whose name we 
knew," says Mark Lomas. "They will inevitably beat Sheriff (great name) home 
and away, as well as Tromso away. You’d back them to beat Anzhi at home as 
well. Seems a bit of a waste of energy. Get Ryan Fredericks out there!" I 
suppose they're just confident they can play West Ham with no goalkeeper on 
Sunday and still not concede.

5.10pm BST 

8 min: More shakey defending from Chiriches, who allows Solomatin to get away 
from him too easily. He recovers well, though, to concede a corner with a fine 
recovery challenge. He had to time that perfectly, as the Anzhi forward was 
clean through and in Tottenham's area. "Not Dagestan - Massachusetts," says J 
Willough. " Holed up with canned beans and bottle water until the US shutdown 
ends... No, really, everything seems normal outside. Glad that Sandro is 
getting some match practice, as I felt that he should have come on against 
Chelsea."

5.08pm BST 

6 min: There are a few random policeman dotted about the place though. Jucilei 
goes on a jaunty adventure down the left flank but he's muscled out of it by 
Walker, who easily guards the ball out for a goal-kick. Then Chiriches takes a 
few inadvisable chances on the edge of his own area, with Anzhi pressing high. 
He's the last man and nearly loses the ball to two players. Probably not the 
best idea on this pitch.

5.06pm BST 

5 min: The pitch is terrible by the way, a real test of the players' control. 
The ball is bobbling about all over the shop. This isn't the Camp Nou. There 
are no fans behind Tottenham's goal.

5.05pm BST 

3 min: Tottenham's confident start continues. They're still hoarding 
possession in midfield. Dembele lopes forward and drifts past a challenge in 
languid style, only to be halted on the edge of the area. From there, Anzhi 
attack, looking to exploit Tottenham's high line with a ball over the top to 
Serderov. He takes it down expertly but the flag goes up for offside, possibly 
incorrectly.

5.03pm BST 

2 min: One minute and 28 seconds in and Anzhi haveb't had a touch yet. Move 
over, Bayern. Move over,"Pep". Kyle Walker is released on the right of the area 
but his cross into the six-yard box is kneed away.

5.02pm BST 

Peep! We are off. Tottenham get the ball rolling in a sparsely populated but 
surprisingly noisy Saturn Stadium. They're kicking from right to left in the 
first half. There's an early touch for Tottenham's new Romanian defender Vlad 
Chiriches. I'm disappointed to hear his name isn't pronounced as "Churches".

4.59pm BST 

Is anyone out there or did you all go to Dagestan by mistake?

4.58pm BST 

Here come the teams. There a few whistles and a few whoops. Anzhi are in a 
lurid green and yellow number, the Norwich of Russia in their own way. 
Tottenham are all in white. From what I can tell, the stadium is far from 
packed. A couple more points and it would have been Tottenham, not Arsenal, 
taking on Napoli this week (actually it wouldn't, the seeding would have been 
different, but the point, whatever the point was, stands. Or falls).

4.57pm BST 

Tottenham got changed in someone's living room. 
<http://instagram.com/p/fAqTVst9uS/>

4.45pm BST 

"Neither of them is quite good enough to be the main striker in a team that 
wins trophies, are they?" says Ethan Dean-Richards. "Defoe scores but is little 
and doesn't hold onto the ball well, and Soldado's scored once from open play 
so far?" 

It doesn't matter though. Strikers are so passé. Soon every team will have 
Phillip Lahm up front. But to answer your question, Soldado is playing well and 
has created a few goals in the league, which is more than Adebayor offers. He's 
been getting in the right positions but hasn't quite been clinical enough yet.

4.43pm BST 

This guy's actually got a traction engine for a foot.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dzh-2eGezFeI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dzh-2eGezFeI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dzh-2eGezFeI&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dzh-2eGezFeI&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dzh-2eGezFeI>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dzh-2eGezFeI&media=>
close 
4.27pm BST 

Here are the teams. Both are employing tactics.

Anzhi Makhachkala: Pomazan; Angbwa, Tagirbekov, Adeleye, Ewerton; Jucilei, 
Ahmedov, Razak, Solomatin; Serderov, Abdulavov.Subs: Kerzhakov, Yeschenko, 
Gadzhibekov, Grigalava, Gatagov, Demidov, Traore. 

Tottenham: Lloris; Walker, Kaboul, Chiriches, Fryers; Sandro, Dembele; Chadli, 
Holtby, Lamela; Defoe.Subs: Friedel, Soldado, Naughton, Dawson, Sigurdsson, 
Eriksen, Kane. 

Referee: Bulent Yildirim (Turkey) 

Updated at 4.28pm BST

4.24pm BST 

It's 20 minutes until ITV's coverage starts so I'm watching a show about 
dangerous drivers. Amazing.

12.55pm BST 

Preamble

And so the Spurs go marching on, all the way to Ramenskoye. No chance for them 
to take in the sights in Dagestan, where the ongoing conflict means that Anzhi 
Makhachakala are playing this "home" match 1,100 miles away from their stadium, 
in a small town on the outskirts of Moscow. The 16,500-capacity Saturn Stadium 
is expected to be a third full. It's Thursday night, it's ITV4, it's the Europa 
League and we are having fun, whether you like it or not.

As it goes, Andre Villas-Boas is a champion, in every sense of the word, of 
the Europa League. Having made his name in this competition by winning it with 
Porto in 2011, Villas-Boas made sure that Tottenham took it seriously last 
season, playing strong sides all the way through to their defeat on penalties 
to Basel in the quarter-final. It might have left his squad a shade knackered 
when it came to pushing for the Europa League's bigger brother but fans like 
winning trophies and they'll enjoy themselves if Tottenham win this trophy this 
season. They haven't won a trophy since the League Cup in 2008. The last time 
they won a European bauble was in 1984, Anderlecht defeated on penalties in the 
final of the Europa League. It's Thursday night, it's ITV4, it's the Europa 
League and Jan Vertonghen and Paulinho haven't travelled but Tottenham mean 
business, nonetheless. This is probably their most difficult group match.

But not as difficult as it might have been. Anzhi's owner, Suleyman Kerimov, 
has decided he doesn't like football that much any more - he likes yachts and 
jetpacks and moon pie instead - and has slashed their budget. No more mega 
oligarch-spending and Chelsea, to a certain extent, have profited from Anzhi's 
belt-tightening measures, signing Samuel Eto'o and Willian (don't mention his 
name to Tottenham. They haven't Christopher Samba and Lassana Diarra has also 
buggered off. "They are radically different from what Anzhi built in these past 
years," Villas-Boas said. And so are Tottenham, with their Christian Eriksens 
and Erik Lamelas and Roberto Soldados. Meanwhile Gareth Bale is already being 
called the new Jonathan Woodgate over at Real Madrid. 

Kick-off: 5pm (BST - but it's raining in London).

Updated at 2.57pm BST
 