
On 19 December 1972, a final sonic boom above the south Pacific signalled the 
end of the Apollo programme, as a tiny space capsule burst back through the 
blue sky. On board were the last three astronauts to visit the moon on Apollo 
17. Riding home with them was the precious negative of a photograph that would 
go on to become the most reproduced image in human history.

Frame number 22725 in magazine NN was a single shot of the whole Earth – later 
branded "the Blue Marble". Snapped 12 days earlier by astronaut-geologist
Harrison Schmitt 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/2007/feb/19/spaceexploration.weekendmagazinespacesection>
 as the spacecraft accelerated away from the Earth, the picture was immediately 
captivating.

Journeying southwards, towards the moon, Schmitt had seen his home planet 
upside down, with the continent of Antarctica sprawling over the top. Below it 
the entire African land mass arced downwards towards the cradle of civilisation 
in the Middle East, with the edge of southern Europe right at the bottom. On a 
rare, relatively cloudless day, so many human histories, causes and stories 
were on show in one view.

Subsequently, this single image was embraced by everyone from NGOs working in 
the developing world to the environmental movements seeking to protect our 
planet. For 40 years it has been used to change minds, behaviours and political 
policies.

Just four years separated Blue Marble from another profound Apollo picture – 
Earthrise, captured by Bill Anders on Christmas Eve 1968. Anders's Apollo 8 
portrait of our vibrant-blue planet, juxtaposed against the barren, brown-grey 
horizon of the moon, drew attention to Earth's apparent fragility.

Such images led one commentator to conclude that "on the way to the moon we'd 
discovered the Earth". They prompted many into thinking differently about our 
home planet. One such person wasStewart Brand 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/2010/oct/03/my-bright-idea-stewart-brand>
, who self-published his ecologically themedWhole Earth Catalogue the same 
year, with a colour image of the entire Earth seen from space on the cover.

Brand's vision was for his new quarterly magazine to create a 
"self-sustaining, critical information service", and he soon nurtured it into a 
forum for the exchange of ideas suggested by the readers themselves. The Whole 
Earth Catalogue ran into the mid-80s, when Brand's concept for a 
"self-sustaining, critical information service" would find a new platform in 
Usenet newsgroups on the internet, and eventually on the world wide web.

American poet Archibald MacLeish, also influenced by these visions of the 
whole Earth from space, penned an essay in theNew York Times, as Apollo 8 was 
heading home in December 1968, pointing out the eternal loveliness of such 
pictures of Earth from space. For MacLeish these images suddenly revealed us 
all as "brothers who know now they are truly brothers… riders on the Earth 
together".

Bill Anders's 1968 Earthrise image also captured the attention of peace 
activist John McConnell, who printed it on flags and handed them out in Central 
Park, New York, the following summer asApollo 11 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/apollo-11-moon-landing> became the first 
mission to land on the moon. His actions would later lead to the founding of
Earth Day <http://www.earthday.org/earth-day-history-movement> – an annual 
celebration of awareness and appreciation of Earth's natural environment that 
is still held today in more than 175 countries. Shortly afterwardsFriends of 
the Earth <http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/friends-of-the-earth> was 
formed by David Brower and other campaigners who felt that if there was one 
thing the Earth needed it was friends.
 The 'blue marble' photo of the Earth taken from Apollo 17. Photograph: 
Harrison Schmitt/Nasa 
Around this time the Lindisfarne Association invited Apollo 9 astronaut Rusty 
Schweickart to their annual conference, to speak to them about his Earth 
orbital flight. Schweickart just stood up and spoke from the heart, recounting 
the story of his space walk, when he had nothing to do but look down on the 
Earth from 160 miles above it for five precious minutes after a camera jammed.

Schweickart's mind-expanding view and the epiphany that it triggered led him 
to vividly appreciate the insanity of humans fighting over borders that were 
invisible to him from up there. "Hundreds of people in the Middle East killing 
each other over some imaginary line that you're not even aware of, that you 
can't see," he recounted. "And from where you see it, the thing is a whole, and 
it's so beautiful," he remembered of his view of Earth. "You wish you could 
take one in each hand, one from each side in the various conflicts, and say, 
'Look. Look at it from this perspective. Look at that. What's important?'"

Schweickart's speech, later turned into an essay entitled "No Frames, No 
Boundaries", was embraced by those at the conference, includingCarl Sagan 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/2012/mar/26/science-writing-cosmos-carl-sagan>
, who borrowed from it to pen his uplifting poemPale Blue Dot 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wupToqz1e2g>, published in his 1994 book of the 
same name.

The sentiment of Schweickart's sermon was eventually taken as the founding 
principle of hisAssociation of Space Explorers <http://www.space-explorers.org/>
. The ASE was established in 1985 and today numbers 375 astronauts from 35 
nations, who work to foster environmental awareness and planetary stewardship.

Forty years after Apollo, the ASE still has its work cut out. Today, thanks to 
the human impact on the environment over the past four decades, many of these 
national borders that the early astronauts struggled to resolve are now clearly 
visible from space.

And the "brothers" that Archibald MacLeish saw in those whole-Earth images are 
still killing each other around the world. The messages of peace and better 
environmental stewardship from those space flights of the 1960s and 70s 
sometimes feel forgotten.

But, thanks to another gift of Apollo, human unity is stronger now than it's 
ever been. The technological boost that the space race provided has changed the 
course of human history in far more profound ways than anyone could have 
predicted.

In 1961, when a new president, just a few months into his term in the White 
House, challenged America to "land a man on the moon and return him safely to 
the Earth", no one in America knew how to make it happen. But that wasn't going 
to stop them rising to Kennedy's dare.

The young minds (the average age of Apollo 11's mission control team was 28) 
who were put to work on Apollo were all recent graduates who had benefited from 
former president Eisenhower's National Defence Education Act, a massive capital 
investment in the US education system, started in the late 50s in response to 
Sputnik.

As progress in human space flight accelerated through the 60s, PhD intake at 
American universities, particularly in the field of physics, increased almost 
threefold. Apollo was making America cleverer.

Nasa <https://www.theguardian.com/science/nasa> knew that its entire moonshot 
challenge would rely on one thing above all others – navigation. So, within 
weeks of Kennedy's speech to Congress, they had appointed some of these bright 
new PhDs at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) to work out how to 
make a soft landing on a moving target hurtling through space a quarter of a 
million miles from Earth.

The prototype inertial guidance system they came up with could not be relied 
on completely and would need to be manually realigned during the flight. To 
assist the astronauts in this task, and to help them control the fly-by-wire 
systems in their new Apollo spacecraft, a small, lightweight computer was 
proposed by MIT. In the early 60s computers still tended to take up entire 
rooms. If the boffins in Boston were going to miniaturise it enough to pack it 
into a modestly sized craft, they'd need some new technology, and they turned 
to an emerging invention called the integrated circuit. Fairchild Semiconductor 
was one of the few companies experimenting with these new micro-electronic 
components at the time; keen to help them perfect the performance of these 
novel miniature circuits, Nasa ordered one million of them.

The agency really needed only a few hundred for its Apollo programme, but, 
aware that they would be betting the lives of their astronauts on them, they 
were keen to make sure the manufacturers could make them has reliable as 
possible.

Such a financial kickstart to a fledgling industry, coupled with the third 
great gift of Apollo – inspiration – would prove to be a powerful driver for 
social change in the decades that followed. In 1969 two employees from 
Fairchild would go on to found a new company called Intel.

Those graduating across the world in the 70s and 80s had watched Apollo's 
engineers dream the impossible and then build it. As an act of human ingenuity, 
Apollo made them giddy, intoxicated on admiration and inspiration.

As William Bainbridge put it, in his book The Spaceflight Revolution, Apollo 
was "a grand attempt to reach beyond the world of mundane life and transcend 
the ordinary limits of human existence through accomplishment of the miraculous 
– a story of engineers who tried to reach the heavens".

And the generation that followed them took this philosophy and ran with it, 
harnessing the new Apollo-driven technologies of micro-electronics to wire up 
the modern world and reinvent society.

Canadian-born space entrepreneur Bob Richards points out: "It was a great 
example of what can happen when human beings come focused on a big, bold goal 
and inspire not only themselves but the generation that comes after them." 
Richards, who describes himself as "an orphan of Apollo", was one of that new 
generation, founding the global movement Students for the Exploration and 
Development of Space, or Seds, in 1980. Caught up in the wonder of it all,Jeff 
Bezos <http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/jeff-bezos> served for a year as 
president of this student group. He would eventually go on to change the world 
in his own Apollo-inspired way, creating the giant e-commerce website Amazon.

Bezos is not alone. Many hi-tech entrepreneurs who have built the new tools of 
the internet and the computing and communications infrastructure that underpins 
it also cite Apollo as their inspiration.

Prof Sir Martin Sweeting founded the world-renowned small satellite company 
SSTL, which revolutionised the industry. "Apollo started me on this whole 
pathway of getting involved in space," says Sweeting. "The idea of being able 
to participate in something as exciting as a lunar landing, it stimulated an 
ambition, the dream of building my own satellite with my friends." The idea of 
a private individual launching a satellite was considered pretty crazy at the 
time, he points out. "After building the first one, I had a lot of advice to go 
out and get a proper job. I'm sure that without Apollo I would have followed a 
more conventional career."

In the hands of people like Sweeting, the new micro-electronics technologies 
made affordable by Apollo led to the pocket calculators of the 70s, the simple 
home computers and the burgeoning internet of the 80s, the emerging world wide 
web of the 90s, and the video streams and social networks of the 21st century.

Former Nasa flight director Glynn Lunney witnessed this technological 
trickle-down straight from Apollo to the rest of us. "Apollo really did drive 
our industry. We were asking people to do things that were probably 10 or 20 
years faster than they otherwise would have done. And they knew it. They 
stepped up to it and succeeded. Today's cell phones, wireless equipment, iPads 
and so on are a result of the fact that the country did this hi-tech thing and 
created this large portfolio of available technologies."

Today's population, over half of whom weren't born when Apollo 17 returned 
from the moon, use these inventions to connect and communicate with each other 
freely and without a thought for geographical and cultural differences.

Thanks to this final legacy of the lunar landings, the Earth of today has at 
last become that borderless world the astronauts looked back on during those 
heady days of the space race. The gifts of Apollo continue to ripple down the 
decades, and they still have the power to unite and inspire us.

Dr Christopher Riley is visiting professor of science and media at the 
University of Lincoln. His documentary, For All Mankind, airs on BBC Radio 4 at 
9pm on 19 December, and his biopic of Neil Armstrong is on BBC2 television at 
9pm on 30 December
 