
Travelling to the moon, Mars or beyond could dramatically increase an 
astronaut’s risk of dying from cardiovascular disease, the first research into 
the long-term health of Apollo spacemen has revealed.

Nasa’s Apollo programme sent nine manned missions and 24 astronauts beyond low 
Earth orbit during the 1960s and early 1970s, includingApollo 11 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/apollo-11-moon-landing>, which delivered 
Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin to the moon. But it seems such missions might 
have taken their toll.

A team of researchers looking into the fate of the Apollo astronauts has 
discovered that their rate of death from cardiovascular disease is four to five 
times higher than that seen for astronauts of the same era who only flew in low 
Earth orbits, or who never flew on an orbital mission at all.

Nasa astronaut Scott Kelly to break US record for longest space flight
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/oct/28/nasa-astronaut-scott-kelly-to-break-us-record-for-longest-space-flight>
That, the researchers say, suggests that venturing beyond the Earth’s 
protective magnetic field could cause long-lasting damage to the cardiovascular 
system, potentially as a result of exposure to deep space radiation.

The findings come as a number of space agencies and commercial enterprises are 
looking to venture to the moon and beyond, withNasa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/nasa> planning to send humans to Mars in 
the 2030s.

“With all of these plans for going into deep space we have only had this one 
really small group [of Apollo astronauts] that has actually done it,” said 
Michael Delp, first author of the study from Florida State University. 
“Previous to this study nobody had ever looked at their long-term health 
consequences - really pulling out the Apollo astronauts out of the group of 
other astronauts.”

Jeff Hoffmann, former Nasa astronaut and director of the Man Vehicle Lab at 
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, agreed, adding that when it comes to 
travelling to the moon and beyond, the findings suggest speed might be of the 
essence.

“We can’t shield against high energy cosmic radiation, not with our current 
mass-limiting capabilities, but it does re-emphasise the importance of getting 
to Mars as quickly as possible,” he said. “The less time you spend in deep 
space the less exposed you are getting to the radiation.”

Writing in the journal Scientific Reports 
<http://nature.com/articles/doi:10.1038/srep29901>, a team of researchers 
including scientists from Johnson Space Centre and Nasa Ames Research Centre 
describe how they compared the causes of death for the seven Apollo astronauts 
who had died up to that point with those of 35 low Earth orbit astronauts from 
the same era, and 35 non-flight astronauts.

While the sample size is tiny - a clear limitation to the study - the results 
reveal that 45% of the Apollo astronauts died from cardiovascular disease, 
compared to only 9% of non-flight astronauts and 11% of low Earth orbit 
astronauts.

While no difference was seen when the rate was compared to that of the general 
population, Delp believes that is most likely because astronauts are very fit 
and healthy, whereas the members of the public suffer from a wide range of 
conditions that could increase their risk of cardiovascular disease.

“Part of the reason why this cardiovascular effect has never been uncovered is 
because you are always looking and comparing [astronauts with] a general 
population,” he said.

To probe whether deep space radiation might be behind their findings, the 
researchers exposed mice to conditions that simulated weightlessness as well as 
the radiation found in deep space.

With previous studies showing that both radiation and weightlessness can, in 
the short term, damage the blood vessels of the mice, the researchers waited 
6-7 months before investigating the effects - a period equivalent to around 20 
human years.

The results revealed that while weightlessness did not cause any lasting 
cardiovascular harm, the radiation did. Mice exposed to radiation were found to 
have sustained damage to the cells lining their blood vessels - damage that 
could increase the risk of cardiovascular disease.

The fact that, by contrast, weightlessness caused no lasting damage makes 
sense, says Delp. “That corresponds with what we saw with the low Earth orbit 
[astronauts] - they may have problems immediately when they come back, which we 
know they do, but they recover.”

Richard Hughson, of the University of Waterloo in Canada, who has studied the 
effect space travel on the cardiovascular systems of astronauts, described the 
new research as “fascinating”.

While Hughson notes that the sample size for the Apollo lunar astronauts is 
very small, he believes the study puts forward a plausible suggestion for why 
lunar astronauts appear to be succumbing cardiovascular disease at a higher 
than expected rate.

Isolation and hallucinations: the mental health challenges faced by astronauts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/oct/05/hallucinations-isolation-astronauts-mental-health-space-missions>
“I think it is really important that Nasa and the European Space Agency, the 
CanadianSpace <https://www.theguardian.com/science/space> Agency, and so on, 
recognise now that the cardiovascular system should be an important focus, one 
they look at, when they send astronauts beyond low Earth orbit,” he said.

With only an ultrasound device and a blood-pressure test needed to check for 
damage to the lining of the blood vessels, Hughson believes astronauts could 
monitor the effects of the radiation during their time in deep space, while the 
results also flag the importance of checking up on the cardiovascular health of 
astronauts once their have returned to Earth. “We just did this within the last 
month onTim Peake when he came back from space 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jun/18/tim-peake-health-six-months-in-space>
,” he said.

Hoffman agrees that such check-ups are important. “I go down to Nasa every 
year for a thorough physical examination and if they know that cardiovascular 
fitness is important, that is something they can monitor you for every year and 
hopefully reduce the risk of a premature death from heart problems,” he said.

Delp admits that a deeper look into the medical history of the Apollo 
astronauts is needed to make sure that the findings are not the result of other 
factors - including their somewhat eclectic post-mission lifestyles. But, he 
adds, the new research also raises further conundrums, from the radiation doses 
needed to damage the cardiovascular system to whether the effects differ 
between the sexes and whether the problem can be lessened.

“All of these are future questions that really I think are important to 
address before we start sending humans into deep space again,” he said.
 