
It's time to come clean: climate change is a hoax. And the moon landings were 
faked, 9/11 was an inside job, and the CIA is hiding the identity of the gunman 
on the grassy knoll.

It might seem odd to lump climate change – a scientific theory supported by 
thousands of peer-reviewed papers and hundreds of independent lines of evidence 
– with conspiracy theories like these. Butnew research 
<http://websites.psychology.uwa.edu.au/labs/cogscience/documents/LskyetalPsychScienceinPressClimateConspiracy.pdf>
 to be published in a forthcoming issue ofPsychological Science 
<http://www.psychologicalscience.org/index.php/publications#ps> has found a 
link between the endorsement of conspiracy theories and the rejection of 
established facts about climate science.

In a survey of more than 1,000 readers of websites related to climate change, 
people who agreed with free market economic principles and endorsed conspiracy 
theories were more likely to dispute that human-caused climate change was a 
reality.

Stephen Lewandowsky and his colleagues at the University of Western Australia 
posted a link to an online questionnaire on eight climate-related blogs with a 
diverse readership, in order to capture people's views about economics, science 
and conspiracy theories. Five "sceptic" (or "sceptic-leaning") blogs were also 
approached but declined to post the link – interesting in and of itself, given 
the frequent claim that sceptical views are excluded from mainstream debates.

What they found was remarkable. People who endorsed conspiracy theories such 
as "9/11 was an inside job" and "the moon landings were faked", were also more 
likely to reject established scientific facts about climate change, such as "I 
believe that the burning of fossil fuels on the scale observed over the last 50 
years has increased atmospheric temperatures to an appreciable degree."

Clearly, a self-selecting sample of blog users is not representative of the 
wider population. But this is precisely why the researchers targeted this 
group: in the cut-throat world of climate change scepticism, this is 
undoubtedly where the action is.

Lewandowsky's research poses difficult questions for the climate sceptic 
community. Although they are not a homogenous group, they tend to coalesce 
around common themes relating to the reality and seriousness of climate change. 
The findings suggest that at least some proportion of the people who consider 
themselves sceptical about climate change are also willing to entertain 
conspiracy theories that are not taken seriously in mainstream society.

All scientists are sceptics: it is a healthy, everyday part of the process of 
systematically weighing up evidence and reaching a considered conclusion. But 
if vocal online opponents of climate change science also do not accept basic 
historical truths about society, can their position really be described as 
"scepticism"?

The findings provide yet more evidence that a rejection of climate science has 
more to with ideological views than scientific literacy, bolstering the 
well-supported finding that climate change scepticism is more likely to be 
found on the right, than on the left of politics. But they go a step further, 
adding an important layer of detail to the crude characterisation of climate 
change scepticism as a "conservative" issue.

The link between endorsing conspiracy theories and rejecting climate science 
facts suggests that it is the libertarian instinct to stick two fingers up at 
the mainstream – whatever the issue – that is important. Because a radical 
libertarian streak is the hallmark of free-market economics, and because free 
market views are popular on the political right, this is where climate change 
scepticism is most likely to be found.

The findings also suggest that talk of a 'consensus' on climate change is a 
double-edged sword: on the one hand, the weight of scientific evidence showing 
that humans are changing the climate is a powerful argument for taking action 
to prevent its dangerous effects. But the very notion of consensual agreement 
is also a red flag to libertarians, who distrust statements about consensus on 
principle.

All of this suggests that the battle to overcome climate scepticism – if that 
is even a useful way of thinking about it –will not be won by simply restating 
the scientific facts 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/2012/mar/30/belief-climate-change-scepticism>
. The problem is that "the facts" are not "the facts" for a small proportion of 
people – and the noise made by this minority group dilutes the otherwise clear 
signal about climate change received by the wider population.

Climate change <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-change> is a 
scientific entity, but one given meaning through the social, political and 
economic lenses we view it through. The challenge of engaging with climate 
change sceptics is finding the lens that better fits their ideological views – 
not just shouting the science more loudly.
 