
Over about 10 years I've directed about 10 plays – each time thinking halfway 
through: "I have no idea what I'm doing." And then, when the show opened and 
somehow found its audience, thinking: "What a joy this being a director lark 
is: what shall I do next?" Until, a couple of years ago when I did a show 
chosen with such terrible lack of self-knowledge that I really couldn't find my 
way through it. I came badly unstuck.

Fortunately, having fallen off one bicycle, I had another I could climb on. 
There's great joy in running a theatre and producing shows for other people. 
But in my heart I know that if you run a theatre, especially one that focuses 
so much care and resource on directors, you have to direct. You have to take 
that scary jump off the cliff into the dark.

So: the other bicycle. One day I found myself thinking hard about August Wilson
 <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/augustwilson> and, in particular, about his 
great play Joe Turner's Come and Gone. I hadn't read it for some years, but 
there it is, bouncing about in my consciousness, and it hadn't gone away.

Casting was easy: it's such a rich, provocative and strange piece that 
everyone I offered a part to said yes. Wilson imagined it for a conventional 
proscenium stage. It took some thought to mould it to the curious architecture 
of theYoung Vic <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/young-vic> in the way that 
we always like to do here. But I've found in the past that when you take a play 
for which its author imagined a detailed naturalistic set ("A door back left 
leads into a gloomy hallway, the dark wooden staircase at the end of which can 
just be seen … ") and do it in the round or the thrust with as little furniture 
and as few doorways – as little materiality as you can get away with – the deep 
musical structure at the heart of the piece can be released.

Talking of music, Wilson loved jazz. It was one of his three great 
inspirations, the other two being Borges and the paintings of Romare Bearden. 
His play is a series of riffs, some of them pages long, and seemingly 
improvised duos and trios and quartets. We worked hard on this jazz thing in 
rehearsals, going back and back over each section day after day aiming to sound 
each word, every note, thinking about the poetic density of the writing and the 
way in which you feel inside the character's head in the very moment she or he 
does. But when we were thinking about the depth at which the relationships in 
the play are conceived, it also seemed like Chekhov.

And then, some weeks in, a discovery. If you play Wilson like Shakespeare and 
like Chekhov at the same time, something surprising happens. If you go back and 
back over the speeches, putting as much pressure as you can on each word, each 
phrase, a different level of meaning leaps out. "Oh she means this! Oh he means 
that!" we would shout, delighted and amazed. "Oh, that's what's going on! She's 
thinking that about him! Good God, I hadn't noticed that." And it becomes clear 
that the scene we're working on is even better than we thought it was; somehow 
all the important, discordant bits of the universe have fallen into place.

Working with great actors, you don't need to be able to explain why you feel 
"instinctively" something's not sharp enough or blunt enough or deep enough, or 
why you're sure there's more resonance as yet unfound, or that something's not 
being properly felt or experienced. Of course, if you can say why, all the 
better. But so often, as we investigated August Wilson's extraordinary 
compendium of human experience, I'd say: "Ooh, I think that's not … mmm … I 
dunno … it's … can't it be … know what I mean?" And the actor would stare for a 
moment and then go: "OK, what if I … " and do something new. Then discovery 
follows discovery, and we found ourselves beaming again.

August Wilson wrote 10 plays in his Pittsburgh cycle. They're all very good. 
For me, seven are wonderful and, of those seven, three are near-genius. Joe 
Turner's Come and Gone seems to me one of the great three. I won't say which I 
think the other two great ones are – I fancy that there are a few more turns on 
my bicycle left in me yet.
 