
David Warner played a starring role as Australia recorded the World Cup’s 
highest ever total 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/live/2015/mar/04/australia-v-afghanistan-cricket-world-cup-live>
 – en route to victory by the widest margin in the tournament’s history – 
against Afghanistan in Perth.

The co-hosts’ 417 for six contained three outstanding innings – Warner, with 
178, pacing himself and his team before upping the ante in a mammoth 
second-wicket stand of 260 with Steve Smith, who made 95, after the early 
wicket of Aaron Finch, and then Glenn Maxwell reaching 88.Mitchell Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mitchell-johnson>, with four for 22, eased 
them to a landslide 275-run win in pool A as Afghanistan were bowled out for 
142 in 37.3 overs.

“I thought the boys played really well to make 400; that’s very satisfying and 
really pleasing after the way we batted against New Zealand, and obviously we 
had some outstanding individual performances,” said the Australia captain,
Michael Clarke <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/michael-clarke>. “Davey 
Warner, obviously he led the way with that and Steve Smith played well around 
that; Glenn Maxwell, too. I thought they played really well to get that record.”

With the ball Afghanistan had made an early breakthrough after winning the 
toss – Finch edging Dawlat Zadran to slip in the third over – and Australia 
were content to bide their time to an extent against the new ball. Warner, 
however, soon became more expansive, passing his century in 92 balls and 
finishing with 19 fours and five sixes from 133 balls in his ODI career best 
before he skied a slower ball well which was well held by the Afghan captain, 
Mohammad Nabi, off Shapoor Zadran.

Smith operated at a run a ball and seemed set for a century, too, only to 
crunch Shapoor straight to mid-off. The stage was nonetheless set for Maxwell, 
with Clarke dropping down the order to make way for the six-hitters. Maxwell 
took his cue for a exhibition of his power and invention. It brought him six 
fours and seven sixes from only 39 balls – and even though he holed out at 
extra-cover before he could break Kevin O’Brien’s record for the fastest World 
Cup century, Australia had enough in the tank to surge past 400 and beyondthe 
two totals made by South Africa in the past week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/south-africa-cricket-team> as well as 
India’s previous all-time tournament high of 413 for five against Bermuda in 
Trinidad eight years ago.

Afghanistan’s mission improbable began with a degree of relative promise but 
wickets soon began to fall. Johnson was responsible for two of the first three. 
The teenage opener Usman Ghani clipped a leg-stump half-volley to straight 
midwicket in the first over from Australia’s first-change and Asghar 
Stanikzai’s attempt to counterattack resulted in a scythe down to third man, 
where Smith ran back and avoided a collision with Mitchell Marsh to take a 
steepling catch.

Javed Ahmadi had already fenced a catch to Clarke at second slip off Josh 
Hazlewood – and despite a handy fourth-wicket stand between Nawroz Mangal and 
Samiullah Shenwari, until the Australia captain nabbed the latter’s wicket in a 
rare spell of his left-arm spin. Then a brilliant slip catch by Finch gave 
Johnson his third, it was merely a case of whether Australia would achieve a 
record margin of World Cup victory and in their own ODI history. They duly did 
both when Hamid Hassan was last out, mispulling Johnson, and have moved up to 
third in the table to stay on course for the quarter-finals.
 