
Uganda <https://www.theguardian.com/world/uganda> has long basked in the 
praise of the international community over its swift and progressive response 
to its crippling HIV/Aids epidemic.

Back in the 1980s more than 30% of Ugandans had contracted the HIV virus. Now 
the national prevalence rate is around 6.4%, an achievement attributed largely 
to the country's rapid acknowledgment of the crisis it faced, the roll out of 
national prevention and treatment messages and its embrace of open discourse 
around causes and solutions to the virus.

But on World Aids Day <http://www.worldaidsday.org/>, Uganda is once again 
facing a rise in new HIV transmissions.

Around 130,000 Ugandans are infected with the HIV virus every year, according 
to the Uganda Aids Commission. The government's new national HIV/Aids strategic 
plan bleakly predicts that the number of HIV positive Ugandans will rise from 
1.1 million in 2006 to 1.3 million in 2012.

There have also been warnings of the impact rising numbers of HIV patients 
will have on Uganda's already fragile economy. The Ministry of Finance says 
that, increasing at its current rate, the wave of new HIV cases could see 
Uganda's annual gross domestic product (GDP) fall by 1.2% in the next five 
years.

The implications on Ugandan's health system would also be grim. According to 
officials at Uganda's Ministry ofHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/katine/health>, 70% of medical admissions are 
HIV-related. Yet Uganda's chronic shortage of trained healthcare workers – the 
health ministry says the country is running at 60% capacity - means that there 
are already insufficient numbers of qualified professionals to distribute and 
administer treatment plans. While 156,000 people are receiving antiretroviral 
treatment, more than double that number are still not on HIV medication.

Last week, Dr Kihumuro Apuuli, director of the Uganda Aids Commission, said 
the country was facing a huge challenge to stem the tide of new infections.

"Over the last four years, a mistake was made to shift focus to treatment, 
rather than prevention," he said at a press conference in Kampala. "A big chunk 
of money is allocated to drugs."

The profile of HIV and Aids in Uganda is also changing. The most recent 
figures suggest that up to 65% of new HIV infections are now transmitted within 
marriage.

The number of "discordant couples", where one partner is HIV positive and the 
other negative, is also rising. This raises the need for a whole new approach 
to prevention and treatment, which up until now has focused largely on the ABC 
approach of promoting abstinence first and then fidelity and contraception.

"Discordant couples raise real challenges because you need to promote better 
testing, use of condoms within marriage and also it means there is a huge need 
for couples to go into counselling together, which is expensive," says Dr 
Elizabeth Namagala, senior medical officer for HIV care and treatment at 
Uganda's health ministry.

"But it also raises great opportunities, because we can move the debate on 
about what HIV is and how to prevent it becoming transmitted through the 
generations."

The African Medical and Research Foundation (Amref), which is working with the 
Guardian to improve the lives of residents living in the rural sub-county of
Katine <https://www.theguardian.com/katine>, in north-east Uganda, is trialling 
a new approach to HIV/Aids work in central Uganda, which it hopes will be 
extended to the sub-county.

Instead of concentrating on "vertical disease management", which looks at the 
treatment of HIV/Aids, tuberculosis and malaria – Uganda's three biggest 
killers – separately, it will work on an integrated approach that concentrates 
on building community capacity to respond to preventable diseases.

Amref's logic is that people don't think in terms of individual diseases, but 
in terms of their struggles with wider health problems.

In Katine this will mean strengthening the work of village health teams to 
respond to HIV/Aids, TB and malaria in their communities. This could mean 
training VHTs to detect, refer and prevent the three diseases and refurbishing 
local labs to improve diagnostics at local level.

"Here in Uganda we are not yet winning the war against HIV," says Susan 
Wandera, deputy director of Amref in Uganda. "But I think we have the tools at 
our disposal to do so. We have already proved that we have the capability to 
respond to HIV and Aids. The government's new HIV strategy has a new focus on 
prevention and if we can bolster this by promoting an integrated approach to 
tacking all diseases to community level instead of seeing HIV in isolation, I 
believe we can win our battle."
 