
Barry Geraghty <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/barry-geraghty>, the jockey 
who has the highest-paid contract in British and Irish jumps, was hit by a 
30-day ban by the Limerick stewards on Sunday for what they believed was an 
ill-judged ride on Noble Emperor, who had finished strongly to be runner-up in 
a two-mile hurdle race.

The stewards also banned the horse from running for 60 days and fined Tony 
Martin, his trainer, €3,000 (£2,400). Geraghty will be able to ride at theGrand 
National <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/grandnational> meeting later this 
week, but his suspension – due to begin on 17 April – means he will miss the 
Punchestown Festival. It is one of the stiffest bans of its type ever imposed 
on a top jumps rider.

Geraghty declined to comment later but admitted to being shocked by the 
stewards’ decision. He is retained as first jockey toJP McManus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/mar/10/jp-mcmanus-interview-cheltenham-festival>
, one of the biggest jumps owners in Europe. Noble Emperor was running in the 
McManus colours.

After the seven-runner Limerick contest, all the jockeys – except one, Barry 
Cash, who rode the winner, Velocity Boy – were called in by the officials to 
explain why they allowed the eventual victor so much of a lead, one that proved 
unassailable.

Geraghty was singled out for a ban, however. Noble Emperor, the 7-4 favourite, 
had run on strongly in the closing stages but was still beaten 11 lengths. The 
race was run in heavy ground and Geraghty’s mount was found later to have lost 
his left-fore shoe. But, acting under Rule 212, which governs running and 
riding, the stewards said the horse had been checked and found to be post-race 
normal.

Michael O’Donoghue, a Limerick track steward, told the Racing Post: “Noble 
Emperor was done under Rule 212, not allowing a horse to run on his merits.”

The report from the stewards said Martin had stated his instructions were, “to 
get some cover and try switch him off, bearing in mind that the horse can be 
keen”. He added that the horse “has disappointed in the past but should have 
enjoyed today’s heavy conditions over two miles, despite having form over 
further”. He expressed satisfaction with the ride and that the lost shoe had no 
bearing on the run on the day’s ground.

It added Geraghty had confirmed the instructions adding that the horse “needs 
to be covered up and delivered late” and that the winner “quickly established a 
good lead at the start and circumstance meant that he was unable to chase the 
leader until the straight as he was riding strictly to instructions”.

Geraghty, who is likely to appeal, was formerly attached to Nicky Henderson’s 
stable but switched to the McManus operation after Tony McCoy retired from 
riding a year ago. One of Geraghty’s finest achievements was winning the 2003 
Grand National on Monty’s Pass. The 36-year-old has yet to decide which horse 
he will ride in Saturday’s big race atAintree 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/aintree>.

McManus’s racing manager, Frank Berry, said on Sunday the owner was keeping 
five horses in the Aintree entries – Cause Of Causes, Gallant Oscar, Gilgamboa, 
Pendra and Shutthefrontdoor – while another entry, Carlingford Lough, would not 
run. “We’ll confirm five,” Berry said. “But I’ve had no indication yet from 
Barry as to which way he’s leaning.”

Barry Geraghty will be joining JP McManus, confirms Nicky Henderson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/22/barry-geraghty-jp-mcmanus-nicky-henderson>
At the Curragh on Sunday US Army Ranger made a winning debut for Aidan O’Brien 
in the Irish Stallion Farms Maiden. The colt immediately became the focus of 
speculation that he could be one of O’Brien’s main contenders for the Derby at 
Epsom on 4 June.

One leading bookmaker cut the colt’s Derby odds from 20-1 to 12-1. He had been 
backed for the Classic during last week, but he was not even favourite for 
Sunday’s 10-furlong contest – that honour had gone to Dermot Weld’s Aasheq 
(11-10).

It looked like favourite-backers would collect as Pat Smullen cruised to the 
front with two furlongs to run, but Ryan Moore was just beginning to ask a 
question of O’Brien’s well-bred newcomer.

Despite the testing ground US Army Ranger (15-8) picked up impressively to win 
going away by three-quarters of a length, in a race O’Brien’s Ruler Of The 
World won before going on to triumph at Epsom three years ago.

US Army Ranger, a son of Galileo, is set to be seen in a Classic trial next. 
O’Brien said: “He was very nice last year but he had a small problem and didn’t 
run. He has only done half-speed work for Donnacha [O’Brien], but he has worked 
well with horses that have Group-race form.

“I told Ryan to drop him in and educate him. He has a great pedigree but has 
only won a maiden. That was the most serious bit he has ever been asked to do. 
He could go for something like the Derrinstown or to Chester for education. 
He’ll only have one more run if he goes to the Derby.”
 