
Unlike in Britain, where you become head of state through accident of birth, 
it is the people ofIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> who will 
elect their president on 27 October.

One of the seven candidates to become the Irish Republic's ninth president 
summed up the nature of the office. Although, like the US, the Irish elect 
their head of state, the latter has none of the executive power of the occupant 
of the White House.

In his first television interview last night, Michael D Higgins, the Irish 
Labour candidate, reminded his interrogator and the viewers that "you are not 
speaking for yourself, but for Ireland".

Moreover, Higgins pointed out that neither is the president "the organised 
opponent or the handmaiden of government". Instead, he or she must be above 
party politics and become a unifying figure for the nation.

The 70-year-old came across well as the first presidential would-be on RTE 
television. He was humble yet also able, with authority, to remind people about 
his long record as a pacifist and human rights campaigner at home and abroad.

His point about the essence of the Irish presidency poses a problem for three 
of the seven candidates who received their nominations in time for Wednesday's 
noon deadline.

Firstly, let us take the candidacy of Martin McGuinness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/martin-mcguinness>. Given his background 
as an IRA commander and one time chief of staff for the Provisionals, his entry 
into the race has proven to be a divisive one – arguably the most of all the 
runners and riders.

Throughout the four-week campaign, he will be haunted by his IRA past and in 
particular his claim that he left the Provisionals as far back as 1974. This 
assertion has been a hostage to fortune given that a retired head of the Garda 
Síochána said this weekend he believed McGuinness remained on the IRA's army 
council right up to the peace process of the 1990s.

The disjunction between the Sinn Féin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein> MP's claim and the testimony 
of a servant of the state like ex-Garda commissioner Pat Byrne puts a question 
mark over McGuinness's honesty.

In his favour, McGuinness has the crowning achievement of the peace process 
and the establishment of power-sharing in Northern Ireland in his legacy. He is 
an experienced media performer who star has been rising since the IRA ceasefire 
of 1994.

He insists he put his life on the line to turn the republican movement away 
from violence and establish that ceasefire. Yet the fact remains that, prior to 
the peace process, thousands died at the IRA's hands and thousands more were 
injured.

McGuinness's supporters will highlight the recent backing he received from a 
Derry based Presbyterian minister. The Rev Latimer, however, is as 
representative of the Northern Ireland Protestant and unionist community as 
those left Israeli academics who are pro-Palestinian and even anti-Zionist but 
have virtually no popular or electoral support in Israel.

The majority of unionists, therefore, will not welcome a President McGuinness 
in the way they tentatively accepted Mary McAleese, the outgoing head of state.

There will be no Orangemen beating Lambeg Drums in Áras an Uchataráin (the 
Irish version of the White House) for President McGuinness's entertainment in 
the way they did for McAleese.

One of McGuinness's rivals is a fellow citizen of his native Derry city, the 
former Eurovision song contest winner Rosemary "Dana" Scallon.

While her background is very different from the former IRA leader, Dana also 
has past baggage that, many will argue, makes her a divisive figure.

The singer stood for the Irish presidency 14 years ago on a traditional, 
conservative Catholic ticket. It was no accident that she received the backing 
of rural west of Ireland and border county councils where these values still 
pertain.

But it is in the urban conurbations, particularly Greater Dublin, that 
elections, presidential or Dail, are won. In this section of the 21st century 
republic's population, church attendances are falling, and respect for the 
Catholic hierarchy is at an historic low due to the clerical child abuse 
scandals and deepening liberal attitudes over sexual and moral issues. Will 
they want to elect a president whose nickname among fellow MEPs in Strasbourg 
was "the Ayatollah?"

Finally, and on the opposite political spectrum to both Dana and McGuiness, 
there is the openly gay candidate, Dublin senator and expert on James Joyce, 
David Norris.

Last night, on the RTE Prime Time programme, he came under pressure over a 
scandal that almost wrecked his chance to run in the presidential campaign. 
Norris pulled out of the race in August after it emerged that he had written to 
the Israeli authorities pleading for clemency over a lover who had been 
convicted of statutory rape.

Now it appears there may have been other letters he wrote to the Israeli legal 
system intervening in the case of his ex-lover, which he refuses to publish. 
This issue will continue to cast a shadow over his campaign, and the fear among 
some of his supporters is that there may be further controversies along the 
road that could seriously tarnish his credibility.

Despite all the slings and arrows fired at Norris over the summer, he 
continued to be the most popular candidate in all the opinion polls.

The big party machines insist the polls are wrong and that, when the media 
focus sharpens on Norris, the surge he has enjoyed will be as transient and 
temporary as the Indian summer we are currently enjoying on both sides of the 
Irish Sea.

Meanwhile, only one thing is certain – at the very least, this is turning out 
to be the most fascinating presidential contest since the liberal candidate 
Mary Robinson won in 1990, her victory marking a turning point in the country's 
evolution from mono-Catholic state to modern European republic.
 