
BBC4 has already delighted British fans of Mad Men by bringing forward the new 
seriesby six months, to September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/aug/18/mad-men-series-four-bbc4>. Now 
viewers partial to slow-burning US dramas can look forward to Rubicon, the 
latest offering from Mad Men broadcaster AMC to be acquired by the channel.

Mad Men <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mad-men-tv-series>, the 
stylish drama set in the world of 1960s New York advertising, is nominated for 
17 awards, more than any other drama, at this Sunday's 2010 Emmy awards. It has 
changed the fortunes of AMC (American Movie Classic), a cable channel once 
known for old movie repeats but now being likened to a mini HBO, the station 
behind The Sopranos and The Wire.

Post-9/11 conspiracy drama Rubicon is slow-paced, although that did not stop 
the debut episode in the US attracting 2.5 million viewers, the biggest 
audience for a new show in the network's history.

Its hero, a data analyst, seems to spend entire episodes lurking in dimly lit 
Washington libraries staring at crosswords waiting for hidden codes to 
materialise in front of his eyes. Code cracker Will Travers, played by James 
Badge Dale, is embroiled in a conspiracy that saw his boss dispatched in a 
train crash. Rubicon also weaves in Miranda Richardson as the widow of a tycoon 
whose husband changed his will to put her in charge of his companies and then 
killed himself.

The initial promise was that the series could stand shoulder to shoulder with 
such 1970s conspiracy classics as Three Days of the Condor and The Parallax 
View. Critics have said Rubicon is not as sexy as Mad Men, nor as brutal as 
AMC's second original drama, Breaking Bad, the lauded jet-black saga of a 
chemistry teacher with cancer turned crystal meth manufacturer. But it has 
confounded some US critics with its cast of shabby government underlings and 
its disinclination to plant a clear signpost as to where the story might be 
headed.

Its audience in the US has dipped, but both Mad Men and Breaking Bad started 
slowly and went on to build a loyal following.

After decades of anonymity, AMC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/amc> saw 
the 2000s out as one of the prime purveyors of signature cable drama. For a 
long time, HBO had that market sewn up. Its slogan was: "It's not TV, it's 
HBO." The very name was a mark of quality. Something that differentiated it 
from terrestrial networks such as NBC and Fox, which still struggled to attract 
the widest possible audiences. But then perennial second-place cable channel, 
Showtime hit on its mums-with-problems formula (Weeds, Nurse Jackie, United 
States Of Tara).

FX, another undistinguished movie channel, took a chance with The Shield and 
quickly became the destination for anti-hero projects (Sons Of Anarchy, 
Justified, Damages).

And now AMC, producer of two prodigious series with nothing in common except 
their leisurely pace, has carved out its niche as purveyor of slow but 
endlessly involving dramas. Despite the show's Rubicon's mixed reception, AMC 
remains committed to commissioning original dramas. October sees the debut of 
The Walking Dead, a zombie thriller created by Frank Darabont and starring 
Andrew Lincoln. And, because its AMC, these zombies move slowly. Very, very 
slowly.
 