
Older victims of the recession struggling to get back into work would no doubt 
scoff at the suggestion that age discrimination poses any problems for people 
in their 20s. But it is being argued that there is one sphere in which turning 
25 puts you at a serious disadvantage. "Educationally, ageism begins at 25," 
says Professor John Field, co-director of the centre for research in lifelong 
learning at Stirling University.

Despite the increasing recognition that adult learning improves people's 
general wellbeing and mental state, for too many adults the choice of education 
is largely restricted to narrow skills-for-work programmes, he says. Policies 
such as the New Deal prioritise the under-25s, he adds, and most public 
education spending is focused on the same group. Alistair Darling's budget 
pledge of training or a job for all applied only to those under 25.Further 
education <https://www.theguardian.com/education/further-education> funding 
prioritises lower-level skills and qualifications, which is of scant value to 
the over-25s. "After 25, you increasingly have to find your own way," Field 
says.

Sense of wellbeing

Interest among policymakers and academics about people's sense of wellbeing in 
affluent societies has been growing since the 1970s, he notes in a new study 
for the Independent Inquiry into the Future of Lifelong Learning sponsored by 
the National Institute of Adult and Continuing Education (Niace).

There is particular concern that levels of depression and stress should be 
rising in Britain and about the resulting costs to society, organisations and 
individuals. A recent report for the King's Fund put the total economic cost of 
mental illness in England at £49bn in 2007. Although helping people to get jobs 
boosts wellbeing, the solution is not simply a matter of creating more wealth, 
he says. "Analyses of survey data have repeatedly shown that, once a society 
reaches a particular level of affluence, further increases in material wealth 
produce very limited changes in people's self-reported happiness."

On the other hand, surveys since the 1970s have shown positive direct and 
indirect links between education and wellbeing, which has been defined as "a 
dynamic state, in which the individual is able to develop their potential, work 
productively and creatively, build strong and positive relationships with 
others, and contribute to their community".

When people fulfil personal goals and achieve a sense of purpose in society, 
their wellbeing is boosted, Field says. He does not argue that the government 
is wrong to improve education for the under-25s: "It's clear that if you invest 
in young people, you make an impact that is lasting."

Field and other supporters of lifelong learning are arguing for more public 
money. It makes more sense, they say, to take a preventative approach to, for 
instance, mental health problems than to pay the much bigger price of treating 
them after they have occurred.

But if learning boosts wellbeing and staves off mental deterioration, won't 
people pay for it themselves in the way that they are prepared to pay for 
cosmetic surgery or gym membership?

No guarantees

"There are several reasons why that doesn't happen in practice," Field says. 
First, not everyone will stave off mental deterioration by learning. "We know 
on the aggregate level it works. For individuals it probably works, but there 
are no guarantees."

Then there is the problem of convincing people to do something now for their 
medium- or longer-term benefit.

Chris Ball, chief executive of the Age and Employment Network, agrees that 
opportunities for lifelong learning narrow significantly at 25, not least 
because of the axing of funds for people wanting to study for qualifications at 
an equivalent or lower level than any they already have. He, too, thinks it 
unrealistic to leave adult learning entirely up to the market.

"There are so many things competing and so many other things going on in 
people's lives," he says. "No doubt many people of 25 have student loans they 
are paying off. Putting all this together, you can see that lack of support for 
lifelong learning is a disincentive."

Funding cuts for general adult education have caused colleges to cut courses, 
which has left limited opportunities for people to learn, he says. "You have 
this kind of spiral of philistinism that sets in."

Ball believes the government should support adult education more. "We should 
do everything we can to encourage a broadly shared learning culture where it's 
seen as thoroughly good for people to learn for learning's sake, because they 
are inquisitive and want to learn more - that's got to be good for society and 
for their economic wellbeing."

A number of schemes in which people at risk of mental health problems were 
prescribed adult education as a possible therapy have fizzled out for want of 
further funding. "If somebody went into a doctor's surgery and the doctor felt 
they would benefit from participation in education, they were referred to the 
learning adviser," says Kathryn James, a development officer with Niace, who 
made an official appraisal of one of the schemes, in Nottingham.

Of the people she interviewed, among those who had taken the learning option, 
nearly all reported benefits. These included improved mental health; decisions 
to improve their physical health by, for instance, stopping smoking or eating 
more healthily; improved employment prospects; raised self-esteem; increased 
social contacts; and fun and pleasure in learning.

But as the initial funding ran out, arguments broke out over responsibility 
for carrying on, James says. The health service reckoned that the education 
budget should bear the cost, since the benefits were largely educational - and 
education argued the opposite.

A spokesman for the new department for Business, Innovation and Skills said: 
"The government is spending more than ever in ensuring people of all ages can 
benefit from learning opportunities ... Some £5bn is being invested in 
supporting adult skills in 2009-10.

"The government recognises the enormous contribution learning makes to an 
individual's quality of life, health and wellbeing, and has made a commitment 
to sustain funding for informal learning."
 