
Last week I travelled back in time. Specifically to a land that the rest of 
Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> has almost forgotten ever 
existed; to an Arcadia where there is prosperity, jobs, optimism, hope.

But this is not a long-lost idyll and I didn't need a time machine to 
transport me there. It just took a gruelling four-hour car journey westward to 
Ireland's Atlantic seaboard, to the home constituency of the republic's prime 
minister, Enda Kenny, or more precisely to the town of Westport in County Mayo.

Unlike the rest of Ireland this coastal town, famous for its tourist 
attractions, appears to be recession-proof. While most of the republic's high 
streets are suffering from a collapse in consumer demand and remain in a 
depressed state, Westport last Wednesday seemed to be thriving. My travelling 
companion and I even had to queue up to be seated in a charming little café in 
the centre of the town until a table became available. Business was booming – 
something you cannot say about the retail or catering trade in Dublin or any 
other urban area at present.

But it is not the tourists who are responsible for the Mayo town being 
fireproofed from the worst ravages of Ireland's recession. The reason for 
Westport thriving is down to one word: Botox.

The anti-ageing, wrinkle-busting treatment that is injected into the face is 
manufactured at the Allergan plant on the edge of the town. Westport is the 
only place on the planet where Botox is made and exported all over the world.

Last month the company announced it was expanding its workforce to 1,000 and 
building a new research and development centre within sight of Ireland's 
holiest mountain, Croagh Patrick.

The knock-on effects of this investment and the presence of such a large 
employer are obvious. It is a template for the one sector of the Irish economy 
that has grown while all others have contracted: the multinational, hi-tech, 
big pharma, export-driven industrial base.

In Westport they are still partying like it's shortly after 1999 when the 
Irish economy was powering ahead with double-digit growth and the Celtic Tiger 
model was the envy of the world. And that is why the local man who made it all 
the way to the highest office in the land will do anything to protect the 
republic's 12.5% low corporation tax rate, which the executives at places such 
as Allergan stress is vital in keeping the multinationals on Irish soil.

However, you only have to go up the road a bit on the same coast in the same 
county to time-travel forward to the depressed days of 2012. In Ballina, 
another town that has always relied on tourism, they are getting desperate. So 
desperate in fact that they will welcome any foreign multinational corporation 
to their town, even the one with the big gold arches.

Normally in a rural idyllic setting the locals would throw their hands up in 
horror at the prospect of McDonald's setting up in their territory. Think of 
the outrage of the trendy set in Hampstead when news broke a few years ago that
McDonald's <https://www.theguardian.com/business/mcdonalds> was establishing a 
branch in their hip corner of north London.

Yet in recession-stricken Ireland the world is turned upside down. When Mayo 
county council blocked a planning application by McDonald's to open a 
drive-thru restaurant in Ballina the people rebelled … in favour of the burger 
chain.

A petition has been gathered with more than 1,000 signatures demanding that 
the council reverse its decision and LET the fast food giant build its proposed 
takeaway. The pro-McDonald's lobby argues that it will bring construction and 
retail jobs at a time when both these parts of the Irish economy are in the 
doldrums.

So it's a tale of two towns in the same county represented in parliament by 
the same taoiseach but with very different stories to tell about how the crash 
of the Celtic Tiger has impacted on their citizens' lives during the global 
downturn.

(Note: this correspondent has no family connections of any kind with either 
the makers of the Big Mac or anyone in Mayo.)
 