
I'm a New Yorker, so it should come as no surprise that I think my city is the 
greatest in the world. I like living in the city where so many of my favourite 
films take place, where nearly every street corner reminds me of some piece of 
lurid personal or criminal history. 'Crazy Joe Gallo was shot here... Big Paul 
Castellano whacked there... Used to score there... That place used to be a 
speakeasy... My old methadone clinic... That used to be an after-hours club...' 
It may not be the most beautiful city. It's certainly not the nicest city 
(though it is, sadly, getting nicer). And it's certainly not the easiest city 
to live in. One minute you're on top of the world, the next - when you wish to 
light up a smoke at the bar and can't, for instance - you're wallowing in 
abject misery and self-pity, unable to decide between murder and suicide. But 
it is exactly those famously manic highs and low lows that make New York like 
nowhere else. I mean, you can talk London, or Paris, or Barcelona all you like 
but we're open all night. I can pick up the phone around midnight and get just 
about anything I want - Chinese food, Lebanese, sushi, pizza, a video, a bag of 
seedless hydro or a human head - delivered to my apartment in about 25 minutes. 
Didn't I say we were the greatest?

And I know what I'm talking about . I travel a lot - about eight months of the 
year, to be precise. And I love London, Edinburgh, Dublin, Melbourne, Hanoi, St 
Petersburg, Salvador, Tokyo and San Sebastián like old friends. But I miss my 
city when I'm away for too long. As much as I enjoy getting lost, disappearing 
into another place, another culture, another cuisine, there are places, fl 
avours, sounds, smells and sights I begin to yearn for after three weeks of 
eating fish heads and rice.

When people from other cities ask me where they should eat, where they should 
go or where they should drink during their stay, they are often surprised at my 
answers. Sure, we have some of the best high-end restaurants in the world , but 
that's not what I miss when I'm wiping fermented bean paste off my chin, or 
trading shots of bear-bile infused rice whisky in Asia. When visiting Manhattan 
one should go for things that we do really well and the rest of the world 
doesn't.

Example? Deli. We have it, you don't. Even LA, with no shortage of Jews, can't 
get it right. For whatever mysterious reasons, no city on the planet can make 
deli like a New York deli and the first thing I start to miss when away from 
home too long is breakfast at Barney Greengrass, 'the Sturgeon King' on 
Amsterdam Avenue and 86th Street. Sunday breakfast at Barney's is one of those 
quintessential New York things to do: a crowded, ugly dining room, unchanged 
for decades, wobbly tables, brusque waiters, generic coffee; but their eggs 
scrambled with dark, caramelised onions and their lox, served with fresh 
toasted bagel or bialy [a Polish roll], is ethereal, and the hometeam crowd of 
Upper-West-Siders is about as 'genuine New York' as you can get. Grab a copy of 
the Sunday New York Times, a copy of the Post, and dig in. If your waiter seems 
indiff erent, don't let it bother you - he's like that with everybody. You can 
buy some of the legendary smoked sturgeon or Nova Scotia salmon at the counter 
to take away, but you will surely be committing a sin against God if, after 
breakfast, you neglect to purchase a pound of what is far and away the best 
chopped liver on earth. Hand-chopped chicken livers, schmaltz (chicken fat), 
sautéed onions and hard-cooked eggs - it's the benchmark to which all others 
should aspire.

No visit to New York is complete without a proper pastrami sandwich, and New 
Yorkers will argue over who's got the best like they're fighting over 
Yugoslavian real estate. A safe bet is the 2nd Avenue Deli, for a 
nearly-as-big-as-your-head pile of steaming-hot pastrami, sliced paper-thin and 
stacked between fresh seeded rye bread. The appropriate beverage is a Dr 
Brown's cream soda or can of Cel-Ray. And be nice to your waitress - chances 
are she can kick the shit out of you.

Pizza is another subject on which New Yorkers have strong opinions and, if you 
feel like humping out to Brooklyn, to DiFara's, you can get the best of the 
best. But I like the white clam pizza at Lombardi's on Spring Street when I 
don't feel like getting my passport punched for a pie. They serve only whole 
pies at Lombardi's, so if you want to master the manly New York art of walking 
down the street while eating a slice of pizza you'll have to grab one at any of 
the ubiquitous mainstream joints. Just remember: feet slightly apart, head 
tilted forward and away from the chest to avoid the bright orange pizza grease 
that will undoubtedly dribble down. Be aware of the risk of burning hot, molten 
'cheese slide' which has been known to cause maxillofacial injury and genital 
scarring.

When I've been home for a while and I need to treat myself to an expensive, 
spirit-lifting experience, I always think sushi. Yasuda on East 43rd Street is 
the place to go for old-school, Edo-style sushi and sashimi, the fish served - 
as it should be - near room temperature, the rice still warm and crumbly. I 
always book the omakase (the tasting menu - literally 'you decide') on a day 
when Yasuda-san himself is behind the bar. I will sit there happily for hours, 
and talk boxing while Yasuda (a former pugilist himself) serves up sublime, 
tasty bits of screamingly fresh, rare, hardto- get, fl awlessly executed 
seafood. I can spend a whole afternoon there, eating whatever comes my way, 
workin g through every available option: mounds of sea urchin roe, top-drawer 
fatty toro tuna, sea eel, yellowtail, mackerel and the occasional surprise: on 
a recent visit I was served some Copper River salmon roe, before season, from 
the chef's personal stash.

If I find myself in the neighbourhood late at night, just across the street, 
through an anonymous office-building lobby, down a flight of fire stairs to a 
cellar and through a plain door, is Sakagura, a huge, nearly all-Asian 
late-night joint with a mammoth selection of sakes and accompanying snacks. 
Guaranteed to inspire exclamations of 'How did you find this place?!' among 
your envious friends.

Sneer at hot dogs all you want but a well-made wiener is a thing of beauty. 
Actually, even a crap hot dog can be a beautiful thing if you're eating it at 
Yankee Stadium washed down with warm, watery beer (and if the Yanks are 
winning). I'll go so far as to say that you will never understand New York, or 
New Yorkers, until you've eaten too many bad hot dogs and drunk too much piss 
beer at a night game at the stadium. Similarly, Rudy's Bar and Grill on 9th 
Avenue serves crap hot dogs too. Free ones. But ambiance counts for a lot and, 
after a lot of mid-afternoon drinks (never go at night) listening to the 
magnificent jukebox, watching the daytime drinkers slump over onto the bar, 
those light-bulb-warmed weenies suddenly seem like a good idea. If you actually 
want a quality dog, the best is at Papaya King on East 86th Street. Be sure to 
enjoy it with a frothy delicious papaya drink - and if you put ketchup on your 
dog I will f***ing kill you.

For late-night bad behaviour, I am a devoted regular at Siberia Bar, located 
on 40th Street in Hell's Kitchen, a few doors east of 9th Avenue. There's no 
sign: just look for the unmarked black doors under the single red light bulb - 
and leave your conscience at the door. If Satan had a rumpus room, it would 
look a lot like Siberia: squalid, dark, littered with empty beer cartons, ratty 
furniture stained with the bodily fl uids of many guilty souls. It's my 
favourite bar on earth. It has a great juke- box of Seventies punk classics 
and, no matter how badly you behave at night, no one will remember tomorrow. 
The crowd is dodgy and unpredictable.

When I mentioned Siberia to a rather proper editrix (of a glossy mag), she 
blushed at the memory of her night there: 'Oh God! Siberia! Oh Jesus! I threw 
up into my Prada bag...it was absolutely the best night I've ever had in a bar. 
What I remember anyway...' You never know who's going to be draped over 
couches, or listening to live bands in the dungeon-like cellar - rockand- 
rollers, off -duty cops, drunken journos, cast and crew from Saturday Night 
Live, slumming fashionistas, post-work chefs, kinky politicos, out-of-work 
bone-breakers or nodding strippers. It's heaven.

If Siberia is too empty - or crowded - the equally degenerate Bellevue Bar 
around the corner on 9th has strange and fabulous lady bartenders, an 
unreconstructed metal-head crowd and a jukebox packed with Judas Priest, 
Motörhead, Dead Boys and other easy-listening classics.

If I've got to put on a tie or a jacket, the food better be damn good - and 
the food at Scott Bryan's Veritas on East 20th Street is always worth 
struggling into a shirt with buttons for. It's also got the best wine list and 
one of the most knowledgeable sommeliers in New York. (Not that it matters to 
me. I usually drink vodka ) Scott's a friend, so I sit at the bar and snack off 
the appetiser menu, but his braised dishes and seafood mains are exceptionally 
good.

Eric Ripert's Le Bernardin on West 51st Street is, in my opinion, the best 
restaurant in New York, but then Eric is also a pal, so don't trust me. As with 
all great chefs, I never order à la carte. You don't go to Le Bernardin for a 
slab of swordfish. You go for the full experience of the tasting menu. Le 
Bernardin is about as 'not my style' as any where but I love it. It's my 
default special- event destination, even though Eric busts my balls every time 
I dine there: 'What are you doing here? This ees not your kind of place! What 
ees happening to you? You've changed. You used to be cool!'

The ultimate New York dining experience, however, may not be in a restaurant 
at all. For me, it's a lazy night at home . I'll smoke a fat spliff , lay out 
some old newspapers on the bed and call out for Chinese. I'll eat - as seen in 
endless films - directly out of that classic New York vessel, the white 
cardboard take-out container, and watch a rented movie from nearby Kim's Video. 
Kim's specialises in hard-to-find exploitation, cult and arthouse favourites, 
organised by director, so I can say give me a Dario Argento, an early John Woo, 
Evil Dead Two, The Conformist and that Truff aut film where the two guys are 
both ****ing Jeanne Moreau. Food never tastes better.

· Anthony Bourdain <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/anthonybourdain> 
writes in the first issue of Schweppes' Tonic magazine , which includes a 
nationwide bar guide to unique drinking experiences. To get a free copy of 
Schweppes' Tonic magazine call 0800 587 2541. It is also available in selected 
bars.
 