
The head of the US network behind hit shows such as Mad Men and Breaking Bad 
has criticised the use of data to pick shows, calling it a “goddamm disaster”.

Josh Sapan, chief executive of AMC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/amc> 
Networks, said data mining was useful for marketing and promotion but not in 
making creative decisions. Although he failed to mention any rival firms in 
comments made at the RTS TV festival in Cambridge, Amazon and Netflix are US 
companies known for using data to inform decisions.

“Others have tried mining data to use it to say good show, bad show or this 
story, that story … I’ve never seen it work terribly well. You can’t number 
your way to greenlighting a show and you can’t get data that shows you how to 
fix a story.

“Numbers are not knowledge; that particularly applies in the creative sphere.”

Adding that AMC had a business analytics department which “provides an awful 
lot of insight”, he added: “Where the data flies well versus not well, it flies 
extremely well on the promotion and marketing side … how to spend money and how 
to reach people.”

AMC, which last year signed a joint venture with BBC Worldwide over BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> America, heaped praise on the British 
broadcaster, which Sapan credited with leading the way for a shift towards 
high-quality shows in the US. “You guys are the godfathers of soul, you’ve been 
at that playbook for longer.” He named Luther, Broadchurch, Top Gear and the 
AMC/BBC joint venture Honourable Woman as great programmes.

Netflix gathers detailed viewer data to guide its search for the next hit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/feb/23/netflix-viewer-data-house-of-cards>
He poured scorn on those fixated by scheduling, before showing a comedy sketch 
on the power of binge watching. “You can’t dictate to people where to go … 
You’d just better hurry up and have the right stuff. If you don’t, no amount of 
clout or scale will work.”

AMC, which owns several cable channels and has a turnover of £2.4bn, is far 
smaller than the big four media companies in the US but Sapan suggested that 
ideas rather than acquisitions were the best way to grow.

“If you don’t have the stuff, no amount of scale, scope or weaponry, you’d 
better be the best candidate.” The four biggest studios all rejected Breaking 
Bad and The Walking Dead, while Mad Men was turned down for being “a bit quiet”.

Social media was “truly democratising” as it could make a hit out of a show 
from a tiny group with little marketing spend, he said.

Talking about the US market, Sapan said subscription numbers were maturing, 
while viewing was moving away from linear channels to streaming. “It’s pretty 
big evolution rather than revolution … It’s not fireworks … people haven’t 
thrown their big TVs out of the window.”

Citing the value of owning content rather than leasing content, Sapan said 
wholly owned shows such as The Walking Dead were far more profitable
 