
The “lid could blow off” the Conservative parliamentary party if ministers are 
denied the chance to follow their conscience to vote on either side in the EU 
referendum, the former chief whipAndrew Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrew-mitchell> has warned.


In a sign of unease at senior levels over Downing Street’s handling of the 
referendum, Mitchell issued what he described as “strong advice” to the prime 
minister to allow ministers a free vote.

Membership Event: Guardian Newsroom: Brexit - what would happen if Britain 
left the EU? 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/guardian-newsroom-brexit-what-would-happen-if-britain-left-the-eu-17274359073>

Mitchell, who served as Tory chief whip in 2012 and first made his name as a 
whip during the fraught Maastricht treaty votes in the mid-90s, told the 
Guardian: “My strong advice to the prime minister would be to let ministers 
campaign and vote as their conscience and their convictions dictate. Not to do 
so will put too much pressure on the parliamentary party and the lid could blow 
off.

“Having been through the ghastly experience of the Maastricht era, 1992-95, 
when the Conservative government whips’ office kept the show on the road, I 
bear the painful marks of that era.”

Cameron gave his clearest warning at the weekend that he will sack any 
government minister who wants to campaign to quit theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, insisting the government will not be 
neutral once he has struck a deal on a new relationship with the EU. The prime 
minister said he was confident of striking such a deal, which would be legally 
binding and do “what it says on the tin”, a formulation that leaves open 
whether the deal will stop short of immediate treaty changes.

There are six members of the cabinet who have strongly Eurosceptic views and 
may wrestle with their consciences over the referendum. The list is headed by
Iain Duncan Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/iain-duncan-smith>, the 
work and pensions secretary, who was encouraged when the prime minister 
appointed him to the cabinet committee overseeing the EU referendum. But he has 
not ruled out campaigning for a No vote if he believes the negotiations do not 
go far enough.


Graham Brady, the chairman of the 1922 committee of backbench MPs, reiterated 
his call for ministers to be allowed to campaign on either side in the 
referendum campaign.Brady told Total Politics 
<http://www.totalpolitics.com/blog/449826/exclusive-1922-chair-graham-brady-warns-pm-over-effective-party-management-on-europe.thtml>
 on Monday: “It is generally better to work with the grain, to engage 
colleagues, than to try to force them into places where they can’t go. And in 
terms of the referendum and certainly the process of healing that needs to take 
place after a big debate of that sort, I think it’s easier the more space 
people be given to express their honest deeply held convictions.”

At the G7 summit in Bavaria, Cameron was asked whether he had “absolutely 
closed his mind to allowing ministers a free vote”. He replied: “I’ve been very 
clear. If you want to be part of the government, you have to take the view that 
we are engaged in an exercise of renegotiation, to have a referendum and that 
will lead to a successful outcome.”

When asked whether anyone in government who opposes that position would have 
to resign, the prime minister said: “Everyone in government has signed up to 
the programme set out in the Conservative manifesto.”

He added: “If I can get a position where Britain would be better off in a 
reformedEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> then obviously 
that is not something the government is neutral about. It’s not a sort of ‘on 
the one hand, on the other hand’ approach. If I can secure what I want to 
secure, I will have secured what I think is the right outcome for Britain.”

Mitchell’s decision to speak out places him ironically on the same side as 
Duncan Smith, who was one of the main “Maastricht rebels” who gave the whips’ 
office such a headache. The former Tory leader believes ministers should be 
free to campaign on either side of the referendum.

Duncan Smith was encouraged when the prime minister appointed him to the 
cabinet committee overseeing the referendum. But he strongly believes Britain 
needs to embark on an ambitious renegotiation to gain control over its borders, 
possibly through the use of an emergency brake.

Downing Street will also be keeping an eye on the highly Eurosceptic business 
secretary, Sajid Javid, who has been given a place on the EU referendum cabinet 
committee too.

The prime minister appointed or promoted three hardline Eurosceptics after 
last month’s election. John Whittingdale, the culture secretary, served as 
Margaret Thatcher’s political secretary in her last years in Downing Street; 
Priti Patel, the employment minister, made her name as a leading figure in 
James Goldsmith’s Referendum party; and Dominic Raab, the justice minister, is 
a high-profile campaigner against the excessive burden of EU regulations.

It is understood Cameron made clear to the new recruits that he expected them 
to support him throughout his negotiations and the referendum campaign. Their 
appointments were seen as an attempt to bind the Eurosceptic Thatcherite right 
into his EU strategy.

David Davis <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/daviddavis>, the former 
shadow home secretary, said Cameron’s stance on ministerial support risked 
sparking a bitter Tory row. The highly Eurosceptic former Tory leadership 
contender told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “This doesn’t show a great deal 
of confidence in the outcome of those negotiations that he has to say: my way 
or the highway, stay and obey the line or leave.”

The intervention by Mitchell, an old ally of Davis’s from the whips’ office 
during the Maastricht years, will have added weight because he is from the One 
Nation mainstream tradition in the Conservative party whose supporters believe 
Britain should remain in the EU. They generally support the prime minister’s 
plans to renegotiate the terms of Britain’s EU membership.

But Mitchell, who served as a whip when the then prime minister John Major 
fought nightly battles to secure the passage of the Maastricht treaty, believes 
Cameron is creating an unnecessary confrontation with the party. He believes 
Cameron should follow the example of Harold Wilson, the late Labour prime 
minister, who allowed ministers to campaign on either side in the EEC 
referendum in 1975.
 