
More than four decades after the Apollo 11 moon landing, a cloth bag full of 
souvenirs brought back to Earth by astronautNeil Armstrong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/neil-armstrong> has come to light.

Among the trove is a 16mm film camera from inside the spacecraft, which filmed 
its descent to the moon and Armstrong’s first steps on the lunar surface in 
1969.

That camera “took one of the most significant sets of images in the 20th 
century,” said Allan Needell, a curator in space history at the National Air and
Space <https://www.theguardian.com/science/space> museum, in an interview given 
on Monday.

Needell said the museum had been told about the bag in June 2013 by 
Armstrong’s widow, who had found it while cleaning out a closet after 
Armstrong’s death in 2012.

The long process of documenting the find concluded only recently, which was 
when the museum decided to go public, he said. The discovery was revealed on 
Friday by the museum, and the camera is already on display in a temporary 
exhibit.

Needell called the discovery “extraordinarily exciting”, noting that the 
images taken by the camera are far more detailed and clear than the grainy ones 
shown on television at the time of the landing. The film cartridges had been 
removed during the mission and so the device itself was no longer needed.

The camera would have stayed on the lunar module, which crashed on the moon’s 
surface after delivering the astronauts back to the orbiter, Needell said, but 
Armstrong, Buzz Aldrin and Michael Collins “decided to take some souvenirs home 
with them.”

It had long been common knowledge that astronauts sometimes took pieces of 
unneeded equipment for themselves, Needell said. Congress has even passed a law 
approving the practice.

The cloth bag also included other small pieces of equipment, including a waist 
tether that Armstrong had used to suspend his feet during a rest period while 
the module was on the moon.

The Armstrong family has loaned the material to the museum and pledged to 
donate it, Needell said.
 