
David Cameron has confirmed that he would be prepared to withdraw from the 
European convention on human rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jun/02/david-cameron-prepared-to-break-with-europe-on-human-rights>
 if a series of proposed changes to Britain’s human rights laws are rejected by 
Strasbourg.

The prime minister told the former Conservative chief whip Andrew Mitchell, a 
leading member of the“Runnymede Tories” 
<http://www.spectator.co.uk/features/9535112/gove-vs-the-european-court-of-human-rights/>
 who are committed to upholding British membership of the convention, that he 
rules out “absolutely nothing”.

No 10 later confirmed that Cameron remained committed to a policy document 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/interactive/2014/oct/03/conservatives-human-rights-act-full-document>
, outlined last year by former justice secretary Chris Grayling, to withdraw 
from the convention if parliament failed to secure the right to veto judgments 
from the European court of human rights.

Lord Falconer of Thoroton, the shadow justice secretary, warned that leaving 
the convention would inflict “incredible damage” to Britain’s standing in the 
world.

The prime minister clarified his thinking after Mitchell asked him to rule out 
withdrawing from the convention, which was drawn up by future lord chancellor 
David Maxwell Fyfe in the wake of the second world war to uphold human rights 
across Europe.

Mitchell said: “There is considerable concern on both sides of the house at 
the proposition that Britain might withdraw from the European convention on 
human rights. Will he take the opportunity today to make clear that he has no 
plans for us to do so?”

Cameron said he had no plans to withdraw from the convention but indicated 
that he wanted to keep the option in reserve if his proposals for change were 
rejected by theEuropean court of human rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/european-court-of-human-rights>, which upholds 
the convention. The prime minister told his former chief whip: “Let me be very 
clear about what we want, which is British judges making decisions in British 
courts. And also the British parliament being accountable to the British people.

“Now our plans, set out in our manifesto, don’t involve us leaving the 
European convention on human rights. But let’s be absolutely clear. If we can’t 
achieve what we need – and I’m very clear about that when we’ve got these 
foreign criminals committing offence after offence and we can’t send them home 
because of their right to a family life – that needs to change. And I rule out 
absolutely nothing in getting that done.”

Michael Gove, the new justice secretary, is planning to implement two key 
manifesto pledges: scrapping theHuman Rights Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/human-rights-act> and asserting the supremacy 
of the UK’s supreme court over Strasbourg. The move, which is designed to 
“break the formal link” between British courts and Strasbourg and to make the 
supreme court the “ultimate arbiter of human rights matters in the UK”, has 
been delayed until the EU referendum, which is due to be held by the end of 
2017.

Senior Tories have also warned No 10 that Gove will face a crippling revolt 
unless he drops the “deeply offensive” threat by Grayling in his document last 
year to withdraw from the convention if the reforms are rejected by Strasbourg. 
No 10 confirmed that the Grayling document remained party policy. A spokesman 
said: “We have published a policy paper on this and that makes clear our view 
is that we are confident, we think we can get a better deal within the 
convention but we don’t rule anything out if that is not possible.”

Falconer said: “The prime minister raises yet again the spectre of leaving the 
European convention on human rights. Withdrawing from the convention would do 
incredible damage to the UK’s standing in the world and it is shocking that the 
government should dither over this issue.

“David Cameron and Michael Gove need to get their act together and tell us 
whether or not they intend to take us out of the convention. What is clear is 
that if they suggest scrapping people’s human rights protections, Labour will 
oppose them all the way.”

Meanwhile, the prime minister ame under pressure on his proposed 
renegotiations of Britain’s EU membership terms when the German vice-chancellor 
challenged his plans. Sigmar Gabriel, the economy minister in Germany’s grand 
coalition government, made his remarks after talks between centre-left leaders 
in Paris.

Reuters cited Gabriel as saying: “Our idea for Europe is quite the opposite of 
the idea of Mr Cameron. Mr Cameron wants to reduce Europe back to a single 
market. Mr Cameron wants to have a level playing field for companies but no 
level playing field for people. [Yet] Europe is made for people.”

Gabriel is chairman of Germany’s SPD party, which is more hostile to Cameron 
than the centre-right CDU party led by Angela Merkel. But senior CDU figures 
have voiced concerns in recent days about Cameron’s plans to demand a revision 
of the Lisbon treaty to underpin his proposed reforms.
 