
With less than a fortnight to go until the Irish general election, the 
dominant theme of campaigning this week will be whether Fine Gael can govern 
alone without Labour.

Polling data suggests the larger party could win up to 70 seats, which would 
leave it 13 short of an overall majority in the Dail. But with a large number 
of independent deputies likely to be elected, some within Fine Gael are now 
considering the possibility of doing a deal with them rather than their 
traditional coalition partner.

In the last three decades, Fine Gael has only come to power with Labour at its 
side. Indeed, the last time there was a Fine Gael taoiseach, John Bruton not 
only relied on Labour but also on the now defunct Democratic Left and the 
Greens in the so-called "Rainbow Coalition" which Bertie Ahern's Fianna Fáil 
ousted from office back in 1997.

The last seven days have been marked by rancourous exchanges between Fine Gael 
and Labour on the most crucial issues of the election – the economy and the 
deficit.

Fine Gael's five-point plan for economic recovery includes a promise to "keep 
taxes low", while Labour talks about reversing cuts in minimum wage and 
protecting the public sector.

At present, there remain huge differences between the two parties' approach to 
driving down Ireland's enormous national debt and dealing with the conditions 
set down by the International Monetary Fund and the European Central Bank when 
they lent more than €80bn (£67bn) toIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> last year.

Fine Gael has tried to portray Labour as a tax and spend party, and the 
former's economic spokesman, Michael Noonan, has accused the trade unions of 
having too much "influence and power" over government policies for the last 
decade. The trade unions, of course, bankroll the Labour party.

In turn, the Labour leader, Eamon Gilmore, has accused Fine Gael of "siding 
with the bankers" because the party had opposed his plan to slap a tax on 
international financial transactions.

On this point, at least, it would seem that the two parties are moving apart 
rather sidling up to each other in preparation for government.

Within the larger party there is a view that Labour would not be able to cope 
with the measures needed to put the Republic on the road to recovery. Public 
sector trade unions would resist any moves to cut pay, pensions and reform the 
state services, they argue.

The unions would then put Labour backbenchers, especially those from the left, 
under enormous pressure and destabilise the new coalition.

For the Fine Gael leader, Enda Kenny, and his team, the magic number now 
appears to be 75. If Fine Gael could reach that figure, they may have enough 
potential supporters among the new independents to govern on their own.

The party has already identified five independent deputies it could rely on to 
build towards the overall majority target figure of 83.

However, given that this election has prompted a record number of independent 
candidates to stand, there are potentially lots of "unknowns" whom Fine Gael 
would have to woo after the votes are counted in two weekends' time. So we 
should expect more Fine Gael spokespersons and sources to flag up the 
possibility of them governing without Labour as they try to raise themselves 
further in the opinion polls.

The safe bet probably remains on a Fine Gael-Labour coalition after 25 
February, but there is still an outside chance that Irish voters could return a 
new government propped up only by independents from the centre right.

At the very least, the latter scenario will help to enliven what has been so 
far a lacklustre and vapid campaign.

The reason why the contest has been so dull is that the electorate itself has 
already made up its mind that it wants to punish Fianna Fáil and the Greens, 
and make Kenny the taioseach. The only question left is whether they want 
Gilmore to join him as the tanaiste (deputy prime minister) when the votes are 
counted.
 