
Many people with dementia are receiving poor care because large numbers of 
staff are badly trained or quit because of their low pay and status, a 
hard-hitting new report warns today.

Too many carers who look after the 700,000 Britons with some form of memory 
loss are unfit to work with such vulnerable people, according to the all-party 
parliamentary group on dementia.

The report, Prepared to Care, claims that although those with dementia require 
specialised care, less than half the personnel who visit them at home to help 
with basic tasks such as washing and dressing have received any training in 
skills needed to handle the condition.

Social care <https://www.theguardian.com/society/social-care> is in such a 
poor state that some people with dementia receive home visits lasting just 15 
minutes, which means their needs are neglected and dignity disrespected, the 
report says.

One in three care homes which look after people with dementia also admit that 
they do not provide specific training in assisting the growing number of 
residents with the condition.

The group said that during its four-month inquiry, "witnesses described the 
very variable quality of dementia care. Key problems included the lack of 
occupation and activity for people with dementia and a failure to look beyond 
the diagnosis and respect people with dementia as individuals".

Of the 700,000 people with dementia, an estimated 244,000 are thought to live 
in care homes while around 424,000 live in the community. Some 62% of people in 
institutions are thought to suffer from memory loss. At the last count around 
1.5 million people were estimated to be working in adult social care service in 
England.

Neil Hunt, chief executive of the Alzheimer's Society 
<http://www.alzheimers.org.uk/site/>, said: "What sort of society do we live in 
when the people who deliver care to thousands of vulnerable people with 
dementia have no training or support? The situation is a disgrace. Staff 
turnover is high and the quality of care in some areas is very poor. There is a 
lot of work to be done if we are to drag the standard of dementia care in the 
UK from its position in the bottom third of Europe."

The report claims that:

• High turnover of staff – between 20% and 23% a year quit their posts – is 
hindering the development of a skilled workforce and discourages service 
providers from investing in workforce development.

• The "inappropriately low status of the dementia care workforce, poor terms 
and conditions of employment" must be addressed in order to make the sector 
more attractive.

• Care providers "get away with providing a bare minimum" service because the 
lack of regulations setting out what training dementia care workers should 
receive makes organising training difficult.

Phil Hope, the care services minister, said training was improving. He 
responded: "The national dementia strategy, published in February, sets out for 
the first time clear plans to transform dementia care, promote best practice 
and tackle the misconception that dementia is an inevitable part of ageing. We 
are determined to make this happen.

"I want to see a skilled and effective workforce in place to support people 
with dementia. The strategy details clear aims to improve the quality of care 
for people with dementia as well as objectives to ensure staff are well 
informed and have the best possible skills to help them to work with people 
with dementia.

"Improving training is essential, so we are working with training providers to 
raise the standard of both basic skills and the process of continuous 
professional and vocational development."
 