
Feckless – it was a word Jane frequently used in conjunction with me and DIY. 
She did all our decorating, gardening and handiwork. So it seems a little rich 
that I write some words on caring.

Jane was 26 when she was diagnosed with breast cancer in 1990 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/sep/05/guardianobituaries.obituaries2> 
and our children, Suzanne and Rebecca, were five and two. She didn't receive 
any chemotherapy or radiotherapy but the mastectomy was radical and quite 
debilitating, though it would probably surprise no one to know that Jane pushed 
herself hard and within weeks she was more or less self-sufficient.

In 2000, she got the terminal prognosis; her health had deteriorated to an 
extent that she hadn't the physical strength to complete basic daily tasks. 
Throughout the next seven years I never considered that I was caring for Jane. 
I loved her unconditionally and whatever was required was just normal life. I'd 
always equated caring as the personal physical acts – lifting, bathing and 
personal hygiene – I imagine this is a view held by most others faced with 
similar circumstances.

On reflection, the reality is substantially different and caring takes many 
different and varied forms. Despite being able to compete in gruelling physical 
endurance activities, Jane constantly needed hospital treatment and 
twice-weekly visits to St James's hospital in Leeds were the norm. Coping with 
a terminal prognosis can be as tough mentally as physically and this put a 
strain on both of us. It was almost impossible for me to comprehend the mental 
turmoil Jane was facing.

Caring is multifaceted, especially when there are other family members to be 
included in the equation. Due to the ages of our children, Suzanne and Rebecca 
took on the caring roles, especially for their young brother who was only three 
in 2000.

The biggest single problem for carers in my experience is managing to sustain 
full-time employment. It's hard to justify continuing to go to work while 
needing to be at home to care for a loved one and I found obtaining a sensible 
balance impossible. Both Jane and I were fortunate that our employers – Leeds 
Hospital trust and Yorkshire Bank – were supportive of our circumstances. So 
often I have heard of people who have been discriminated against in the 
workplace. It's inevitable that the more serious the condition, the more time 
is needed away from the workplace and it is clear that some employers use the 
opportunity of workplace restructures to cull such staff.

As a society we take carers for granted, they are rarely admired or celebrated 
– a sad reflection of the current age. The government needs to do much more to 
protect us. It should review the legislation regarding security of employment. 
Mothers going off on maternity leave have certain legal rights, so carers 
should be entitled to career breaks in the same way, without fear of losing 
their job. Those who remain working also need more security. As the recession 
takes hold and companies make redundancies, managers often look at absence 
rates when choosing between employees. It is culturally more difficult to 
justify absence when employees are caring for an adult than a child. So carers 
are at an automatic disadvantage. This has to change.

While my employers were amazing, what happens to others is nothing short of 
scandalous. The government needs to act and act now.

• Mike Tomlinson was married to Jane Tomlinson, who died of breast cancer in 
2007 after raising £1.85m for children's and cancer charities through athletic 
challenges. This week isCarers Week <http://www.carersweek.org/>
 