
Given that the idea that breakfast equals cereal is largely an invention of 
the advertising industry, it is perhaps unsurprising that purveyors of the 
puffed, flaked and indecently sugared staples of the modern breakfast table 
push the boundaries from time to time, as cereal offender Kellogg’s has found 
to its cost this week.

Kellogg's Special K ads banned over 'full of goodness' and 'nutritious' claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/20/kelloggs-special-k-ads-banned-health-claims>
Indeed, the idea that breakfast is “the most important meal of the day” came 
from a1944 campaign for Grape-Nuts 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2016/06/how-marketers-invented-the-modern-version-of-breakfast/487130/>
 by US giant General Foods. By then, the religious fruit loop John Harvey 
Kellogg was also using ads to turn the cereal industry into a global 
juggernaut. He had long extolled the virtues of his Corn Flakes as an 
anti-masturbation aid for young boys (he believed, optimistically, that their 
blandness might keep horniness locked up till at least lunchtime).

It is possible to buy genuinely healthy cereals, the more boring and 
unprocessed the better – plain old porridge (easy on the honey), Weetabix and 
Shredded Wheat are hard to beat – but in the grand tradition of puffed-up 
breakfast health claims, here follows a multipack of dodginess, starting with 
the latest overreach.

Special not OK 

It’s fine to say “They’re gr-r-reat!” or something similarly vague about your 
cereal, but make general health claims without evidence and you’re toast. The
Advertising Standards Authority <https://www.theguardian.com/media/asa> (ASA) 
this week banned Kellogg’s from claiming that Special K is “full of goodness” 
and “nutritious” because it failed to back up either suggestion (Special K is 
more sugary than Shreddies, Rice Krispies and Corn Flakes). It is not the first 
time Special K has been oat of order (sorry) and called out for claims about 
its health benefits: in 2012, a TV ad said the cereal contained 114 kcalories 
per 30g. It did, but that didn’t include added milk. Kellogg’s argued that milk 
was not required to eat the cereal, but the ASA pointed out that the ad showed 
milk being poured on. Then, in 2014, Special K claimed its porridge line 
contained “30% less fat than most other porridges”. Big Porridge piled in with 
complaints, pointing out that, again, milk had not been accounted for. The ASA 
upheld the complaints.

Dreaded wheat



Nestlé-owned Cereal Partners UK was caught out in 2014 for running an ad 
featuring two cereals and a single claim of “no added sugar”. A fair enough 
claim for the original Shredded Wheat, but it was pointed out that it was 
misleading as the honey in the Honey Nut Shredded Wheat also shown would 
qualify as “added sugar”.

Confessquik 

In 2013, Nestlé was again rapped by the ASA for comparing the nutritional 
qualities of Nesquik cereal to other breakfasts, including jam on toast. The 
ASA ruled that the ad made comparative nutrition claims with a food that was 
not of the same category as Nesquik cereal and thus breached advertising codes.

Cheatabix 

Weetabix are as sugarless as their sawdust composition suggests (although 
plain Shredded Wheat are even less sweet) but a 2012 ad that claimed the dry 
bricks are “packed with slow-release energy” triggered complaints; without 
milk, it turns out Weetabix have a relatively high glycaemic index, which means 
they actually release energy quickly.
 