
South Africa’s recuperation after being stunned by England on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/18/england-south-africa-world-twenty20-match-report>
 commenced against Afghanistan on the bowler’s graveyard that is currently 
Mumbai.

Despite setting a target of just 210, which was 20 runs shy of the one 
achieved by England, South Africa won by 37 runs. But there were one or two 
frights along the way.

England’s Eoin Morgan: ‘That was probably the best innings chasing I’ve ever 
seen’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/19/england-eoin-morgan-joe-root-world-t20>
Mohammad Shahzad, another keeper who bats dangerously, was flailing away 
brilliantly at the start of the chase so that Afghanistan posted 50 without 
loss within four overs and the South Africa captain, Faf du Plessis, was 
grim-faced again. But in the end this spirited Afghan side ran out of steam 
thanks mostly to the man of the match Chris Morris, who finally gave his 
captain some traditional South African aggression with the ball.

Morris stalled the chase by taking two wickets in his first two overs, 
including the irrepressible Shahzad, who cracked 44 from 19 balls. He decided 
to bowl fast, as if he was back at the Wanderers, on a pitch in Mumbai that has 
surprising similarities with his home ground. Such simple, clear-thinking is 
often absent from bowlers watching the ball disappear to all parts in this 
punishing format. In the end Morris finished with four for 27, which was enough 
to deprive AB de Villiers of the man of the match award.

Earlier De Villiers had struck 64 from 29 balls after Quinton de Kock and Du 
Plessis had launched the South Africa innings with another array of silky 
strokes. De Villiers was especially severe on the immensely gifted 17-year-old 
wrist-spinner, Rashid Khan, whose final over was pummelled for 29 runs. The 
locals revelled in a Mumbai Indian making so merry.

However Rashid remains one of the most exciting youngsters in the tournament. 
It would be a surprise if he does not cause senior batsmen trouble before the 
tournament is out. There are more spinner-friendly tracks in the country, 
though there must be a doubt whether JP Duminy will be fit enough to bowl upon 
them after he left the field clutching a hamstring.

In the end the outcome was anticipated. What was more surprising was when Du 
Plessis announced his side at the toss. There was one change, whispered by the 
captain as if he was trying to hide the name of the man omitted from Friday’s 
side. It was Dale Steyn, someone expected to have a major influence in this 
tournament. Returning from injury he needs more overs; he was not permitted any 
against Afghanistan.

His replacement was David Wiese, whose four overs cost 47 runs. Batsmen from 
this group will be keeping an eye on this situation. On balance they would 
probably prefer to face Wiese rather than Steyn.
 