
From his time as Ireland's communications minister in 1995 until his 
re-election to the 31st Dáil, the whiff of corruption has swirled around 
Michael Lowry.

It concerns the relationship between the former Fine Gael TD from Tipperary 
and a number of leading businessmen in the republic – members of a so-called 
"golden circle" who made deals and earned millions thanks, in part, to their 
political connections.

In particular, Lowry has been the focus of public interest due to his links to 
the billionaire telecoms tycoon Denis O'Brien and the former supermarket boss 
Ben Dunne.

On Tuesday, that nexus was exposed in a damning report 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/mar/22/irish-minister-accused-collusion-telecoms?INTCMP=SRCH>
 investigating Lowry's role as a minister when O'Brien was bidding for a 
lucrative mobile phone license.

The Moriarty tribunal of inquiry concluded it was "beyond doubt" that Lowry 
gave what it termed "substantive information to Denis O'Brien, of significant 
value and assistance to him in securing the licence".

Running to more than 2,000 pages and costing hundreds of millions of euros, 
the report concluded that Lowry proceeded to bypass consideration by his 
cabinet colleagues and thereby not only influenced but also delivered the 
result that Esat Digifone had won the evaluation process, ultimately leading to 
the licensing award.

The report describes these matters as elements of Lowry's "insidious and 
pervasive influence" on the process.

The tribunal, headed by a Dublin high court judge, also found Lowry sought to 
influence the outcome of an arbitration being conducted in 1995 in relation to 
the rent payable by then state-owned Telecom Eireann for Marlborough House to a 
company owned and controlled by Dunne. The hike in rents agreed by Lowry's 
department made Dunne millions.

The report found that move was "profoundly corrupt to a degree that was 
nothing short of breathtaking".

In typically bullish fashion, Dunne rejected the findings and insisted he is 
not a corrupt businessman.

He said that if the tribunal felt he acted outside the law, it should forward 
a file to the republic's director of public prosecutions.

Lowry no longer belongs to the main party of the new government, Fine Gael – 
the allegations of graft and sleaze forced him out of the party a long time ago.

None the less, in the face of these latest accusations from a report 
originally established to investigate the openly venal and corrupt Charles J 
Haughey, you would think Lowry's position as a member of parliament would be 
untenable. But to think that is to fundamentally misunderstand the nature of 
politics in the Irish Republic.

Despite more than 15 years of controversy over his connections to the "golden 
circle", Lowry will not be stepping down from the Dáil.

Regardless of the accusations, 14,000 voters re-elected him to the parliament 
in last month's general election. Lowry topped the poll in Tipperary with two 
quotas, having doubled his support from the first time he entered the Dáil as a 
then Fine Gael TD.

Whatever else he is, in the eyes of the electorate of Tipperary, Lowry is the 
local man made good who brings jobs and investment to the county. He bats – or, 
given that county's love of the Gaelic sport of hurling, hurls – for Tipp' when 
up in Dublin.

Indeed, during the final period of the last government led by Fianna Fáil, 
Lowry extracted concessions to his constituency as the price of his support for 
the Brian Cowen-led coalition.

The survival of Lowry proves that Tip O'Neill's old saw about all politics, in 
essence, being local. InIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>, 
they are very much local. All is forgiven if the local lad can deliver the 
goods, it seems.

Even Charlie Haughey (who once took a £1m personal donation from Dunne) still 
had his admirers when the Moriarty tribunal first reported the extent of his 
corruption.

As for the national picture, the ghost of Lowry has haunted Fine Gael this 
week. The Moriarty report found, for instance, that €80,000 was given to Fine 
Gael by Denis O'Brien. Mercifully for Fine Gael, the then Fine Gael prime 
minister, John Bruton, handed that money back.

That means the damage done to Fine Gael is probably containable, especially 
given that Enda Kenny is completely distanced from the Lowry era.

Instead, Kenny's premiership will be defined over the next few weeks when he 
goes toEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> to renegotiate 
the IMF/European Central Bank €80bn-plus rescue package for Ireland.

And that Herculean task begins this week when he meets fellow EU premiers 
ahead of a critical EU summit later this month.
 