
Ian Rankin: Tony and I have a special relationship, which is based around a 
love of alcohol and dangerous foods. Living in Scotland, you can't help but 
like dangerous foods.

Anthony Bourdain: Deep-fried Mars Bars.

IR: And the deepfried haggis. I introduced you to that. And the curried rib.

AB: Was it a king rib?

IR: No, it was a cut up burger-y thing. There was no rib in it. But the last 
time we met was in your local in New York, which is a world away from the 
Oxford Bar, which is where we met before.

AB: The Siberia Bar. It's a fairly squalid hellhole with no sign but it's 
actually a really comfortable place.

IR: Comfortable wasn't a word that came to mind. Dangerous was a word that 
came to mind when we came through the front door past the dancer...

AB: You never know whether you'll go in and find a load of cops hanging out, 
or the other thing entirely. You might find a load of restaurant people, which 
is one of the reasons I like the place.

IR: And absolutely no narcotics...

AB: Minimal narcotics. There are a couple of interesting policies: no hitting 
on women and no cursing, especially if the owner doesn't like you. He says it 
keeps things calm. He's very orthodox in that way. If he gets too many yuppie 
Wall Street guys hanging around the bar with their shirts off and in 
suspenders...

IR: That's braces, by the way...

AB: Yeah, he plays really disturbing, hardcore gay porn at around one in the 
morning. He'll turn round to the bartender and say, "Run the film... " That 
thins out the yuppies right away.

IR: He sounds like the guy who most famously ran the Oxford Bar, he left in 
1979, just before I started drinking there, called Willie Ross. You weren't 
allowed to hit on women because no women were allowed in. There was no women's 
toilet. If you were English, you weren't allowed in. If you were a student you 
weren't allowed in. If you asked for food, like a packet of crisps, he dragged 
you outside, pointed at the sign and said, "Does that say bar or fucking 
restaurant?" Some people have got great stories about him. He sounds like a 
terrible man to me, but a character, and you need characters.

AB: Somebody noticed that I obliquely referred to the actual bar, I did the 
best I could to not identify either the bar or the person who brought me there. 
I didn't want to see any American tourists there. The first time I went there I 
thought, "I want to die here, with a pint glass in my hand."

IR: Unfortunately the Rebus walking tour always ends up at the Oxford Bar. 
There is an official walking tour of Edinburgh, they take you to all the murder 
scenes. The man who runs it says you can go in if you want, but I'm not 
actually going to take you in as a group because Harry the barman is the rudest 
barman in Scotland. He would immediately eject any of them he didn't like the 
look of. The reason I go in there is because it takes you straight back down to 
earth again. I walk in there and Harry says, "When are you going to get a 
proper fucking job?" I say, "I'm 42 years old, I quite like what I'm doing." I 
get the feeling that if my parents were alive, that's how they would feel.

AB: All my cooks definitely feel that way. I've brought disgrace to my 
profession by writing. I feel that way sometimes.

IR: You're never going to do one of those chef books are you, where it's just 
all recipes?

AB: Yeah, I'm going to be doing the Jamie Oliver Christmas special, sitting in 
a hot tub together, long massages and Santa hats... No I don't think so.

IR: I don't think Jamie does that. Have you ever come across Nigella Lawson... 
so to speak?

AB: I didn't like the whole idea of Nigella Lawson. Everyone thought she was 
cute, I didn't like the provocative nibbling of an asparagus thing. Is she a 
chef? I don't like stand-up cooking shows in general. I hated the whole idea of 
her. Someone said to me, come out to dinner with me and Nigella. I ended up 
sitting at a table with her, we were all talking about shock food, trying to 
gross each other out. I mentioned I'd eaten a live beating cobra heart in 
Vietnam, drank its blood and bile, I thought that was pretty good. The other 
guy was talking about eating big bugs in the Sahara. I looked over at Nigella 
and she was really into this passionate discussion we were having, so I'm 
liking her already. Then she said, "I was in the south-west of France and they 
ordered a pig for me, a roasted, crispy foetus, it was delicious." I thought 
now that is hardcore. I thought that was really cool, so actually became a fan.

Audio clip: Anthony Bourdain on Nigella Lawson (1min 36s) 
<http://stream.theguardian.com:7080/ramgen/sys-audio/Books/audio/2002/10/15/crime1.ra>

IR: I didn't see that one... Although you've got this successful career as a 
writer about food and as an executive chef in New York, you also like crime 
fiction, you write crime fiction. Is that something that goes back a long way?

AB: I read crime fiction, I love crime movies, like most Americans - we look 
at outlaws as our heroes. The man in black was always more interesting that the 
cowboy with the white hat. I'm also working through personal issues when I 
write crime fiction. As much fun as it is, and lucrative, to write and talk 
about myself, it really feels good to lose yourself in characters and solve 
their problems with guns and blunt objects. You put characters in situations of 
crisis, crime and violence come with that.

IR: I think you are probably right, that's why crime writers are such balanced 
individuals in real life, all that stuff we write about has come from 
somewhere: it's either been channelled from above or below or it's just in our 
imaginations, these rather fertile and disturbing imaginations we've got. If we 
didn't write it all down, who knows?

AB: Criminals speak in interesting patterns. When you create a world, as you 
have done, it's a whole little universe with rules and expectations. The 
language in there is much more interesting than the day to day, 9-to-5. If you 
listen to some of the guys in Sopranos, that's poetry to me, it's beautiful. I 
like Brit gangster movies too, I love the speech patterns and expressions, 
often the more murderous these guys are the funnier they are. I like the 
divided nature of criminals, I like heroes in fact. It's not so much, "Does the 
good guy catch the bad guy at the end of the book?"; it's more, "Is the good 
guy still a good guy at the end of the book?" It's the struggle for good and 
evil within the protagonist that I find most interesting.

IR: In your novels, the characters at the start are always morally grey, they 
are never cleancut. They are morally compromised at the beginning of the book, 
and what you hope is that they will get to the end of the book alive.

AB: I've been in the restaurant business for 28 years, so I don't know anyone 
who isn't morally compromised when they get going. It's a comfortable world to 
write about. I don't know anyone completely good.

IR: What issues have you been working through with Bobby Gold?

AB: Shame and guilt, it's a book about a guy who when we meet is breaking an 
old man's arm, yet he's the hero. He's a big, hulking, dangerous guy, who likes 
to think he performs his tasks of breaking arms and legs with a minimum of 
force. He takes satisfaction in the technical proficiency in which he does it. 
In some pathetic way he's yearning to be normal. I can relate to that. There's 
this urge to stand in the backyard and barbecue. I try to create characters 
that are caught up in a grey world.

IR: Are you as influenced by TV and film as by other writers?

AB: I grew up on movies, as I'm writing I'm thinking what it looks like and 
what it sounds like. I really don't care whodunit in books, I'm not there to 
find out whodunit, I like spending time with the characters.

IR: I would love to give it all away in line one - in fact, the book I'm 
writing now, I do give it away in line one. This is who did it, this is how 
they did it, this is why they did it. Then the story starts. Critics and 
academics always say the reason why crime novels are not taken more seriously 
in Britain especially, is because of the structure, the red herrings, getting 
all the suspects together. It makes it a fictional construction and not enough 
like real life.

AB: Do you think about throwing out all the red herrings?

IR: Yeah, the problem is though that structure enforces itself as you write 
the book. You find you do need red herrings and other subplots. The story takes 
over. As much as I try to plan books, I might as well chuck the script away, 
because the story will go off on huge tangents that are much more interesting 
than the plans I had for the book. The best example was Set In Darkness, which 
was to be the first book in a trilogy about a hugely important Scottish 
parliament, the most important thing to happen in Scotland in 300 years. I 
planned it that there was a guy in book one, running to be a member of 
parliament, book two he's elected, book three the parliament is up and running. 
Great, except 20 pages into book one, I kill him. So it turned into a one-book 
trilogy, because that's all the Scottish parliament deserves.

AB: Do you feel a gravitational pull in your work?

IR: I think it's easier in American crime fiction, because we've got this idea 
that you have a gun culture.

AB: I'm not a gun nut, if too many people get shot too soon into a book, I 
lose interest. I would find it a problem to have my detective not to be able to 
at least pistol with somebody.

IR: Bobby Gold does pretty well with just his fists. It's a very disturbing 
scene, the one you were talking about earlier. He knows the guy, his uncle, and 
he has to go up to him and say, "I've got to break your leg or nose now."

AB: The uncle is a degenerate gambler, every two years he is late with 
payments, so someone is sent to break his arm, he's lucky that this time it's 
his nephew. I imagine a lot of that goes on. I was really interested in that 
creepily consensual violence thing - it turns out that the uncle is no angel; 
he talks about an incident when some less skilled people were beating him up, 
once he got out of the hospital, he employed them himself.

IR: That's what I mean about morally grey areas.

AB: Victims are not always nice guys.

IR: Do you have an incredible split personality now? Last night you were on a 
show in Dublin talking about Cook's Tour.

AB: I have no idea what I do for a living anymore. I guess I'm just a lucky 
cook who has an opportunity to tell stories.

IR: There's one way to know if you are still a chef or not. Do you still carry 
a box of knives around with you?

AB: I don't carry knives to airports much these days.

IR: You're the executive chef, right? Does that mean you make up the menus?

AB: Yeah, theoretically.

IR: Shall we talk about evil? This is something, as crime writers, we have to 
think about. Do we have a moral responsibility when writing these books with 
dark characters? How do we represent these characters to the public? I hadn't 
thought about it except in those terms. I've been making a three-part 
documentary on Channel 4, about evil. What do we mean when we use the term 
evil? Because it's relentlessly overused. We have examples from Bush, "My job 
now is to rid the world of evil!" After three programmes we still didn't know 
what was meant by evil. In programme two, we looked at if evil does exist, 
where does it come from? Programme three, what do we do about it? I went to 
death row in Texas, I met a man who'd been on death row for 15 years, a black 
guy with an IQ of 70. Apparently, there's nothing but black guys with low IQs 
on death row in Texas. What do you think about evil?

AB: It just seems too easy to be evil sometimes. Evil is when fairly decent 
people make compromises. That's the evil I want to understand more, when good 
people struggle with the evil within themselves. A sociopath who takes pleasure 
in hurting others, and is clearly nuts - what do you do about them? I think 
that society can live with the evil of murdering, not executing. What do you do?

IR: In some cases what you do is put them in jail - when they come out they 
serve as useful members of the community by becoming bestselling crime writers 
like Anne Perry. When I went to death row and talked to that guy, it was an 
interesting comparison because I went back to Scotland and talked to Anne Perry 
in the back of a Rolls Royce. She served eight years for helping a friend kill 
her mother in cold blood in the 50s. She was one year too young to be executed.

AB: You sound like you don't approve?

IR: Don't approve of her being alive?

AB: Yes.

IR: No, I think it's just chance, depending on your circumstance, you can 
murder someone and either end up on death row or as a bestselling crime writer. 
It all depends on the system you are a part of and how good your lawyer is. 
Which is the reason you get so many poor black guys on death row in America.

AB: In one place I visited, one guy I met pointed out a man in the street who 
had killed his own family. He said he would be voting for him as sheriff in the 
next election. The journalist there was horrified and said, "You must be scared 
of him?" The guy said, "No, this is the best of the many unlovely options." In 
that neighbourhood they won't be making too many distinctions between degrees 
of evil. It's people caught in bad situations, you don't know about good or 
evil until you are pushed into making a hard decision.

IR: Is any of this stuff taken on board when you write? Who are you writing 
for?

AB: I'm writing for myself. In Gone Bamboo I was trying to write a 
dysfunctional potboiler that people like me would like to read on a beach 
blanket. It pleases me to write. How about you?

IR: I always want every book I write to be better than the one before, you are 
afraid to repeat yourself. At the same time you can't make the next book really 
different from the last.

AB: Have you ever considered doing anything really rash with one of your 
characters?

IR: No, because whenever I read a series of books with the same detective, if 
the detective goes away on holiday it's a sign the series is really flagging.

AB: Do you believe in amateur sleuths?

IR: I think it's much harder to believe than used to be the case. English 
writers started to write about amateur detectives for the same reasons 
Americans started using private eyes... because you don't have to know how the 
police work. You don't have to know any of the procedural stuff, or the 
forensic, you have someone outside the normal criteria.

AB: If I've just killed my wife and buried her somewhere, and Miss Marple 
turns up, I'm not telling her shit.

IR: I don't want to diss the traditional English crime novel, they just annoy 
me. I tried reading Agatha Christie, but it didn't say anything about the world 
I lived in. I was always desperately wanting to find books that did. I started 
writing contemporary books about Edinburgh because nobody else was doing it. I 
didn't know why no one else was writing about it. Now we have the opposite 
problem, every fucker is writing about it. There are more crime writers there 
than criminals. I want some seriously older people to come along and write some 
crime fiction. I'm sick of being called the grand old man of Scottish crime 
writing.

Audio clip: Ian Rankin on why he started writing crime novels (1min 35s) 
<http://stream.theguardian.com:7080/ramgen/sys-audio/Books/audio/2002/10/15/crime2.ra>

AB: When violence occurs in books, it hurts, it looks painful and it has 
consequences. Does a crime writer have any kind of responsibility to show 
consequences of violence?

IR: The consequences are more interesting, it's the same with murder, the 
effect that a murder has on a community is much more interesting than the crime 
itself. It's the aftermath that interests me.

AB: Have you ever thought of a really cool way of killing someone and just 
done it for that reason alone?

IR: Yes, I went on an underground tour of Edinburgh, I gave this guy 20 quid 
and he took me down to an underground city. There was this vaulted room with 
hooks hanging down, as soon as I saw it I thought - next book, someone's 
hanging from there.

AB: For my first book, the editor said, we have a problem, all the major 
characters make it through alive, you've got to kill at least one of them or at 
least wing one. I work in a kitchen, I thought of the most painful, horrible 
thing you could do to a person with one of those rotary meat slicers... I read 
that scene now and I hurt reading it.

Audio clip: Anthony Bourdain and Ian Rankin on inventing interesting deaths 
(53secs) 
<http://stream.theguardian.com:7080/ramgen/sys-audio/Books/audio/2002/10/15/crime4.ra>

IR: It's funny that when you start off you will do anything you are told. My 
agent once said to me the reason your books don't sell as well in America as 
they do in Britain is because the murder doesn't happen till page 60, 70, 80, 
or 90. We need the killing on page one. I did that for a while but then decided 
I didn't like it. What I do like is open endings, so all the loose ends aren't 
necessarily tied up. Real life isn't like that. In the States I had to add 
another chapter at the end of the book to explain what happened to the 
characters.

AB: The opposite of the director's cut?

IR: So and so went off and opened up a tanning butter factory. 

IR: A mystery solving chef is not a bad idea... Writers, when they get 
together, never talk about writing, because when we do we start nicking each 
other's ideas. At the Edinburgh festival, I was asked, "What's your next book 
about, have you started it yet?" I said, "Yes, I'm 40 pages in. It's about a 
shooting in a posh private school just outside Edinburgh. Two 17-year-old Goths 
are shot down by an ex-army guy." Everyone thought it sounded quite 
interesting. The next day in the newspaper: "Rankin to write Dunblane novel". 
It must have been a quiet day, he'd actually phoned up some of the victims' 
families. So, you have to be very careful what you say in front of an audience, 
people get the wrong idea.

AB: My plan is to go to Vietnam, and figure out what to write when I get 
there. I love the country.

IR: I would have thought you would find it a very alien place?

AB: It's as different from New York City as any place could be. I fell in love 
though, the food is incredible, it's a gentle, beautiful place, just like the 
movies only better. Every time I go there I seem to read The Quiet American. I 
don't know if I want to write like Graham Greene but I want his life, to some 
extent.

IR: Is he your favourite writer?

AB: He's one writer I keep coming back to. 

IR: Questions now? 

Q1: How do you feel about your books being taught on higher education courses?

IR: It means I get a lot of emails from students asking where I get my ideas 
from. It's a bit odd, because when I started writing crime fiction it was 
actually an accident, I thought I was rewriting Jekyll and Hyde for the 80s in 
Edinburgh, but as it turned out I was writing a crime novel, because the main 
guy was a cop not a doctor. At the time I thought I was going to become a 
professor of English; suddenly, I'd become a writer by accident. I was so 
apologetic to all my professors at university. I had to read a lot of crime 
fiction in order to make myself feel all right about the situation. At first my 
books were unlikely to be recommended by the Scottish tourist board. Now, at 
school you do an extended essay as part of your course, and choose which book 
you want to write about. One of the books on the list is Black and Blue. A 
lecturer at St Andrews has just written a book about it - a 100-page book about 
one of my books, is that freaky or what? It's like crime fiction has suddenly 
become OK, which is great. The literary novel in England is in a state of 
crisis at the moment. Look at the Booker prize shortlist: three Canadian 
novels, one Irish, one Australian and one English novel - a 19th century novel. 
All the big prizewinning books are historical novels. It's like the literary 
novel doesn't want to deal with the here and now and the problems we've got 
with urban society in Britain. A crime novel very much does, we've moved out of 
Miss Marple's village and into urban society. We are talking about the problems 
we've got and how we got here. That's what we like about crime fiction.

Audio clip: Ian Rankin on the crime novel v the literary novel (1min 32s) 
<http://stream.theguardian.com:7080/ramgen/sys-audio/Books/audio/2002/10/15/crime3.ra>

Q2: Are people writing to you with recipes or ideas for murders? What sort of 
fans do you have?

AB: I get some pretty disturbing mail... I get mail from convicts, I hear from 
the same guys over and over. Also, a lot of chefs saying, "You wrote my life, 
man." It was a real surprise to me that there's this chef subculture that cooks 
in Australia, Scotland, Spain, France: all sharing similar experiences. That 
feels good. The disturbing stuff is from convicts and from people that know me 
only from TV.

IR: Could you do us a favour and try and get Gordon Ramsay to write a crime 
novel?

AB: I'll tell you this: Gordon Ramsay is a very funny guy. He called Antony 
Worrall Thompson a 'squashed Bee Gee.' He sure talks real well.

IR: I got a letter recently from a guy in jail, he was talking about a book of 
mine called Dead Souls. The guy who wrote to me is Scottish and currently in 
jail for murder in Walla Walla, he said thanks for putting me in your book. 
Lots of the letter was cut out, by the censor, I guess. I was worried that 
these were the bits that said, "I'm going to be released in a couple of weeks"

Q3: What are your favourite characters in Rebus and what is your favourite 
book?

IR: My favourite characters are ones that were supposed to be tiny little 
cameos and grew to be huge behemoths. I like Cafferty, the villain who runs 
Edinburgh. He started life as a tiny, tiny character in Tooth and Nail and just 
got under my skin, and now I can't bear not to write about him. Siobhan, Rebus' 
colleague, was meant to be just one of his colleagues but she was very 
interesting to write about - she's English, which means I can talk about racism 
in Scotland. She's a woman in what's seen as a man's job so you can talk about 
sexism in the police force. And she's attached to Rebus' way of doing things, 
bending the rules. But she's canny and wants to climb up the promotion ladder, 
so she's tempted to break the rules but can't go that far. So she's got lots of 
sides to her, and I liked that - she just forced her way through to be a major 
character. My favourite book is Black and Blue because it was the breakthrough 
book - it won the Gold Dagger and it broke into the top 10 in the UK. It was 
the first book where I thought I'd got Rebus. I knew him and I felt confident 
about what the crime novel could do and what I could do with him.

Q4: Did you have any input into the casting of John Hannah as Rebus on TV?

IR: This young, glamorous, thin, healthy looking Scottish actor with an East 
Kilbride accent? No, I had no say in that whatsoever. The first person up for 
it was Robbie Coltrane. Actually, no, the first person was Leslie Grantham who 
played Dirty Den in EastEnders. He bought the rights to Knots and Crosses when 
it came out, but didn't do anything with it - thank God. John Hannah's 
production company bought it and so I knew he'd want to play Rebus. I felt it 
was a bit of a mistake because he was too young and too good looking, but what 
the hell. I consulted some other crime writers and they all said, "Take the 
money and run."

AB: All of my books have now been bought or optioned by Hollywood. I heard 
that Brad Pitt was going to play me and I didn't like the idea - he's way too 
pretty. I knew that the cooks in my kitchen would bust my balls so bad. But you 
look at all the great writers who were smarter and better than me, and a lot of 
them were ruined by believing that they were going to make a great movie out of 
the book. Just take the money and run. You're the last person they'll want to 
hear from.

IR: You can't win. I used to do these gigs and people would say, "When's Rebus 
going to be on TV?" And then when he was on TV, they said, "He's wrong. Why was 
it on TV?" The good news, for those of you who don't like John Hannah, is that 
he's gone and Ken Stott is coming in, maybe next year. He was in The Vice and 
is Edinburgh born and bred. He's a rumpled kind of guy - he wouldn't be my 
first choice, but he's better than John Hannah. First choice would have been 
Brian Cox, who played the first Hannibal Lecter. He looks like he's been in the 
SAS, which is more than I can say for John Hannah. Or Robbie Coltrane.

Q5: Has anyone been interested in Jack Harvey books for films?

IR: No. No one's gone near them.

Q6: Do you miss working in the kitchens?

AB: I'm 46 years old and I've spent 28 years of my life doing 150 knee bends a 
day to get into the fridge. I'm slowing down. It's hot. But I miss the 
camaraderie and the satisfaction of cooking well under pressure, night after 
night as part of a team. That's satisfying in a way that writing has never been 
for me. Writing has been more lucrative, and has allowed me to travel the 
world, but I do miss it.

Q7: What comes first, character or plot?

IR: The first draft of a book is an exploration for me - it's getting to know 
the characters, what their motives are and what I can do with them. They often 
end up dying on page 20, because I thought I had some use for them, but I 
didn't. Sometimes minor characters become major characters. But I don't sit 
there and do a major background for each of them. Which is why I sometimes 
forget who they are. When Resurrection came out in January and I did a gig in 
Edinburgh, I was asked about a character in one of the early books and it meant 
nothing to me - I couldn't remember him at all. Afterwards a guy came up to me 
and said that I should let him do a database of all of my characters. I 
immediately thought of duct tape in the back of a car. But the guy's name is 
Jimmy and he's become a good friend, and he's just finished the job after eight 
months. He's done this 400-page printout of all the characters in all the books 
with crossovers and background. It's a labour of love, and I'm going to put it 
up on the website as soon as I can. That's a big help.

AB: This guy's scaring me...

· This is an edited transcript of Ian Rankin and Anthony Bourdain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/anthonybourdain> in conversation at 
this year's Waterstone's Dead on Deansgate crime fiction festival in 
Manchester. To find out more about the festival, call Jude Davis on 0161 837 
3030.

Listen to audio clips of the conversation

Clip 1: 
<http://stream.theguardian.com:7080/ramgen/sys-audio/Books/audio/2002/10/15/crime1.ra>
 Anthony Bourdain on Nigella Lawson (1min 36s)

Clip 2: 
<http://stream.theguardian.com:7080/ramgen/sys-audio/Books/audio/2002/10/15/crime2.ra>
 Ian Rankin on why he started writing crime novels (1min 35s)

Clip 3: 
<http://stream.theguardian.com:7080/ramgen/sys-audio/Books/audio/2002/10/15/crime3.ra>
 Ian Rankin on the crime novel v the literary novel (1min 32s)

Clip 4: 
<http://stream.theguardian.com:7080/ramgen/sys-audio/Books/audio/2002/10/15/crime4.ra>
 Anthony Bourdain and Ian Rankin on inventing interesting deaths for crime 
novel characters (53secs)
 