
'Very brave, minister," Sir Humphrey might warn about today's green paper 
<http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/SocialCare/DH_078755> on social care for the elderly. 
The government proposes a fundamentalreform 
<http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/life_and_style/health/article6695688.ece> of 
how care is paid for and how well it is delivered. This is an explosive issue, 
unleashing clashing political furies. How should services be funded: 
collectively or privately, with local or national standards, billed before or 
after death?

Undeterred by these flashing warning lights, the health secretary Andy Burnham 
thinks the plan may be a winner for Labour's manifesto. This is a good new 
policy – but can a weakened government win such a difficult argument against 
the noisy forces lining up against it? Doing the brave thing may be the only 
way for Labour to regain public trust – and this challenges the Tories. This 
wicked issue can't be fudged when millions of older voters will demand to know 
what David Cameron would do.

Polling shows that few people understand the care system until they need care 
for themselves or elderly parents. But growing numbers are shocked to discover 
that it's not free (except for the poorest), and in most places it's not good 
either. People discover the hated "postcode lottery", where what they get 
depends on the policy or parsimony of their local council. (Extreme localists 
note that the public detests local difference more than they yearn to 
participate in local policymaking.) If people require expensive years in a 
nursing home, they discover that a council will sell their property to pay for 
it. Some 60,000 frail old people a year lose their homes, causing outrage 
(mainly to their children).

Labour traditionally regarded this as fair enough: if the taxpayer picks up 
the high cost of your care home and you are never returning to your property, 
then you should pay, rather than hand the estate on to middle-aged children. It 
is life's lottery: if you drop dead before you need care, you keep your 
property to pass to your children. The spin of the roulette wheel gives you 
only an estimated 1:6 chance of having your property being seized and sold. But 
that argument has been lost, along with the case Labour failed to make for the 
fairness of inheritance tax. It now causes unreasonable but politically 
unsustainable rage.

However, all other options may be unpopular too. Raising the question may just 
remind people how much they don't want to pay, and neither do they want tax 
rises. Can Labour force the Conservatives to face this dilemma too? Money must 
be found, since the quality of care is well below any acceptable standard. Even 
without improvement, there will soon be a £6bn funding gap. The average cost 
per head is £30,000, varying between the drop-dead lucky ones who pay nothing 
and long-term Alzheimer's cases who may pay £200,000 for years in a nursing 
home.

Today's green paper will lay out various options. On retirement, everyone who 
can would pay a lump sum of around £20,000 up front and nothing ever again. Or 
that sum could be attached to the value of their home, deducted from their 
estate after death along with accumulated interest. Or, if you delay retirement 
and don't draw your state pension for three years, the sum would be waived 
altogether. These could be mixed and matched by paying a portion up front, and 
having a portion attached to the value of your home.

One thing is plain: if the scheme is to work, then paying this £20,000 will 
have to be compulsory for all – or at least for the 70% who own property and 
savings. Polling showed only 15%-20% would pay up and join the scheme if it was 
voluntary: the rest would take their chance with the care roulette wheel, 
hoping for the best and risking losing everything. But unless all join, this 
universal insurance plan won't work.

The vital quid pro quo is a rapid improvement in care: some services are so 
appalling that agency care assistants helping people at home are given only 15 
minutes to get someone out of bed, bathed and dressed and only two minutes to 
take them to the toilet, with no travel time between clients. In one case a 
carer could only keep to the timetable by feeding an old person who was sitting 
on the toilet.

Care is being spread more thinly as the number in need rises: now most 
councils help only extreme cases. According toAge Concern 
<http://www.communitycare.co.uk/Articles/2009/06/10/111777/age-concernhelp-the-aged-slam-care-rationing-in-top-councils.html>
, even councils with three stars restrict care to those with the highest needs. 
So the green paper proposes a new national care service with a "minimum care 
entitlement". Regardless of postcode, everyone will know what care their 
contribution buys.

But another dangerous issue surfaces in this green paper: the £4.4bn 
attendance allowance 
<http://www.direct.gov.uk/en/DisabledPeople/FinancialSupport/DG_10012425> paid 
to all frail enough to need help, regardless of means, may be removed from 
future claimants. The idea is to roll it into the new personal care budget, 
which frees people to buy whatever help they want – care, or taxis, or whatever 
eases their lives. It seems reasonable to put everything into this one budget. 
After all, this new insurance scheme will not cover full costs: at least 30% 
will still be paid for out of general taxes, as 30% of old people have no 
savings or property. But expect campaigning groups to resist any change to the 
attendance allowance.

Labour might do well to drop it for now, since so far only 27,000 have 
personal budgets. In exchange Labour would earn the support of pressure groups 
vital to winning public goodwill. Age Concern and the new umbrella of care 
charities have greeted the funding reform warmly, but Labour knows to its cost 
that the voluntary sector has a habit of vanishing from the battlefield at the 
first whiff of political gunpowder. TheMail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-1198969/New-stealth-tax-middle-classes-pay-care-old-age.html>
 has already fired the first cannonade. "New stealth tax on middle classes", 
ran its headline – though anything less stealthy than an upfront £20,000 is 
hard to imagine. The Mail praises the end of a system in which some lose their 
whole property, but it complains that "the middle class will continue to be 
unfairly penalised" because those who have "worked and saved" will pay while 
those with nothing pay nothing.

What's its answer? All care should be free for all. But its method of paying 
is a dishonest fudge: "Trim our bloated public sector to fund a vital service 
instead of grabbing at the wallets of those who've spent their lives paying 
taxes." The Conservatives will need to come up with something better than that 
in answer to Labour's genuinely bold and fair proposals.
 