
A highly-commended detective has been cleared of giving a misleading account 
to the public of what was said during a meeting with the MPAndrew Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrew-mitchell> over the Plebgate affair.

He is the second officer to be cleared of any disciplinary offence in relation 
to a meeting he had with Mitchell shortly after the spat outside Downing Street 
in 2012 which was made public in the media.

DS Stuart Hinton and two other Police Federation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/police-federation> representatives met 
Mitchell at his constituency office in October 2012, three weeks after the 
politician was involved in the altercation in Downing Street which came to be 
known as Plebgate.

The meeting took placed amid a high-profile federation campaign against the 
cuts to policing. Hinton, a serving Warwickshire police officer, was accused of 
giving a false impression of Mitchell’s explanation of the incident, when he 
spoke to BBC Radio 5 Live on 13 October.

But a misconduct panel on Wednesday found his comments did not amount to 
dishonesty, discreditable conduct or a breach of integrity.


He is the last of three police officers to face disciplinary hearings over the 
meeting with Mitchell and its aftermath. Only one, Insp Ken Mackaill, has been 
found guilty of misconduct.

Hinton was described in the hearing as a model detective with a string of 
commendations to his name. The officer, who was the federation branch secretary 
at the time of the meeting with Mitchell, said in evidence: “My intention was 
to give an accurate view of the meeting.”

Giving the decision, the tribunal chairman, Assistant Chief Constable Ingrid 
Lee, of South Yorkshire police, said: “The panel are of the view that this [Mr 
Mitchell’s] was such a partial account of what was believed to have happened it 
wasn’t misleading for Sgt Hinton to say: ‘He still won’t say exactly what he 
did say,’ in his radio interview.”


She added: “The panel therefore do not consider that the account Sgt Hinton 
gave was misleading or believe he was intending to mislead anyone or was 
careless as to whether he might have been.”


A libel judge ruled in 2014 that Mitchell probably did call PC Toby Rowland a 
pleb after the then Conservative chief whip was stopped from riding his bike 
through the vehicle gate in Downing Street on 19 September 2012.

But at the time of the meeting with Hinton, on 12 October, Mitchell denied 
uttering the offending word.

Closing the misconduct case against Hinton on Wednesday, Aaron Rathmell said 
Hinton had got involved in the “politically toxic dispute”, as federation 
representatives in the Midlands were poised to launch a campaign against 
policing budget cuts.

Rathmell, presenting officer, said: “Sgt Hinton’s answers to the radio 
presenter contained – regrettably – spin and that is not a compliment, 
emphasising some things at the cost of balance and accuracy.

“Spin is not a word that is usually or should be associated with police.” 


A secret recording of the meeting with the Sutton Coldfield MP, played to the 
tribunal, heard Mitchell state: “I did not say – and I give you my word – I did 
not call an officer a fucking pleb, and that you should know your fucking 
place.”


Mitchell also said: “I complied with the officer and picked up my bicycle and, 
you know, but I did say, you know, under my breath but audibly – in 
frustration: ‘I thought you lot were supposed to fucking help us’ – I did say 
that and it is for that I apologise.”


The next day, Hinton told BBC radio: “He still won’t say exactly what he did 
say, which suggests that the officer’s account is more likely to be the 
accurate one.” He also called for the MP to resign.


In his closing statement to the panel, Rathmell said the officer had “passed 
judgment” and not given a fair and accurate account of the meeting.


But Hinton’s barrister told the hearing: “A man of his integrity is being 
charged with inaccurately reporting the lies told by a dishonest man [Mr 
Mitchell].”


Adrian Keeling said: “One striking feature of the evidence, and forgive me for 
not pulling punches, is the brazen way and the number of times Mr Mitchell said 
to varying people: ‘I give you my word,’ the number of people he looked in the 
eye and said that to, including the prime minister.”


Keeling added: “Hindsight absolutely supports Sgt Hinton’s honest, accurate 
and candid view, relying on his good sense and judgment, which no doubt he’s 
relied upon all these years [as a detective].”


A string of glowing references from senior officers, including a retired chief 
constable, described Hinton’s character as “beyond reproach”.


Last year, Rowland accepted £80,000 in damages from Mitchell. At the end of 
last year, a disciplinary panel found Hinton’s West MerciaPolice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Federation colleague Mackaill guilty of 
misconduct, but he escaped any penalty.


Another colleague, West Midlands police sergeant Chris Jones was cleared of 
any wrongdoing.


Commenting on the panel’s decision, Mitchell told the Press Association: “It 
really would be better for the police not to conduct these inquiries into their 
own but for independent bodies to carry out this work.


“That would command more public confidence and I hope the justice secretary 
will consider this matter in his forthcoming legislation.”
 