
At the heart of the Old English epic poem Beowulf is Heorot, the splendid mead 
hall built by King Hrothgar to celebrate his victories in war. With its throne 
room, its patterned floor and its wide and towering gables, this was "the hall 
of halls", full of feasting and harping but, the poet adds ominously, "awaiting 
a barbarous burning". Such was the fate of most Anglo-Saxon architecture. Wood 
was plentiful in northern Europe and cheaper than stone, so houses, even those 
as grand as Hrothgar's, were built of timber and burned easily and often. 
Beyond the hints in Beowulf and the remains of halls that archaeologists have 
found at Cheddar and at Yeavering in Northumberland, the story of early British 
architecture is almost entirely told through the churches and monasteries for 
which stone was used. That story begins in the late sixth century with the 
re-introduction of Christianity and the arrival of St Augustine.

At first it was a matter of make do and mend rather than creativity. 
Augustine's first church in Canterbury was patched together from an existing 
Roman one and was in turn swept away by the later cathedral.

One of the best surviving Saxon churches, All Saints Brixworth in 
Northamptonshire, was also built partly out of reused Roman bricks, a remnant 
of the great building campaign begun by Bishop Saxulf of Mercia in 675. All 
Saints was designed on the model of a Roman basilica, a hall with a nave and 
aisles. It was a common pattern, for while Europe was little more than 
a patchwork of warring principalities, the Church was its one unifying force, 
and Christian architecture was international in style. St Peter's in Rome and 
the church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem were the themes on which early 
medieval architecture played across the continent, without producing anything 
particularly remarkable in Britain. Architecturally it could be said that 
Britain went from being a remote provincial outpost of the Roman empire 
to being a remote provincial outpost of Christendom.

But if there was no national style, there were local variations such as the 
monasteries and churches at Jarrow and Monkwearmouth in the seventh century.

However, there were no buildings to match the quality of the art in Ireland's 
illuminated treasure, the Book of Kells, or jewellery like that found at Sutton 
Hoo.

Gradually, however, Europe recovered from the onslaughts of the Vikings and 
the Magyars, and order and prosperity threw up new buildings and new building 
types. A feudal society needed churches and town walls, and its ruling class 
required private strongholds in the countryside, and so the castle was born.

The Normans dominated architectural style after their invasion in 1066. They 
built for permanence, with walls of cut stone filled in with rubble. In London, 
William the Conqueror put up the White Tower, the foundation of the Tower of 
London, which was the biggest building in the city since the Romans left. It 
was joined by equally imposing castles at Rochester and Dover.

Having smartly dismissed most of the local clergy, the Normans set about 
building and rebuilding churches. From Tintagel to Kirkwall Cathedral 
on Orkney, the round Norman arch, supported by massive pillars, swept the 
country. At Durham the new castle and the rebuilt cathedral drew state and 
spiritual power together.

There was a lighter side to Norman buildings, too. In parish churches such as 
Iffley near Oxford, there are decorative, almost playful zigzag patterns and 
lively carvings which, at Kilpeck in Herefordshire, become comic and bawdy.

A century after the Conquest, architecture in England could fairly be called 
Anglo-Norman. The imported style had put down roots and sprouted varieties. In 
Scotland, meanwhile, King David was establishing his own authority with the 
group of great Cistercian monasteries that included Melrose and Jedburgh. By 
1150 the essentials of what would be called gothic were in place. Durham 
already had rib vaults and flying buttresses, though they were concealed. 
Gradually these elements would be recomposed into Britain's first native style, 
the Early English.

• Rosemary Hill is the author of Stonehenge (Profile) and God's Architect: 
Pugin and the Building of Romantic Britain (Penguin)

Three era-defining events

731: The Venerable Bede completes The Ecclesiastical History of the English 
People

The first history of the country, charting the growth of the church in 
England. A precious text in an era of few publications.

1066: Battle of Hastings 

The last successful invasion of these islands, by the Normans, lead to radical 
changes in social hierarchy, land use, law and architecture: Romanesque 
triumphs.

1095: Pope Urban II decrees the first crusade to the Holy Land

Travellers to Jerusalem encounter Islamic design and pointed arches, which 
leads Britain into the gothic world.
 