


1. Church of the Holy Sepulchre, Cambridge 
<http://www.christianheritageuk.org.uk>

Round churches were something of a fad following the first crusade in the late 
11th century. They were modelled on the original Church of the Holy Sepulchre 
in Jerusalem, built by Constantine over Jesus's tomb in the fourth century. The 
Normans translated it into their own style in Cambridge, with thick pillars and 
supporting round arches, and rainbow-like concentric bands of dog-tooth carving.

01223 311602



2. Boothby Pagnell Manor, Lincolnshire

More a country pied à terre by modern standards, this is one of the few 
surviving fragments of domestic architecture from the end of the Norman era 
c1200. The first floor is only accessible by an external staircase, and 
contains a hall and a small bedchamber, while the ground-floor undercroft would 
have been storage and servants' space. It was probably joined to a larger 
timber structure, all surrounded by a moat. It even has a chimney, which at the 
time must have been the height of luxury.

Viewing by appointment only, 01476 585374



3. St Mary and David, Kilpeck, Herefordshire

The structure is fairly typical of a 12th-century village church, but the 
carvings here are something else, in both quality and quantity. Around the 
south door and on the remaining corbels (stone blocks set into the tops of the 
walls) is a lexicon of British symbolism, with some decidedly pagan entries. 
There are snakes eating their tails, mythical beasts, even an explicit 
sheela-na-gig. They almost look like the work of a modern-day cartoonist. There 
are also Christian figures such as angels and a tree of life over the doorway, 
but you're left wondering how they got away with it.

Viewing by appointment only, 01981 570315



4. All Saints, Earls Barton, Northamptonshire 
<http://www.allsaintsearlsbarton.org.uk>

In plain Saxon terms, this 10th-century church tower (c970) is riotous with 
ornament, dressed up as it is with decorative strips of stone (pilasters), none 
of which are strictly necessary to the structure. They may be an imitation of 
timber-frame buildings of the era. The five-light windows around the belfry 
also verge on the ostentatious but the "long and short" pattern of the tower's 
cornerstones is more characteristically Saxon. The rest of the church has 
elements from every subsequent century – from a medieval rood screen to 
Victorian pews.



5. White Tower, Tower of London <http://www.hrp.org.uk/TowerOfLondon>

William the Conqueror's primary power base, an architectural two-fingered 
gesture to his reluctant London subjects: he was in charge and he was here to 
stay. The style was unlike anything else London had seen in scale and 
workmanship at the time of its construction in 1078. William imported the Caen 
stone with which to finish the windows and corners (the whitewash came 200 
years later). It was impregnable as a military stronghold, but a gloomy royal 
residence. The Chapel of St John, in the southeast corner of the tower, is an 
oasis of austere Norman simplicity.

0844-482 7777



6. St John the Evangelist, Escomb, Durham

Clearly built to last, this is one of the best preserved seventh-century 
buildings in Europe. It was built some time between 670 and 690, using stone 
from a nearby Roman fort, which was a common Saxon practice. Some  features, 
such as the chancel arch inside and the north door, are believed to be directly 
re-assembled elements of the Roman construction. It escaped with little 
alteration during the medieval period. The porch may be a late medieval 
structure and the nave roof is dated 1480-90. The small windows, splayed on the 
inside to let in maximum light, are typically Saxon. Its most unusual feature, 
though, is a sundial on the exterior south wall, thought to be Britain's 
oldest. It bears only three marks – one vertical and one at 45° to each side – 
showing times of prayer.

01388 602860



7. Durham Cathedral <http://www.durhamcathedral.co.uk>

"It rather awes than pleases," as Samuel Johnson put it. But England's finest 
Norman building, perched on the city's ecclesiastical acropolis, is an 
architectural leap. Built in 1093, its key innovation was the system of rib 
vaults and pointed arches over the nave and aisles – the beginnings 
of the structural order that enabled gothic architecture to soar and sprawl. 
The vast building holds innumerable riches and mysteries, such as the "odd 
column" with a different pattern to the others – a deliberate mistake? Or 
material for a new Dan Brown novel?

0191-386 4266



8. St Laurence's church, Bradford-on-Avon, Wiltshire

While other churches of the era were destroyed by the Vikings, this humble 
little building, probably from the 10th or early 11th century, prevailed. 
Perhaps they overlooked it because its proportions are so modest. The nave is 
just 25 feet long, but high enough for later owners to include another floor 
and use it as a school. It was only in 1856 during renovation that it was 
recognised as a precious Saxon survivor. The row of blind arcading (see p18) 
around the outside is distinctly pre-Norman, but the most remarkable features 
are the "Bradford Angels" – two finely carved relief sculptures of flying 
angels, carrying cloths to wipe a long-disappeared Christ on the cross.

Open 9.30–5pm all year



9. St Mary's, Sompting, Sussex <http://www.somptingparish.org.uk>

The extraordinary, pyramid-topped spire of this church still looks incongruous 
today. It is known as a Rhenish helm – a style imported from the Rhineland in 
the time of Edward the Confessor, and this is the only surviving British 
example. Beneath the fancy foreign hat, note the narrow, triangular and 
round-headed windows and scant decoration on the tower. The rest of the church 
was built in the 12th century by the Knights Templar.



10. St Botolph, Hadstock, Essex <http://www.essexinfo.net/hadstockchurch>


Proud home of what's believed to be the oldest door in the country, this 
simple little church could be a reminder of how little has changed in English 
village life. It has been through many changes, while enough 11th-century 
features remain – the walls of the nave, the north door and its honeysuckle 
carvings. The tower and south transept were added a few centuries later, but it 
has been in constant use for about 1,000 years. Historians say it may have been 
built by King Canute to commemorate his victory at the Battle of Assandun in 
1016.

01799 500947
 