
There is a great unspoken paradox about the current politico-fiscal crisis 
gripping the Republic of Ireland. The Irish people's anger and disillusionment 
may have thrown a lifeline toSinn Féin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein> and rescued the party from 
total irrelevance in the Republic but its united Ireland project is more 
unrealisable than ever.

Last week Sinn Féin reversed several years of setback in the Irish Republic 
when its candidate easily won the Donegal South West byelection, thus cutting 
the present Irish government's majority in the Dáil to just two seats. Its 
successful candidate, Pearse Doherty, personifies new hope for Sinn Féin in the 
Republic.

Doherty is free from the whiff of cordite that swirls around many of the Sinn 
Féin candidates north and south of the Irish border. He has no past connections 
with the Provisional IRA or the violence that almost droveNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> to edge of civil war during 
the Troubles.

The newly elected TD could fast become the new face of Sinn Féin in the south 
on television, the arena during in which his boss,Gerry Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gerryadams>, performed so disastrously 
during a live party leaders debate on RTE during the last general election.

Adams himself has declared his hand and will seek to regain the Sinn Féin seat 
in County Louth, which would give him a much higher profile in the Irish 
Republic's media over the next few years.

The party will also expect to increase its overall Dáil representation as it 
hopes to harvest votes from disgruntled Fianna Fáil supporters, who are going 
to abandon the Soldiers of Destiny in their droves as punishment for Brian 
Cowen's mishandling of Ireland's fiscal woes.

Some commentators on both sides of the Irish Sea have been hyperventilating 
over Sinn Féin's fortunes and the possibility that the party could soon be 
sitting in power on both sides of the border.

Their reductionist thinking concludes that we could, within the next few 
months, have Martin McGuinness as deputy first minister in Belfast and Adams as 
a minister is some new "rainbow coalition" in Dublin. No doubt the party would 
seek to portray such a benign scenario as the first phase in the drive for 
Irish unity, casting their members as the only people serious about driving 
forward political and economic fusion on the island.

Even if you set aside the fact that the main opposition party, Fine Gael, will 
not take Sinn Féin into an alternative government coalition, the above theory 
is entirely fanciful. And even if you ignore the historic opposition of 
unionists to a UnitedIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>, the 
idea that the north and the south are on an inevitable path towards unity is 
counterfactual.

While Sinn Féin may exploit the seething discontent with the political 
establishment and the Irish banking system, the chronic state of the Republic's 
finances highlights a gaping and growing faultline on this island.

For the foreseeable future Northern Ireland remains in the sterling currency 
zone while the Irish Republic is tied for better or for worse into the 
crisis-ridden euro. Two states with radically different currencies is hardly 
the recipe for economic and social unity.

Worse still for the "united Ireland now" lobby is the undeniable fact that the 
Republic is flat broke and would be unable to afford the billions the UK 
Treasury pumps into Northern Ireland each year.

It is surely a supreme irony that the Irish government, the opposition in the 
Dáil and the trade unions would dearly love more time to drive down the 
country's unprecedented national debt from over 30% today to around 3% of Irish 
GDP.

The EU has given Dublin the target date of 2014 to reach 3% while Dublin would 
prefer if that could be two years later – 2016 to be precise: the year the 
republic will commemorate the 100th anniversary of the Easter Rising.

In 1966 the Irish Republic celebrated the 50th anniversary of the rising at a 
time when the country was modernising under Seán Lemass and emerging from years 
of stagnation and economic autarky.

Amid all the new national confidence were the stirrings of a republican 
renaissance, which was given lethal impetus three years later when sectarian 
violence erupted in Belfast as the unionist regime reacted with typical 
obstinacy to the reformist demands of the civil rights movement. The result was 
three decades of slaughter and destruction.

Fifty years later the Irish Republic will commemorate the rebellion with equal 
national enthusiasm but with most of its population more concerned with the 
huge debts bestowed upon the current generation than the imperative of the 
"dead generations" urging it on to take back the north of Ireland and fulfil 
its historic mission towards unity.

• Henry McDonald's new book, co-authored with the late Jack Holland, INLA: 
Deadly Divisions, is currently on sale and is published by Poolbeg Press
 