
At least 30 people were killed and 250 injured in Port Said on Saturday during 
riots sparked by a court's decision to sentence to death 21 football fans for 
their role in a massacre at a match in the Egyptian city a year ago.

Troops were deployed and rail services suspended after furious relatives 
attacked a police station and a prison in an attempt to free some of those 
condemned. Police used teargas, rubber bullets and live ammunition as fans 
rampaged through the city. Angry fans and relatives also blocked a major road 
and disrupted ferry services.

The carnage followed widespread civil unrest on Friday, which saw hundreds of 
thousands of Egyptians mount violent protests against the president,Mohamed 
Morsi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mohamed-morsi>.

The trial of the 21 condemned men was sparked by the death last February of 74 
football fans in ariot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/middle-east-live/2012/feb/02/egypt-port-said-football-dsaster-live-updates>
 following a match between Al Masry, a Port Said team, and Al Ahly, from Cairo. 
Moments after Al Masry had won 3-1, Al Masry fans chased the players from the 
pitch and attacked those in the Al Ahly stands – sparking what the deputy 
health minister called "the biggest disaster in Egypt's soccer history". The 
entire league was suspended for the rest of the year, while this season's games 
will begin behind closed doors.

Al Masry fans feel they have been made scapegoats by the security forces. Some 
claim security officials instigated, or at least did nothing to stop, the 
attack, due to a long-running antipathy between the club's hardcore fans – 
known as Ultras – and the police.

By Saturday afternoon in Port Said more people had been killed in the 
aftermath of the verdict than sentenced to death by the court. The death toll 
in the past two days was at least 39.

But in Cairo the mood could not have been more different. There was joyful 
pandemonium in the courtroom as judge Sobhy Abdel Maguid read out the verdict, 
which was broadcast on national television. Relatives of those killed last year 
leaped screaming to their feet, jumping up and down, and brandishing large 
portraits of the dead.

Jubilant and unforgiving Al Ahly <https://www.theguardian.com/football/alahly> 
fans also created a carnival atmosphere outside their stadium on Zamalek, an 
island in the middle of the Nile. Thousands of fans gathered from 8am, blocking 
off the street that leads to the stadium, singing songs, waving huge flags, 
beating drums, and setting off flares and fireworks. A few fans from Zamalek, 
Al Ahly's arch-rivals in Cairo who share the same ground, also gathered in 
solidarity.

"I feel very happy, very relieved," Al Ahly fan Salha el-Deen said, holding a 
sign reading: "Congratulations on your execution, Port Said". He said: "I thank 
the judiciary for this very fair decision." Another fan said: "What happened a 
year ago was very sad. Today is a turning point, a new dawn for everyone."

Yet some Al Ahly fans were still furious at the failure to convict any senior 
security officials. Like their Al Masry counterparts, Al Ahly fans allege the 
police were either involved in the deaths or failed to intervene – in revenge, 
they claimed, for the Al Ahly Ultras' role in the 2011 revolution which saw the 
overthrow of the president, Hosni Mubarak. "We are angry, but hope more will be 
convicted in the future," said another fan, who did not give his name.

On Friday, hundreds of thousands of Egyptians took to the streets across the 
country to protest against Morsi and his Islamist allies. At least seven were 
killed and 379 injured in clashes in 12 of Egypt's 27 provinces, as protesters 
sacked state institutions and Muslim Brotherhood offices in several cities.

Worried that the verdict would not appease Al Ahly supporters, Cairo residents 
had braced themselves for more carnage in the capital.

Al Ahly Ultras had already brought central Cairo to a standstill on Wednesday. 
In an attempt to influence the court's decision, the Ultras blocked off parts 
of Cairo's metro system and road networks, and surrounded the Egyptian stock 
exchange. "Beware of our anger: justice or blood," the group wrote on their 
Facebook page on Friday, creating the impression that, whatever the judges' 
verdict, at least Cairo and Port Said would see some trouble.

Fifty-two defendants – including nine policemen – have yet to be sentenced for 
their part in the massacre, while those convicted can still appeal.

In an effort to deal with the situation, Morsi cancelled a trip to Addis 
Ababa, Ethiopia, on Saturday.
 