
Mohamed Hamouda was celebrating the third goal by his team, Al Masry, when a 
policeman standing near the playing field caught his eye. "A police officer 
told supporters to come on to the pitch," Hamouda claimed in the aftermath of 
Egypt's deadliest night of football violence, which killed 74 people and 
wounded hundreds more. "The gates on to the pitch were opened on purpose by 
someone before the game started."

Nursing an arm he said was injured trying to defend besieged fans from the 
Cairo-based Al Ahly club, Hamouda said nothing was normal about the chaotic end 
to the football game on Wednesday night that has reignited a combustible 
post-Mubarak Egypt. "When the match was over supporters rushed on to the pitch 
and then the lights went off," he said. "People didn't know who was with who. I 
then saw people throwing theAl Ahly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alahly> supporters from the stands.

"The gate at the exit was also closed by someone on purpose. I saw people 
yesterday with knives and swords. I don't know them, they were not from Port 
Said."

The mad scramble to escape the carnage inside the Port Said stadium has 
horrified Egyptians, who are demanding answers about how and why the violence 
happened, who – if anyone – might have played a role in inciting it, and why 
the police and security forces appeared to do so little to stop it. The 
question remains whether the deaths and injuries were the result of simple 
football hooliganism that spiralled out of control, the inaction of the 
Egyptian police, who appear to have done nothing to stop the violence as it 
escalated, or whether it was orchestrated by the state, with paid thugs sent 
into the crowd to stir up trouble.

Many of the country's new legislators are calling for Egypt's military rulers 
to be held to account for a death toll unprecedented in the past year of 
turmoil and scenes that have weakened an already unstable and volatile state.

Tension had been building throughout the game, a grudge match between two 
historical foes. Two hardcore groups of fans, known as ultras, sat among the 
rival supporters. The ultras, who partly model themselves on Italian, Serbian 
and even British football gangs, have thrown themselves into the revolution's 
front lines over the past year, fighting frequent pitched battles with riot 
police.

Eyewitnesses spoken to by the Guardian said there was more to the violence 
than pure football hooliganism, the reason put forward by the Supreme Command 
of the Armed Forces, which has ruledEgypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> since Mubarak's removal.

Whatever the cause, the aftermath has become a political crisis. A day of 
highly charged accusations that security officials had partly engineered the 
violence in revenge for the ultras' role in revolutionary violence has led on 
Thursday night to renewed clashes near Tahrir Square, close to the interior 
ministry headquarters. The same riot police who were accused of standing back 
on Wednesday night as a group of Al Masry ultras stormed the field, in pursuit 
first of the Al Ahly players and then their fans – ultras and regular 
supporters – fired volleys of teargas at protesters.

Al Masry fans spoke of supporters at the game whom none of them knew. "We were 
surprised by buses coming from out of town carrying supporters wearing the 
shirts of Al Masry ultras," said Hamouda. Salah Abdel-Naeem el-Masry, a 
protester who was at the game, was just as shocked. "I swear it wasn't the 
people of Port Said who did this. I saw a young boy jump off the top of the 
stand out of fear. He landed on the top of the mosque and broke his leg."

He too claimed that there was more to the violence than initially met the eye. 
"I don't understand how five gates could be opened at the same time as soon as 
the referee blows the whistle," he said. "I ran to find the Al Ahly supporters 
injured, I went down to ask the security forces to do something and one of them 
told me he wouldn't because he didn't want to get hurt."

Mohamed Saleh, the security supervisor for the Al Masry club, claimed that he 
too noticed people in the crowd whom he described as "strangers". He said they 
were not the only strange part of an evening in which little went to a 
well-established security script.

"There are many reasons behind what happened," he said. "The banner, the gates 
being opened, the criminals in the crowd and Nile sports channel showing the Al 
Ahly ultras' buses arriving on the screen inside the stadium.

"The locks on three gates were broken throughout the game, by whom I don't 
know. I've been here four years and I've never seen some of the people I saw 
inside. Yes, they were from Port Said, but they were not the people I see 
regularly. I've never believed in conspiracies until yesterday. I've decided to 
not work in football again."

Mohamed Shaaban, who travelled from Cairo for the game, was in the main stand 
and saw frequent pitch invasions throughout the match, none of which were 
stopped by police. He said he noticed a lack of security well before kick-off. 
"When going into the stadium I was late, the police outside weren't in big 
numbers as they usually are for this game," he said. "As Al Ahly players were 
warming up on the pitch, fans were throwing missiles at them. Insults were 
exchanged by both sets of supporters but what really inflamed things was the 
banner unfurled by Ahly fans saying there were no men in Port Said.

"There were a lot of people around the pitch throughout the entire game and I 
have no idea who they were. Fans stormed the pitch at half-time and stayed 
around the pitch. When Masry scored more people would leave the stands and head 
to the pitch to celebrate with the players. Missiles were exchanged between the 
stands.

"The Ahly dressing room was beneath the stand that held the Ahly supporters. 
The gate between one of the stands and the pitch was opened as the game ended 
and fans rushed through. I could see the Ahly supporters rushing to the exits 
but they didn't seem able to leave."

Islam Saeed, a member of the Al Ahly ultras, said some Al Masry supporters 
were mocking the dead and injured after the game and stopping ambulances from 
arriving. He said a sense of foreboding had been building all night.

"Hundreds would storm the pitch after every goal, so we could sense what was 
going to happen. There was a huge lapse in security. The police 
non-intervention was very strange – there was practically no security outside 
the stadium and inside it they didn't do anything when events escalated.

"This was gross security incompetence coupled with the barbarity of some 
supporters. This has been happening for the past five years but security always 
intervened. They didn't this time. If you allow this to happen then you are 
liable for the deaths."

The family of one 16-year-old ultra, Mohamed Ahmed, had travelled from Cairo 
to find him. His cousin, Alaa, was in tears after a fruitless search through 
hospital morgues in Port Said, which were holding more than 50 bodies. The 
hospital was caring for several hundred casualties, many of whom were crushed 
against locked gates.

Protesters in Port Said marched through the streets of the city on Thursday, 
disavowing links to the violence. The region's governor has resigned his post, 
along with the region's security chief.
 