
At least 30 people have been killed and 250 injured in Port Said during riots 
sparked by a court's sentencing of 21 people to death on charges related to 
violent clashes between rival football fans last year.

The Egyptian army has deployed armoured personnel carriers in the coastal city 
after furious relatives and fans of the local Al Masry football team attacked a 
police station and a prison in an attempt to free some of those condemned.

The death sentences, which were announced live on television, relate to 
clashes in Port Said on 1 February 2012 after Cairo's Al Ahly beat the local 
team.Al Masry supporters attacked Al Ahly fans, causing a stampede for the 
exits. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/middle-east-live/2012/feb/02/egypt-port-said-football-dsaster-live-updates>
 The police did not intervene in the violence except to switch off the stadium 
lights, and in the confusion the Cairo fans were crushed as crowds pushed 
against a locked gate which gave way under the pressure. Seventy-four people 
were killed.

Fans in Cairo cheered (video) 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/video/2013/jan/26/football-death-sentences-egypts-video>
 as Judge Sobhi Abdel-Maguid announced the verdict while those in Port Said 
protested, blocking streets and attacking police, who fired teargas, rubber 
bullets and live ammunition into the crowds.

The death sentences must be confirmed by the grand mufti, Egypt's senior 
religious authority, and can also be appealed. A further 52 defendants are to 
be sentenced in March, including nine security officials.

Many football fans have taken a leading role in wider political protests over 
the past two years, often forming the vanguard of violent resistance against 
the police and army. Supporters of bothAl Ahly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alahly> and Al Masry believe former 
members of Hosni Mubarak's regime helped instigate the Port Said violence, and 
that the police were responsible for gross negligence at the very least. Some 
Al Masry fans claim security officials instigated or at least did nothing to 
stop the attack, because of long-running antipathy between the club's hardcore 
fans – known as Ultras – and the police.

In recent days Al Ahly fans had warned of bloodshed and retribution, and 
hundreds gathered outside the Cairo football club in anticipation of the 
verdict, chanting against the police and the government.

But after the verdict a carnival atmosphere reigned. "I feel very happy, very 
relieved," said Al Ahly fan Salha el-Deen, holding a sign that read: 
"Congratulations on your execution, Port Said." He added: "I thank the 
judiciary for this very fair decision."

"What happened a year ago was very sad," said another fan, Bas, who would not 
give his surname. "Today is a turning point, a new dawn for everyone."

But some Al Ahly fans were still furious at the failure to convict any senior 
security officials. "We are angry, but hope more will be convicted in the 
future," said one who did not give his name.

The lawyer of one of the defendants sentenced to death said the verdict was 
nothing more than "a political decision to calm the public".

"There is nothing to say these people did anything and we don't understand 
what this verdict is based on," said Mohammed al-Daw, a Port Said resident.

The verdict comes after a day of deadly clashes between security forces and 
protesters opposed to Egypt's Islamist president, Mohammed Morsi. The clashes 
continued into Saturday morning in several Egyptian cities as thousands of 
demonstrators protested against Morsi, the Muslim Brotherhood and police 
brutality on the second anniversary of the start of the revolution that forced 
Mubarak from power.

The military was also deployed overnight in the city of Suez after eight 
people died in clashes between security forces and protesters opposed to Morsi.

At least 379 people were injured across the country on Friday as riots broke 
out in Cairo's Tahrir Square and cities including Alexandria, Mahalla, and 
Ismailia. Police fired teargas across much of central Cairo and protesters 
pelted them with stones, bringing parts of the city's road and metro networks 
to a standstill.

Morsi cancelled a trip to Ethiopia on Saturday to focus on dealing with the 
violence.
 