
Egypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> is bracing itself for further 
unrest following Wednesday night's violence at a football match in Port Said, 
with marches planned to protest against the police failure to prevent or 
contain the fighting that left 74 dead and hundreds injured.

Trouble flared after al-Ahly, one of Egypt's most successful teams, were 
beaten 3-1 by al-Masry. Television footage showed players running from the 
pitch chased by fans.

A small group of riot police tried to protect the players, but appeared to be 
overwhelmed and unable to stop fans from attacking players. Fans of both teams 
then clashed, storming the pitch and dressing rooms, and part of the stadium 
was set on fire.

Most of the hundreds of black-uniformed police with helmets and shields stood 
in lines and did nothing as people chased each other, some wielding sharp 
objects and others hurling sticks and rocks. One officer was filmed talking on 
a mobile phone as people poured on to the field.

One al-Ahly supporter, Khaled Gad, told the Guardian: "What's upsetting is the 
huge lapse in security, which I feel is purposeful on the part of the interior 
ministry and the military."

An al-Ahly official, Hanan Zeini, told the BBC: "I cannot believe these things 
happened randomly. I don't think so, it was arranged."

Mohamed Hussein Tantawi, head of the ruling military council, ordered 
helicopters sent to Port Said to ferry injured team members and fans of the 
visiting side to a military hospital.

In Cairo on Wednesday night fans gathered outside al-Ahly's ground in the 
Zamalek neighbourhood as they waited to hear news of family and friends who had 
attended the match. They were joined by fans of their arch-rivals Zamalek. 
Chants rang out against the ministry of interior and the Supreme Council of the 
Armed Forces.

People have been quick to point the finger at the former regime, the police 
and the army, and claim events were either orchestrated or allowed to escalate. 
Egyptians are angry that, a year since Hosni Mubarak was driven out, their 
country is riddled with lawlessness and fighting.

The Muslim Brotherhood, which has emerged as Egypt's largest party in recent 
elections, said the violence was a message from supporters of the ousted 
president and accused the army and police of wanting to silence those demanding 
an end to the state of emergency in the country.

The country's football association has ordered an indefinite suspension of 
top-tier matches and parliament was due to hold a special session on Thursday 
to discuss the violence.
 