
A court has upheld the death sentences of 21 people found guilty of causing 
Egypt's worst ever football riot at a match in Port Said in February 2012, 
sparking renewed unrest.

Thousands of football fans took to Cairo's streets in protest, before setting 
fire to the football federation headquarters. In Port Said, residents tried to 
block the canal and attacked the football stadium.

In Cairo, a man died of teargas inhalation during a confrontation between 
police and anti-government demonstrators.

The court in Cairo also announced verdicts on Saturday for the other 52 
defendants in the case, with 24 being sentenced to jail, including two senior 
police officers who received 15 years. The remaining 28 were acquitted, 
including seven police officers.

Police in Port Said retreated to their stations, fearing for their lives after 
weeks of violent clashes with supporters of the local football team, al-Masry. 
More than 50 people have died and hundreds more have been injured in the 
Mediterranean city during protests against the trial over the past month.

The sentences, broadcast live on television, were met with howls of protest 
from Port Said residents. Many felt their friends had been convicted for 
nothing.

"Twenty-five years for someone helping to carry the dead outside the stadium," 
said Mohamed Ataya, a football fan describing the case of his friend, convicted 
on Saturday. "What we need now is to separate from the rest of the country," he 
said, voicing the sense of estrangement from the rest ofEgypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> that is felt by many in Port Said.

Hundreds gathered outside the local government headquarters after the verdict 
carrying flags that called for an independent republic of Port Said.

Residents said they felt scapegoated by both the verdict and the military 
curfew enforced in the city since violence erupted in January when the death 
sentences were first announced.

Some protesters dragged a donkey through the streets daubed with the words 
"Fuck Ahly" – a reference to the Cairo-based fans of al-Ahly FC, whom al-Masry 
supporters claim were favoured in Saturday's verdict. Many in Port Said feel 
those sentenced to death were framed by police whom they believed favoured the 
al-Ahly fans.

But in Cairo, al-Ahly fans were also angered by the verdict. They initially 
set off fireworks in celebration that more Port Said supporters had been 
convicted. But sourness set in as they realised that only two of the nine 
police officers had been convicted.

In both Cairo and Port Said, many believe the February 2012 riots, in which 74 
people were killed, were provoked by police. They began after al-Masry fans 
invaded the pitch and attacked al-Ahly supporters during a match between the 
two teams. Police stepped back from the trouble and turned off the stadium's 
electricity. In the darkness, fans were crushed at locked doors.

On Friday, two protesters were buried in back-to-back funerals after allegedly 
being shot by police. There are multiple reports from human rights activists 
and local campaigners of police firing indiscriminately at Port Said residents 
over the past few weeks.

But police holed up in the al-Sharq police station denied responsibility, 
blaming the deaths on criminals taking advantage of the chaos. "There are a lot 
of thugs beside the demonstrators," said Mohamed el-Adawy, the station's deputy 
commander. "Maybe they shot them by accident."

The case has highlighted worsening law and order in much of Egypt since 
President Hosni Mubarak was overthrown two years ago.

The government of President Mohamed Morsi is struggling to halt the slide in 
security, hampered by a strike by some police in protests that are likely to be 
further fuelled by Saturday's jail sentences for the senior officers.

• This article was amended on 10 March 2013. An editing error added "in an 
unrelated protest" to the original article. This has been corrected.
 