
Elderly people in England could be required to pay up to £20,000 to guarantee 
basic social care and support if they need it, under government proposals 
unveiled today.

The compulsory insurance scheme is one of three options for funding a new 
national care service, designed to end the current "cruel lottery" under which 
some elderly people have to sell their homes and use up most of their savings 
to pay for care, while others pay nothing.

Launching a consultation on the future of social care, the health secretary, 
Andy Burnham, told the House of Commons he wanted to create a system which was 
"fair, simple and affordable" to all.

He has already ruled out full state funding from general taxation, on the 
grounds it would place too great a burden on people of working age, and 
retaining the "pay for yourself" system, which is unfair to those who need 
years of care for conditions such as Alzheimer's.

Today he called on the public to give their views on three possible solutions:

• A "partnership" approach, under which the state would pay around a quarter 
to a third of the cost of basic social care and support, leaving individuals to 
find the remainder;

• A voluntary insurance scheme, under which the state would pay the same 
proportion, but would also make it easier for individuals to take out insurance 
– at an estimated cost of around £20,000 to £25,000 at today's prices – to 
cover the rest;

• Compulsory insurance for all, costing around £17,000 to £20,000 at today's 
prices and providing free care for all who need it.

The national care service would offer assistance with needs such as dressing, 
washing and moving around at home, but individuals who need to go into 
residential care would continue to pay the cost of accommodation and food 
themselves, whether they had taken out insurance or not.

However, new national arrangements would allow for bed and board costs to be 
deferred and paid as a lump sum after the individual's death.

The Department of Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> is also 
consulting on whether insurance costs should be deferred until after death, 
paid in instalments or handed over in a single lump sum when an individual 
reaches retirement age.

Under all three options, those with little or no savings or assets would 
continue to receive free care.

At present, apart from those on low incomes or disability benefits, all 
elderly people are expected to pay for the full cost of social care, which can 
eat up all of their savings - including the equity in their home - to a 
threshold of £23,000.

Around 20% need care costing £1,000 or less during retirement, but 50% need 
more than £25,000 and 20% more than £50,000, while a few can run up bills of 
£200,000 or more. The average 65-year-old today can expect to need care costing 
£30,000 – with the burden on women averaging £40,400 and men £22,300.

Burnham said the figures contained in today's green paper, Shaping the Future 
of Care Together, were "indicative" but all three options could be expected to 
cost the state around the same as the current £14.7bn annual budget.

He said the cost of care at the end of life was "the stealthiest tax of all".

"It is a real injustice that people who have worked all their life and paid 
taxes all their life, if they are unlucky enough to develop a condition like 
Alzheimer's in later life, they get no help to deal with the implications of 
that condition," said Burnham.

"The way we look after our older people defines what we are as a country and I 
believe we can do better than we are today."

A national care service would get rid of "inequities and inconsistencies" by 
ensuring care needs were assessed and paid for in the same way everywhere in 
England and were based on personal circumstances and needs, he said.

Consultation on today's proposals will continue until November, and firm plans 
are expected to be published in a white paper next year, to be phased in over a 
number of years from 2014.

In a foreword to today's document, the prime minister, Gordon Brown, wrote: 
"The fact that as a nation we are now living longer is clearly a cause for 
celebration, but it also means that the pressures on our care and support 
system are greater than ever before.

"A care and support system that reflects the needs of our times and meets our 
rising aspirations is achievable, but only if we are prepared to rise to the 
challenge of radical reform."
 