
During the boom years in Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> 
when you used to have to pay for the privilege to enter some Dublin pubs even 
before forking out more than ¤5 at the bar for a pint of beer, the nation's 
taxi drivers had a favourite, repetitive boast. In between moans about there 
being "too many bleedin' foreigners" and who they had in the back of the cab 
once, Irish cabbies, particularly Dublin drivers, couldn't wait to tell you 
about their property portfolios.

They would regale you with tales of how they were just back from the Costa 
Brava having bought two duplex apartments next to an 18-hole golf course, or 
that they and their siblings had just purchased a series of buy-for-rent flats 
at Sunny Beach on the Bulgarian Black Sea. Back at home meanwhile they had just 
got planning permission to turn the garage beside their humble two-up-two down 
semi in Finglas into a games room for the kids which would be equipped with the 
latest plasma 36" TV screens, full-size pool table, sofa beds for sleepovers, 
fridges, microwaves and all the other mod cons to keep their offspring happy 
and out of mum and dad's hair.

All these domestic and foreign investments were of course fuelled by bank and 
building society loans based on the seemingly never-ending rise in equity on 
their homes. At the height of the Celtic Tiger prosperity in the first half of 
the last decade, houses prices, like Irish GDP, started to outpace the cost of 
home ownership in the most affluent parts of the UK.

From the dank gloom of early 2012 this collective spending spree appears like 
an orgiastic aberration, a blip of boom in the history of a nation more used to 
struggle, austerity and sacrifice. In short, for nearly a decade, the Irish did 
go mad before the bust brought them back to earth with a bone-shattering bump.

Which makes it all the more puzzling to understand why there has been so much 
outrage over the last few days about remarksEnda Kenny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/enda-kenny> made at the Davos economic 
summit last week. During a question-and-answer session about the Irish economy, 
the taoiseach told his audience that the Irish bubble had burst because "people 
went mad with borrowing." Elaborating on this, Kenny added: "The extent of 
personal credit, personal wealth created on credit, was done between people and 
banks – a system that spawned greed to a point where this went out of control 
completely with a spectacular crash."

Kenny's comments provoked a storm of protest from the opposition benches of 
Dáil Éireann, such as Sinn Féin who pointed out accurately that his Davos 
remarks completely contradicted what the Irish premier had said prior to last 
December's cost-cutting austerity budget. Softening up the Irish public for a 
round of cuts and tax hikes, the taoiseach used a live televised address to 
explain why the government had to slash programmes and raise VAT. One of 
Kenny's first lines was the current economic mess his government was now 
dealing with was "not your fault", the implication being that the real fault 
lay with the builders and speculators, and their chums in the Irish banks who 
loaned them billions to construct new homes and offices that no one really 
needed.

However, the truth is it wasn't just the so-called "golden circle" of property 
developers, bankers and politicians – the latter rail-roading through Irish 
planning laws to get these projects built – who fuelled the credit-based boom; 
a huge number of ordinary Irish citizens also placed their bets in the 
casino-economy, believing that rising equity loaded the dice in their favour.

One of the most startling aspects of the debate over Kenny's statement of the 
obvious in Davos was Fianna Fáil's reaction. They too expressed dismay over the 
premier seemingly blaming the general populace for the mad-greed laden years of 
Celtic Tiger prosperity. Yet it was that party which presided over the boom 
times and were rewarded with three general election victories in a row.

Bertie Ahern's successive governments from 1997 onwards also spent wildly, 
creating the most generous social welfare system inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, an expansive public sector and 
pay levels in the public services that vastly outweighed those of other EU 
nations. One small example of this was a post for chief librarian at a regional 
university in Ireland during the latter years of the boom. The salary on offer 
to the successful candidate was almost double what the head of the Bodleian 
Library at Oxford was on at the time.

In the Ahern era there was widespread government profligacy, such as the 
aborted so-called "Bertie Bowl" (a proposed single national stadium for soccer) 
and the use, or rather non-use, of electronic voting machines, which cost tens 
of millions of euros but were never put into use.

Meanwhile, the property pages of Irish national newspapers were full of 
advertisements for investments in all kinds of exotic locations from Ukraine to 
Cape Verde, as Celtic Tiger man strolled the globe gobbling up vast tracts of 
land and housing developments. By the mid-noughties, the Irish for example were 
the second biggest foreign property owners in Berlin with Irish companies 
establishing offices along famous thoroughfares like the Kürfurstendamm to run 
portfolios for investment clubs back in the Republic.

Of course, the main villains of the piece remain the banks and the 
speculators, and the political leaders who allowed greed to thrive and the 
economy to overheat. The "people" though have more right to be outraged over 
what happened after the boom rather than during it. Even though billions of 
taxpayers' euros had to be diverted into the banking system to ensure its 
survival the banks continue to behave disgracefully, refusing to loan to small 
and medium enterprises, harassing households with mortgage problems, 
overcharging customers for going into the red by merely a few euros, etc.

Yet when the good times were rolling how many voices out there were shouting 
"stop"? The hat-trick of election wins for Fianna Fáil and Ahern from 1997 to 
2010 suggests those voices were few and far between. The majority of the 
country was too busy partying. We were, to borrow an infamous phrase from 
across the Irish Sea, all in it together. Kenny was merely conveying an 
inconvenient truth.

As for those Dublin pubs, they used to charge a door fee in order to control 
the crowds that once flocked into the city centre every day of the week when 
the nation's pockets collectively bulged with bundles of euros. These days, 
Dublin publicans may start paying you for the pleasure of your company given 
that virtually no one is going out on the town anymore except the tourists and 
the filthy rich.
 