
Nearly 43 years after they thrust the Apollo 11 <> astronauts moonwards 
through a blue Florida sky, the mighty engines that helped deliver man to the 
Sea of Tranquillity have been found in the depths of the Atlantic Ocean.

The five engines, last seen driving the Saturn V rocket free of the Earth on 
16 July 1969 <>, were found in a search led by the Amazon <> chief executive 
and space enthusiastJeff Bezos <>, who hopes to recover at least one.

The engines took 2½ minutes to hurl the rocket 40 miles into the heavens 
before falling into the ocean. Four days later, Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin 
became the first men to walk on the moon.

Bezos – who credits the Apollo 11 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/apollo-11-moon-landing> mission with 
fuelling his passion for science, engineering and exploration – embarked on the 
salvage mission a year ago after deciding it might be possible "with the right 
team of undersea pros".

"I'm excited to report that, using state-of-the-art deep sea sonar, the team 
has found the Apollo 11 engines lying 14,000 feet below the surface, and we're 
making plans to attempt to raise one or more of them from the ocean floor,"
Bezos wrote in a breathless blog post 
<http://www.bezosexpeditions.com/engine-recovery.html> on Wednesday.

"We don't know yet what condition these engines might be in — they hit the 
ocean at high velocity and have been in salt water for more than 40 years. On 
the other hand, they're made of tough stuff, so we'll see."

He gave no details about where the engines had been found, or how they had 
been identified.

But Bezos did make it clear that he was not claiming ownership of the F-1s and 
said he hoped they would one day be displayed for the public.

"Though they've been on the ocean floor for a long time, the engines remain 
the property ofNasa <>," he said. "If we are able to recover one of these F-1 
engines that started mankind on its first journey to another heavenly body, I 
imagine that Nasa would decide to make it available to the Smithsonian for all 
to see. If we're able to raise more than one engine, I've asked Nasa if they 
would consider making it available to the excellent Museum of Flight here in 
Seattle."

The Amazon founder said the salvage operation was a wholly private affair: "No 
public funding will be used to attempt to raise the engines."

Nasa <https://www.theguardian.com/science/nasa> said it hadn't been formally 
contacted by Bezos and was waiting for more details.

A spokesman said: "There has always been great interest in artefacts from the 
early days of space exploration and his announcement only adds to the 
enthusiasm of those interested in Nasa's history."

The sea floor is littered with spent rockets and debris from missions dating 
back to the dawn of the space age. In 1999, a private company salvagedGus 
Grissom's Mercury capsule 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/1999/jul/21/spaceexploration>, which 
accidentally sank in the Atlantic after splashdown in 1961. It was restored and 
displayed at theKansas Cosmosphere and Space Centre <http://www.cosmo.org/>.

Robert "Bob" Biggs, a development engineer who spent almost a decade working 
on the F-1, reflected on the engine's sheer power during a Nasa lecture six 
years ago.

"It took the Apollo launch vehicle, which was 363 feet (110m) tall and weighed 
six million pounds, and threw it downrange 50 miles, threw it up to 40 miles of 
altitude, at Mach 7," he said. "It took 2½ minutes to do that and burned 4½ 
million pounds of propellant – a pretty sizeable task."

Bezos, who founded his own spaceflight company, Blue Origin 
<http://www.blueorigin.com/about/about.html>, "to enable human access to space 
at dramatically lower cost and increased reliability", described the F-1 rocket 
engine as an enduring technological marvel.

"The F-1 rocket engine is still a modern wonder – 1½ million pounds of thrust, 
32 million horsepower, and burning 6,000 pounds of rocket grade kerosene and 
liquid oxygen every second," he wrote on his blog. "Those five F-1s burned for 
just a few minutes, and then plunged back to Earth into the Atlantic Ocean, 
just as Nasa planned. A few days later, Neil Armstrong stepped onto the moon."

The Apollo programme, he went on, had exercised a profound influence over his 
life.

"Nasa is one of the few institutions I know that can inspire five-year-olds," 
he said. "It sure inspired me, and with this endeavour, maybe we can inspire a 
few more youth to invent and explore."

Boy's toys

Jeff Bezos is not the first extraordinarily rich individual to harbour a 
penchant for extreme engineering and exploration. Howard Hughes pushed the 
aeronautical envelope in the 1930s and 1940s by designing and flying 
experimental aircraft, including the Hughes H-4 Hercules – better known as the 
Spruce Goose 
<http://www.evergreenmuseum.org/the-museum/aircraft-exhibits/the-spruce-goose/> 
– which was the largest flying boat ever built.

James Cameron, the director of Titanic and The Abyss, is another member of the 
very rich adventurers' club. Last week, Cameron became the first person to 
perform a solo voyage to the oceans' deepest point– the floor of the seven-mile 
deep Mariana Trench. Emerging from his 12-tonne, lime green submarine, Deepsea 
Challenger, the film-maker described the trench as "a very desolate place… My 
feeling was one of complete isolation from all of humanity".

Sir Richard Branson – no stranger to perilous endeavours – has also been 
building his own one-man sub to explore the ocean depths later this year. His 
Virgin Oceanic deep-diving programme was to have started with a descent to the 
bottom of the Mariana Trench, but Branson will now pilot his submersible to the 
Puerto Rico Trench, the deepest point of the Atlantic Ocean.
 