



The expected result came in the most unexpected manner. In fact this England 
win was almost on a par withthe astounding one against South Africa  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/18/england-south-africa-world-twenty20-match-report>
in Mumbai last week. At various points in the game Eoin Morgan and his side 
were deep in the mire, this time thanks to batting of alarming ineptitude. Yet 
they managed to prevail by 15 runs.

India beat Bangladesh by one run after stunning World Twenty20 finale
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/23/india-beat-bangladesh-stunning-world-twenty20-finish>
On a slow, blameless surface upon which they decided to bat, England slumped 
from 42-1 to 42-4, to 57-6 and 85-7. Yet they contrived to escape, scrambling 
to 142-7 and that was just enough. In Mumbai the South Africans must have 
realised that they blew it; here the Afghans had every reason to experience the 
same galling feeling. At the moment England do not deal in conventional 
victories. But at least there are victories.

They have one group game left against Sri Lanka on Saturday in Delhi and there 
are permutations aplenty. The simplest has the West Indies beating South Africa 
on Friday, which would mean that any sort of victory against Sri Lanka would 
ensure their qualification. But if South Africa win in Nagpur against Darren 
Sammy’s side the dreaded net run rate probably comes into play and the 
calculations begin and we run out of space.

It soon became evident that Morgan’s promise not to concentrate on net run 
rate in this game would be kept. For most of the contest conjuring a way to 
deliver any kind of victory was his sole preoccupation on a stressful 
afternoon. He would contribute rather more as a captain than a batsman.

In the end England were indebted to an unbroken 57 run partnership between 
Moeen Ali, the man-of-the match, and David Willey; some disciplined, hard-nosed 
out-cricket and the fact that an Afghanistan side with victory there for the 
taking wilted under the peculiar pressure that can afflict sportsmen sensing a 
famous win on the horizon.

For the first 15 overs of the match England’s performance had all the 
attributes of the classic cricketer’s nightmare, which involves lead in the 
boots, legs tied together, brains scrambled and a bat the size of a Swan Vesta.

Afghanistan, assessing the conditions shrewdly, decided to trust mostly in 
their spinners, omitting their experienced paceman, Dawlat Zadran. Until the 
19th over this plan worked like a dream. Not that the pitch, which retained 
some grass, offered much turn for the spin bowlers. But with pace taken off the 
ball boundaries were not the formality of Mumbai.

Moreover lack of pace adds to the torment for tense batsmen and England had 
plenty of those.

James Vince, replacing Alex Hales who was sidelined by his troublesome back, 
soon witnessed Jason Roy heading off to the pavilion after running past a ball 
from the left-armer, Amir Hamza. Then there was a little flurry of boundaries, 
which offered England’s bench a little flicker of reassurance but that did not 
last long.

The sixth over was the most ghoulish of the lot. First Vince presented a 
straightforward catch to the bowler, Mohammed Nabi; then Morgan unaccountably 
left a non-spinning delivery, which struck the inside of his off-stump. Two 
balls later Mr Dependable Joe Root was horribly run-out.

Having been stranded mid-pitch where Root realised that Ben Stokes was not 
going to run he had the agony of watching Nabi break the wicket with his hands 
but having the presence of mind to rip a stump out of the turf once the ball 
was in his hand. This was not really a question of adapting to the conditions, 
which was Morgan’s theme after the game; it was the consequence of addled 
minds. Thereafter it was a challenge to bat the overs. Progress was ponderous 
and boundaries elusive until the decisive 19th over.

This was given to Hamza and by now Moeen and Willey had acclimatised. Both 
being left-handed they were therefore bound to swing with the spin and they did 
so gratefully in an over which yielded three sixes and a total of 25 runs. 
Suddenly there was a lifeline for England.

Ian Bell inspires MCC to four-wicket win over Yorkshire in Abu Dhabi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/23/ian-bell-mcc-four-wicket-win-yorkshire-abu-dhabi-cricket>
Morgan and his men were early into the field, like a football team which had 
just been scolded by their manager at half-time (although a relieved Trevor 
Bayliss may have saved any frank observations about their batting until after 
the game when England had a dressing room post-mortem). They began with purpose 
and seldom relented. David Willey had the Napoleonic Mohammad Shahzad lbw with 
his third ball; Chris Jordan took the appropriate simple option, which was to 
bowl as fast as he could and was soon rewarded by the wicket of Asghar 
Staniskai, caught at slip by Root.

Liam Plunkett, preferred to Reece Topley, which may be the pattern from now 
on, operated in a similar fashion and would yield just 12 runs from his four 
overs. Soon Afghanistan were 13-3 and although their experienced men down the 
order loitered longer than their predecessors, the required run rate crept 
higher while England’s bowlers and outfielders remained sure. There was just 
one drop, a difficult chance to Jos Buttler behind the stumps from Adil 
Rashid’s googly.

This was an ominous moment since Nabi hit the next ball for six. However 
Rashid had Nabi caught on the boundary in his next over. Shafiqullah, 
mysteriously batting at nine – he is, after all, a batsman – swung vigorously 
in the final overs but it was too late. England had survived a major scare. 
They had won another game, which they had looked like losing, not a bad time 
for the coaching staff to share some home truths. Dusk had long descended by 
the time a relieved squad of English players headed for their hotel.
 