
The end for England proved not as gloomy as the weather. For the duration of 
this, their final match of their sojourn down under, until the lights took hold 
and the sky became velvet black, the clouds billowed low and gunmetal-grey over 
the SydneyCricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Ground. Showers 
skittered in on the wind, driving the players from the field three times during 
the Afghanistan innings, the last time more substantially, bringing their 
effort to a conclusion and curtailing an already reduced match to what proved 
to be a 25-over chase for England.

By that time Afghanistan, put in to bat by Eoin Morgan, had struggled their 
way to 111 for seven, a total that, coming as it did on Friday the 13th, would 
have had those of a superstitious disposition scuttling for cover.

It proved a simple task for England, who eased home by nine wickets. Alex 
Hales and Ian Bell added 83 for the first wicket from 13 and a bit overs before 
Hales was caught behind for 37. Bell finished unbeaten on 52 with James Taylor, 
back where he began at No3, on eight. The game headed towards the finish line 
almost exclusively, and somehow appropriately, in a blaze of singles. There 
were 41 balls remaining.

It had, though, been close to being a suitably damp end to what has been a wet 
campaign in which, as the England assistant coachPaul Farbrace admitted on the 
eve of the match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/12/england-cricket-world-cup-2015-paul-farbrace-afghanistan>
, the team had never really recovered from the double thrashing they had 
received at the hands of Australia at the Melbourne Cricket Ground and New 
Zealand in Wellington. In no way does this win compensate for anything that had 
preceded it, but the alternative ought to have been unthinkable yet somehow 
attained the status of perfectly plausible.

The England team will now fragment, the team sheet torn up, to start afresh in 
the summer at home, first of all with a match against Ireland immediately after 
the Caribbean Test tour finishes. There will be some players who have bowled 
their last deliveries in ODIs and played their last innings, for England will 
surely not consider picking henceforth any players who they can say now will 
not be part of their plans for the next World Cup, in England, in 2019. This 
will no doubt include Jimmy Anderson, Bell and Ravi Bopara, and perhaps even 
Stuart Broad, although he ought to have a few more miles in his legs yet.

Now, though, the attention turns to a flight home, and then to red-ball 
cricket once again, with the start of a period of Test match cricket in which 
they play 17 games in little more than nine months; after West Indies, against 
New Zealand, Australia, Pakistan and South Africa, as challenging a schedule as 
can be imagined. The squad for the Caribbean is due to be announced on Tuesday 
and will be as strong as can be selected. This is no time to treat any series 
lightly and they have, through their play here, given themselves a couple of 
weeks’ extra rest.

The nature of the Duckworth-Lewis calculations meant that a target of 101 from 
25 overs was not going to offer a particularly stiff challenge. The Afghanistan 
pace trio ran in with their wonderful gusto and madcap enthusiasm (talented 
bowlers these, with some genuine pace) and Hales, opening now in the absence of 
Moeen Ali, was twice missed at point, once from the third ball he faced and 
again when 12, both times from the suffering Shapoor Zadran. But between times 
he hooked the first ball from Dawlat Zadran for six, with Bell driving and 
pulling strongly.

As predicted, England made two enforced changes to the team that lost to 
Bangladesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/mar/09/england-v-bangladesh-cricket-world-cup-live>
. As the team arrived at the ground, Chris Woakes hobbled in on crutches, the 
team straggled out as if it was the retreat from Moscow. Both he and Moeen, 
with a side strain, had been ruled out two days before. So James Tredwell and 
Bopara were given their first and only games of the tournament.

If Afghanistan struggled to make headway against the new ball, unable to hit a 
single boundary until the 13th over, then Anderson in particular ought to have 
made better use of conditions that suited him as well as if it had been Trent 
Bridge in mid-April. Cloud cover and humidity, allied to a pitch that had been 
sweating under covers, demanded that the ball be pitched full. But Anderson was 
a yard too short and – seduced perhaps by field settings that had seven men on 
the off side and, briefly, eight – also too wide; clearly he did not want to 
stray too straight. So the ball beat the bat, or was waved through. He should 
have had better reward than a single wicket from his seven overs.

Instead it was Chris Jordan who produced the best bowling, as he had done 
against Bangladesh, although on this occasion holding a fuller length, and 
claiming a couple of cheap wickets as a result.
 