
A newspaper ad for an Enid Blyton gift shop featuring a golliwog has been 
banned after the advertising watchdog found it was likely to cause serious 
offence.


Corfe Castle’s Ginger Pop shop – which describes itself on its website as “all 
about Enid Blyton and her era” – ran an advert in local Dorset paper the 
Purbeck Gazette. It featured an illustration of a golliwog holding a pint of 
ginger beer with text underneath reading “English freedom”. Underneath this it 
read “Visit our shop and get the tea towel”.

Two readers, who believed the depiction of the golliwog character was racist, 
complained to theAdvertising Standards Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/asa> that the ad was offensive.

Sexually explicit Sunday Sport ads banned despite 'censorship' claim
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/21/sexually-explicit-sunday-sports-ads-banned-censorship>
The shop’s owners said they did not accept that the golliwog represented 
negative racial stereotypes, claiming it had a long history with origins in a 
children’s book in the late 19th century. They believed the character in the 
original books and on Robertson’s marmalade badges was heroic and was an 
aspirational role model, but acknowledged it had become stereotyped over time.

They also provided a letter from a supporter and a comments book from their 
shop, which they said showed most passers-by were positive about the fact they 
sold golliwogs.

Ginger Pop had produced a tea towel intended to celebrate 120 years of 
golliwogs, which it said included words far removed from the minstrel doll 
stereotype.

The Purbeck Gazette said it had checked the legality of the ad prior to 
running it and had been told it was within the law. It had not directly 
received any complaints.

The ASA said it understood that there had been some local controversy around 
the tea towel, and that the ad was a reference to that. However, it did not 
consider that all readers would be aware of that background.

It said “many people were likely to view the character as representing 
negative racial stereotypes” and its inclusion in a press ad was “likely to 
cause serious or widespread offence”.

Including the words “English freedom” was likely to make this worse because 
“in combination with the image it could be read as a negative reference to 
immigration or race”.

The ASA therefore banned the ad.


 