
Family history sometimes fails to turn up interesting stories. But the 
philosopher and writer Alain de Botton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/alaindebotton> and his sister, the singer 
Miel de Botton, 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/lifestyle/london-life/bankers-wife-to-singer-miel-de-botton-on-her-search-for-love-and-launching-a-pop-career-9855671.html>
 both members of a wealthy and cultured dynasty, must have suspected research 
into the life of their paternal grandmother would produce more exotic intrigue 
than anyone could handle.

Now the secrets of the clandestine life of Yolande Gabai de Botton, a spy 
known as the Jewish Mata Hari, are to be laid bare with the British premiere of 
a documentary film backed and produced by her granddaughter. “She had a great 
passion for her cause and she very much believed in the coexistence of Jews and 
Arabs,” said her granddaughter, Miel, this weekend. “I do feel there should be 
recognition for the way she neglected her own health and safety, and even that 
of her family, because of what she wanted to achieve.”

In Israel, the glamorous Gabai de Botton, who died in 1959, has a growing 
reputation as a key player inthe foundation of the state after the second world 
war <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/may/31/londonreviewofbooks>. Her 
charm, beauty and high-class international connections allowed her to travel 
undercover across the Middle East, often carrying secret documents at extreme 
personal risk. Only now, with the release of the film, is the impact of her 
unconventional lifestyle on politics and on her family becoming clear.

Gilbert de Botton, the late financier and father to Alain and Miel, will 
appear in the documentary,Yolande: An Unsung Heroine, when it is screened at 
Seret, the London Israeli Film and Television Festival, on Sunday [14 June] 
<http://www.seret.org.uk> and he describes a childhood with a mother who was 
often absent and in danger. Her only son, he was sometimes left without enough 
food to survive when she was sent abroad on a mission. But he never blamed her, 
according to his daughter: “On the contrary. In fact, I worried that he was 
denying a resentment of her, because she was his idol,” she told theObserver. 
“He admired her endlessly and never said a bad word about her until the day he 
died.”

Born to a Turkish Jewish mother and raised in Egypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> speaking French, Yolande was a 
favourite of King Farouk’s court and moved easily in Egyptian high society. At 
17, she was married to a businessman named Jacques de Botton and her son was 
born a year later.

In 1945, when the head of the Jewish Agency’s political department, Moshe 
Sharett, visited Egypt, she was recruited as a secret agent for the Jewish 
settlement in Palestine at a cocktail party. A part-time journalist, she had 
access to editors atAl-Ahram, the most popular Egyptian daily newspaper, and 
among her admirers and sources of crucial intelligence were Tak ed-Din as-Sulh, 
chief assistant to Abdul Rahman Hassan Azzam – known as Azzam Pasha – and 
Mahmoud Mahlouf, son of the Grand Mufti of Cairo. The Swedish ambassador to 
Egypt, Widar Bagge, also fell under her spell and was persuaded of the Zionist 
cause.

“She died 10 years before I was born,” said Miel, who has Yolande as a middle 
name and is often told she bears a close resemblance to her grandmother. “We 
didn’t even see any pictures of her when we were children, so it was years 
before I understood what she did.”

Her brother Alain has described the emotional legacy of this “very spirited 
woman” and the effect on his late father. “He grew up in this very uncertain 
atmosphere. She was a single parent; they were Jews living in Egypt. There were 
times when he was looked after by the neighbours because his mother was in 
prison,” he said, adding that his father had found parenthood difficult because 
of his own “painful” experiences.

Among key documents Yolande supplied to the Haganah were the resolutions 
adopted by the Arab League in 1947 and 1948, declaring they would “sacrifice 
all the political and economic interests of the Arab world in order to save 
Arab Palestine”, and Arab military plans for the end of the British Mandate for 
Palestine.

In 1945, she was tasked with recruiting a network of Egyptian agents that 
included members of the Muslim Brotherhood and, in 1948, she flew to Palestine 
to pass David Ben-Gurion secret plans for Syria and Egypt to invade the new 
Israeli state. She had sewn them into her shoulder-pads.

Later that year, she was deported to Paris, but she continued to feed 
information back when she could. She returned to a small flat inIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> with Gilbert towards the end of her 
life, upset she had been forgotten by her former masters.

According to her late son, this marginalisation was one of two things that 
made her sad. The second was the death of an airman called Harmor she had 
married in the 1940s and whose name she kept.

SERET 2015 runs from 11 June to 21 June.
 