
‘We found the place with the dead inside. We can use it.’

The opening sequence of the first season finale of Fear the Walking Dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/sep/27/fear-the-walking-dead-season-one-episode-five-cobalt>
 was quite beautiful. We see the city at night under a blanket of moonlight 
looking still and peaceful. As the camera moves, we start to see the fires 
burning randomly, a sign of some unseen tumult or silent violence. Then the 
camera finally focuses on the Coliseum, the thumping heart of darkness at the 
center of the city that is finally about to come undone.

Waking up to the fact that the army abandoned them and that no one is coming 
to help, Maddie, Travis, Daniel, and their respective families pack up their 
cars to get ready to travel toward the desert. In order to do that, they need 
to rescue Liza and Nick from the military encampment downtown, something they 
hope to accomplish using a giant reanimated diversion. Daniel lets all the 
walking corpses out of the Coliseum, where the soldiers locked the living in 
with the dead, so that they can attack the army base on one side and our heroes 
can enter from the other side.

The plan works all too well as the walkers storm the fences and rip down the 
guard towers. Because of this new threat, the evacuation helicopters that were 
going to rescue Liza, the other medical personnel, and their patients retreat 
and leave all of them to die, or at least fend for themselves. Dr Exner tells 
Liza to run while she still can, but Liza is stunned by the violence and 
hopelessness she sees as the zombies take bites out of the military and one of 
the infected sacrifices himself into the rotors of a helicopter rather than 
turn into a zombie.

This was, by far, the most action-packed sequence of the entire series, and 
the whole first half of this episode had the adrenaline-pumping, high-stakes 
drama that we’re used to from The Walking Dead: Original Recipe. It seems like 
the show’s producers used the whole special effects budget on those towers 
collapsing. We could use a bit more of this in season two.

‘You see what doing the right thing gets you?’ 

This episode was really about retribution and people paying for their 
misdeeds. The soldiers locked the living in with the zombies at the Coliseum 
and now there’s an even bigger swarm of zombies coming after them. Daniel 
tortured Soldier Andy and he comes back to shoot his daughter in the arm. The 
soldier who bargained with Strand and took his cufflinks gets eaten alive by a 
zombie and Strand takes his bounty back with him. Chris was annoying as hell 
the whole season and finally some soldiers beat the crap out of him. See, 
everyone is getting what they deserve.

But there is one point when Nick tells Strand that they need to help all the 
other prisoners and he says that it’s not worth their time. What they do to 
help them could actually end up hurting them. The same thing happens to Travis. 
He lets Andy go free so that Daniel won’t kill him, but Andy returns with a gun 
and threatens everyone. Travis responds by pummeling Andy, probably to death. 
But this is a moment of transition for Travis, and everyone else. It seems like 
those that learn the best thing they can do is look out for themselves stand 
the best chance, because there will be negative consequences regardless.

Fear the Walking Dead: Season one, episode five – Cobalt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/sep/27/fear-the-walking-dead-season-one-episode-five-cobalt>
‘You can get out, but there’s nowhere to go.’

One of the things that differentiates Fear the Walking Dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/fear-the-walking-dead> from The 
Walking Dead: Original Recipe is that people are still being confronted with 
this awful tsunami of hopelessness for the first time. Look at Dr Exner, who 
just sort of gives up. She delivers the quote above, and decides she doesn’t 
want to be a part of this world any more and that nothing is safe. Rick and his 
crew also deal with hopelessness, but after dealing with the post-plague life 
for so long, it’s more about reminding themselves why they chose to live.

Getting out of the military base was the most exciting part of the episode, 
especially the moment when Strand and Nick were trapped in the hallway with the 
walkers and Liza saves them at the last minute. But then where are they 
supposed to go? No one knows what is waiting in the desert, but at least if 
there are fewer people there will be fewer zombies. Strand offers a solution: 
to come to his house by the beach. This doesn’t seem like the best plan to me. 
There is only one route to escape on land, and if it’s blocked by the undead, 
then the group is pinned against the ocean. However, Strand’s house does look 
real nice and he has Popsicles, so it can’t be that bad.

Once they arrive, Nick tells his mother that he’s always felt like he didn’t 
know where he was going, which is why he turned to drugs, and now he feels like 
the whole world is catching up with him. He seems especially well equipped for 
what it’s going to take to survive and it will be nice to see him thrive in a 
way that he couldn’t before the plague. That is what is interesting about the 
title of the episode, is the idea of goodness and the people that have it is 
shifting. Strand is good because he can plan out how to escape a bad situation. 
Nick is good because he’s devious and not afraid to lie. Travis is good because 
he is moral. Daniel is good because he is strong. Liza is good because she 
wants to help others. Maddie is good because she is determined. All of these 
are valuable, although somewhat conflicting.

‘The only way to survive a mad world is to embrace the madness’

While our crew sits in luxury and Ophelia nurses her gunshot wound, Strand has 
a plan: he’s going to escape on his boat, which is waiting right off the coast. 
It doesn’t seem like he’s taking everyone with him and he says they can’t stay 
in his house. (But if he’s leaving, what choice does he have?) What is the next 
step? I’m sure that is what is going to fuel the next season, where they should 
all head from here. I’m as eager to find out as they are.

But the madness has yet to come to an end. Bitten by one of the zombies during 
their escape, Liza pleads with Maddie to kill her because she doesn’t want to 
turn. I think she was about to do it, but then Travis arrives and he doesn’t 
want her to die. He thinks she can still be treated, but Liza tells him that it 
is useless. She has to get back to prison to film season four of Orange Is The 
New Black. Just kidding. She tells him there is no hope and this is what she 
wants.

That is when Travis surprises everyone and takes the gun from Maddie and kills 
Liza himself. But what she feared seems to be happening – it broke Travis. He 
seems like a weaker version of Rick, always conflicted about what he has to do 
to survive. Unlike Rick, Travis always hesitates and feels badly about his 
decisions once he’s made them. Maddie is really the strong one and she comforts 
him as the sandy water washes over them on the shore.

And the episode ends with another beautiful shot, as the camera flies out 
toward the ocean, the blue water teeming with life underneath the surface and 
the plants are visible, swaying in the surf. But there is nothing else out 
there, no humans, no monsters, no hope, no fear. It’s just cold beauty, waiting 
to beat down on the show, eroding it slowly.

Dead Ends

 * I’m glad that Nick got rid of his goth girl eye makeup, but didn’t he get 
over his addiction pretty quickly? Maddie steals a whole bunch of drugs for him 
from the hospital, but does he still need them? He seems pretty sober at 
Strand’s house. That was pretty quick. 
 * Please don’t let Chris and Alicia get it on. That is just gross. 
 * I loved when Maddie and Strand were joking about what freeway to take to 
get to his house. It was a perfect reframing of that classic joke about people 
who live in LA being obsessed with traffic.  