
A magnifying glass or a pair of binoculars might be in order if you were 
trying to pick out the words "Fianna Fáil" on the party's election posters 
erected on lamp-posts in various Dublin constituencies.

That's because the name of Ireland's dominant political movement since the 
1930s has become microscopic beside those of its various candidates around the 
Irish capital in this most unusual and historically important election campaign.

Even some of the biggest dynasties in Fianna Fáil history, such as the Andrews 
family in Dun Laoghaire-Rathdown, are treating their party like Oscar Wilde's 
love that dare not speak its name.

In the same constituency, that also applies to Mary Hanafin, whose surname is 
splashed bold across her posters while the name of the party served in, as both 
TD and minister, is almost out of sight.

Candidates' reluctance to splash the Fianna Fáil label on posters and leaflets 
underlines two salient facts about current Irish politics. The first, and most 
obvious, is that the party is blamed across the board for mismanaging the 
economy and plunging the country into its worst-ever fiscal crisis.

Those standing on its ticket regard their best route to survival as 
emphasising their personal and local track records in individual constituencies 
rather than their role in a governing party.

To run their campaigns principally on national questions such as the economy, 
health or education would only further remind voters of their positions in a 
party that has been in power since 1997 and is now accused of squandering 
Ireland's wealth during the Celtic Tiger years.

In addition, the overemphasis on the local man and woman underlines another 
important axiom about Irish elections: they are in fact 43 separate 
byelections, often fought on localised issues.

Although this appeal to the parochial record of individual Dail deputies might 
save a few Fianna Fáil TDs, there is still likely to be a merciless cull of its 
parliamentarians. At least half its outgoing 71 deputies will lose their seats 
as the public punishes the party at the polls.

Anger is palpable on doorsteps, in streets and outside shopping centres. Last 
week, at the doors of a Tesco store in Ballybrack, the poorer end of the 
otherwise prosperous Dún Laoghaire-Rathdown constituency in south county 
Dublin, shoppers' bitter resentment towards the outgoing government was stark.

One woman stopped the socialist People Before Profit candidate, Richard Boyd 
Barrett, with a tale of personal woe.

The pensioner said her husband had been treated for cancer in a local hospital 
but, from mid-December until early in January, he had been on a trolley rather 
than proper bed. She complained she had even had to bring her own pillows to 
his trolley because the hospital had run out of them.

While there is widespread hatred of the Fianna Fáil/Green coalition, the 
campaign over the last eight days has been relatively flat.

Even Tuesday night's first live television debate on the TV3 station did not 
excite or ignite. The Fine Gael leader, Enda Kenny, refused to turn up, instead 
opting to speak at a public rally in County Leitrim, nearly two hours away from 
Dublin.

The normally tenacious and Paxmanesque chairman and journalist, Vincent 
Browne, was subdued in his handling of the two political leaders in the studio. 
Those leaders, Labour's Eamon Gilmore and Fianna Fáil's Micheál Martin, 
exchanged a few verbal blows but, in general, their argument was conducted in a 
restrained tone.

The general consensus after the debate was that Martin had shaded the first 
televised contest, giving some in Fianna Fáil a morale boost as they seek to 
reduce their expected heavy losses.

Sinn Féin, meanwhile, has been trying to capitalise on Fianna Fáil's 
unpopularity and looks set to take seats from the larger party in some 
constituencies. However, their leader, Gerry Adams, has thus far performed 
poorly on television and radio, showing an inability to answer detailed 
questions about the republic's economy.

The paradox for Sinn Féin is that, while Adams is certain to retain the 
party's seat in the Louth constituency, his performances on the airwaves have 
raised questions in the public's mind as to the party's economic competence.

Adams's biggest test is yet to come – he will take part in a five-way leaders' 
debate on RTE, which will be one of the set-piece televised events of the 2011 
campaign.

The Sinn Féin president is expected to be further grilled on his party's 
economic programme, particularly its promise to "burn the bond holders" who 
have lent the Republic billions to pay for the country's public services in the 
fiscal crisis.

There may be questions, too, about his alleged role in the IRA, particularly 
in the 1970s, and the "disappearance" of a west Belfast mother whose remains 
were found only a few years ago in the constituency in which he is now standing 
– claims he has always denied.

Adams has tried to exploit his role in bringing about the IRA ceasefire and 
the subsequent historic compromises with unionism in the north ofIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> and to portray himself as an 
international peacemaker and statesman.

The trouble is that issues pertaining to north of the border are almost 
totally irrelevant in the 2011 Irish general election. Indeed, the only mention 
of the words Northern Ireland on the republic's airwaves this week have been in 
reports on its international football team, who are in town for the Celtic 
Nations cup at the Aviva/Landsdowne Road stadium.

• This article was amended on 10 February 2011. The original piece described 
Mary Hanafin as the deputy prime minister of Ireland; she is not. She is deputy 
leader of the Fianna Fáil party. The deputy PM (tánaiste) is Mary Coughlan.
 