
The appearance of Britain's first stone castles spread the message: we are 
here to stay.

The stone had always been there, of course, and the Anglo-Saxons knew it to be 
durable and fireproof. But it was also more difficult to move and shape than 
timber, and so it was used only for churches and monasteries, where permanence 
was the point. So in the decades after the 1066 invasion, when the new Norman 
aristocracy began methodically rebuilding their hasty wooden hill forts out of 
stone, there could be no doubt about who had won.

The new buildings were larger than anything the English would have seen 
before. This spoke not only of their impregnability, but also of their ample 
storage, designed to survive years of siege. And it displayed the superiority 
of Norman culture for having architects who could build things on such a scale 
(though much of the grunt work,naturellement, was  done by the enslaved locals).

These strongholds were often much stronger than were necessary to subdue the 
natives. Instead, it was generally the earl next door that their inhabitants 
had to worry about, which led to a rapid proliferation and evolution of the 
island's stone castles to protect the ruling classes during the fractious 12th 
century.

Yet even the ambitious Normans can surely never have imagined how durable 
their buildings would prove to be. Though modified through the ages, many 
remained in use as homes and fortresses right up until the English civil war 
500 years later, when several were destroyed. And at Windsor, of course, the 
Queen still lives in one today.

1. Corfe Castle

Restored for visitors, this hilltop complex has served as a royal treasure 
house and a prison. Carvings suggest it was one of the most important castles 
of the 11th century, comparable in prestige to the Tower of London.

2. Kenilworth Castle

Founded in the 1120s, and expanded with five centuries of modifications, this 
large castle still retains a particularly magnificent Norman keep, designed to 
be the owner's living quarters and the last bastion of defence.

3. Leeds Castle

With its neat gardens and spectacular moat, this is one of the best preserved 
medieval castles in the south of England. (It is in Kent, not Yorkshire.)

4. Castle Rising

A perfect, though ruined, example of a rectangular Norman keep. It is 
surrounded by a moat and an enormous earth rampart.

5. Chepstow Castle

Looming from the clifftops above the river Wye, Chepstow was founded as a key 
defensive position immediately after the Norman invasion. It is now the oldest 
surviving stone castle in the country.
 