
It is 10 years since Anthony Bourdain's Kitchen Confidential rocked into town 
and gave food writing such a hard slap that it has never quite known which end 
to stand on ever since. Bourdain's account of life as a professional chef in 
New York City made midweek service at Les Halles or the Supper Club sound like 
going on tour with the Rolling Stones circa 1972. In exquisitely dirty prose he 
described a life of constant high pressure, meaty sweats, singed fingers and 
drunken all-night come-downs with his crew of semi desperados.Kitchen 
Confidential blew the idea that there was anything refined or effete about 
cooking for a living, and gave its entranced readers the kind of insider 
information that made them feel as though they had been initiated into the 
coolest gang on earth.

Now, a decade on, Bourdain has published Medium Raw. There have actually been 
five books in between, but this one is branded as the official follow-up to
Kitchen Confidential. There is something identifiably different about it, 
though. It is not just the tone – Bourdain is in his 50s now, off drugs and a 
first-time father, so some of the piratical swagger has been burnt off, 
although the language remains as rococo as ever. It is more that the landscape 
into which Bourdain is launching his sequel has changed entirely. Whereas
Kitchen Confidential was free to slash and burn its way through literary 
territory that felt relatively static, even stuck,Medium Raw is obliged to pick 
its way carefully through a richly variegated and much expanded genre. Food 
writing has evolved its own elaborate ecosystem, bristling with sub-genres, 
starting points, cross-currents and trip wires. For Bourdain to repeat his 
trick of 2000 and storm in, steak knives rattling, would not look so much 
heroic now as simply ignorant.

In Medium Raw, then, Bourdain is obliged to insert himself into a crowded 
field, carefully feeling out his position and defining himself as much by what 
he is not as by what he is. He is not, he makes clear, Eric Schlosser or 
Michael Pollan, two campaigning writers (authors respectively ofFast Food Nation
 andIn Defence of Food) whose recent work he admires but whose handle on the 
science and politics of agribusiness is a million miles from his own 
blood-and-guts approach. He is not Marco Pierre White, a man who anticipated 
his foul-mouthed persona but who nevertheless received Michelin stars that 
Bourdain could never aspire to (by his own admission, he has never been more 
than just good enough to work as a line chef in second-tier restaurants). He is 
not Jamie Oliver, about whose cooking he remains tactfully mute, but whose 
commitment to doing the "harder thing" he finds admirable. "Most chefs I know, 
were they where Jamie is on the Success-O-Meter? They'd be holed up at a Four 
Seasons somewhere, shades drawn, watching four tranny hookers snort cocaine off 
each other."

But most significant of all is the fact that Bourdain is no longer a 
professional chef but a professional food writer. Ever since hanging up his 
whites following the global (he calls it "freaky") success ofKitchen 
Confidential, he has made his living outside the bloody chamber that is the 
restaurant kitchen. ThusMedium Raw's subject matter is no longer the discipline 
of twice-daily service (and yes the religious parallels have been noted), but 
its ersatz reconstructions in the various foodie television shows on which 
Bourdain is now a regular celebrity participant. His beefs no longer concern 
light-fingered colleagues – "don't touch my dick, don't touch my knife" – or 
his personal hatred of vegetarians, but instead centre on the idiocy of the 
Food Network or the nullity that is Rachael Ray (a wildly successful 
middle-of-the-road American TV cook who is mercifully unknown in the UK).

Instead of riffing on a lavish, career-hobbling multi-drug habit, Bourdain's 
main dilemma now is whether or not he should endorse a rubbish restaurant in 
return for $40,000 a month. (In the end he decides not to, but not before 
torturing himself – and us – with the fact that the only thing stopping him is 
a narcissistic desire to believe himself "above all that").Medium Raw is not so 
much written in a minor key – it is as ferociously rude as anything Bourdain 
has done before – as written at one remove from the thing that made him who and 
what he is. As Bourdain admits, by letting the world in on his love affair with 
cooking, he managed to kill the thing he loved the most.

Still, if Bourdain is working out his issues about what it means to be a food 
writer, plenty of others, Britons as well as Americans, are ready to seize the 
moment with relish. Indeed, we are currently experiencing a bit of a food 
writing renaissance, with the genre occupying the kind of sunny uplands that 
travel writing did 30 years ago. Back in the late 1970s a clutch of young men – 
Chatwin, Raban, Theroux – reanimated the dusty travelogue with high style, 
strong narrative presence and a box of tricks to match any literary novelist. 
For the next 15 years travel writing offered a viable freelance career for 
writers who couldn't do fiction, weren't academics, but felt themselves to be 
something more than journalists. Suddenly everyone was at it. Newly expanded 
Sunday supplements provided outlets for shorter pieces from intellectuals who, 
while not primarily travel writers, had something they wanted to say about far 
away places, much as Julian Barnes or Simon Schama today might turn in an 
elegant piece about food as a kind of holiday from their usual writing selves.

Of course there were plenty of travel writers before Chatwin and his gang 
pitched up (Thesiger, Stark, Douglas, for starters), just as there were 
excellent food writers before the current crop. Indeed, postwar Britain was 
stiff with experts paid to tell other people how and what to eat, the best of 
whom you can sample in the new Guild of Food Writers anthology,How the British 
Fell in Love with Food (Simon & Schuster). Marguerite Patten, Robert Carrier, 
Elizabeths David and Luard, and Jane Grigson all nudged the genre into new and 
slightly different shapes. David, Luard and Grigson in particular wrote like 
greedy angels. The late Egon Ronay, meanwhile, bossed Britain's restaurants 
into aiming higher than they ever thought possible. Even Constance Spry, who 
should really have gone to hell for inventing coronation chicken in 1953, was 
basically a force for good. (In Sue Shephard's new biography,The Surprising 
Life of Constance Spry, published by Macmillan, Spry turns out to have been 
almost as wild as Bourdain, numbering a cross-dressing lesbian among her many 
adventures.) Still, what all these writers had at the core of their practice 
was the production of recipes. No matter how sparkily delivered – and Fanny 
Cradock could be pretty sparkly – their books and accompanying television 
programmes were essentially rebranded home ec lessons. No surprise, then, that 
when food writing started to take off again in the mid-1990s, it was still 
predicated on the recipe book, albeit glamorously packaged as theRiver Café 
Cook Book or Nigella's How to Eat.

Since then the realisation has spread that food writing is about much more 
than recipes. Instead of being simply the fuel we put in our mouths, it is now 
understood as our culture's – all cultures' – connective tissue. Rolled up in a 
feast or a snack, a Sunday roast or a piece of sashimi is a story of history, 
geography, memory and time just waiting to be unpicked. Writers who might once 
have worried that showing an interest in food suggested they were either effete 
gourmandisers or vying for Delia's crown now stake a proud claim for the 
subject's centrality. And since food is as universal as breath, it is hardly 
surprising that it has insinuated itself into every aspect of the literary 
imagination. These days you will find food wherever you look on the bookshelf – 
in memoir, biography, popular science, academic anthropology, post-colonial 
studies and, of course, in travel writing. Indeed, so varied now are its 
domains that very often you have to squint to recognise any family resemblance 
at all.

One of the most popular of these new foodie forms is memoir. Mostly written by 
cookery writers as opposed to professional chefs, food memoirs typically season 
the story of a fractured childhood with recipes from a much-missed home. So in 
last year'sRisotto with Nettles (Chatto & Windus) the doyenne of 
British-Italian food writers, Anna Del Conte, tells of a prosperous 
middle-class girlhood in Milan blown apart by the second world war. Trips to 
fancy restaurants are replaced by foraging in the countryside as young Anna 
learns to eat (and survive) like a peasant. The book is sprinkled, too, with 
recipes that chart her unbelieving first few years in postwar England, a 
culture which still thought that olive oil was something you bought from the 
chemist to treat earache.

Equally telling, and part of a further sub-genre of British-Asian food memoir, 
is Yasmin Alibhai-Brown'sThe Settler's Cookbook (Portobello). Here the 
political journalist plots the multiple dislocations of her Ugandan-Indian 
family in the 19th and 20th centuries through the foods they inherited, adapted 
and chowed down in great greedy gulps. The recipes she includes illustrate what 
academics call "hybridity" and everyone describes as a glorious mash-up: "roast 
red spicy spuds", "carrot halva" and shepherd's pie with a dash of chilli. 
Alibhai-Brown has made a point of clinging to her home (wherever that might be) 
comforts, but for an account of what happens when you attempt to remodel your 
cultural identity by rejecting its iconic dishes, try Yasmin Hai's zestyThe 
Making of Mr Hai's Daughter (Virago). Growing up in 1970s Wembley, Hai and her 
schoolfriends, the daughters of middle-class British Pakistanis, try to 
out-English each other by declaring to whoever is listening that theynever eat 
curry at home.

Ironically, given that memoir is a form predicated on the value of individual 
experience, many of these books – and there are hundreds published annually in 
the States that never make it over here – tend over time to take on a generic 
quality. There'salways a granny in them, one who makes daily trips to the 
market before bustling home to toil over a dish that had been handed down as a 
precious secret through the maternal line. But what, say, if you had a gran 
whose idea of nurture was to rummage in the freezer and cut you off a hank of 
arctic roll before tottering back to watch the wrestling on the telly? For 
those kind of food memories, the patron saint remains Nigel Slater. InToast 
(HarperPerennial), Slater told of a childhood no less busted than that of Del 
Conte or Alibhai-Brown, but one that took place in 60s Wolverhampton rather 
than prewar Europe or 50s Uganda. Instead of home-made pasta and fruit lovingly 
plucked from the orchard, Slater told gleeful stories of Angel Delight and 
Rolos bought from the Spa shop. Sensing he was on to something (there are, 
after all, more of us in Britain whose culinary heritage involves Wall's 
neapolitan ice-cream than homemade bread), Slater followed this up with the 
brilliantEating for England, which didn't even pretend to bother with proper 
chapters, but instead formed itself out of little riffs on those food items 
which collapse time in a suck, crunch or slurp – Spangles, KitKats and Heinz 
tomato ketchup.

Given the success of Eating for England, it was perhaps a little cheeky of 
Simon Majumdar to call his new bookEating for Britain (John Murray). Although 
the premise is a good one – a road trip to try out the regional specialities of 
British food undertaken by a writer who is partly British-Asian, the execution 
is not quite sharp enough to compete with those recent classics of the genre,
British Regional Food (Quadrille) by Mark Hix and The Taste of Britain 
(HarperCollins) by Laura Mason and Catherine Brown, which really know their 
onions. And, by the way, if it's simply recipes using regional ingredients that 
you're after, then you still can't beatNose to Tail Eating (Bloomsbury) from 
Bourdain's culinary hero,Fergus Henderson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/fergus-henderson>. (So passionately 
does Bourdain feel about Henderson that inMedium Raw he solemnly damns to hell 
the former New York Magazine food critic Gael Greene for once slightly getting 
the man's name wrong.)

Memory may seem to be a guarantor of memoir's authenticity, but when pressed 
into service for a more general kind of food history, it can be become as 
slippery as an eel. The genre as a whole is shot through with the most damaging 
nostalgia for a golden age of eating that never quite was. Take Jane 
Fearnley-Whittingstall'sThe Ministry of Food: Thrifty Ways to Feed Your Family 
Today (Hodder & Stoughton), which is predicated on the idea that the food the 
nation ate during its finest hour in 1939-45 is somehow the food we should all 
be eating now. The book is a delight of retro graphic design, culled from a 
trip to the Imperial War Museum's archives. But is anyone, really, about to 
make their family eat Spam fritters? And while "kidneys in red wine" certainly 
sounds tastier, was this really what plucky British families set themselves up 
with before a night of fire-watching in Bethnal Green? More palatable, perhaps, 
is the decision taken by Waverley Books to reprintThe Glasgow Cookery Book. 
The book, initially published 100 years ago as the textbook of the Glasgow 
College of Domestic Science, has been updated here for modern use. As a result, 
it is still possible to discern (and enjoy) its original architecture of pot 
roast, haggis and dundee cake without feeling as if you are being asked to take 
part in a slightly out-of-focus historical reconstruction.

Still, the cream of the crop of the recent historical reprints remains The 
Complete Indian Housekeeper and Cook (OUP) by Flora Annie Steel and Grace 
Gardiner. Originally published in 1888, it aimed to do for memsahibs what Mrs 
Beeton had done for their stay-at-home sisters. Steel and Gardiner were both 
married to members of the Indian civil service. The book provides, as do all 
household management guides, a window not on how women lived, but on how they 
desperately wished that they did. Steel and Gardiner preach a severe counsel of 
perfection, one that involves teaching your native cook to rustle up fish 
quenelles and how to treat the bites of "mad, or even doubtful dogs". Their 
mission, to create a domestic space that was forever Wiltshire, throws a bright 
light on the larger project of which they were part, that of running the 
British empire.

All these new titles may suggest that food writing is flourishing. And so, in 
one sense, it is. But while new and reissued books seem to be doing well in 
difficult times, the same is not true of newspaper and periodical food 
journalism. Amid much lamentation, Condé Nast took the decision to close 
Gourmet magazine last autumn. A bible of the elite American table for the past 
70 years, Gourmet was a place for elegant, informed writing about high-end home 
and restaurant dining. Its editor, Ruth Reichl, formerly restaurant critic of 
the New York Times, blamed a steep fall-off in advertising revenue. All those 
car, travel and jewellery companies could no longer justify taking space in a 
publication that didn't deal directly with their core constituencies (just 
because you like reading about sushi, it doesn't mean you want to drive to 
Tokyo wearing diamonds).

While Reichl's analysis is doubtless mostly correct, commentators have been 
quick to see Gourmet's demise as part of a broader shift. Expertise and even 
prestige are increasingly passing from paid journalists to food bloggers, who 
combine a deep and committed knowledge of their subject with almost 
non-existent start-up costs. In every city in the world (and, perhaps more 
pertinently, in the countryside, too) you will find an articulate commentariat 
able to respond nimbly to both local and international conversations about food 
production and consumption. Their responses and suggestions range from locating 
the best coffee beans in Sunderland to the effect of the Icelandic volcano dust 
on the import of cheap veg from Kenya. There are wit and invention here too. 
The recent Oscar-winning filmJulie and Julia is based on a blog written by New 
Yorker Julie Powell as she attempted to cook her way through Julia Child's 
classicMastering the Art of French Cooking. It is hard to see how Powell's 
quirky project would ever have found page space in an American food magazine, 
let alone in the hallowed (and strictly rationed) pages of Gourmet.

It is this opening up of what might be called a pro-am space in food writing 
that likewise accounts for the new buoyancy of smaller and more specialist 
journals dedicated to the subject. While Gourmet may have floundered under its 
insatiable need for advertising dollars, periodicals such as Gastronomica in 
the US and Petits Propos Culinaires (PPC) in the UK are doing wonderfully well. 
Not exactly academic journals (although Gastronomica is published by the 
University of California Press), publications such as these provide a space in 
which original scholarship and elegant writing can meet on equal terms 
(usually, you have to plump for one or the other). Here you will find an 
article by a university-based anthropologist trotting companionably alongside a 
piece by a professional chef, travel journalist or poet. The current issue of 
PPC, for instance, ponders "Court-bouillon, an early attestation in 
Anglo-Norman French?" while not being too grand to ask anxiously "Is slurping 
uncouth?"

It is customary to end an article such as this by pointing out that, despite 
the exponential increase in books, blogs and journals dedicated to food, we now 
cook less than we ever did. We are, say the doomsayers, a generation of food 
voyeurs, porno-dependent quick-fixers who snack on crisps (quite possibly of 
the "artisanal", hand-crafted kind) while virtual-feasting on pictures of 
Nigella's store cupboard. Even Bourdain, who usually says the opposite of 
everyone else, agrees that it is a crying shame that children aren't 
automatically taught to cook in America's school system. All this is laudable, 
but slightly misses the point. Food writing is a literary activity, built upon 
words, sentences and paragraphs rather than flour, butter and eggs. It may 
refer to the kitchen and the dining room, but it is forged in the library and 
the study. Someone who reads Hemingway is not assumed to spend their weekends 
fishing or fighting bulls. A devotion to Agatha Christie does not require you 
to be either a fiendishly clever murderer or a detective. Even an "armchair 
traveller" who laps up travelogues by Michael Palin or Jonathan Dimbleby while 
never stirring further than Southwold is an object of benign contemplation 
rather than sharp rebuke. And so it must be with food writing. You can 
appreciate its delicious qualities without feeling the least need to pick up a 
wooden spoon and have a go yourself. (The recipes included in all those food 
memoirs are surely for illustrative purposes only.) Food writing is writing 
full stop, and the best of it does what good writing always does, which is to 
create an alternative world to the one you currently inhabit. Anything else is 
gravy.

Medium Raw is published by Bloomsbury (£18.99). To order a copy for £14.99 
with free UK p&p call Guardian book service on 0330 333 6846.
 