
Who knew that somewhere in the belly of the Emirates there was a high-tech 
suite in which a crack team with fancy touch screens and headsets analysed 
footage and stats forevery single player in the world, 24 hours a day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/aug/17/arsene-wenger-arsenal-aston-villa>
? All this time we were thinking there was one intern sat in a broom cupboard 
with a well-thumbed copy of the Yellow Pages, but no, saysArsène Wenger, 
Arsenal "are there to spend money." Money plus one pound, even. "People say: 
'Buy players, buy players, buy players,' but who?" Wenger asked, licking the 
tip of his pencil and peering expectantly over his jotter pad. Good news, 
Arsenal fans! It says here thatGareth Barry is available. It's all going to be 
fine.

Today's back pages and centre spreads are spattered with Mourinho-lovin'. Not 
only did the returned Chelsea manager notch up an opening day win against Hull 
– swoon! – but he's still banging on about signingWayne Rooney, legitimising 
yet more gum-flapping – our hero! Apparently there's another £28m bid coming in 
the next 48 hours, and if that fails the world will slowly stop turning and 
crumble in to space Mourinho will be back in January.

Willian will need to decide much sooner than that if he wants to join 
Liverpool, who thought they had this one in the bag, or Tottenham, who've come 
in with a late £27m bid and promised to do a really good song to the tune of 
The Smiths' William, It Was Really Nothing,even including that high ooh-ey bit 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wvpMV0UiJfM&feature=youtu.be&t=2m40s>. Spurs 
are also being linked with the latest 17-year-old attacking midfielder to be 
lumbered with the "new Modric" tag,Alen Halilovic, and this may or may not 
precipitate the sale ofGylfi Sigurdsson. The Fábio Coentrão rumours persist, 
too, but since that would necessitate mentioning Gareth Bale in an article that 
already contains Wayne Rooney, the Mill refuses to speculate. And the Mill is a 
strong-willed customer: if we're sick of talking about Bale and Rooney and 
Suárez, and of everyone else talking about Bale and Rooney and Suárez, we'll 
think nothing of taking a stand.

Oh.

Signs are that Newcastle United can persuade Lille to hand over the midfielder 
Florian Thauvin for £8m, while Stoke City are interested in the Rennes forward 
Mevlut Erding. In Marseille, meanwhile, an email has just appeared from West 
Bromwich Albion, subject: So, aboutMorgan Amalfitano …

Norwich City are apparently in the bidding for Brescia's Andrea Caracciolo, 
and are also being linked withJohan Elmander. Bolton Wanderers want to sign 
Chris Baird fromFulham, who are unlikely to put up much of a fight. Neither are 
Leeds United, who could do with the money raised by selling Ross McCormack to 
Middlesbrough and seemingly aren't at all worried that his departure might cost 
them more in the long run. It's all going to be fine.
 