
Fraser Nelson inhabits what must be the most agreeable editor's office in 
London.The Spectator <https://www.theguardian.com/media/the-spectator>, which 
the Scotsman edits, dates back to 1828 in its current incarnation – and Addison 
and Steele's original title to 1711 – and the wood-panelled Westminster office 
with its ground floor view of St James's Park looks as if it was inherited from 
the Victorians.

In reality, the rightwing weekly moved into its Old Queen Street digs only six 
years ago, but there are some older heirlooms too. Nelson points to the 
Chesterfield sofa that looks out onto the park. "When I say that came from 
Boris's office," he begins – referring to London mayor Boris Johnson,who came 
before his predecessor Matthew d'Ancona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/aug/28/spectator-matthew-dancona-fraser-nelson?INTCMP=SRCH>
 as editor – "people look at me suspiciously." Well they would – although the 
irony is that the so-called "Sextator" era, when all sorts of liaisons 
occurred, was when sales peaked, at about 77,000. "Boris was a very virile 
editor," Nelson observes none too judiciously, which may be his way of noting 
that sales are a little lower now at 63,000, though they have been steady (up 
0.1% year on year) according to last week's ABCs for 2012's second half. "To 
have your print product holding up is more than a lot of newspapers have 
managed," he points out. On top of that he has just introduced a paywall, in 
hope of digital subscriptions.

Nelson was political editor at the beginning of 2006, just after Johnson quit 
to spend more time on politics. A fixture as a commentator on Sky News, he 
became editor three years later after D'Ancona's sudden departure. But the key 
figure behind his rise wasAndrew Neil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andrew-neil>, the BBC presenter who also 
acts as the magazine's chairman on behalf of its owners, Sir David and Sir 
Frederick Barclay. Nelson, who started at the Times as a business journalist, 
followed by a short stint as Scottish political correspondent, met Neil "at a 
party in Scotland, and he liked a comment piece that I wrote". Neil was 
editor-in-chief of the Scotsman at the time, and Nelson followed him from there 
to the Spectator after the Barclays sold the Edinburgh paper and bought the 
London weekly alongside the Telegraph titles from Conrad Black.

"I talk to him a lot," says Nelson of his mentor. "But about a third of the 
conversations are 'What's the gossip from Westminster?' – he wants to know if 
one minister has fallen out with another; that's the gossip he loves." The 
editor also talks a lot to his boss about digital strategy, but "not so much 
about editorial". l" Neil, perhaps, acts as a buffer between the editor and the 
owners – Nelson himself has "not met" the Barclays, let alone been to their 
island of Brecqhou. His links to the family are to Sir David's sons, Aidan and 
Howard, and he praises them for a hands-off approach, with both interested in 
discussing politics but not telling him how to write. "I often think how lucky 
I am to have them as owners; a magazine like ours could be easily run as an 
entree into society," he says. Budgets are flat and it is profitable – making 
"just under half a million [pounds per year]", Nelson says.

"Bonfire of the Establishment" is the headline of the latest leader, a phrase 
which draws on the title's history: the term "establishment" was coined in it 
by Henry Fairlie, writing in a September 1955 issue. Referencing the 
Spectator's past in this way is typical of Nelson – the demi-basement floor 
below his office is the magazine's boardroom, complete with bound copies dating 
back to 1828, where he browses for inspiration at a weekly whose raison d'etre 
has always been trenchant comment.

In the week when we met, the editorial he penned cited a piece by Kingsley 
Amis 30 years earlier opposing government funding of the arts. "Insurgent" is 
how Nelson prefers to describe the Spectator and "more of a cocktail party than 
a political party" – and also "right of centre, but not strongly right of 
centre". The conclusion of the "Bonfire" leader, incidentally, is that the 
establishment – as defined by newspapers such as the Daily Express and 
Guardian, the BBC, Marks & Spencer and HMV – is in retreat. And at this point 
Labour is on the side of the establishment because it supports the public 
sector, by "abolishing the free schools programme and putting the bureaucrats 
in charge".

No surprise there, perhaps, but Nelson points out that he also publishes Tanya 
Gold and Julie Bindel. "Charles Moore's politics are well-understood, but Hugo 
Rifkind's are not," he says. "We serve up cask-strength opinion, and by and 
large our readers like it. Even I as editor have one or two pieces each week 
I'd like to pull because I disagree with so much." Which one this time then? It 
turns out he didn't agree with a Carol Sarler piece that argued "there is no 
such thing as a full-time mum".

Maybe it's time to move on to Rod Liddle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/rod-liddle> – who last week chucked a 
racially loaded term into a piece on horsemeat. Nelson says that a common 
reaction he gets from Spectator readers is "don't tone down Rod". He describes 
Liddle as "one of the best writers in the country", but one who, he admits, 
"our non-readers don't like". He is wary too of online criticism: "Twitter has 
got a habit of vastly amplifying the concerns of whose who have spent their 
lives being wound up. Twitter is not the vox populi; it is a very effective way 
of getting a point across to a journalist. But there is a temptation in 
politics and the media to overreact to Twitter."

That said, Fraser concedes one point – it was wrong for Liddle to write a 
piece ahead of the Stephen Lawrence murder trial that suggested the defendants 
could not get a fair trial and even made unsubstantiated accusations about 
Lawrence himself. Nelson takes responsibility for breaking the law of contempt: 
"That was a straight out-and-out mistake." Although he was away and did not 
proof-read the article he accepts that "every word that goes out is my personal 
responsibility". The piece was pulled and the Spectator was ordered to pay 
£5,625 in fines and compensation to the Lawrence family last June.

Nevertheless, with such writers in his employ, it is not surprising that he 
places much store in a "dog and lamp-post" relationship between the press and 
politicians. Asked about last week's announcement of a royal charter body to 
verify the work of a revamped Press Complaints Commission, Nelson is sceptical. 
"If an independent press regulator is answerable to a government-appointed 
'validator', is it really independent?" he asks, worrying that the charter 
allows "politicians to define the parameters within which the press operate". 
Nelson says he won't allow the Spectator to sign up to a royal charter-backed 
set-up if it amounts to "any system of government licensing". He sounds still 
ready to be the first Leveson martyr; because somebody, after all, has to 
defend publishing the words of Rod Liddle.
 