
Matt Smith really doesn't want to be typecast as the guy from Doctor Who any 
more. That's why he's starring as Patrick Bateman in American Psycho – a 
musical stage version ofAmerican Psycho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/american-psycho>, in fact. As professional 
handbrake turns go, it's pretty drastic. But he isn't the first. History is 
littered with actors who've been pushed to extreme measures to break out of 
their typecasting straitjackets. Here are some of the best.

Hugh Grant

It's a shame nobody really saw Cloud Atlas, because it contained the largest 
assembly of actors performing against type in modern cinema. Lovely, funny Tom 
Hanks played a sort of post-apocalyptic caveman. Halle Berry was a male Korean 
dentist. But most startling of all,Hugh Grant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/hughgrant> broke his 20-year run of playing 
the same bumbling, ineffectual romantic lead to become a bald, facially 
tattooed cannibal tribesman. It was as far from Music & Lyrics as you can get, 
so no complaints.

Mariah Carey

Mariah Carey's first film lead won her a best actress award. But the film was 
Glitter (2001), and the award was a Golden Raspberry. Then Lee Daniels came to 
her rescue in 2009, scraped off the slap, stripped away the sequins, encouraged 
a light moustache and cast her as a social worker in Precious (for which she 
won proper awards).

Lenny Henry

In 2009, one actor's turn as Othello was described by one critic as "one 
of the most astonishing debuts in Shakespeare I have ever seen". The actor in 
question wasLenny Henry <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/lenny-henry>, a 
man who'd spent much of his career shouting the word "Katanga!" and throwing 
custard pies at Chris Tarrant while dressed as Trevor McDonald. It would have 
been a perfect transformation were it not for his subsequent decision to 
channel all that classical stage experience into reciting poems about budget 
hotels on TV.

Daniel Radcliffe
 Daniel Radcliffe in Equus … at some point he seems to have decided the rest 
of his career would be spent distancing himself from Potter as violently as 
possible. Photograph: Chris Young/AFP/Getty Images 
Radcliffe's career has had two distinct halves. There was the half where he 
was made to say "A wuh-wizard?" on a green-screen stage every day for a decade, 
then the half where he disrobed for a paying audience and stabbed a horse in 
the eye. When he starred in Equus, he planted a flag in the ground: the rest of 
his life would be spent distancing himself from Potter as violently as 
possible. The fact that he went on to make Young Doctor's Notebook (morphine 
addict) and Kill Your Darlings (nudity and drug-taking) is proof. Radcliffe is 
currently filming a remake of Frankenstein, playing Igor.

Pauline Quirke

Quirke could have had a perfectly comfortable career playing downbeat 
housewives in mainstream sitcoms. But then she made The Sculptress, an 
incredibly distressing BBC miniseries about a woman convicted of murdering her 
family and arranging their limbs into abstract shapes. Suddenly she was a 
dramatic actor. Sure, she wouldn't be able to make any more sitcoms, because 
the sight of her cold, dead eyes made everyone involuntarily burst into tears 
and run away, but that was probably the point (see also: Broadchurch).

Liam Neeson

His Michael Collins was a triumph. His Oskar Schindler was perfect. Liam 
Neeson was the actor's actor, picking up Oscar and Golden Globe nominations 
wherever he went. And then he junked it all by starring in Taken – an action 
film about a man who tells another man he's going to find him and kill him, and 
then finds him and kills him. Since then,Liam Neeson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/liam-neeson> has become Hollywood's go-to, 
vaguely geriatric vigilante. He won't win any awards for this new direction, 
but at least nobody's going to start a fight with him.

Kaya Scodelario

Scodelario became famous as Effy in Skins, the TV show written by and starring 
young people doing young people things: bad sex, OK drugs, sarcastic banter. 
She then contrasted it with the role of Cathy in Andrea Arnold's adaptation of 
Wuthering Heights – though kept her yoof credentials by admitting she hadn't 
read it.

Sean Connery

It's hard enough to convince anyone you're not James Bond any more, which 
might explain why Roger Moore hasn't really bothered. But for Sean Connery 
it must have been impossible. "If only there was a role," he must have thought, 
"where I could grow a ponytail and moustache and run around an alien planet in 
a sort of proto-Borat mankini." Luckily for him, the script for John Boorman's 
Zardoz – which required him to do exactly that – landed on his desk shortly 
afterwards.

Mark Wahlberg

As the lead singer of Marky Mark and the Funky Bunch, Wahlberg's lifestyle was 
the envy of the world. He travelled the globe, swamped with adoring fans, never 
wearing a sweater and only rarely a belt. But he wanted more. He wanted people 
to take him seriously. So, just like that, he became an actor. Mark Wahlberg 
the rapper was dead;Mark Wahlberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mark-wahlberg> the man who makes violent 
films you might watch on an aeroplane was king. He would eventually make 
another major career turn, into a man who made films that people did want 
to see, but that would be years away.

Charlize Theron
 All the vindication she needed… Charlize Theron (right) in Monster 
Theron had an enviable acting career on the go, starring in films by Robert 
Redford and Woody Allen, but it wasn't until she did Monster that she won an 
award. Why? Because until then she was seen as nothing more than eye-candy. But 
in Monster, she fattened up and stopped washing. It was a transformation, and 
all the vindication she needed. She, and every other film actress brave enough 
to wear the sort of clothes that normal people wear, deserve our gratitude.

Helena Bonham Carter

Helena Bonham Carter <https://www.theguardian.com/film/helena-bonham-carter> 
was once the definitive porcelain face of Merchant Ivory – so much so that it 
was genuinely unsettling to see her out of period dress. But then in 1999 she 
starred in Fight Club as a damaged chain-smoker who may or may not be a 
secondary figment of the protagonist's imagination. The role immediately cut 
her free and allowed her to do anything she wanted, which turned out to be 
making loads of films with Tim Burton and Johnny Depp.

Hugh Laurie

Everyone's favourite gormless sidekick stuck firmly to the laughs, whether on 
small screen (Blackadder, A Bit of Fry and Laurie) or big (Peter's Friends, 101 
Dalmatians, Stuart Little). But then Hollywood came a-calling, and even after 
Dr House laid down his cane for good in 2012, Laurie's movie choices have 
tended to be as blue as his music.
 