
If anyone thought they might like to hold a public inquiry into the private 
lives of the crew of America’s most recent aeronautical pride and joy -Apollo 11
 <https://www.theguardian.com/science/apollo-11-moon-landing> - the women 
behind the men forbade any intrusion into that sphere when they faced the press 
yesterday.

The astronauts’ wives, pleasantly cooperative and looking predictably “all 
American,” were well groomed and alert. Most of the time they were serious, 
pausing to think before they answered questions but apparently thankful for any 
light relief in what must be a tedious task when it’s all been said before.


Each is a university graduate (with the ability to understand her husband’s 
work), is very proud of him, has seen no change in him since the moon mission 
(and did not really expect to), is very glad to be married to a man who is 
still the same man she married, does not expect her marital status to change 
(death to all rumours that any one of them might soon be in the divorce court), 
is enjoying her world tour (but finding the pace hectic) and one suspects, is 
looking forward to resuming her role of wife and mother under normal 
circumstances.


Janet Armstrong, Joan Aldrin, and Pat Collins are perfectly able to take this 
public parade in their stride. After all, they explained, they had had time to 
adjust. For at least six years their husbands had been involved with the NASA 
projects.


Mrs Collins said she had had a great deal of confidence in the mission but she 
had been glad that if anything went wrong while her husband orbited the moon 
alone it was not his own personal and private decision to return without the 
other two.


All three said they had discussed the possibility of their husband’s death 
with him, but Mrs Collins said they had not conditioned themselves consciously 
for the takeoff or flight because it was something they lived with every day of 
the years of training.


Mrs Aldrin who is tall, bright-eyed and blonde said she had had a list of 
repairs-around-the-house for her husband when he came out of quarantine: “But I 
did wait a day or two before I told him about the non-functioning cooker, 
washing machine, and dish-washer.”

 