
Miss Rose Macaulay had much to say on modern novelists when she addressed 
members of the English Association at Manchester University last night. As Mr. 
Allan Monkhouse suggested when he introduced Miss Macaulay, no one expected to 
find in her comments mere dull acquiescence, and her audience was entertained 
by many pungent criticisms of well-known writers.

After suggesting that the novel of all the sisters of art was the least 
intellectual, Miss Macaulay, whilst professing little knowledge of so-called 
cynicism among young writers, thought that much nonsense was talked about the 
psychological effect of the war upon any but the older novelists.

She also expressed astonishment, considering what an interest was taken in 
foreign books, at the surprisingly small debt English writers owed to 
contemporary foreign novelists. Flaubert and Maupassant had their effects 
thirty years ago, the great Russians likewise, as for instance, on the 
Katherine Mansfield school, with its patient attention to trivial detail, but 
in Proust there was no British writer whose style had been seriously affected 
by him. Foreign writers had not affected Wells, or Galsworthy, or Bennett, or 
E. M. Forster, the most English and to her the most delightful of modern 
novelists.

E. M. Forster was one of the very few who could draw live young women. He was 
the cultured spinster among novelists. D. H. Lawrence had strength and interest 
and a hot, dark, rich power, but Miss Macaulay criticised him for his obsession 
with sexual relationships, an obsession sufficient to prevent him from being 
really great.Aldous Huxley <https://www.theguardian.com/books/aldoushuxley> was 
in some ways a disciple of Lawrence. His characters were all his mouthpieces, 
and he needed a great many for he had a lot to say. Most of them were engaged 
in amorous adventures, and he was often what children called "nasty" and 
grown-ups "out-spoken."

Discussing those writers who dealt with the "stream of consciousness," the 
speaker mentioned Virginia Woolf, James Joyce and Dorothy Richardson, of whom 
the first was the most delicate and charming. Betraying a critical acquaintance 
with the works of an extraordinary number of contemporary writers, Miss 
Macaulay ran swiftly and sometimes with deadly effect over many well-known 
names, touching lightly upon the diverse schools of thought and practice which 
exist to-day.

Among the new humourists she thought Evelyn Waugh to be one of the most comic 
and gifted. It was rare to find many humorous writers, but there were probably 
more and better in this country than in any other. Miss Macaulay went on to 
discuss the "literature of escape," among which were the fantastics like 
Garnett and Stella Benson. The latter demonstrated how the modern heroine had 
not to be beautiful, but to be rather self-conscious and not at all amiable.

After commending the adventurous romantics like Masefield and Buchan, the 
speaker went on to deplore any tendency to brighten crime. Then there were the 
writers of country life, such as T. F. Powys, who brightened its dullness with 
violent incident, and to whom village life appeared to be a mixture of Borstal 
and Colney Hatch. There were also the writers on life at women's colleges and 
schools, always extremely surprising to women who had been there. And men who 
wrote about women seemed to think the subject needed more spice.
 