
An organised crime gang convicted of plotting audacious raids on museums and 
auction houses to steal rhino horn and artefacts worth up to £57m may have had 
specific Chinese buyers waiting for the goods, an antiquities expert has said.

Fourteen men have been convicted of thefts and attempted plots, including 
break-ins at Cambridge’s Fitzwilliam Museum and Durham’s Oriental Museum in 
2012, with the gang stealing items more valuable than this year’sHatton Garden 
raid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/14/hatton-garden-heist-ringleader-brian-reader-kenneth-noye>
 haul, according to police.

On Monday, a jury at Birmingham crown court convicted the final four 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/29/chinese-artefacts-fourteen-men-convicted-british-museums-rhino-horn>
 of the so-called Rathkeale Rovers gang’s generals who had overseen the thefts, 
John “Kerry” O’Brien Jr, Richard “Kerry” O’Brien, Daniel “Turkey” O’Brien and 
Michael Hegarty.

Some private buyers in China may have little concern for where the treasure 
they purchase has come from, according toDr Donna Yates 
<http://www.gla.ac.uk/schools/socialpolitical/staff/donnayates/>, lecturer in 
looting and trafficking of antiquities and cultural property at the University 
of Glasgow.

“In this case, it’s one of few cases where it is very clear they did have a 
resale market for it,” she told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “So looking at 
what this gang targeted, which was rhinoceros horn, and small, portable but 
very valuable Chinese antiquities, they had a clear market for these items in
China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>.”


Yates said the market for Chinese antiquities being sold back to China from 
Europe was huge. “The legitimate antiquities market sees a lot of Chinese 
buying of Chinese material that has come to Europe and is going back, but 
presumably these items are desirable by collectors who don’t expect to have 
anybody checking up on them,” she said.


Among the 14 convicted was Donald Chi Chong Wong, a London-based “fence” with 
close links to Hong Kong. The court was told police twice found him with 
thousands of pounds in cash stuffed in plastic bags.

Yates called the four men convicted on Monday “organised, focused and they 
seem to be the top rung of the organisation ... these are very motivated 
criminals”.

The gang’s criminal careers had been marred by a series of almost comical 
mishaps, police revealed on Monday, including one incident described in court 
as “a fiasco” in which four offenders, hired by the gang’s ringleaders, dropped 
a rhino head as they attempt to leave the Castle Museum in Norwich, having 
apparently failed to appreciate that the head would be too heavy to carry.

In April 2012, a jade bowl worth at least £2m and a figurine were stolen from 
Durham’s Oriental Museum and left at a pre-agreed “deposition site”, which 
members of the gang then forgot to mark on a map and so lost the items.

However, that same month, four hired burglars successfully stole more than a 
dozen jade pieces worth at least £15m from the Fitzwilliam Museum, and though 
they were later arrested the stolen items have never been recovered.

DCI Jim McCrorie, of Cambridgeshire police, said the items lost from the 
Fitzwilliam were of huge cultural significance. He added: “We remain committed 
to following any new lines of inquiry that could lead to their recovery.”
 