
The genuine enthusiasm for the Queen's speech at Dublin Castle, which 
signalled a new era in Anglo-Irish relations, has been dampened today by news 
of the death of Dr Garret FitzGerald.

Amid relief that the royal visit is so far running smoothly without any 
violent disruption, and the positive reaction to the Queen's address, there is 
a palpable sense of loss acrossIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> for one of its most respected 
leaders.

His passing, just hours after the monarch's words of sadness and regret for 
past pain in Anglo-Irish relations, was poignant. He should have been close to 
the top table in St Patrick's Hall last night, near the Irish president and the 
British monarch, but for the fact that he was so ill.

Yet his death, and the tributes to him following it, compound the overriding 
impression in Dublin that there has been a tectonic shift in the politics of 
Irish and British history. FitzGerald, after all, persuaded Margaret Thatcher 
to sign the 1985 Anglo-Irish agreement, which gave Dublin a stronger say in
Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> affairs and 
paved the way for closer and deeper co-operation between the Irish and British 
governments.

Without that nascent partnership, delivery of the peace process would 
undoubtedly have been harder and longer to nurture.

However, the former taoiseach was always concerned about not alienating the 
unionist population of Northern Ireland. Although the Hillsborough Accord 
outraged unionists in the north and led to a spike in loyalist violence, it was 
never his intention to push that community further into a corner.

There is a poignant image of FitzGerald a year or so after the signing of the 
agreement when he visited Northern Ireland amid tight security. He made it his 
business to break away from his entourage and shake the hand of a Royal Ulster 
Constabulary officer who had been guarding him.

At the time, the RUC was facing the enmity of not only the Provisional IRA but 
also extreme loyalists, who were burning police officers out of their homes 
because the force had been asked to physically defend the new Anglo-Irish 
Secretariat building on the outskirts of east Belfast.

The handshake was probably the first since Seán Lemass went to Northern 
Ireland to meet his prime ministerial counterpart, Sir Terence O'Neill, in the 
1960s.

FitzGerald would have approved of the presence of the Queen and Prince Phillip 
as a powerful sign of normalisation between the two countries.

He would have been equally delighted to see another unionist minister, the 
leader of Northern Ireland, Peter Robinson, attending the historic state dinner 
as an equally important signal that relations between unionism and nationalism 
in the north were reaching a new and better understanding.

His enthusiasm for the royal visit this week appears to be shared by most 
people in the republic, at least in terms of anecdotal evidence. The protests 
against the Queen's presence have been numerically insignificant and 
inconsequential.

The Garda Siochána has so far been quick to quell any serious trouble. The 
dissidents have enjoyed no traction in their protests over the last three days.

It could be argued that their inability to disrupt a well flagged up programme 
for the Queen or bring large numbers onto the streets has been a major morale 
blow to the republican dissident cause.

Their failure to do so will not convince them – at least not yet – of the 
futility of their armed campaigns, but it does put their influence in some 
perspective.

The Queen <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/queen>, whether today at the 
National Stud in Kildare, or on the hallowed ground of Gaelic sports in Croke 
Park, or at a memorial garden for the fallen of previous Irish republican 
campaigns earlier in the week, has proven that those who would regard her as a 
"legitimate target" are more isolated than ever.
 