
He's a terrible comedian that does incredibly well with audiences... But he's 
hated by other comedians for being nothing but an idiot that dances and jumps 
around on stage while talking about hooking up with girls."

No, comedian Aziz Ansari <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/aziz-ansari> isn't 
describing himself from afar. Or having a self doubt-induced nervous breakdown. 
He's talking about his latest film role. And it isn't just any role. After 
playing to the fringes of New York's comedy circuit (and a bit part in Flight 
Of The Conchords) Aziz is about to be launched into middle America's 
consciousness with a starring role as the club-footed comic Randy in Judd 
Apatow's Adam Sandler-starring flick Funny People. It's no coincidence that 
Apatow, whose many-headed hydra comedy ensembles have gone on to successful 
careers of their own, has chosen the 25-year-old comic to star in his new film.

"It's probably the best character I've played in a movie," he says. "Judd gave 
me a lot of room to play with the character. I couldn't have been more excited 
to work with all those guys."

Mixing the Woody Allen "likable nerd" factor with the kind of hip pop culture 
references that wouldn't be out of place on The Mighty Boosh, Aziz has been 
much beloved of US blogs like Stereogum for years. This is in part due to his 
brilliantly surreal websiteazizisbored.com <http://www.azizisbored.com>, a 
place for random internettery from his love of Aphex Twin and a fave burger bar 
to his best skits. And thanks to his naturalistic stand-up which saw him 
receive Rolling Stone's Hot Stand Up accolade.

Aziz is having none of it, though. "I wouldn't walk into a bar and, like, 
eight girls would jump up and go, 'OH MY GOD! IT'S ROLLING STONE'S PICK FOR THE 
HOT STAND-UP ON THEIR HOT LIST!'" he laughs.

This year he can also be seen in the top secret spin-off of The Office 
starring SNL alumni (and Tina Fey's BFF) Amy Poehler and Quincy Jones's 
daughter, Rashida. "She'll play a nurse whose boyfriend has a strange injury 
that leads her to the world inhabited by myself and Amy." Then there's a guest 
spot in the eighth season of Scrubs where he plays "insanely lazy but super 
intelligent" intern Ed. All of which is pretty good going for someone whose 
formative comedy influences are questionable. "I watched the movie Short 
Circuit 2 a lot," he says with pride.

Aziz grew up in the heart of America's deep south (South Carolina) where, as 
an Indian American, he had to deal with a degree of prejudice. "It was weird at 
times, I was the only minority in my school up until high school," he recalls. 
"Occasionally I had to deal with racist-type stuff but there was a good side: I 
also got to eat fried chicken, baked macaroni and cheese and biscuits. It was a 
fair trade-off."

He started doing open-mic sessions in 2000 and, after climbing up the ladder 
of New York's notoriously spiky comedy circuit, he finally landed his first 
stand-up show at theComedy <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/comedy> Cellar. 
"The deal was that new comics who brought five friends to the club could get 10 
minutes stage time. I was pretty terrible but I had a lot of friends."

What was his material like back then? "I had some bits about Lassie. Yeah, 
Lassie the old TV dog, how bad does that sound?"

One of his funnier stand-up skits was an attempt to woo the singer MIA by 
saying "very, very good songs" in Tamil. It sort of worked; he now counts her 
as a friend, although when they first met he felt "like a little girl at a John 
Mayer concert". Is he still in love with the singer? "I love Maya but only as a 
friend," he laughs coyly. "She's married now."

At the same time as the Rolling Stone accolade, MTV commissioned his show 
Human Giant, a series of sketches performed by Aziz and Curb Your Enthusiasm's 
Rob Huebel. The show (a sort of Adam & Joe meets Trigger Happy TV) gave birth 
to some of Aziz's most memorable one-liners such as ("Think you got what it 
takes? Well, take a shit on Mount Rushmore and call me Jefferson, buddy!"), 
while the show courted controversy with skits about 9/11. Elsewhere, the 
Shittest Mixtape Boombox Blast segment saw him carrying a huge 80s boombox 
blasting out songs by Gloria Estefan and Sixpence None The Richer. Not everyone 
got the joke. "We had to change a lot of the songs because artists like Paula 
Cole [whose Dawson's Creek theme song I Don't Want To Wait featured] were less 
than excited to be on a 'Shit Mix'."

Season two featured an even more extreme storyline. "A gay porn star [played 
by Huebel] dies and haunts me by, let's say, 'doing pretty intense stuff'. It 
could have been really homophobic but instead we got a nice write up in - and 
I'm not making this up - the Gay Porn Times!"

Right now though, Aziz is preparing for a stand-up tour called Glow In The 
Dark, named after the Kanye West tour of the same name (including a very funny 
rip-off tour poster). "I got a cease and desist letter from his lawyer, so I 
just called him on the phone and he said, 'I'm in Brazil, hanging out with one 
of my dream girls from the movies,'" explains Ansari. "And I said 'I don't know 
what that means but that sounds really awesome!'"

Kanye on speed-dial is a far cry from posting homemade vids on YouTube, but 
you can bet Aziz won't be bored for much longer.

• For more Aziz go to azizisbored.com <http://www.azizisbored.com>; Funny 
People is out in July
 