
Fauja Singh is something of a celebrity at the east London gurdwara (Sikh 
temple) which he visits daily. While he tucks into a breakfast of rice pudding 
and a cup of tea on a sunny Thursday morning, a steady stream of people 
approach to congratulate him on his latest achievement. He smiles and chats, 
his eyes twinkling. Just days before, he completed both the Luxemburg 
Interfaith marathon and the Edinburgh marathon as part of the relay team Sikhs 
in the City - a team of four Sikh elders with a combined age of 336.

Fauja is the oldest of the four, a sprightly 98 but, as I interview him, with 
the help of his trainer-cum-mentor-cum-manager-cum-friend and, for today, 
translator, Harmander Singh, he exudes a boyish charm that makes you forget 
he's close to 100.

Fauja first ran when he was a youngster in India, but returned to the sport 
after a 54-year gap to complete his first marathon at the age of 89. He says he 
took up running after losing a son and later his wife - these losses left him 
demoralised and saddened and he felt he needed a new focus in his life. He 
moved to Britain and soon started challenging other old-age pensioners to 
races. He chuckles cheekily as he explains how he increased his competitive 
edge: "If they looked healthy, I'd extend the distance; the races got longer 
and longer until I ran my first official race - a 20km run for Cancer Research 
UK in 1999."

Once bitten by the running bug, he set his sights on the London marathon and 
with the help of Harmander he gained a place running for Bliss - the premature 
baby charity - making him the oldest person in the race running for some of the 
youngest.

"I didn't really feel tired after crossing the line, which was partly down to 
the training but mainly to God. He put me there so he had to help me finish! I 
thought: 'I'm going to do more of these.'"

Since then, Fauja has run six more marathons - another four in London, one in 
Toronto and one in New York - and he has broken 12 UK, European, Commonwealth 
and World records, though he remains remarkably humble about his 
accomplishments.

"I only weigh 52kg," he says. "It's not a lot."

All four members of Sikhs in the City share an infectiously positive outlook 
and lust for life that is key to their ongoing success. Ajit Singh, 79, for 
instance, has just learned to ride a bicycle, so one of his goals now is to 
complete a triathlon. He and his lifelong friend Amrik Singh, also 79, have 
completed more than 1,000 races between them and acted as mentors to Fauja. 
Karnail Singh, 80, is the newest member of the team and the least experienced 
runner. His "experimentation" with course routes means that his teammates have 
to keep an eye on him, but what he lacks in kilometres he more than makes up 
for in providing the focus for a little gentle mickey-taking.

The Sikhs in the City are familiar faces on the marathon scene and are treated 
to a warm reception wherever they go, but Fauja in particular has become a bit 
of a global star. Having completed marathons in America, Europe and Asia, he 
was recruited as the face of Adidas for their "Impossible Is Nothing" campaign 
in 2004. He has also been the subject of an online petition to be recognised in 
the Queen's Birthday Honours and there is even a "Fauja Singh Appreciation 
Society" on Facebook.

How does it feel to be on the receiving end of so much public adoration? "It 
makes me happy," he says. "Elderly people are like little children, they like 
attention."

The running quartet are in agreement about why they've managed to stay so 
healthy: a positive frame of mind, keeping the company of people who are 
forward looking, not indulging in any excesses, appreciating what God has 
provided them with and keeping active.

And for Fauja age isn't even a consideration:

"I do not consider myself to be old. From the moment I do that, I would lose 
everything, because age is a state of mind - as long as you're positive you can 
do anything."

None of the four have any intention of hanging up their trainers. In the next 
four months alone they're taking part in a relay marathon in Redbridge (east 
London), a relay from Birmingham to London, attempting to notch up yet more 
records at the Norway KnarvikMila where times are age-weighted, and they are 
joining a British team with a total age of 1,000 years at the Toronto 
Waterfront marathon to challenge a team of Canadian elders over a 5km course.

For Fauja the answer is simple: "I won't stop running until I die. The next 
target, God willing, is to be the oldest marathon runner ever." The title is 
currently held by a Greek man who completed a marathon aged 98, but as nobody 
seems to know his exact date of birth, Fauja is holding fire until he turns 99 
and the following year, when he will be 100, he would like to return to the 
London marathon - his home course.

Before leaving I ask Fauja what changes he has seen in Britain in the 15 years 
he's been here and he replies in his typically charming, upbeat way. "Maybe 
it's because I'm getting on a bit and so I'm grateful for everything, but 
despite what other people might say, I only see improvement. The respect and 
acknowledgement I get here is just wonderful." And with that trademark twinkly 
smile he adds: "I am very grateful for the opportunities I have been given. If 
I didn't do any of this why would a man like me, of my age, have the 
opportunity to wander the streets of the world?"
Laura Potter
 