
Tiny little flies buzzing around my houseplants; it’s not the welcome home 
committee I’d wanted. Fungus gnats, or compost flies, are small, dark, 
short-lived gnats that love houseplants. The adults are annoying but harmless; 
the larvae, however, feed off the roots of houseplants. They are particularly 
fond of tender roots, fungus and other rotting material. An infestation can do 
considerable damage to seedlings, young plants and cuttings. Often it’s a sign 
that you’ve been overwatering and the roots are rotting a little. You can put 
out yellow sticky traps to catch the adults, but you may trap pollinators, too.

The best solution is to grow butterwort. Pinguicula 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pinguicula> (pings for short) are a genus of 
carnivorous plants that have sticky, glandular leaves that trap and eat their 
prey. Look closely and you’ll see little gnats struggling away, much like the 
yellow sticky trap, except more exciting. The leaves emit a faint rotting smell 
that attracts insects to the glistening pools of digestive enzymes. They get 
stuck and the plant turns them into a digestive soup to sup.

Like all carnivorous plants, pinguiculas do this to supplement their diet: 
they live in soils with poor mineral content. Their pretty flowers attract 
different flying insects from their leaves, so they never trap their 
pollinators.

The name butterwort comes from the Latin pinguis, meaning fat, referring to 
the fleshy leaves. The most common areMexican butterworts 
<http://www.carnivorousplants.org/howto/GrowingGuides/Pings_Mexican.php> with 
leaves up to 10cm long and cute, violet-like, pinky-purple flowers. These make 
great houseplants. They like warm conditions all year round, but can go outside 
in summer. They can grow in full sun or shade, but do best somewhere in 
between. In full sun the leaves often turn brilliant pink, but watering can be 
an issue in strong light because the leaves scorch if splashed. Come winter, 
they ditch their sticky leaves for succulent ones, surviving with little or no 
water; the compost just has to remain damp.

Like other carnivorous plants, they do not like alkaline conditions and are 
happiest drinking rainwater. It’s easiest to water them from below, draining 
off any excess after a couple of hours.

They are easy to propagate. Gently pull off a leaf and nudge the end into some 
very free-draining compost (add lots of perlite). New babies will appear at the 
end of leaf after a couple of weeks.

How to make the most of house plants
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/feb/21/how-to-make-most-of-house-plants> 