
Because it was Martin McGuinness who said it, commentators and observers of 
Northern Irish politics <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/northernireland> 
have been getting overexcited. It was, after all, McGuinness who was holding 
secret talks via a "back channel" in Derry with John Major's government back in 
1993.

Now McGuinness announces that the Irish and British governments are currently 
engaged in some form of covert talks with the republican dissident groups who 
are determined to destroy the peace process theSinn Féin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein> MP, amongst others, helped 
piece together.

The parallels continue between 1993, when the Observer exposed the existence 
of the "back channel", and the summer of 2010. Seventeen years ago, in the 
House of Commons, Major said it would "turn my stomach" to talk to the likes of 
Gerry Adams.

The present Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> 
secretary, Owen Paterson, vehemently denied reports at the weekend that there 
was fresh dialogue between Britain, Ireland and the likes of the Real IRA, 
Continuity IRA and Óglaigh na hÉireann.
 Gerry Adams and McGuinness in 1993. Photograph: Dylan Martinez/Reuters 
 Given the success of the previous process, including the clandestine talks 
between McGuinness and MI5 operatives in Derry, the rather simplistic 
conclusion is drawn that talks will once more yield similar results: a total 
cessation of violence.

There are, however, several reasons why the two situations are radically 
different, particularly on two key fronts. First, in 1993 the British faced a 
united, coherent movement – the Provisional IRA.

The twin dominating characters in that organisation were McGuinness and Adams, 
who exercised almost full control of their membership.

Secondly, the British state had a comprehensive insight into the strategic 
thinking inside that movement. Given the number of high-powered agents working 
for the British state within the PIRA and Sinn Féin there was more than enough 
intelligence to indicate to London that there was a significant "peace party" 
within the provisionals.

Indeed, many of these agents were engineered into place at top levels of the 
movement to advance the agenda of the "peace faction" inside the PIRA and Sinn 
Féin.

Think, for instance, of the late Denis Donaldson, the British agent and close 
ally of Adams. He was able to remove potential Sinn Féin candidates who were 
not fully trustworthy regarding the peace process and not loyal enough to 
Adams' line.

IRA veterans of the "armed struggle", such as gunrunner Gerry McGeogh, will 
tell you that they were moved sideways by Donaldson not just to suit the Adams 
agenda but also that of the British state counterinsurgency strategy.

While there has been some evidence of Garda infiltration of dissident groups 
in the Irish republic, their counterparts in Northern Ireland are currently 
suffering from an "intelligence gap".

What is more, the nationalist SDLP have alleged that if MI5 (now the prime 
mover in counterterrorism in Northern Ireland) has made any real inroads into 
the dissident groups, it is certainly not sharing it with the PSNI.

In addition, unlike the PIRA in 1993, the dissident republican groups are a 
disparate constellation of forces. The Continuity IRA, for instance, is 
arguably the most ideologically pure of the three rebel republican groups. It 
refuses to talk even to Sinn Féin, let alone the British or Irish governments, 
about moves towards any end to its armed campaign.

At present, the smaller but more lethal Óglaigh na hÉireann is, on its terms, 
currently on a roll, having carried out a number of bomb attacks in recent 
times. ONH has shown no indication that it intends to wind up its violence. In 
fact, it appears to be ratcheting up its terrorism as it seeks to destabilise 
the political process.
 