
In a famous essay first published in 1955, the historian Noel Annan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2000/feb/23/guardianobituaries> attempted to 
describe the complex set of kinship relationships that bound together the great 
thinkers and scientists of late Victorian England. These great families formed 
what Annan called an "intellectual aristocracy", who bequeathed to their 
descendants not money or titles, but rather "some trait of personality, some 
tradition of behaviour, which did not perish with the passing of the years". 
Pre-eminent among these high-minded, inter-marrying, multi-generational 
magnificos were the Macaulays, the Trevelyans, the Arnolds and perhaps most 
extraordinary of all, the Huxleys.

The founder of the Huxley dynasty was Thomas Henry Huxley, born in Ealing in 
1825 to a middle-class family fallen on hard times. He benefited from only two 
years of formal education and later claimed to have been "kicked into the world 
a boy without guide or training". Huxley is indeed the very image of the 
autodidact – adventurous, bold, prone to bouts of depression, an omnivorous 
reader who taught himself Greek and Latin. He eventually became a professor and 
president ofthe Royal Society <http://royalsociety.org/>. Broad of nose, 
mutton-chop whiskered and a famous defender of Darwin's theory of evolution, he 
was known as "Darwin's Bulldog".

Huxley and his wife "Nettie" (Henrietta Anne Heathorn) had eight children and 
the shadow of the great man fell heavily upon them and their descendants. 
Juliette Huxley, wife of one of Huxley's grandchildren, said in an interview in 
1985: "There is something really devastating about having a grandfather … who 
was a god in the family. These children grew up with that atmosphere ... 'You 
must be worthy of grand-pater'." It seems possible that Annan's grand theory of 
the intellectual aristocracy is not based on the transmission of traits or 
behaviours, but on simple human fear. We must be worthy of grand-pater.

The worthiest among Huxley's many children was undoubtedly Leonard, an editor 
and literary journalist, who married Julia Arnold, scion of that other family 
of Victorian intellectual aristocrats, the Arnolds. She was one of the first 
women to attend Somerville College, Oxford, and later set up her own school, 
Prior's Field. Leonard and Julia had four children, among whom wasAldous Huxley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/aldoushuxley>, who recalled being taken as a 
six-year-old to the grand ceremonial unveiling of a statue of his grandfather, 
Thomas. Overcome with awe and emotion, young Aldous threw up in his brother's 
top hat.

Aldous was perhaps closest among all the many Huxleys to his grandfather's 
pioneering intellectual spirit. Tall, half-blind, terrifyingly intelligent, and 
the author of dozens of works of fiction, non-fiction, poetry and plays, his 
subject, according toIsaiah Berlin 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/obituaries/obituray-sir-isaiah-berlin-1292530.html>
, was nothing less than "the condition of men in the 20th century". According 
to his biographer, Nicholas Murray, inAldous Huxley: An English Intellectual 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/apr/13/biography.aldoushuxley> (2002), 
Aldous was a "like an 18th-century philosophe, a modern Voltaire", a "prophet".

Born in Surrey in 1894, Aldous later moved to California with his wife Maria 
and their son Matthew, where he dabbled in writing screenplays and wrote a 
bestseller, The Art of Seeing (1943), about his attempts to improve his 
eyesight. But he achieved perhaps his greatest notoriety with his experiments 
with mescaline and LSD, about which he wrote The Doors of Perception (1954) and 
Heaven and Hell (1956). The rock band the Doors apparently took their name from 
his title.

In an interview late in life, Aldous Huxley remarked: "We are multiple 
amphibians living in many different – even in some senses incommensurable – 
universes at the same time, and ... our business in life is somehow to make the 
best of all the worlds we live in." It might have been the Huxley family motto.

• This article was amended on 16 November 2010. The original named Thomas 
Henry Huxley's wife as Ann. This has been corrected.
 