
The Green party’s flagship economic policy, the £72 a week “citizen’s income”, 
would hit the poorest hardest unless it was made more complicated by including 
a means-tested element, the leading advocate of the policy has conceded.

The Citizen’s Income Trust <http://www.citizensincome.org/> (CIT), which has 
given advice to the Green party and been repeatedly cited by the Greens, has 
modelled its scheme and discovered it would mean 35.15% of households would be 
losers, with many of the biggest losers among the poorest households.

The trust’s research shows that for the two lowest disposable income deciles, 
more than one-fifth would suffer income losses of more than 10%, something one 
of the most leftwing parties in the election is unlikely to want to advocate.

Malcolm Torry, director of the CIT, a small charitable research body, said: “I 
am not sure theGreen party <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/green-party> 
has yet taken on our new research or the need to retain a means-tested element. 
We have only just published the new work.”

The criticisms of the scheme, as well as doubts about costings, have led the 
Greens to make a tactical retreat, with the party’s leader, Natalie Bennett, 
saying detailed costings for the policy will not be available in the manifesto 
in March.

She faced a difficult time when interviewed by Andrew Neil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andrew-neil> on the BBC’s Sunday Politics on 
the subject, repeatedly arguing that any extra cost would be covered by 
reductions in the administration of welfare.

Citizen’s income is an unconditional, non-withdrawable income for every 
individual, including children, given as a right of citizenship. The idea has 
won support in the past on both sides of the Atlantic from left and right, and 
was until 1996 a Liberal Democrat policy. It was finally rejected as utopian.

It replaces personal tax allowances, and most means-tested benefits including 
jobseeker’s allowance, child benefit, the basic state pension and tax credits.

The CIT, the charitable body that has done most to promote the policy in the 
UK, admits after modelling its proposal with the help of the Euromod model at 
the University of Essex that the complexity of the current welfare system has 
led to a major design flaw being revealed, including a big hit on the poor.

Writing in the latest issue of the CIT’s newsletter, Torry states: “It is a 
pity that such a large number of households with low disposable incomes suffer 
such large losses on the implementation of what otherwise looks like a useful 
and revenue-neutral scheme.

“But unfortunately, with that number of large losses, the scheme would be 
impossible for a government to implement, and we ought to look for an 
alternative.”

However, Torry argues almost regardless of the level at which the citizen’s 
income is set, the poor cannot be compensated for withdrawal of both the 
personal tax allowance and means-tested benefits without the scheme becoming 
too expensive.

In a bid to make the scheme more palatable, the trust has looked at retaining 
the central principle of a non-contributory scheme and the abolition of the 
personal tax allowance, but retaining other means-tested benefits such as tax 
credits, so depriving the scheme of the simplicity and administrative savings 
once promised.

The revised scheme hits the rich hardest, but also requires a substantial 
increase in the basic rate of tax to 30%, as well as lifting national insurance 
to 12% of all income. The scheme still costs £24bn.

Alternatively, the trust has looked at cutting the value of citizen’s income 
from £75 a week to just £50 a week, much closer to the value of a personal tax 
allowance.

Torry told the Guardian that citizen’s income still has substantial advantages 
since even under this scheme it replaces a proportion of means-tested and other 
benefits, and total marginal deduction rates would be greatly reduced.

The amounts of means-tested benefits received would be reduced through 
citizen’s income being taken into account when calculating benefits.

In addition, for many households the reduction would offer the option of 
adding additional hours of employment and so escaping from means-testing.

A Green party spokesman said: “The citizen’s income is one of the items the 
manifesto working group are looking at. The Green party manifesto will be 
launched at some point in March.” 
 