
Remember Margaret Thatcher's desire to starve terrorists of the "oxygen of 
publicity"?

The former prime minister's remark was a precursor to the Tories' broadcasting 
ban in the late 1980s that prevented supporters of the Provisional IRA in Sinn 
Féin – or indeed loyalists – from talking freely on the UK's airwaves. The 
thinking behind this prohibition was that terrorist groups were exploiting the 
broadcasters, that the enemies of democracy were subverting the system by 
harnessing a key tenet of democracy – a free, open media.

Of course the ban led to surreal outcomes such as actors' voices replacing the 
actual voices of Gerry Adams, Martin McGuinness and other key players in the 
Northern Irish politico-paramilitary world. At its most extreme the ban's 
absurdity was exposed on the BBC comedy mock-news show The Day Today when Steve 
Coogan, playing a Sinn Féin spokesman,sucked in helium before an interview 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UOUeauLWEaE> in order "to subtract credibility 
from his statements".

 In the aftermath of the Guardian's story on the Real IRA 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2010/sep/14/real-ira-targets-banks-bankers> today 
and the dissident group's bellicose warning to bankers and the banking system, 
the "oxygen of publicity" argument was resurrected once more.

A reviewer, in fact a favourable one, perusing our story on Sky News late on 
Tuesday evening, raised the possibility that the report could give the Real IRA 
the "oxygen of publicity". Although he was fair and objective in his review of 
the story, others were more hostile in their attitude to our interview with the 
republican dissident terror group. Some in the media have privately remarked 
that it has given theReal IRA <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/real-ira> 
disproportionate coverage given its size and lack of support within the 
nationalist community.

Aside from the fact that we emphasised the point that most nationalists 
support the peace process in the story it is alarming that there is so much 
self-censorship out there. The reason one suspects that there is may be due to 
an overwhelming (and well-meaning) desire to protect the amazing gains of the 
Irish peace process. So much has been achieved as a result of years of 
painstaking work and dialogue. The end result has been the once-unthinkable 
sight of Sinn Féin and the Democratic Unionists sharing power together.

However, this does not and should not end in a process where those who oppose 
that historic compromise are shut out from the debate or censored out of 
existence. This was one of the key strategic political/PR errors of the British 
government when the nascent Provisional IRA began to intensify its violence 
from the early 1970s.

At the time the PIRA was dismissed as everything from an Irish version of the 
Mafia to simply a gang of mad dogs. One government television advert in the 
early 70s even compared local PIRA commanders to the Pied Piper of Hamelin 
leading children towards a disastrous end.

The H-block dirty protests and later the hunger strikes finally shattered that 
manufactured caricature, and even the British state came to accept that the 
overwhelming majority of republicans were ideologically motivated and dedicated 
to their cause.

In underground armed insurgent groups there will always be criminals and 
opportunists who ride on the back of "armed campaigns" to enrich themselves; in
Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> this 
particularly phenomenon was a common trait of loyalist paramilitaries. The 
danger in reporting and explaining the activities of groups such as the Real 
IRA is that they are dismissed as having no support, no political strategy and 
as nothing more than a collection of common criminals hiding under the banner 
of dissident republicanism.

That is why it was important to speak directly to one of the three armed 
republican groups that continue to carry out acts of violence despite 
ceasefires, historic agreements and a general war-weariness among the majority 
of the nationalist population.
 