
It's almost pointless, blogging on American Psycho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/american-psycho>. Most people made up their 
minds about Patrick Bateman and his murderous progress through the New York 
yuppie scene long ago. It might be best to write, simply: "Discuss." I'm not 
going to change your position, am I?

Having said that, it is interesting to note how much more favourable modern 
opinion is towards the book than it was back in 1991. I'm guessing your 
comments will be much more appreciative of Bret Easton Ellis's efforts than 
they would have been 20 years ago. Now that American Psycho, which isthe 
subject of this month's Guardian book club 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2010/jun/26/book-club-bret-easton-ellis>, has 
become an established feature of the literary landscape and is generally 
acknowledged as a modern classic, it's fascinating to go back through the 
archives and discover how much critics hated the book when it first came out.

The Guardian's digital archive, for instance, features a review by Joan Smith, 
who described the book as "nasty, brutish and long". She noted, with 
inadvertent hilarity, that it was "unconvincing" in its depictions of murder 
and concluded that it was "an entirely negligible piece of work, badly written 
and wholly lacking in insight or illumination". Andrew Motion in the Observer 
meanwhile lamented that the book was "throughout numbingly boring, and for much 
of the time deeply and extremely disgusting. Not interesting-disgusting, but 
disgusting-disgusting: sickening, cheaply sensationalist, pointless except as a 
way of earning its author some money and notoriety."

To describe such reviewers as suffering from a sense of humour failure is 
almost as much of an understatement as the following delightful assessment I 
came across on Wikipedia:"Bateman's mental state appears increasingly 
questionable." <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/American_Psycho>

But the reviewers were minor players when it came to hating the book. Its 
troubled emergence into the world is well known. Simon and Schuster refused to 
publish at the last minute and let Ellis walk off with his alleged $300,000 
advance. They claimed editorial objections; Ellis claimed that they feared 
commercial reprisals. Spy magazine had just written an excoriating article 
about the way Bateman likes to rip the skin off women, andthe LA chapter of the 
National Organisation of Women had started sharpening their knives 
<http://www.tabula-rasa.info/Horror/AmericanPsychoFiles.html> (branding the 
work: "a how to novel on the torture and dismemberment of women") and 
threatening a boycott of whoever dared publish it.

Luckily, Sonny Mehta, the president and editor-in-chief of Knopf (a division 
of Random House), purchased the book for Vintage, defending his decision on the 
grounds that Ellis's novel was "serious". The boycott did indeed take place, 
the critics savaged the book, and only a few lone voices spoke out against them 
(like Fay Weldon – also in the Guardian, redeemingly – who described it as a 
"beautifully controlled, important novel").

As they nearly always do, the boycott-and-ignore lobby brought the book 
fantastic publicity, it sold in the hundreds of thousands and has remained 
essential reading ever since. Ellis's evisceration of the creatures that roam 
around Wall Street seems more relevant than ever in the face of the recent 
world recession. The motif of the serial killer working in plain view because 
none of his contemporaries was prepared or able to look beyond his haircut, his 
clothes and his pay cheque seems horribly prescient in the light of Enron and 
the great sub-prime Ponzi scheme. Sonny Mehta was right. It is a "serious" 
work: seriously funny, seriously sharp, seriously sick, and, to borrow Andrew 
Motion's construction, seriously serious.

It's also a significant work of literature. The collision of absurd reality 
and deranged fantasy still works a treat. Bateman's voice – obsessive, and only 
a very small fraction of a degree madder than the average style magazine – is a 
superb achievement: equally unsettling when he describes a suit, the "emotional 
honesty" of Phil Collins, or doing unspeakable things to prostitutes. There's 
also the disturbing uncertainty of the whole thing. Should we believe anything 
Bateman says? Does he actually look good? Does he attract hardbodies as easily 
as he makes out? Is he really a killer? Do cash machines really demand that he 
feeds them cats? It's impossible to tell. But there's no doubt that it works as 
an indictment of a culture.

Yet to talk of such weighty matters hardly does justice to the most 
significant aspect of the American Psycho reading experience: the fact that 
it's hilarious. As well as being a repulsive nightmare, Patrick Bateman is a 
comic creation of the highest order. His snobbery, his bad taste, his obsession 
with Les Mis and ability to take Huey Lewis and the News seriously, his terror 
when someone has a better business card than him, his constant worry that he 
has "to return some videos" all add up to one of the funniest comic creations 
since Bertie Wooster. True, he isn't quite such pleasant company as Bertie, but 
what did you expect? He's a psycho.

Discuss.

Comments will be most appreciated, as they'll help inform John Mullan's final 
book club column <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/series/bookclub> this month.
 