
The Leonids, enigmatic visitors from outer space, will arrive after midnight 
on Thursday, slamming into the Earth's atmosphere at 158,000 mph - 40 times the 
speed of a bullet - and burn up. If astronomers' predictions are right, the 
shooting stars could light up the heavens at the rate of 20 a minute.

The Leonids are an annual meteor shower, arriving on the night of November 
17-18 every year. They are the dust of comet Tempel-Tuttle, which swings around 
the sun every 33 years, showering dust and ice in the path of the orbiting 
Earth.

Every 33 years, astronomers expect not a shower but a storm. In 1966, Leonids 
flashed across the sky at a peak rate of 40 a second. In 1833, with 100,000 
shooting stars in an hour, the young Abraham Lincoln was woken up by his 
landlord to be told that the day of judgment was at hand. In 1866, the next big 
meteor shower inspired the song Stars Fell On Alabama.

Other key years in the cycle have been damp squibs. Last year, astronomers 
hoped for the best and Nasa worried about damage to satellites, but observers 
in Europe were disappointed. "It's marginal as to whether the meteor activity 
will reach storm level in 1999," says David Asher of theArmagh Observatory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/armagh-observatory>. "But European 
longitudes are ideally placed for observing the outburst."

The high point of the firework display could be at 2.08 am on November 18, 
give or take five minutes. With a clear, dark sky an observer might see 20 
shooting stars a minute coming from the direction of the constellation Leo.

Although the comet dust is small, at 45 miles a second, it is dangerous. A 
dust particle from another regular meteor shower called the Perseids is 
believed to have sent a European spacecraft out of control in 1993. The mirrors 
on Nasa's Hubble space telescope will be turned away from the arriving dust, 
and Nasa ground engineers will be watching out for electrical short circuits 
caused by tiny direct hits.

They pose no danger to anyone on the ground, usually burning up at between 100 
and 60 miles high.
 