
Even the giant leprechaun dressed in a heavy bottle-green coat and a woolly 
detachable head near a Dublin landmark seemed to be enjoying the sunshine. When 
he took off his head there wasn't a single sign of perspiration on his face. He 
appeared happy enough to take a breather and let his companion pass the 
collection hat around the knots of tourists using their iPhones and mobiles to 
take a snap beside the Molly Malone statue across the road from the walls of 
Trinity College.

When he put the ginger-bearded head back on, the leprechaun was asked whether 
the unseasonably warm weather was making his suit uncomfortable. Faithful to 
the leprechaun omerta, he gave a non-verbal response: a shake of the head to 
indicate he wasn't sweltering, and a thumbs-up presumably to show he was happy 
to see the crowds come out in the sun.

With throngs of shoppers darting in and out of stores on Grafton Street and 
drinkers slaking their thirsts outside the pubs on side streets all the way up 
to St Stephen's Green, you could be forgiven for wondering, momentarily at 
least: recession, what recession?

The government faces a test this week over the €100 (£83) flat-rate household 
charge that every homeowner must pay by the weekend. Failure to pay could 
result in heavy fines, but only about 30% have done so thus far. The government 
fears that failure to collect the revenue needed to pay for local government 
services (the Republic abolished UK-style rates in 1977) would send out a 
damaging signal that the Irish won't pay their way.

The household charge could be the greatest error of the Fine Gael-Labour 
coalition's first year in office, and has already been compared (with a more 
than touch of hyperbole) to Margaret Thatcher's poll tax. There will be no 
replication of the poll tax riots in Dublin, but if less than half the 
population signs up by the end of the week it will mark the first act of 
collective defiance against the austerity programme designed to drive down the 
national debt and restore international confidence in the economy.

Fine Gael and Labour are starting to realise they have a fight on their hands 
as they face accusations that they are more interested in penalising 
mortgage-holders than the bankers and speculators whose greed laid waste to the 
property market. On Monday the Fine Gael minister of state for finance, Brian 
Hayes, said that if the government didn't get the revenue from the household 
charge it would have to find the money from elsewhere, possibly by raising 
personal taxation.

"Pretending that there is some painless solution to this is utterly 
delusional," Hayes said. "If we don't want to see jobs being lost because of a 
taxation system that taxes the hell out of people for working, then the only 
way to resolve our problem is to look at new sources of taxation." He said the 
state still needed to borrow €10bn this year to pay for public jobs and 
services.

Opposition parties, most notably Sinn Féin and the United Left Alliance, are 
capitalising on the opposition to the charge, although the two blocs have taken 
different approaches. Sinn Féin TDs who are homeowners will refuse on principle 
to pay the €100 tax, but the party has stopped short of calling on the public 
not to pay either, because it says it would not be in a position to pay 
everyone's fines and legal bills. The ULA, comprising the Socialist party and 
People Before Profit TDs, has urged all those liable for the tax to refuse 
payment before the weekend deadline.

The controversy could pose a threat not only for Enda Kenny's administration 
but for the EU as a whole. If the issue is not resolved by the timeIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> goes to the polls to ratify the EU 
fiscal compact, voters might be tempted to use the referendum to protest 
against the tax. In their anger over a domestic issue, the electorate could 
throw the EU reform process back into chaos.

Inside the student cafe of Independent College on Dawson Street, the cafe's 
owner, Jonathan, proffers the view that if the weather was like this more of 
the time, the Irish would not be so weighed down by all the economic doom and 
gloom.

"Even if you were out of work or skint you could sit out somewhere in a park 
for instance and at least it would be free. It's much easier to do nothing in 
the sunshine, whereas you have to go somewhere which can cost if its raining," 
he joked beneath a Cuban national flag and a stencilled outline of the face of 
Che Guevara displayed in the café along with the Irish tricolour.

According to Jonathan's theory, a long spell of sunshine would make Ireland a 
nation of lazy, sleepy, hedonistic Sancho Panzas rather than a rising mass of 
raging rebellious Ches. We would be too busy baking under the sun to care about 
direct action. But Irish radicals should not be too despondent, even if the 
masses seem more interested at present in sunscreen than socialism. Greece is 
sun-kissed for most of the year, and yet those long periods of blue skies have 
failed to stop the Greeks from revolting.
 