
What do you do when the days are slate-grey and muggy, when the pavements are 
damp-stained and puddles are slicked with substances you don’t care to think 
about? You make the most of it. Yes, June was largely a washout. In such 
weather, peppers sulk, tomatoes grow too green and hide their fruit, and slugs 
devour wet-handkerchief lettuce – but some things thrive.

Few vegetables like sitting in water, and it’s questionable whether you should 
eat anything that has done so. Flooding is part of our weather pattern these 
days: if your beds regularly turn into ponds, futureproof them by raising them. 
However, if it’s a case of wet soil rather than flooding, you must work with 
the right plants.

Perennial plants do better than annuals during strange summers. Once 
established, skirret, salsify, yacon, sweet cicely, jerusalem and globe 
artichokes, rhubarb, apples, pears, gooseberries, jostaberries and currants 
often do very well in wet summers, particularly if they are planted on a mound 
so water can drain away quickly.

Mashua, an ancient, perennial root from the Andes, goes bonkers in a wet 
summer, and unlike potatoes it won’t get blight. However, as exciting as mashua 
is, cooking with its tubers is less thrilling. Still, we’ll find a foolproof 
method only by experimenting, so please share if you’ve found something good. 
It’s a pretty-looking thing: give it humus-rich soil and something to scramble 
up so you can enjoy its scarlet flowers (which are also edible). It will 
survive anywhere, but you’ll get only marbles for tubers if you fail to feed it.

Watercress loves rainy weather, too. The finest is grown in crystal-clear 
water fed from chalk streams, but you can do pretty well with a bucket of 
rainwater. That said, although it loves water, it doesn’t love stagnant 
conditions, so grow it in a pot with a deep saucer and flush water through 
regularly if the sky fails to deliver.

An overgrown garden isn’t always a neglected one | Alys Fowler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/02/overgrown-garden-benefits-alys-fowler>
Growing wasabi equates to growing gold, considering the price for which the 
fresh stuff sells. Getting there is tricky if you have lots of slugs, mind. For 
rooftop growers and shady balcony types (or anyone else who can outwit 
the slugs somehow), this may be your ticket to riches. Again, grow it in a pot, 
in shade, with a deep saucer. It loves humidity and won’t be happy at all 
drying out in full sunlight.

If the weather is warm and wet, amaranths are wonderful, but you’ve missed the 
boat for this year: they do best when started in April, in the way of tomatoes, 
and planted out as robust little plants; they will romp away. The Real Seed 
Catalogue has been selecting for years and has a strain calledmixed grain 
amaranths <http://www.realseeds.co.uk/grains.html>, which is a riot of yellow, 
red and pink flowers: visit its website for detailed instructions for threshing 
and cooking the grain. Amaranth seeds are so small you can add them to rice for 
flavour and nutrition. Definitely a good one for the busy allotmenteers, since 
they are self-sufficient and big enough to outcompete weeds.
 