
There is a rather lovely, but I feel rather unlikely, tale about the mistletoe 
cactus,Rhipsalis baccifera, and a homesick sailor. The mistletoe cactus is the 
only cactus that grows outside the New World. As well as America (North and 
South), you’ll encounter it in Sri Lanka and Africa, including the island of 
Madagascar. How it got from one side of the Atlantic to the other has long 
puzzled those who care.

One suggestion is that way back when Gondwana 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gondwana> was the supercontinent and Africa and 
America were one, the mistletoe cactus was already in existence. When Africa 
and America split, the cactus chose a home on both sides: this is known as 
vicariance. Or perhaps dispersal is responsible – that is, the plant, rather 
than the Earth, moved. Birds eat the fruit of rhipsalis (the baccifera part of 
the Latin name refers to its lovely white berries), so they could be the reason 
it’s found in both places, though that’s a long flight for a bird, and no one 
has found a likely feathered candidate.

The cactus, if you are far from home, does resemble a mistletoe of sorts, 
particularly when it’s in fruit and those glistening white berries look similar 
to those of mistletoe. Perhaps more importantly, however, this is an epiphytic 
cactus, which means it grows in trees. Add the slender, circular, succulent 
stems to the picture and it starts to make a tall tale shorter. There is 
an idea that 16th-century ships moved it from Africa to America, perhaps as a 
mistletoe substitute, though whom the sailor wished to kiss under it will 
remain a mystery.

Summertime adventures in a supermarket car park
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/03/summertime-adventures-supermarket-car-park>
It’s rather a good cactus because it is spineless and likes dim conditions. It 
flops about in a pot in a pleasing way, rather like a mop of hair. There’s a 
hairy version,R. pilocarpa <http://www.rhipsalis.com/species/pilocarpa.htm> – 
aka the white-haired mistletoe cactus – for those who like hirsute things and 
can offer slightly brighter conditions (the white hairs protect the stems from 
direct light).

This is not a genus for direct sunlight; its epiphytic nature means the 
mistletoe cactus likes the dappled sunlight found when it is nestled in a tree 
canopy. Rhipsalis doesn’t mind a little early morning direct light or evening 
sun, but a proper roasting in midday beams will scorch the leaves.

In fact, it is the perfect house cactus for the bathroom with its humid 
conditions. Hang one on the shower rail or above the bath. It will need 
watering, but it hates to sit in the wet (and, if you make it do so, its roots 
will eventually rot), so let it dry out between waterings; water minimally over 
winter. The warmer the room, the more water it will need.

The flowers are white and appear over the summer, followed by the berries, 
though this tends to happen more often on mature plants.
 