
In 1999, Cliff Curtis hit a kind of American cinematic jackpot: in a single 
year, he had roles in Michael Mann’s The Insider, David O Russell’s Three Kings 
and Martin Scorsese’s Bringing Out the Dead.

“Scorsese talks tens to the dozen. He’s amazing. Like a machine gun,” the 
actor reminisces about the experience, making gun noises, during interviews in 
Wellington and his hometown, Rotorua, New Zealand. “Rattling off. Like ADD.”

“Those three directors believe in artistry. A lot of the work I do is not 
really art,” Curtis went on to say. “I spent most of my career as a tradesman: 
fixing doors, digging holes. But those guys are true artists, they love and 
respect the artists. I learned working with those guys that at the core of it 
you have to keep that alive inside of yourself.”

Better than the original? An abridged guide to recent TV drama spinoffs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/aug/18/television-spinoffs-drama-better-call-saul>
Curtis is an engaged, beguiling interlocutor. His cheekbones are chiselled, 
his brown eyes sharp, his style of dress elegant. He shares qualities with 
former co-stars: the 47-year-old Kiwi has Clooney-esque intellect and 
Depp-style cool.

Fear the Walking Dead is decidedly a “genre” show, but in moments it also 
reminds us of Bringing Out the Dead’s creeping sense of dread. “Our director 
[Adam Davidson] is a real artist,” Curtis says. “He really has treated it in a 
way where he built anticipation and tension through scenes rather than giving 
it all away with cheap shots.”

Curtis plays Travis Manawa, whose blended family must reinvent themselves 
because of the zombie apocalypse in the spinoff of theAMC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/amc> hit series the Walking Dead. His son 
Nick is battling addiction. “I think most families can relate to having a black 
sheep in their family who’s gone off the rails, but that we all still love and 
care for.”

Gone Girl’s Kim Dickens plays counsellor Madison Clark, his wife. “Kim has 
this really deep warmth that you really empathise with her as a person through 
her characters.”

Fear the Walking Dead’s second episode raises the issue of police brutality, 
so I ask Curtis about it. “Brutality in general is a good question. My son is 
caught up in this idea of police brutality, and I’ve taught him to question 
authority, question things in society, and do something about it … LA is a 
volatile place.”

As on screen, Curtis is empathetic in person. “I’ve really tried to stay away 
from repetitive stereotypes of people of colour. I try to imbue roles with 
humanity.” He has portrayed a very diverse range of ethnic groups. “What 
connects us is the specifics of who we are, and then that relates universally 
on many levels.”

The father of three was less enthusiastic about his previous TV role in Gang 
Related, where he played murderous Chicano boss Javier Acosta. “Bread and 
butter, brother. It helps feed the kids.”

Curtis’s commitment to artistry came to the fore in his devastating 
performance on the big screen in 2014 as The Dark Horse’s Genisi Potini, a 
bipolar chess coach who inspires disadvantaged kids. Curtis went all-in with De 
Niro-style method acting, packing on 30 kilos. “Even my sister didn’t believe 
it was real. I had to do the ol’ pull-up-the-top and show everybody my 
midsection.”

Curtis drew on his own youthful struggles with marginalisation and depression. 
“When I was 13, I was a ward of the state. I’d been in and out of dramas … 
Sometimes you just don’t wanna get up, you wanna stay there and let it wash 
over you or go in a dark room. I suffered from depression quite a lot in my 
teens going into my early 20s. If I couldn’t feel good about life, I’d go watch 
as many movies as I could to get through. I would read books, too.”

Ultimately, in Curtis’s view, The Dark Horse is about aroha, or love 
<http://www.maoridictionary.co.nz/search?idiom=&phrase=&proverb=&loan=&keywords=aroha&search=>
, as Genesis fights to save his nephew Mana (the equally superbJames Rolleston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/30/james-rolleston-new-zealand-teen-star-interview>
) from gang life. “The movie’s about celebrating unsung heroes. Every day, 
every week, in mental health, in supporting kids that need support.”

Curtis’s work back home also includes defining New Zealand films The Piano, 
Once Were Warriors, River Queen and Whale Rider. The Piano, Curtis’ first film, 
won the top prize at the Cannes Film Festival in 1993 and won an Oscar for its 
screenplay and white leads, but has been criticised for its portrayal of 
indigenous New Zealanders.

“I spent a lot of time sitting around on set, not doing very much, and then 
what role I did have, a lot of the time was spent carrying the piano. My big 
scene with Harvey Keitel got cut out – that’s sitting under the Sydney Harbour 
Bridge,” Curtis recalls.

“The central drama was around Harvey Keitel, who had a moko [Māori facial 
tattoo], and spoke Māori, Sam Neill and Holly Hunter. So the central characters 
were the Europeans in our world, and we were the ‘blackdrop’, the exotic 
blackdrop to this European love story. I learned a lot … It did strike me we 
were the exotic setting for someone else’s story in our land.”

Today, Curtis is at film and TV’s forefront, both as a producer (working with 
the likes ofJemaine Clement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/02/jemaine-clement-australians-have-a-great-attitude-to-being-made-fun-of>
) and actor. “For many years in Hollywood, many actors have lamented over 
casting limitations because of colour. And it’s been great to be invited into a 
massive franchise, this hugely popular American show, and for my ethnicity and 
my colour to be a non issue.”

Like Fear the Walking Dead’s Travis Manawa, Curtis is a committed family man. 
For balance, he play chess and hangs out by Lake Rotorua. “We sit as a family 
and we look at the lake.”

The icy Kiwi winter provides another way for the man playing Jesus in 
January’s Risen to relax. “I love getting up early in the morning. I love 
getting the firewood ready to light the fire: chopping the wood, getting the 
kindling. Those kind of tasks make me feel calm. Especially early in the 
morning, the birds and the sky changing and all that.”

 * Fear the Walking Dead premieres 23 August in the US, 24 August in 
Australia, and 31 August in the UK.The Dark Horse gets its US cinematic release 
on 11 December. It came out on DVD in the UK last week.  