
Amorning poking around one of my favourite gardens reminded me that my 
stepover apples <https://www.rhs.org.uk/advice/profile?PID=598> need a prune. 
They are dancing wildly around their wires, going hell for leather to become 
the tree they secretly want to be. Poor stepovers.

Summer pruning is an essential if oft forgotten task for more than just 
stepovers, espaliers and other restricted fruit trees. Plums, cherries, 
apricots, almonds and other prunus species are also pruned between July and 
August to reduce silverleaf, a fungal disease caused byChondrostereum purpureum 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/advice/profile?PID=245>. The leaves become covered in a 
slivery sheen and eventually the branch will die. A bracket-shaped fungus 
(white and woolly above and purple-brown with spores) often appears on older, 
dead branches. The most infectious spores are produced in winter under damp 
conditions, so the idea is to prune now when there are fewer spores and the 
pruning wound can heal quickly. You can remove dead, diseased or badly placed 
branches as well as crown lifting (removing the lower branches) for better 
access under the tree.

In general, I think a little summer pruning is worthwhile for any tree. Only 
in leaf do you get to see its true shape, and removing the odd branch to better 
frame a view or allow your eye to be drawn further down the garden can have a 
dramatic effect. Crown thin to let more light through as well, but never take 
more than 30% of the overall foliage.

But back to those stepover apples. Prune restricted forms too early in summer 
and you can encourage a second flush of vegetative growth, particularly if it’s 
a wet year. This growth doesn’t have time to harden up properly, so it’s more 
susceptible to frost damage and canker. By waiting until mid-August to early 
September, you will encourage fruit bud production, which is what you are after.

Love butterflies? Say it with oregano | Alys Fowler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/30/alys-fowler-origanum-butterflies>
Prune new growth back to an inch or so (or a couple of buds, whatever makes 
most sense), always choosing an outward-facing bud. This will encourage short 
spurs that will produce next year’s fruit buds. It will also let in 
considerably more sunlight on to existing fruit, allowing them to ripen better.

Unrestricted fruit trees not in the stone fruit category (apples, pears and 
the like, which actually look like a tree) aren’t pruned in this way. The main 
time for pruning these is winter, when structural and architectural work can 
take place. If you feel the need to do some light summer pruning, do it before 
the longest day (so it’s one to mark on the calendar for next year).

Finally, magnolias and walnuts are finicky if pruned, and it has been noted 
that they heal much quicker if any pruning work takes place from mid-August to 
September, so if there’s a branch that’s been bothering you for some time, now 
is your moment to chop, chop.
 