
Every year, every year, there are one or two plants that shamelessly refuse to 
play ball with my plan. They grow taller than I thought, or bloom earlier than 
I remember – it’s either that or I am just fickle, because I stand outside and 
look upon my garden and think, “It would look so much lovelier if that was not 
right there but a bit further back.”

If I were a more ordered person I would make a list of things to move, but I 
am not. I figure I’m not the only one, either. So here is a guide to moving 
something at the wrong time of year.

Plants in flower or about to flower hate being moved. It’s a big no-no in 
their world. All their resources are going in to producing a flower so they can 
create seed, not new roots. If you must move a plant in flower, do so only if 
you can accept that you might make the plant unhappy, and that you’ll need to 
be around to water regularly until you see signs of new growth.

Moving a plant means breaking roots – usually the fine root hairs that do the 
job of exploring the soil to find moisture. Firstly, you should water the plant 
before you move it. Then dig your new hole and fill that with water, right to 
the top; then wait for it to drain away. If you’ve got time (because you 
haven’t already dug up the plant), do this a second time. This ensures that the 
soil around the plant is saturated with moisture, and it helps no end.

Then, carefully dig up the plant, making sure that you support the roots as 
you go. The soil is wet and heavy, and yanking the plant will tear roots – the 
more roots that remain unbroken the better.

How to grow vegetables on a balcony | Alys Fowler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/11/how-to-grow-vegetables-on-a-balcony-alys-fowler>
If you need to move it before the next spot is ready, keep it in a tub trug 
with a little water and soil at the bottom. It doesn’t want to sit in water, 
but it wants to rest somewhere moist. Replant it and water it again. It’s all 
about water at this stage: don’t go for a cup of tea – get straight to watering.

And here’s the rub: you should cut off all the flowers,. They need lots of 
water to produce nectar, so they are stealing a resource that goes into making 
new roots. Think of it as gaining some cut flowers for the house.

If you find you don’t get a lot of roots, reduce the top growth of the plant. 
There needs to be a similar ratio of roots to top growth. The plant may sulk 
and flop about. Be patient.

The younger the plant, the better it will re-establish. Those with fleshy 
roots nearly always sulk much more than those without. Perennials are much 
easier to move than shrubs, which along with trees can only be moved from later 
autumn to early spring. If there’s a lot of soft growth and these are plants 
loved by slugs and snails, this can be an issue, as those molluscs will sense 
the plant is under stress and take a bite.

Add a good layer of garden compost as a mulch around the plant. It will feed 
the plant as it establishes, and lock in moisture to the soil.
 