
The summer of 2003 is unforgettable in France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> for all the wrong reasons. Close to 
15,000 older people, most of them over the age of 75 or in frail health, died 
from the effects of the heat when the temperature reached 35-40C across the 
country for a fortnight.

Often living in isolation or with relatives away on holiday, they died without 
anyone noticing. Authorities were slow to raise the alarm, hospitals were too 
understaffed to cope, and mortuaries were so busy that refrigerated lorries and 
warehouses were used to house the deceased. When the crisis was over, hundreds 
of bodies were left unclaimed by their families.

Despite the dramatic loss of lives, the heatwave has had one positive effect. 
It was a wake-up call for France to tackle the issues affecting its older 
citizens. "It really kickstarted the process we're in now," reckons Sylvain 
Denis, president of the National Federation of Pensioners' Societies (FNAR). 
"The issues had always been there, but suddenly people paid a lot more 
attention to them."

Efforts are focusing on reducing what the French have labelled "dependence": 
the loss of autonomy people experience either as a result of a disability or of 
old age. France has decided to bring together these very different groups 
because, so the thinking goes, they are united by their need for outside help.

"The aim was to bring some coherence in a very fragmented regime and solve 
some basic problems," says Gérard Lucas, an adviser at the French Union of 
Pensioners (UFR). "Under the previous system, a person with a disability would 
lose his or her status upon retirement, which was ridiculous."

A fifth national social security agency solely dedicated to "dependence" was 
created in 2005, alongside the existing ones for family, disease, retirement 
and the body collecting social security contributions. Its job is to distribute 
an extra €12.6bn (£11bn) among the services helping older people who need care 
and individuals with disabilities.

The sum appears tiny when compared with the overall social security budget – 
€407bn, or £357bn, in 2008 – but the government is looking to expand benefits 
further by creating a new funding system, solely dedicated to "dependence". A 
bill is expected to be presented to parliament next year and, if the government 
gets its way, it will suggest that future funding creates a mix of public 
support available to all, with top-up private insurance for those who can 
afford it.

But this solution is controversial, especially in a country with a high-tax, 
generous welfare system such as France.

"We are pushing for all the funding to come from national solidarity [public 
funding] by introducing a new payroll tax," explains Denis. "We don't think 
private insurance is the solution. If you tell a 30-year-old 'you should take 
up private insurance to cover the care help you will need at 80,' he will 
ignore you. He will start thinking about it when he's 50 or 60, and by that 
time, insurance becomes very expensive."

Another move was to expand the autonomy benefit, introduced in 2002, which 
helps people over the age of 60 pay for the care services they need – be it a 
nurse or a cleaner at home, or to help pay the fees of one's retirement home. 
The benefit has proved very popular, with 1.12 million people receiving it in 
2008 – twice the number who claimed it in 2002.

The benefit value varies according to the client's needs, but on average, a 
person at home receives €494 (£433) per month, while a person living in a home 
receives about €460 (£403). Retirement home fees average between €1200 (£1053) 
and €3000 (£2632) per month, according to the UFR. "It's been a great help," 
says Denis.

Aside from dependence, another issue on the agenda in France has been the 
state of pensions. Like everywhere else in the industrialised world, the French 
pension system is feeling the strain of the growing number of retiring 
baby-boomers. In 2003 the age of retirement in France was increased one year to 
61 and it's likely the government will have to increase it again in future.

But, unlike in Britain, the debate across the Channel has focused more on the 
erosion of pensioners' purchasing power, rather than on the current levels of 
pension. "Pensions are indexed on inflation, but many people pay for a cleaner 
or a carer, whose salaries have been increasing at a higher rate than 
inflation," explains Denis. "Over the long term, the overall level of pensions 
is being decreased, little by little."

There is less strain in France than in Britain, partly because many people of 
working age – and their employers – are forced to pay into state-guaranteed 
mutual funds on top of their national insurance contributions, which means more 
money is available to them upon retirement. Private pensions invested on the 
stock market are not the norm.

 "It's true, there are problems in France we need to solve and some nations, 
like Germany, are doing better than us," says Denis. "But overall we're doing 
better than a lot of other European countries."
 