
We like to craft, but we don't just knit, as some people would have you 
believe. No, we dye fabrics, etch glass, paint pictures, make masks … We'll put 
our hand to anything in the workshops put on by Age Concern at the Great Croft 
centre in Camden, London.

On Mondays we make jewellery, and over the past few months we have been 
working on necklaces, bracelets and keyrings. We make lots of our own beads 
from scratch and are planning to sell some of our work at the King's Cross 
County Show at Corams Fields on July 18 to raise some much-needed money for the 
centre.

Polymer clay beads
 Isabella Reid. Photograph: Felix Clay 
Remember the clay that you modelled then baked in the oven? Children loved it, 
especially those who grew up in the 1980s. Instead of using it to make mini 
sculptures, we use it to make beads.

We work with Fimo <http://www.eberhardfaber.com/FIMOClassic_GB.EBERHARDFABER>, 
the best-known polymer clay brand. For a very basic, solid-colour bead, roll it 
about it your hands to soften it up, roll it into a ball, then poke a cocktail 
stick through the middle to make a hole. Keep it threaded on the cocktail 
stick, lay this across the indents of a cup cake/muffin tray (to stop it from 
touching the sides) then bake in the oven according to the instructions on the 
packet.

But solid coloured beads aren't the best things we have made. We like to make 
marble-effect beads. This involves mixing two or three colours of clay together 
- you can find some really good instructions onthis how-to website 
<http://wickedhowtos.com/index.php/2007/06/12/how-to-make-fimo-beads/>. 

Isabella created some really wonderful large beads (shown above) by rolling 
two different-coloured clays into thin sausage shapes. She then twisted these 
together and rolled them into one long sausage, mixing the colours as she went. 
Finally, she wrapped this into a coil, leaving a little gap in the centre so 
she could wrap her thread through.

Frugal beads
 John North-East. Photograph: Felix Clay 
This is jewellery-making for people with empty wallets - it turns a humble 
potato into a handful of colourful beads.

Peel your potato and cut it into 1cm cubes (or use mini cookie cutters to get 
star, heart or flower shapes). Thread three or four cubes on to a cocktail 
stick and leave these in a dry, warm area for about a week, turning them at 
least once every day.

Once completely dry, give the beads a coat or two of paint, and finish with a 
layer of varnish to seal.

To make bigger beads, cut larger cubes (these will need longer to dry). To 
make beads with bigger holes, thread them on to two cocktail sticks rather than 
one.

Knotting
 Jeane Smith. Photograph: Felix Clay 
Rather than just threading beads on to a piece of leather, string or thread, 
we use a series of knots to make a more interesting necklace.

1. Take two pieces of leather thong or cord - these should be at twice as long 
as you want your final necklace to be.

2. Thread a large bead on to your two pieces of cord. Tie a knot in the cord 
to keep it in place. You might need to tie another knot on top of it if the 
bead has a large hole.

3. Split the two pieces of cord - thread a smaller bead on to one piece and 
another small bead on to the other piece.

4. Tie another knot in the two pieces of cord to hold these two beads in 
place. Thread another large bead on.
 Knotting. Photograph: Felix Clay 
5. Continue doing this until you have knotted and threaded as much of the 
necklace as you want. Then, either tie anecklace fastening 
<http://www.kaleidoscopeiow.co.uk/jewelleryfindings3.htm> to each end, tie a 
basic knot, or, for a necklace that is adjustable, tie aslip knot 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zJzF1IeQQck>.

6. Once you have mastered the simple knots, you can have a go at something 
more complex.

• Jeane, John and Isabella spend time at one of three Age Concern centres in 
Camden <http://www.ageconcerncamden.org.uk/>, crafting, gardening, exercising, 
drinking tea and generally having a lovely time.
 