
The head of the International Cricket Council 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/international-cricket-council> said the 
world governing body is unlikely to change its plans to reduce the number of 
teams at the next World Cup despite being impressed by the performances of the 
associate nations during the current tournament.

The next World Cup in 2019 will be contested by only 10 teams – four less than 
the 2015 tournament – prompting complaints from the developing teams they are 
being shut out from cricket’s biggest spectacle.

The ICC chief executive, Dave Richardson, said the number of teams for the 
next World Cup was not set in stone and would be reviewed later this year but 
he did not expect any changes.

“The decision has been made, as we stand it’s a 10-team tournament at the next 
World Cup,” Richardson said. “We’ve also got theCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> World Cup qualifier, which has been 
upgraded and been granted a higher status. Any decision to change the number of 
teams that qualify will have a knock-on effect for that qualifying tournament.

“There are lots of commercial implications to consider. We also need to have a 
look at the attendances at all the associate games, what were the viewing 
figures, and see where they really stand.”

Although none of the associate-level nations reached the knockout phase of the 
World Cup,they did record some wins against the traditional full member nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/feb/28/ireland-afghanistan-cricket-world-cup-2015-2019-icc-associate-nations>
. Their supporters believe that reducing the number of teams will stall the 
global growth of the game but Richardson disagrees.

“To me the debate should be more about what are we doing for associate member 
cricket to enable them to qualify for a World Cup, whether it’s an eight-team, 
10-team, 12-team, 14 or 16-team. I think that’s where we’ve made the most 
progress,” he said. “We want the World Cup to not just be window-dressing but a 
shop window for cricket at the highest level.”

Richardson said the ICC still had ambitions of spreading the game to new 
frontiers, such as the United States but the priority for now was consolidating 
their existing teams.

“Now we realise, let’s not spread ourselves our too thin, we’ve got full 
member countries, Zimbabwe being one, West Indies maybe, where we’ve got to be 
careful that they don’t fall off the ship,” he said.

“USA, as an example, is a country that has enormous potential. It has more 
players playing cricket in the USA than Zimbabwe and I think very close to the 
number playing in New Zealand. If UAE can qualify for the World Cup then 
there’s no reason why USA shouldn’t. So that’s going to be a focus for us in 
the next few years.”
 