
One of my dearest college friends who, by a benign coincidence, has moved into 
the same North Dublin road I live in describes himself as the "least 
nationalistic person you know".

His patriotic fervour only extends to the fortunes of the Republic of Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> football team. And although he will 
cheer himself hoarse this summer supporting Giovanni Trapattoni's side in 
Poland at the European Championships, he is not the kind of person to wrap 
himself up in a tricolour or knot a green, white and gold scarf around his neck.

Yet when asked this week how he might vote if the Irish electorate had to go 
back to the polling stations to decide on any new EU treaty my friend was 
adamant: he would vote No.

If a liberal -minded, well-travelled Irish Europhile is thinking about voting 
against the EU reform plan it raises a question as to what conservative, 
nationalist middle-Ireland must be thinking at present.

Enda Kenny <https://www.theguardian.com/world/enda-kenny> and his cabinet 
ministers must be thinking something similar at present. No wonder the Fine 
Gael minister for Europe, Lucinda Creighton, said on Thursday that what was 
required from Friday's critical EU summit was an amendment to the current 
Lisbon treaty rather than a brand new constitutional arrangement.

This has been the worst week for the Fine Gael-Labour government since it 
swept to power at the start of 2011.

Over two days, ministers laid out a brutal cost-cutting/tax-raising budget 
aimed at saving €3.2bn (£2.7bn) and driving down Ireland's national debt. Both 
parties have been subjected to savage criticism not only from the opposition 
benches in the Dáil but also from a range of community and welfare groups over 
various cuts to social programmes.

Indeed the pressure became so intense over the past 72 hours that the 
government was forced into an embarrassing U-turn over plans to cut allowances 
for younger disabled people in the republic. Under fire from backbenchers as 
well as disability rights organisations, the cut was put on hold on Wednesday 
evening.

The climbdown, however, has not diluted the public's fury over the cuts and 
increases in areas such as VAT and hospital charges. People are seething with 
anger over the fact that while billions were pumped into the Irish banks, 
ordinary citizens – especially among the squeezed middle classes – are the ones 
enduring the pain of post-Celtic Tiger austerity-Ireland.

Given the slightest opportunity the people will seek to punish a government 
that came into office promising that it would not replicate the policies of the 
last Fianna Fáil administration.

On the streets of Dublin the mood regarding the economy, the cuts and 
"Eurogeddon" seems to be a mixture of burning resentment tinged with 
resignation. On the one hand, the people feel a deep sense of injustice that 
while they will pay more in indirect taxes and health insurance costs to get 
the nation's finances back in order, the bankers and the property tycoons 
appear to be fireproofed from austerity.

But on the other hand, you also see the shrug-of-the-shoulder-what-can-you-do 
attitude regarding Ireland's weak position internationally, and particularly 
within the EU.

It is, after all, EU and IMF largesse that continues to help pay the police 
officers, the nurses, the fire crews and civil servants as Ireland borrows 
millions each month to shore up its public services. Without the transfer of 
cash from EU taxpayers – most notably, of course, the Germans – the country 
would be bankrupt.

Fear might be the only factor that could produce a Yes vote if Enda Kenny's 
nightmare became a reality on Friday and Ireland had to once more endorse a 
fresh EU treaty.

Under the Irish constitution, any significant changes to whatever sovereignty 
the country has left in a new treaty would have to be voted on by its people. 
The electorate might accept German and French demands for greater fiscal union 
on the basis that they simply have no alternative given Ireland's reliance on 
the EU/IMF financial lifeline.

Yet given the volatile mood of the battered and bruised Irish public, still 
stung by the humiliation of last year's sovereignty-surrendering bailout, 
nothing is guaranteed. An Irish No vote would plunge the EU into even deeper 
chaos than it currently finds itself in.

David Cameron may be looking over his shoulder at his Eurosceptics in the 
House of Commons but his Irish counterpart has to worry about how an entire 
population currently regards the EU, especially the French and the Germans.
 