
In terms of Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> 
there are three "futures" on the line in this Thursday's general election. Two 
of them concern the fate of two party leaders while the other relates to the 
overall durability of devolution and power-sharing at Stormont.

The futures of first minister Peter Robinson and Ulster Unionist party leader 
Sir Reg Empey are intertwined in this election.

For Robinson, retention of his East Belfast 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/constituency/700/belfast-east> seat is 
critical to his survival. Humiliated over his wife Iris's affair and the 
£50,000 loan she secured for her lover; embattled due to allegations about his 
financial dealings with property developers and revelations over his and his 
wife's parliamentary expenses, Robinson's position on the surface at least 
appears to be precarious. In theory public anger over MPs' expenses and the 
specific scandals engulfing the Robinson political dynasty would tip the odds 
in favour of him losing his seat. But the normal rules of political gravity do 
not apply on this side of the Irish Sea.

In Trevor Ringland, the joint UUP-Conservative alliance are fielding a strong 
candidate for East Belfast. Ringland, a former British Lion and Irish rugby 
star, is a clean-cut, highly respected politician and social campaigner who 
runs a number of cross-community projects in Northern Ireland. Ringland would 
be an ideal choice for any party in Britain fighting to unseat a sitting MP 
under fire over allegations (which Robinson strenuously denies) of sleaze or 
graft.

However, the bookmakers and most local political pundits reckon that Robinson 
will still retain enough votes to win East Belfast, albeit with a reduced 
majority. Robinson is still one of the most able political operators on the 
entire island of Ireland and his ability to survive months of horrendous 
publicity, including deeply embarrassing and hurtful revelations about his 
wife, will impress certain sections of the electorate.

He is also the man who against the odds delivered the final act of devolution 
– the transfer of policing and justice powers to Stormont from London – and is 
still the province's most powerful politician.

If Robinson was to lose or indeed if the DUP performed poorly elsewhere in the 
other 17 parliamentary constituencies his leadership both of party and province 
would be under serious question.

One of those constituencies where one of his fellow DUP MPs is most vulnerable 
isSouth Antrim 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/constituency/1293/antrim-south>. The 
sitting member, William McCrea, has a majority of around 3,000 and is facing a 
strong challenge from Sir Reg Empey.

McCrea's greatest danger, however, comes from another source, who, although he 
has no chance of winning, can inflict enormous damage on him. If Melwyn Lucas 
of the hardline Traditional Unionist Voice takes several thousand votes in 
South Antrim (from ultra-loyalist disgruntled ex-DUP voters) then McCrea may 
lose the seat to Empey.

Empey's victory would not only be portrayed as a comeback for the UUP but also 
as a vindication of his decision to enter into a formal alliance with David 
Cameron. Senior UUP and Tory sources have told the Guardian that Empey's gamble 
would see him rewarded with a seat in the cabinet. Conversely if the UUP leader 
fails to dislodge McCrea the UUP-Tory project will be judged to have been a 
failure and Empey's position as party chief would be untenable.

Finally, the battle in nearby North Antrim 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/constituency/1164/antrim-north> poses an 
even greater question about the future of the entire power-sharing settlement.

The family who converted from "Ulster says no" to "Ulster says yes" are 
fighting to keep the seat that has been theirs for almost four decades. Ian 
Paisley Jr is hoping to follow in his father's footsteps and take North Antrim 
for the DUP, a seat Paisley Sr held since the early 1970s.

The Paisley dynasty's main opponent is TUV leader and former DUP MEP Jim 
Allister. If Allister took the seat it would be tantamount to a political 
earthquake and have the potential to reshape unionist politics. Victory for 
Allister would allow him to build up momentum for the 2011 assembly elections 
and form a team of up to eight or nine at Stormont who could block moves to 
build a cross-community government next time around.

Those God-fearing Free Presbyterians the Paisleys do not approve of betting, 
which they see as being as sinful as supping the "devil's buttermilk" (ie 
booze). However, Paisley Jr must be privately hoping that the local bookies 
have called it right, given that they still have him as the evens favourite to 
win the seat for the DUP and decisively see off the hardline challenge from 
anti-power-sharing unionism.
 