
Two Police Federation officials who were accused by MPs of giving misleading 
evidence about the Plebgate affair should face disciplinary hearings for gross 
misconduct, theIndependent Police Complaints Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ipcc> (IPCC) has decided.

Inspector Ken Mackaill, of West Mercia police, and DS Stuart Hinton, of 
Warwickshire police, were accused of misrepresenting their meeting with the 
former Tory chief whipAndrew Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrew-mitchell> days after the Plebgate 
affair erupted in September 2012.

After the meeting in Mitchell’s Sutton Coldfield constituency office, Mackaill 
wrongly told the media that the Tory MP would not provide an account of the 
incident. Hinton had to apologise to MPs after after he initially denied 
referring to the home secretary, Theresa May, as “this woman that the 
Conservative party have”.

The meeting took place just days after police refused to let the cabinet 
minister and his bicycle through the main gates of Downing Street. Mitchell, 
who resigned over the row, has always denied calling officers guarding Downing 
Street “fucking plebs”.

The officers’ account of the meeting was contradicted by a transcript, which 
shows that Mitchell insisted he did not call police officers plebs, but he 
accepted that he did swear at them. The transcript records Mitchell saying: “I 
did say under my breath but audibly, in frustration: ‘I thought you lot were 
supposed to fucking help us’ and it is for that I apologise. I am grateful to 
that officer for accepting my apology and I should never have said it and I 
will never do it again.”

An investigation by the IPCC into Mackaill, the most senior officer at the 
meeting, found that he has a case to answer for gross misconduct and will face 
a disciplinary hearing.

IPCC investigators found that Hinton should also face a disciplinary hearing 
for gross misconduct. It is understood that Warwickshire police dispute this 
verdict and could ignore the IPCC’s recommendation. However, the police 
watchdog could exercise its power to direct that a disciplinary hearing be held.

The IPCC commissioner in charge of the investigation has decided that a third 
Police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Federation official, Sergeant 
Chris Jones of West Midlands police, will face no action. Jones denied 
misleading MPs about his disciplinary record when giving evidence before the 
home affairs select committee on 23 October 2013.

An IPCC spokesman said: “The IPCC has completed its independent investigation 
into the conduct of three Police Federation representatives following their 
meeting with Andrew Mitchell MP at his Sutton Coldfield constituency office in 
October 2012.

“An investigation report was sent to the chief constables of West Mercia, 
Warwickshire and West Midlands police in May 2015. The forces responded, 
setting out what action they considered appropriate to take in response to the 
report. Following consideration of the appropriateness of these responses, the 
IPCC has made a formal recommendation to one of the forces as to what action 
the IPCC considers they should take.

“We intend to make the outcomes public when final decisions have been made in 
relation to all of the officers.”

Anthony Bangham, deputy chief constable for West Mercia police, said: “The 
Independent Police Complaints Commission confirmed today the outcome of their 
review following our determination of Inspector Ken Mackaill’s conduct as a 
result of the meeting with Andrew Mitchell in 2012.
“As a result, we are putting in place formal proceedings to consider whether 
or not Inspector Mackaill’s conduct amounted to gross misconduct.”


The IPCC’s disciplinary findings are embarrassing for West Mercia police, 
whose internal investigation concluded in October 2013 that the officers had no 
case to answer for misconduct or gross misconduct.

The police watchdog said at the time that it disagreed with the decision. The 
force’s chief constable, David Shaw, offered an unreserved apology to Mitchell 
and told him that the handling of the affair had been “clumsy”. Shaw later 
admitted he had considered resigning over the saga.

Karen Manners, deputy chief constable for Warwickshire police, said: ”We 
confirm that we received the Independent Police Complaint Commission’s decision 
today regarding our internal review of our officer’s conduct during and after 
the meeting with Andrew Mitchell in 2012, which he undertook in his capacity as 
a Police Federation representative. We are currently considering the decision.”

A spokesman for the Police Federation said it could not comment while the 
process was ongoing.

 