
In the World Cup of 2011, England kept the tournament alive in the early 
stages by losing to Ireland and Bangladesh and beating West Indies and South 
Africa, thereby scraping into the quarter-finals before producing an anaemic 
performance against Sri Lanka.

This time, until the little epic at Eden Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/28/new-zealand-beat-australia-world-cup>
 on Saturday, the associates were the ones keeping us interested. Ireland, who
thrashed West Indies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/16/cricket-world-cup-ireland-beat-west-indies>
 andscraped past the United Arab Emirates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/25/cricket-world-cup-ireland-uae-match-report>
, have yet to be beaten.Afghanistan frightened Sri Lanka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/22/cricket-world-cup-sri-lanka-beat-afghanistan>
 and then participated in a thrilling game when theydefeated Scotland by one 
wicket in Dunedin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/26/cricket-world-cup-afghanistan-scotland-report>
.

The vanguard for the associates is growing by the day. Some of the advocates 
come purely from a cricketing perspective, others are more political seeing the 
shunning of the Irish, Afghans, Scots and Emiratis as further evidence of a 
nasty plutocracy in charge of the game.

I have to admit to swaying in their direction. In 2011 in Asia Kenya were 
thrashed by all the established nations; so, too, Holland – except against 
England when they lost respectably – and Canada. The experience did not seem to 
do any of them much good and we were lumbered with some ghastly games, which 
made the tournament appear bloated and stupid.

Fearing a repetition in 2015 the idea of a 10-team tournament, almost 
mirroring the format of 1992 in Australasia, made sense. But last October the 
ICC, after much protest, swerved back to 14 teams. Now the associates are 
winning me over. Ireland are so tenacious; they are capable of chasing anything 
and they are not frightened to win. Moreover, Afghanistan, with three serious 
pace bowlers, were brilliant against Sri Lanka when they lost. They played 
nowhere near as well against the Scots when they won.

Advocates of the associates should be wary of using that game in Dunedin to 
support their argument. There was some awful cricket played by two associate 
teams in what proved to be an utterly spell-binding contest and both sides 
admitted that after the game. One could argue that this was the best game of 
the tournament – and the worst. Certainly it was an infinitely preferable 
spectacle to watching Bangladesh and Zimbabwe in the field against Sri Lanka 
and West Indies. Between them they conceded 704 for three in 100 overs. And it 
was so much more captivating than West Indies succumbing to South Africa in 
Sydney on Friday by 257 runs.

Clearly, there are some very fine cricketers among the associates. Just to 
start an argument here’s a possible combined team, which may not go down too 
well north of Hadrian’s Wall: Paul Stirling (Ire), Ed Joyce (Ire), Samiullah 
Shenwari (Afg), Niall O’Brien (Ire), Mohammad Nabi (Afg), Shaiman Anwar (UAE), 
Gary Wilson (Ire), Amjad Javed (UAE), George Dockrell (Ire), Hamid Hassan 
(Afg), Shapoor Zadran (Afg). It is possible to select another team from the 
associates to give that one a good game. I am converted to the notion of an 
expanded World Cup for 2019.

But there remains the problem of finding the best format. This is the 11th 
World Cup since 1975 and there have been seven different formats. The ICC is no 
nearer a permanent solution than those trying to find the best schedule for the 
English domestic season, which changes almost every year and has been debated 
after the elevation of Colin Graves to chairman of the ECB.

The conflict is similar in both cases; it is inevitably between commercial 
priorities and cricketing ones. The commercial ones nearly always win. Graves 
has pointed out that the ideas for English cricket were only in a “strategy 
conversation summary”. To allay alarm he stressed that anything and everything 
could be tossed into the pot. (So where was a return to uncovered pitches and 
the rehabilitation of KP?)

There was a strange mix of the radical and the reactionary in that pot. For 
example, quite how county chairmen can think that because they prefer the idea 
of 40-over cricket at their grounds, the rest of the world will fall into line 
for the 2019 World Cup after a nod and wink from president Giles Clarke of the 
ECB beggars belief. Commercial imperatives certainly dictate our World Cups. 
The 2007 tournament in the Caribbean horrified the moneymen since Pakistan and, 
far more importantly, India were out within a fortnight. All that lovely TV 
advertising revenue went down the pan. That potential revenue also dictated the 
schedule for the 2011 tournament when the option of playing two matches on the 
same day was shunned and the format ensured that no team went home early. In an 
entrepreneurial age it is almost unbearable for those in charge to avoid the 
most lucrative option.

Yet there is still time to rethink the 2019 World Cup, indeed there is still 
more evidence to be gleaned from this one. After two weeks I want to see more 
of Ireland and Afghanistan. They have shown sufficient talent and confidence to 
seek victory rather than respectability.

In contrast, Scotland, so desolate after the defeat by Afghanistan, have 
underperformed. They can atone by beating Bangladesh at Nelson on Thursday, a 
result that would bring a broad smile to the new chairman of the ECB – or will 
he soon be the chairman ofCricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> 
England and Wales since the ECB is apparently such a “toxic brand”? A Scottish 
victory would help England’s campaign greatly. And it would further bolster the 
argument for the associates.
 