
A leisurely stroll along the river Liffey in the unseasonably warm January air 
between two of Dublin's most famous landmarks will provide you with all the 
evidence you need of an economy still in the doldrums of recession.

From the Four Courts, which the anti-treaty republican forces occupied during 
the civil war of the early 1920s to the curved elegant Ha'penny Bridge 
connecting either side of the river there are boarded up empty pubs, closed 
hotels lying dormant for years, abandoned shops and businesses along this 
historic route.

The Republic may still even amid the eurozone crisis be a successful exporter 
of food, hi-tech goods, pharmaceuticals and computer components but its 
domestic economy, in particular consumer demand, remains stagnant.

Most of the economic indices of late such as the lowering of growth rates to 
jut 0.7% confirm the widely held view across Dublin and the entire Republic 
that 2012 is going to be another year of fiscal pain and sacrifice.

This was the atmosphere into which the 166 members of the Dail returned to 
work on Wednesday. The economy remains the dominant issue that will loom over 
this session of the Irish parliament.

The Fine Gael-Labour government faced the opposing ranks of Fianna Fáil, Sinn 
Féin, the United Left Alliance and heterogeneous band of independent TDs 
knowing that in many ways the coalition's fate is as much in the hands of a 
trio staying at a hotel directly behind the parliament as inside the chamber.

By a cruel coincidence the Dail resumed business just 24 hours after the 
so-called "troika" from the European Central Bank and the International 
Monetary Fund rode into town.

The trio are staying at the Merrion Hotel behind Irish Government Buildings 
and many wags in Dublin are noting that this is where the power in the country 
really lies. The "troika" are in Dublin to inspect the nation's books, to 
ensure that all relevant economic data is available to the IMF/ECB following 
the multibillion-euro bailout of the Irish economy. Their presence has also 
sparked fears that they may recommend further cost-cutting austerity measures 
on top of Enda Kenny's in order to keep driving down Ireland's national deficit.

Opinion remains divided about whether there should be a traditional Irish 
welcome for the foreign fiscal experts. Richard Boyd Barrett, a United Left 
Alliance TD, last night dismissed the "troika" as nothing more than the "boot 
boys of international capitalism", while a Dublin newspaper columnist appearing 
on the same television programme suggested the Irish should be as welcoming and 
friendly as possible given the largesse of the EU/IMF in bailing out the 
country and its debt-ridden banking system.

There are other challenges ahead not only for the coalition but also the main 
opposition party Fianna Fáil, which has still barely woken up from the 
knock-out blow it received from the Irish electorate last February when it 
endured historic losses at the ballot box.

For the government there are a couple of problematic referendums pending, the 
most important of which is a potential vote to endorse the latest EU treaty 
hammered out (minus David Cameron) at the end of last year.

Fine Gael and Labour strategists will be hoping that the fear factor will 
force the electorate to vote yes in that referendum; that fear of being left 
isolated outsideEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> will 
discourage many from registering a protest vote by plumping for no to the EU.

Fianna Fáil's high command is also trembling at the prospect of the 
publication of the Mahon Tribunal report into political corruption. All the 
Irish political classes expect the report to be highly critical of Fianna 
Fáil's election hat-trick winner and taoiseach during the boom years, Bertie 
Ahern. The party will have to deal not only with the sullying of Bertie's 
legacy but also the nexus between Fianna Fáil, major property 
speculators/builders and the financial institutions – the so-called "golden 
circle."

Micheal Martin, the current Fianna Fáil leader, will have to try and distance 
himself from the Ahern-Brian Cowen era while at the same time not alienating 
the party's grassroots, many of whom once worshipped Bertie as their champion.

But it is the economy that eclipses all other political issues in the Republic 
ofIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> between now and when the 
country takes time out to party when its national soccer team arrive in Poland 
for the European Championships.

Prior to entering the Dail on Wednesday the minister of finance, Michael 
Noonan, described as "ludicrous" talk that Ireland may need another 
international bailout this year, even though a top European banker from 
Citibank warned that this may come to pass.

On his arrival Enda Kenny <https://www.theguardian.com/world/enda-kenny> also 
denied there was any possibility the Republic would go with the begging bowl 
for a second time to the IMF and ECB. Those confident assertions from the two 
most powerful men in the Irish government could become hostages to fiscal 
fortune over the next 12 months.

Maybe the two of them should nip over to the Merrion Hotel and ask to speak to 
three foreign gentlemen staying there to check if they agree with that analysis.
 