
The X Factor may be over in the UK for another year but a new contest has just 
started across the Irish Sea – The Fear Factor.

Michael Noonan, Ireland's finance minister, set the tone for the battle on RTÉ 
last night and it will be one shot through with the F-word.

Noonan warned that any new referendum on the outcome of last week's EU 
agreement (the one minus the Brits) would be centred on whether or notIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> stays in the euro. Although the 
Fine Gael minister's remarks have provoked accusations from Fianna Fáil and 
Sinn Féin that the government is engaged in early scaremongering, the tactic is 
a shrewd one.

The minister and the Fine Gael-Labour government know that a population worn 
down by austerity cuts in the last budget and still furious over the bailout of 
the country's hated banks might use any forthcoming referendum to punish the 
coalition.

In the event of a no vote the magnitude of the chaos across Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> would be far greater than when 
Ireland first rejected the Lisbon treaty. The stakes will not be higher when 
(it is no longer a question of if) the Irish go to the polls to ratify any new 
EU treaty coming out of last week's meeting in Brussels.

Given the serious crisis Ireland and the entire eurozone finds itself you can 
hardly blame Noonan and the rest of the cabinet for signalling that the next 
referendum will be a negative campaign.

In effect Irish voters will be faced with an economic/fiscal Hobson's choice: 
vote yes even if means a further dilution of sovereignty; vote no and you will 
probably end up junking your euro notes and coins for a currency pegged to 
sterling. The latter choice, the Dublin government will suggest, would mean 
essentially coming back under British influence 90 years after the state was 
founded following the Anglo-Irish treaty.

Framing the next referendum on Europe around the republic's continued presence 
in euro does indeed inject the fear factor into the campaign. Essentially, it 
is saying this to the Irish electorate: "In the 20th century you swapped one 
union, ie the connection with Britain, with another union, namely by joining 
the EU and becoming in fact one of the most passionately pro-European nations. 
By voting no you are in danger of reversing your history and sending the nation 
back into the arms of the British!"

In addition, the government will point to the billions of euros the Europeans 
– principally the Germans – have pumped into the Irish economy, and ask if the 
country could continue to afford to pay its public servants and maintain its 
massive welfare bills if the Republic ejects itself from the new EU 
arrangements.

In short, Noonan's play on the Fear Factor is for real. It is an admission of 
the real position Ireland finds itself in after the boom went bust – a nation 
that is vulnerable, dependant and weak vis-a-vis other more powerful EU states.

This may cause outrage and consternation among those of strong nationalist 
opinions in the Republic but the coalition will be hoping that a majority in 
Middle Ireland might hold their noses and vote yes on the new treaty because 
the alternative is even more unthinkable.
 