
There are two parallel revolutions taking place on either side of the Irish 
Sea that will radically alter the relationship between government and non-state 
institutions that exercise major temporal power.

In Britain the ongoing revelations of wrongdoing within the Murdoch empire and 
the public humiliation of a media baron and his son may result in re-alignment 
in the relationship between politicians and the press, with the former becoming 
less supplicant to the latter.

One of the most important by-products of the last few incredible weeks has 
been the end of fear. Specifically, fear of media tycoons who used to boast 
that some of their newspapers had "won" elections and had left the prime 
ministerial ambitions of party leaders in ruins. The humbling of Murdoch Senior 
and Junior this week marked the end of that fear.

Meanwhile, here in Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> the 
political classes have also lost their fear, namely of the once almighty Roman 
Catholic church. The news reports both in the Republic and the UK were not 
exaggerating on Wednesday.

Enda Kenny's attack on the Vatican 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jul/20/irish-prime-minister-attacks-vatican>
 over its handling of yet another clerical child sex abuse scandal in Ireland 
was indeed truly "unprecedented". Even Kenny's Fine Gael, a party with deep 
roots in rural Catholic Ireland, had lost its fear of the men (they are always 
men!) who wear red cabs and wield crosiers.

Since the mid 1990s the Catholic church's reputation has been slowly eroding 
amid a deluge of damaging revelations about its priests, religious orders and 
the institutions they run.

If you want to find a starting point for this decline the best place to begin 
is probably in 1992, when under massive pressure from the Catholic right the 
Republic tried to re-introduce internment on the island of Ireland – this time 
for a 14-year-old rape victim.

The girl at the heart of this story had been raped in Dublin and sought to 
terminate her pregnancy in England. However, when the attorney general 
department learned of this they attempted to force her to remain against her 
wishes in Ireland.

Thus began a constitutional and legal battle over conflicting rights, with the 
rape victim's lawyers arguing that under EU law she had a right to travel and 
indeed a right to life, as an enforced pregnancy brought up by rape might end 
in her taking her own life.

This became known as the X-Case and it resulted in the Republic being tried in 
the court of international public opinion and portrayed through the democratic 
world as an uncaring society more worried about finger-wagging, moralising 
bishops and cardinals than the child victims of sexual assault.

That accusation has come back to haunt the church and state over and over 
again in the subsequent years since the X-case.

She won her right to travel to the UK to terminate the pregnancy and the legal 
battle established a precedent in terms of right to travel and, eventually, the 
right to abortion information although abortion itself is still illegal in the 
Republic.

Following the X-case there were a series of horrific stories that broke about 
members of the Catholic clergy raping, beating and abusing children either in 
care or under their pastoral guidance.

The most notorious of these abusers was Father Brendan Smyth, a serial sexual 
predator of children who even after the Catholic hierarchy learned of his 
crimes in the 1970s kept moving him around not only Ireland but also the United 
States.

The church's decision to keep the scandal hidden allowed Smyth to continue 
abusing children for years before the police in Northern Ireland finally caught 
up with him after receiving allegations from some of his victims.

The Smyth scandal and the disclosure that the authorities were complicit in 
the cover-up led to the collapse of the Fianna Fáil-Labour government, which at 
the time was basking in the glow of helping to secure the IRA's 1994 ceasefire. 
Yet it was only the start.

Hundreds of victims started coming forward including one time "inmates" of 
Dublin's Artane Industrial school which was run by the Christian Brothers. One 
of the orphanage-cum-prison workshop's most famous "rebels" known as the Steve 
McQueen of Artane came forward to the Observer back in 1999 and gave a detailed 
account of the abuse, both sexual and physical, that was rife throughout the 
school.

Thomas "Anto" Clarke's testimony to the Observer indirectly led to the 
establishment of one of the most tenacious, campaigning victims groups – the 
Irish Survivors of Child Abuse.

Since there have been several extremely detailed and devastating independent 
reports shining light into Catholic dioceses where clerical sex abuse was not 
only rife but in the main covered up.

The latest of these was the Cloyne Report which showed that not only the local 
bishop, John Magee, but also the Vatican were still obstructing the civil 
power, ie the Garda Síochána, in their inquiries into allegations against 
priests in the County Cork diocese.

The fact that this was going up to only three years ago is part of the reason 
for the unprecedented outrage within the Irish parliament this week. Because 
despite protestations from the Irish church and Rome that they had changed, 
that new guidelines on child protection were being adhered to, the clerical 
authorities were still behaving as if it was the old days when they dealt with 
this sort of things behind closed doors, away from the rigours of the laws 
everyone has to abide by.

What makes the verbal sortie on the Vatican so groundbreaking however is that 
it is a Fine Gael taoiseach, whose political base lies in the conservative west 
of Ireland, who has led from the front.

Once upon a time not long ago Fine Gael leaders were even more strident in 
their defence of the Catholic church's "special position" within Irish life as 
drawn up in Éamon de Valera's 1937 constitution.

In the great battles of personal liberty and sexual freedom from the 1960s 
onwards it was leading figures in Fine Gael who manned the barricades for 
traditionalCatholicism <https://www.theguardian.com/world/catholicism> as they 
tried to hold back the tide of liberalism surging in from Britain, Europe and 
North America.

It was only after the reformist Dr Garret Fitzgerald took control of Fine Gael 
and tried to make the Republic a more secular place to live in that the nexus 
between the church and the party finally began to break up.

And, even then, there were still Fine Gael deputies and senators who played a 
prominent role in resisting the introduction of divorce, in pushing for the 
foetus to become a full Irish citizen via the 1983 pro-life amendment campaign 
and in trying to stop the liberalising of laws on homosexuality and access to 
condoms.

Once upon a time not very long ago politicians feared that denunciations from 
the pulpit at Sunday mass would end their careers.

Liberal and leftwing TDs had to walk through gauntlets of screaming pickets 
outside their constituency surgeries and even their homes as rightwing Catholic 
agitators accused them of being "baby killers" because they were pro-choice on 
abortion. The latter was still going right up until the early 1990s.

For the generation that grew up in the Celtic Tiger years, in the era of a new 
national self-confidence, in a Republic more open and tolerant than ever 
before, such stories of intolerance and repression must seem like ancient 
history.

It would have been unthinkable even perhaps back in the 1990s for a leader of 
Fine Gael to go as far as take on the Vatican. But this is exactly what 
happened this week and it marks a significant, historic milestone on Ireland's 
journey away from being a mono-Catholic state into a 21st European republic.

Of course Kenny remains a devout Catholic like so many millions of other Irish 
citizens. However, their faith is for the private sphere by and large. The loss 
of fear has left the Catholic church, in the main due to their own crimes and 
their own ham-fisted culture of cover-up, devoid of real political power.
 