
Italian police are trying to establish the true owner of a Picasso painting 
worth €15 m (£11m) after confiscating it from a pensioner who says he was given 
it for free.

The Rome resident, a former frame-maker, told detectives he received the work 
in 1978 as a thank-you gift for an act of kindness towards a recently bereaved 
customer.

A widower had come into his shop in a state of distress after breaking a photo 
frame in which he kept a picture of his late wife. Touched, the frame-maker 
replaced the glass for free.

Two days later, the elderly customer returned to the workshop and presented 
him with the Picasso, without giving any indication of its value or artistic 
significance.

According to the frame-maker’s story, it was only last year that he realised 
the 54cm x 45cm oil-on-canvas could be a Picasso, police said.

The painting is a representation of a violin and a bottle of Bass beer that 
police experts have authenticated as a 1912 work by the Spanish artist, then at 
the height of his Cubist phase.

The police became interested in it last year when auction house Sotheby’s, 
which had been instructed by the pensioner, attempted to secure a state 
authorisation to export it with a declared estimated value of €1.4m (£1m).

That triggered an investigation during which police were able to identify the 
work as corresponding to one mentioned in a 1961 edition of the Zervos, a 
catalogue of Picasso’s work written by the art critic Christian Zervos in 
conjunction with the artist that is considered the definitive guide to 
Picasso’s prodigious output.

Bottles of Bass pale ale, which carried a distinctive red triangle on their 
classic labels, feature in more than 40 Picasso paintings, mostly from his 
Cubist period.

The iconic British beer, once the most widely drunk in the world, also puts in 
an appearance in impressionist Édouard Manet’s 1882 painting A Bar at the 
Folies-Bergère.

The specialist police unit that deals with crimes related to art works and 
cultural artefacts unveiled two other significant seizures on Friday, including 
a Roman sculpture dating from the second or third century that has an estimated 
value of €8m (£7m).

The marble was dug up during unauthorised excavations in Tarquinia, a town 
just to the north of Rome famed for its roots in the post-Roman Etruscan period.

Police seized it as part of an investigation into the gang behind the illegal 
digs who, they believe, were planning to drive the marble to Switzerland to 
find a buyer.

The sculpture features the Roman god Mithra killing a bull and was said to be 
almost perfectly preserved. There are thought to be only two other marbles of 
similar composition and quality in the world – one is in the British Museum and 
the other is housed in one of the Vatican museums.

The third work recently recovered was another very valuable oil painting, a 
view of St Mark’s square in Venice by noted Italian landscape painter Luca 
Carlevarijs (1665-1731).

The work, which had been registered as stolen, was found following raids on 
the premises of a Milan art broker suspected of smuggling artworks to 
Switzerland with a view to selling them on to wealthy collectors in the US.
 