
Just before 9.30am Florida time, on 16 July 1969, Jack King confirmed his 
place in media history by describing technology in action, and transfixing 
audiences around the planet. “Two minutes and 10 seconds and counting,” he 
said, in his flat, laconic, Bostonian tones. “The target for theApollo 11 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/apollo-11-moon-landing> astronauts, the 
Moon … Third stage completely pressurised,” he went on. “Second stage tanks are 
now pressurised … all engines running.”

“We have a liftoff, 32 minutes past the hour. Liftoff on Apollo 11 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o4OBKOlgmfo>. Tower cleared.” Thus did a calm 
King, at the centre of a global media clamour, count down as the Saturn V 
rocket blastedNeil Armstrong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/aug/26/neil-armstrong>, Buzz Aldrin 
and Michael Collins off into their lunar epic.

Apollo 11 was the climax of King’s time with the National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration. From 1960 until 1971, he was chief of public information 
at what became the KennedySpace <https://www.theguardian.com/science/space> 
Center at Cape Canaveral in Florida, and subsequently, from 1971 until 1975, 
public affairs officer for Nasa. As such, King, who has died aged 84, provided 
the commentary on every manned spacecraft launch from Gemini IV in 1965 to the 
later Apollo moonshots in 1971. One exception was the ill-starred Apollo 13 
mission.

Nasa <https://www.theguardian.com/science/nasa> was created in 1958, 
shouldering the civilian burden of the space race that had grown out of the 
cold war. It was a time when the American public, shocked by Soviet successes 
in space and sceptical after US rocket failures, needed reassurance. In 1961 
President John F Kennedy raised the stakes, committing the US to a moon landing 
before the end of the decade.

The one-man Mercury project put Americans into orbit. The two-man orbital 
Gemini missions tested the systems for the 473,000-mile round trip. The Apollo 
operation, which began with the catastrophic launchpad incineration of Apollo 
1’s astronauts in 1967 ended, in 1972, with the return of the last men to visit 
the moon, aboard Apollo 17. By then King had become, in the words ofReginald 
Turnill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/feb/12/reginald-turnill-obituary>, the 
BBC’s then space correspondent, “the public relations man with the world-famous 
voice”.

Born in Boston, Massachusetts, King was the son of Bill, an Associated Press 
sports journalist, and Marcy, a schoolteacher. During his time at Dorchester 
high school, Jack spent vacations as an office boy at AP. In 1951 he was 
recruited by AP, before graduating with an English degree from Boston College 
in 1953. This was followed by two years’ national service, as a second 
lieutenant in the US army artillery corps posted to South Korea and Japan.

Back as an AP news reporter, in 1958, he was assigned as the agency’s first 
news chief at Cape Canaveral, on the “space coast” where Nasa’s rockets were 
heading out over the Atlantic. The Soviet Union solved PR problems with a news 
blackout. The US could not. In 1960 the promising young journalist moved into 
Nasa.

With the conclusion of the US moon programme in the early 1970s, King helped 
negotiate and assemble the news/PR package on the joint US-Soviet Soyuz-Apollo 
mission. Complete with orbital dockings, and cosmonaut-astronaut handshakes, it 
provided a moment ofdétente in the later cold war.

From 1975 until 1977 King directed public affairs for the US Energy Research 
and Development Administration. Subsequent corporate employment included time 
as an executive vice-president with the controversial oilman Armand Hammer’s 
Occidental Petroleum. Later, returning to his great love, he was a spokesperson 
for the private-sector United Space Alliance, backed by Boeing and Lockheed 
Martin.

Nasa – for whom he became a media volunteer – awarded King its exceptional 
service medal twice. In 2011, his words from Apollo 11 became part of a 
compendium of the sounds of American space flight.

King’s wife, Evelyn, whom he married in 1965, died in 2005, and their son 
William died in 2012. He is survived by his daughter, Beth, son, Harry, and 
five grandchildren.

• John William King, journalist, born 12 February 1931; died 11 June 2015
 