
More than 1,000 jobs are at risk after stricken pawnbroker Albemarle & Bond 
was forced to call in administrators.

The group, which has 188 stores across the UK, called a halt to its attempts 
to find a rescuer after lenders said they did not consider options to save the 
business "capable of being completed".

The appointment of administrators PwC came as the Reading-based business 
admitted that, with losses mounting, it would not seek an extension to a 31 
March restructuring deadline set by its banks.

PwC stressed that all staff would be paid as normal in March, including 
accrued bonuses. It will now seek to sell all or part of the business, but said 
it aimed to protect as many jobs as possible.

All stores will remain open and landlords have been paid. PwC said: "Our 
priority is to keep all pledged items safe and available for redemption as 
normal."

It added: "The group and PwC are doing all that they can to support employees 
through this difficult time and will work with government agencies in order to 
support anyone affected by potential redundancies."

Trading in the Aim-listed stock was suspended. Shares, which were suspended at 
6.65p, had lost around 97% of their value in the previous 12 months.

Albemarle, which includes the Herbert Brown jewellery and pawnbroking stores, 
was founded in Bristol in 1983 with a single shop. Plunging gold prices and 
increased competition left the group struggling with losses and overstretched 
finances, but last year it attempted to turn itself around by slashing costs 
and closing 33 pop-up gold stores.

It abandoned an attempt to sell itself in January, saying none of the 
proposals it had received represented a fair value for the business.

An Albemarle spokesperson said: "In the absence of any other available 
facilities from its lenders or elsewhere, the company will shortly be unable to 
meet its liabilities as they fall due.

"The board has therefore concluded that, in such circumstances, the 
appointment of an administrator is the most appropriate course of action."

The recession, a clampdown on lending and the soaring price of gold after the 
financial crisis of 2008 prompted customers to trade in gold jewellery for cash 
and Albermarle & Bond to declare it was "the age of the pawnbroker". It opened 
new pawn shops and pop-up gold buying stores. But the price of gold – and the 
pawn business – went into reverse.

The group admitted earlier this year it was melting down gold jewellery stocks 
to raise cash.

There has also been a mass exodus of its board of directors, with five of its 
six non-executives quitting at the start of December.
 