
I've been thinking overnight about Kelvin MacKenzie's Hillsborough and me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/international> article in The Spectator because he 
asks a question that deserves an answer. In essence, he asks two overlapping 
questions: why me and/or why The Sun?

The story containing allegations by South Yorkshire police of misbehaviour by 
Liverpool fans was sent by Whites news agency to all newspapers three days 
after the tragedy that resulted in 96 people dying.

It was published in several papers, national and regional, and some appeared 
to accept the veracity of the allegations. Why then did the people of Liverpool 
judge MacKenzie and his paper more harshly than the others?

Why was The Sun <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sun> the only newspaper to 
suffer a boycott when others ran the story of allegations in a way that 
suggested they were largely truthful?

"I was by no means the only man in Fleet Street who believed the police's 
story," Mackenzie writes, and then cites some examples:

The Daily Star headline on the same day said, 'Dead fans robbed by drunk 
fans'. The Daily Mail said, 'They were drunk and violent and their actions were 
vile.' TheDaily Express <https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailyexpress> said, 
'Police saw "sick spectacle of pilfering from the dying."

Even more pertinently, he then quotes from a piece by the Liverpool Daily 
Post's John Williams who wrote:

"The gatecrashers wreaked their fatal havoc… Their uncontrolled fanaticism and 
mass hysteria… literally squeezed the life out of men, women and children… 
yobbism at its most base… Scouse killed Scouse for no better reason than 22 men 
were kicking a ball."

MacKenzie, though puzzled by his paper alone being subject to immediate 
boycott (which has held fast for 23 years), tentatively offers a possible 
political reason:

"Was it picked out because the paper had always backed Thatcher, while the 
city had always been pro-Labour?"

I just don't think that argument stands up. After all, there were thousands of 
pro-Thatcher Suns being sold on Merseyside before the boycott. So, it's too 
far-fetched to imagine that The Sun's politics alone was responsible. But that 
is not to say it didn't play a part.

What we need to consider instead is the perception in the late 1980s of The 
Sun and also put into context MacKenzie's editorship during that period.

I worked closely alongside him, as assistant editor, from the day he was 
appointed in 1981 until the end of 1986, some 11 months after the paper's move 
to Wapping.

In his early years at The Sun he had stirred public controversy many times 
over, especially during the Falklands war (a time of bingo and jingo) and the 
miners' strike (remember the "Mine Fuhrer" headline?) In spite of the 
controversies, of maybe because of them (plus bingo), the paper's sales rose 
steadily.

He took risks, he was cavalier and he didn't care who he offended - 
politicians, the French, the Japanese, gays, the staff, including me, and 
occasionally readers too. Incidentally, he did occasionally betray an 
anti-Liverpool prejudice. For instance, he could not share the widespread 
enthusiasm for the TV series Boys From The Blackstuff, which concerned five 
Scousers coping with unemployment.

The four years from 1981 can now be seen in retrospect as his calm period. 
Post-Wapping (from January 1986), he became more reckless and even more 
mercurial.

Freed from the constraint of unions, more arrogant than before in his dealings 
with internal management (except forRupert Murdoch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/rupert-murdoch> himself, of course), he 
became over-confident in his own judgement. I detected a master-of-the-universe 
feel about him.

He still had a sense of humour. He could be self-deprecating on occasion, 
though less so than in the Bouverie Street days. Always impossible to 
second-guess, he now appeared not to listen to any advice at all.

I have never previously written about why I quit The Sun but I admit that one 
important factor was my finding it impossible to work with Kelvin any longer 
(and, to be scrupulously fair, I think he'd say I had been lucky not to have 
been fired for lack of effort, among other things).

I watched from afar as matters grew worse. Though The Sun did suffer an 
initial circulation fall after the Wapping dispute, once it resumed its upward 
climb, MacKenzie was emboldened to go further out on a limb to take greater 
risks (the libel ofElton John <https://www.theguardian.com/music/elton-john>, 
for example).

Sometimes, he even tended to forget his readers' interests in order to poke 
fun at characters they neither knew nor cared about. (Example: his "Randy Andy 
and Dirty Don" front page about the relationships Sunday Times editorAndrew Neil
 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/andrew-neil> and Observer editor Donald 
Trelford had separately enjoyed with the same woman, Pamella Bordes).

By this time, having upset a string of agents and PRs, plus the stars 
themselves, no celebrity would talk to The Sun. That's why he encouraged his 
Bizarre columnist,Piers Morgan <https://www.theguardian.com/media/piersmorgan>, 
to make a fool of himself - which he appeared to do willingly enough - by 
cosying up to the famous at showbiz events in order to obtain pictures.

By April 1989, when the Hillsborough disaster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hillsborough-disaster>, occurred, 
MacKenzie was at the zenith of his powers and his paper's grotesque coverage of 
the police allegations was entirely due to his waywardness.

It is noticeable that in his Spectator article he makes no mention of Harry 
Arnold, the reporter who was given the Whites news agency copy and assigned to 
write the article.

Yet Arnold's recent BBC interview was very revealing. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2012/sep/07/hillsborough-disaster-sun>
 He said he wrote the story in a "fair and balanced way" because he understood 
that he was dealing with allegations.

He said he was about to leave the newsroom when he saw MacKenzie drawing up 
the front page. He continued:

"When I saw the headline, 'The Truth,' I was aghast, because that wasn't what 
I'd written. I'd never used the words the truth... So I said toKelvin MacKenzie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/kelvin-mackenzie>, 'You can't say that'. And 
he said 'Why not?' and I said, 'because we don't know that it's the truth. This 
is a version of 'the truth'."

Arnold, who has told me that anecdote many times over the past 23 years 
without changing a word, concluded:

"I walked away thinking, well I'm not happy with the situation. But the fact 
is reporters don't argue with an editor. And, in particular, you don't argue 
with an editor like Kelvin MacKenzie."

Everyone who ever worked with Kelvin will recognise the truth of that 
statement.

It is important to grasp all of this internal context in terms of how The Sun 
was viewed externally. Aside from its liberal critics who, by implication, were 
non-readers, The Sun was seen by a fair portion of its own readers as some sort 
of wild media beast.

Britain's best-selling daily, with a claimed readership at the time of 12m, 
had tipped over from being amusingly anti-establishment into being 
irresponsible. That didn't stop people buying it, but it did make them wary.

Though hardly anyone knew of Kelvin MacKenzie at the time, his bombastic 
arrogance and right-wing agenda was evident in his paper day after day. Seen in 
that context, in terms of The Sun itself, Hillsborough was a disaster waiting 
to happen.

For the Sun buyers of Liverpool, it was a tipping point triggered by the 
coverage. And there, of course, was the paper's difference from the Star, Mail 
and Express. For all their faults, and their right-wing politics, they were not 
as successful as The Sun, not so in-your-face. And none of them had dared to 
publish a front page conclusively saying "The Truth."

Though MacKenzie was obliged by Murdoch to apologise soon afterwards, it was a 
mealy-mouthed apology, as he admits inThe Spectator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/the-spectator>.

But did he learn from the episode? I don't think do because, some six months 
later, he ran a headline that said: "Straight sex cannot give you Aids – 
official". Another "truth" that was anything but.
 