
There are not an awful lot of things to look forward to as one ricochets 
towards middle age. The one silver lining is a renewed passion for sex. This 
you will know if you are a reader of sex surveys. The latest to spring to mind 
(there have been so very many) is the so-calledSex Census 2012 
<http://www.relate.org.uk/sex-census/index.html>.

While we are too bogged down in our 30s and 40s with child-rearing and 
worrying about the mortgage, the findings of this survey – jointly funded by 
Relate and "adult shop" chain Ann Summers, and published last month – suggest 
that when we hit our 50s we are absolutely raring to go. As for our 
sexual confidence, that supposedly peaks between the ages of 60 and 69.

Really? Who are these middle-aged chandelier-swingers? Where do they winkle 
them out from? And can they really be telling the truth?

In my not-so-meagre experience, if there is one thing we lie about once we get 
to a certain age, this is it. And if we are not exactly lying (as, quite 
clearly, the friend of mine is who keeps reiterating, loudly and 
long-sufferingly, how she still has to tell her husband "once a day is 
perfectly sufficient") then we are being, shall we say, economical with the 
truth.

Admit to having shoplifted. Admit to having a bit of a drink problem, or being 
bankrupt. But living in a sexless marriage? Never. Fidelity, monogamy, still 
sleeping with the same person after however many years – that is what we are 
all supposed to value most. To admit to anything else, is to admit to a 
societal failing so profound, so deep, so … almost spiritual, it's beyond the 
pale. It is something that cannot be acknowledged, maybe not even to each 
other, let alone to one's friends.

As one 44-year-old married woman, whom I interviewed for my own little 
informal survey, wrote in an email (anonymously, of course): "It's such a 
blissful scenario: separate beds, or even bedrooms, deep love for each other, 
friendship, shared parenting but NO PRESSURE TO HAVE SEX! The couples who are 
living it – you think they are going to let on? Men and women are far more 
prepared to talk about having extramarital affairs than about having a celibate 
marriage. There's far less shame in having loads of sex than there is having no 
sex at all."

Sex <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/sex>. Or rather the lack of it. 
It could be the nation's sordid secret. Perhaps even the world's. Instead of 
running a cover story on mothers breastfeeding six-year-olds, as Time Magazine 
did last month, celibate marriage is the taboo they should have addressed. How 
for millions of us supposedly happy, fulfilled, hand-holding couples, the spare 
room isn't the spare room anymore; how whenever we are cuddled up on the sofa 
and a torrid sex scene crops up on the TV, we both inwardly go "ewww".

Of course, there are those of you out there in your 50s, 60s and 70s still 
going like stink. Such as, for example, the nice lady I met at drinks the other 
evening who volunteered how she had her first orgasm at the age of 50, and has 
been merrily bonking ever since. But what of the swathes of who are very much 
not? Those of us who have been there and done that, with bells on, but at this 
point can think of nothing we would like to do together less, thanks all the 
same. Those of us who, yes, have sexual urges – many women find themselves 
suddenly becoming obsessed by sex during the perimenopause; it's like Custer's 
Last Stand – but find ways other than having a shabby, predictable affair to 
satisfy them. Why should we be the ones made to feel as though we are "living 
in sin", when we still hold hands, still basically respect each other, and 
still very much have stuff to say to each other over the dinner table?

Everyone – sigh – knows the drill: schedule it in; push through the 
repulsion/exhaustion/irritation barrier; engage in some roleplay; use it or 
lose it. But after one's broken the novelty shower-cap rule (I've got a cow and 
a frog one, you?), after one has spent 15-20 years cohabiting with the 
same perfectly delightful, perfectly attractive person, seeing them walk nude 
around the house about five million times, it can feel, frankly, a little … 
inappropriate. There's a reason, in other words, why kids retch at the idea of 
their parents doing it.

Oh dear. I might be out on a very long limb here. But there comes a stage in 
any relationship when the prospect of ordering your breakfast together the 
night before becomes far more the point of a saucy weekend minibreak than does 
the prospect of uninterrupted bonking. As Alain de Botton observes in his 
latest self-help manual 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/may/17/alain-de-botton-sex-talk>
, How to Think More About Sex, it was not until the 18th century that the idea 
of a love-based marriage took hold. The idea of sex being the cornerstone of 
a marriage came way, way later.

One couple I know, who are the same age as me, have children and live in the 
US, have not been having sex for a few years now. They seem to have arrived 
at a way of dealing with it. He goes to massage parlours for a "happy ending" 
every now and then, but would not dream of getting involved with anyone else. 
She, who is still as attractive as she was 30 years ago, doesn't ask. He 
doesn't tell, and they are fine. Ditto the 50-something friend with grownup 
children who, though happily married, has not had sex with her husband (or 
anyone else) in eight years. "People say sex cements a relationship," she says. 
"But at this stage of our lives together, I think it would actually impair it."

Then there are all those couples out there who, yes, can frequently be found 
at it – as it were – of an evening. Him downstairs in front of his flickering 
computer, her upstairs, er, reading her book. In other words, yes they are both 
having sex under the same roof, just not necessarily in the same room.

And what of the affectionate wife I know, now in her 50s, who cheerfully 
confides: "My husband? Hah! He hasn't seen a nipple for years."

The saucy sex survey is only partly to blame for this schism between myth and 
reality – the pretence that we are doing it every week, when in truth it is 
more like every six months (and even that might be an exaggeration). With a 
media that kids us into thinking ageing is negotiable, that so fetishises youth 
and beauty and so inaccurately represents what most of us walking down the 
street are actually like (not to mention our inability to talk about it without 
poking fun at it), is it any wonder? "As a nation we are sexually inhibited," 
offers Sue Newsome, a sex educator, tantra adviser and trainee psychosexual 
therapist. "We don't have frank, honest conversations about it with each other. 
It's not part of our national character. The upshot is that we create myths 
around our friends. Everyone is better than I am, everyone is having this 
wild sex life, while I am not. The grass is greener. Compound that with the 
images we are bombarded with via the media, where lots of young people are 
having fantastic sex and having orgasms exactly the same time as each other, 
and no wonder there is this rift between how we present ourselves and who we 
really are."

"Shampoo advert" sex. Yes. How shrivelling, how alienating that can be. As can 
all those American sitcoms where the cupcake-making mommy still wears a 
negligee to bed and is still hot for the daddy. Perhaps we need to take our 
cues from Scandinavian culture, where sex seems to be just part of your 
everyday routine, like brushing your teeth: a kind of Health & Efficiency 
thing, as opposed to this unbelievably momentous, fireworks-inducing event that 
nobody – not even Rachel Weisz and Daniel Craig, I'll wager – can live up 
to in real life. And even then, as the evolutionary anthropologistHelen Fisher, 
aka the "doyenne of desire" 
<http://www.ted.com/talks/helen_fisher_tells_us_why_we_love_cheat.html>, noted, 
romantic love – when you've got all that dopamine and PEA (phenylethylamine) 
coursing through your veins – can only physically last for a few years.

A married, male friend in the publishing business – 39 with one child and 
another on the way – still enjoys sex with his (extremely beautiful) wife, but 
is already aware of it becoming just another thing on the "to-do" list.

"The whole reason why it is so exciting in the first throes is because you can 
both objectify each other – that's really the whole fun of it, each of you both 
being able to treat each other as a piece of meat." He adds how the 
one-stop-shop pressure for a partner to be everything – a best friend, a 
fantastic lover, a fruitful provider and so forth – hardly helps. "How can you 
be that Milk Tray man or that Bond Girl you were when you first met for ever? 
It's finite. You can't fulfil every role." Right now, in the Venn diagram of 
sociosexual dynamics, he is in the most favourable position of all, where all 
three circles of fanciability, love and parenthood overlap (for me it 
was probably soon after the birth of my first child), but he can perfectly 
foresee a time when sex will dwindle to nothing. "Shared history is lovely 
and cosy, but ultimately it is not terribly sexy."

Or as Anthony Robbins, the motivational expert put it, in a slightly different 
way: "It is in the realm of uncertainty that your passion is found."

"There's a huge societal pressure at all ages to be more sexual," says Dr 
Petra Boynton, a psychologist specialising in sex research, "and that doesn't 
mean just having sex. It means having sex that is always exciting, different 
and novel. That, in a sense is why these surveys are so pernicious, because 
they are using image to stack up a myth, a myth which is in turn used to sell 
an aspiration about achievement and performance that one is never going to 
measure up to. This idea that we should be using those 18-30 years as a 
benchmark, that we should be scheduling date nights and going on sexy 
minibreaks to France; that if you aren't bonking like rabbits some terrible 
thing will befall your relationship."

So, then, can it be agreed, that not having sex after a certain point 
is normal?

"I wouldn't say it's 'normal', but then I hate that word," offers Guardian sex 
columnistPamela Stephenson Connolly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/pamelastephensonconnolly>. "Normative, 
certainly. Of course, it's ubiquitous, and is a couple's right to choose that 
if it works for them. Not having sex is often a painful secret, though, because 
people always imagine there's something wrong with them (after all, since no 
one wants to confess, many couples think their friends are all having more sex 
than them).

"Many people go through a period of mourning for their lost sex life," she 
continues. "Even if they don't want it any more. Lots of things can happen 
psychologically. It's not the same for everyone, but I have come across many 
happy, sexless marriages."

"If you are having a lot of sex, and you are enjoying it, obviously I'm not 
going to talk you out of it," says Boynton, "but in this environment where we 
vet or measure our relationships by the amount of sex we are having, I think 
that is disingenuous for people who have lots of other ways to express 
intimacy. There are a number of things which connect people, but we are 
constantly spun this line that the glue to a relationship is sex, and without 
it one's relationship will fall apart, and I think there are a lot of 
commercial reasons why that message is put out. That's not just insulting, it's 
pernicious."

A post-sex state, then? A world where it's OK for marrieds to have separate 
beds, just like they did 50 years ago, and if they still sleep in the same one, 
do so in the manner of Morecambe & Wise? Is it such a sentence? Or might it not 
give us the freedom to fixate on something else, something we couldn't fixate 
on when we were younger because we were too busy fixating on you-know-what?

"We might be better off if we didn't have a sex drive," De Botton writes in 
his conclusion, "for most of our lives, it causes us nothing but trouble and 
distress." Gardening, then? It's not so bad after all.

Twitter @shithomemaker <https://twitter.com/#!/shithomemaker>
 