
By a bitter, depressing twist of irony the scene of the latest battleground in 
the Ulster loyalist marching controversies happens to be a holy place that once 
symbolised Protestant-Catholic co-operation.

St Patrick's is the second oldest Catholic church in Belfast and its 
construction at the start of the 19th century was helped on its way partly by 
the generosity of Protestants in the city. Two centuries later the church in 
Upper Donegall Street has become a fresh focal point for trouble.

It all started on 12 July - loyalism's most sacred day. A loyalist band from 
the nearby Shankill Road were captured by Sinn Fein activists on film playing a 
sectarian tune outside the shut doors of St Patrick's.

As they wheeled around the street they played a song mocking the Irish famine, 
a ditty that urges Scottish Catholics of Irish origin to "go home" now that the 
famine is long over.

Naturally, the secret filming, when it was broadcast, outraged even moderate 
nationalists, given that it showed utter disrespect for a place of worship.

It also prompted the Parades Commission - the body that adjudicates on 
disputed Orange Order and other loyalist marches - to impose new restrictions 
on future marches passing St Patrick's.
The Parades Commission ruled that no songs were to be played as loyalist bands 
filed past St Patrick's last Saturday, the traditional final day of the Ulster 
marching season when the Protestant Royal Black Preceptory parade all over
Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>.

The Commission also banned the Shankill Road band, the Young Conway 
Volunteers, from passing the church.

However, not only did the Young Conway Volunteers defy the ruling but a slew 
of other Kick-the-Pope style bands marched past St Patrick's (possibly in 
solidarity with their Shankill colleagues) and blared out their music.

This defiance enraged a group of nationalists protesting against the march and 
for a brief period there was some hand-to-hand fighting on Donegall Street 
between both sides.

Riot squad officers had to intervene while the whole scene around this 
northern corner of Belfast city centre crackled with menace, the atmosphere 
poisonous with sectarian hatred.

Normally that would be the end of it all – for this year at least. Once the 
Blackmen, as they are known colloquially to all communities, march, the season 
of parading finishes.

But 2012 will be different. This year marks the 100th anniversary of the 
signing of the Ulster Convenant, when tens of thousands of unionists pledged to 
oppose the Liberal government's plans for Home Rule for Ireland, many Ulster 
Protestants even signing it in their own blood.

All of the loyalist marching institutions plan a major rally in the centre of 
Belfast to mark that anniversary on Saturday 29 September, and once again the 
main route from the loyalist redoubts of north Belfast includes passage past St 
Patrick's church.

The loyalists' appalling behaviour both on 12 July and last weekend has 
resulted in the creation of a new tension-point across the many marching routes 
of Ulster. Nationalists and republicans, Sinn Fein and supporters of more 
hardline dissident groups, as well non-aligned Catholics, will protest against 
the presence of loyalist bands (some of whom have strong links to loyalist 
terrorist groups) passing by this much loved institution of Belfast Catholicism.

The scene therefore is set for a potentially major, and possibly violent 
confrontation at the end of next month.

The St Patrick's chapel dispute therefore poses important challenges to a 
number of key players in post-ceasefire, power-sharing Northern Ireland.

The first of these is of course the cross-community regional coalition in 
Stormont and its dominant political forces - Sinn Fein and the Democratic 
Unionist Party.

At a meta-political level the DUP and Sinn Fein leadership have established a 
strong, businesslike working relationship in the day-to-day running of Northern 
Ireland, personified by first minister Peter Robinson and deputy first minister 
Martin McGuinness.

It is clearly not in either the parties' or the two men's interests if one 
parade at one single flashpoint causes serious inter-communal damage this 
autumn.

Moreover, the dispute risks disrupting the Sinn Fein-DUP axis, given that even 
ministers in the cabinet have taken radically opposing positions about the 
rights and wrongs of the marches past St Patrick's over the summer.

McGuinness and Robinson will undoubtedly be expending a lot of energy once the 
holidays are over seeking to find a compromise before Ulster Convenant day. 
Otherwise the atmosphere between the two main parties in the power-sharing 
executive could be further poisoned.

For the DUP in particular the party should also recognise there is an inherent 
danger lurking in this new dispute for their partners in government.

Perceptions of loyalist triumphalism and sectarianism on the rise, even 
outside Catholic churches, can only be good news for Sinn Fein's critics in 
dissident republicanism who will use any riot or communal confrontation to 
hoover up new recruits among alienated, unemployed, politically-disconnected 
nationalist youths.

In terms of policing, the PSNI sustained some pointed criticism even from the 
likes of the head of Belfast's Catholics, Dr Noel Treanor.

The bishop was critical about the PSNI's inability last Saturday to enforce 
the Parades Commission's ruling on bands and sectarian songs outside St 
Patrick's.

The police have vowed to arrest, question and possibly charge those seen 
openly defying the law last weekend. Yet even if they start to pursue those who 
broke the ban the next question is how they will react to events on the ground 
in a month's time?

If for instance the Parades Commission imposed another vow of silence as bands 
passed by St Patrick's, will the PSNI execute that ruling on the streets? 
Furthermore, just imagine if the Commission decided to re-route altogether 
Orangemen and loyalist marchers away from Donegall Street, opting instead for 
the parade to file into Belfast city centre down the Shankill Road. Would this 
result in a major stand-off security headache for the PSNI?

The final group under stress thanks to the emergence of this new flashpoint 
are the loyalists themselves, or to be more specific, the loyalist terrorist 
groups such as the Ulster Volunteer Force and the Ulster Defence Association.

These are organisations officially committed not only to ceasefires but to 
decommissioning their weapons and their military-style structures. In past 
marching disputes such as Drumcree there is clear evidence that most (but not 
all) mainstream loyalist groups actually tried to lower tensions along 
sectarian interfaces and even eventually co-operated with republicans to keep 
the peace at some of the peace lines.

Is it really in the interests of the UVF and UDA leadership's to allow a 
spontaneous upsurge in violence from its grassroots that could in a worst-case 
scenario unravel everything they sought to achieve since the 1994 ceasefires?

The date of 29 September 2012 could prove to be a pivotal one in 21st century 
Northern Ireland. It could turn out to be the day the power-sharing politicians 
on the big hill at Stormont and the community activists on the streets of 
working-class Belfast demonstrated their ability to defuse a dispute that has 
deep roots in the sectarian ravaged history of their city. Or it could be the 
day on which the contradictions between co-operation in politics and 
confrontation between still rival communities is laid bare for the entire world 
to see.
 