
On July 14 in Beverly Hills the US Television Critics Association gathered to 
preview the new shows offered up by cable channels for autumn 2008. HBO was 
pushing Generation Kill, a gritty seven-part miniseries about the invasion of 
Iraq based on a book by Rolling Stone reporter Evan Wright, executive produced 
and co-written by David Simon and Ed Burns of The Wire. At the sessionHBO 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/hbo> co-president Richard Plepler boasted 
that Marines based near San Diego had praised its realism.

The critics nodded, then one writer asked for clarification about a report 
that HBO didn't even reply to writer Matthew Weiner - a former Sopranos scribe 
- when he offered the channel his award-winningMad Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mad-men-tv-series>, which wound up at 
AMC. "Here's the bottom line: it's a wonderful show," Plepler said. "I wish it 
were on HBO, but it's not. Sometimes that happens, but you move forward."

Four days later Pleper must have been wishing a whole lot harder. On July 18 
Mad Men picked up 16 Emmy nominations - more than any other drama - including 
best drama, best actor (Jon Hamm), and best supporting actor (John Slattery). 
AMC also took four nominations forBreaking Bad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/breaking-bad>, a dark comedy about a 
chemistry teacher with terminal cancer who starts making crystal meth to leave 
his family a decent inheritance.

"The critical buzz has undeniably moved from HBO to AMC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/amc>," according to Matthew Gilbert of the 
Boston Globe. "A channel once known solely for airing and re-airing old movies 
has more X factor than HBO? That's got to sting a little."

BBC executives pondering Armando Iannucci's recent calls for the BBC to launch 
a subscription channel to fund British rivals to The Sopranos and The Wire 
might look to AMC for a few ideas on how to create a successful drama channel 
from almost nothing. Indeed AMC - formerly known as American Movie Classics - 
hadn't made any original drama before Mad Men.

Launched in 1987 as a classic movie subscription channel showing mainly black 
and white films, with a horror film special every Friday hosted by George 
Clooney's dad Nick, AMC stuck to the format until 2002 - when a management team 
in search of younger viewers updated its movie range to include modern films 
and switched to an ad-funded business plan. (AMC is part of the basic cable 
package, while viewers pay more for premium channels such as HBO).

The first steps into drama scripts came in a co-production deal with ITV - 
signed in 2006 - to remake Granada's cult classic The Prisoner. Two years on, 
and the series has only just started filming in Namibia and is expected to air 
in 2009.

"We wanted to start commissioning scripts that would stand up next to the 
movies but allow us to attract a new audience," explains Joel Stillerman, 
senior vice president of original production at AMC. "We want to shoot drama 
cinematically, and tell big screen storylines but over a number of hours. We 
went out looking for smart, complex and challenging scripts - which is kind of 
the opposite direction to the way TV is moving these days. But we really had to 
prove ourselves and it was hard to get the scripts initially."

AMC got lucky with Matthew Weiner. In 2002, he had sent the Mad Men pilot as a 
writing sample to The Sopranos' creator David Chase - who hired him to work on 
the gangster drama. Meanwhile HBO, under its previous leadership, passed on 
Weiner's idea whilst he was delivering Sopranos scripts. Which is how Mad Men 
found its way to AMC.

Even so, says Weiner, AMC could have messed it up. "[They] deserve the credit 
for having the stomach to go with a cast of mostly unknown actors. They bought 
what they liked. There were no focus groups, no testing. They said, 'This is 
the kind of show we want to watch'." He says his budget is $2.3m per episode - 
low compared to a one-hour drama average of $2.8m, but high for a channel used 
to showing classic movies. The gamble seems to have worked, with Mad Men 
attracting 1.6 million viewers for its premiere, with audiences dipping to 
around 1 million viewers an episode for the rest of the 13 episodes - although 
top dramas on higher-rated cable competitors, such as TNT and USA, draw 3 
million or more.

But it's not just about how many are watching - there's also the question of 
who is watching. According to the US website Mediabuyerplanner.com, a third of 
the show's audience are young men earning $100,000 or more, which has had 
advertisers pouring in. In the second quarter of 2008, AMC's revenue was up 12% 
to $186.6m, while revenue at its parent company Rainbow rose 14.6% to $239.7m.

However, this success could make the channel vulnerable. Rainbow's holding 
company is a publicly-listed media operation called Cablevision - which owns a 
bouquet of channels as well as the actual cables in the ground. Cablevision is 
run by eccentric mogul James Dolan, who has been trying to buy back 
Cablevision's shares and take the company private again. AMC's programming 
success, according to US analysts, means selling the channel off to raise funds 
for this move is increasingly likely.

AMC's Stillerman bats away such concerns, keener to talk about new scripts 
that Mad Men's success has pulled in to the channel. "We are getting some 
phenomenal A-list screenwriters who have only written for the big screen 
pitching their TV ideas to us," he enthuses. "I've been buying and selling 
programmes for 20 years and I've never felt a buzz like it before. They're 
offering us the kind of thing they know other TV stations would turn down."

AMC's follow up to Mad Men, Breaking Bad, is a case in point, he says. 
Chemistry teacher Walter White - played by Malcolm in the Middle's Brian 
Cranston - is pushed to provide for his family after his death because his 
teenage son suffers from cerebral palsy. The son is played by RJ Mitte, who was 
born with the disease.

USA Today has hailed Breaking Bad as "the best thing to happen to TV since the 
Sopranos", which must sting HBO's Plepler even more. Despite its blend of 
disability, terminal lung cancer and crystal meth, the programme will be 
screened in the UK by FX in late September.

"We do make challenging television and plan on making more," he says. 
"Hopefully we'll introduce maybe one new drama a year that we're sure of rather 
than throw a whole load of average telly out there and hope some sticks. Our 
basic criteria is 'could we take this show, book a movie theatre in New York, 
put it up on the big screen and not be embarrassed?' So far, I think we've 
achieved that."
 