
Angel Haze

I'm really good friends with Metallica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/metallica>, so it will be exciting to see 
them play for the first time in my life. And Arcade Fire, too – their album 
Reflektor is on repeat for the rest of my life. A lot of people are surprised 
to hear I like rock, because as a rapper you're supposed to have limited taste. 
I'll be on the side of the stage, not the moshpit. All the moshpits at my shows 
have been completely wild. I moshed at my own gig in Hammersmith and it was 
crazy – they were holding on to me in places I didn't know I had.

John Newman

I saw Paolo Nutini <https://www.theguardian.com/music/paolo-nutini> a couple 
of weeks ago, and I want to see him again. As a kid I went to watch him in 
concert in Leeds, and I've always been such a huge fan of what he does. Now 
that he's at the pinnacle of his career his live shows are better than ever, 
and he has great material and is an all-round lovely guy. Rudimental also – 
I've worked with them a lot, and they have incredible festival shows. They know 
they have to smash it at festivals and they'll do that.

Yukimi Nagano of Little Dragon

Dolly Parton – I'm a huge fan. I think she's an amazing writer, and I'd love 
to see her in the flesh. Another strong female artist is Yoko Ono. She's one of 
the most internationally famous Japanese people out there – there aren't that 
many Japanese celebrities. She's quirky and spacy and creative, and I'm sure 
she's crazy onstage. I'm not the biggest fan of her music but I still want to 
see it. I also wouldn't mind seeing Metallica. The documentarySome Kind of 
Monster <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-7iuDpBMM5Y&list=PL07A976CAD7B2151A> 
entertains many nights on the bus. I'm not a metalhead at all, but it's 
Metallica!
 Jack White … 'It's going to be a set to remember' says Matty Healy. 
Photograph: Brian Rasic/Rex 
Matty Healy of the 1975

Dolly Parton <https://www.theguardian.com/music/dolly-parton> is on just after 
us, and I'm looking forward to seeing her, but the person I'm most excited by 
is Jack White. I've never seen him on a huge stage – it's going to be one of 
those sets that people really remember. I'm looking forward to having some time 
off and being a punter rather than an artist. My guitar tech stumbled back to 
my tent at 9am one year and said a small gent had approached him and taken him 
down a tunnel and when they came out they found an Alice in Wonderland-themed 
club. That's the great thing about Glastonbury.

Thea Gilmore

As soon as I finish on the Acoustic stage, I'm going to hotfoot it over to the 
Pyramid stage to catch the end of Lana Del Rey's set. I'm a big fan, and I 
can't think of a better setting for that brand of woozy hedonistic noir. No 
Glastonbury experience is complete for me without heading over to the Leftfield 
stage. I play festivals a lot and, let's be honest, you don't find a Leftfield 
stage at V, do you? Leftfield will be very different this year with no Tony 
Benn. I'm sure there will be many glasses raised in his name. I know mine will 
be.

Lianne La Havas

Not only has Dolly Parton been a huge inspiration to me, I find her extremely 
entertaining and wise, and I love her point of view and her humour. She's the 
kind of woman I'd love to be as cool as when I'm her age. De La Soul will be 
amazing, becuse I grew up with their music, and MIA is just effortlessly cool; 
I love her beats and her style. And I've got to see Rodrigo y Gabriela. They're 
my favourite non-singing act ever and I'm proud of them for succeeding. I've 
learned a lot of guitar techniques from watching those guys.

Luke Sital-Singh

I've never seen Elbow and I'm a big fan. I'm also a fan of Mogwai, and that 
sort of atmospheric music will be magical on the Park stage. Massive Attack are 
also on and it's a great atmosphere for that sort of thing – chilled-out and 
dancey at the same time, that cool trance vibe that Glastonbury's really good 
for. I saw Prodigy play at Reading a few years ago and that was amazing – bands 
that have a good light show and deep beats are impressive to see at a festival 
when everyone's outside and under the stars.

Dave 1 of Chromeo

I'd love to see Haim. They're our favourite band, because they're a 
combination of Fleetwood Mac and Destiny's Child – and they're nice Jewish 
girls and that would make my grandmother happy. I also want to see Chvrches. 
Can I pronounce it "churches"? I've been Chvrching for a while now. I might 
stay for Dolly Parton. She has one of the best jokes in the world and I want to 
see her for that joke. People ask her: "What's your morning ritual?" and she 
says: "I get up, I put my clothes on and I go back home."
 Debbie Harry … 'One of the coolest human beings on the planet' says Raleigh 
Ritchie. Photograph: Ferdy Damman/EPA 
Raleigh Ritchie 

Debbie Harry will eternally be one of the coolest human beings on the planet, 
so Blondie are on my must-see list. It's almost like a bucket-list thing with 
them. ESG are incredible – their music is a direct link between them and the 
part of your brain that makes you dance. Lana Del Rey's got presence, and she 
would command an audience. And I want to shout Lekiddo, Lord of the Lobsters! 
from the rooftop. He has a cult following, and I don't understand it, but I 
also completely get it. You might not experience anything else like it ever. 
That's quite a big thing to say.

Caro Emerald

I'd have loved to have seen Lily Allen and Rudimental, but they're playing 
Friday. Dolly Parton would be really cool, too, because she's an excellent 
singer and a great songwriter, but usually they plan all kinds of promotional 
stuff for me when I get offstage. But I love being backstage and watching shows 
from that angle. Lily is one of my inspirations, especially on her first album, 
because that was around the time I started making my own music and I remember 
loving her album. There were a lot of jazz elements on it and the lyrics were 
so funny and clever, mocking the whole world.

Jamie MacColl of Bombay Bicycle Club

I'm a big Dolly Parton fan, and she's a good antithesis to a lot of the other 
stuff. I think we'll also see Metallica, which I'm going to out of curiosity 
rather than being a fan. They've been getting a lot of shit for it, and it'll 
be interesting to see if they can pull it off. Last year I went just as a fan 
and eschewed all the backstage stuff – I don't like the separation of VIPs and 
the general public. People think watching bands from the stage is better than 
the reality, 'cos the sound's not very good and you can't see what's going on.

Hollie Cook 

Carroll Thompson was a huge inspiration when I started singing reggae and I've 
seen her before, but on a nice sunny afternoon at a festival it should be 
great. Warpaint, too – I've seen them a couple of times and I like the energy. 
I've not seen them in an outdoor environment, so Glastonbury feels like quite 
an appropriate one. It's been a long time since I attended Glastonbury, so this 
year I'm going to stay for the weekend. I'm really excited, but I'm going to 
pace myself and see how it goes. I have to perform on Sunday so I can't get too 
crazy.
 