
A former university librarian has admitted stealing 143 paintings by famous 
Chinese artists from a gallery he was in charge of and replacing them with 
fakes he painted himself.

Xiao Yuan, 57, substituted valuable works including landscapes and 
calligraphies between 2004 and 2006, while working as the chief librarian in a 
gallery within the library of the Guangzhou Academy of Fine Arts in south-east
China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>.

Appearing in court on Tuesday, he claimed the practice was rampant and the 
handling of such paintings was not secure. Xiao said he noticed fakes already 
hanging in the gallery on his first day in the job. Later, after he replaced 
some of the remaining original works with his own fakes, he was surprised when 
the latter were substituted for further fake paintings.

He told Guangzhou people’s intermediate court: “I realised someone else had 
replaced my paintings with their own because I could clearly discern that their 
works were terribly bad.”

Xiao said he did not know who replaced his fakes, but that students and 
professors could borrow paintings in the same way as library books.

He sold 125 of the original paintings at auction between 2004 and 2011 for 
more than 34m yuan (£3.5m), and used the money to buy apartments and other 
paintings. The 18 others he stole are estimated to be worth more than 70m yuan 
(£7.2m), according to prosecutors.

Matisse: can you spot the fake?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2014/jul/08/matisse-fake-art-forgeries>
Xiao pleaded guilty to a corruption charge for substituting the 143 paintings 
and said he deeply regretted his crime.

The stolen works mentioned in the court transcript included paintings by the 
influential 20th-century artists Qi Baishi, who used watercolours, and Zhang 
Daqian, who depicted landscapes and lotuses, and was considered a master forger 
himself.

Also removed from the library was Rock and Birds by Zhu Da, a 17th-century 
painter and calligrapher.

Xiao said he stopped when the paintings were moved to another gallery. He was 
the university’s chief librarian until 2010, and his actions came to light when 
an employee discovered what had happened and told the police.

Calls seeking comment from the university were not answered. Xiao will be 
sentenced later.
 