
The Metropolitan police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> 
is being taken to court in a landmark case over its decision to secretly obtain 
journalists’ phone records in an attempt to identify the mole behind the 
Plebgate saga involving the then cabinet minister Andrew Mitchell.

The force has been accused of using “coercive legal powers” normally reserved 
for criminals and counter-terrorism operations to intercept the communications 
of three Sun journalists and calls to and from the tabloid’s newsdesk in 2012.

At an interlocutory hearing in the high court on Tuesday, News Group 
Newspapers (NGN) outlined its skeleton case.

It argued the police had not demonstrated that what they did was “necessary in 
a democratic society” in the meaning of article 10 of the European convention 
on human rights, which protects journalistic sources.

A full hearing before the investigatory powers tribunal will take place next 
Monday following the legal action taken by NGN, the Sun’s political editor, Tom 
Newton Dunn, and two other reporters, Anthony France and Craig Woodhouse.

Police studied a week’s worth of the journalists’ phone records and used GPRS 
data to locate their whereabouts, said Gavin Millar QC, representing NGN.

The court will hear that the Met also obtained records for two newsdesk 
landlines for an hour and a half in its attempts to discover who leaked the 
claim that Mitchell called Downing Street police officers “plebs”.

The case is the first of its kind and will be presided over by a panel of five 
senior legal figures, including two high court judges.

It has previously emerged that the police used the controversial Regulation 
and Investigatory Powers Act (Ripa), created to oversee all communication 
interception in criminal investigations, to obtain the data.

Millar said: “This is a hugely important case. We never try these cases in an 
open court in this country. It is a human rights claim.”

At a pre-tribunal hearing in the high court, it was agreed that several Met 
officers would give evidence.

NGN’s skeleton argument said: “It is notable that the witness evidence filed 
by the Metropolitan police service (MPS) does not address why, in each 
instance, a Ripa authorisation by a police officer was the chosen measure to 
seek to identify the source.”

The Sun <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sun> will argue that it was open to 
the police to progress their investigation in other ways and that they had not 
gone to NGN to ask further questions.

Instead, it will say, they used “coercive legal powers” to access private 
phone data and did not demonstrate that Ripa trumped the rights of journalists 
under article 10.

NGN’s skeleton case says the internal form submitted as evidence shows the 
word “proportionate is repeated time and again, as if doing so is the solution 
to all problems, but there is no indication the relevant legal principles were 
understood”.

Ripa requests from mobile phone companies can be issued by a senior police 
officer and are generally made covertly to protect the police investigation.

The use of the legislation against the press has been highly criticised and 
the Met is facingseveral further actions from journalists. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/nov/30/plebgate-police-war-on-journalists>

• This article was amended on 15 July 2015. An earlier version said the police 
“monitored” the phones of journalists. This has been amended to clarify that 
they looked at the phone records.
 