
For the first time in roughly 30 years, Metallica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/metallica> are underdogs. As titans of a 
genre hitherto unexplored at Glastonbury, they are like the president of a 
country you've never heard of, their importance somewhat baffling. As such, 
they are the festival's riskiest booking since Jay-Z six years ago but, as 
frontman James Hetfield says: "I know it's all represented here so why not 
heavy rock, heavy metal? It's about time."

No genre should be off-limits and gambles are more admirable than playing 
safe. However you might have expected Metallica to open their set, it surely 
wasn't with a Julien Temple-directed short film of the band mowing down 
fox-hunters while dressed as bears, soundtracked by The Sweet.

To the uninitiated, the music can seem unintentionally comical: when Hetfield 
follows a long speech about world peace and brotherly love with the words "This 
one's called Cyanide," it's hard not to laugh. But they are impressively 
relentless and they work hard to impress a neutral constituency. It's difficult 
to think what more they could have done. That said, there's no excuse for 
Hetfield constantly addressing the festival as "Glasto".

Earlier in the evening, the Manic Street Preachers play the Other Stage. 
Fifteen years after they headlined the festival, they're still a potent draw, 
generous with the hits from what singer James Dean Bradfield terms "the 
behemoth phase", yet spiky enough to play a song called Die in the Summertime. 
A Design for Life is the only festival anthem illustrated by a line from Orwell.

During the afternoon, Lana Del Rey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/lana-del-rey> appears wearing a summer dress 
rather than, as her songs might suggest, a bloodstained prom gown but she has a 
dolorous, detached manner which is entirely in character. She sings like you'd 
imagine a Raymond Chandler femme fatale would talk, with a kind of erotic 
cynicism, her love songs poisoned by encroaching doom; she even smokes a 
cigarette like she's flirting with a gumshoe. The whole set is just as 
unwavering – a series of narcotic torch songs about death and emotional 
masochism – a little monotony being the price she pays for such a watertight 
aesthetic. As final song National Anthem climaxes, as if on cue, it starts 
raining.

In a female-dominated afternoon on the Pyramid Stage, Angel Haze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/angel-haze> is a rivetingly intense MC who 
delivers raw emotional candour with machine-gun urgency. She drops into the 
front rows and performs the last two songs while moving through the crowd like 
an electric current. Bookended by a version of Nina Simone's Feeling Good, 
Kelis's set is a mellower affair, updating old songs to suit her new, 
brass-powered neo-soul material: Milkshake and Acappella are repainted in 
shades of samba, afrobeat and disco. After Del Rey, an Aslan-like Robert Plant 
tightrope-walks between Led Zeppelin methadone (Black Dog, Whole Lotta Love) 
and his globetrotting solo material.

Friday is sliced in two by a brutal late afternoon thunderstorm which forces 
the temporary closure of every stage for safety reasons. The day started with 
an unannounced 11am appearance by theKaiser Chiefs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/kaiser-chiefs> on the Other Stage. Frontman 
Ricky Wilson's ferocious determination to bounce back after the departure of 
songwriting drummer Nick Hodgson translates into a lean, hit-packed set and 
tireless, somewhat manic showmanship. West coast sister act Haim, all wearing 
white, boast somewhat prematurely of bringing the "California sunshine". Both 
bands have form at Glastonbury but it's a pleasure to see new artists making 
their debut, visibly amazed by the experience: Philadelphia's The War on Drugs, 
who blend AOR with space-rock; Australian singer-songwriter Courtney Barnett, 
whose wry, poignant songs unfold like Lorrie Moore stories soundtracked by 
Sonic Youth​; and blue-eyed soul man John Newman whose number one hit Love Me 
Again is one of the day's highlights.

Serendipitously, the job of getting the Pyramid Stage back on track after the 
shutdown falls to two artists who have a long history with the festival.Lily 
Allen <https://www.theguardian.com/music/lilyallen>, who's been coming here 
since infancy, strides out on to a stage decorated with giant baby bottles and 
plays LDN ("the sun is in the sky, oh why oh why/Would I want to be anywhere 
else?") with Glastonbury in place of London. The festival's in her bones and 
she knows exactly what to say, teasing people who call the festival "Glasto" 
and promising: "You're in for the time of your lives." Smile explodes into 
drum'n'bass, an exuberant Fuck You is dedicated to Sepp Blatter and Keane's 
Somewhere Only We Know provides a surprisingly lovely pause for breath.

Elbow <https://www.theguardian.com/music/elbow> are old hands, too. Arguably 
Britain's subtlest arena band, they aren't afraid to be quiet. Their 
slow-burning songs, enriched by string and brass, create powerful intimacy in a 
big field. They succeed because between songs Guy Garvey is anything but quiet, 
hoisting a full pint glass, orchestrating a reverse Mexican wave and showering 
the "remarkable bunch of human beings" in front of him with flattery. My Sad 
Captains' ode to boozy friendship ("what a perfect waste of time") is 
heartbreakingly apt, as is the closing One Day Like This, which, in this 
post-storm sunset, sounds more cathartic and defiant than ever.

Arcade Fire's last appearance here, in 2007, was blighted by bad weather and 
bad sound, but their Friday headlining set is another story. The dancefloor 
reinvention that felt strained when the Montreal band first started touring 
their latest album Reflektor now feels instinctive. The stage, bathed in red 
and blue light, is a blur of constant motion with the seven glammed-up band 
members joined by percussionists and, during We Exist, a troupe of dancers. 
Drummer Jeremy Gara gives even old songs such as Rebellion (Lies) a subtle 
disco pulse and there is a pleasingly bizarre DJ mash-up of 90s headliners 
(Pulp, Oasis, Prodigy) before the encore. Win Butler, with a slash of facepaint 
over his eyes, remains a somewhat earnest frontman but Regine Chassagne looks 
like the happiest person on site, whether darting between drums, keyboards and 
accordion, or dancing with coloured streamers during her synth-pop solo spot 
Sprawl II. She personifies the spirit of a spectacular show: busy, joyous, 
dazzling.

If there's competition between headliners, then Arcade Fire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/arcadefire> strike to the heart of the 
festival in a way that Metallica, for all their exertions, cannot.
 