
The voice was strong and passionate. The "fired up" catchphrase was familiar. 
The two-thousand strongFlorida <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/florida> 
crowd of Democrats was adoring as they were urged to get to the polls.

But the Obama on the stage was not Barack. It was Michelle. In a fiery piece 
of oratory given in a sports hall at Broward College in Davie, Florida, the 
first lady was a natural campaigner getting the full rock star treatment every 
bit as much as her spouse does.

"Yeahhhh!" she said as she took to the podium. "This is what I call a rally!" 
She looked out at the roaring crowd. "I can tell you all seem pretty fired up 
and ready to go. And that's a good thing because I am really fired up and ready 
to go myself," she said.

But Michelle Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michelleobama> does 
not have the field to herself when it comes to the fierce and increasingly 
tight election battle of 2012. Ann Romney, wife of Republican challenger Mitt, 
has also emerged as a powerful advocate for her husband. She, too, is 
criss-crossing the battleground states, enthusiastically rallying Republican 
foot soldiers for her spouse's cause.

Both candidates' wives have the same role: energise the base and humanise 
their husbands with warm tales of character and family life. But now, as the 
neck-and-neck election draws to a close, each is also seen as a vital advocate 
for what is emerging as the most important demographic in the contest: women 
voters.

A new poll, published on Thursday, showed that Obama's long-held lead among 
women voters had all but vanished as Romney's campaign has enjoyed a remarkable 
national surge and brought the overall race to a virtual dead heat. After 
months of leading by double digits among female voters, the AP-GfK survey 
showed the candidates now tied at 47% among women. Just a month ago Obama's 
lead had been a huge 16 points. "Often the Democrats have taken the female vote 
for granted. But this is four years into an economic crisis and the Republicans 
have hoped to siphon off some of that female support on economic issues," said 
Katherine Jellison, an expert on women's history at Ohio University.

Michelle Obama and Ann Romney are now a key part of each campaign's fight for 
women voters. But they are making their pitches to wildly different audiences 
and in significantly different ways. They are also very different people. One 
is a black ex-lawyer who once earned far more than her husband. The other is a 
blonde housewife, devout Mormon and mother of five boys. Mirroring their 
husbands' polarised campaigns, the efforts ofAnn Romney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ann-romney> and Michelle Obama are also 
studies of opposites even as they share the goal of winning the White House.

At Broward, Michelle Obama hammered away at a mixed-race crowd gathered at a 
community college in a lower-middle class neighbourhood of small homes and 
strip malls lined with fast food joints. She gave an impassioned speech for 
about 45 minutes, heavy on her husband's policy achievements from the past four 
years. She came across as a natural speaker, mixing in anecdotes of family life 
with a stern lecture on the importance of volunteering for the campaign. "I 
don't care what's going on, sign up to do something before election day," she 
insisted.

Meanwhile, near Orlando, Florida, Ann Romney made her own pitch this week. She 
spoke outdoors in a bucolic city park in Winter Park, one of the wealthiest 
communities in Florida. Just off a street lined with expensive restaurants and 
fashionable boutiques she spoke to an overwhelmingly white crowd of locals. She 
emerged on stage clutching the hands of two young boys. "I have brought some 
special friends with me," she gushed. "These are two of my 18 grandchildren." 
Her speech, with a heavy emphasis on Romney family stories, was largely policy 
free and lasted just 15 minutes. But her image was flawless: that of a proud 
churchgoing mother and wife concerned for the future of America. At one stage 
she talked in folksy tones of her spouse's decision to run for president. She 
said she had asked her husband if it was "too late" to save America. "Mitt 
said: "It's growing late. It's getting very late. But it's not too late yet." I 
said: "That's all I need to know. Go save America!"," she explained.

Despite – or in fact because of – their hugely different styles, both 
candidates' wives are popular with their party's grassroots. "I feel like I won 
a million dollars. She's very boisterous. She is active. When she speaks it's 
more heartfelt," said Shanovia Brown, 33, a corrections officer at Michelle 
Obama's Broward rally.

But in Winter Park, Ann Romney was hitting the spot, too. "She is very 
elegant, very classy. She will be a beautiful representative of America," said 
Beth Young, a 54-year-old flight attendant. Indeed, both Michelle Obama and Ann 
Romney are more popular than their husbands. In one recent poll, Michelle 
Obama's favourability rate was 69%, with Ann Romney at 52% - a jump of 12 
points since April as her public profile has grown.

So far Michelle Obama has been the more active spouse. She has been a 
fundraising powerhouse, bringing in more than $17m since the start of the year. 
At one event having a photo taken with the first lady cost $5,000. Michelle 
Obama has also been on edgy late-night talk shows, like Jimmy Kimmel, and 
appeared at Hollywood fundraisers with stars like Will Smith. "With Michelle, 
Barack Obama can double the territory and double the number of donors reached," 
said Robert Watson, a professor of American studies at Lynn University.

Meanwhile, Ann Romney has been a little more reticent. She frequently appears 
alongside her husband on television, but less so by herself. Some experts 
believe that is a mistake. "She is not as naturally comfortable as Michelle. 
She has been under utilised," Watson said.

But being a first lady, or a would-be first lady, is an entry into a strange 
and tradition-bound corner of American politics. It is essentially a 
subordinate role whose main aim is to tell a husband's story. Michelle Obama, 
once a distinguished lawyer, calls herself a "mom-in-chief" and does not shy 
away from schmaltz. It is seen as "humanising" Obama, who is often viewed as 
aloof. "Although my husband is handsome and charming and incredibly smart – yes 
indeed – that is not why I married him. Listen closely. What truly made me fall 
in love with Barack Obama is something you all see every day – it's his 
character. It's his decency and his honesty," she said in Broward.

Ann Romney, too, lays it on thick. In Winter Park she spoke of how her husband 
tended to a dying boy in hospital, visiting him regularly, telling him about 
heaven and helping him with his final wishes. She spoke of pride of her 
husband's performance in the television debates. "To have Mitt Romney defining 
who he is and what kind of a person he is, I loved it," she said.

Telling these homely stories is seen as vital by campaign strategists, not for 
the spouse's own image, but for their husbands'. "We don't elect first ladies. 
Instead we think: this is the kind of spouse that he has chosen to marry and so 
her world view must line up with his," said Jellison. "Religious conservatives 
will hear Ann Romney's message and feel comfortable that she is a 
traditionally-minded woman and that her husband will champion that mindset."

Yet in the end their campaigning reduces both Michelle Obama and Ann Rommey to 
playing a subservient, traditionally "female" role in the election. Both tout 
their domestic credentials and experiences of motherhood. They talk about 
favoured recipes, their fashion choices are endlessly analysed and they do a 
whole parade of "softball" magazine and newspaper interviews. They chat to 
Elle, Home Journal, Parade and appear on Oprah Winfrey's show. "It is a 
guaranteed win-win. You get soft ball questions and they tend to be more 
popular than their husbands. You would be a fool not to send them out there," 
said Watson.

The crowds flocking to see them were not complaining. Mary Faro, a local 
academic, had waited for three hours to the see the First Lady come to Broward. 
"And I'd do it again. Happily," she explained. Supporters at the Ann Romney 
rally felt the same. "When she speaks, she speaks from the heart. You can sense 
a phoney, and Ann Romney is very genuine," said Hib Theriault, a retired army 
colonel.

All of which explains why the candidates' wives have been so active as the 
election enters it final and fiercest phase. They are both succeeding at the 
part of politics that is more a high school contest popularity contest than a 
policy debate. "Not all voters like policy. It's like the prom king and queen, 
and no one tells a person's story as well as their spouse," said Watson.
 