
I am typing this on a villa balcony, watching a glorious view of the sun 
setting on the Mediterranean coast of Turkey, having been on an overnight sea 
kayaking adventure. I feel very lucky to be able to write that sentence. I also 
feel a little surprised. First, Turkey has never really cropped up on my 
agenda, holiday-wise. Second, I went on a sea kayaking adventure. And, yes, you 
heard correctly for those who are equally (and slightly rudely) surprised. So, 
let me explain.

Last September, I wanted to find some dying summer sun in the hope that 
embracing the long, dark British days ahead would be more bearable. I had never 
been to Turkey, it was only a four-hour flight and would be guaranteed good 
weather. I was sold. And then I surprised myself by booking not only a villa 
for full sun-worshipping and resting, but also a two-day sea kayaking trip.

In the lead-up to my holiday, if the conversation couldn't naturally get on to 
holidays, I would find myself saying, "Ask me where I am going on holiday, 
please."

"Oh, where are you going on holiday, Miranda?"

"Gosh, what a spontaneous question. I am going to the Turkish coast, if you 
please, where I will partake of a two-day sea kayaking adventure."

The response would either be: "Oh, it is absolutely beautiful, totally 
underrated" (a little frustrating, because they had been to Turkey first, but 
also pleasing, because my holiday choice had been affirmed) or, "Oooh, that's 
exotic – I have never been there" – just the response I craved, so I could 
retort, "Well, Iam exotic, I need an exotic location and I think you'll find I 
am quite an adventurous person with adventurous exotic needs."

Now, I can confide in you – although you may well have noticed – that I am 
definitely not exotic and, although I am naturally adventurous and a traveller 
at heart, the fearful practical side will often take over. (Well, there are 
planes that might crash, injuries and illnesses that might be sustained, 
difficult languages and people one might need to negotiate.) But I am bored 
with the fears. So I was Turkey-bound and sticking to a recent new philosophy 
in my life, which is simply, "Get out of your comfort zone every day." It 
doesn't have to be big, expensive things; it could be just walking a different 
route to the tube or attempting a new recipe. In my case, this was on a 
slightly larger scale, but who knew where it might lead – the 2012 canoe team, 
perhaps?

As we landed, the sun was beginning to set and by the time we'd made the 
two-hour transfer to the villa it was dark, which meant the next morning was 
filled with childish excitement as we pulled back the curtains to reveal the 
view. We found ourselves looking over a rugged, mountainous terrain, the kind 
that lets you know you are away from home, with the green of the trees 
interspersed with dry, sandy, bald spots. Just by looking at them, you can tell 
how hot it gets and know you are in a more remote, untouched part of the world.

Our villa looked straight out to sea (I suppose a 150m walk away – oh yes, we 
had a private beach area), so clear that even from the terrace you could make 
out rocks under the water. We couldn't wait to dive in. Like true Brits, we 
were braced for the breathlessness of cold water that the sea usually brings, 
but here it was deliciously warm.

On the first day, my "something new" was a traditional hammam, or Turkish 
bath. Lying on a hot marble slab while someone washes you is never going to 
take off in Britain due to the sheer embarrassment potential, but in Turkey I 
succumbed fully and,encased in bubbles, turned tomy friend and said, "Oooh, 
heaven – like a blanket of love." Could I have been any more camp?

A five-minute walk from the villa was a hotel where we were able to book for 
dinner and just tip up for breakfast or lunch if we were feeling lazy – if you 
prefer hotels to villas, I recommend going down this route. The managers 
informed us that there was a fish night, barbecue night and music night that 
week – would we care to join them? The unadventurous Miranda balked at the 
thought, imagining having to "make friends" at a long trestle table, clap 
awkwardly and belly dance. But what "something new" was I going to try today? 
So I booked a table for fish night.

My philosophy blessed me. It was individual tables on the beach front, there 
was no belly dancing and you chose which fresh, local fish you would like 
barbecued. That plus the warm evening air, the lapping of the sea and, to make 
it all the more nauseating as you read this on a cold January morning, I saw 
the best shooting star I have ever seen.

All right, I thought the next morning, I've conquered a stranger washing me 
and a "fish night", but tomorrow it's sea kayaking – help! But it turned out to 
be the holiday highlight, and as I write I wish I was back on the high seas.
 'I couldn’t think about any of the worries that might face me back home; I 
simply had to focus on paddling, steering, maintaining balance, the new sounds 
and sights.' Photograph: Charla Jones for the Guardian 
We were collected from the villa and driven to pick up the kayaks at a village 
an hour away, from where we were to paddle for three hours to a cove for lunch. 
Miss Negative thought of the sunstroke, the sore upper arms, the capsizing, the 
strain on the weak lower back, the fitting in the kayak (which did prove a 
little embarrassing while they searched for one to suit a very tall person). 
But the minute I launched on to that mirror-like sea and heard the ripples of 
the water as I ploughed steadily on, I felt exhilarated. It was a bit of 
a tough kayak to the first cove, as we were against the wind and it got choppy 
as we turned out of the harbour, but it was so worth it. If nothing else, for 
the overnight stay at an island accessible only by small boats and yachts. We 
climbed to the top of a 4th-century BC castle ruin to watch the sun set over 
the mountains, with the sea on one side and green valleys on the other. 
The pansiyon we stayed in was basic but delightful – its colourful throws, low 
tables, hammocks and candles took me back to my backpacking days. I felt the 
freedom and joy of being 20 again, and celebrated with two favourite passions 
of my youth – a beer and a cigarette.

The next morning, back in the kayak, I realised that, however tired one feels, 
one of the best ways to de-stress is to be distracted in action and purpose. I 
couldn't think about any of the worries that might face me back home; I simply 
had to focus on paddling, steering, maintaining balance, the new sounds and 
sights. And when I returned to the villa, I thought I had been away for 
weeks, not just a couple of days. Always the first sign of a good break.

I never usually say I will come back to a place, mainly because I feel I would 
rather explore new areas on this wonderful planet of ours, but Turkey, you have 
got me. I will be coming back. I will try something new with you next time – 
perhaps mountain biking – and I know you will reward me.

• Turkey specialist Exclusive Escapes <http://www.exclusiveescapes.co.uk> 
offers a range of boutique hotels and villas with pools on Turkey's Lycian 
coast. A seven-night villa stay with an overnight kayaking safari costs from 
£915pp, including return flights (from Heathrow or Manchester) to Dalaman, 
transfers, seven days' car hire, a welcome hamper and daily cleaning.

• WIN: Waterskiing or wakeboarding lessons in Crete. For full details of the 
holiday on offer, plus how to enter the competition and full terms and 
conditions, go toweekend-travel-competition 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2012/jan/27/weekend-travel-competition>.
 