
This week, motherhood was thrown into the political spotlight 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/apr/12/hillary-rosen-ann-romney-live> 
when Ann Romney and Hilary Rosen argued over the challenges facing modern moms.

We asked you to tell us about the challenges facing modern mothers, and the 
responses came in droves. Here's a selection of Guardian responses:

'I do not want to give up "me"' – Nicki Leaper
 peoples nicki leaper Photograph: nicki leaper 
I am a mother, currently on maternity leave with my second child. I had my 
daughter while working in New York and got 11 weeks paid leave, after which I 
voluntarily returned to work. This time round I'm taking 6 months. It feels 
like a luxury to have that amount of time with my son, but I am looking forward 
to going back to work.

Raising children is very hard work. But I do not believe that I have to do it 
all myself. Neither does my husband. We chose to have our family; it is our 
responsibility to work for it. It takes a village to raise a child and so, 
nowadays, professional, caring daycare that nurtures, entertains and teaches, 
extended family and friends, kids clubs – I truly believe that these, and all 
other 'village' options are good things, both for my children, my family as a 
whole and for me.

I have studied and worked long and hard to get to where I am. I am good at my 
job and get pleasure from it. I am happy to acknowledge that I couldn't stay at 
home all day long with my children long term. I crave a different kind of 
stimulation. I do not want to give up 'me'. If I was resentful of giving up 
'me', my children would feel it. And whilst my focus has now changed, it does 
not mean that I cannot combine both work and motherhood.

I think we fixate too much on the idea of perfection – and how someone must 
have it 'right'. If you want to work, work. If you want to stay at home, stay 
at home. If you want to stay at home but have to work – I hope you can make the 
best of the situation. But let's not demonize each other. There is no reason to 
judge each other so harshly – we, and I mainly mean women here, are our own 
worst enemies.

Do I feel that the motherhood debate represents my life? I feel the pressure 
constantly, to justify what I am doing and why. But do I want it to represent 
my life? No, never. I am worth so much more than that. We all are.

'A new career has also emerged for me' - Elsie Button
 peoples Elsie Button Photograph: Elsie Button 
I certainly wasn't a girl who longed for the day when I got married and had 
kids, but I always knew instinctively that if I had children, I would be a 
full-time mum, even if it meant living on a pittance.

And when my first daughter arrived, my new working life began: scrubbing 
pureed pear from walls, obsessing over baby poo and trying to get ever more 
inventive with Play-Doh. It gets pretty relentless and grueling at times. A 
couple of times, I've jumped in the car in a flurry of tears, driven up to the 
top of a mountain, and stared into the middle distance for what felt like 
hours, wondering how I would mentally get through the bedtime routine that 
night.

But although I have sometimes considered myself a failure as a mother, I have 
also felt immensely proud of myself and my offspring. My development as a 
person would have been impossible in any other work, paid or unpaid.

A new career has also emerged for me out of being a full-time mum. For five 
years now, I have been writing all my parenting anecdotes down via a blog 
(initially in an attempt to keep my sanity intact). The horrors and joys of 
parenthood have provided the raw material for work as a professional writer, 
and I am now contributing to various online and print magazines on a regular 
basis.

Being a stay-at-home mum has given me new direction and focus for my work, and 
I have never felt so professionally fulfilled.

'The stay-at-home mom is the center of her universe' – RJ
 Avatar green Photograph: guardian.co.uk 
I was a stay-at-home mom of eight. Now my children have grown, and I'm back in 
the business world. Here's what I have observed:

There's no denying that stay-at-home moms have unique challenges and 
responsibilities. However, the perspective of a stay-at-home-mom is vastly 
different than her counterparts. She is, of necessity, the center of her 
universe. Her authority can't be questioned; she can't get fired; her world 
view shrinks until it only encompasses her immediate surroundings. She develops 
a singular and necessary goal: the smooth operation of home and family.

Unfortunately, this ultra-focused mindset results in a skewed perspective. 
Anything that mars the smooth operation of the family becomes a "job". Chores 
like having to run to the store to buy milk are no longer an inconvenience; 
they are considered to be a "day's work". Working out a car-pooling schedule 
with other neighborhood moms is considered a major day's accomplishment. (Had 
someone pointed this out to me when I was a stay-at-home mom, I would have 
vehemently defended my job – and I would have believed it.)

The women I respect today are those that are forced to juggle motherhood, 
employment and education at the same time. I know many young mothers who have 
to work (often at minimum wage) to help pay for food and mortgage, and many who 
additionally take night or weekend classes in the desperate hope of furthering 
their job prospects. They don't get to send the kids off to school in the 
morning and then "have lunch" with their friends to relax; they send the kids 
off to school, go straight to work, come home, spend some time with the family 
and then go to their own class. These women do not have the luxury of choosing 
to be stay-at-home moms.

When I hear affluent moms complain about the hard work of motherhood and 
compare it to these women who are living on four or five hours of sleep every 
night in a desperate attempt to better the conditions of their families, I'm 
not impressed.

'Will I get better at this?' – Sarah Manley
 peoples Sarah Manley Photograph: Sarah Manley 
The baby is getting his first tooth. He wakes as I am heading to bed, then 
again every two hours until 6:30 in the morning, when I give up and we start 
the day. Our preschooler gets up soon after, then on to the school run, 
playgroup, a work project with an annoying sponsor, ballet, dinner and bath. 
After the children are in bed I have a few precious hours to be an adult, which 
usually means bills and laundry. My day begins in exhaustion and runs headlong 
at full speed until I collapse, delirious, into bed some seventeen hours later.

Because we couldn't afford to give up either income, my husband and I chose to 
work from home when our daughter was born so we could be more available as 
parents. Now, with no real ability to separate our home and work lives, we have 
the worst of both worlds: one eye on the kids and one eye on the computer. It 
is easy to be a half-assed employee: when I'm doing my paid job, my tasks are 
finite and if I'm overloaded I can pass along the work to a colleague. As a 
mother I have no such luxury. Each day brings fresh challenges in unexplored 
territory, and when my daughter cries for mama I'm on my own, drawing the maps 
as I go.

Despite 18 years of formal education and two university degrees, I never had 
any training for my mothering job, which includes duties as a doctor, chef, 
activity planner, storyteller, cheerleader, nutritionist, cash machine, taxi 
driver, CEO, cleaning lady, cabaret singer, fashion consultant, referee and 
counselor. The work I do as a mother is hard precisely because I don't know 
what I'm doing. I am an inexperienced bumbler running the whole show. The me 
that I used to be before motherhood, a person of authority, always 10 steps 
ahead, is no longer with us. Will I get better at this, or is this simply a 
test of endurance, to see if my family finishes the marathon intact? I'm only 
three years in; it's too soon to tell.

'We should be enabling women to choose' – Louise Hartley
 people Louise hartley Photograph: Louise Hartley 
I'm a PhD-qualified professional astrophysicist, but for seven years I have 
been a full-time mum.

In order to understand the worth of something, our society tends to reduce it 
to its purely economic value, so when it comes to work only paid work is 
considered an achievement. We talk about paid employment giving women 
confidence and self-esteem. How about the sense of fulfilment that a woman 
feels when she is caring for and educating her children?

If you feel tempted to dismiss that last question as airy-fairy and 
old-fashioned, please pause and take time to think about your attitudes to 
mothering. Mothering is hard. When done well it produces stable, responsible, 
happy and engaged members of our society. When done badly, it destroys lives. 
Now tell me that mothering isn't rocket science. I was a rocket scientist. I 
know what I'm talking about.

While I have been "unemployed", I have done thousands of hours of volunteer 
work: web design for community groups, campaigning, fundraising, running 
support groups and helping to form a political party. I see mums around me 
running playgroups and co-ops, and teaching each other new skills. If we were 
all at work, none of these things would be happening. Our communities would 
lose out.

I'm glad I've had the chance to experience every moment of life with my young 
children, rather than seeing them as a blip on my career path. Rather than 
letting financial constraints dictate women's child-rearing decisions, we 
should be enabling women to choose whether they want to stay at home or work, 
and not penalising them for doing either.

'Both sets of women have it hard' – Avital Norman Nathman
 Avital Norman Nathman Photograph: Avital Norman Nathman 
The issue is not "the mommy wars" (no matter how catchy of a headline it is). 
This is not about being a working mother or a stay-at-home mother. I have been 
both, for the record, and currently am a mother who works out of the home. I 
try hard not to compare myself to other mothers (which is incredibly difficult 
in this mommy-blogging, Pinterest-obsessed culture of ours), because that only 
accomplishes to remind me of the division surrounding motherhood. If we 
continue to focus on that divide, nothing will be resolved. Both sets of women 
have it hard, regardless of the choice they've made, simply because society as 
a whole is not supporting them.

The motherhood debate doesn't represent my life because for me, it's not about 
having a career versus having a family. Here's the problem: the have-it-all 
concept only sets women up to fail, mostly because not everyone has the same 
definition of having it all. Beyond that, we are just not in a society that 
supports women having it all, which makes that concept extremely difficult to 
attain.

When we begin to honestly discuss and debate current maternity/paternity laws, 
realistic/fair wages, paid sick leave and quality/affordable childcare, only 
then will be finally delving into the true war that mothers are facing on a 
daily basis, regardless of whether they're facing it from behind an office desk 
or their kitchen counter.

Also, it's incredibly telling that these questions and comments are almost 
always directed at women. Why isn't anyone asking fathers how they manage to 
"do it all"? How are men able to meet the demands at both home and work? It 
always comes down on the mother, and that lays the groundwork for all of this.

'Whatever I pick will never be enough' – Sarah Lewis-Hammond
 peoples moms Sarah Lewis-Hammond Photograph: Sarah Lewis-Hammond 
It would be accurate to say I occasionally suffer from bouts of humour-free 
militant feminism. I am a Modern Woman. I like to work. I like supporting 
myself, financially and emotionally. I can operate power tools. I don't like 
pink and its stinking oppressive politics. I do not want to be a stay-at-home 
mum, because what self-respecting woman would want that, right?

Except actually maybe hanging out with my five-month-old daughter is the most 
fun I've ever had, and the thought of leaving her with someone else during the 
day feels like someone ripping away my Pullman-esque daemon, clawing at some 
vital part of the now invisible umbilical link, leaving us both worse off for 
it.

And I hate myself for it. I hate myself for not being back at my desk with an 
eight-week-old asleep in her Moses basket next to me, for the fact that since 
she was born at the end of October I have only managed to write one article and 
spend an hour or two helping my yoga teacher with her Twitter feed. I hate 
myself for all the sneering judgement I have cast over all the stay-at-home 
mums I know and for my inability to consider that I might be just that, even if 
only for a short time.

Whatever I pick will never be enough. If I go back to work full time I will 
never bear the guilt and judgement of leaving my daughter with someone else. If 
I don't go back to work, I won't be able to feel like a complete, contributory 
member of society. All of it is bullshit, of course, but thems the messages we 
send. Is being a parent hard? Yes. Did I choose it? Yes. Is the job valued? No. 
Not even by me. Stupid, huh?

'There's pressure on me from all sides' – MariaMM
 blueavatar Photograph: guardian.co.uk 
I'm 32 and seven and a half months pregnant with my first child. I will 
benefit from my employer's generous maternity leave policy, but I also feel 
under pressure to return before the full possible year is up. Our family would 
be best off financially if both myself and my husband continue to work full 
time, as each of us makes roughly twice the daily cost of childcare for one 
child in our city. I feel pressured by work to be available as much as possible 
and to produce at the same rate as I did before having a child, but there is 
also pressure from family, friends and society in general to spend more time 
with our child.

We'll end up compromising somehow for now, but as I am likely to be the higher 
income earner within a few years, I'm likely to be the one working more. If we 
have more children in the future, it's probably going to make the most sense 
for my husband to be the primary carer. I don't know how I feel about that yet. 
I want to say that the motherhood debate does not represent my life, and that I 
want to stay out of it, but I'm afraid I'm going to be sucked into it anyway.
 