
Despite public anger over the mishandling of the fiscal crisis and historic 
low support in successive opinion polls, there appears to be some life in 
Fianna Fáil yet.

The evidence for this was demonstrated on Monday and was overlooked by most 
international commentators who keep an eye onIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>.

The minister for finance, Brian Lenihan, seized an opportunity to win back 
some kudos from a public outraged over the behaviour of the country's banks. 
That anger was particularly focused at the weekend on Allied Irish Bank after 
its announcement that it would pay €40m in bonuses to its top staff even while 
billions more were being pumped from the Irish taxpayer and the EU/IMF into the 
same bank.

On Monday Lenihan moved against AIB by warning it that the major 
recapitalisation programme of its bank would be in jeopardy if it paid out the 
bonus package. Under that pressure, and probably facing total collapse, the AIB 
board met on Monday afternoon in its Dublin HQ and later announced that it was 
withdrawing the payouts.

Lenihan's letter had the desired effect and put the bank in an impossible 
position, and for the first time a major Irish financial institution had been 
put in its place.

After pushing the AIB into a corner, Lenihan also ensured that legislation 
that would tax new bank bonuses by more than 90% would be incorporated into the 
bill that will ratify the IMF/ECB multibillion-euro package. At a stroke, the 
finance minister had outmanoeuvred the opposition. Fine Gael and Labour have 
both stated that they will vote against the Dáil motion that will endorse the 
global financial bailout for Ireland. But now if they do so Fianna Fáil can cry 
that they will also be voting down a measure that has popular support among a 
public seething with hatred for the Republic's banks – the taxation of bankers' 
bonuses.

The trap that Lenihan and the Irish cabinet have cynically set for the 
opposition won't save Fianna Fáil from a crushing defeat in the general 
election, which is likely to be held some time in early March.

Nonetheless, tying the tax on the banks' bonus payments to the IMF/ECB rescue 
plan demonstrates that there is still some residual strategic thinking within 
the Fianna Fáil high command. It is also a reminder that there is one axiom of 
Irish politics you should never forget and that is to never, ever underestimate 
the Soldiers of Destiny.
 