
Every month produces new cases of the “repatriation” of antiquities from 
American museums to their countries of origin.

In late May, Italian authorities displayed 25 looted artefacts retrieved from 
the United States. They included some objects smuggled by the infamous dealer 
Giacomo Medici, convicted in 2004 for selling thousands of stolen pieces of 
Greco-Roman art from Italy and the Mediterranean. A few weeks earlier, the 
Cleveland Museum of Artreturned 
<http://www.nytimes.com/aponline/2015/05/11/us/ap-us-statue-returned.html> a 
10th-century statue of the Hindu god Hanuman to Cambodia. The idol had been 
hacked from the Prasat Chen temple in Siem Reap in the 1960s before journeying 
via a litany of dealers into the holds of the Cleveland Museum of Art in 1982.

In April, homeland security agents relieved the Honolulu Museum of Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> of seven ancient Indian 
artefacts believed to have been acquired through Subhash Kapoor, a New 
York-based art dealer.

Kapoor, who currently languishes in police custody in India, presided over a 
vast criminal operation whose full scope authorities are still trying to 
understand. An ongoing investigation dubbedOperation Hidden Idol 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/08/arts/design/museums-begin-returning-artifacts-to-india-in-response-to-investigation.html>
 spans four continents in trying to untangle Kapoor’s network. For decades, he 
funnelled stolen antiquities from India and south-east Asia to private 
collectors and major museums in the west to the tune of over $100m (and perhaps 
even more than that).

Some of the big American institutions connected to Kapoor include the 
Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, the Art Institute in Chicago and the 
Asian Museum of Art in San Francisco.

Operation Hidden Idol has piled further pressure on American museums to ensure 
that their collections are not home to illegally acquired artefacts. In the 
last 10 years, public collections including the Getty Museum in Los Angeles and 
the Met have given up hundreds of tarnished objects. In acquiring these illicit 
antiquities, museums failed to do due diligence in determining the authenticity 
and provenance of objects. They have since lost millions of dollars.

But it’s not just the financial pain that worries curators and museum chiefs. 
The headlines generated by such scandals threaten the very acquisitive 
enterprise of western museums; mounting demands for repatriation make more 
difficult the project of building “universal” institutions presenting the art 
and history of the world.

Sometimes, these claims have little to do with the illicit trade. Writing in 
the New York Times, Hugh Eakindecried 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/01/27/sunday-review/the-great-giveback.html> the 
strong-arming tactics of “art-rich” countries like Turkey, Greece and Italy. 
“Museums’ relationships with foreign governments have become increasingly 
contingent upon giving in to unreasonable, and sometimes blatantly 
extortionary, demands,” he wrote. As China and India grow on the geopolitical 
stage, so too have Chinese and Indian demands (often by private groups and 
individuals rather than governments) for the restitution of artefacts from the 
west.

As a result, defenders of museums believe that their diverse and cosmopolitan 
collections are under attack from governments and groups with narrow, 
nationalist agendas. Critics of western museums accuse them of complicity in 
the illicit trade, and at a more general level, of perpetuating the gross 
inequalities between the west and the rest of the world.

According to Jason Felch, author of Chasing Aphrodite: The Hunt for Looted 
Antiquities at the World’s Richest Museum <http://chasingaphrodite.com/>, 
“museum culture in the US has been slow to sensitize to the realities of the 
illicit trade”. He sees a parallel between the trade in antiquities and the 
drug trade: demand in western countries makes both possible. “As long as 
there’s a lucrative market for looted goods, for objects with uncertain 
provenance, there will be an illicit antiquities trade,” he said.

Tess Davis, a lawyer with the Antiquities Coalition, praised the Cleveland 
Museum of Art for voluntarily returning the Hanuman statue, but argued that it 
should never have been allowed to enter the collection in the first place. “The 
Hanuman first surfaced on the market while Cambodia was in the midst of a war 
and facing genocide,” she said. “How could anyone not know this was stolen 
property? The only answer is that no one wanted to know.”

American museums are largely self-regulated, though many subscribe to the 
stricter guidelines adopted in 2008 by the American Association of Museum 
Directors governing the acquisition of archaeological material.Museums 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/museums> have rarely been forced by legal 
rulings to give up artefacts; instead, they have voluntarily – sometimes 
pre-emptively – handed over the dodgy objects in their collections.

“No one wants to be promoting the illegal trade,” said James Cuno, CEO of the 
Getty Trust and a major proponent of universal museums. “Collectors have to be 
very careful about both the authenticity of the object and the legality of a 
transaction.”

But Cuno fears that universal museums in the west face a deeper challenge from 
nationalists around the world. Governments and their deputised national museums 
often couch their demands for repatriation in terms of “repairing the integrity 
of the nation”. Cuno argues that these claims are more theatrical than moral, 
making cultural property “about politics and the political agenda of ruling 
elites”.

In his view, the universal museum remains the best context in which to engage 
with art. “Works of art have not adhered to modern political borders,” he said. 
“They have always sought connection elsewhere to strange and wonderful things.”

The ongoing destruction of ancient sites in the Middle East by the Islamic 
State has galvanised the case for the universal museum, with advocates like 
Gary Vikan, the former director of the Walters Art Museum in Baltimore, arguing 
that only institutions in the west can preserve the world’s cultural heritage. 
Isis’s cultural atrocities “will put an end to the excess piety in favour of 
the repatriation model”, he told the New York Times.

From another perspective, that defence smacks of western privilege. 
“Colonialism is alive and well in the art world,” Davis said. “So-called 
leaders in the field still justify retaining plunder in order to fill their 
‘universal museums’ where patrons can view encyclopaedic collections from all 
over the world. A noble idea, in theory, but in practice, a western luxury. The 
citizens of New York, London, and Paris may benefit, but those of Phnom Penh? 
Never.”

Felch, who has spent years investigating the practices and acquisitions of 
institutions like the Getty Museum, understands the problematic history of 
universal museums in the west, but still sees great value in their 
encyclopaedic character. “Many collections were built during colonial times, 
but I’m not tilting at windmills, trying to undo history,” he said. “I wish 
there were encyclopaedic museums elsewhere in the world.” He suggests that the 
many large, well-resourced museums in the west must help facilitate loans and 
exchanges with museums in other parts of the world.


While at odds with Felch on other counts, Cuno agrees that institutions like 
his have a global mission. “Any museum that argues for cosmopolitanism and 
cultural diversity has the obligation to encourage that access everywhere,” he 
said. “There is no reason to believe that people elsewhere are not curious 
about the world.”
 