
History may be written by the victors, but an author's reputation is made by 
the keepers of the flame. In the case of CS Lewis, who died on 22 November 
1963, the keepers are Christians, many of them American evangelicals, and, with 
the exception of his children's fiction, a glance at the shelf of his books 
kept in print by their enthusiasm might lead you to conclude he was primarily 
a popular theologian. But Lewis had a day job, as a tutor and fellow in English 
literature at Oxford and Cambridge, and if, like me, you far more interested in 
his literary criticism than his apologetics, you often have to scrounge up 
shabby used copies of those titles online.

Almost obscured by the dominant picture of Lewis as a sort of modern-day 
Protestant saint is the Lewis who wrote those works, the Lewis I admire. He was 
one of the world's great readers. The criticWilliam Empson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/jun/04/featuresreviews.guardianreview17>
 once described him as "the best read man of his generation, one who read 
everything and remembered everything he read", which included obscure 
allegorical Latin poets of the late classical period, who are nowadays 
justifiably forgotten. Yet there's never a sense in Lewis's literary 
scholarship of the accumulation of expertise for its own sake. He read 
omnivorously and for pleasure, first and foremost. If his opinions and 
observations on the world sometimes reflected the narrow, old-fashioned views 
of his middle class Anglo-Irish background, he was always willing to extend and 
expand himself to meet an author halfway. His writing on the joys of reading 
verges, at times, on the erotic.

Apart from the Narnia books, the work of Lewis's I most cherish, "An 
Experiment in Criticism", makes the almost postmodern – and at the very least 
radically humble – proposition that we might best judge the literary merit of a 
book not by how it is written, but by how it is read. If "we found even one 
reader to whom the cheap little book with its double columns and the lurid daub 
on its cover had been a lifelong delight, who had read and reread it, who would 
notice, and object, if a single word were changed, then, however little we 
could see in it ourselves and however it was despised by our friends and 
colleagues, we should not dare to put it beyond the pale". That is a faith I am 
happy to share.

• Laura Miller's The Magician's Book: A Skeptic's Adventures in Narnia is 
published by Little, Brown.
 'Free-ranging intellect' … Aldous Huxley. Photograph: Bettmann/Corbis 
Aldous Huxley <https://www.theguardian.com/books/aldoushuxley>, the tall, 
short-sighted, cerebral English writer who ended his life 50 years ago in 
Hollywood as a modern guru, might seem an unlikely hero. But in writing his 
life I grew to admire his resilience – overcoming temporary blindness, 
childhood traumas and, later, permanent poor sight – and the quiet courage of 
his particular brand of liberal individualism.

Collared by a journalist on his arrival in the US in the middle of the 1926 
general strike, he described his politics as "Fabian and mildly labourite", but 
he was never a political partisan, and his free-ranging intellect was incapable 
of being pressed into a sectarian mould. Yes, he was an old Etonian – posh, 
successful very early, always the mild and courteous, silver-voiced English 
gentleman that one of his Hollywood neighbours watched in fascination putting 
out a bag of garbage with the delicate grace of a court chamberlain – but he 
had the courage of an exemplary open mind. The FBI kept a fat file on him but 
failed utterly to find anything damning (as his biographer I was sorely 
disappointed when it slid out of the jiffy bag). He was nevertheless refused US 
citizenship – a rejection that wounded him – and his British critics, 
predictably indicting his residence in the US during the war, are still to be 
found in conservative newspapers and academic conferences where they try to pin 
sinister labels on him.

He has survived his detractors and remains an eloquent critical voice, warning 
against our tendency to "love our slavery" –Brave New World's dystopian idea of 
manipulation and conformity and our tendency to submit to soft power, so 
clearly vindicated by the extraordinary complacency with which the public seems 
to have greeted the Snowden revelations of illegitimate surveillance. A free 
democrat to the core of his being, at war through words with "the great 
impersonal forces now menacing freedom", he shows that heroism can exist away 
from the noisy battlefield.

• Nicholas Murray's biography of Aldous Huxley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/aldoushuxley> is published by Abacus.
 