
A friend going to church in the country saw one sheep holding a dustbin lid 
while another sheep ran at it. Several psalms later, they were still at it 
though they might have changed sides. Hard to tell with sheep. Even sheep have 
to make their own entertainment in Ambridge because there are acres and acres 
when nothing whatsoever happens. The highlight of the week was a farm walk in 
which people actually came to look at holes in the ground (“There’s another 
hole in the next field!”).

Now Rob has left blood-soaked Blossom Cottage, it falls to Toby to buck things 
up a bit. Toby (“I’ve got a bit of a cashflow problem”) is full of good ideas. 
The best of these is home-brewed gin. Elizabeth is encouraging: “Gin with a 
whiff of the hedgerow.” Pip is cautious: “Dingleberries are poisonous.” 
Apparently, you can add anything to gin. Jam. Anything. The world’s your larder.

David Archer – whose strength, like Galahad, is as the strength of 10, because 
his heart is pure – was furious and closed Toby’s gin still down. But Toby had 
read the small print on his lease, which Galahad – what with the helmet and 
visor and all – hadn’t. So Ambridge Gin is on again. A catchy brand name is 
solicited for this promising tipple.

Ambridge’s premier gin tippler is David’s Aunt Lilian, whose motto is: 
“There’s a dance in the old girl yet!” She has been having a fling with Justin, 
who is rich and ruthless and married. Rob, who has silkily sashayed into 
blackmail, Now Knows All.

If this sounds like a pantomime, it is. Lynda is producing her widely dreaded 
Mother Goose, with Tom (last seen legging it from the altar) and Kirsty 
(his abandoned bride) playing young lovers. When Kirsty queried this, Lynda 
said: “Use it, Kirsty! Use it! It’s what real actors do!” Which, in the 
circumstances, verges on the offensive.

I was, however, very taken with The X Factor interlude starring two 
of Ambridge’s silent characters, Molly Button, the infant phenomenon, and the 
sinister Nathan Booth. Molly did a belly-dance while Nathan attempted a 
speciality act. “What was he doing with those ping-pong balls?” asked Lynda, 
bemused.

“Well, that was quaite … ” said the continuity announcer stiffly. Only a BBC 
announcer can say “quaite” quite like that.

A month in Ambridge returns on 4 January.
 