
My God, is it safe to come out now? Has everyone stopped shouting? As Ernest 
Thesiger said at the battle of Ypres: “My dear, the noise and the people!” He 
passed the time doing petit point embroidery, which distracted him from both.

The gaggle of pointless celebrities rounded up for jury service at Helen’s 
trial all shouted at once (“Stop it! Stop it all of you! That’s enough!”) They 
were ably led by Nigel Pargetter, whose lung power is legendary. Defenestrated 
fromThe Archers <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-archers>, the 
length of his scream still holds the record for anyone falling off anything 
anywhere ever. He was recalled for one night only to play Dennis, a misogynist 
abattoir manager. “I know what it takes to push a knife into muscle.” “Thank 
you, Dennis,” said Nigel Havers repressively.

With any luck, having made a perfect pig’s ear of the verdict, all the jurors 
left on the last train from Borchester. With Rob’s father, Bruce, who was ever 
on the verge of bursting, Helen’s lesbian lawyer, Anna, who was going through 
some churning turmoil of the heart and, leaving for fresh woods and pastures 
new in Walford, Sean O’Connor, The Archers’ exciting editor. Who realised, when 
he first arrived in the Garden of Eden, that what was needed to liven things up 
was a snake. A nice, big, boa constrictor.

Silence like a poultice comes to heal the blows of sound. Hush! Listen! Can 
you hear the grass growing in Ambridge? The dew falling and the hushed town 
breathing?

The Archers' verdict on Helen Titchener concludes storyline that gripped the UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/11/the-archers-verdict-on-helen-tichener-aired>
Ambridge is a place where nobody needs to shout (unless they back into a bull) 
because this is radio and the minimal inflections of a good actor’s voice tell 
you all you need to know about grief or desire. The constant listener catches 
these tiny hints like catching a fluffy day-old chick. Peggy, the matriarch, 
has had 90 years to practise this subtle shading of the voice and now has a 
whole colour chart of unspoken emotion. Most people live to be 90 in Ambridge 
except Scruff and he had a good innings. Unlike the Ambridge cricket team.

The children of Ambridge are surprisingly well spoken and all have a darkling 
side. There is young George, whose paternity was hotly disputed by the Grundy 
brothers. Ruairi, the local landowner’s love child. Adam, the result of 
Jennifer’s affair with a passing cowman (the passing cowman is a constant motif 
in Ambridge). Phoebe, the child of a summer of love. Everyone seems quite 
relaxed about this. The only downside to this cheerful confusion is that you 
might inadvertently marry your uncle. On this colourful patchwork quilt of 
chaotic children, Helen’s children, Henry and Jack, will hardly be noticed. 
Though bearing in mind the Garden of Eden and Cain and Abel and all that, I 
will be following their lives nervously.

The real casualty of the trial was an innocent bystander. Ian was left 
standing there with all his clothes blown off, naked to the gossips. He is 
married to Adam, whose infidelity was used in court to discredit Ian as a 
character witness. The debris of the detonation seemed to fall about him like 
charred flakes in a bombed building. Questioned, he said quietly he didn’t want 
to talk about it. Now that puts all the shouting in the shade.
 