
My grandmother – now, we’re going back a bit – used to describe pregnancy 
delicately as “being confined”. It’s a phrase that suits Helen very well. Ever 
since she became pregnant, she has been a wraithlike presence, a pale face at 
the window of Blossom Hill Cottage, lank-haired and wearing the charity-shop 
clothes her husband, Rob, prefers, making occasional disconcerting distressed 
forays into an oblivious Ambridge. Wilkie Collins would have spat on his hands 
and whistled.

This sorry situation burst into flames recently when a toad-in-the-hole caught 
fire. Who Torched the Toad escalated into a full-scale fight, with Helen 
showing a flash of spirit, Rob hitting her and five-year-old Henry, entering 
into the spirit of things, shoving a small school friend called Xanthe. Though, 
frankly, I think any child called Xanthe is just asking to be shoved.

It is, as you can see, a madhouse. Rob actually believes his own lies, a 
dizzying phenomenon usually only encountered on a rostrum. Those who confront 
him end up, rather to their surprise, in the wrong, or Poland, or Perth. Or, if 
Helen isn’t careful, a psychiatric ward. Now that’s what I call confinement. 
This is a fine, toe-curling psychological thriller with a ruthlessly long 
gestation period and, queasily, an unborn child in the mix.

Unaware of the black hole in the middle of the village, David and Ruth have 
bought 200 multicoloured cows, a hard-bitten bunch who laugh at the weather, 
while Rex and Toby are buying Welsh hens (nothing much to look at, but 
beautiful voices). All free to wander wherever they want. Freedom is very much 
the buzz word now in Ambridge. Except, of course, in Blossom Hill Cottage.

I must say I am disappointed in Pat, Helen’s mother. She is the only person in 
Ambridge to buy the Guardian, but she obviously doesn’t read it. I feel I’m 
wasting my time here. Helen’s best hope is Kirsty. You remember Kirsty? Last 
seen waiting at the church wreathed in orange blossom, doves and harpists (it 
is possible her wedding plans got a bit out of hand), while Tom, an 
ever-diminishing figure in the distance, legged it to Canada. This sort of 
thing can cause a certain coolness between a couple, but Kirsty and Tom have 
one thing in common. They distrust Rob even more than they distrust each other. 
It’s a bond.

Brainteaser of the month: “Why does Penrith have to be so far away?” (Pip 
Archer)

A month in Ambridge returns on 12 April
 