
The US astronaut Neil Armstrong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/neil-armstrong> secured his place in 
history on 20 July 1969, when, as commander of the Apollo 11 spacecraft, he was 
the first man to set foot on the moon, and made his famous statement: "That's 
one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind." Armstrong, who has died 
aged 82, was accompanied on that epic journey by Edwin "Buzz" Aldrin, the pilot 
of the lunar landing module with the call sign Eagle, and Michael Collins, 
pilot of the command module with the call sign Columbia.

The crew of Apollo 11 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/apollo-11-moon-landing> were not chosen 
for the mission because they were in any way special among the elite group of 
test pilots who comprised the corps of American astronauts: it was simply their 
turn on the flight roster. If an earlier plan had succeeded, the crew of Apollo 
10 would have made the first moon walk in May 1969, but because of delays in 
the development of the lunar module that mission became a full dress rehearsal 
for a lunar landing, all bar a touchdown.

Armstrong cut his teeth as an astronaut in March 1966 as commander of the 
Gemini 8. The mission also involved the first serious space emergency, 
highlighting the dangers of manned space launches when the public were 
beginning to take their seemingly effortless success for granted. The Gemini 8 
mission was designed to perform the first docking in space by astronauts. The 
Soviet Union had already demonstrated automated docking of two unmanned 
vehicles in orbit. Armstrong and his crewmate, David Scott, were to rendezvous 
with a 7,000lb Agena rocket target vehicle.

They found the Agena and docked successfully, but when they tried a 
pre-arranged manoeuvre of the combined spacecraft it went into a spin. 
Armstrong disengaged from the Agena, thinking the problem was there, but the 
tumbling worsened. The Agena steadied but the Gemini capsule kept turning at 
360 degrees a second and was in danger of colliding with the Agena.

The fault was clearly on Gemini. It was discovered later that one of 16 Gemini 
thruster rockets was stuck. As he was unable to stop the spacecraft turning 
with the main thrusters, Armstrong shut them down and brought the Gemini craft 
under control using a second set of 16 thrusters that were intended only to 
control the capsule's re-entry in to the Earth's atmosphere.

Mission Control ordered Armstrong and Scott to cut the flight short and they 
splashed down in a contingency recovery area in the Pacific Ocean. The drama of 
surviving man's first space emergency completely obscured the fact that it was 
on the Gemini 8 mission that the US had overtaken the Soviet Union in space 
technology

Armstrong was born in Wapakoneta, Ohio, and from a young age was fascinated 
with aviation, experimenting with model airplanes and a home-built wind tunnel. 
At 15 he began flying lessons in an Aeronca Champion, and by 16 acquired his 
student pilot's licence. In 1947, he enrolled at Purdue University on a Navy 
scholarship to pursue a degree in aeronautical engineering, but in 1949 the 
Navy called him to active duty in the Korean War. As a navy pilot, he flew 78 
combat missions. He was shot down once and received three medals for his 
military service. In 1952 he returned to his studies and completed his BSc at 
Purdue and an MSc in aerospace engineering at the University of Southern 
California.

In 1955 he became a civilian research pilot at the Lewis research centre of 
the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (Naca), the forerunner of the 
National Aeronautics andSpace <https://www.theguardian.com/science/space> 
Administration (Nasa). Later that year, he transferred to Naca's high-speed 
flight station (today, Nasa's Dryden flight research centre) at Edwards Air 
Force Base in California as an aeronautical research scientist, and then as a 
pilot. He was a test pilot on many pioneering high-speed aircraft, including 
the 4,000mph X-15. He flew over 200 different models of aircraft, including 
jets, rockets, helicopters and gliders.

Armstrong was engaged in both piloting and engineering aspects of the X-15 
programme from its inception. He completed the first flight in the aircraft 
equipped with a new self-adaptive flight control system and made seven flights 
in the rocket plane. In 1962 he was of the nine test pilots chosen by Nasa for 
its second astronaut-training programme.

Four years later Armstrong made his successful recovery of the Gemini 8 
spacecraft in a situation that, if misjudged, could easily have resulted in the 
death of the crew. That achievement was also invaluable in helping Nasa meet 
the target set in May 1961 by President John F Kennedy for the USA to 
establish, as a national goal, a manned landing on the moon by the end of the 
decade.

The choice among competing techniques for achieving a moon landing still 
needed some intensive research and development. The method ultimately employed, 
of a lunar-orbit rendezvous, was influenced strongly by the experience with 
Gemini 8, and there was an element of poetic justice in Armstrong being at the 
helm again for the first manned lunar landing attempt.

On 16 July 1969, Apollo 11 blasted off for the moon. Four days later, at 
4.18pm EDT (Eastern Daylight Time), the Eagle lunar lander was guided to land 
on a plain near the southwesten edge of the Sea of Tranquility. At 10.56pm 
Armstrong stepped off the ladder of the Apollo 11 lunar module and became the 
first human being to set foot on the moon. Twenty minutes later Buzz Aldrin 
joined him for two hours of ceremonies and moon-rock collecting. They unveiled 
a plaque and read the text to a worldwide TV audience, "Here men from the 
planet earth first set foot on the moon July 1969 AD. We came in peace for all 
mankind."

After raising the American flag and talking to President Nixon by 
radiotelephone, the two astronauts took numerous photographs, carried out the 
lunar surface experiments assigned to the mission and collected 22kg of samples 
of lunar soil and rocks. All the astronauts' lunar activities were televised in 
black-and-white. Meanwhile, Collins continued orbiting the moon alone in the 
Columbia command module. Armstrong and Aldrin re-entered the lunar module and 
closed the hatch at 1.11am on 21 July. The Eagle took off from the moon at 
1.54pm, having spent 21 hours 36 minutes on the lunar surface. It docked with 
Columbia at 5.35pm.

After splashdown in the Pacific on 24 July, decontamination procedures began. 
The astronauts were carried by helicopter to the recovery ship, USS Hornet, 
where they entered a mobile quarantine facility to begin a period of 
observation under strict quarantine conditions. The command module was 
recovered and also removed to the quarantine facility, and the rock samples and 
film were flown to Houston.

Following the moon landing and the subsequent world tours by the crew of 
Apollo 11, Armstrong became deputy associate administrator for aeronautics, 
Nasa headquarters office of advanced research and technology from 1969 to 1971, 
when he resigned. For the next eight years he was professor of aerospace 
engineering at the University of Cincinnati. Numerous industrial appointments 
followed, including New York's AIL Systems, where he was chairman from 1981 
until 2001. In 1979 he was chairman of the board of Ohio's Cardwell 
International; from 1982 to 1992 chairman of Computing Technologies for 
Aviation, in Virginia.

In 1985-86 he served on the National Commission on Space, a presidential 
committee to develop goals for a national space programme into the 21st 
century; and was also vice-chairman of the committee investigating the Space 
Shuttle Challenger disaster in 1986. During the early 1990s he presented an 
aviation documentary series for television entitled First Flights. Earlier this 
year he spoke at an event to mark the 50th anniversary of the orbiting of the 
Earth by the first American to do so, John Glenn.

Armstrong is survived by his second wife, Carol, and two sons from his first 
marriage, which ended in divorce.

• Neil Alden Armstrong, astronaut, born 5 August 1930; died 25 August 2012

• Pearce Wright died in 2005
 