
Dudley Schuler is a childhood friend of Neil Armstrong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/neil-armstrong> from Ohio, USA.

Neil was one of my very best friends. We first met when I was 12 or 13. I had 
moved to Wapakoneta, Ohio, a year or two earlier and Neil moved there the 
following year. We met in the boy scouts, and because we were the new fellas we 
got to be well-acquainted and became good friends. We were almost identically 
the same age – his birthday was 5 August and mine was 27 September.

He was a studious boy – they moved him up a grade because he was very eager to 
learn – but we had a lot of fun and laughs together. Already at that age, he 
was interested in flying. He'd build model aeroplanes and had all different 
kinds hanging from the ceiling of his bedroom. They'd have a rubber band 
attached to the propeller so you could wind them up and they would fly. If one 
didn't turn out too well, we would light the tail on fire and let it fly out 
the window and watch it crash and burn.

Neil got himself a job at one of the drugstores downtown, and with the money 
he made he'd ride his bicycle out to our makeshift local airport and take 
flying lessons from a local pilot. He got his flying licence before he was 16 
and eligible to drive. Most of us really weren't aware that he was doing it. He 
was a very private person.

In his senior year at high school, we went to the prom. His father allowed him 
to have the car for the night and after the prom was over we got in the car 
with our dates and started to drive. Coming home at about four in the morning, 
Neil dozed off and drifted off the road into a ditch. A farmer with a pick-up 
truck had to come and pull us out, but the next morning Neil's dad saw the 
scratches all along the whole side of the automobile. We promised that we would 
never tell anyone what happened, and none of us ever did until we had the 
homecoming after the moon flight and Neil's date from the prom finally told the 
story. As time went on we could tell that he was destined for something 
important, but we had no idea what. I became a florist and opened my own shop 
in Wapakoneta, and Neil became an aeronautical engineer. He flew from aircraft 
carriers in the Korean war, and then later he served as a test pilot. When he 
came home, he would call ahead and then fly over the house so his folks knew to 
go and collect him from the airport.

When I found out he was going to the moon, I immediately wrote him a letter 
congratulating him and wishing him the best. I always felt that Neil was the 
obvious person to be chosen as the commander because he was such a cool-headed 
person. In situations of tension, he was always cool and in control.

During those eight days, the whole community was really tense and anxious that 
everything went well. The church held a continuous prayer vigil and at home we 
had two televisions, one on top of the other, in case one of them went out and 
we missed something. Our whole family sat watching. We were all in tears of joy 
when they touched down on the moon. It was a wonderful moment, but the tension 
didn't stop until they landed in the ocean and were picked up.

A few weeks after the flight, we had the big homecoming for Neil. Afterwards, 
he and his wife at that time, Jan, came over to our house accompanied by two 
nice young fellas from national security. We sat and chatted and then the Miss 
America pageant came on and we all watched it in the family room with our shoes 
off. We asked him a few questions about going to the moon and he said a few 
things, but even with close friends he was reluctant about discussing it. He 
just thought of it as his job and didn't feel that he was deserving of all the 
accolades. He did mention that the only thing anybody was concerned about 
during the flight was the fact that the ship and everything on it had been 
manufactured by the lowest bidder. That was the kind of dry sense of humour 
Neil had.

Later, he moved close to Cincinnati, which is about 100 miles south of here, 
to teach aeronautical engineering at the university. He lived on a farm with 
his wife and they were very private. He would come here once in a while for a 
dinner party or a class reunion, but mostly we stayed in touch by email.

We were in Tennessee when we heard on the news that Neil had passed away. Even 
though we'd just arrived, we turned around and got in the car and came back 
home. We felt we needed to be there with the people who knew him. A few days 
later the community had a memorial service in his honour. His family had said, 
if you want to honour Neil, just wait until there's a full moon in the sky and 
look up and give him a wink. And that's just what we did. The sun went down and 
the moon came up and it was one of the most beautiful moons we'd ever seen. At 
the end of the service everybody looked up at the moon and gave it a wink.

Read the Guardian obituary here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/aug/25/neil-armstrong>
 