
The first arrival of earthly life on another celestial body ranks as an 
epochal event not only for our generation, but in the history of our planet.
Neil Armstrong <https://www.theguardian.com/science/neil-armstrong> was at the 
cusp of the Apollo programme. This was a collective technological effort of 
epic scale, but his is the one name sure to be remembered centuries hence.

Armstrong spent years as a test pilot, but he didn't seem a daredevil; indeed 
his demeanour more resembled a stolid civilian airline captain. He described 
himself as a "nerdy engineer", and it was as a professor of engineering that he 
quietly spent his later life.

Apollo 11 <https://www.theguardian.com/science/apollo-11-moon-landing> landed 
on the moon only twelve years after the launch of Sputnik, and only 66 years 
after the Wright brothers' first flight. Had the pace been sustained there 
would by now be human footprints on Mars. But the moon race was an end in 
itself, driven by the urge to beat the Russians; there was no motive to sustain 
the huge expenditure.

The images of Earth's delicate biosphere, contrasting with the sterile 
moonscape where the astronauts left their footsteps, have become iconic for 
environmentalists: these may indeed be the Apollo programme's most enduring 
legacy.

It is now 40 years since Harrison Schmidt and Eugene Cernan, the last men on 
the moon, returned to Earth. To the young, this is all ancient history. They 
learn that America landed men on the moon just as they learn that the Egyptians 
built the pyramids, but the motivations seem almost as bizarre in the one case 
as in the other; the outdated gadgetry and "right stuff" values portrayed in 
films and news clips of the period seem as antiqated as those of a traditional 
Western. Manned spaceflight has lost its glamour – understandably so, because 
it hardly seems inspiring, 40 years after Apollo, for astronauts merely to 
circle the Earth in the space shuttle and the InternationalSpace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/space> Station.

We depend on space technology for communications, weather forecasting, 
mapping, position-finding and so forth quite apart from the science it has 
given us. But this doesn't need astronauts.

Closeups of the Martian surface, and of Jupiter, Saturn and their moons, have 
beamed back pictures of varied and distinctive worlds. In the coming decades, 
the entire solar system will be explored by flotillas of unmanned craft. 
Indeed, it is realistic to expect robotic fabricators, building large 
structures, or perhaps mining rare materials from asteroids.

But will people venture back to the moon, and beyond? The need weakens with 
each advance in robots and miniaturisation. But deep space still beckons as a 
long-range adventure for – at least a few – humans.

Perhaps the Chinese will embark on a prestigious space spectacular. For this, 
a return to the moon would not be enough. To repeat Neil Armstrong's feat, 50 
years later, would hardly proclaim thatChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> had achieved parity with the US. They 
would surely aim to trump Apollo by heading for Mars.

But would humans on Mars <https://www.theguardian.com/science/mars> serve a 
purpose beyond mere prestige? There's no denying that an observant geologist 
might make startling discoveries that Nasa's recently-landed Curiosity rover 
would overlook. But the current cost gap between manned and unmanned missions 
is huge.

This is partly because Nasa <https://www.theguardian.com/science/nasa> has 
become constrained by public and political opinion to be too risk-averse. The 
space shuttle's two failures in its 135 launches were national traumas in the 
US, though that is a risk-level that astronauts would willingly accept.

Indeed Neil Armstrong, who landed the tiny Eagle module with the aid of no 
more computer power than we have in a washing machine today, rated his odds of 
a safe touchdown as no better than 50/50. And that wasn't the scariest risk: 
the rockets that blasted them off on the return trip could have failed. Indeed, 
staff of the president, Richard Nixon, had prepared an alternative speech for 
him to give if Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin had been stranded and perished on the 
moon.

Future expeditions to the moon and beyond will only be politically and 
financially viable if they are cut-price ventures, spearheaded by individuals 
with the right stuff of the Apollo astronauts, prepared to accept high risks – 
perhaps even "one-way tickets". They may be privately-funded adventurers. The 
SpaceX company led by the entrepreneur Elon Musk, has successfully sent a 
payload into orbit and docked with the International Space Station.

It is foolish to claim, as some do, that emigration into space offers a 
long-term escape from Earth's problems. Nowhere in our solar system offers an 
environment even as clement as the Antarctic or the top of Everest. 
Nonetheless, a century or two from now, small groups of intrepid adventurers 
may be living independent from the Earth. Whatever ethical constraints we 
impose here on the ground, we should surely wish such pioneers good luck in 
genetically modifying their progeny to adapt to alien environments: the 
post-human era would then begin. Neil Armstrong, the quiet hero, would then 
indeed have prefigured "one giant leap for mankind".

Sir Martin Rees is the astronomer royal
 