
Neil Armstrong, the first man to walk on the moon, has died aged 82. The 
former US astronaut, who will go down in history as themost famous pioneer of 
space exploration 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/video/2012/aug/26/neil-armstrong-man-moon-dies-video>
, passed away as the result of heart complications following surgery.

As commander of the Apollo 11 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/apollo-11-moon-landing> mission, he became 
the first person to set foot on the moon, on 20 July 1969, fulfilling the 
longheld dream of the United States to get there before the Soviet Union. His 
first words as he stepped on to the surface – "That's one small step for man, 
one giant leap for mankind" – instantly became one of the most recognisable 
phrases ever uttered.

Armstrong underwent heart bypass surgery earlier this month, just two days 
after his birthday on 5 August, to relieve blocked arteries.

His family released a statement on Saturday describing him as a "reluctant 
American hero who always believed he was just doing his job".

It read: "We are heartbroken to share the news that Neil Armstrong has passed 
away following complications resulting from cardiovascular procedures. Neil was 
our loving husband, father, grandfather, brother and friend.Neil Armstrong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/neil-armstrong> was also a reluctant 
American hero who always believed he was just doing his job. He served his 
nation proudly as a Navy fighter pilot, test pilot, and astronaut.

"While we mourn the loss of a very good man we also celebrate his remarkable 
life and hope that it serves as an example to young people around the world to 
work hard to make their dreams come true, to be willing to explore and push the 
limits, and to selflessly serve a cause greater than themselves."

Other tributes have come flooding in for the astronaut as news of his death 
spread across the world. US president Barack Obama hailed Armstrong as one of 
America's greatest heroes. In a statement issued by the White House, he said 
the crew of Apollo 11 carried with them the aspirations of an entire nation 
when they set out for the moon in 1969. He later tweeted: "Neil Armstrong was a 
hero not just of his time, but of all time. Thank you, Neil, for showing us the 
power of one small step."

Former astronaut Tom Jones, who completed four space shuttle flights between 
1990 and 2001, said: "Mr Armstrong was one of the astronauts that was my hero 
when I was growing up and I watched his initial landing on the moon in 1969 
with incredible interest. He really was an inspiration to an entire generation 
of people." The US space agency tweeted: "Nasa offers its condolences on 
today's passing of Neil Armstrong, former test pilot, astronaut & the 1st man 
on the moon. Neil was 82."

Armstrong grew up in Ohio with a keen interest in flight and earned his 
pilot's certificate when he was just 15. After flying combat missions during 
the Korean war, he became a test pilot and joined Nasa's astronaut programme in 
1962.

Armstrong was joined on his moon landing by Buzz Aldrin and the pair spent 
nearly three hours walking on the lunar surface, collecting samples, conducting 
experiments and taking photographs. Last night Aldrin called Armstrong "a true 
American hero and the best pilot I ever knew". The Apollo 11 mission turned out 
to be Armstrong's last space flight. The following year he was appointed to a 
desk job at Nasa, later becoming a lecturer in engineering at Cincinnati 
University.

In 1961 President Kennedy had declared before the United States Congress that 
the US would have a man on the moon before the turn of the decade and the moon 
walk marked America's victory in the cold war space race. An estimated 600 
million people – a fifth of the world's population – watched and listened to 
the moon landing, the largest audience for any single event in history.
 