
It was not an expected setting in which Neil Armstrong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/neil-armstrong> found himself when giving 
his final interview earlier this year. But perhaps that was appropriate, given 
his achievements. In May, the Certified Practicing Accountants of Australia 
secured almost an hour of the former astronaut's time to discuss his 1969 
expedition to the moon.

Chief executive Alex Malley masterminded the scoop by appealing to Armstrong's 
family background – his father Stephen worked as an auditor for the Ohio state 
government.

Armstrong, who rarely gave interviews, regaled his audience with news of how 
he thoughtApollo 11 <https://www.theguardian.com/science/apollo-11-moon-landing>
, which carried him, Buzz Aldrin and Michael Collins to the moon, only had a 
"50-50 chance" of landing safely on its surface and a 90% chance of returning 
home.

He said it was "sad" that the current US government's ambitions for Nasa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/nasa> were so reduced compared with the 
achievements of the 1960s.

"Nasa has been one of the most successful public investments in motivating 
students to do well and achieve all they can achieve," said Armstrong. "It's 
sad that we are turning the programme in a direction where it will reduce the 
amount of motivation and stimulation it provides to young people."

He said the short-term nature of decision-making was doing a disservice to the 
agency, adding: "I'm substantially concerned about the policy directions of the 
space agency. We have a situation in the US where the White House and Congress 
are at odds over what the future direction should be. They're sort of playing a 
game and Nasa is the shuttlecock that they're hitting back and forth."

Armstrong had opened up about his parents, his boyhood fascination with flight 
and his experiences of flying fighter planes in the Korean war.

He also expressed a sense of fate about his work as a test pilot and 
astronaut, refusing to worry about future tasks because he thought something 
would go wrong first and he'd be otherwise engaged firing the ejection seat or 
scrambling to repair a valve.

As the launch day approached, Armstrong said preparations were on schedule. "A 
month before the launch of Apollo 11, we decided that we were confident enough 
we could try and attempt … a descent to the surface."

Armstrong remembered the moment when he got the call to ask him if the rest of 
the crew of Apollo 11 were ready to land on the moon.

"The bosses asked, 'Do you think you and your guys are ready?' I said it'd be 
nice to have another month, but we're in a race here and we had to take the 
opportunity when we had it. I had to say we are ready, we are ready to go."

He described the crew's harrowing 12-minute descent to the moon, when he 
realised that the Eagle lunar module's auto-pilot was preparing to land the 
crew on the slope of a huge moon crater. "The computer showed us where it 
intended to land, and it was a very bad location, on the side of a large crater 
about 100-150m in diameter with very steep slopes covered with very large 
boulders – not a good place to land at all," he said.

Armstrong took over the craft manually and managed to land it like a 
helicopter in a smoother area to the west with just 20 seconds of fuel left.

As for "that's one small step for [a] man, one giant leap for mankind," 
Armstrong says he didn't think of those words until after they'd landed safely.

Of his time on the moon's surface, he said: "It was special and memorable but 
it was only instantaneous because there was work to do. We weren't there to 
meditate. We were there to get things done. So we got on with it."

Armstrong even had time to respond to the conspiracy theorists' favourite 
question: Was the moon landing faked?

"People love conspiracy theories," he replied. "I mean, they are very 
attractive. But it was never a concern to me because I know one day, somebody 
is going to go fly back up there and pick up that camera I left."
 