
When the astronauts and engineers of the Apollo programme were in the frenzy 
of their moonshot in the 1960s, it is hard to believe that they knew they were 
engaged in a one-off exercise.The moon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/moon> landings should have been the start 
of an epic age of space travel, moon bases and trips to Mars. But Nasa somehow 
lost its way after the pinnacle of Apollo, its ambition hobbled by drastic 
funding cuts and a muddled sense of identity over the past four decades.

The first decade of the 21st century, however, has brought with it a new space 
race: a mixture of private companies battling to make space travel cheaper and 
a series of big national space programmes in the east that could finally propel 
explorers to build on the legacy of Neil Armstrong's first step on the moon in 
1969.

Since the crew of Apollo 17 came back from the moon in December 1972, humans 
have not left low Earth orbit. More than 450 men and women have been into space 
since Apollo, but all of them have stayed within a few hundred miles of the 
Earth's surface. "I don't think the Apollo astronauts realised they were doing 
something that would stand alone for the next four or five decades," said the 
astronomer and author Stuart Clark.

A flurry of robotic probes was sent out by Nasa to all parts of the solar 
system in the decades after the Apollo programme – the Mariners, Pioneers and 
Voyagers were the first step in realising Apollo's wider legacy. They would 
survey the planets, space enthusiasts believed, while the space shuttle of the 
1980s would help to build, in Earth orbit, the rockets and space stations 
needed to send humans to new places.

One problem was that Apollo was crushingly expensive and no government could 
spend that amount of money over the long term. At its height in the 1960s, 
Nasa's budget took up 3.45% of US federal government spending. After 1975, the 
budget dropped below 1% of federal spending and in the past decade it has 
fallen further to around 0.5%.

The Apollo missions had developed a culture inside Nasa that could 
relentlessly focus on a single goal in a specified time limit, but that culture 
was not quite right for carrying out a long-term programme of exploring the 
solar system.

The space shuttle programme, though successful as an engineering exercise, did 
little for Nasa's image in Congress. Politicians had been promised by Nasa 
chiefs that the reusable space plane would fly 50 times a year and drastically 
reduce the costs of a space mission to millions, rather than billions, of 
dollars.

"They believed they could make low Earth orbit commercially sustainable 
because of the massive launch rate of shuttles but, of course, it never 
achieved it," said Kevin Fong, an expert in space medicine at University 
College London. The shuttle was an engineering success but the commercial 
promises made by Nasa chiefs were orders of magnitude out of line with what the 
programme eventually delivered.

There was a brief flicker of ambition in 2004 when the then president, George 
Bush, called on Nasa for a return to the moon followed by Mars expeditions. The 
space agency's response was the Constellation programme, composed of a new 
exploration vehicle called Orion, shaped like the Apollo space capsules last 
used in 1972 but three times larger, which could replace the space shuttle. Two 
new rockets, known as Ares I and Ares V, would blast the astronauts and 
equipment separately into space. Plans followed for a permanent moon base and 
for scientific experiments to measure cosmic rays, hunt for exotic subatomic 
particles in space and look for asteroids on a collision course with Earth.

But Bush's challenge was never met with the increase in funding for Nasa 
needed to develop the required technology. In 2010, Barack Obama cancelled 
Constellation's funding. With the retirement of the space shuttle in 2010, the 
lack of priority for human spaceflight has left Nasa in the doldrums.

But not all hope is lost for would-be space adventurers. In May, the PayPal 
entrepreneur Elon Musk's company, SpaceX, made history when his Dragon craft 
carried out a successful mission to dock with the InternationalSpace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/space> Station.

Clark said that this rejuvenation of the space programme – led by private 
companies – rested on learning from many of the mistakes of Nasa's wilderness 
years. "It's better to use a cheap launch vehicle to get the equipment into 
space and then put humans up separately," said Clark. "That's the way we're 
going now. Perhaps the space shuttle tried to be all things to all people and 
ended up being the jack of all trades and master of none."

Nasa's collaborations with private companies might lack the national prestige 
of the big-ticket space adventures. And there is the spectre of commercialism 
entering the pure idealism of space travel, but Clark said it was an exciting 
time. "It's possibly the opening of the door we need to realise the dreams of 
Apollo."

Nasa and its collaborators are not the only player in the future of space. The 
same year that Bush challenged Nasa with the 21st-century moonshot, Yang Liwei 
became China's first astronaut. The country wants to build its own space 
station and land robots and rovers on the Moon – and by 2020 there is a good 
chance it could send a person there too. The former Nasa administrator Mike 
Griffin has said that he believed China had the capability to get to the moon 
and he wouldn't be surprised if the next person to walk on the moon was Chinese.

India has also sent a probe to the moon and is investing large amounts – 
reportedly more than £500m a year – on its space ambitions, which include human 
spaceflight.

This year, in what would turn out to be his last public interview, Armstrong 
lamented the wasted years since the end of the Apollo programme. "Nasa has been 
one of the most successful public investments in motivating students to do well 
and achieve all they can achieve," he said. "It's sad that we are turning the 
programme in a direction where it will reduce the amount of motivation and 
stimulation it provides to young people."

He said he was concerned about Nasa's policy direction, which was was 
uncertain because of tensions between the White House and Congress. "They're 
playing a game and Nasa is the shuttlecock they're hitting back and forth as 
both sides try to get Nasa on the proper path."

In 2010, Armstrong wrote to NPR's science correspondent, Robert Krulwich, and 
spoke of the need for humans to return to the moon. "Some question why 
Americans should return to the moon. After all,' they say, 'we have already 
been there.' I find that mystifying. It would be as if 16th-century monarchs 
proclaimed that 'we need not go to the New World, we have already been there.' 
Or as if President Thomas Jefferson announced in 1803 that Americans 'need not 
go west of the Mississippi, the Lewis and Clark expedition has already been 
there.' Americans have visited and examined six locations on Luna, varying in 
size from a suburban lot to a small township. That leaves more than 14m square 
miles yet to explore."
 