
Hometown: Vancouver.

The lineup: Tommy Genesis (vocals, music). 

The background: Before we even get to the music, we lov Tommy Genesis. For 
starters, what a great name that is. It sounds like Domo Genesis of Odd Future, 
our favourite group of the decade. It completely fails to place the musician in 
question sexually or otherwise, and it has biblical overtones with intimations 
of religious provocation; of someone keen to challenge assumptions. We love her 
manga cute/Harajuku couture 
<http://dazedimg.dazedgroup.netdna-cdn.com/612/azure/dazed-prod/1150/6/1156070.jpg>
, or at least its contrast with her music which so graphically alludes to sex 
and is full of strident self-assertions (“I never met a muthafucker that I 
need”). Then there’s the sound, which is brittle, harsh and full of cold, 
futuristic sonics seemingly informed by witch house, postpunk DIY electronica 
and the chilly clatter of ATL trap. Perhaps there’s something in the water 
because Genesis, although from Vancouver, records forAwful Records 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/06/awful-records-atlanta-hip-hop>, 
the Atlantan label renowned for its idiosyncratic approach in challenging the 
definition of hip hop.

It almost comes as a surprise to realise, beyond the conceptualising, that 
she’s a flesh and blood person, albeit one with an intriguing backstory. Her 
dad is from a religious/traditional family in India, and her mum is a “very 
liberal-minded” Scandinavian, which might explain the interrogative nature of 
her beliefs. She describes herself variously as a “fetish rapper” and “a 
playful demon angel baby”, justifying her choice of American Apparel thus: “I 
like to wear plaid skirts because it’s like walking around with a sign that 
says, ‘Fuck you I’m young’, and I like to wear crop tops because they’re really 
comfortable but also slightly provocative. I like combat boots because they 
make me feel powerful and masculine. I like to look like I could have just 
walked out of an anime.” She used to be one half of an indie band called Moan 
and studied gender politics, film and sculpture at college. She has run art 
galleries in Vancouver and done performance art and poetry readings. If this 
makes her sound dilettantish, good: it means she won’t be pinned down and fully 
intends to “[traverse] media as frequently as her own moods”, as Dazed Digital 
put it. She’s a very internet-age artist. “The internet is my heritage,” she 
says. “My cultural lens is a blurry, undefined, intimate one.” Despite being 
signed to Awful, she reminds us of the Odd Future members at the peak of their 
fluid online polymathy before they got bogged down in record company politics 
and release dates. Polymorphously perverse, her songs are “about pussy and 
darkness ... pain, sex, relationships, drugs, boredom and revolt” and are 
either self-produced or produced by Awful’s father, KeithCharles Spacebar, 
GODMODEGAME666 and others. There is one mixtape out there – World Vision – with 
a sequel ready for release and a third on its way. If you like machine-hard 
futuristic production and glassy, zomboid vocals, you’ll love tracks such as 
Hate Demon. Shepherd was written “about a girl who broke my heart” and serves 
as a protean anthem, while Angelina – nominally about la Jolie – veers between 
the abstract and psychotic with the demented glee of early Tyler, the Creator 
(“She tell me he gon’ flip me like he flip his cousins back South / But she 
don’t know that I went from cunt to dick early this month”). Bump (about 
suburban drug culture) is her minimalist apotheosis, as sparse and terse as 
Ariana Grande in hell remixed by 1986 Mantronix. Recently, Genesis told Complex 
magazine she wanted her work to “be something, not be about something”. “In art 
theory, there’s a concept called phenomenology,” she elaborated. “To me, it’s 
when you make art that can operate on its own. It’s not something you have to 
sit there and explain in a critique, but something the viewer can discover. I 
try to apply this concept to my methodology of music-making. I don’t just want 
to reference what’s already been made, I want to make something new.” We’re 
struggling to think of firm antecedents for this music, or too many 
contemporary reference points, so we’d have to declare ... job done.

The buzz: “Meet the internet’s most rebellious underground rap queen.” 
<http://www.dazeddigital.com/music/article/29159/1/meet-the-internet-s-most-rebellious-underground-rap-queen>

The truth: If Ariana Grande signed to Awful … 

Most likely to: Be a sacrificial lamb.

Least likely to: Follow the flock. 

What to buy: World Vision 2 will be released by Awful. 

File next to: Angel Haze, Kitty Pryde, Future, SpaceGhostPurrp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/apr/13/new-band-spaceghostpurrp>. 

Links: soundcloud.com/tommygenesis <https://soundcloud.com/tommygenesis> 

Ones to watch: Ta’East, River Tiber, The Hunna, Fifi Rong, In Letter Form. 
 