
Will the recently elected leader of the Social Democratic and Labour party 
become Northern Ireland's new Dr No? Specifically, will the South Belfast MP 
and family doctor say no to the SDLP's continued presence inside the five-party 
power-sharing coalition at Stormont?

This is the key question now facing Alasdair McDonnell and his embattled 
troops as they seek to carve out a survival strategy over the next few months: 
to be inside the tent or out; to offer the electorate something different other 
than crowing about the party's past record of promoting non-violent nationalism 
and historic compromise with unionism.

Over the last decade the party founded out of the civil rights movement by the 
likes of Gerry Fitt and John Hume has declined as a force within nationalism.
Sinn Féin <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein>, having allowed the 
IRA to wither away and memories of the Troubles to fade, has stolen the party's 
clothes in a dramatic act of political cross-dressing.

Gerry Adams and his followers have established themselves as the number one 
nationalist party in Northern Ireland; a position following the last assembly 
elections that looks unassailable.

Sinn Féin is today seen as the key component in the power-sharing arrangement 
with the Democratic Unionist party. The republican party now talks the 
inclusive language theSDLP <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sdlp> spouted 
for decades through the Troubles regarding unionists.

They even invite Presbyterian ministers these days to address Sinn Féin 
delegates when they used to cheer to the rafters of Dublin's Mansion House 
masked men reading out bellicose statements from the IRA army council not so 
long ago. In this role reversal the SDLP has looked increasingly old and 
irrelevant.

As for McDonnell, he may lack certain airs and graces but at least he is up 
for a fight. Having once been the team doctor of the Antrim Hurling team he 
understands the need to get in hard and dirty, and to try to score some points 
by any means necessary.

He knew this in the rough and tumble of hurling, the world's fastest sport 
played on grass. Instinctively he realises this too in that other sport of 
blood and guts called politics.

Yet McDonnell cannot hope to score victories over his opponents while his 
party remains part of the power-sharing executive administratingNorthern Ireland
 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>.

During the leadership contest one of his rivals, the very able minister Alex 
Attwood, suggested that perhaps it was time for the SDLP to leave the devolved 
government and become the main opposition force in the parliament. It is an 
idea McDonnell should return to and soon.

At present the size of the opposition in the assembly is miniscule and 
divided. It comprises just three, including the leader of the anti-power 
sharing Traditional Unionist Voice, Jim Allister, and the Green party's sole 
representative, Steven Agnew.

Every major political party is in government, which many people already 
disillusioned with politics regard as a cynical carve-up on sectarian-cantonal 
lines.

The SDLP will probably not catch up with Sinn Féin again in terms of the race 
to become the leading force of northern nationalism. That contest has been run. 
But the party of Fitt, Hume, Mallon and McDonnell can create a new space for 
itself as the one that holds the administration to account, that offers people 
of all creeds an alternative, that turns the Stormont parliament into a truly 
democratic arena with a large and viable opposition bloc.

By saying no to the current arrangement, the SDLP may even win some new 
supporters among the mass of disaffected out there in Northern Ireland who are 
repelled from the ballot box at election time because there is no alternative 
to vote for.

Because that old anarchist adage urging people not to vote because only the 
government (always the same government) gets in currently rings true in 
post-agreement Northern Ireland.
 