


Shortly before kick-off Papiss Cissé, a devout Muslim, was spotted praying. 
Just as it seemed his appeal for a goal would go unanswered, the Senegal 
striker met Sylvain Marveaux's fabulous right-wing cross and headedNewcastle 
United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited> into the 
quarter-finals.

Three minutes of stoppage time had passed and, as Cissé sank to his knees to 
thank Allah, the ground erupted in celebration as Guus Hiddink shook his head. 
Despite playing with 10 men for much of the second half following Mehdi 
Carcela-González's idiotic dismissal for a second bookable offence, Hiddink's
Anzhi Makhachkala <https://www.theguardian.com/football/anzhi-makhachkala> had 
looked marginally the more likely team to progress. They might have done so had 
Mbark Boussoufa's 88th-minute free-kick not rebounded out off the underside of 
Rob Elliot's bar.

"If the result had been decided by a jury we would have won unanimously," said 
Hiddink. "We could have killed the game; we missed three or four open chances. 
Newcastle struggled to create chances against us but they are strong, they must 
be in the Premier League's top five next season." Pardew did not demur. "That 
was an outstanding team I had out there," said Newcastle's manager, who 
required another fine defensive performance from Steven Taylor to keep the 
Russians at bay. "Our resilience saw us through and Papiss was calm at the 
crucial moment. Steven Taylor was terrific too. He was outstanding.

"I honestly believe we've put one of the best teams in this competition out. 
We've beaten Anzhi, albeit with a slight bit of good luck, and we can go on and 
win theEuropa League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> 
now."

Highly technical and "very modern" as Hiddink puts it, Anzhi were strong in 
every position, with Samuel Eto'o, especially, not to be underestimated in 
attack.

Sure enough, it was not long before Andrei Eschenko advanced, unchecked from 
right-back before releasing Hiddink's star striker, only for Eto'o to drag his 
low, angled shot narrowly wide.

Not to be outdone, Marveaux cut inside from the right, dodging Jucilei, the 
Russian team's influential holding midfielder, and Yuri Zhirkov – one of three 
former Chelsea players in the Russian starting XI – before unleashing a 
left-foot shot that flew fractionally wide.

When Eto'o and Lassana Diarra played a threatening one-two, Newcastle lived 
dangerously but Taylor intercepted. "Taylor for England," sang the Gallowgate 
End on the day he could count himself unfortunate not to be included in Roy 
Hodgson's latest England squad.

Taylor, who seemed to be getting in the way of almost every Anzhi attack, came 
to the rescue again after Cheik Tioté squandered possession, blocking Diarra's 
shot as the game swung from end to end.

With Newcastle struggling to retain possession, Yohan Cabaye was becoming 
over-stretched in the epicentre of Newcastle's midfield and Pardew's heart must 
have sunk when his key player clutched his groin. Off hobbled Cabaye to be 
replaced by Jonas Gutierrez.

Shortly afterwards Mapou Yanga-Mbiwa inexplicably gave the ball away in his 
own area and Hiddink threw his head in his hands after Odil Ahmedov missed the 
easiest of chances to confirm Anzhi's slight first half superiority.

At the other end, Taylor, playing like a man intent on sending Hodgson a 
message, headed narrowly over from Marveaux's delivery but Pardew was clearly 
concerned at his team's inability to keep the ball and control the tempo. For 
once even Moussa Sissoko struggled to make his presence felt. So, too, did 
Tiote.

Although Anzhi's pace continued to present a counter-attacking threat, they 
were up against it after Carcela-González's sending-off for an unnecessary, 
bookable foul on Massaido Haidra committed minutes after he received his first 
yellow card for pulling Tioté back.

"Stupid," said Hiddink, who looked relieved when Zhirkov was subsequently 
shown a yellow card rather than red for a high challenge on Marveaux. "We 
played well but we have only ourselves to blame," he added.
 