
During winters in Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>, Castlederg consistently 
produces record temperatures well below zero. At present even in this heatwave 
summer the County Tyrone border town has become a very cold place. In terms of 
Protestants and Catholics, unionists and nationalists, relations are, to say 
the least, frosty.

If anyone wants to gauge the atmosphere between the two communities in the 
north of Ireland, despite relative peace and power sharing, they should come to 
Castlederg and check the social mercury levels. The reason they have dropped so 
far is a planned parade to commemorate two IRA men who blew themselves up 
transporting a bomb into the town almost 40 years ago.

Castlederg has a nationalist majority but a large Protestant-unionist 
majority, and the latter are outraged over Sinn Fein's decision to hold a 
“Tyrone Volunteer Day” in the town on 11 August. Unionist politicians who sit 
in the Stormont assembly and share power with Sinn Fein point out that 38 
people were murdered in the Castlederg area during the Troubles, the majority 
of them from the unionist community, mostly members or part time members of the 
security forces. They accuse the mainstream republicans of staging a grossly 
insensitive march which they say denigrates and insults the memories of those 
murdered in the conflict by the IRA.

In response to unionist protests and up to 500 emails objecting to the rally, 
the Parades Commission has imposed restrictions on the march, although it will 
still go ahead. To placate unionist anger, Sinn Fein offered to re-route their 
parade away from the town's war memorial and a local Methodist church out of 
which many of the IRA's local victims were buried during the Troubles. The body 
that adjudicates on controversial marches, be they nationalist-republican or 
unionist-loyalist, does not have the power to completely ban the parade and 
thus it will go ahead next weekend.

As was seen earlier this year in the loyalist protests over the union flag 
restriction by Belfast City Hall and latterly the four days of savage street 
violence connected to a re-routed Orange Order march in north Belfast, the 
issues of parades, demonstrations and commemorations continues to expose the 
sectarian faultlines lying underneath the surface of Northern Irish society.

The furore surrounding the Castlederg march produced a sideshow of 
sectarianism on the Internet after Democratic Unionist councillor in Belfast 
and former deputy lord mayor of the city Ruth Patterson posted offensive 
remarks about the Sinn Fein march, which nationalists claimed were an 
incitement to violence. She later apologised for making the comments although 
the damage was done and the atmosphere further poisoned in the run-up to next 
weekend.

What the Castlederg controversy tells us is that in the quest for a proper 
post-conflict truth and reconciliation process even history is a loaded gun. 
While Sinn Fein fetes the two bombers as heroes who deserve like everyone else 
in the Troubles to be remembered, unionists of all hues regard them as would-be 
murderers and enemies of their besieged border community. They cannot agree on 
historical truth let alone reach any form of reconciliation, which appears to 
doom any chance of creating a South African-style open, independent and frank 
examination of what went on here over the last 40 years.

It is worth noting too that 48 hours before the “Tyrone Volunteer Day”, 
another republican march will take place back in Belfast. This is one has been 
organised by dissident republicans and will take a long, circuitous route from 
the nationalist Ardoyne district in the north of the city, into the city centre 
(a possible new flashpoint-clash zone with loyalists) and then up onto the 
Falls Road in the west. It has ostensibly been organised to commemorate the 
anniversary of the introduction of internment without trial in 1971 as well as 
highlighting the case of republican dissident prisoners currently held in jails 
here and abroad. However, the rally is also a direct challenge to Sinn Fein's 
near hegemony in nationalist communities in Northern Ireland. The parade on 9 
August will be a test of the dissidents' ability to demonstrate they have some 
support after years of being accused by Sinn Fein of being “micro groups”.

Last year the disparate factions of hardline anti-ceasefire republicans held a 
commemoration in County Tyrone to remember fallen IRA members killed by the 
security forces, loyalist terror groups or by their own lethal mistakes. 
Thousands turned up including many families of the IRA's notoriously militant 
East Tyrone Brigade, some of whom were there to show they had switched 
allegiance away from Sinn Fein to the anti-ceasefire republican groups like the 
now defunct Real IRA, which has morphed into the new IRA.

Part of the reason why Sinn Fein has invested so much in their Co.Tyrone 
commemoration next weekend is to in effect “reclaim the dead” from the 
dissident republicans and to show that they represent the republican base in a 
county with long, historic association to militant republicanism. But in doing 
so, in their strategic, ideological war with the dissident republican factions, 
the party may have also created yet another parade-flashpoint that has turned 
this small rural town into a cold house for community relations in the border 
zone.
 