
The advertising watchdog has banned a TV ad for Nurofen for misleading viewers 
with claims it has special painkilling prowess, in a landmark ruling likely to 
spark a crackdown in the way companies are allowed to market general 
painkillers.


The ruling by the UK’s Advertising Standards Authority follows a separate 
action by Australia’s Federal Court which fined Reckitt Benckiser, the 
manufacturer of Nurofen, A$1.7m (£940,000) formisleading customers 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-36167011> by claiming its products targeted 
specific pains, such as migraines.


The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission had asked for a hefty A$6m 
fine.


Nurofen's maker misled consumers over painkillers' contents, court rules
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/14/nurofens-maker-admits-misleading-consumers-over-contents-in-painkillers>
Reckitt Benckiser <https://www.theguardian.com/business/reckittbenckiser> had 
already been warned about its ad claims in the UK when it was forced to quietly 
remove a TV ad, for Nurofen Express, earlier this year after the ASA informally 
resolved complaints that it was misleading without launching a public 
investigation.


However, the UK drug company has not managed to abide by its agreement not to 
run ads that could imply its products have a “special mechanism” that targets 
specific types of pain.


The ASA received 18 complaints about an ad for Nurofen showing a woman who 
fixed her back pain by taking its Nurofen Joint and Back product.


The complainants argued that it was misleading to imply it could specifically 
target back pain.


“Viewers were likely to infer that the product had a special mechanism or 
contained an active ingredient which made it especially effective for back and 
joint pain in comparison to other painkillers,” said the ASA. “We understood 
the product was absorbed by the stomach and distributed to sources of pain 
wherever they may be located around the body via the bloodstream, and that 
there was no mechanism by which the product actively sought out the source of 
pain in a user’s back or joints.”

The ASA banned the ad in a landmark ruling that is likely to set a precedent 
that will see a crackdown on the large number of pharmaceutical products in the 
market that are advertised as being able to target specific pain ailments, when 
in fact they are just general painkillers.
 