
Dave Stewart <https://www.theguardian.com/music/davestewart> is a musician, 
record producer, songwriter and photographer, best known as one half of 
Eurythmics. Born in Sunderland in 1952, Stewart began performing in his teens, 
securing a record deal at the age of 18. In the late 1970s he formed the 
post-punk band the Tourists, and when that band split in 1980, he and singer 
Annie Lennox formed Eurythmics, going on to sell almost 80m records worldwide. 
Since their split in 1990 Stewart has collaborated with numerous other artists 
(including Terry Hall, Paul McCartney and Bono) and has had several successful 
solo projects. Two years ago he and Mick Jagger formed the supergroup 
SuperHeavy (which also includes Joss Stone, Damian Marley and AR Rahman). His 
albumLucky Numbers is out on 7 October, and Ghost the Musical is on a national 
tour until March 2014.

Thomas Lindsey
 Thomas Lindsey. 
There is a lot of old and current music I could talk about, but I thought I 
should take this opportunity to talk about a singer no one has yet heard of, 
tomorrow's music rather than today's. Thomas Lindsey is an unknown singer who I 
genuinely believe will be hugely important. He has a voice that borders on the 
ethereal one minute and massive power the next. It's tinged with sadness, but 
also a feeling of hope, rather like Sinéad O'Connor, or Nick Drake, or even 
Nina Simone. It's very beautiful and very emotional. I got him to send me some 
of his songs and instantly fell in love with the voice. He is from a small town 
in Louisiana and I got him to fly out and do a support slot before my show and 
he blew everybody away. He had never been to a major city or ever flown in a 
plane before so it was a pretty daunting experience but he was amazing.

Anthony Bourdain: Parts Unknown, Season 2 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a4uvwiYbRgw>
 Anthony Bourdain. 
It's ostensibly a cookery programme, but what I love about it is him – Anthony 
Bourdain <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/anthonybourdain>, a chef who 
travels the world truly immersing himself in other cultures. He is fascinated 
not just by food, but by the people he meets, their ways of life, their customs 
and traditions. You get the sense with him that he believes that another 
culture's food is almost like their language, and to understand both properly, 
you need to understand the people and their culture and fall in love with that. 
He's brilliant with words and extremely well read. He is the reverse of the 
macho, misanthropic chef throwing his weight around – the diametric opposite of 
Gordon Ramsay.

Mystery Train by Greil Marcus
 Greil Marcus. Photograph: Ulf Andersen/Getty 
I'm rereading this, Greil Marcus's history of rock'n'roll. It's an incredible, 
beautiful book that puts the work of great artists in the context of other 
arts, particularly literature. It was written in 1975 and is hugely optimistic 
in the sense that you get the idea that he believes music can change not just 
people but the world. And music has done that. It did that for me, and I still 
really believe it has the power to change the world.

Silver Linings Playbook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/nov/25/silver-linings-playbook-review>
 Jennifer Lawrence and Bradley Cooper in Silver Linings Playbook. 
I love this film. It is an independent movie that got a fairly modest release, 
but has won a number of awards. It's a love story concerning two people with 
bipolar disorder who fall in love. Everyone around them warns them their 
relationship isn't just doomed but dangerous. What appeals to me is that I have 
always liked outsiders, people regarded as wayward or even crazy. Many of the 
people I've had the most fruitful, creative relationships with have been 
considered difficult or even nuts by others, and I have often been warned 
against them. And yet, as I say, some of the best and most rewarding 
experiences of my life have been with people on the margins. Maybe it's because 
I am a little that way too.

Kehinde Wiley <http://www.kehindewiley.com>
 Artwork by Kehinde Wiley. 
He's an artist who lives in New York City, but I went to see his work at a 
gallery here in Los Angeles after a friend of mine showed me one of his 
paintings. He's a brilliant renaissance technician. He places his 
African-American subjects entirely out of context, wearing sneakers, track 
pants, tank tops, and team caps but within the visual language of classical 
European portraiture. I bought a piece of his titledJonathan I. I own quite a 
few paintings by my late friend Eric Scott and years ago he did a series of 
African tribes people set within Picasso-like blue line paintings; they have a 
similar feel to Wiley's work. I suppose I'm drawn towards these juxtaposed 
worlds in art, music and life.

selvedgeyard.com <http://selvedgeyard.com/>
 Online mag selvedgeyard.com. 
This is supposedly a blog, but really it works as one of the greatest online 
magazines about popular art, fashion, music and photography ever produced. It's 
about people, places, products, clothes, photography, painting, anything that 
interests the guy behind it. So you'll have an item on the day Elvis met Led 
Zeppelin, followed by something on Sharon Tate's modelling career, then an 
article on photography, or a photographic piece about classic motorcycles. They 
did this immense item on Japanese tattoos which I spent hours looking at. It's 
utterly eclectic, and proves that if you commit yourself to a vision without 
compromise you can create great things.
 