
The extent of Albemarle & Bond's financial woes was laid bare when the 
cash-strapped pawnbroker warned there were "no signs of recovery" in its 
markets.

The firm blamed a sharp drop in profits on a 23% fall in the price of gold, 
reduced volumes of gold jewellery in circulation and the loss of customers to 
competitors.

Pre-tax profits plunged to £4.9m in the 12 months to 30 June from £21.4m a 
year earlier. When one-off restructuring costs were stripped out underlying 
profit more than halved to £9.5m. Revenue fell to £107.1m from £117.7m.

Britain's second biggest pawnbroker put itself up for sale last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/dec/02/albemarle-and-bond-sale-mass-walkout>
 after revealing it was close to breaching its bank covenants. It announced the 
resignation of five non-executive directors on the same day.

The firm has been granted a stay of execution after its lenders agreed to 
defer its bank covenant testing dates until 3 February. It had debts of £50.6m 
as at 2 December, close to its £53.3m debt facility.

Greville Nicholls, its chairman, said: "The group's financial year was a 
particularly challenging one for pawnbroking and gold-buying markets in which 
it operates. We were disappointed that the extent of the fall in the gold price 
added an additional and unexpected challenge for the business.

"Tough trading conditions have continued to impact our results in the new 
financial year, but we are managing within our current banking facilities."

Nicholls added that Albemarle & Bond had received "expressions of interest" 
but there was no guarantee that an offer would be made.

The company has been forced to melt down some of its gold stocks to avoid 
breaching covenants, and has closed loss-making "pop-up" gold buying stores.

The board recommended that no final dividend be paid to shareholders, meaning 
that the total dividend for the year fell to 3p a share from 12.75p a year 
earlier.

In September the company was forced to abandon a £35m rights issue after 
failing to secure the backing of its largest shareholder EZCorp, an American 
pawnbroker.

Albemarle & Bond was founded in Bristol in 1983 with a single shop, and is now 
based in Reading.
 