
Lenders to the troubled pawnbroker Albemarle & Bond have pulled the plug on 
its turnaround plan, leaving investors little chance of getting their money 
back.

The UK's second-largest pawnbroker asked for its shares to be suspended from 
London's Aim stockmarket for small-cap firms on Monday, as it warned its share 
price could remain at rockbottom levels.

Albemarle & Bond, which also provides short-term loans, has experienced a 
sweeping reversal of fortunes since it boasted of "the age of the pawnbroker" 
in 2011 and launched pop-up shops specialising in gold dealing.

Following two profits warnings last autumn, it parted company with five of its 
six directors, saw its share price crash and was forced to melt down its gold 
reserves to raise emergency cash.

In January, the board abandoned plans to sell the business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jan/27/pawnbroker-albermarle-bond-buyer-share-plunge>
, admitting the shares held little attraction. The company had been struggling 
to find a buyersince private equity veteran Jon Moulton of Better Capital 
dropped out of the bidding in December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/dec/24/albemarle-bond-buyer-walks-away>
.

In a notice to the stockmarket on Monday, Albemarle & Bond said: "Over the 
weekend, the board was informed by the company's lenders that they will not be 
able to support the management turnaround plan for the business. The board is 
continuing to work with the company's lenders on possible alternative options 
for stakeholders."

It added that options left for the company included selling it for less than 
its debts – meaning there is "no realistic prospect of any value being 
attributable to the company's ordinary shares".

The shares have been frozen at 6.65p, 97% less than they were worth a year ago.

The company's creditors, Barclays and Lloyds, have given the firm until the 
end of March to sort out its problems. But although the company has enough cash 
to continue trading, it faces collapse if asked to repay its total debts of 
£50m.

The 31 March deadline was agreed after Albemarle & Bond abandoned a £35m 
rights issue to raise money from shareholders, following a veto from its 
largest shareholder, the US pawnbroker EZ Corp.

Albemarle said: "The company's lenders have indicated they may be willing to 
extend this [credit] agreement in certain circumstances, but if they do not 
then the company could be required to repay its outstanding loan facilities and 
although the company has sufficient cash headroom to meet current trading 
requirements, if the entire debt facility became repayable it would not be able 
to meet this liability."

The pawnbroker, founded in 1983 with a single shop, expanded rapidly during 
the recession as people cashed in their gold to take advantage of rising 
prices. But a recovery in the global economy – making gold less attractive 
against rising stock markets – drove the price of gold down 28% last year, 
leaving Albemarle with big losses. The precious metal is expected to continue 
to shed value in 2014, darkening the outlook for the pawnbroker.

Retail analyst Jonathan De Mello suggested not all Albemarle's troubles could 
be pinned on gold prices. He said much of the company's income had been based 
on its loans business, an area subject to increasing competition from payday 
lenders such as Wonga.

The pawnbroking sector had also been hurt by the pick-up in the economy, with 
"a return of quality retail" on the high street, he added. "[Pawnbroking] is a 
market that is a sign of the times. It tends to be dominated by independent 
stores and a lot of the smaller players have closed.

"There is a structural change going on. People are less inclined to use 
pawnbrokers because they are not getting rid of products."
 