
The pawnbroker Albemarle & Bond has put itself up for sale just days after it 
revealed it had begun melting down its gold reserves to raise emergency cash.

The sale announcement after markets closed on Monday capped a torrid day for 
the UK's second largest pawnbroker when five non-executive directors resigned 
with immediate effect, leaving chairman Greville Nicholls as the only 
non-executive standing.

In a statement the company said a sale was "in the best interests of 
shareholders", although it warned there was no certainty any offers would be 
made. Rivals in the pawnbroking industry are understood to be interested in 
bidding for Albemarle & Bond, which as well as pawnbroking, also offers 
short-term loans to customers looking for emergency funds. The pawnbroker, 
which has seen its shares shed 90% of their value over the past year, ended the 
day with its shares down 2.5% at 19p, valuing the company at £10m.

The shares dropped on news of the departure of non-executive director Geoff 
Brady, which came late in the afternoon, without any of the customary thanks 
from the chair. His exit followed the morning's news that non-executives Robin 
Ashton, Tracey Graham, Sterling Brinkley and Tom Roberts would be standing 
down. Nicholls thanked the quartet for their "significant and much-appreciated 
contribution". Ashton was chair of the audit committee and Graham chaired the 
remuneration committee.

Albemarle & Bond has been hit by the plunging price of gold and announced last 
week that it had started melting down its inventory of jewellery and other gold 
items that were not likely to sell before Christmas, providing an immediate 
release of cash to stay within its lending limits.

The firm, founded in 1983 with a single shop, expanded rapidly during the 
downturn as people cashed in their gold items to take advantage of soaring 
prices. In 2011 it declared "the age of the pawnbroker" and launched "pop-up" 
shops specialising in gold. But a recovery in the global economy – making gold 
less attractive against resurgent stock markets – has seen gold prices fall by 
more than a quarter this year.

Albemarle & Bond issued a profit warning in September and brought in Chris 
Gillespie from doorstep lender Provident Financial to serve as chief executive.

The stockbroker Canaccord Genuity is advising on the sale, which will proceed 
with special dispensation from disclosure rules, meaning any bids can be made 
in secret.

The company, due to publish results on 9 December, last week announced that 
market expectations were "significantly more optimistic than its own", causing 
its share price to tumble. Albemarle & Bond has taken measures to slash costs, 
which include closing the 33 pop-up stores in its 230-store estate.

It has also warned that it sees no signs of recovery in the market, while its 
"pledge book" of customer items secured against loans has fallen 12%, hit by 
the falling gold price and growing competition. At the height of its growth 
A&B, and its bigger rival H&T Pawnbrokers, opened new shops focused heavily on 
gold, saddling them with fixed costs that gave them little scope to scale back 
when the post-crash gold rush ended.

The firm's woes have been exacerbated by a bill for its failed attempt to 
secure a £35m cash injection from its biggest shareholder Ezcorp last month, 
when talks on a deeply discounted rights issue were aborted.
 