
The police appear to have declared war on journalists. If this sounds more 
than a little far-fetched, consider the evidence.

Case one: in September, it emerged the Metropolitan police had used the 
Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act (Ripa) in orderto covertly access the 
mobile phone records of the Sun’s political editor, Tom Newton-Dunn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/oct/06/sun-official-complaint-ripa-journalists-met-police>
. He was responsible for the controversial Plebgate story in September 2012, 
which alleged the then government chief whip, Andrew Mitchell, had insulted 
police officers at the gates of Downing Street.

Case two: in October, it was revealed that Essex police had secretly used 
Ripa, also in 2012, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2014/oct/07/press-freedom-police> 
to hack into the phone records of the Mail on Sunday newsdesk in order to 
discover how it obtained exclusive articles about the former cabinet minister 
Chris Huhne. In so doing, the police outed the paper’s source and the freelance 
journalist, Andrew Alderson, who acted as the go-between. The police did not 
even keep the details of the calls and emails between Alderson and the paper’s 
news editor, David Dillon, to themselves; they passed them on to lawyers.

Case three: two weeks ago, six journalists announced they were taking legal 
action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/nov/20/police-legal-action-snooping-journalists>
 against the Met after discovering officers had been recording their activities 
and movements on a database that monitors “domestic extremism”. They are Jules 
Mattsson, a Times reporter; Mark Thomas, the comedian-cum-journalist; three 
photographers - Jess Hurd, David Hoffman and Adrian Arbib - and Jason 
Parkinson, a freelance video journalist. Parkinson was astonished to find the 
police had detailed his movements in 130 entries, including his attendance at 
demonstrations as a member of the press.

The six, represented by the National Union of Journalists, have launched a 
legal challenge to the surveillance along with a demand that the Met destroys 
the files held on them. Some of the group complain that, quite apart from being 
monitored, they have been persistently stopped, searched and assaulted by 
police officers. Five of them have successfully sued the police in the past, 
winning damages or apologies from the force. These frontline confrontations 
have something of a history, but they are also suggestive of the growing 
antagonism between officers and journalists.

Case four: last week, the Times reported that the police had examined the 
phone records of 1,757 staff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/25/vodafone-metropolitan-police-met>
, including journalists and lawyers, working for the Times, Sunday Times and 
Sun after the material was mistakenly sent to them by Vodafone. It enabled 
officers to scrutinise the records to the extent of conducting data analysis 
and building a spreadsheet before, after several months, they eventually lodged 
“a formal error report”.

Those four separate incidents certainly go a long way to suggest the police 
are at war with the hacks. In addition, we should not overlook the matter of 
the arrests of 25 Sun journalists for alleged illegal payments to public 
officials, which followed the News of the World phone-hacking drama. Indeed, it 
was the Met’s embarrassment after being exposed for having failed to carry out 
a comprehensive investigation into hacking that engendered the opening of 
hostilities with the press.

It triggered an inquiry, led by the former parliamentary commissioner for 
standards, Elizabeth Filkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/jan/04/filkin-report-met-police-journalists>
, that registered official concern about the nature of the relationships 
between police officers, from the highest to the lowest ranks, and journalists. 
Her inquiry ran in parallel with Lord Justice Leveson’s inquiry into press 
practices. But Filkin’s report appeared almost a year before Leveson’s and 
heralded a split between Scotland Yard and Fleet Street. She contended that the 
previous informal relationships had caused “serious harm”, that information was 
passed to journalists “inappropriately” and warned of the need to terminate 
socialising.

The former Daily Mirror crime reporter, Jeff Edwards, said at the time that 
Filkin’s report appeared to “have taken a sledgehammer to crack a nut”. He 
foresaw the likely outcome, and it came to pass very quickly. Although her 
report dealt only with the Met, the Association of Chief Police Officers (Acpo) 
took the opportunity to publish “guidance” for all police forces in England and 
Wales. For guidance read rules, which virtually outlawed easy contact between 
police and journalists. Officers were under no illusion that speaking to the 
press could cost them their jobs. “All contact,” sad Filkin, “should be 
available for audit.”

Just as significant was the transformation in internal police culture. It had 
begun to change with the increasing use by police forces of professional press 
officers as a buffer between officers and reporters. The chill, as crime 
correspondents confirm, soon became a deep freeze. Journalists are not getting 
information and, as one former Guardian crime reporter said, the loser is the 
public. People are not getting to know as much as they should.

The police have also been subject to criticism in several high-profile cases 
over the past five years, all of which have resulted in hostile headlines. 
Among the controversies were the Hillsborough disaster cover-up, the 2009 death 
of Ian Tomlinson during the G20 summit protests, and the 2011 death of Mark 
Duggan that resulted in inner-city riots. To add to the toll of negative 
coverage came Plebgate itself.

Not speaking to journalists is very different, however, from treating 
journalists as criminals or using their private phone conversations as ways of 
investigating crime. As many reporters have pointed out, the result will be to 
scare off whistleblowers. Who will dare to speak to journalists who cannot 
ensure the confidentiality of their calls and emails? Stories that should be 
told will not see the light of day. In effect, therefore, the war the police 
have launched on journalists is really a war on the public’s right to know.
 