
A police officer accused of giving a misleading account of a Plebgate meeting 
praised MPAndrew Mitchell <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrew-mitchell>
 for his “candour” before telling the media the politician had been evasive, a 
tribunal has heard.

DS Stuart Hinton and two other Police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> 
Federation representatives met the Tory MP at his constituency offices in 
October 2012, three weeks after Mitchell was involved in an incident with 
Metropolitan police officers in Downing Street.

Following the meeting, Hinton, a serving Warwickshire police officer, made 
comments about what was said at that meeting in an interview on BBC Radio 5 
Live on 13 October, which it is alleged were misleading.

A misconduct panel has been convened at the force headquarters to hear an 
allegation that the officer breached professional standards of honesty, 
integrity and conduct.

Andrew Mitchell and the Plebgate affair explained for non-Brits
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/nov/27/plebgate-andrew-mitchell-explain-non-brits>
Hinton, who was secretary of the local Federation branch at the time, denies 
any wrongdoing.

A recording of the meeting with the Sutton Coldfield MP played to the tribunal 
heard that Mitchell had opened the meeting with an apology saying he was 
“profoundly, deeply sorry”.

Hinton then asked him for his account of what he had said to officers at the 
gates of Downing Street. The MP replied: “I did not say – and I give you my 
word – I did not call an officer a fucking pleb, and that you should know your 
fucking place.”

Mitchell also said: “I complied with the officer and picked up my bicycle and, 
... I did say, you know, under my breath but audibly – in frustration, ‘I 
thought you lot were supposed to fucking help us’ – I did say that and it is 
for that I apologise.”

Opening the case on Tuesday, presenting officer Aaron Rathmell said that the 
next day, Hinton appeared on BBC radio and commented: “He [Mitchell] still 
won’t say exactly what he did say, which suggests that the officer’s account is 
more likely to be the accurate one.”

During the interview he also backed a call for the then chief whip Mitchell to 
resign.

Rathmell said the police officer made these comments despite the MP giving 
what he described as a “positive” account of his exchange with Met officers on 
19 September 2012.

It was Rathmell’s case that Hinton had seemed satisfied with the answers he 
heard in the meeting, telling Mitchell: “I appreciate your candour,” later 
adding: “Everybody can have a bad day.”

Rathmell said: “The key controversy in this case surrounds exercising of 
judgment as to whether Sgt Hinton gave a misleading account regarding the 
meeting with Mr Mitchell, rather than facts or witnesses’ statements being in 
dispute.”

At the time, the Police Federation representatives were preparing to launch a 
campaign against government budget cuts to policing.

The panel heard that before seeing the MP, Hinton and his colleagues Insp Ken 
Mackaill, of West Mercia, and Sgt Chris Jones, of West Midlands police, were 
advised by their media strategist to use the meeting as a “springboard” for 
that campaign.

If the case is found to amount to gross misconduct, Hinton could be sacked. 

The hearing at Leek Wootton, near Warwick, which has been scheduled for up to 
three days, continues.

A judge ruled in 2014  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/nov/27/pleb-andrew-mitchell-loses-libel-case>
that the MP probably did call Met officer PC Toby Rowland a “pleb” after the 
politician was stopped from riding his bicycle through the vehicle gate in 
Downing Street.
 