
The Metropolitan police force has come under further scrutiny over its covert 
grab of Sun journalists’ phone records relating tothe Plebgate incident 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/sep/24/andrew-mitchell-armed-officers-plebs>
, on day two of a landmark hearing.

The force has been taken to court by News Group Newspapers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers> (NGN) and three of its 
journalists. The complainants say that the Met’s use of powers normally 
reserved for criminals and counter-terrorism operations – and which avoid 
judicial scrutiny – to obtain communications data was unnecessary and 
disproportionate.

The then chief whip, Andrew Mitchell, resigned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/oct/19/andrew-mitchell-resigns-police-pleb>
 as a result of stories alleging that he called officers “plebs” as he left 
Downing Street on 19 September 2012.

On Tuesday, the investigatory powers tribunal heard that the Met’s application 
to obtain the data – which officers hoped would reveal the source, believed to 
be a fellow police officer, behind NGN’s Plebgate stories – was granted on the 
basis of “corrupt conduct between MPS (Metropolitan police service) and the 
press”.

The Met’s counsel, Jeremy Johnson QC, was questioned by the panel of five 
senior legal figures hearing the case about why it was phrased in that way, 
given that the force’s stated reason to the tribunal for use of the powers was 
that it was investigating a suspected conspiracy of police officers to bring 
down a cabinet minister.


Mr Justice Michael Burton, the chair of the tribunal, suggested that 
corruption usually referred to money changing hands.


Johnson said that better words could have been used but that the corruption 
referred to was the alleged plot, later found to be without foundation, to 
bring down Mitchell.

“It’s pretty well established that the aim was to investigate whether there 
really had been a conspiracy to falsely undermine Mr Mitchell,” he said. “This 
was a very difficult investigation, a very unusual investigation.”

Johnson said officers were affected by the media reporting of Plebgate and 
public reaction to the story but that they acted as they did because they 
believed a “very serious crime” had been committed.

NGN, and Sun journalists Anthony France, Craig Woodhouse and Tom Newton Dunn, 
the paper’s political editor, launched their claim on the basis of article 10 
of the European convention on human rights, which protects journalistic sources.

They argue that the Met should have gone to a judge to request the records or 
approached the paper directly to seek more information. Using the Regulation 
and Investigatory Powers Act (Ripa) enabled the force to get approval from a 
senior officer and obtain the data through mobile phone companies without the 
complainants knowing. On Monday, the officer who approved the Ripa application
admitted he did not know that reporters had a right to protect their sources 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/20/met-police-defend-covert-seizing-sun-reporters-phone-records-plebgate>
.

The force obtained a week’s worth of the reporters’ phone records, including 
GPRS location data, and details of 90 minutes of calls to and from two newsdesk 
landlines.

Gavin Millar QC, for the complainants, described obtaining journalists’ phone 
data as “a pretty drastic step”. He suggested the investigating officers should 
have known there was no conspiracy and have taken more steps – including 
checking the communications data of officers suspected of being the mole – to 
establish whether it was the case before obtaining the reporters’ phone records.

In his written submissions, Millar stated: “This is the first claim in this 
jurisdiction by journalists and their newspaper alleging that their convention 
rights were violated because theMetropolitan police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> used covert powers to 
identify a confidential journalistic source … The case therefore raises issues 
of great importance.”


The judges reserved judgment in the case until an unspecified date.
 