
MP and former chief whip Andrew Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrew-mitchell> has paid £80,000 in 
libel damages to the police officer he called a “fucking pleb” during an 
altercation at the gates of Downing Street.

It marks the end of a two-year battle for PC Toby Rowland, who was accused of 
lying by the Conservative MP.

At the end of a costly high court libel trial last year, brought by the Sutton 
Coldfield MP against the Sun newspaper,a judge ruled that Mitchell had used the 
“politically toxic word pleb” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/nov/27/pleb-andrew-mitchell-loses-libel-case>
 in reference to Rowland and other officers at the gates.


Mitchell lost his case against the Sun, which reported the incident based on 
Rowland’s account. He also failed in his defence to the counter libel action 
brought by the police officer.

The judge said he believed Rowland, a member of the diplomatic protection 
group, who has stuck to his account of what took place on 19 September 2012 
after the MP was refused permission to cycling through the main gates of 
Downing Street and forced to wheel his bicycle through a side entrance.

On Wednesday, Rowland’s solicitor, Jeremy Clarke-Williams, told Mr Justice 
Warby: “The payment of £80,000 damages by Mr Mitchell sets the seal on PC 
Rowland’s vindication, as well as providing compensation for the injury to his 
reputation and the distress caused to him and his family over many months.

“PC Rowland never felt that the events in Downing Street were anything more 
than a minor incident. He was not responsible for the publicity which followed 
and would have much preferred that the whole matter had never entered the 
public domain. He now simply wishes to be left in peace to continue his police 
career.”

Clarke-Williams, from Slater and Gordon, said Mitchell “has abandoned the 
other defences he had raised to my client’s claim and consequently terms of 
settlement have been agreed”.

He said the police officer had been left with “no option” but to bring the 
action after Mitchell accused him of lying over what happened that day.

Two days after the incident on 19 September, Mitchell phoned Rowland and 
apologised to him for his behaviour at the gate, which the officer accepted. 
Leaked police logs appeared to back up Rowland’s account and the MP later 
resigned.

However, later CCTV footage of the event appeared to throw the police version 
into doubt. A subsequent police investigation called Operation Alice found 
officers other than Rowland, including one who was not present during the row, 
had lied about it.


One officer was sent to jail and three were sacked. Clarke-Williams said that 
his client sought legal action when the MP repeated his accusation that Rowland 
had lied, even after Operation Alice had cleared him of all wrongdoing.


The lawyer said: “However, on the very same day as the DPP’s announcement, Mr 
Mitchell held a televised press conference accusing PC Rowland of having lied 
in his account of what Mr Mitchell had said at the gates of Downing Street and 
implying he should have been prosecuted.”


Last November, after an eight-day trial, high court judge Mr Justice Mitting 
said he was satisfied the MP “did speak the words alleged or something close to 
them as to amount to the same including the politically toxic word pleb”.

Mitchell, who was ordered to pay £300,000 in costs to the Police Federation, 
representing Rowland, and the News Group Newspapers, for the Sun, is also 
liable for the costs of the case, estimated in excess of £3m. Neither man was 
in court on Wednesday.

A specialist costs judge will make a detailed assessment of the legal bills to 
work out exactly what the MP will have to pay.

The MP, described in court as a “Jekyll and Hyde’ character, had sworn on oath 
that he did not use the word “pleb” and said the allegations were a “web of 
lies”. The Sun’s report quoted him as saying: “Best you learn your fucking 
place – you don’t run this fucking government – you’re fucking plebs.”

In his summing up, Mitting described Rowland as a “rather old-fashioned police 
officer” who was “well-suited to his job”.

“He is not the sort of man who had the wit, the imagination or the inclination 
[to] invent in the spur of the moment what a senior cabinet minister would have 
said to him,” he said.

After the ruling last November, Rowland said: “Even before this trial began I 
had been cleared of any wrongdoing by four extensive and wide-reaching 
investigations including a criminal one. I am delighted that here again my 
innocence, integrity and reputation as a police officer has been recognised.”

 