
The deaths of 74 fans at a football match in the Egyptian town of Port Said 
has highlighted the impact that politics has had on other aspects of life in 
post-revolutionEgypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> since last 
year's uprising.

The violence was a reminder of the deteriorating security situation in the 
Arab world's most populous country as instability continues nearly a year after 
the former president Hosni Mubarak was swept out of power in a popular uprising.

The removal of the police and their replacement with the military has left 
security stretched, with many police officers refusing to return to work after 
the revolution.

Following live television footage which showed images of security forces 
standing idly by as fans of Port Said's local team, al-Masry, stormed the pitch 
to chase al-Ahly players, angry fans congregated outside al-Ahly's ground to 
protest against the ministry of the interior and the ruling Supreme Council of 
the Armed Forces (Scaf) for what they felt was a major lapse of security at the 
stadium.

They had watched the pitch invasion after al-Masry had won the game 3-1, and 
the ensuing scuffles when players fled to dressing rooms for safety.

The supporters in the stand ran into the narrow exits at the top of the stand 
and it is believed that the majority of the deaths were a result of the ensuing 
stampede.

Some believe the violence was intrinsically linked to the political situation. 
One al-Ahly supporter outside the club, Khaled Gad, told the Guardian: "There 
is a strong political connection. What happened today was not just about 
trouble at a football match, it's related to other events in the country."

He was referring to the recent removal of Egypt's longstanding emergency law 
with the exception of "thuggery" and recent statements by the interior minister 
Mohamed Yusuf of the need to keep the extraordinary powers it provides to 
handle recent crime-related incidents.

A spate of recent incidents show an alarming lapse in the security situation 
in Egypt, such as the armed holdup of a HSBC bank branch in broad daylight – an 
almost unheard of event – and the hijacking of armoured cars as they 
transported money.

Another fan, Mahmoud Kamel, said, "Where was the security? And where were the 
clubs and governorate representatives who always attend this game. This is a 
huge rivalry and they're always in attendance, but they weren't this time."

Kamel insisted that the cause of the catastrophe was the chant against Scaf 
rule by al-Ahly's group of supporters known as the Ultras at a previous game. 
The Ultras of al-Ahly and arch-rival Zamalek played prominent roles in the 
18-day uprising that spelled the end of Mubarak's rule and the violence raised 
fresh concerns about the ability of the state police to manage crowds.

Most of the hundreds of black-uniformed police with helmets and shields stood 
in lines and did nothing as soccer fans chased each other, some wielding sharp 
objects and others hurling sticks and rocks.

Security officials said the ministry has issued directives for its personnel 
not to "engage" with civilians after recent clashes between police and 
protesters in November left more than 40 people dead.

But as much as there were fans chanting "down with military rule" there were 
others who were loath to involve politics in what they felt was a 
football-related incident. Scuffles between the two sets of fans have often 
broken out before.

One man gathered at the stadium shouted to the throng: "There has always been 
trouble between al-Ahly and al-Masry, why bring politics into it?" Another 
said, "If you want to chant slogans against the military, go to Tahrir Square." 
Thousands of fans marched towards the Ramsis train station to receive the 
injured that were coming back from Port Said. Activists quickly scheduled 
rallies for Thursday outside the headquarters of the interior ministry in Cairo 
to protest against the inability of the police to stop the bloodshed.

In Port Said, residents marched early Thursday, denouncing the violence and 
saying it was a conspiracy by the military and police to cause chaos.

Army tanks and armored vehicles joined police patrolling near hospitals and 
morgues. Police were not to be seen in the streets after the violence and were 
unavailable to break up fights that followed.The tension also spread to the 
nearby Suez province. About 500 protesters, including soccer fans and 
activists, gathered outside the main police headquarters to protest what they 
called police negligence.

A security official said the police fired tear gas to disperse the crowd. He 
was speaking on condition of anonymity because he wasn't authorized to speak to 
reporters.

Scaf head Field Marshall Hussain Tantawi also ominously said: "People know the 
ones responsible for the events in Port Said, and should not let them get away 
with it," without elaborating, but promised to find those responsible.

There is a historic rivalry between al-Ahly and al-Masry, and matches are 
always heated.

Clubs from across the country have always felt that Egypt's premier club 
al-Ahly and it's Cairene counterpart Zamalek have been favoured for being the 
capital clubs. Between the two, they have swept the majority of league titles 
and cups.The events of the match also affected a match taking place at Cairo 
stadium between Zamalek and al-Ismailiya. Zamalek coach Hassan Shehata decided 
at halftime that his players would not continue the match. This caused 
discontent in the stands and a section of the stadium was set alight by irate 
fans.
 