 Illustration by Marcus Butt <http://www.marcusbutt.com/> 
I can understand Adrian Searle's irritation with Alain de Botton's curation of 
the Rijksmuseum to reflect his "art as therapy" theory (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/apr/25/art-is-therapy-alain-de-botton-rijksmuseum-amsterdam-review#history-link-box>
, 26 April); he is a professional critic and he doesn't want to be told how to 
interpret things. But personally I find de Botton's work helpful, inspiring and 
exciting. I've often been in a gallery or museum and wished for plain English 
insights into the work. Many of us appreciate such information being made 
available to us. It can add depth and meaning to something that can otherwise 
feel obtuse and unrelatable. I very much want to embrace art but am sometimes 
left mystified and disconnected because it's presented in a void.

The analysis of art doesn't come easily to everyone. Don't want to be guided 
in what to look for? Don't read the descriptions then. De Botton – in this 
exhibition, his books and the fantastic workshops and courses offered at the 
School of Life – aims to translate things into user-friendly language, to 
broaden the audience and bring pleasure and solace to people who may otherwise 
be excluded. That's a noble effort that I welcome. I think he's articulate and 
brilliant, and I'm grateful for his efforts.
Emma Clayton
Brighton

• Adrian Searle has missed the underlying point De Botton is trying to make: 
that art has the potential to help us to reflect on issues intimately related 
to our private (and public) lives. This is not a new idea. Only we have 
forgotten this through decades of scepticism and a "material turn", in which 
stuff for its own sake is seen as valuable.

So we hoard and measure and evaluate material culture based on surface data 
that looks good and knowledgeable, but ultimately has limited sticking value 
when it comes to thinking about how we live our lives. De Botton is right: we 
do need to learn to see art again in more immanent ways. But we do not need 
facile stickers to do this for us; rather, we need schools and 
universities that no longer abdicate their responsibility to help us engage 
with art in intimate, assimilative ways that become part of our daily "working 
equipment".
Richard Whitney
Pewsey, Wiltshire

• You report the artist Simon Starling as criticising Henry Moore for 
accepting a commission for a sculpture celebrating the splitting of the atom (
Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/apr/29/henry-moore-home-artists-damien-hirst-exhibition>
, 30 April). Has he actually seen Nuclear Energy in its position on the site of 
the first atomic pile in the University of Chicago? There is no way that this 
brilliant and horrible piece is a celebration of atomic physics. When I visited 
the Enrico Fermi Institute I was amazed that the physicists there could bear to 
see it outside their windows.
Tony Sudbery
Professor emeritus, University of York

• The chairman of Arts Council England, Peter Bazalgette (Just as big as a 
Boeing 747 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/apr/24/new-heathrow-sculpture-expected-to-be-most-viewed>
, 24 April), says Richard Wilson's new sculpture for Heathrow Terminal 2 "lifts 
your spirits". When I read those words my heart sank as my blood boiled.

At 78 metres long and consisting of 77 tonnes of aluminium, Wilson's creation 
is just the latest example of a trend towards gigantism in modern public art.
Antony Gormley <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gormley> can probably 
be blamed for starting it with his Angel of the North. Other sculptors who 
subscribe to the bigger-is-better outlook include Anish Kapoor (his 
ArcelorMittal Orbit made for the 2012 Olympics is Britain's largest piece of 
public art, at 114.5m tall) and Damien Hirst, whose Verity, an allegory of 
truth and justice, is a 20m high stainless steel and bronze affair; and if you 
visit St Pancras station you'll be cowed by Paul Day's The Meeting Place, a 
gigantic 9m tall pair of lovers in bronze towering over you, locked in an 
embrace. 

"I wanted that wow factor," says Wilson of his Terminal 2 sculpture. So wowing 
the public would seem to explain why these artists are in thrall to bigness. 
This is why size really matters for them. In my opinion, however, what they 
actually achieve is to prove that more is less – more size, less depth.

What can't be denied is the impact these mega-objects have on our cultural 
environment. Nor should their impact on our natural environment be overlooked. 
The smelting and working of all that bronze and steel must have required vast 
amounts of energy, sending a large quantity of CO2 into the atmosphere. 
Wilson's as-big-as-a-Boeing aluminium structure might add prestige to the 
expanding aviation industry but its creation will degrade the natural 
environment. Can creating a piece of mega-art for its mega-wow effect justify 
all that pollution?
John Lloyd
London
 