
As I write, I am stuck on a halted train somewhere north of Dundalk, unable to 
cross the Irish border. There is a bomb alert, not only on the rail link but 
also on the M1 motorway running parallel to it.

To pass the time while we wait for instruction from staff on the 7.30am Dublin 
to Belfast Enterprise service, I peruse the coverage of the proposed royal 
visit toIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> next month. And, as 
I read the details of the trip, I cannot believe my eyes.

The first startling element to the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh's historic 
Irish tour – the first by a British monarch since 1912 – is the time. They will 
stay for three days, between May and 20 May.

Hardly anyone had expected, when the visit was first announced, that the royal 
couple would stay in the Republic for more than one day. To string out that 
visit over 72 hours will undoubtedly give those opposed to it more of a chance 
to cause mayhem.

However, the most stunning aspect of the planning (or lack of?) for this are 
some of the locations the Queen will attend.

Among her stops will be a ceremony in Dublin's Garden of Remembrance and later 
Croke Park, the national/spiritual home of the Gaelic Athletic Association. 
Even if you leave aside the historic neuralgia that these places hold for a lot 
of nationalist-minded Irish people, the sheer logistical and security 
challenges they pose are daunting.

The Garden of Remembrance commemorates those who died in the 1916 Easter 
Rising and later the War of Independence against the British. Croke Park was 
the scene, in 1920, of the first Bloody Sunday massacre when British troops 
fired into the crowd, killing 16 civilians in retaliation for Michael Collins's 
assassination squads murdering British agents across Dublin.

The prospect of a British Queen visiting those hallowed sights will inflame 
further the passions of the unrepresentative but vocal, often violent, minority 
who adhere to dissident republicanism.

Yet it is the geography that poses a serious modern-day problem for the Irish 
and British officials who are choreographing this groundbreaking royal visit.

Take first the Garden of Remembrance, which is located at the northern end of 
O'Connell Street. Overlooking the gardens are a row of splendid and 
well-preserved Georgian houses that are home to the Irish Writers' Centre, a 
museum dedicated to Irish authors and poets, and an award-winning restaurant.

All these buildings will presumably have to be evacuated of their staff and 
then occupied by Garda officers in order to secure them. Behind the main 
memorial, which was completed in time for the 50th anniversary of the Easter 
Rising, is the Rotunda Maternity Hospital which, it is assumed, will also have 
to be taken over by the Garda in order to keep the Queen and the Duke safe from 
any line of dissident fire.

And even if you also temporarily leave out the prospect that the likes of the 
Real IRA, the Continuity IRA and Óghlaigh na hÉireann will deploy security 
alerts across Dublin to disrupt the royal entourage, the Irish state still 
faces the prospect of horrendously damaging global publicity.

If we stay with the Garden of Remembrance, it is worth noting that is only a 
short walk from there to inner city working class Dublin redoubts which have 
long been steeped in republican traditions.

The dissident republicans could gather demonstrators in, say, the Summerhill 
area and march them up towards the end of Parnell Street, where it intersects 
with the north end of O'Connell Street. In those kind of routes, the Garda's 
riot squad would have to be deployed leading to potentially violent clashes 
between anti-royalist protestors and the force.

All of this would be within earshot of the Queen and and Duke inside the 
gardens and, more critically, in front of the world's cameras. If the 
anti-ceasefire republicans get mobilised, they could grab world headlines, with 
violent street disorder taking place just a couple of hundred yards away from 
where the Queen is standing.

The logistics of her tour of key sites in north inner Dublin is further 
complicated by the question of how to get her and the Duke, and their security 
teams, up to Croke Park.

The Garda Síochána will have to create a huge cordon sanitaire along one of 
the main arterial northern arterial routes into the city centre. They may have 
to corral demonstrators off the road along Dorset Street prior to the royal 
cavalcade reaching the GAA's magnificent stadium on the banks of Dublin's 
appropriately named Royal Canal.

Overall, if violence erupts on the streets around the heart of Dublin's north 
inner city, these pictures will be beamed all around the planet; they will 
partly – if not largely – colour the coverage which, for a republic seeking to 
rebuild its international image after the national humiliation of going with 
the begging bowl to Europe and the IMF, is disastrous.

None of this is to suggest that the majority of Irish people oppose the royal 
visit. Far from it. Judging by opinion polls, the views of the country's main 
political parties and the ongoing fascination with the House of Windsor in 
Irish newspapers, magazines, television and radio programmes, the overwhelming 
majority welcome the arrival of the Queen.

But in the era of 24/7 news, it is very often a militant and determined 
minority who can, through violent actions, steal the headlines and dominate the 
agenda.

This is what organisations like Republican Sinn Féin or the Real IRA-aligned 
32 County Sovereignty Committee are hoping for. The ill thought-out logistical 
planning for the royal visit, especially in Dublin, makes that scenario all the 
more possible.

In the meantime, the train has rolled back to Dundalk, with buses waiting at 
the station to transfer us up north by road. We cannot travel on the main route 
into Northern Ireland as the M1 remains shut.

Only six days after republican dissidents caused outrage with the murder of a 
young Catholic police officer in Omagh, they are back inflicting more 
disruption to the lives of ordinary Irish citizens who do not sympathise at all 
with their narrow, futile agenda.

Yet provoking such opprobrium doesn't seem to bother them, and nor will it if 
they succeed in disrupting the royal visit next month.
 