"I take a bran muffin, a decaffeinated herbal tea bag and a box of oat-bran 
cereal. A bowl of oat-bran cereal with wheatgerm and soy milk follows; another 
bottle of Evian water and a small cup of decaf tea after that."  Bob  Patrick 
"Got up at 6am and did 40 minutes on the crosstrainer. Then ate a hotel 
breakfast - carrot juice, omelette, lentils, salad, salmon — with no bread, no 
croissant; my new resolve on diet."  Bob  Patrick "There are more important 
problems than Sri Lanka to worry about. Sure our foreign policy is important, 
but there are more pressing problems at hand."  Bob  Patrick "How rock-hard, 
how halved my stomach is ... how bronzed and defined my abdomen has become."  
Bob  Patrick "My ambition: to have a concave abdomen defined by deep-cut 
obliques."  Bob  Patrick "He belongs to the elite of the flat-stomached: men 
who've looked at the prospect of swelling belly fat and settled on strategies 
to stay slim."  Bob  Patrick "In bed I'm wearing Ralph Lauren silk pyjamas."  
Bob  Patrick "Business class. No edible food. No airline pyjamas….I lie in my 
tailored suit."  Bob  Patrick "Bulgari or Hermes. You can’t go wrong."  Bob  
Patrick "The shower has a universal all-directional shower head and adjusts 
within a thirty-inch vertical range. It's made from Australian gold-black brass 
and covered with a white enamel finish."  Bob  Patrick "I take two Advil, a 
multivitamin and a potassium tablet, washing them down with a large bottle of 
Evian water."  Bob  Patrick "I've been wolfing down whey powder ('cross-flow, 
micro-filtered and hydrolysed') and branched-chain amino acid tablets."  Bob  
Patrick "I'm wearing a lightweight linen suit with pleated trousers, a cotton 
shirt, a dotted silk tie, all by Valentino Couture, and perforated cap-toe 
leather shoes by Allen-Edmonds."  Bob  Patrick "With the Stairmaster you work 
the body's largest muscle group (between the pelvis and knees) and you can end 
up burning more calories per minute than by doing any other aerobic activity, 
except maybe Nordic skiiing."  Bob  Patrick "Outside a circle of the ruling 
elite, nobody in America is lean anymore."  Bob  Patrick "I worked out heavily 
at the gym after leaving the office ... but the tension has returned, so I do 
90 abdominal crunches, 150 push-ups, and then I run in place for 20 minutes 
while listening to the new Huey Lewis CD."  Bob  Patrick "I did two hours of 
Pilates, then … for my third meditation lesson; then to the office to read 
cables; to the gym."  Bob  Patrick "Before leaving my office for the meeting I 
take two Valium, wash them down with a Perrier."  Bob  Patrick "Popped two 
Normison to smother the excitement."  Bob  Patrick "Steel-cut oats with 
blueberries and goat-milk yoghurt, unflavoured, and espresso coffee…"  Bob  
Patrick "Listen, the mud soup and charcoal arugula are outrageous here."  Bob  
Patrick "I want turkey, I want grass-fed beef … This is the new 
Fuhrer-directive."  Bob  Patrick "I have more energy than 16 gladiators."  Bob  
Patrick  You got…  Welcome to the flat-stomached elite  Good workout, but not 
in the gladiatorial class  Flabby effort – time to up your whey intake  
Challenge your friends Submit answers  