
It is an annual pleasure to hear the cast of The Archers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-archers> protest, "I'm not an 
actor!" It marks the start of the panto season.

This year it's Robin Hood. Linda Snell, the producer, envisioned an autumnal 
version with Maurice as a craggy Robin and Anthea as a matronly Marion. You 
will not be familiar with either of them. Maurice, Tom's shadowy 
sausage-stuffer, stood revealed as Ambridge's answer to Sean Connery, weathered 
and deep-chested. Anthea, Lilian's sharp-tongued secretary, is presumably 
weathered and deep-chested, too. Unfortunately, Anthea's husband turned out to 
be suspicious of leading men and not without cause, as Maurice has a weakness 
for strong women. So Robin Getting On a Bit has been shelved.

It shone the spotlight on two – not to mince matters – minor characters, and 
quite knocked spots off the stars, Rob "The Rat" Tichener and Helen "What do 
you mean you are going back to your wife?" Archer. Robin will be played by Rob, 
and Marion by Helen's best friend. Friar Tuck will try to separate them if 
things get nasty. "It's going to be a very odd production," as Rob's 
unsuspicious but perceptive wife remarked.

For the merry men I strongly recommend Moanin' Joe Grundy ("I ain't never 
going to get no better") and Darrell the chippie chippie ("I know when I'm not 
wanted"), who have been grizzling on for months. Singly you want to kill them 
but, trust me, together they will be hilarious. What's more, they both have a 
natural facility for diverting money from the rich to the poor. Moanin' Joe has 
just stung Grey Gables for £3,000, and Darrell has touched everyone in Ambridge 
for a tenner.

To put the tin lid on a terrible month, Niels Bohr has been found among Ed's 
herd, and has killed three cows. (Ed: The infection is believed to be neospora. 
Andersen and Andersen have asked me to point out that Niels Bohr is entirely 
blameless. Apart from that atomic thing, of course.)

A Month in Ambridge returns on 10 December
 