
'Hi, this is me, I have scars to show you." The 20-year-old rapper Angel Haze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/angel-haze> begins talking casually about 
the most raw, unflinching song she has written but her words soon pour out, as 
though she has practised them in her head for years. "When I listened back, I 
felt disgusted. I wanted everyone to feel that. It was good that they felt it, 
because it was fucking wrong. I want someone who's a father to listen to the 
song, and be like: 'No one had better ever fucking touch my daughter like that. 
And if they do, you can tell me.'"

Quietly uploaded to her Soundcloud account last October, Cleaning Out My 
Closet – a version of theEminem <https://www.theguardian.com/music/eminem> 
track of the same name – tackles the sexual abuse Haze endured between the ages 
of seven and 10. She spares the listener nothing: the graphic details of what 
happens to her body, the fury and trauma that run through her mind. Redemption 
comes at the end, but not before you're left physically reeling. "There are 
people who go through this shit every day, and people turn a blind eye," says 
Haze. "They're too scared to say what happened to them. To make people feel 
uncomfortable." Of all the responses she has had, the ones she treasures most 
are from fellow survivors. "Surprisingly, more boys than girls," she muses. "A 
lot of guys were like: 'I've been suffering, I don't know how to love anyone, 
you really helped me with that.'"

The brutal catharsis of Cleaning Out My Closet is in keeping with the 
no-holds-barred honesty that runs through Haze's work. If hip-hop's most 
fundamental maxim is to keep it real, she not only passes the test but 
redefines it. Over the six mixtapes she has released to date, she documents and 
dissects her inner life with dexterous skill and intelligence – fromgothic 
fantasies <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=msDsL3Y7xfQ> so dark that Haze's 
producer nearly downed tools (he couldn't see God in it and tried to get her to 
change the line "don't scream, don't ask for God" before he'd continue working 
on it, but eventually backed down) to evocative outpourings ofdeeply felt love 
poetry <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bEObhpJ18oo> to ruminations on sexuality 
and religion. (Haze is a self-confessed hopeless romantic: "I'm really obsessed 
with the idea of love. I have this desire to have this immaculate form of love 
that really doesn't exist, so my obsession goes on through life and I never 
find it and I end up miserable. But it makes me a better writer.") When she 
turns her hand to more traditionalbattle raps 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=szj7efHG-00>, the ferocity with which she 
shreds her foes is lent extra significance by her experiences.

BACKSPIN TV - Angel Haze "Werkin Girls" 
<http://www.muzu.tv/backspin/angel-haze-werkin-girls-music-video/1609857/> on 
MUZU.TV <http://www.muzu.tv/>. 
Not that Haze is solely defined by her intensity. When we meet in London she 
rapidly switches between flippancy and seriousness – a technique likely 
designed to keep people on their toes. Describing herself as both a 
"super-sarcastic big bitch" and "really awkward to meet", Haze cracks jokes 
that you're not quite sure are jokes about the strip clubs she wants to visit 
later ("I want those hos naked!" she declares before the interview has even 
started), and dissolves into laughter when describing her rapid-fire rapping 
technique ("You have to train your mouth to move and your jaw not to lock").

As a teenager, she posted a video on YouTube called How To Give No Fucks 
<http://whereethewildthingsare.tumblr.com/post/3277571476/iraeen-how-to-give-no-fucks-raeen>
 – essentially a step-by-step guide to building up a defence mechanism 
involving sarcasm, blank facial expressions and a solid dose of self-help. You 
get the impression it has been put into practice a lot.

Now signed to a major label and working on her debut album proper, the Detroit 
native – voted third in theBBC Sound of 2013 poll 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/efxzp6> – is becoming a legitimate force in rap 
despite her unlikely background. Born Raykeea Wilson, not only is she gay (she 
describes herself as pansexual) and mixed-race (she taught herself Tsalagi, the 
language of her Native American forebears), but she was raised within the 
traditions of the Pentecostal Greater Apostolic Faith, a church that Haze now 
describes as a cult. "We all lived in the same community, within 10 minutes of 
each other," she says. "You weren't allowed to talk to anyone outside of that, 
you weren't allowed to wear jewellery, listen to music, to eat certain things, 
to date people … you weren't allowed to do pretty much anything. Church was on 
Sundays, Wednesdays and Fridays. When they did revivals it was every

day. I used to just crawl under the bench and try to sleep."

The resentment she now feels is reflected in the religious imagery with which 
she peppers her most thrilling raps. "I'm challenging saints, and beating they 
fuckin' asses with the bibles they came with," she spat onan early freestyle 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fdFkM4g9ZNo> on Kanye West's Monster. More 
concisely, she declared, "I'm Satan, and I'mma take your ass to church now," on 
last year'sNew York <http://vimeo.com/45790839>.

"I think of religion as something that stains the person," she says. "It's a 
mindset you can never get free from, it's always in the back of your head. Even 
mine! I think, am I going to hell for this? Then I have to remind myself that I 
don't fucking believe in hell!" Haze laughs again, even more uproariously.

Does she enjoy saying things others might find blasphemous? She leans forward, 
eyes flashing: "I thrive off that shit."

When she was 15, she escaped from the church's clutches after her mother fell 
out with its leaders and they moved to New York City. Unsurprisingly, she found 
it hard to relate to classmates at school. "It's the worst thing ever," she 
says, remembering a particularly excruciating incident involving a milkshake 
and her ignorance of theKelis song <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6AwXKJoKJz4>>
 with that title. Now, she is more sanguine. "The first Biggie [Smalls] song I 
heard was, what, a few months ago? Peter Rosenberg [hip-hop DJ at New York's 
Hot 97 station] played it to me live on air to embarrass me. I can't remember 
what it was." But was she embarrassed? Haze laughs contemptuously and 
emphatically. "No! When I first got signed, I read that Angel Haze shouldn't be 
a rapper, because she only started listening to music four years ago, she 
doesn't know anything about rap and she doesn't have enough credentials. That's 
how most hip-hop heads think, though. Bullshit."
 Angel Haze performs at the Hoxton Bar, October 2012. Photograph: Robin Little 
Haze's refusal to play along with the rap industry's expectations is 
refreshing, although she has been drawn into a well-publicised Twitter storm 
involving fellow up-and-coming rapper Azealia Banks. Insults of increasing 
viciousness flew back and forth – revolving around the question of whether 
Haze, as an outsider, had any right to record a song called New York – before 
the pair then tradedswiftly-recorded diss tracks 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/musicblog/2013/jan/04/angel-haze-on-the-edge>.

When we first meet a few weeks earlier, she sighs when she speaks about rap 
beef: "A lot of it is male rappers pitting female rappers against each other. A 
lot of it has to do with female rappers and their insecurities, wanting to be 
the only one because people have gotten accustomed to seeing that. It doesn't 
have to be like that. There isn't 'the' male rapper, there are all these dumb 
niggas out there rapping about dumb shit. Why can't girls have that? I don't 
partake in it. I've seen a lot of stuff in the press about Azealia and I being, 
like, friends and whatever … I just have a genuine respect for any female 
rapper, even the ones I don't particularly think are good."

When we speak again in late January, she sighs again. "Most people will never 
know the whole story or the truth behind [what happened with Banks], so for me 
it's dead and done and in the past. I don't have any problems with anyone." 
Later that week, she takes once more to YouTube to apologise for being a 
"bully".

However, more intriguing was Haze's calling out of Lupe Fiasco on the same 
mixtape that featured Cleaning Out My Closet in October. The original version 
of Fiasco's trackBitch Bad <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C3m3t_PxiUI> (from 
last year's album Food & Liquor II) saw the rapper attempting to stand up to 
misogyny, while only digging a hole for himself by blaming women for it. Haze 
flipped the narrative, detailing exactly how boys and men are shaped by, and 
end up perpetuating, anti-female attitudes. "Yes!" she exclaims. "I had to 
embarrass Lupe Fiasco because he did it all wrong. He did the woman-shaming, 
'It's your fault, bitch' thing. The feminist in me wouldn't let this live. For 
me, it was important to portray what he couldn't."

Was the choice of the Eminem track motivated by similar feelings, given the 
prevalence of sexual violence in his material, or was that a tribute to his 
confessionalism?

"No. I love Eminem for the fact that he uses violent sexual imagery. People 
don't really get the extent that Eminem's music is emotionally driven. For me, 
he is clear from my line of fire because I love everything he's done."

It's the kind of statement that might seem inconsistent with Haze's feminist 
beliefs but she doesn't seem conflicted. She condemns rappers who trade on rape 
jokes for mere humour, and thoughtfully muses on the logistics of taking 
offence. "I feel like my [Native American] heritage isn't important … until I 
see shit like Gwen Stefani's video." The reference is to the No Doubt video for
Looking Hot <http:>, in which Stefani wore an eagle-feather plume and a leather 
fringe designed to portray a Native American woman. "I didn't have a problem," 
Haze continues, "but then you see white people in America discussing it and 
saying: Oh, the 'Indians' are mad about nothing. And they don't understand the 
significance of what she did, how she made us look."

She shrugs, and refers to How To Give No Fucks once again: as most members of 
marginalised groups realise, this is often as imperative as fighting back.

A few weeks later, the issue of rape culture 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2013/jan/07/rape-culture-libby-brooks> 
is dominating the media following the gang rape and murder of a 23-year-old 
medical student in Delhi and allegations of a coverup in an alleged gang rape 
in Ohio.

Speaking on the phone, Haze says: "People say, maybe you shouldn't have worn 
such a short skirt, instead of, maybe you – as a male – shouldn't have raped. 
And even though it's so prominent in our culture – stories every day! – people 
always say: You're lying. Every rapist is quick to tell the victim: Nobody's 
gonna believe you. When I finally told someone, they did nothing about it, and 
that's the worst thing of all."

Haze recently found some old photos on Facebook that brought this home to her: 
of her, pictured withJerry Sandusky 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jerry_Sandusky>, the former Pennsylvania State 
University assistant football coach, on a college open day. "He was cool and 
paternal and took us everywhere. To the Skybox at the stadium. To the fucking 
locker rooms, where it happened." Sandusky was convicted last year of 45 
charges of sexual abuse of young boys over a 15-year period.

Neither of Haze's rapists have ever been convicted. "Yet everyone seems to 
know," she says tightly. "I want to say I want to bring a case, but I honestly 
don't know how or where to begin. They'll say, it doesn't matter any more. It 
was 10 years ago. They'll say it was too long ago."

She trails off, and starts talking about her forthcoming album. "I'm taking my 
time to craft this, because you only ever get one debut album and you're judged 
on it for ever. I want it to be perfect." It doesn't sound intentional, but 
it's an echo of how Haze's Cleaning Out My Closet ends: "I made it through 
everything, I made you look like a clown / I'm fucking great, can't fucking 
hate you, nigga: Look at me now."

Angel Haze intends for the whole world to look at her as a great, not as a 
victim: the best revenge.

Angel Haze's mixtape Reservation can be downloaded at whenitraeens.com 
<http://whenitraeens.com/>

Her UK tour dates are: 7 May, London Scala (Sold out); 8 May, Brighton 
Concorde 2; 9 May, London Heaven; 10 May, Birmingham Library; 11 May, 
Manchester Ruby Lounge; 12 May,Glasgow ABC 2.

Comments will be opened on this article at around 9.30am GMT tomorrow.
 