
A veteran correspondent who has covered the Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> conflict for the last 35 years 
made an astonishing assertion following David Cameron's speech marking the 
publication of the Saville report on Tuesday.

As we left the "lock down" room of the Derry hotel we were holed up in reading 
the report one hour before its official launch, my colleague turned to a group 
of us and said: "If someone on the council proposed thatDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> be given the Freedom of 
Derry he would get it!"

Until the release of the Bloody Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/bloodysunday> report and the prime minister's 
statesmanlike introduction to it in the House of Commons, it would have been 
unthinkable that nationalist Derry would have considered giving such an award 
to a leader of the Conservative party. At the very least the thousands who 
turned out in Derry's Guildhall Square to watch Cameron deliver Saville's 
findings gave a massive cheer when the prime minister said he was "deeply 
sorry" for the loss of so much life on 30 January 1972. They cheered again when 
he admitted he found Lord Saville's conclusions "shocking". And they cheered 
and clapped once more when he insisted you could not defend the indefensible 
even when it came to the British army – an institution that he reveres. For 
many Derry people it seemed the tone Cameron struck – humble, apologetic, firm 
– was pitch perfect.

 Even if some of the Bloody Sunday families pursue the surviving soldiers 
accused of "unjustifiable" shootings in the report, either through the criminal 
or civil courts, there does seem to be a collective sense of closure within 
Derry and throughout nationalist Ireland in relation to this totemic massacre 
of the Troubles. It may also mark a seminal day in the tortured history of 
Anglo-Irish relations. Evidence for this can be found in the lack of outrage 
thus far over some of Saville's conclusions.

For example the report found that the British state, whether at cabinet level 
at the time or among the highest echelons of the military, planned the use of 
lethal force against rioters and demonstrators in Derry. And it did not point 
the finger of blame at the then-unionist-dominated Northern Ireland government, 
which six months before Bloody Sunday had coaxed London into the disastrous 
policy of internment without trial. The fact that few voices were raised to 
protest about these particular conclusions was evidence that an apology and the 
exoneration of the dead had been enough for most.

On the fringes of the festive crowd gathered in Guildhall Square were a 
handful of republican dissidents who oppose Sinn Féin's peace strategy, some 
wholly through politics and others through the continuation of "armed 
struggle". Throughout Irish history the road of constitutional, peaceful change 
has been diverted by the actions of recalcitrant minorities.

Even in the relatively prosperous years of the 1960s it was a vocal minority 
on the unionist side – the Paisleyites – who disrupted and frustrated attempts 
by a reform-minded unionist prime minister to meet the basic demands of the 
civil rights movement. Another rebellious minority – the remnants of the 
republican movement who refused to accept the IRA's defeat in the 50s border 
campaign – formed the nucleus of the Provisional IRA.

The Saville report will placate the overwhelming majority of nationalists not 
only in Derry but throughout both states on the island of Ireland. Some justice 
will have been seen to have been done at long last. But for a new recalcitrant 
minority, like those I encountered at the edge of the euphoria in Derry city 
centre last Tuesday, one terrible wrong righted will never be enough. Even in a 
week when such a wound as Bloody Sunday was being healed, diehard republicanism 
refused to march into history. Because as I write this, army bomb-disposal 
officers are currently dealing with a suspected explosive device placed inside 
a van outside a police station on the Irish border.
 