
The man who let the genie out of the bottle is sitting, with fine serendipity, 
in Cork. The scene unfolding before us has happened, will happen, scores, 
hundreds of times around the world - in Singapore, Sydney, Saint Louis, Paris, 
Barcelona, Duluth - but it is unfolding before us today with a quite particular 
Irishness. A chef is running up and down the street outside, popping into 
restaurants to tell his mates that the great Tony Bourdain is in town. Some 
shy, some exuberant, they are climbing to the first floor of the Hi-B Bar to 
pay homage, to buy him a drink, to have their photo taken. 'Tony!' come the 
cries, and 'Hey Tony, good on you!', and 'Jesus it that really yer man?' 
Someone wins a bathload of money on the National and buys Guinness for the 
whole room, which is starting by then to fill with fiddle music. It's a 
struggle to remember which year we're in. It can only be a matter of time 
before a horse is led up the stairs or someone bombs the neighbouring GPO.

He is trying to talk to me about the words of wisdom of, variously, Graham 
Greene, A J Liebling, Joseph Conrad, Henry Miller and, in his eyes the greatest 
of them all, Homer J Simpson, but we are continually interrupted. They offer 
him meals, they offer him recipes, they ask if he's tried the local cheese, 
they simply stand close and look at his stick-slim 6ft4in, and the gnarled 
boots, and the battered jacket, and stare. Personally I'd be all in favour of 
seeing off the drunkest of them with a stiff knobkerrie to the back of the 
neck, butAnthony Bourdain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/anthonybourdain> - he likes to be 
called Tony after, say, the first drink - is taking it all with good grace. 
This is partly because you'd have to be particularly ungracious not to, but 
also because two of the things he likes most in the world are drink and chefs - 
and also because he is quite conscious of what he has done.

Six years ago this chef at Les Halles, a Park Avenue brasserie, wrote what he 
now calls 'my obnoxious, over-testosteroned account of my life in the 
restaurant business'. Kitchen Confidential was an instant hit. The first real 
account of proper life in a restaurant kitchen, the cheating and the burns and 
the drugs and the short-cuts and the sex and the threats, and the tears, and 
the savage triumphs, it was written with magnifi cent flair. It delighted the 
rest of us, whether eager restaurant-goers or simple readers: we were being let 
in on the secrets of the trade, perhaps best exemplified by the chapter 'Don't 
order fish on a Monday', first published in the New Yorker, which gave him the 
confidence to do the book, and kicked off the whole phenomenon. But what he 
also did, perhaps more significantly, was to map a whole new community, with 
its mores and its language and its shared experiences: the community of cooks 
and chefs.

'Something has, indeed, happened. Everywhere I've gone in the last few years 
I've had it. There was this world, this very different world, which I knew 
about, and since I wrote about it cooks, chefs, have told me, everywhere, that 
they just went, oh, that's me, that's my life. I can remember something 
slightly similar happening to me, years ago, with Marco Pierre White. When his 
book White Heat came out. It wasn't just the recipes, the writing. It was him. 
Here, finally, was a guy like me, like cooks I knew, chefs I knew. Big, rugged, 
arrogant, real. For decades, forever, chefs had been portrayed as fat bobbing 
little Frenchmen with joke moustaches. They were the help.' He has problems 
with aspects of the 'celebrity chef racket', mainly being thought of or ever 
described as part of it, after 30 years of thinking of himself simply as a good 
professional chef, 'but, in the end, it has been good for for food. I hate some 
bits. I hated the Naked Chef. Fine, yes, he did good things for school food or 
whatever, but, you know, I don't want my chefs to be cute and adorable. Don't 
speak to me. You work for Sainsbury's now.

'But one thing that it has changed is the value given to the chef, and that's 
not just good for us, it's good for food. When I was working it was all about - 
if you hold up your station tonight, work properly as a line chef, don't get 
late, don't fall into the weeds, then you felt like a rock star ... and now 
some of them pretty much are. And what it means is that the customer is no 
longer king. What you're going to be eating in the next year is decided by 
chefs. If the consensus is that pot-bellies are in next season, that's what's 
on your plate. And I think that's a good thing, because we know, obviously, 
about food. I think I realised the change, the tipping-point, was the success 
of sushi in America. Hell, when Americans can be made to eat that, and come 
back for it, you know the picture is changing. It's a good time to be a chef.' 
The bizarre thing, though, is that for him, after all those years working, just 
when the profession comes good, he's not in it any more. He's travelling the 
world, making TV programmes, writing; he has hardly lifted a knife in anger. 
'Yes, I'm probably aware of the fact I'd be crap in a kitchen at this point. My 
hands are like a baby's bottom.' But was this in the plan?

'The plan? Nothing was ever in the plan. Even now, I still think, this is all 
going to come crashing down; I'm always slightly staggered that I'm actually 
getting away with this. But back then? Let me say, mildly, that it comes as 
something of a very rude surprise. If you'd told me I'd be here when I was 30 I 
would have accused you of talking nonsense, but not so politely - Christ, I 
didn't even plan to make it to this age. My plan was, basically - fuck it, I'm 
going to be dead by then.'

He had, as you will know if you read the book, which you really should, been 
something of an avid cocaine and crack user for much of his kitchen life. He'd 
managed to wean himself off , but one of the upsides of his new-found fame was 
that he stayed off. 'Partly, you know, it was the being ripped off that made me 
stop. I'd just hit that stage where I thought, do I really want to spend any 
more of my life being ripped off by fellow crackheads? Because they will always 
rip you off, there is no honour. By the way - why are they still so silly in 
England about cocaine, they seem behind the curve on it: it's everywhere. In 
New York now it's seen as slightly shameful. You don't tell your friends if you 
do it, it's just embarrassing. Anyway, I thought, on balance, I'd rather live.' 
So he travelled, and filmed, and he also, importantly, got to write about it.

The process of making two series of food programmes saw him visit countries he 
had longed to see and eat foods he had at least wondered about - all the bad 
bits, the grisly bits, wrapped veal-calf's face, and the still-beating heart of 
a cobra: pretty much as far you could possibly be from the blandness of much 
American food.

The Nasty Bits, a collection of his journalism during those travelling years , 
is everything you would expect: acerbic, fun, occasionally rash. He's changed 
his mind, he says now, about a couple of things: a splendid rant, for instance, 
about London pubs going gastro, when he just wanted to sit and smoke and drink 
pints in a dirty bar. 'Gastro-pub?' he writes. 'What the fuck is that? For me, 
fancy food in a traditional old pub is about as inviting as the phrases 'hot 
male-on-male action', or 'tonight: Billy Joel live!' or 'free prostate exam 
with every drink' - but now he thinks this was all 'a bit misguided: they're 
there to stay, and can be pretty good too.' Changed his mind a little, while 
we're on the subject, about Billy Joel, who gets both barrels in another 
article about the music busy kitchens work by, and particularly that which 
should never be played. After that appeared, he explains, Joel actually got in 
touch.

'He called my sister and asked to book, and what could I say? I'm D-list and 
he's A-list, and he'd made the first move, and I'm not going to be rude for the 
sake of it. He was fine, sense of humour, more than all right. Sent me a 
picture later, he'd managed to get into the kitchen and have his picture taken 
with my chefs, and a note saying, "So I guess you do allow Billy Joel into your 
kitchen after all." Hard to dislike someone like that. His music? Well, of 
course, that's still truly shit. Uptown Girl. Jesus.'

He hasn't changed his mind, hardened it if anything, on other subjects. There 
are frothing and splendid rants at London's Aberdeen Angus Steak House chains, 
and grand personal ones against food 'purists' such as Woody Harrelson 
insisting on eating nothing but raw vegetables while amid the many culinary 
delights of Thailand. 'I meant every word of this, and still do. I shake with 
rage.'

He writes about customers: I ask who makes the worst customer. 'The worst? 
Easy. The man who comes in and as soon as you see or hear him you know he's 
saying, "I am determined, no matter what happens, to have a miserable time 
tonight. Whether the food is great or not, and no matter what the wine and 
service are like, I will show off in front of my companions and make life hell 
for the waiter, because my life is all about power and I am a seriously unhappy 
jerk." There are plenty of them. Everywhere. Them and the psycho food nerds. 
They take notes while eating, for Christ's sake. They're not the very worst but 
they're worrisome, demanding for the chef. Chefs and regular restaurant-goers 
are the best, and leave the best tips. I love other chefs.'

Bad restaurants? 'Well, you always know it yourself. When you see the owner 
and the chef sitting together, and the wine waiter joins them ... you know 
you're not going in there. Why do they keep opening? It's a dream for people. 
Hubris. Ego.

'But it is still a hard business. Despite it being a better time for chefs, it 
can still be a tough business. Even for good places. Especially sometimes for 
good places. Critics come. Foodies come. And if they come on a quiet night, 
whatever the reason, suddenly it's, oh, this place is so last year, even though 
you've just fucking opened. That's why you should never run the hottest place 
in town. So it's a shame good places go, but they do. A real shame when you see 
the crud that stays open.

'Those places I don't understand, just doing bad food. It takes some doing. 
Making good pasta is so much easier than making bad stuff. It actually takes 
quite an effort to make poor linguine pomodora. So those places, and your 
Planet Hollywoods - hell, I want to enjoy a meal, not queue for Bruce Willis 
memorabilia ... why does low-end food in the West suck so much? Compare it to 
the stuff you get in Asia, for a tenth of the price. In too much of the West, 
everyone wants the guarantee of safety, and never having to make any decisions.

'If there's hope, and there is, it will come by looking to Singapore. There's 
a very timid country, with heavy heavy hygiene regulations, but they have 
still, somehow, managed to preserve good food: the stuff you will get at the 
roadside continues to be fantastic. In America, there's still too much of what 
Liebling called 'the crippling handicap of affluence'. When there's filet 
mignon everywhere, nobody has to try. Shall we nip out for another?'

Smoking is all that really interrupts him at this stage: it's a year since 
Ireland banned it, and its lack is all that's spoiling the mood upstairs. 'When 
it happened back home I was outraged. Eventually I just accepted I was on the 
losing side of the hysteria. Most chefs smoke. Yes, it messes up the palate, 
but the palate's power begins to diminish after the mid-twenties. So yes my 
palate's probably not as perfect but ... why else do you think they invented 
salt? But, then, to ban it here? Scotland? England? Well I don't think I'm 
exaggerating, do you, to call it the worst thing that has ever happened in the 
whole history of civilisation.'

His writing reads particularly true, it struck me as I read the proofs of his 
book on the plane, because he knows so often whereof he talks. He knows the 
grand French dishes and sauces, understands the language and the terms, and 
because he knows them he can, if he chooses, revere or lambast them with the 
confidence of having, for too many years, cooked them.

'I do know my stuff properly, yes,' he says. 'But you can go on too much about 
the thinking behind it all. All it really is is a coagulation of protein. 
What's interesting is what all good chefs do, even if they don't know all the 
science: they're applying reptile logic. We look, touch, taste, smell.' He is 
particularly good on this, I remember from Kitchen Confidential, when singing 
the praises of the nonAmericans who do so much good work in New York's 
kitchens: the Ecuadorians, for instance. 'He may not know what a soubise is, 
but he can sure make one. He may not know who Vatel was - but who cares? Vatel 
punked out over a late fish delivery and offed himself like a bad poet. 
Somebody had to cover his station the next day.'

And now he has met many of them, from all around the world, and most of them 
have shaken his hand, and there are another two coming up the stairs here in 
Cork to do the same, and then we begin slowly, as a soft smirr of rain drifts 
down outside, to get to the darker sides of success.

'What did it get me? It got me the world. But you do pay a price when all your 
dreams come true.'

Someone interrupts for an autograph, and it's a while before I can prompt him 
on what the price was, and a while again before his careful voice falls a 
little softer. 'Well. My home. My friends. My country. My kitchen. My 
profession.

'Oh, I enjoy the filming, the travelling - hell, the places and the things 
I've seen, who would have dreamed, I would never have dreamed, how can I be 
ungrateful for that? And the writing, much of the writing. But what did Henry 
Miller say about being a writer - something about it being your job to betray 
the whole human race.

'And, for me, writing is so much easier than cooking. I know what it's like to 
work hard. I know what a lot of my peers are still doing every day. I don't 
miss the standing on my feet for 16 hours a day. But I do miss the sense of 
certainty, of absolute quality, the feeling you get at the end when you can 
assess whether what you did, the skills you brought, have resulted in success 
or failure.

'Being a dishwasher, succeeding that night as part of a group - that was the 
first time I ever went home feeling proud of myself.

'I miss the chef talk. Five or six chefs, all talking away about someone who's 
a backstabbing treacherous psycho, all agreeing, completely, and then into the 
anger someone just says, yeah, but he can cook. I miss that. Cooking is such an 
intimate thing. There's no lying in the kitchen. You can't massage or spin your 
ability: you can't even lie about your personal life, because problems come 
through.'

His own personal life began to fall apart not long ago. You could blame the 
success of the book only in part: it was because of one physical place that 
success got him, and that was Vietnam.

'I'd read Greene. Conrad. Maugham. And Vietnam was just like the books, just 
like the movies, only better. The guileless generosity of strangers, waking up 
smelling those smells, seeing those sights. And having, once, one perfect meal, 
a confluence of everything good, a source of perfect happiness; I was almost 
ready to believe in God.

'But there was quite a big downside to all of that.' His eyes are intently on 
me now, the background chatter receding. 'I knew that my whole previous life 
was doomed. It was no longer going to be normal. I had seen that ... colour ... 
and I knew that that had changed me, altered the way I would look at things. 
And the first time I went back to America, I found I was right. Everything was 
flat. Everything.' He doesn't go into too many details, but his marriage to 
Nancy broke up shortly afterwards. 'She was the love of my life. But everything 
changed.'

There are vague mentions of girlfriends , but he is quite sure that the one 
regret he doesn't have is not having children. 'I would have been a shit 
parent. I'm a very good uncle. The evil uncle who lets them do everything. But 
a parent? Up until very recently I could hardly take care of myself.

'But ... look ... yes, there are regrets. But, also, and never mind this 
extraordinary change in life, the book - I have had so many things. So many 
other things. I have loved with all my heart, and I have been loved. I knew 
better people than I deserved. I had more fun than I deserved.

'What I do regret is letting people down. Not being able to be a complete 
human being. Long before I was even on TV I was always, somehow, seeing myself 
as if I was in a movie: selfish, narcissistic. And in being that selfish I must 
have disappointed people, and all my regrets are about disappointing people - 
as a friend, as a lover, being a letdown. Cooks. That explains why a lot of us 
go into the business in the first place. In there, there was something you 
could control, a way you could feel good about yourself.

'And I know that I was a good chef, and a good employer. If you came to me, 
even if you worked as a salad man or a dishwasher, I would be loyal, a mentor, 
a friend. Even if it was a bit like Michael and Freddo in The Godfather - you 
know, of course, my friend, that if you break the rules I will kill you ...'

I leave him chatting to his new friends about the Mob and go outside for a 
last cigarette myself and when I return there is a strange look in his eyes. He 
motions me over, leans across conspiratorially, and quietly says my name.

'I don't know what's happening. Just while you were out ... there was 
something. Something about the light, that music. Chefs nearby. I don't know 
what's happening but t feels really good.'

And when I glance back, a bit later, seeing him still there, smiling quietly, 
the image that strikes me is one from his books: the attention every good chef 
must pay to setting out his mise-en-place. The perfect, inviolate piles and 
layers and just-so angles into which the good chef arranges his knives and 
towels and boards for the evening, and which can make or break his performance 
in the night ahead. This wry, kind, thoughtful man needs, perhaps, to shake off 
a little more guilt at his success, and get on with enjoying the wealth of 
learning his travels can bring, and perhaps, slowly, he's beginning to get 
there: perhaps, with a quiet smile on his face and a pint of Guinness to his 
left and a couple of chefs talking Goodfellas to his right, we are looking at 
the mise-en-place for the post-50 Bourdain, the mise for the rest of his life.

But a cigarette would be perfect.
 