
A pair of stolen NC Wyeth paintings worth up to $500,000 apiece have been 
recovered and will be displayed inMaine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/maine> along with four other stolen 
paintings recouped nearly a year ago in California, officials said on Thursday.

The two paintings were recovered last month when a third party surrendered 
them to a retired FBI agent in the Boston area, Harold Shaw, special agent in 
charge of the bureau’s Boston field office, told reporters at the Portland 
Museum ofArt <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art>, where the 
paintings were on display. No additional arrests have been made, and the 
investigation is continuing, he said.
 This poster released by the FBI shows one of two missing NC Wyeth paintings. 
Photograph: AP 
All six Wyeth paintings were stolen in May 2013 from the home of a Portland 
businessman. Four of them were recovered by the FBI last December in Los 
Angeles, and three people were arrested at the time.

Celebrating the return of the remaining paintings, Portland police chief 
Michael Sauschuck called it a “monumental day” for law enforcement, the art 
community and the collector who was reunited with valuable property.

“This is a big deal for the victim,” he said. “We’re certainly always happy to 
bring these pieces of property home to our victims. And I’ll tell you it’s a 
big deal if we’re returning a TV set, right? It’s a big deal to recover and 
return six paintings like this right here in the city of Portland.”

The FBI had announced a $20,000 reward for the two paintings after the other 
four were retrieved from a pawn shop in Beverly Hills, California.

Investigators said Thursday they now believe paintings “The Encounter on 
Freshwater Cliff” and “Go Dutton, and that right speedily” never left New 
England. Police have not identified the man who turned them over on 9 October 
and the FBI declined to say whether he is part of the investigation. The reward 
remains uncollected.

Two of the three men arrested in Los Angeles are behind bars.

Lawrence Estrella, of Worcester, Massachusetts, was sentenced to more than 
seven years in prison after pleading guilty to transporting four stolen 
paintings to California, and Oscar Leroy Roberts, of North Hollywood, 
California, was sentenced 2 1/3 years for using the stolen paintings to secure 
a loan.

The third, Dean Coroniti, also of North Hollywood, California, is expected to 
be sentenced next month after pleading guilty to possession of stolen property.

Wyeth, one of the nation’s greatest painters and illustrators, was patriarch 
of a family of artists including his son, the late Andrew Wyeth, creator of 
“Christina’s World”, and grandson Andrew Wyeth, also a painter. The family 
would spend most of the year in Chadds Ford, Pennsylvania, and summers on the 
Maine coast.

The six NC Wyeth paintings that were stolen will go on exhibition starting 
Saturday and running through the new year, said Mark Bessire, director of the 
Portland museum.

“The owner is incredibly relieved to have these irreplaceable works returned 
to his family,” he said. “Now that the ordeal is nearly over, he’s entrusted 
the museum to share them with the public.”
 