
Protesters in Port Said tried to block the Suez Canal and deadly riots broke 
out in Cairo on Saturday after a judge upheld the death sentences for 21 people 
involved in Egypt's worst ever football crowd disaster and jailed a further 24.

The unrest follows a month of violence in the northern Egyptian city where 
more than 50 people have already been killed and hundreds injured in clashes 
with police.

On Saturday, Port Said residents set loose boats, attempted to block the Suez 
with ferries, and attacked the city's stadium after the verdict. In Cairo, 
hardcore football fans set on fire a police building and two restaurants, and 
blocked several roads and one of the city's main bridges. At least two people 
died during the ensuing clashes with police.

The fighting is part of the fallout from a stadium disaster in February last 
year, in whichmore than 70 fans of Cairo club Ahly FC were killed 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/middle-east-live/2012/feb/02/egypt-port-said-football-dsaster-live-updates>
 in rioting and crushes after a game against Port Said's Masry FC. Twenty-one 
Masry fans were condemned to death in January for their role in that riot – a 
verdict that sparked a bloodbath in which at least 40 people died, and set in 
motiona month of civil disobedience 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/feb/01/port-said-protests-egypt-anniversary>
. Throughout February, Port Said has been paralysed by strikes, school walkouts 
and further clashes that have seen government offices set alight and ransacked. 
Port Said residents have resorted to civil disobedience because they believe 
that those condemned in January's verdict were sacrificed in order to placate 
the restive Ahly fans in Cairo.

That feeling of injustice was exacerbated by Sunday's verdict, which was met 
by screams of horror from Port Said residents watching on television in cafes 
across the city.

Many felt their friends had convicted for nothing. "Twenty-five years for 
someone helping to carry the dead outside the stadium," said Mohamed Ataya, a 
Port Said fan alluding to the case of his friend – jailed on Sunday – who Ataya 
said was not involved in the violence. "They are sacrificing us to satisfy 
Cairo."

Across town, Port Said ultras targeted their own stadium in anger. "Some of 
them were just throwing rocks – and yet they have been sentenced to death," 
said Nader, one of the ultras, who declined to give his surname.

"What we need now is to separate from the rest of the country," added Ataya, 
whose feeling of estrangement from the rest ofEgypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> is matched by many in Port Said.

"Port Said is always targeted, the city and all its people," said Mona Metwaly 
at a funeral procession for one of those killed this week. "They don't count 
Port Said as part of Egypt."

Hundreds gathered outside the local government headquarters following the 
verdict carrying flags that called for the creation of an independent state of 
Port Said. Residents feel scapegoated by not just the verdict, but also the 
military curfew enforced in the city since violence erupted in January. 
Opposite the burnt-out government headquarters, which was badly damaged this 
week, there hangs a quotation from the Qur'an that sums up Port Said's feeling 
of isolation: "A few people can beat the many."

Others dragged a donkey through the streets daubed with the words "Fuck Ahly".
 Egyptian protesters run for cover from tear gas fired by riot police during 
clashes in Cairo. Photograph: Reuters 
But in Cairo, Ahly fans were themselves angered by the verdict. At first they 
set off fireworks in celebration. But soon sourness set in, as the Cairo fans 
realised that 28 Port Said supporters had been acquitted, and that only two of 
the nine police officers on trial had been convicted.

In both Cairo and Port Said, there is a belief that the 2012 stadium massacre 
was at least partly set up by police – a sentiment compounded by a widespread 
antipathy for the police. Police brutality was a leading cause of the 2011 
uprising that toppled Hosni Mubarak, and anger at police has prompted much of 
the violence that has affected Egypt beyond Port Said in recent weeks. Even in 
Port Said, the ongoing civil unrest stems not just from the recent verdicts, 
but also from fury at recent police brutality.

"We want revenge on the police, blood by blood, head by head," said Barakat 
Mubarak, another protester shot by police this week, who rolled up his trousers 
to show his wounds.

Anger at police in Port Said is so great that on Saturday police forces 
retreated into their stations, fearing for their lives.

On Friday, two protesters were buried in back-to-back funerals after allegedly 
being shot by policemen. There are multiple reports from human rights activists 
and local campaigners of police firing indiscriminately at Port Said residents 
over the past few weeks.

But officers holed up in el-Sharq police station, near Port Said's fish 
market, were in a state of denial about their role in the violence, blaming the 
deaths on criminals taking advantage of the chaos. "There are a lot of thugs 
beside the demonstrators," said Mohamed el-Adawy, the station's deputy 
commander. "Maybe they shot them by accident."

Others blamed the violence on the dangers of the job. "When people say that we 
are using force against the protesters, you have to go on the other side and 
see the situation when thousands are attacking you and shooting us with 
automatic weapons more advanced than us," said Ahab Kamel, a sub-officer. "We 
are cursed in the street. We are under big psychological pressure, both us and 
our families."

Residents also blame the new Islamist government – led by Egypt's first freely 
elected president, Mohamed Morsi – for failing to reform the police, and many 
see the police and the government as one and the same.

"Mohamed Morsi is beating our children," claimed Samira Ali Zaghloul, at a 
funeral for one of those shot dead this week. "He controls the police," said 
Barakat Mubarak.

But allies of the president say he has little control of an institution that 
is still staffed by Mubarak loyalists and that it will take time to reform. 
"The corruption of the past 60 years is not going to be solved in just one or 
two or even five years," said Walid al-Haddad, a spokesman for Morsi's Freedom 
and Justice party, the political wing of the Muslim Brotherhood.

But human rights activists argue that the Muslim Brotherhood has no genuine 
interest in doing anything about the problem. "They do not intend to reform the 
police," said Aida Seif el-Dawla, co-founder of the Egyptian Association 
Against Torture. "They know that they need the support of the police. They have 
a choice: to remain in power supported by the people or remain in power 
supported by institutions like the police."

But this weekend, such support seems unlikely, as thousands of policemen 
across Egypt refused to deploy in protest at what they see as political 
interference from the Muslim Brotherhood.
 