
Alan Pardew refused to accept that Newcastle are favourites to reach the 
Europa League quarter-finals despite witnessing a spirited display in Moscow. 
The Magpies became the first side to denyAnzhi Makhachkala 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/anzhi-makhachkala> a European victory on 
home soil this season as they fought out a 0-0 draw on the artificial pitch at 
a wintry Luzhniki Stadium.

Indeed, they might have headed into next Thursday night's second leg with a 
precious away goal had Hatem Ben Arfa accept the glorious opportunity which 
came his way on his 26th birthday. In the event, the two sides will battle it 
out at St James' Park with everything to play for, and Pardew is relishing the 
prospect.

The manager said: "I wouldn't say we are favourites because they have got good 
counterattacking abilities in the team, but it's going to be a very different 
game at St James' Park. But we really need to set it up on Sunday [against 
Stoke]. Sunday is something we need to put right.

"If we can get a win there, then I think the mood in our stadium is going to 
be something that's going to be very difficult for Anzhi to cope with. We 
didn't really have to fight the crowd today, and that probably helped us to 
settle."

Pardew was without six members of his strongest team – Tim Krul and Fabricio 
Coloccini through injury, Mathieu Débuchy and Yoan Gouffran, who are ineligible 
in Europe, the sick Papiss Cissé and Jonás Gutiérrez, whose knee his manager 
did not think would stand up to the plastic pitch – and chose not to start with 
Davide Santon, Steven Taylor or Cheik Tioté.

But his confidence in his squad was rewarded with fine individual displays by 
the goalkeeper Rob Elliot, who made two vital saves from Samuel Eto'o, and 
January signings Mapou Yanga-Mbiwa and Massadio Haidara at the back, while Ben 
Arfa returned from a 12-week injury lay-off to play in an unaccustomed striking 
role. Pardew said: "It's something I have thought about in the past with Hatem 
because if I was a central defender, he's the last person I would want to get 
possession in and around the box.

"He obviously isn't 100% fit, but he still put a really good shift in today. 
He actually lasted longer than I thought.

"Dropping deep and Moussa [Sissoko] going in behind, I think it's a nice 
option, and if we lose Cissé any time between now and the end of the year, I 
will look at it again. I think it worked OK and certainly when he us up to 
speed – and I don't think it's going to take him long – he can play that role, 
no problem."

Anzhi, who lost dangerman Willian through injury after 23 minutes, enjoyed 
plenty of possession, but were unable to make much of it with Yanga-Mbiwa 
expertly marshalling his defensive troops. Elliot had to tip Eto'o's dipping 
40th-minute strike over the bar and then get down well to turn his skidding 
effort around a post 16 minutes after the restart.

However, Ben Arfa might have won it for the visitors three minutes later after 
being played in by Yoan Cabaye, but Vladimir Gabulov blocked his ambitious 
chipped effort.

Pardew said: "We got what we deserved tonight. We came and gave a really 
disciplined display. Rob had to make two good saves and really and truly, if 
someone had said that to me before the game I would have taken that. That's a 
really good display in the conditions and environment we were in."

His opposite number Guus Hiddink did not attend the post-match press 
conference because of illness, but assistant Zeljko Petrovic summed up Anzhi's 
emotions. He said: "We played a very complicated game against a team from the 
Premier League, and you can see that between the teams that we played before 
Newcastle, there's a big difference to the Premier League teams.

"We are not disappointed because we played a good game, tactically a very 
strong game, and Newcastle actually didn't play a Premier League game, they 
played a European game." , and Shatov acrobatically fired wide from the 
resulting corner. But Ben Arfa was handed a glorious opportunity to give the 
visitors the lead three minutes later when he was played in by Cabaye, but saw 
his chipped effort easily blocked by Gabulov. It proved to be the France 
international's final act of the night as he was replaced by Shola Ameobi.

Eto'o blazed a long-range free-kick high and wide as his frustration started 
to show, but it took a good block by Eschenko to stop Sylvain Marveaux's 
long-range effort.

Elliot had to field a scuffed effort from Eto'o as time ran down – and the 
visitors held on.
 