
Since losing the 2012 US presidential election, Mitt Romney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/mittromney> has kept a notably low 
profile, a great disappointment to those who had come to enjoy the regular 
campaign appearances of the former Massachusetts governor, his wife, Ann, and 
the couple's five photogenic sons.

People craving their Romney fix will be sated, however, by the publication 
this week of Ann Romney's first book: The Romney Family Table.

The book features more than 100 recipes enjoyed by Romneys past and present. 
But this is more than just a guide for aspiring chefs. Between the recipies,Ann 
Romney <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ann-romney> weaves a narrative of 
life in the family household: Mitt, Tagg, Matthew, Josh, Ben and Craig all make 
regular appearances. Often dressed in chinos.

"For a guy as prominent as Mitt is, his tastes are pretty plain," she begins a 
chapter titled Birthday Celebrations.

"When we were first married, our apartment was too small for a dining table, 
so we folded down the ironing board in the kitchen and ate there, across from 
one another. His favorites were things like pot roast, mashed potatoes, and 
sliced carrots. To this day, he claims that his favorite meats are hot dog and 
hamburger. I guess McDonald's didn't get where it is by serving things people 
don't like."

The family members appear in the recipes, too. There are Mitt's meat loaf 
cakes, which he devours "every birthday", according to his wife (5lbs of minced 
beef, one egg, a chopped onion, some breadcrumbs and some lemon juice, topped 
with a sauce made from half a cup of ketchup mixed with half a cup of brown 
sugar, a teaspoon of dry mustard and a quarter teaspoon of allspice). Josh's 
Heavenly Rolls are sure to set mouths watering: Vanity Fair described Josh 
Romney 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/online/daily/2012/10/Josh-Romney-News-Barbara-Walters-Like-All-Over-Josh-Romney>
as "super-hot" during his father's failed bid for the White House.

As to be expected, Mitt Romney features prominently in the book, and his wife 
releases more detail about the early days of their romance. The couple began 
dating in 1965, when Mitt, two years older than Ann, was in his senior year of 
high school. "Getting to know each other included spending time with our 
respective families, learning their traditions, and spending time at [their 
families'] cottages," Ann Romney writes. "Most of the memories are good, but 
one on morning my dad caught us on the town docks, kissing. Chaperone rules 
were tightened."

The relationship survived the enhanced chaperone regulations, of course, and 
Ann would bear Mitt five sons – "all married, all fathers" – Ann writes in a 
chapter called Sundays and Boys.

"Sunday is a unique family day," Ann says, before drifting into a slightly 
biblical tone: "On Sundays we were all together. What a blessing the Sabbath is 
for raising a family!"

The recommended dish for the Sabbath is chicken pot pie, made with six chicken 
breasts, onions, carrots, celery and and no fewer than 12 tablespoons of butter.

In the next chapter – Welsh Heritage – Ann shares her recipe for skillet 
cakes, all while continuing to write like an over-excited Sunday school teacher 
("How grateful I am for the courage and sacrifice of my grandparents!").

The skillet cake recipe comes from Annie Evans, Ann's "Welsh grandmother". 

"It is required that all family members learn to love this recipe – the Welsh 
blood must live on," Ann writes.

Life in the Romney household was traditional. Ann cooked, Mitt worked, and 
that's the way they liked it. Mitt's involvement with the cooking appears to 
have been limited to overseeing a pancake griddle while serving as a device for 
men everywhere to be patronised.

"I guess men think they're cooking or something – they take such pride in how 
many cakes they can fit on the hot surface, whether they can keep the batter 
from touching the other pancakes on the griddle, and whether they are just the 
right shade of golden brown," Ann writes on men and pancakes.

"Somehow these small satisfactions seem to give them a disproportionate 
measure of self-esteem."

The Romney Family Table is available online and in bookstores now, and could 
serve as the perfect Christmas gift for anyone who likes Mitt Romney, or likes 
seeing pictures of someone else's happy, gorgeous family, or simply is 
determined to ensure that the Romneys don't just dissolve into obscurity.
 