
Ronnie Bedford, who has died aged 90, was science editor for the Daily Mirror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/daily-mirror> for almost a quarter of a 
century. And he was - even by Fleet Street's exacting standards for such things 
- an extraordinary character.

He overcame speech and eyesight handicaps to become one of best - arguably the 
best - popularisers of science and medicine for a tabloid audience.

He managed to do it without having any university background, explaining that 
he learned the subject through voracious reading and "picking up enough 
knowledge to avoid asking daft questions of those who know all about such 
things."

Ronnie was also an accomplished jazz pianist who could be encouraged to liven 
up any party, no matter how spontaneous.

Totally blind in his left eye and with poor eyesight in his right, his speech 
was hampered by a cleft palate that often made it difficult to grasp what he 
was saying.

Mirror colleagues recall him holding copy inches from his nose, peering at it 
through spectacles with thick lenses.

He was born at Walton, near Wakefield, the only child of a railway footplate 
man. He was educated at Wakefield College, his tuition fees being paid in part 
by a charity. In 1934, he won the open class for under-14s at the London music 
festival.

Realising that his poor eyesight would prevent him from following his father's 
railway career, he decide to be a reporter. It meant starting at the Wakefield 
Express as an errand boy and sweeping the print shop floor.

Just before the outbreak of the second world war, he landed a junior 
reporter's post on another of the group's titles, the South Emsall and 
Hemsworth Express.

Rejected for military service for obvious reasons, he worked on several weekly 
and evening papers until 1943, when he secured an editorial job with the Daily 
Mirror's northern office in Manchester.

Two years later he moved to London to join Reuters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/reuters> news agency, first as a feature 
writer and then chief reporter. One of his tasks was to train a 
messenger-boy-turned-junior reporter, Derek Jameson, who later became editor of 
three national newspapers.

Jamie, who had left school with only a rudimentary education, recalls: "Ronnie 
practically had to teach me how to read and write. He made me rewrite my first 
story 14 times." Ronnie always claimed it was only 13 times.

In 1947, Ronnie returned to the Mirror, this time in London, as a feature 
writer. He switched to writing about science as a reporter and was appointed as 
science editor in 1962.

Such was the Mirror's commitment to science - and to educating its then 15m 
readers - that Ronnie even had a deputy, Arthur Smith, who was jokingly 
referred to by a colleague, Brian Hitchen, as "Frankenstein on a trickle 
charge."

Ronnie's skills - as reporter and pianist - were especially appreciated by 
Hugh Cudlipp, the Mirror group's editorial director. He recognised Ronnie's 
talent for explaining complex matters in a way that everyone could understand, 
so he gave him free rein to travel the world to report on scientific and 
medical news.

Two anecdotes from a single assignment - the 1969 Apollo launch from Cape 
Canaveral that resulted in the first manned moon landing - say a lot about 
Ronnie.

During delays due to bad weather journalists spent a lot of time in a local 
bar (naturally) where Ronnie was often persuaded to play the piano.

One of the reporters, John Edwards, later told how a man burst into the bar 
while Ronnie was playing and shot his unfaithful wife. Evidently, an untroubled 
Ronnie went on playing.

At the final press briefing before blast-off, Ronnie dared to ask the question 
that American journalists were too polite to ask.

Finally, he stood up and said: "What my colleagues are trying to ask is 
whether the astronauts will be carrying cyanide kits to the moon."

Hitchen, who was sitting next to him, recalls that the silence was 
electrifying until flustered NASA officials started whispering to each other. 
Then one said: "We have considered all contingencies."

Ronnie was having none of it: "You have not answered my question. Are the 
astronauts carrying cyanide pills, or any other form of suicide kits in case 
they become lost in space or marooned on the moon?"

Grudgingly, an official replied: "No sir, the astronauts are not carrying 
suicide kits with them to the moon".

"Thank you", said Ronnie. And that was the splash in the next day's Mirror.

Ronnie went on to cover several other Apollo launches. He had previously 
broken the story, in 1957, that Laika - the Russian dog who was first animal to 
orbit the Earth – had died in space.

His other great passion was in reporting on medicine. After something of a 
stormy start, he forged a lengthy and close relationship with the British 
Medical Association (BMA).

Paul Vaughan, the BMA's chief press officer during the 1950s and 60s, wrote 
that, initially, doctors "assumed a patronising, contemptuous attitude towards 
him, partly because he suffered a speech defect, but mainly because of their 
lofty assumption that his newspaper, being a popular one, was incapable of 
reporting serious issues.

"How wrong they were. His was a skill born of years of experience as a 
reporter and of his sharp intelligence."

One of Ronnie's greatest successes began with a tragedy when pharmaceutical 
researcher Bill Inman's baby daughter was strangled to death by an elastic rope 
of toys that was strung across the front of her pram.

Inman's campaign against the manufacturer to redesign the pram was taken up by 
Ronnie and, after a struggle, they won the day.

Ronnie helped to found the Medical Journalists Association, which he chaired 
for three years. And, in 1982, he was appointed OBE for his services to 
journalism. He retired from the Mirror in 1985.

Ronnie also fulfilled two ambitions - to play the piano in a brothel and at 
the South Pole. He managed the first when the Mirror's Paris correspondent, 
Peter Stephens, introduced Ronnie to Madame Claude, purveyor of courtesans to 
the rich and famous

He was reputedly given a round of applause - and several bottles of champagne 
- by the ladies' clients for his stirring performance.

And he also pulled off the other feat in Antarctica when members of the 
British Polar Expedition dragged a piano across the ice, complete with piano 
stool, for Ronnie to serenade them.

Ronnie married twice. He was amicably divorced from his first wife, Betty, who 
predeceased him. They had three daughters, two of whom, Helen and Joy are still 
living He is also survived by his second wife, Thelma.

Ronald G. Bedford, journalist, born 6 August 1921, died 19 May 2012

NB: This appreciation is based on an obituary that Ronnie himself wrote in 
June 2010 (passed on by his widow, Thelma) and on anecdotes from former 
colleagues, notably Brian Hitchen and Derek Jameson. Thank you also to Mike 
Molloy and Jane Futrell, daughter of Ronnie's great Mirror pal, Denys.
 