
A sizeable minority of men and women are still sexually active into their 80s, 
according to a study which debunks the myth that older people no longer have 
sex.

Older men are getting more action than women, however, and a survey says they 
are almost three times as likely to masturbate. Women are 10 times as likely as 
men to feel “obligated” to have sex in their twilight years, finds the survey, 
entitledEnglish Longitudinal Study of Ageing (Elsa) 
<http://www.elsa-project.ac.uk>.

Just over 31% of the 80- to 90-year-old men surveyed in England had sex or 
masturbated in the last year, compared with 59% of those in the 70-79 age group.

Among women in the same age brackets, the figures were 14% and 34% 
respectively, though more than 41% of 80- to 90-year-old women who lived with a 
partner reported some sexual activity in the previous year.

A total of 6,201 people in England aged 50 to 90 answered questions about 
their sexual activity as part of the Elsa project. Unlike other similar 
studies, none of the respondents had been recruited specifically to discuss 
their sex lives, suggesting the results could be more reliable than most. It is 
also believed to be the first time in England that over-80s have been asked 
about their sexual behaviour in an academic study.

Researchers from the University of Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/universityofmanchester> found that, 
contrary to popular conceptions, health and relationship problems were more 
closely linked to decreasing sexual activity and functioning, rather than 
simply advancing age.

The paper, whose main author was David Lee, an Age UK research fellow at the 
university’s school of social sciences, is published in the American academic 
journal,Archives of Sexual Behavior <http://link.springer.com/journal/10508>.

Lee said: “This is the first nationally representative study to include people 
over the age of 80 when asking older men and women in England about their 
sexual health. We hope our findings improve public health by countering 
stereotypes and misconceptions about late-life sexuality, and offer older 
people a reference against which they may relate their own experiences and 
expectations.

“Our research is also highlighting the diversity of late-life sexualities, and 
trying to impose youthful norms of sexual health on older people would be 
over-simplistic and even unhelpful. It is, however, important that health 
professionals act on this and are more open about discussing sexual health with 
older people – it can’t simply be assumed to be an irrelevance.”

Problems most frequently reported by sexually active women among the 50- to 
90-year-olds surveyed related to becoming sexually aroused (32%) and achieving 
orgasm (27%), while for men it was erectile difficulties (39%). Chronic health 
conditions and poor self-rated health seemed to have more obvious negative 
impacts on the sexual health of men than women.

Men were more concerned about their sexual activities and function than women 
and, with increasing age, these concerns tended to become more common. Sexually 
active women were less dissatisfied with their overall sex lives than men, and 
also reported decreasing levels of dissatisfaction with increasing age.

The study also found that many septuagenarians and octogenarians were still 
affectionate towards their partners, with 31% of men and 20% of women reporting 
frequent kissing or petting. Among those who reported any sexual activity in 
the past three months, 1% of men and 10% of women reported that they felt 
obligated to have sex.

Just over 44% of men in the study masturbated frequently, compared with only 
15.9% of women. Viagra or other erection enhancing drugs were used by just over 
7% of men, half of whom reported satisfaction with the results, said Lee.

In a further study, soon to be published, Lee found that most older people 
said they still felt sex was an important part of being in a relationship. 
“When we asked whether satisfactory sexual relations were essential to the 
maintenance of long-term relationships, just over two-thirds of men and just 
under two-thirds of women agreed,” said Lee.

Caroline Abrahams, charity director at Age UK, said: “The fact this is the 
first time that people over 80 years old have been included in this kind of 
research highlights how often the public health needs of older people, 
including sexual health, are ignored or overlooked. With an ageing population 
it is important that providers of sexual health services understand the needs 
of older people in both clinical settings and when developing information and 
advice. These recent findings now need to be used to improve sexual health 
advice and information for older people.”
 