
As ever, the devil is in the detail. The options for reform, the green paper 
makes clear on page 105, apply only to the costs of people's care, not their 
accommodation. "This is because the state would not pay for people to buy their 
food or pay their mortgage or their rent if they were living at home."

While this is logical and consistent with the position in Scotland, it was not 
expected. Hitherto, the debate around a new system of care and support for 
elderly and disabled people in England had made no discernible distinction 
between the costs of bed and board and those of help with washing, dressing, 
eating and drinking.

So what does this mean? As the green paper states, the costs of accommodation 
in a care home can be "as much again" as those of personal care. Therefore the 
proposals for debate could cover as little as half the total bill facing an 
older person entering a residential home.

Ian Owen, chairman of Partnership Assurance, currently the only company 
offering pre-funded long-term care insurance, said: "This is buried in the 
green paper. It seems like a little bit of smoke and mirrors."

All the costings in the document are based on this distinction. At 65, it 
says, a woman can expect to face average care costs of £40,400 and a man (who 
will not live as long) £22,300. Overall, men and women face an average bill of 
£31,700.

Against this, the three options set out for debate would leave an individual 
paying an average £20,000-£22,500 under a basic partnership scheme, though some 
would pay far more; £20,000-£25,000 under a voluntary insurance scheme, though 
the uninsured might pay much more; and £17,000-£20,000 under a compulsory 
comprehensive scheme.

On top of this, however, people with the means to do so would still need to 
pay for their own accommodation costs. At present, care homes do not separate 
such costs within their overall fees.

Sheila Scott, chief executive of the National Care Association, which 
represents many smaller care home providers, said care costs could in many 
instances be approaching two-thirds of total fees because of the growing 
dependency of people entering residential care.

The other controversial issue in the green paper is the proposal to "consider 
integrating some elements of disability benefits, for example attendance 
allowance (AA), to create a new offer for individuals with care needs".

This would mean stopping payment of AA, which is not means-tested and is 
currently paid to 1.6 million people aged 65 or over at rates of £47.10 or 
£70.35 a week, costing £4.4bn, and converting it into a discretionary grant 
focused on those most in need. Existing claimaints would have their money 
protected.

Stephen Burke, chief executive of older people's charity Counsel and Care, 
while praising the green paper as a whole, warned of "a massive rearguard 
action to defend this benefit which is very popular with older and disabled 
people".

The green paper appears to rule out integrating similarly the equivalent 
benefit paid to younger disabled people, the care component of disability 
living allowance. Ministers, who are known to have been agonising over the 
benefits proposals, may have decided that would have been a provocation too far.

Younger disabled people were hoping that the document would offer a clear 
commitment to "portability" of entitlement to care and support – that is, a 
right to move from one local authority area to another and retain the same 
services.

The green paper does not go this far. It proposes portability of one's 
assessment of need, but not necessarily a guarantee of the same services to 
meet that need. Part of the debate to come, it says, must be about whether 
local authorities should retain the power to vary provision of services.

The debate, which will run until 13 November, is designed to be a followed by 
a white paper in 2010. But a general election looms and Labour may not be in a 
position to follow through.

Much attention will focus on the Conservative shadow health secretary, Andrew 
Lansley, who promised on BBC radio yesterday, ahead of the green paper's 
release, that if it did not contain costed proposals, "we will come forward 
with our proposals before the election".
 