
Two priceless 15th -entury oak panels that were stolen from the rood screen of 
a west country church 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/aug/13/15th-century-icons-stolen-devon-church>
 have been recovered by detectives.

The decorative oak panels were taken from Holy Trinity church at Torbryan in 
Devon in the summer of 2013.

Fifteenth-century icons stolen from Devon church
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/aug/13/15th-century-icons-stolen-devon-church>
Bearing images of St Victor of Marseilles and St Margaret of Antioch, the 
panels were found by the Metropolitan police’s art and antiques unit after 
being spotted by a private collector in an online sale.

This led to a raid by specialist detectives in south London earlier this year 
and the recovery of the panels, along with dozens of other artefacts.

The rood screen and its panels are particularly precious as they are one of 
only a handful of such artworks in England that survived the reformation.

Despite elation at their recovery, the trust faces a £7,000 bill to restore 
the damage – the result of the thieves hacking the panels out of the screen – 
and haslaunched a campaign to raise the money 
<http://www.visitchurches.org.uk/Torbryan/>. Currently they are in storage in 
Bristol.

Holy Trinity is one of 347 historic churches cared for by the charity the 
Churches Conservation Trust <http://www.visitchurches.org.uk/>. Its chief 
executive, Crispin Truman, said: “Torbryan rood screen is one of the highlights 
of this internationally significant collection. The theft of these unique 
artworks from Holy Trinity was a real blow, so we’re delighted that they are 
now back in our hands.

“Unfortunately the damage caused as the thieves hacked them out of the church 
will cost a lot to put right.

“The CCT is committed to displaying unique artefacts like these panels in 
their original setting and open to the public for everyone to see and enjoy.”

The Rev Peter Ashman, the incumbent vicar, added: “The value of the panels 
cannot be underestimated – they form part of a unique collection of medieval 
paintings preserved from destruction during the reformation housed in a 
beautiful and very special church. We look forward to their safe return where 
they belong.”

Historian and presenter Dan Cruickshank, who backed the original campaign to 
find the stolen panels, said: “I’m delighted that these 15th-century artworks – 
once feared lost forever – have been recovered. The panels are irreplaceable 
examples of an important period in our art and history, and pieces like this 
help us to learn about who we are as a society. They should belong to everyone.”

The discovery of the screens prompted the police to set up an operation 
codenamed Icarus, which has led to a treasure trove of other church artefacts, 
including stonework, friezes, statues, paintings, brasses, misericords, stained 
glass and bibles, being recovered.

Among the items already returned to where they belong are a pair of 
misericords – mercy seats – that were taken from St Cuthbert’s Church at Holme 
Lacy in Herefordshire. Saxon stonework has also been returned to another church 
in Herefordshire, St David’s in Much Dewchurch.

Police are struggling to identify many of the items recovered, sometimes 
because churches do not know they have gone.

The collector who first went to the police wishes to remain anonymous. It is 
understood he recognised the panels from media coverage of the theft.

Since the theft, the Churches Conservation Trust have conducted an audit of 
security at Holy Trinity, Torbryan, and a new alarm system is now in place at 
the church.

The painted saints, once part of a procession of 40 panels stretching the 
width of the church, are exceptionally rare because so few figurative 
paintings, either on panels or stained glass, survived the flurry of 
image-smashing during the reformation in the 16th century.

Most rood screens – which originally divided the nave from the altar area of 
the church and supported carved crosses – were dismantled and either burned or 
recycled for their wood. Those with representations of saints were particularly 
targeted.

The Torbryan panels were restored in the 19th century from beneath layers of 
whitewash that may have been deliberately applied to protect them from 
iconoclasts. They were regarded as among the best preserved in Britain.

The church itself is unusual because it was built in one phase, between 1450 
and 1470, with a spectacular fan-vaulted ceiling, instead of the usual pattern 
of gradual extension over centuries. Both the carving and the painting of the 
screen were of very high quality, and the piece is believed to have been a 
contemporary commission from an unknown master craftsman for the church.
 