
Today’s best bets, by Chris Cook

Here’s a handy little gizmo 
<http://maps.turftrax.co.uk/latestgoingreport.asp?course=aintree> for any of 
you wishing to monitor the state of the going at Aintree this week, having 
perhaps backed a horse that wants drying ground in the Grand National. The link 
takes you to a TurfTrax map of the course, showing the state of the going all 
the way around the two-mile circuit.

As you’ll see, the National course is mostly good to soft, with some good bits 
around the home straight. For some reason that I’ve never fathomed, the far end 
of the course is always softest and it is indeed soft around the Canal Turn. 
Does the canal leak on to the track, do you think?

The forecast I use says Aintree <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/aintree> 
will get rain every day this week, totalling perhaps 17mm before racing starts 
on Thursday. Temperatures may not get above 10C, so it doesn’t look like a 
drying week and I’d expect there to be plenty of give in the racing surface by 
Saturday.

Today’s main action is at Warwick, where I fancy Andy Thornton’s chances of 
getting a bit closer to that longed-for tally of 1,000 career wins. He’s on
Dawson City (3.30) in the staying handicap chase, a horse who’s been running 
consistently well without quite winning, notably when a loose horse unsighted 
him at Chepstow in December as he led over the third-last.

On another occasion, he was beaten only by Golden Chieftain and that rival 
would have won the Midlands National by daylight the other day, but for coming 
down at the last. So Dawson City looks value for his current rating and gets a 
winnable opportunity in a small field today. The 7-4 is fine.

Barry Geraghty hit by 30-day ban as Limerick stewards criticise ride
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/03/barry-geraghty-ban-limerick-grand-national-punchestown-aidan-obrien-derby>
I’ll take 5-1 about Ballyrock (4.00) in the following handicap hurdle. Like a 
few of Tim Vaughan’s runners, he recently returned to form, though he couldn’t 
quite make it count and went down by a neck at Chepstow last month. Richard 
Johnson returns to the saddle, having partnered this beast to his only victory 
on the only occasion they have been matched before now.

Skybet Grand National tipping competition – a new week

Congratulations to GForce1, who won last week’s competition on a final score 
of +11 despite a winnerless Friday, and also to Mulldog, who was second on +8. 
They bagged the two sets of tickets to this week’sGrand National 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/grandnational> meeting and I have been in 
touch with both to arrange same.

This week’s prize, kindly offered by Skybet, is arguably more exciting still! 
It’s a £100 bet on this week’s Grand National!

To kick things off, we’d like your selections, please, for these races: 3.00 
Warwick, 3.40 Wincanton, 4.00 Warwick.

As ever, our champion will be the tipster who returns the best profit to 
notional level stakes of £1 at starting price on our nominated races, of which 
there will be three each day up until Friday. Non-runners count as losers.

In the event of a tie at the end of the week, the winner will be the tipster 
who, from among those tied on the highest score, posted their tips earliest on 
the final day.

For terms and conditions click here <http:>.

Good luck!

And post your tips or racing-related comments below.
 