
Rabih is on holiday with his father and step-mother in Spain. He is 14 years 
old. He becomes friendly with a 15-year-old French girl who is also on holiday. 
They hold hands and Rabih believes himself to be in love. The next day she goes 
home and they never see each other again.

This is a typical schoolboy error. This is not Love. It is a passing crush 
which many people mistake for Love.

True Bottonian Love is a night at Premier Inn, where 'A Good Night’s Sleep is 
Guaranteed'

In the early days of their marriage, Rabih and Kirsten would often be asked 
how they met. This is how it started: Rabih was in his early 30s and was a not 
very successful architect; Kirsten worked for the council. They met in a bar 
and started talking to each other. He thought she was quite attractive. She 
also thought he was quite nice. So they had sex.

In our ordinary understanding of Love this is where the story would end. Our 
modern notions of Love are inextricably linked to a notion of Romanticism. We 
are addicted to the process of falling in Love and fail to pay attention to the 
Act of being in Love. Thank God you’ve got me to point it out.

The Course of Love by Alain de Botton review – affairs, childcare and Ikea 
glassware
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/28/the-course-of-love-alain-de-botton-review>
After dating one another for six months, Rabih unexpectedly finds himself 
proposing to Kirsten. After just a moment’s deliberation, Kirsten accepts and 
so they get married. Were they to have been gifted with the insight of an 
emotionally complete colossus they might have realised that we are frequently 
attracted to each other for complex reasons. Rabih was looking for the mother 
who died when he was 10; Kirsten was looking for the father who walked out on 
his family when she was 10. But as they didn’t realise this, they started to 
quarrel and blame each other for things that weren’t the other’s fault.

Love requires people to be both good listeners and good communicators. While 
we might hope that Love could be effortlessly explained in the poetry of the 
Romantics, the reality is that it is more easily expressed through a nice chat 
and a cup of tea. If that doesn’t work, a night in a Premier Inn, where a ‘Good 
Night’s Sleep is Guaranteed’ should do the trick. Whatever you do, try not to 
sulk like Rabih and Kirsten.

As Rabih and Kirsten get closer to each other, they start to share their 
sexual fantasies. Kirsten tells Rabih she likes to have her hair pulled when 
they make love and he finds this difficult as he does not want to hurt her. 
Encouraged by the level of trust developing between them, Rabih says he would 
quite like them to have a threesome with the waitress from the cafe who has 
indicated to him she would be well up for it. Rabih cannot understand why this 
goes down like a cup of cold sick with Kirsten.

Only in Romantic love does the girl automatically agree to a threesome. In 
True de Bottonian Love, some fantasies are best kept to yourself.

Rabih and Kirsten continue to experience difficulties as they fail to deal 
with their transference issues. Both blame the other for not nurturing their 
child within and as a result they act out their insecurities. Some marriages 
collapse at this point, but Rabih and Kirsten are subconsciously aware that 
part of being in Real, rather than Romantic Love, is that it is OK to be 
together because they are frightened of being apart. They decide to have two 
children, Esther and William. They are both desperate for their children not to 
suffer the emotional damage that they suffered as children, but as they are not 
even aware of how much damage there is, some of it gets passed on anyway. They 
both get tired, believe the other to be doing less to help and start using the 
children as weapons against the other.

Alain de Botton – your questions answered, on art, God and ugliness
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/live/2016/apr/25/alain-de-botton-webchat-the-course-of-love>
Triangulation is a very dangerous process. It leads people to say indirectly 
those things that should be directly expressed. In some cases this can lead to 
one partner having an affair.

Rabih is no longer sure if he is a walking cliche as he has come to believe 
that Kirsten does not understand him. He has a one night stand with an American 
woman who appears to understand him extremely well but in the morning he does 
feel guilty. He can’t believe he has fallen prey to narcissistic Romanticism 
and wonders if he should tell Kirsten. On balance, he decides against it.

An affair can be an expression of how much one loves one’s partner and not 
merely a sign that a relationship is on the rocks. What Rabih needs to do is to 
find a way to reconnect with Kirsten without acting out self-destructively.

Rabih and Kirsten decide they need help and choose Alain de Botton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alain-de-botton> as their therapist. Alain 
is able to show them how to relate to one another and find the Path of Love. 
Rabih and Kirsten are both overjoyed that they have learned how to deal with 
their issues and live happily enough ever after.

Digested read, digested: The Consolations of Therapy

 