
Nice guys always let you down, man. 

Now that Gabriel has run away, Eugene is waking up, and Bob smashed Sasha into 
a window, it feels like the mid-season finale next week will have almost 
everyone in triage.

Carl had a pretty good, if not robotic, breakdown of why they had to keep 
moving and couldn’t stay in one place too long when he was talking to Father 
Gabriel, but I was hoping they’d at least consider the church for a while since 
it seems easy to barricade and they had supplies. Traveling with a crying baby 
hasn’t really worked out too well for them so far; maybe they’ll hook up with 
Glen and Maggie and ride the fire truck.

Gabriel has finally been pushed over the edge, which isn’t surprising – this 
group has that effect on people sometimes. He compulsively tried to rub the 
blood stains from the Terminus massacre off the floor with his nails, and that 
quickly turned into his feverish need to get away altogether. I thought he 
might have been looking for something sacred when he was prying up those 
floorboards, possibly trying to save a relic of some kind, but nope! He was 
just trying to bounce using the crawlspace under the church. Fitting that he 
slithered out under the “you’ll burn for this” carving, and tragic that he 
stepped on a nail but kept going – you think that walker he pushed off is the 
only one he’ll see in the immediate future? He still has faith, or at least 
enough to prevent him from smashing a walker wearing a cross, but that trail of 
blood he’s leaving behind is like an advertisement for fresh meat. Considering 
how we met Gabriel, I feel like his fate is already sealed unless Michonne goes 
after him. Although, he did leave a giant hole open in the church, so they may 
be fighting off walkers who get in. Thanks, father!

The Glen and Maggie contingent seem to be in the most vulnerable spot, 
physically; they’re out in the middle of the road, baking in the sun, and they 
just ran out of water. Abraham has popped out of his catatonic state now that 
Eugene woke up, but it was touch and go for most of the episode. He’s always 
been like a bomb about to go off, but I wonder what’s going to happen now that 
he’s turned that rage inward. Rosita had a cool trick for filtering their muddy 
water, but couldn’t she have done that back at the truck? They also went 
fishing, but any time someone has fun on this show I wait for the other shoe to 
drop.

Rick took a small group to the hospital, and that’s where the real showdown 
will happen. Beth is working from the inside to stay alive and keep Carol 
healthy after the cops decide to give up on her, with no idea that her friends 
are mobilizing outside. The idea is that they’ll kidnap a couple of cops, and 
then use them to trade for Carol and Beth, but the snatching goes awry when 
more cops show up. Sasha shoots out their tire so Daryl goes after the driver, 
and manages to pick him up after a very tense scene with half-melted walkers 
chomping near his face while the cop holds Daryl down. How’d he get free? Oh, 
the ol’ put your fingers through the eyes of a walker skull and use it to smash 
someone in the head bit. It was gory! It was wonderful! Daryl delivers the best 
deaths.

Sasha still hasn’t processed Bob’s death, and is mostly working through her 
feelings with an axe and some church pews until Rick puts together the rescue 
mission. I really love her relationship with Tyreese, who told her to let him 
help her a little when she was ready, a theme that comes back for her later 
when she’s trying to help Bob, the supposedly nice officer. The soft-spoken 
officer convinces Rick that he’s peaceful and wants to help since he knows 
Dawn. He gets Sasha to take him to a secluded spot to perform a mercy kill on 
someone he says he knows that got turned, and when she eyes up her shot, he 
runs forward, smashes her head into the glass window, and runs away.

Is Sasha dead, or just knocked out? Is Bob going to tell Dawn what’s coming? 
Next week is the last episode of this year – see you then!
 