
It’s not often that a teenager mucking about in their bedroom results in a 
commemorative blue plaque. But that’s what happened to William Henry Perkin in 
1856.


Perkin was studying at the Royal College of Chemistry and was trying to find a 
way of making quinine in his makeshift lab at home. At the time, quinine was 
used to treat malaria, but it was expensive because it came from the bark of 
the South American cinchona tree. Perkin had been adding hydrogen and oxygen to 
coal tar, as you do, and this heady concoction left a black residue in his 
glass jars. When this was made into a solution, it resulted in the first 
“aniline dyestuff” – as the blue plaque, on his former house in London’s Cable 
Street, notes.


In the month he turned 18, Perkin had discovered not synthetic quinine, but 
synthetic purple. The mucking about in his bedroom not only made him famous, it 
made him rich.

 Pondering purple ... William Henry Perkin in his study. Photograph: Science & 
Society Picture Librar/SSPL via Getty Images 
At first he called it Tyrian Purple – as the original, ancient colour was 
known. But to make it sound more fashionable, he renamed it mauve – missing a 
golden opportunity to call it Perkin’s Purple and perhaps bag a slot on the 
Farrow & Ball colour chart.


This was a big deal because, until then, purple could only be made using 
natural dyes and had been so expensive to make, it had become one of the most 
coveted colours. Because of this, purple was used to denote wealth and power.

 The innocent murex (Bolinus brandaris) trying to look as un-purple as 
possible. Photograph: Alamy 
Tyrian purple was made from the mucous of sea snails – or muricidae, more 
commonly called murex – and an incredible amount was needed to yield just a 
tiny amount of dye. Mythology states that it was Hercules himself who 
discovered it – or rather, his dog did, after picking up a murex off the beach 
and developing purple drool.

Tyre, in what is now Lebanon, was a Phoenician city on the coastline of the 
Mediterranean Sea where the sea snails (still) live. Amazingly, given how many 
were needed to sate the appetite of emperors and kings, they didn’t become 
extinct. The vats used to make purple sat right on the edge of the town, 
because the process was a stinky one. The Roman author Pliny the Elder, not 
easily swayed by the fashion for purple, wondered what all the fuss was about, 
declaring it a “dye with an offensive smell”.

Perhaps you’re beginning to see why purple is the coolest of colours, steeped 
in mythology, legend, history and … mucous. No matter what other moniker it has 
been married with over the years – rain or deep for example – it overpowers any 
suffix or prefix to be absolutely itself. Not like pink, which can so easily be 
swallowed up by additions of powder, candy or girlie. We talk of reds as 
vibrant and bold, blues as calming, oranges as zesty. But purple? Nothing. 
Perhaps, at a push, groovy.


On the colour wheel, purple sits between blue and red. Some might call it 
violet, or mauve, but whatever you call it, it is the most refracted colour 
when light is passed through a prism; at the very end of the visible colour 
spectrum and the hardest colour for the eye to discriminate.


Purple was in fact, so sought after, such an obvious message to other lowly 
people that you were rich and important, that laws were introduced to protect 
its use. People were killed for not following the law, and daring to have a 
hint of purple about them.

 Elizabeth Taylor as Cleopatra: passionate about purple. Photograph: 
Allstar/20th Century Fox/Sportsphoto Ltd./Allstar 
Julius Caesar was particularly partial to purple. After visiting Cleopatra 
with her purple sails and sofas (reputedly an early influence on DFS sofa 
sales) he came home with a purple toga, which he decreed only he could wear. I 
wonder if he knew that his toga was dyed with what was basically sea snail 
spittle.


Many years later, when Henry Howard, the Earl of Surrey, was tried for high 
treason against Henry VIII, part of the evidence against him was that he had 
been seen wearing purple: which only the king could wear. Though let’s face it, 
with Henry VIII, it didn’t take much.


Today, purple is still regarded as a bit of an “ooh” colour. Perhaps because 
of its heritage, it has never been a mainstream choice, but then also because 
of this, it’s never lost its panache either.
 Political statement ... Gordon Brown was an early adopter of the purple tie. 
Photograph: Antony Jones/UK Press via Getty Images 
However, over the past 15 years, politicians have started to appropriate 
purple for their tie colour – Tony Blair and Gordon Brown were early adopters. 
Purple ties spoke to a global audience, not the left (red) or the right (blue), 
but everyone. But still, purple was cool.


Then Ukip got hold of it. Purple has survived for centuries, has been the most 
legislated colour in history, has sent men to their deaths and yet still causes 
most people to smile when they look at it. But this may be the biggest threat 
purple has ever faced.

 