
There can have been few programmes in recent memory with as fortuitous a 
launch as Channel 4's gastro-reality-game-thing, The Taste. OK, there is 
nothing fortuitous aboutspousal abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/dec/20/nigella-lawson-charles-saatchi-ugly-face-patriarchal-power-grillo-trial>
, drug allegations and the trashing of a person's children. But somewhere in 
the darkest, most mercenary corner of a Channel 4 scheduler's id, there were 
fireworks.

The Taste had already been a runaway hit in the US, and while UK success 
looked likely, the runup to the launch saw an unprecedented outpouring of 
sympathy towards wronged Nigella Lawson. Team Nigella reached that level of 
ubiquity when a hashtag becomes a meme. Her books were hastily republished. The 
week before the show debuted,a candid Good Morning America interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jan/02/nigella-lawson-us-tv-interview-fraud-trial>
 to promote the US version was deemed worthy of a report on the BBC news, so 
buzzworthy were Lawson's travails. Yet after debuting with 1.8 million viewers, 
the show wheezed to its finale last night. Boltonian Debbie's scallops and 
homestyle rabbit stew walked away with the odd-looking trophy, but by this 
point, ratings had beendropping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jan/15/nigella-lawson-taste-tv-ratings-channel-4>
 as low as 750,000, and Channel 4 has not, as I write, commissioned another 
series.

What went wrong? For a start, the "Voice-meets-MasterChef" format itself felt 
vague and counter-intuitive. The judges – Nigella plus "maverick food writer"
Anthony Bourdain <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/anthonybourdain> and 
"revolutionary chef" Ludo Lefebvre – selected their teams from a round of 
Voice-style blind-tasting of single spoons. But after that, there was never 
much chance for much mentoring to actually go on. They would stand over and 
vaguely advise their cooks as they whipped something up for a guest chef, who 
would give the winning contestant "immunity" from elimination in the second 
challenge. But apart from a couple of occasions where the person with immunity 
found themselves in the eventual bottom three, it left zero jeopardy. The 
judges then sent somebody home based on the blind-tasting of spoons without 
knowing who has cooked what, eliminating much sense of teams or mentoring.

It didn't help that the contestants were not a hugely likeable bunch. You 
might argue against empathy being an issue with this sort of high-end foodie 
show, but at least MasterChef gives you someone to root for. Barry, the fit 
one, was booted off in the first week after some unfortunate business with 
shop-bought sponges, thus alienating the gay audience (a key factor in Bake 
Off's success as we all know). Then the show lost its villain when the arrogant 
Justin went out in week five (cause of death: haggis lasagne) while the nicest, 
chemistry teacher Kalpna, went out in the semi-final when her nerves got the 
better of her Asian salmon tartare.

And then there was the food. So much food that it actually became part of the 
problem. Nigella built her empire out of food porn, but there's something 
rather less titillating about glimpsing a single mouthful of something for a 
few seconds. The charm of the best food shows was lost as well, and the 
preparation of so many high-end things so quickly took away hope of tutorial 
appeal. Rather than being a gilt-edged frame for her flight from Charles 
Saatchi and the Grillos, The Taste may have actually harmed the commercial 
clout of Brand Nigella.

And yet for all this, I found myself weirdly fixated with the show. At the 
centre of of this awkward format was a TV trinity for the ages. That itself was 
awkward too: in a role so undefined, Nigella had to veer between a TV 
presenter, a warm and supportive mentor, a stern schoolmarmish judge ("Who is 
the culprit here?"), an expert critic and a fangirl to the visiting guest 
chefs. It's to her credit that she just about pulled it off while marshalling 
two ludicrous companions.

There was Lefebvre, kind of a manic pixie dream girl trapped in the body of a 
grumpy Frenchman, constantly animated to the constant verge of giving himself a 
hernia. He was locked in an endless pissing contest with Bourdain, who carries 
himself with all the withering hubris you'd expect from a man who used to send 
busboys out to fetch his heroin.

More4 is showing the more gameshowy US version from Sunday, but beyond that, 
that may well be it for The Taste. Nevertheless, I need to see more of these 
three. Maybe in a spin-off series where they band together to fight crime. That 
would be good.

• This article was amended on 26 November 2014 to correct the spelling of Ludo 
Lefebvre's name.
 