
Explosions ripped across Belfast <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/belfast> 
Lough on Sunday afternoon, creating vibrations in the air and apprehension on 
the faces of some of those who had gathered to watch the battle.

Just a 10-minute stroll from the Short Strand, hundreds of people looked on as 
two rival factions jeered and snarled at one another before the final 
confrontation, when hand-to-hand fighting finally broke out.

But this was not a re-enactment of the sectarian disorder that turned a small 
corner of east Belfast into a war zone less than a week earlier.

Yes, the "combatants" in this conflict were re-enacting struggles from another 
era – albeit one that belonged to the piratical adventures of the 18th and 19th 
centuries. They were observing a sham fight between two pirate ships as part of 
the Belfast Maritime Festival.

The throngs that had flocked to the river Lagan on Sunday were far greater 
than the numbers involved in real life street fighting at the edge of the 
Catholic enclave of Short Strand last Monday and Tuesday.

The fact that the spectators at the mock pirate battle vastly outnumbered the 
rioters on the nearby Newtownards and Mount Pottinger roads last week 
illuminated something important about post-ceasefire, post-Troubles Belfast.

For a start, the actual violence – amplified in the international media due to 
the wounding of a respected press photographer – was confined to a small corner 
of a city that otherwise appears to be trying to move on from its troubled past.

Of course for the residents of the Short Strand, who were the main victims of 
the loyalist-originated violence, the assaults on their homes were terrifying 
and traumatic.

Once again, those living in this small Catholic/nationalist redoubt, 
surrounded by larger loyalist communities, found themselves vulnerable and in 
peril.

Nonetheless, the violent scenes need to be placed in some perspective, not 
only in terms of scale and comparison with other conflicts and not just because 
the trouble did not represent most of what goes on inNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> these days.

Many media commentators, some London-based, some local, who spend little time 
on the ground in places like the Lower Newtownards Road or Short Strand, bought 
into the line that this latest conflagration was the result of spontaneous 
working class loyalist anger.

They argued that, because loyalist paramilitaries had no representation in the 
Stormont parliament or that because socioeconomic or educational attainment was 
low in poor Protestant areas around eastern Belfast, these communities suddenly 
erupted in anger.

In doing so, the commentators swallowed a fairy tale as faux as the 
make-believe pirate battles on Sunday.

Returning from a short break in the west of Ireland, I bumped into a resident 
of the Short Strand on the Dublin to Belfast train last Friday morning. She is 
a woman I have known for more than 30 years, who has no love for republican 
paramilitaries or wants, in any way, to see a return to violence.

Over the two and a half hour journey north, she explained in grim detail how 
her home in one end of the Short Strand district was attacked while her 
daughter's house was subjected, simultaneously, to a similar bombardment in 
another part of the area.

She explained that the sortie began with military precision around 9pm on 
Monday, that all of those who attacked their homes were wearing surgical 
gloves, masks and combat uniforms, that they arrived with wheelie bins stuffed 
with bricks, bottles and other missiles, and that the entire attack appeared to 
be well organised.

The evidence from other Short Strand residents tells a similar tale, and 
suggests that the entire incursion was well planned and carefully executed. In 
addition, it is known that the Ulster Volunteer Force's East Belfast battalion 
was behind the initial invasion of the Catholic area.

The man heading up that unit has been in dispute not only with the UVF's 
"national" leadership on the Shankill Road but also with the police, who are 
investigating how he amassed such a large personal fortune.

Within 48 hours of the trouble, this so-called commander had attained a number 
of goals. He had forced the Stormont administration into sending senior civil 
servants to loyalist community representatives with a view to setting up an 
economic programme for their areas.

He had flexed his muscles, and those of his men, and enhanced his street 
fighting reputation. This was evident on Friday evening, when I attended a band 
parade on the Newtownards Road, held principally to commemorate the IRA murder 
of two Protestants in 1970.

Most of the locals on the Protestant/loyalist side of the loyalist were full 
of praise for the UVF's actions, which they perceived – rightly or wrongly – as 
being the correct response to alleged republican attacks from the Short Strand.

All the above suggests one important factor that most commentators missed in 
their analysis of why east Belfast ignited last week: human agency.

The disturbances on the streets underneath the shadow of the giant yellow 
shipyard cranes that dominate Belfast Lough were due to the decisions of 
individuals, electorally unimportant individuals who nevertheless use violence 
or the threat of violence to get their way.

They used the one critical faultline that still lies just below the surface in 
places like the Short Strand/Newtownards Road – sectarianism.

They cynically manipulated that underlying sense of fear and loathing that 
holds back these working class redoubts from moving on with the rest of 
society. Only when the power bases of these manipulators are undermined, 
challenged or confronted can these communities hope to move on.

On one side of the Newtownards Road stands St Matthew's Catholic church, which 
was – not for the first time – a repeated target of the UVF-controlled rioters 
last Monday and Tuesday night.

Inside the church, there is a memorial on stained glass to a relative of mine. 
It commemorates the sectarian murder of my paternal grandfather's brother, who 
was beaten and stabbed to death by a loyalist mob very close by during the 
Troubles. To be precise: the Troubles that erupted way back in 1921.

Henry McDonald is co-author of UVF: The Endgame.

• This article was amended on 26 June 2011. In the original all references to 
Newtownards Road were written as Newtonards. This has been corrected.
 