
To the first day of the dressage, to meet one of the most intriguing and 
divisive competitors of the Olympic Games: Ann Romney's horse, Rafalca. You are 
perhaps aware that Republican presidential hopeful Mitt Romney cannot put 
enough distance between himself and his wife's elitist equestrian interests – 
"Ann's the horse guy," he told American breakfast TV – and it's hard to imagine 
an outcome that would reflect well on his campaign. If Rafalca does well, he 
could be competing into next week, providing plenty of unwanted distraction. 
And if the horse loses, well, America hates losers, even horses that dance. 
Sorry, horse guys.

*******

Britain's bronze campaign took the tally to four yesterday, which for a short 
time was a good enough joint fourth place in the bronze medal table. But since 
thenTeam GB <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-gb> has been overtaken by 
Canada, and Japan, with 11 bronzes as of this morning, is beginning to look 
unassailable. Come on, Britain! There's still the tennis.

*******

Due to a rash decision made nearly 12 months ago, I am obliged to abandon my 
armchair for part of the day, in order to attend the actual Olympics. I've got 
four tickets to the boxing at the ExCel centre. I hate to abandon the wide 
range of sport offered by the red button to concentrate on just one discipline, 
but I am also conscious of how unseemly my empty seats would look on 
television. The boxing itself should be exciting, if only for the idiosyncratic 
scoring: on Wednesday night a Japanese bantamweight lost his bout despite 
knocking his opponent down five times, a decision which drew boos from the 
crowd. And the ExCel centre - I haven't been there since the arms fair. 
Memories.

LingoWatch: Medal (v.) 

The verb form of the noun medal, meaning "to win a medal" as in, "Guess what? 
I medalled in the cycling yesterday!" It's not a construction much used in 
British English – for good reason, you might be thinking. It's also easily 
confused with the more common verb "meddle", although we've never had a problem 
with peddle and pedal. What about "to bronze" as a verb? It used to mean "to 
apply fake tan to oneself" but all that could be about to change: "Oh my God, I 
just bronzed in the pool!"

*******
 Chorley's tribute to Wiggins. Photograph: Royal Mail/PA 

This picture shows a post box in Chorley, painted gold in honour of local boy 
Bradley Wiggins. This is what's so great about the Olympics: through its prism 
of sporting excellence, even mindless vandalism can become a fitting tribute. 
Can you buy bronze paint?
 Wiggins celebrates winning Olympic gold with friends and a "few vodka tonics" 

Bradley Wiggins posted this photo of himself on Twitter on Wednesday night, 
along with the tweet, "Getting wasted at StPauls". He's so normal, it's 
beginning to seem weird.

****

There were, it transpired, virtually no empty seats in South Arena 2, but it's 
disappointing to realise that at my age real life is no longer in HD. Still, 
until you see it in person, you can't believe how hard boxers punch each other. 
Honestly, it's like water polo without the pool.

The only British boxer of the afternoon, Anthony Ogogo, drew his bout 18-18. 
Then the judges went to "countback", which was also a draw. The everyone 
started cheering wildly, including my son.

"What just happened?" I shouted, above the roar.

"I don't know!" he shrieked.
 