
It has got to this: I’m considering gin and tonic on a Monday morning. It’s 
Charles’s fault. Charles is a very nice man with whom I wandered around the 
gardens of the lakes in Italy. He spent his working life in the drinks 
industry, and pointed out that as lovely as expensive gin is, you could buy a 
cheap bottle and flavour it yourself for half the price, and end up with 
something equally good. That was all the encouragement I needed.

Traditionally, gin is subtly flavoured with herbs such as cardamom, coriander 
and juniper, and fruit such as cucumber, lemon and orange peel. Cardamom can be 
hard to grow, and oranges may be a push, but you probably have plenty of other 
ingredients in your garden that will flavour gin.

If coriander is going to flower, collect the fresh green seeds – they impart a 
truly clean flavour. I collect juniper berries from a spot near my mother’s 
house for the same reason. Homegrown and freshly dried, they taste far more 
exciting than their store-bought counterparts. Citrus peel, coriander and 
juniper should be infused for a week or so; cardamom added for just a day or 
two. With rosemary, anything more than three days and a few sprigs is 
overpowering. I am experimenting with basil because I’ve read about 
a basil-cucumber martini that must be tried. The recipe called for half a cup 
of chopped basil, but I went with whole sprigs instead. I’m on week two of 
infusion and I think it’s about right; if you chop the basil, leave it for no 
more than a week.

Love butterflies? Say it with oregano | Alys Fowler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/30/alys-fowler-origanum-butterflies>
Any infusion must go into a very clean jar with a tight lid. Bad bacteria will 
sour the drink. As for how much you add, it depends how fast you want to get 
there. I add a teaspoon of coriander and juniper berries, half that of 
cardamom, and taste regularly till I am happy. (Any excuse to drink gin.)

Elderflowers in gin are lovely, but you’ve missed that moment. Elderberries 
are equally good. Either dry them or make a simple syrup of sugar and 
elderberries boiled up gently. (Raw, they can make you sick.) Remove all the 
green stems which are poisonous in large quantities. You need a scant cup of 
syrup to a litre of gin and it makes a wonderful cocktail with champagne.

Another seasonal gin is blackberry and apple (works equally well with vodka or 
cheap whisky). Take roughly equal parts of brambles, apples and sugar, around 
200g of each for a litre of gin. Chop up the apples, unless you are using crab 
apples, which look lovely left whole in the bottle. Place the washed fruit and 
sugar in a sterile jar, pour over the gin, put the lid on tightly and give the 
whole thing a good shake. Do this every so often for the next four weeks and 
you should have a lovely deep purple liqueur in under a month. Strain and 
decant into pretty bottles. This gin works wonderfully with champagne or 
prosecco.
 