
It seems impossible that Mary Quant, the celebrated fashion designer who once 
declared "I grew up not wanting to grow up. Growing up seemed so terrible", is 
now 75 and perfectly happy. Yet her enthusiasm for life and work remains as 
girlish as her famous bright plastic raincoats. "The most rewarding thing about 
being my age is that you don't have to take things quite so seriously," she 
explains gleefully. "Most annoying: that other people do take things so 
seriously." So does she find herself urging them to lighten up? "Well I hope I 
don't tell them, I hope I make it happen!"

No designer's work and personal style is as synonymous with youth as Quant's. 
She became famous for her Vidal Sassoon bob, for shaving her pubic hair into a 
heart and dyeing it green, and for helping bring Mod style into the mainstream. 
Her clothes label brought miniskirts, hot pants, paintbox make-up kits and 
patterned tights to the masses and became an integral part of the spirit of 
swinging 60s London. Quant became such a British success story she was awarded 
the OBE in 1966.

Spearheading a fashion revolution that embraced youthfulness at its sauciest, 
blithest best, her shop Bazaar, which opened on the King's Road in 1955, 
offered fun, affordable clothes. She helped fundamentally change the price and 
accessibility of fashion. In short (bum-skimmingly, leg-baringly short), 
without Mary Quant there would be no Topshop. We are indebted to her for 
kickstarting high street fashion and also for many of the retro looks that are 
back in vogue today.

She concedes that current style is "terribly like the stuff I was working on" 
but is far from miffed: "It's great fun! I love that sort of look - the short 
skirts and the hot pants and the over-the-knee-socks. Although I hate the 
effect the recession's having because I like everything to be bouncing. But 
golly, it's still looking great."

Still involved with her cosmetics company in Japan - she founded Mary Quant 
Cosmetics in 1966 - and now at work on her second autobiography, she needlessly 
admits, "I have an awful lot of energy." The word "fun" pops into almost 
everything she describes: "I can't imagine not working, really. I just think 
work's more fun than fun." Age doesn't seem to have slowed her down much. "I 
mean, one has days when one feels a bit rheumaticky, but I walk a lot and swim 
a lot."

Whilst she deems the Pill the best invention of her lifetime - "It's given 
women independence more than anything else" - an undiminished "greediness for 
the look of things" and "huge pleasure in colour and light" means that other 
great innovation, colour television, also gets her approval. She's a big fan of 
Sky in particular: "I watch a lot of sport on television and colour makes it so 
much more exciting. And you can get it any time of day, which is wonderful. 
Tennis has become just terrific, and the characters in it are just fabulous. 
The Paris Open this year was hugely exciting and we've got Wimbledon starting 
now. Terrific. And cricket's become wild! Terribly exciting."

Once started on this list of improvements to modern life, she's quite hard to 
stop: "Motorcar salesmen are now polite to women. That used to be awful. I 
remember one day when things were going frightfully well I went to buy myself a 
really smashing car. I asked them to show me a Porsche with an automatic 
gearbox and the salesman called over all the other salesmen and they stood 
around absolutely roaring with laughter. Because that's a contradiction, you 
know: the whole fun to them was moving this stick up and down. Well, I was so 
humiliated that I had to beat a retreat. What's so funny is that they now do 
have automatic gearboxes - I mean, everybody has."

Cars and their salesmen may have changed but Quant remains firmly fixed in her 
passions and priorities. "I find the same things are important to me: friends, 
design, fashion, food. London, too; oh London, I love it," she sighs. "It's 
improved so much - that view now across the river to St Paul's, it's quite 
staggering all the different sorts of architecture. Just stunning." Growing up 
has proved not so terrible after all.
 