
When I asked if anyone had read Huxley under the influence of psychedelic drugs
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jan/04/reading-group-doors-perception-aldous-huxley>
, I have to admit I wasn't expecting so many serious answers. But I'd 
underestimated the power of the internet to surprise and delight: minutes after 
the first piece on Aldous Huxley was posted members of the Reading Group 
started recounting their experiences of tripping their way through The Doors Of 
Perception.

"Must admit to having tried reading this while on acid," Kushti wrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/13973640>. "It was 
great, all the black squiggly things on the pages did a little dance, then they 
turned into a lizard and ran away. And there were rainbows. Can't remember what 
the book was about though."

"Got through the first few pages before collapsing in giggles at both the 
concept of a 'book' (you've got to be tripping to understand how ridiculous the 
entire concept of 'writing' and 'reading' can become when thought about too 
much) and also the idea that anyone could write about the experience I was 
going through,"leaun added 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/13975553>. "It's just 
impossible to portray in anything as mundane as 'words'."

There were further related reflections from jediperson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/13976077>:

"My memory of acid trips in the seventies was being absolutely fascinated by 
watching wallpaper for several hours (beats watching paint dry I guess). I 
never tried reading a book though. I doubt if it would make much sense. Wasn't 
itAldous Huxley <https://www.theguardian.com/books/aldoushuxley> who was quoted 
with saying that he 'discovered' the secret to the universe on one trip he had 
and was determined to write it down when he stopped tripping. His result was I 
believe 'the outside of a banana is bigger than the inside'."

I wouldn't want to read too much into these comments - they were written to 
amuse (and succeeded). All the same, they do point towards a more general rule: 
that people who try to intellectualise the act of tripping frequently come a 
cropper (for further evidence, see The Doors 
<http://www.elyrics.net/read/d/doors-lyrics/horse-latitudes-lyrics.html>). 
Trying to make coherent sense out of an experience so governed by random 
cerebral (mis)firings and enabling others to understand such a deeply personal 
experience isn't easy. Likewise, the attempt to produce intelligent thought 
becomes something of a losing battle. How could one think grand thoughts when, 
as Huxley describes, you can become entirely absorbed in the folds of your 
trousers? "I looked down by chance and went on passionately staring by choice, 
at my own crossed legs. Those folds in the trousers – what a labyrinth of 
endlessly significant complexity! And the texture of the grey flannel – how 
rich, how deeply, mysteriously sumptuous!"

Notice how Huxley can make a commonplace word like "passionately" vibrate with 
meaning. His prose is admirable. And it's doubly impressive that he has managed 
to produce, firstly, a piece of writing at all, and secondly, such a smart 
piece of writing, where lesser minds tend to produce nonsense. He might have 
spent more time than was strictly sensible staring at his strides, but he 
managed to put it to good use. He slotted his fascination (and a similar 
interest in the nature of chairs) into a broad theory about the evolutionary 
development of the mind. This thinking is neatly summarised in JG Ballard's 
introduction in my edition of the book, in which he says the mind works to 
"screen out all those perceptions that do not directly aid us in our day-to-day 
struggle for existence". We don't normally pay any attention to the splendour 
of something like a chair because if we were to do so, we'd never have time to 
do more important things, like feeding ourselves. The brain normally screens 
out "noise", even though plenty of that noise may well be very interesting. 
Huxley suggests his experience with mescalin re-opened his sense of wonder and 
allowed him to make contact with an "other world". He might have lost some of 
his senses ("There seems to be plenty of it was all I would answer when the 
investigator asked me to say what I felt about time") but others are 
marvellously heightened. He says the drug allows him to access a "sacramental 
vision" of reality where objects glow with significance. Red hot poker flowers 
in his garden seem "so passionately alive that they seemed to be standing on 
the very brink of utterance". Looking at the draperies in a Botticelli 
painting, meanwhile, makes him think he is seeing with the same "transfigured 
and transfiguring" eyes of artists, and realise the significance that the 
"Istigkeit" ("is-ness") of objects can play in artistic vision – even if he 
can't connect with the more emotional pretensions in a Cézanne self-portrait.

Mescalin gives Huxley other insights. He claims empathy with schizophrenics: 
"suddenly I had an inkling of what it must feel like to be mad." (Amusingly, 
this realisation was also inspired by the sight of a chair: "That chair - shall 
I ever forget it? … A chair which looked like The Last Judgement, or to be more 
accurate … a Last Judgement, which after a long time and with considerable 
difficulty, I recognised as a chair.") He also feels he has insights into the 
"transcendent contemplation" that lies behind religious thought and even (no 
mean feat) makes some sense out of a pronouncement from a zen master. Crudely 
put: "The hedge at the bottom of the garden" is the Dharma-body of the Buddha, 
because the Dharma-body of the Buddha is anything you might care to look at..."

OK, it's possible that explaining such things in this brief summary won't do 
justice to Huxley's arguments. The point I hope to make, however, is that he is 
always lucid and intelligent.

Early on in the book Huxley produces a typically elegant disclaimer about the 
impossibility of really sharing experience: "The martyrs go hand in hand into 
the arena, they are crucified alone … By its very nature embodied spirit is 
doomed to suffer and enjoy in solitude … We can pool information about 
experiences but never the experiences themselves. From family to nation, every 
human group is a society of island universes." He suggests that taking mescalin 
may help us bridge the gap between these universes – but what he really proves 
is that good writing can do it better. The Doors Of Perception gives a good 
feeling for what Huxley must have experienced – even if it's possible to doubt 
how new his insights actually were.

As the currently excellent Wikipedia article 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Doors_of_Perception#cite_note-49> on the book 
tells us, the scientistRonald Fisher 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ronald_Fisher> stated that The Doors Of 
Perception is "99% Aldous Huxley and only one half gram mescaline". It's easy 
to feel that Huxley approached his mescalin experience with preconceived 
notions about art, vision, religion and Istigkeit. I'll be posting about 
Huxley's unusual life and philosophy later this month, but for now it's enough 
to say it's clear that many of his ideas were already formed before he took 
that tablet in 1953, and that many of the things he discusses reflect 
obsessions he already had. He had already gone through most of the "doors of 
perception" that he claimed the drug opened for him.

There are, of course, problems. Huxley's suggestion that he had an inkling of 
madness struck me as unlikely, for instance, while his solution for helping 
schizophrenics with – of all things – hidden microphones in their pillows was 
plain daft. If we were to deconstruct many of the other notions in the book, 
I'm sure we could find similar faults. But even if we can rip the book apart 
point by point, I'm not sure it matters. In the end, the important thing for me 
was that it was all so very interesting and (something I've barely mentioned so 
far) so beautifully composed. The book may not convince you of the benefits of 
mescalin, but it does encourage further engagement with Huxley. I'm with the 
99%. How about you?
 