
The Sun has revealed that the BBC paid MPs more than £200,000 to appear on TV 
and radio programmes 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/politics/6328272/Greedy-MPs-paid-more-than-200k-of-taxpayers-cash.html>
 in the course of the last five years.

That doesn’t seem excessive or overly surprising, but the article is given a 
big show in today’s newspaper. It states, gasp, that 65 MPs received money for 
their appearances. And it gleefully tells readers that Labour members got the 
lion’s share by “trousering £141,260 of the £203,132 between them”.

The paper names former Labour home secretary Alan Johnson as the highest paid, 
receiving £58,767 between the start of 2010 and the end of 2014. Labour’sDiane 
Abbott <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/diane-abbott> was second, getting 
£43,380.

Both are regular guests on Andrew Neil’s This Week show on BBC2 and would 
therefore receive more than the nominal sums paid to MPs for other appearances.

The Sun’s political editor, Tom Newton-Dunn, explains that he obtained the 
information through “an extensive trawl of the register of members’ interests” 
in which MPs declare their extra earnings.


He writes: “The vast majority of the controversial payments appear to go very 
close to breaching the BBC’s own guidelines, as most of the MPs profited from 
spouting their own political views”.

To underline his argument, he quotes from the BBC’s rules on payments to 
politicians, which states:

“We should not normally pay MPs for appearances or other contributions to any 
BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> output in which they are speaking 
as a member of their party or expressing political views.

“They can, where appropriate, be paid a limited and realistic disturbance fee 
and/or any reimbursement for genuine expenses”.

But I’m not so certain that the majority of the payments listed by Newton-Dunn 
can be said to breach those rules.

On Neil’s entertaining show, for example, Johnson and Abbott - and others who 
also appear in that slot - rarely indulge in serious party political 
point-scoring.

Similarly, relatively high fees (about £1,500 a time) are paid to people who 
appear on Have I Got News For You. But it is a comedy show and MPs, who tend to 
be the butt of jokes, do not make political statements.

It’s possible to argue that MPs who review newspapers for the BBC News Channel 
are able to make party political points. So the BBC might like to consider 
whether the payment of the standard fee for such reviews (£150) is appropriate 
if the person is a sitting MP.

Even more pertinently, the £150 fee paid to MPs who appear on Radio 4’s Any 
Questions may be a cause for concern. The whole point of them doing the show is 
to push their party’s political agenda.

Given that their travel and accommodation expenses are covered by the BBC, is 
it really necessary to give them a fee?

Needless to say, the Sun found “incredulous” rent-a-quote critics. Sorry, it 
found one critic. Let’s be honest: it’s a double whammy for a paper that 
despises both the BBC and elected politicians.

But its scattergun approach, appearing to condemn every MP who was paid fees 
for BBC appearances that were not specifically related to their work in 
parliament, was unjustified.

Why shouldn’t Michael Gove be paid for non-partisan appearances on Newsnight’s 
Late Review slot? What’s wrong withTristram Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tristram-hunt>, David Davies, Rory 
Stewart and Peter Hain being paid for making documentaries?

Newton-Dunn did quote a BBC spokeswoman at the end of his piece, and if 
readers got that far - beyond the headlines and display - they would have 
discovered that she undermined the entire foundation of his article.

She said: “In general, the BBC does not pay the dozens of elected politicians 
who appear on its news programmes.


“However, we do make payments to MPs who are involved in presenting or 
appearing on programmes where their primary purpose goes beyond promoting a 
party political viewpoint.

“In common with other broadcasters, we sometimes cover travel costs and pay a 
small ‘disturbance fee’ where appropriate”. Exactly.
 