
While Honor Blackman thoroughly enjoys herself at the OM fashion shoot and 
likes the clothes - the Alexander McQueen shirt, Miu Miu trousers and Banana 
Republic Oxford bags draw particular praise - she hates shopping for outfits 
herself. "I know lots of women who love it, but I can't imagine why." Working 
out what to wear can't hold too much fear for Blackman: she still has a figure 
that women a quarter of her age would envy. "I do exercise, I think I'm lucky 
with my genes, and being in this business I always know I have to fit into a 
slinky dress, go on stage and deliver the goods - so I watch what I eat."

Blackman has no intention of leaving the business any time soon. "As long as 
my health and my memory stand by me, as long as I'm offered work I'll take it. 
I've worked since I was 16 - the idea of stopping is appalling." She found fame 
in the 1960s as Cathy Gale in The Avengers and Pussy Galore in Goldfinger, and 
has worked continuously in TV, film and theatre ever since. She was in 
Coronation Street, appeared in Cabaret and The Sound of Music on the West End 
stage, and she's particularly fond of the character Laura West, the glamorous 
granny in 1990s sitcom The Upper Hand. "As Cathy Gale I got fanmail from 
fellas, obviously, thanks to the black leather and everything, but playing 
Laura I got lots more mail from women. That role made women who'd just retired 
and felt they'd been put on the back burner realise they had a lot of life left 
to live."

Like many actresses, she bemoans the dearth of roles for older women. "It's 
extraordinary how men with big beer bellies who look like hell still go on 
working - no one tells them they look like the back of a cab. But once a woman 
gets past 40 everyone gets twitchy about them."

Despite industry ageism, Blackman is still working hard. As well as appearing 
in the new series of Hotel Babylon, she's releasing a new single called "The 
Star who Fell from Grace" with the Prague Philharmonic in July (she and 
Avengers co-star Patrick Macnee had a Top 10 hit with "Kinky Boots" in 1990). 
"It's about someone who's fallen from grace, the way anyone who drinks or do 
drugs does. People keep saying that I've never done any of that - well, I say, 
there's still time."
 