
Alittle over 100 years ago, a daughter was born to Winchester schoolmaster 
Archie Wilson and his wife, Ethel, and they named her Jean. Three months ago 
she celebrated her birthday with a lunch party at Christ Church, Oxford, 
surrounded by her three sisters and countless nieces, nephews and friends. The 
cake was in the shape of the figure 100. "I had so many people to talk to I 
didn't even get close before it had been cut up," says Jean, sitting at her 
desk in the bay window of an Oxfordshire nursing home which is furnished like 
an upmarket country house hotel. The room overlooks the local common, where a 
funfair is being set up. "I like feeling connected to the world," she says, 
indicating the view. "There's a beautiful garden at the back, but I prefer 
being able to see what's going on across the road. My sister Mary comes to 
visit me every week, and we have a long chat and lots of giggles, and a lot of 
friends come in, and I am much better informed about the news than I ever used 
to be."

When she isn't reading the Times, Jean spends her time decoding her 
grandfather's teenage diaries from the mid-19th century, which are written in 
German italics, and translating them into English. "He's just starting to learn 
the piano at the age of 10," she explains, pointing at an indecipherable 
passage of swirls and loops.

She can't walk unaided any more and wears a hearing aid, but when her sisters, 
the philosopher peerMary Warnock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/mary-warnock>, 85, and Stephana Thomson, 87 
- who has driven from Yorkshire, and still teaches music after a career at the 
Ripon Cathedral Choir School - arrive, it is like being with a group of 
enthusiastic 20-year-olds. They have not told their other sister, Grizel, 
because they are worried about how she would travel from her own nursing home 
in Burford.

Stephana enters, brandishing cakes she refers to as "Sudden Death" and flowers 
from Mary's nearby garden. Within minutes they are talking about the games they 
used to play. "The relationship between us has hardly changed since we were 
children," says Stephana. "Certainly not with Mary - we still inhabit a world 
where we understand one another well. With the others it has changed a bit: we 
used to do things together, whereas now, because they can't move around as 
much, I come to visit them, which means we miss seeing exhibitions or shopping. 
But in some ways life has brought us together again now: when Grizel married, 
we saw less of one another, but now we have become closer again."

Every week, Mary travels by train between a flat she shares with one of her 
daughters in London and her home in Oxfordshire. In London she commutes to the 
House of Lords by tube. "I am definitely aware of getting older, particularly 
when I need to run to catch the bus and can't," she says. She gives the 
impression of finding this an annoyance, rather than a cause for depression. "I 
always try to walk up and down escalators rather than standing."

For Mary, aspects of growing old are met with relief, even joy. "In a way, 
emotionally, you change back. I am freer now to feel intense excitement like I 
used to as an adolescent - being out of doors, for example, or listening to 
music. I somehow didn't have time for that when I was bringing up my children 
and working full-time. I have been able to spend much more time with my 
youngest grandchild than with the older ones, and that's been wonderful, too."

The sisters regroup in Jean's room after the photo session - all three hate 
posing - and agree it's a shame Grizel couldn't make it.

"I really enjoyed that," says Jean. She smiles as she leafs through the album 
of her birthday party pictures, and opens a tin of Duchy Original biscuits.
 