
Nine original Andy Warhol <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/andywarhol>
 prints were quietly stolen from a Los Angeles movie business and replaced with 
fakes in an art heist that went undetected for years, police and court 
documents showed on Thursday.

The silk screen prints worth an estimated $350,000 are from the artist’s 1983 
series Endangered Species and his 1980 Ten Portraits of Jews of the Twentieth 
Century, according to a police report submitted toLos Angeles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/los-angeles> superior court as part of a 
search warrant affidavit.

 The theft was first reported earlier this week by celebrity website TMZ.

 Los Angeles police detective Don Hrycyk of the city’s art theft detail 
declined to comment, saying the case was under investigation.

 In the affidavit, police said the theft of the prints from the premises of 
movie company Moviola was so seamless, it was only discovered after one of the 
pieces was taken to be reframed. Staff at the framing firm noticed that the 
print was fuzzy and lacked a print number and signature.

 A special tool was used to remove the frames in which the prints were hung at 
Moviola, because otherwise the walls would have been left damaged, according to 
the affidavit.

 It appears whoever stole the prints replaced them with large color copies, 
Los Angeles police detective Brent Johnson wrote in the affidavit.

Bald Eagle, one of the pilfered works, was sold by auction house Bonhams on 25 
October 2011, according to the affidavit.

 A judge last month issued a search warrant for the Los Angeles office of 
Bonhams, as detectives investigated who bought the print and who consigned it, 
court papers showed.

 Bonhams spokeswoman Kristin Guiter said police did not search the office but 
that last month the company responded to a request from investigators for 
information and documentation about the Bald Eagle print sold in 2011.

 She said police have not contacted Bonhams about any prints from 10 Portraits 
of Jews of the Twentieth Century.

 An official at Moviola did not return a telephone call seeking comment.

 A Los Angeles police report said the conditions of the fakes indicated the 
theft occurred in the past three years, although the 2011 auction of the Bald 
Eagle suggested a date earlier than that.

 The Ten Portraits of Jews series includes Sarah Bernhardt and Martin Buber, 
while Endangered Species includes the bighorn ram and the Siberian tiger. It 
was unclear exactly which images from the two series were stolen.
 