
Police in Madrid are searching for about 70 paintings worth an estimated 
€600,000 (£475,000) after three men walked out of an art gallery with the works 
as the sun rose last Thursday.

The thieves are thought to have spent two to three hours carrying the 
paintings out of thePuerta de Alcalá art gallery <http://www.puertaalcala.es/> 
and propping them against nearby trees before loading them into a van.

The men are believed to have entered by punching a hole in the wall of a 
neighbouring bar, said Pedro Márquez of the gallery, noting that the bar had 
been closed for about a year.

“Once the hole was made, one person entered the gallery, disabled the alarm 
and opened the doors.” From there, he added, “they were able to take out 
anything they wanted without any problems”.

Márquez said he was working to determine exactly how many paintings were 
stolen and their exact value. The thieves also made off with a receipt book 
from the gallery, and he worried they would attempt to pass off sales of the 
stolen artwork as legitimate.

Further details of the heist came from a security guard who was keeping watch 
at a nearby construction site.

After spotting the men carrying the paintings on to the street, the security 
guard stopped them to ask what they were doing. The men said they were from the 
gallery and were moving the paintings to be displayed somewhere else.

“At this time of night?” the security guard reportedly asked them. The men 
assured him that an early start was crucial to getting the paintings to their 
next destination in time.

The theft came as the gallery was preparing to host a solo show by Seville’s 
Pablo Segarra Chias. Márquez said the stolen works included 13 of Chias’s 
paintings, as well as work by Eustaquio Segrelles and Juan González Alacreu. 
“They took all our best work,” said Márquez.

While he had few hopes of recovering the pieces, Márquez said he was planning 
on posting pictures of the stolen artwork on the gallery’s website to at least 
prevent its sale on the black market. “This has destroyed us. It’s left us in a 
really tough situation,” he said. “Forty years of work and they just walked out 
with it.”
 