
Joe Turner's Come And Gone, London

After writing Joe Turner's Come And Gone, August Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/augustwilson> said: "After I wrote it I said 
to myself: 'If I die tomorrow, I have fulfilled myself as an artist.'" Of all 
the plays Wilson wrote from his decade-by-decade chronicling of the 20th 
century, this probably sums up the African-American experience best. Within the 
series of 10 plays, this is the third of the "Pittsburgh Cycle" and finds 
Herald Loomis in 1911 having just been released from Joe Turner's slave gang 
and trying to pick up the life he was snatched from seven years previously by 
searching for his wife. It's a riveting account of one man's journey, and that 
of a people's recovery from slavery. Delroy Lindo (The Cider House Rules, 
Malcolm X) played Loomis in the original 1988 Broadway production, but takes 
another role here. David Lan directs.

Young Vic, SE1, to 3 Jul

Mark Cook

Pulse Festival, Ipswich
 Sex Idiot, part of Pulse Festival. 
There may be a burgeoning number of festivals in this country, but few have 
the energy of Pulse, bringing together artists from across the east of England 
and mixing their offerings with international work. There is Dancing Brick's 
6.0, about ice skaters Heap and Pebble who attempt to carry on in a world 
without ice, plus a chance for the audience to take on the role of a disaster 
response team as Ipswich faces ecological disaster in Metis Arts' 3rd Ring Out. 
This weekend continues a showcase of works that have emerged from the 
successful Escalator programme which supports artists in the region, and will 
include 30 Bird's Poland 3 Iran 2, about the 1976 Olympic football match. 
There's a lot of site-specific work, and it's definitely worth taking a punt on 
the unknown.

New Wolsey, to 12 Jun

Lyn Gardner

Doubt: A Parable, Glasgow
 Doubt: A Parable. Photograph: John Johnston 
With Catholic sex abuse revelations in the news, John Patrick Shanley's 
multi-award-winning play should have an even greater charge, despite being 
maybe a little too dramatically contrived for UK theatre-goers. There's no 
doubt that there's plenty of meat in this tale, the bones of which are 
suspicions of inappropriate behaviour by a priest, Father Flynn, at a Catholic 
school in the Bronx in the early-60s. School principal Sister Aloysius believes 
that there are reasons to doubt Father Flynn's behaviour, particularly in his 
relationship with the school's only black student, but her colleague, Sister 
James, only sees the good in everyone and everything. The play packs a great 
deal into 90 minutes as its considers issues of conviction, faith and doubt, 
and it is one that certainly sends audiences out into the night debating the 
rights and wrongs of the situation.

Tron, Tue to 5 Jun

Lyn Gardner

Women, Power And Politics, London
 Niamh Cusack. Women, Power And Politics. Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
Given the distinctly masculine slant of recent negotiations to form a 
government, the need for a season entitled Women, Power And Politics is clear. 
Staged at the Tricycle along the same lines as its Afghanistan season The Great 
Game (which returns from 23 Jul to 29 Aug), it comprises nine plays, a film 
festival, three short plays by young playwrights and an exhibition. The plays 
are divided into two programmes, entitled Then – looking at the historical 
perspective – and Now (from 8 Jun), bringing the issues up-to-date, and come 
from the pens of Moira Buffini, Zinnie Harris, Marie Jones and Sue Townsend, 
among others. Indhu Rubasingham directs the plays, which include Niamh Cusack, 
Stella Gonet and Kika Markham among the casts. There are also post-show 
discussions with Reeta Chakrabarti, Bonnie Greer and Clare Short.

Tricycle Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre>, NW6, Fri to 17 
Jul

Mark Cook

Love Story, Chichester
 Love Story. Photograph: Manuel Harlan 
Love means never having to say that you're sorry, so here's hoping composer 
Howard Goodall and lyricist Stephen Clark won't be apologising for this musical 
version of Eric Segal's novel adapted for the big screen with Ryan O'Neal and 
Ali McGraw. Here, Michael Xavier is Oliver, the rich preppie student who falls 
for Jenny (Emma Williams), a girl from the wrong side of the tracks. Despite 
Oliver's father's disapproval, the couple wed, but when Jenny falls ill the 
stage is set for tragedy.

Minerva, Sat to 26 Jun

Lyn Gardner

Small Worlds, Salford
 Small Worlds. 
The Lowry has a great programme for children and family audiences this half 
term. Teatro Kismet performs its version of The Mermaid Princess and LaLaLuna 
combines circus and film following a man's attempt to relight the moon when its 
light is snuffed out. Then there's Slung Low's interactive show Small Worlds. 
The story of Mark, searching for his marbles, it combines live performance, 
music and digital projection as Mark discovers that there are many different 
ways to lose your marbles.

The Lowry, Wed to 6 Jun

Lyn Gardner

Petit Mal, Southampton & London
 Petit Mal. 
Something wild comes our way courtesy of that brilliant producer of 
contemporary circus, Crying Out Loud, which has brought so much breathtaking 
work to these shores. This Finnish circus show is an underground hit that comes 
on a stage resembling the aftermath of a riot and which has a stripped-back DIY 
aesthetic. Taking its title from the French words to describe transient lapses 
in consciousness, Petit Mal offers a new take on old skills as hip-hop 
movements meet Chinese pole and breakdancing melds with acrobatics. Awesome 
trampolining and juggling with found objects are just two of the highlights of 
a production that offers chaos and control in equal measure. We've had some 
great circus shows in the UK this year, and this one should win the fast 
growing artform even more fans.

Nuffield, Southampton, Mon to Wed; Queen Elizabeth Hall, SE1, Fri to 6 Jun

Lyn Gardner

Shining City, Keswick
 Shining City. 
Theatre By The Lake this season offers bonnets with Tim Luscombe's adaptation 
of Northanger Abbey, romance with a revival of William Inge's Bus Stop, as well 
as Joe Orton's farcical What The Butler Saw and Tennessee Williams's The Glass 
Menagerie. First up in the studio season is Conor McPherson's wonderful Shining 
City, which takes place in the office of a Dublin therapist, Ian, a former 
priest wracked with guilt, and faced with a man who claims to be seeing the 
ghost of his dead wife. It's a tremendous, knotty play that offers no answers, 
only probing questions.

Theatre By The Lake, Sat to 5 Nov

Lyn Gardner
 