
David Cameron has said Andrew Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrew-mitchell> and the other parties in 
the Plebgate saga should accept the ruling of the high court this week and 
finally bring the two-year episode to an end.

The prime minister’s comments – which further reiterate that Mitchell’s 
top-level political career is over – came as one of the four policemen on duty 
at the scene of the incident in September 2012 expressed sympathy for the 
former chief whip.

Ian Richardson said the initial confrontation after Mitchell tried to leave 
Downing Street on his bicycle was a “nonsense incident” that spiralled out of 
control, in part propelled by the political aims of thePolice Federation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/police-federation>.

On Thursday at the high court Mr Justice Mitting concluded that Mitchell did 
use the “politically toxic” word pleb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/nov/27/andrew-mitchell-plebgate-gamble-career-fails>
 against Richardson’s colleague PC Toby Rowland.

Cameron said after a speech in the Midlands on immigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/nov/28/david-cameron-immigration-eu-treaty-change>
: “On the issue of Andrew Mitchell, I mean, let me be clear, it is never right 
to be abusive or rude to a police officer. I think that is extremely important.

“But, look, we’ve had a court case now. That’s how we do things in this 
country. The judge has made very clear his verdict and I think everyone should 
accept that verdict and move on.”

Following the ruling, Mitchell – who faces an estimated legal bill of around 
£1.5m – said he was deeply disappointed with the decision but hoped to “bring 
this matter to a close”.

Richardson, who has retired after 30 years’ service as a Metropolitan police 
constable, said it was absurd that the affair had led to Mitchell resigning 
from government and to a series of officers being sacked or otherwise 
disciplined, some for passing information to the media.

He told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “It was a nonsense incident that 
shouldn’t have cost Mr Mitchell his job, and certainly shouldn’t have cost the 
officers who were whistleblowers – or whatever their opinion of them is, 
whether they’re whistleblowers or leakers – their jobs. But here we are, with 
that. Mr Mitchell lost his sense of humour. Who hasn’t lost their sense of 
humour at work?”

Richardson said he heard all of the exchange when Mitchell was initially told 
he could not ride his bike through the main vehicle gate, but only part of the 
MP’s conversation with Rowland.

Richardson said he felt sorry for Mitchell and for the officers sacked over 
apparent efforts to gain political capital over the saga in battles with the 
government over police reforms. He said he was so incensed by thePolice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Federation “jumping on the bandwagon” 
by calling for Mitchell to resign that he wrote a letter to his chief 
superintendent explaining his take on the initial incident.

“They were very interested in the leak, to find out where the leak was, but I 
was told that who said what to whom at the gate was of no interest to the 
organisation,” Richardson said. “We then had a succession of conspiracy 
theories that were coming along like London buses – every day someone else was 
leading this conspiracy.”

If senior officers had read his notes from the evening, Richardson said, it 
might have saved a lot of trouble: “I think it could have been put into 
perspective. It could have been said that it was a minor incident that’s been 
leaked to the newspapers, and let’s move on. But, of course, we didn’t move on, 
and we ended up at the high court last week and this week. It’s a great shame. 
And at what cost to so many people.”

Richardson said he was still annoyed that the Police Federation had used the 
affair as “a hook to hang their grievances on”, and was disappointed by the 
response from the Metropolitan police commissioner, Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe, to 
whom he had also written. “I got a very bland response back, which quite 
frankly wasn’t worth the cost of the stamp to send it to me,” he said.

The affair ended up in the high court after Mitchell sued the Sun over a story 
that appeared on its front page on 21 September 2012, in which he was alleged 
to have launched an offensive and arrogant attack on the Downing Street police 
officers. Rowland then sued Mitchell for accusing him of lying.

The judge decided against Mitchell, saying: “For the reasons given, I’m 
satisfied, at least on the balance of probabilities, that Mr Mitchell did speak 
the words attributed to him, or so close to them as to amount to the same, the 
politically toxic word pleb.”

In another interview on Today a former Tory MP, Michael Brown, said Mitchell 
would not have got into trouble if he had been using a ministerial car rather 
than a bicycle.

“The reason that cabinet ministers and junior ministers were given ministerial 
cars by Harold Macmillan was so that they didn’t get into this kind of mess,” 
he said. “My main criticism of Andrew Mitchell is that all this Cameroon 
bicycling nonsense is what got him into trouble. Ministerial cars are for 
ministers to be protected from this kind of rubbish.”
 