
BT has been in the news recently for laying off staff – by the thousand. So 
perhaps it is somewhat ironic that behind the scenes the telecoms company has 
some ground-breaking policies to keep staff on and maintain their sense of 
well-being and productivity in the workplace.

The company is unusual in having a workforce with an age gap of up to 60 
years. Its oldest member of staff is 75 years old and provides technical 
support to one of its largest global accounts out of New York, while its 
youngest is a service coordinator in Brazil who will be celebrating his 16th 
birthday in July.

Overseeing the company's employment policies is Caroline Walters, BT's 
director of people and policy, who underlines the importance of its "career 
life planning" for all staff. The scheme offers mentoring to take employees 
through each significant period of their working life – from school right 
through to official retirement and even beyond that. Since 2000 it has 
developed a package of "flexible" retirement options and policies that allow 
people to "zig-zag" through their careers, taking advantage of sabbaticals and 
secondments.

Walters, who joined BT straight from school at the tender age of 16, has 
recently added another string to her not insignificant bow. She is the first 
chair of a new project from the stable of Nesta – the National Endowment for 
Science, Technology and the Arts – which has earmarked the challenges ofan 
ageing Britain <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/series/ageing-britain> as the 
first area to be tackled by anew public service innovation lab 
<http://www.nestalab.org.uk/age-unlimited-call-for-ideas/>, launched earlier 
this year.

The project came about as a result of the shocking findings of research which 
revealed that the UK is completely unprepared for ageing. Just under a third of 
all pensioners live on or close to the poverty line, while 12 million people – 
half the UK workforce – are putting nothing aside for their old age. 
Demographic patterns mean these trends are getting worse and the UK is failing 
to find solutions, focusing instead on existing services and initiatives.

The board of the Ageing Lab, chaired by Walters and stuffed with experts on 
the issue (includingSarah Harper of Oxford University 
<http://www.ageing.ox.ac.uk/people/sarah-harper>), held its first meeting this 
week. It is calling for people to support ideas that will help over-50s to 
develop optimal ageing skills (ie to age well) through work extension and new 
approaches to the transition into retirement. Selected ideas will receive 
funding from Nesta to pilot them over a two- to three-year period. The call for 
entries has just opened and closes on 19 June.

Rowena Young, director of the Nesta Lab, says: "The rise in our ageing 
population is one of the most significant social challenges we face. It 
requires radical new approaches to avert an unprecedented drain on our already 
depleted public finances.

Helen Gresty, head of Nesta's innovation programmes, adds: "Individuals in 
their 50s can be helped to age well and exercise choice before these become too 
constrained. Whether it's employees negotiating with their employers to 
continue to work (along the BT model), or creating more stimulating 
alternatives to traditional employment, we will test the best ideas on a small 
scale before taking what works to the market. It's an exciting approach which 
will empower people reaching old age."

Walters says of the situation at BT: "Of course we are happy to let people go 
in the right circumstances – and particularly those working in declining areas. 
But our normal pensionable age is 65 and a lot of staff get to that. Many 
decide to retire then because they have other commitments, such as wanting to 
spend time with their families and grandchildren But many choose to stay on – 
we have many employees in their 70s. They enjoy the intellectual stimulation of 
work and the social side of it."

Walters says the evidence from the workplace is compelling. Staff working in 
mixed-age teams have relatively high productivity. And there are noticeable 
benefits in terms of health and well-being, with stress-related absences 
declining by 36% over the past five years.

Walters has a personal empathy with older people and their importance to the 
younger generation: "Three of my grandparents died before I was born, and one 
before I was eight. But despite losing them I spent a lot of time with older 
people, one of whom had been in a concentration camp. We all have a lot to 
learn from older people."
 