
1. The most important tip is to enjoy your food. Having a little of what you 
fancy really does help in keeping to a healthy diet. But too many indulgences 
will only make you feel unwell over time. Keep some foods as occasional treats, 
so they retain their value as something to look forward to.

2. Eat a variety of foods from the main food groups to ensure your diet 
contains as many different nutrients as possible. A balanced diet means lots of 
fruits and vegetables and enough starchy foods for energy (grainy or brown 
carbohydrate foods are particularly healthy). It also means having some 
calcium-rich foods such as dairy foods (or calcium-fortified soya products) and 
protein foods, such as meat, fish, eggs or vegetarian protein foods such as 
lentils/beans or meat substitute products. A balanced diet does not mean all of 
these food groups at every meal, rather all of these over most days.

3. The advice to try to reduce salt applies to the whole population, so try to 
become 'salt aware' and cautious with the amount added during cooking or at the 
table. If food seems to taste a bit bland, there are lots of ways to add 
flavour: adding spices or dried/fresh herbs during cooking, or using a dash of 
lemon juice or vinegar adds interest to meals. Watch out for some of the 
pre-mix seasoning packets: many of these also contain a lot of salt. Many 
products have information about salt content on the front of the packet (either 
as a traffic light guide or as a flash with the percentage of salt in a portion 
of the product): try to choose products that contain less salt.

4. Drink adequate amounts – this does not just need to be water, although the 
stuff out the tap really is the best way to hydrate. Cups of tea or coffee or 
well-diluted squash are all excellent ways to get enough fluid. Fruit 
juice/smoothies are fine in small amounts, but they can be a concentrated 
source of sugars and calories, and are not always as hydrating. It is important 
to drink a bit more in hot weather. If your urine is a pale-straw colour, then 
you are drinking enough.

5.Vitamin D is a really important nutrient for bone health. Many people get 
vitamin D from exposure of skin to sun, so getting out-and-about on a sunny day 
is good advice. However, skin becomes less efficient at producing vitamin D as 
you get older, and official advice states that everyone over the age of 65 
should take a daily supplement of vitamin D (10 micrograms per day). Fortified 
margarine, oily fish and eggs are among the few foods that contain vitamin D, 
so try to eat some of these regularly.

6. Fibre, fibre, fibre. The best way to increase your fibre intake is to have 
oats/grainy-brown cereals for breakfast, and then lots of fruits and 
vegetables/salads throughout the day in any way you like. Fruits can be tinned, 
stewed, mashed or baked; vegetables can be tinned or from frozen, in 
soups/stews or as sides. Drinking enough helps fibre to fill out. If being 
constipated is a problem, choosing a bran cereal for breakfast is helpful, as 
is choosing wholemeal bread.

7. It's a good idea to keep a stock of basic food items so that you can eat 
well even if you can't get to the shops. It is helpful to have foods in the 
cupboard that are easy to open and quick to prepare; tinned and long life foods 
are especially useful. Keep a list of usual favourite foods to allow family 
members/carers to more easily buy foods you like, if you are feeling unwell. 
Local grocery stores may also be able to deliver food to you, if you are unable 
to get to the shops.

8. Try not to skip meals. It is a good idea to have breakfast, and if appetite 
is low, to have light snack meals later in the day (rather than eating late at 
night and then not being able to face morning food). The tea-and-biscuits diet 
is not a good way to develop good health: if you cannot face a cooked meal, 
then snack on small portions of nutritious foods such as tinned fruit, custard, 
egg and toast or a small portion of plain rice/pasta/cous-cous (with a few 
beans/tomatoes for colour and flavour). This is especially true if you are 
underweight – being a healthy weight (not overweight or underweight) can help 
to keep you well.

9. Alcohol is a friend and a foe. Small amounts of wine with meals can add to 
enjoyment of the food, and also help slumber and relaxation. However larger 
amounts of alcoholic drink depresses appetite and depresses mood, and regularly 
drinking to excess leads to many health problems. If you enjoy alcohol with 
meals, try to keep to the safe drinking limits, and try to have a least several 
days a week without booze.

10. Supplements can be helpful, but these products do only 'supplement' 
nutrients in the diet; they do not replace many of the essential components 
found in a variety of foods. A vitamin D supplement is highly recommended, and 
if appetite is poor, or getting enough of some food groups is a challenge, then 
a general one-a-day multivitamin product gives some reassurance of adequate 
intakes of some nutrients. Fish oil supplements are popular, and are also a 
useful additional source of omega 3 fatty acids (especially for people who are 
not keen on the one-a-week portion of oily fish recommended for good health).

• Vicki Pout chairs the British Dietetic Association <http://www.bda.uk.com>'s 
nutrition advisory group for older people (Nage).
 