
The interminable transfer sagas of Gareth Bale, Wayne Rooney, Luis Suárez and 
Robert Lewandowski are dominating the headlines around western Europe but there 
is also plenty going on in the east of the continent.

Russia


When his head is right, Igor Denisov is one of the best holding midfielders in 
Europe but his head goes awry with alarming frequency. Last season, he was at 
the centre of the Zenit players' revolt against the salaries earned by the two 
big-name arrivals, Hulk and Axel Witsel, and ended up spending several weeks 
training with the reserves.

He moved to Anzhi in the summer but after falling out with Samuel Eto'o 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/samuel-etoo> and Lassana Diarra, there 
were reports last week that he had been released. The club have now denied that 
but it does appear that Denisov is training alone as he tries to maintain his 
fitness for Russia's World Cup qualifier against Northern Ireland next week.

Kazakhstan

Aktobe, the easternmost team left in the Europa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league>, will travel to 
Iceland to face Breidablik on Thursday to defend a 1-0 first-leg lead in the 
third qualifying round. Hold on and they could face Tottenham, Real Betis or 
Fiorentina in the play-off round but there is a shadow over their progress to 
this stage. In the last round Aktobe, who are essentially a state-run club, 
overcame the Norwegian Cup-winners Hodd. Named after Hodr, a mythological 
archer, and based in the village of Ulsteinvik in the fjords (population, 
5,686), Hodd should have been one of the great fairytales of this year's 
competition: instead, they went out, insisting they had been cheated.

They won the first leg 1-0 but were prevented from taking their strongest team 
to Kazakhstan for the return when the Nigerian defender Akeem Latifu and the 
midfielder Sivert Heltne Nilsen, the son of the manager, Lars Arne Nilsen, were 
denied visas. They lost 2-0 in Kazakhstan. "I do not know very much and will 
say little. People can draw their own conclusions, then we will express ours a 
little later," the manager told TV2.

"What can I say? We have applied for a visa properly, we were told that 
everything looked good and then suddenly we are told that [the two players] 
cannot be with us, what do you think about that? It is very strange, we have 
not received any explanation as to why they cannot go. They know their football 
at the Kazakh embassy."

The Kazakh embassy has refused to give its reasons for denying the visas but 
there are suggestions they were taking retaliatory action over Norway's refusal 
to grant visas to Aktobe's two Uzbekistan internationals, Timur Kapadze and 
Aleksandr Geynrikh. It also appears that the Kazakh authorities refused visas 
to the Slovakian refereeing team who were supposed to be taking charge of the 
second leg, forcing Uefa to appoint a team of Turkish referees instead.

Serbia

Vuk Rasovic is under no illusions that he will be judged as Partizan coach, 
not on domestic results but on what happens in Europe – and that makes their
Champions League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> 
third-round qualifying tie against Ludogorets Razgrad of Bulgaria vital. As 
Crvena Zvezda continue their sorry path of self-destruction, the Serbian league 
has become almost meaningless, something that Partizan simply expect to win. 
Rasovic only arrived in May and has already picked up one title, their sixth 
straight championship.

His is a young side and, with four major departures in the summer, one in 
transition. He admits he is still waiting "for everything to click into place" 
but also knows that failure to reach at least the play-off round would be a 
setback. "We were 1-0 up in Razgrad last week when, for some strange and 
illogical reason, we sat back and left space for them," he said. "We can 
overturn a 2-1 deficit but we have to be brave and work well together, showing 
a lot more concentration."

Ukraine

As Shakhtar Donetsk <https://www.theguardian.com/football/shakhtardonetsk> 
look to beat Arsenal and Tottenham to the signing of Bernard from Atlético 
Mineiro, life goes from bad to worse for Dynamo Kyiv. It is four years since 
they last won the Ukrainian title and the gulf between them and Shakhtar was 
clear as they lost an ill-tempered game 3-1 at the Donbass Arena last Sunday to 
slip five points behind the leaders after four games of the season. "Dynamo are 
stronger than Shakhtar," the Dutch forward Jeremain Lens insisted. "We just 
failed to show that today."

That, though, seemed further evidence of the state of denial in which the club 
finds itself. Dynamo were also furious about the refereeing of Viktor Shvetsov, 
a piece on the club's website stating there were "half-a-dozen questionable 
decisions" and pointing in particular to the incident that led to Andriy 
Yarmolenko suffering a broken leg. Shakhtar's Brazilian forward Taison was not 
shown a red card for the foul but Yarmolenko had no doubt about the intent. 
"I'm sure Tyson specifically wanted to cause me a personal injury," he said. 
"In a challenge for the ball, he raised his leg and thrust the studs into my 
thigh."

Bulgaria

When CSKA Sofia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cskasofia> were saved 
from bankruptcy last month, their new board promised absolute transparency and, 
true to their word, on Monday they revealed the salaries of their playing and 
coaching staff. Best paid is the head coach, Stoichko Mladenov, who earns 
€10,000 a month, while the best-paid players are Valentin Iliev, Emil Gargorov 
and Apostol Popov, all of whom returned to the club this summer and all of whom 
earn €7500 a month.

Flotation on the stock market is expected soon, with any money raised to be 
reinvested in the club. That suggests that under the new owner, Alexander 
Tomov, CSKA are beginning to find some stability but chaos remains a way of 
life at the club. Two weeks ago Mladenov called in police after allegedly being 
attacked at the training ground by the former owner, Kaloyan Stoyanov, 
apparently in a dispute over a foreign player signed by Stoyanov but released 
by Mladenov.
 