
Two major controversial votes in two parliaments and two street demonstrations 
in two capital cities, the only difference being that it's the British who now 
appear more radical and militant than their Irish counterparts.

Watching yesterday's disturbances following the student protests in London 
against tuition fees, there was a stark contrast to what happened in central 
Dublin earlier in the week.

Where the demonstrators around Westminster smashed the windows of key 
government buildings, and later businesses in Oxford Street, their Irish 
equivalents in Dublin beat drums and blew horns and whistles outside Dail 
Eireann in Kildare Street. In the area around Leinster House, there wasn't a 
single window broken.

Even inside the two parliaments, the contrasting attitude of politicians was 
stark. Although the Conservative-Liberal Democrat government secured a 
20-strong majority to get the tuition fees bill passed, both parties – 
particularly the latter – faced internal rebellions.

In Dublin, the ruling Fianna Fail/Green party coalition held firm with no 
rebels on the backbenches, albeit relying on the votes of just two independent 
members of the Dail. The administration held the line by pushing through 
legislation that will cut welfare, take one euro per hour off the minimum wage 
and trim civil servants' pensions.

The evidence from the streets of Dublin city centre, and other parts of the 
city among less vocal, middle of the road Irish citizens this week, was that 
the populace may hate the austerity measures in the budget but are likely to 
accept four years of fiscal pain because they believe there is no alternative.

This doesn't mean public anger over the way this government has mismanaged the 
fiscal crisis and the toxic debts of Ireland's banks will peter out.

The Irish people will take their revenge in the first week of March in the 
expected general election. Fianna Fail will suffer historic losses of close to 
an unprecedented 20% of the popular vote, whilst their Green coalition partners 
could face oblivion.

In the government's place, a new coalition will be formed, consisting of Fine 
Gael and the Irish Labour party. A number of veteran students of the Irish 
electoral system, such as former Taoiseach Garrett Fitzgerald, estimate that 
this alternative government could hold a majority of 30 plus once the votes are 
counted. Such an outcome would mark a major shift in the Irish political 
landscape.

Fianna Fail, meanwhile, is already pondering its post election-hammering 
strategy. The party's high command would prefer if the embattled Taoiseach, 
Brian Cowen, leads Fianna Fail into the expected disaster rather than a taint a 
new, fresh leader with the mark of defeat. Party strategists will hope that 
under new, younger leadership the party can start its fightback and try to 
exploit some obvious contradictions between Fine Gael and Labour when they take 
power – contradictions such as the issue of public sector reform, which Fine 
Gael wants but Labour is nervous about, given the party's link with public 
sector trade unions.

Privately, Fianna Failers hope such divisions will open up major fissures in 
the new government and lead to Labour's exit from it within two to three years. 
Meanwhile, Fianna Fail indicated that it may declare a political ceasefire if 
the Fine Gael/Labour administration continues with the austerity programme and 
follows, broadly, the four-year plan to repair the country's finances.

Fianna Fail will try to paint itself in opposition as non-partisan, patriotic 
and operating in the national interest.

Ironically, the legacy of austerity that Fianna Fail will hand over to Fine 
Gael and Labour may be the Soldiers of Destiny's real undoing because, if the 
measures the current government is taking to drive down national debt are 
replicated by the alternative government,Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> may end up turning a corner.

Confidence could return to the economy and banking system, whilst debt as a 
proportion of GDP is slashed from more than 30% to just over 3% by 2014.

In those benign circumstances, the Fine Gael-Labour administration could 
benefit from the country's recovery. The cosmic irony would be that a series of 
harsh budgetary measures, which Fianna Fail advocated and lost power because 
of, could end up bolstering the reputation of the two parties who are going to 
take power in just over three months time.
 