
Egyptian police have shot dead two protesters in Suez, while crowds rallied 
outside Cairo's interior ministry building overnight as anger spread over the 
deaths of 74 people in a bloody riot at a football stadium.

The response to the scenes after the match on Wednesday night in the 
Mediterranean city of Port Said has taken on a wider political dimension amid 
claims police at best did nothing to prevent the violence and, at worst, 
actively helped instigate it.

In Suez a crowd of around 3,000 people demonstrated outside police 
headquarters after news spread that one of the victims came from the city.

The riot started when supporters of Al Masry, the home team, stormed through 
open gates leading onto the pitch, first chasing players from Cairo'sAl Ahly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alahly> club and then their supporters. 
Police responded with teargas and opened fire, witnesses said, with officials 
saying two people had died.

Thousands more held protests on Thursday in front of the interior ministry, 
which has responsibility for the police. Demonstrators threw rocks, and police 
responded with teargas, with almost 400 protesters needing treatment.

The aftermath of the riot threatens to spiral into a more general political 
crisis forEgypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt>, almost a year since 
the toppling of Hosni Mubarak, with anger focused particularly on the widely 
distrusted police and the military now in charge.

The lack of security at the Port Said stadium, which allowed Al Masry 
supporters to attack rival fans chase them against closed exit gates, where 
many were crushed, caused heated debate in the newly elected parliament, with 
some MPs claiming security officials helped cause the violence.

While Egypt's military rulers were quick to blame football hooliganism, a 
group of hardline Al Ahly fans, known as ultras, accused the police of 
intentionally letting rivals attack them because of their historic antipathy to 
the security forces and their role at the forefront of anti-Mubarak protests a 
year ago. Many ultras were among those protesting outside the interior ministry.

Some witnesses at the stadium reported seeing people in the Al Masry stands 
armed with clubs and knives after police failed to carry out usual pre-match 
searches. TV footage of the riot showed men on the pitch with clubs and poles.

Pedro Barny, Al Ahly's Portuguese assistant manager, told Portuguese TV there 
was very little visible security.

"The atmosphere was very aggressive," he said. "There were opposition fans 
walking up and down unchallenged in front of our bench during the game and the 
police did nothing."

Islam Saeed, a member of the Al Ahly ultras, said nobody had attempted to 
control the crowd as it grew ever more restive as Wednesday's game progressed.

"Hundreds would storm the pitch after every goal, so we could sense what was 
going to happen," he said. "There was a huge lapse in security. The police 
non-intervention was very strange, there was practically no security outside 
the stadium, and inside it they didn't do anything when events escalated.

"This was gross security incompetence, coupled with the barbarity of some 
supporters. This has been happening for the past five years, but security 
always intervened. They didn't this time. If you allow this to happen, then you 
are liable for the deaths."

Members of the Cairo-based ultras vowed to hold Egypt's military rulers, the 
supreme command of the armed forces, accountable for the deaths, and said they 
were planning a series of rolling demonstrations across the country for the 
rest of the week.

Egypt's previous worst football incident was in 1974, when 49 people were 
trampled to death at a match in Cairo.

Egypt's parliament has accepted the resignation of Port Said's civilian 
governor and the region's security chief. It also pledged to look into the 
allegations of excessively lax security for a game between two teams known to 
be arch-rivals and whose fans had clashed before.

The Egyptian Football Association was also sacked en masse, as was the 
security team responsible for the stadium. Some MPs blamed the interior 
minister, Mohammed Yousef, for allowing lapses and they gave him one week to 
restructure the ministry.

Morgue officials in Port Said said most of the dead had been killed by blows, 
falls or as a result of being crushed.
 