
Two former international development secretaries have called for an inquiry 
into the way in which UK counter-terrorism laws are hampering the humanitarian 
work of Islamic charities, including some of the few British charities capable 
of operating insideSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>.

One of the two former cabinet ministers, the Conservative Andrew Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrew-mitchell>, has raised the issue 
with senior officials in Downing Street and questioned whether government aid 
is being diverted from Islamic charities. Nearly a fifth of government aid goes 
to charities.

Mitchell, who was international development secretary from 2010 to 2012, and 
Clare Short, a Labour party predecessor, are writing to the Commons 
international development select committee urging the all-party body to mount 
an inquiry into growing complaints by Islamic charities.

Islamic charities in UK fear they are being unfairly targeted over extremism | 
Alex Delmar-Morgan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jul/22/muslim-charities-uk-targeted-extremism-fears>
The charities, including Islamic Relief <http://www.islamic-relief.org.uk/>, 
one of the largest Muslim charities, which was praised by David Cameron during 
the 2010 election campaign, say their urgent humanitarian work is being 
disrupted either by banks nervous of falling foul of counter-terror legislation 
or by civil servants anxious that some of the funding may fall into the wrong 
hands.

Short, who was international development secretary from 1997 to 2003, said: 
“This is an issue that needs clarifying and sorting out. It has been around as 
a problem for some time, but it has been getting worse and worse. We have got 
this enormous capacity in the UK of these Muslim humanitarian charities, yet 
they are struggling with one hand behind their back. We need a proper scrutiny 
and examination bringing all this out. It is preventing efficiency.”

Mitchell said: “These are some of the few charities that can get into Syria 
and help the benighted people of that country, yet they are being held back due 
to misunderstandings and banking bureaucracy.”

Stephen Twigg, the committee chairman, said he would look at the request for 
an inquiry “very sympathetically”.

The government has set up an interdepartmental working party to look into the 
issue after complaints were made. Mitchell and Short visited southern Turkey to 
see some of the work being undertaken by the MuslimCharities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/charities> Forum to get aid into Syria, 
returning full of praise for their work.

It is claimed that banks, many fearful of US legislation, are either closing 
the charities’ accounts or blocking money transfers due to the organisations 
being put on a risk register, often solely on the basis of newspaper reports. 
Others report their Paypal accounts being closed. Banks say they fear swingeing 
fines and reputational risk if they are seen to be facilitating terrorism.

Yet international law stipulates that, in a civil war such as the one raging 
in Syria, the consent of the faction or factions controlling territory is 
necessary for the delivery of aid. That requires interaction between charities 
and non-state groups controlling territory in which people require humanitarian 
relief. Factions often demand a fee or tax to allow right of passage, but this 
may fall foul of UK bribery legislation. There is also a prohibition against 
meeting members of proscribed organisations.

Until recently, the Home Office has refused to get involved, saying that the 
charities’ difficulties with the banks are a private sector issue, and not one 
for government. ButBond, the umbrella group for charities 
<https://www.bond.org.uk/>, is lobbying the government to do more to clarify 
the law for charities and banks, partly to set out what due diligence is 
required.

Islamic Relief, which is funded by the Department for International 
Development,had one of its accounts closed by HSBC 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/news/2016/01/hsbc-bank-cuts-services-islamic-relief-charity-160104152429151.html>
 without any prior warning. There are claims that many smaller Muslim charities 
have been blocked but want to avoid publicity, fearing that donors will be put 
off.

Banks block charity donations over terrorism funding fears
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/mar/05/banks-block-charity-donations-over-terrorism-funding-fears>
Omayma El Ella, the operations manager of the Muslim Charities Forum, an 
umbrella body for nine humanitarian charities, said: “No one is accountable for 
what is going on right now. Every time we speak to the government about this, 
they say it is a private sector issue and they cannot get involved. That is not 
good enough any more. We are told no one will be prosecuted for ‘benign 
engagement’, but what is ‘benign engagement’? That has not been clarified.”

A Chatham House discussion on the impact of humanitarian law on charities 
working in the Middle East said the issue had implications for UK foreign 
policy, since “the provision of humanitarian aid in areas such as the Middle 
East is seen as an important part of the UK’s contribution towards stabilising 
the region.

“In Syria, where large organisations have withdrawn, these have been replaced 
by new organisations that apparently lack experience in the delivery of aid in 
conflict zones and which are not as well resourced. The general climate of 
suspicion and risk aversion in charities has resulted in organisations failing 
to work together because they are not confident that they can openly share 
information.”
 