
During the Troubles when his life was under constant threat from the IRA and 
INLA Ken Maginnis remained a jovial character in Northern Irish political life, 
someone who could be extremely good company even in the darkest days of the 
conflict. The former Fermanagh/South Tyrone MP – now Lord Maginnis – was a far 
cry from the stereotypical image of the dour-sounding, sour-faced, 
bowler-hat-wearing caricature unionism often conjured up in the media. So it 
was somewhat surprising that the former part-time soldier and retired 
schoolteacher has found himself at the centre of a fresh homophobic storm, the 
like of which was the stock in trade of his rivals in the Democratic Unionist 
party in the past.

His outburst today depicting gay sexual acts as "deviant" and "unnatural" on 
BBC Radio Ulster's Stephen Nolan Show came from moral personal crusade 
territory that in the past Maginnis never strayed into. That area of public 
life used to the terrain of the DUP given that the party was rooted in 
fundamentalist Free Presbyterian Church and an amalgam of other hardline 
evangelical Protestant sects. The slightly more secular UUP avoided lecturing 
individuals on issues affecting the bedroom. Moreover, some of Maginnis's 
closest colleagues in the run up to the Good Friday Agreement he backed in 1998 
were openly gay men. Most notably there was David Trimble's political adviser 
Steven King who by a sad coincidence is this week gravely ill in an Indian 
hospital.

Indeed Lord Maginnis might recall that when King was still working for the 
Ulster Unionist party he married his long-term partner in a gay civil ceremony 
in England. King's marriage provoked Ian Paisley Jr into denouncing gay wedlock 
and love as repulsive, sparking a major row between the two unionist parties, 
with the UUP accusing the DUP of exploiting individuals' private lives for 
political purposes.

In recent years every time a senior DUP figure decided for one reason or 
another (normally to gain media attention to themselves) to pick on the gay 
community it usually backfired on the party. Iris Robinson, the wife of current 
first minister Peter Robinson, also publicly jumped up and down about her 
abhorrence over gay sex, her moral crusading turning out to be a hostage to 
fortune. First, a gay masseur "outed" DUP assemblyman Paul Berry in Dublin 
tabloid the Sunday World over a sexual encounter they had in Belfast's Ramada 
Hotel. Then, Iris Robinson's affair with a teenager was exposed, much to the 
embarrassment of her husband and resulting in her temporary withdrawal from 
public life including standing down as MP for Strangford.

Back in the early 1980s Ian Paisley Sr launched his unsuccessful "Save Ulster 
From Sodomy" campaigned aimed at preventing the lower of the age of consent for 
gay men to 18 like the rest of the UK. During that struggle for equality in the 
law the gay community fought back imaginatively with posters depicting Paisley 
as the new dictator of Iran and the warning that: "The Ayatollah is watching 
you. Gays Now. You Next!" Paisley's successor as DUP leader and first minister 
has wisely chosen to tune down the bible bashing and the moral lecturing. Peter 
Robinson has moved to secularise the DUP in order to continue to appeal to 
middle class unionists who are turned off the strict moral codes of the rural 
fundamentalist right.

Robinson's rival Mike Nesbitt realises too there is little purchase in playing 
pulpit politics these days. While not seeking to impose a democratic centralist 
gagging order on Maginnis, Nesbitt has already sought to distance his party 
from the remarks. In a sense that move alone tells you how much in fact the 
political mainstream even within unionism has changed when it comes to picking 
on minorities like Northern Ireland's once invisible and put down gay, lesbian, 
bisexual and transgender communities.
 