
A team of make-believe baseball players descended on Trump Tower in New York 
on Tuesday afternoon, using tax day to highlight corporate unaccountability as 
Ann Romney, wife of Republican presidential frontrunnerMitt Romney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/mittromney>, celebrated her birthday at an 
exclusive party inside.

The so-called Tax Dodgers wore white uniforms, not unlike their LA-based 
counterparts in the MLB, with "1%" emblazoned on the back of their jerseys, a 
nod to the nation's highest earners. The satirical sports stars were supported 
in their efforts by the Loopholes, a team of red-dressed cheerleaders, and 
their mascot Mitt, a giant walking baseball mitt. A man in a fedora carrying a 
bag of fake money and a cigar appeared to be the team's manager and described 
the Dodgers as "the best team corporate money can buy".

The demonstration was part of a nationwide day of action coordinated by a 
coalition of activist organizations working with an umbrella group, 99% Spring, 
which aimed to pull off 350 protests in 43 states. A number of the 
demonstrations kicked off at local post offices, where many Americans were 
filing their taxes, followed by scheduled marches through financial centers 
around the country.

In addition to New York's action, protesters in swing states planned to target 
politicians who have opposed the "Buffett rule", Barack Obama's plan to reduce 
economic inequality by introducing a higher minimum tax rate for taxpayers in 
the highest income bracket. In Pittsburgh, protesters gathered outside the 
office of senator Pat Toomey, who today called the "Buffett rule" a "political 
stunt" on the floor of the Senate. Similar demonstrations were also planned at 
the offices of senator Ron Johnson in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, and senator Roy 
Blunt in Kansas City, Missouri.

For Cathy Cyphers Soref, an attendee at Ann Romney's fundraising birthday 
party inside Trump Tower, the protesters' repeated references to loopholes made 
little sense.

"Where's the loophole?" Soref told the Guardian. "I mean, I want one. There 
aren't many loopholes, believe me. If I could find it, I would do it."

Soref said she owns a philanthropic genetic research business that has 
generated $20m "modestly". She claimed to have recently returned from a trip to 
Mexico, where she says she visited with the family of Carlos Slim, the richest 
man in the world. Soref believes America's wealthy class has been demonized 
through misunderstanding.

"We are the big bad people. We're the ones who were lucky enough to be the 
offspring of inventors, who invented things that became a staple that made a 
lot of money," Soref said. "My husband's family, the eight heirs, his children 
and probably his grandchildren and the cousins' grandchildren – because of good 
investments that they do that allows other people to have money, when you 
invest or create a business – we're bad because we have unearned income from 
being inherited money."

"I pay, our family pays, in excess, state federal and local taxes, probably 
55%, no fooling," Soref said. She argued that when George W Bush cut taxes for 
wealthy Americans, it gave her the freedom to launch a company that provides a 
service to society.

But LeRoy Johnson, with New York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>
 Communities for Change, saw the issue differently. He works in a Brooklyn 
neighborhood where the average annual income is well under $40,000. He was on 
the sidewalk early Tuesday morning, trying to rally support for the "Buffett 
rule" among community members by handing out fliers portraying Mitt Romney as a 
tax dodger.

Standing across the street from a boarded up and deteriorating school, Johnson 
said the message of financial accountability, particularly the issue of paying 
taxes, resonates with most citizens in a way that Mitt Romney couldn't 
understand.

He said: "People agree with what we are doing because people are hurting. The 
neioghborhoods are hurting everywhere." The former governor, Johnson said, was 
"born rich".

"Romney doesn't know how it is to feel hardship," he said.
 