
An advert for a Walkers Crisps competition offering 20,000 holidays has been 
banned after more than 100 consumers complained that the trips on offer were 
virtually impossible to win.

The Spell and Go promotion, which featured TV adverts presented by Gary 
Lineker, had participants taking codes printed on promotional packets of crisps 
and entering them on a website to gain letters that would help them spell out 
holiday destinations. A completed name of a destination would result in a 
holiday.

But customers took to social media to complain that it seemed impossible to 
get the letters C, D or K to complete the names of some of the places. More 
than 100 people complained to theAdvertising Standards Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/asa> (ASA) that the competition withheld 
certain letters.

Defending the promotion, Walkers said all 26 destinations included at least 
one of the letters C, D or K – known as type one letters – and the company had 
ensured enough of these were in circulation to allow for 20,000 holidays to be 
won. The company said 796 families had won four-star, seven-night holidays 
worth more than £1.35m.

Following the complaints, the ASA said it was satisfied a small proportion of 
the total number of letters in circulation were type one letters.

However, the watchdog was not satisfied with another part of the competition, 
the “random swap” function, which allowed participants to swap letters within a 
“pool” on the competition’s website, which stated “all letters are treated 
equally”. The ASA discovered that C, D or K could not be won in the pool. The 
ASA said the omission was “misleading and likely to cause unnecessary 
disappointment to consumers”.

A Walkers spokeswoman said: “We welcome the ASA’s recognition that our Spell 
and Go promotion was fair as everyone who participated had an equal chance of 
winning one of the 20,000 holidays available.

“We are aware some customers are disappointed that they have not been 
successful in winning a holiday; 20,000 holidays could have been won if all the 
promotional packs in the market had been played and we would have honoured all 
of those should that have been the case.”
 