
I am 61 and my wife and I both have back problems from lifting and handling 
our disabled 25-year-old son and caring for my 85-year-old mother in law.

Our son has ring chromosome 22 (a comparatively rare but very debilitating 
genetic abnormality) which has resulted in acute developmental problems. He has 
severe learning disabilities, no communication, epilepsy and is autistic. Now 
he is an adult, he is increasingly difficult to handle. My mother-in-law has 
dementia, heart and thyroid issues. Care in the community failed her miserably 
and quite frankly we don't think she'd be around now if we hadn't taken her 
into our home.

The first thing carers have to realise is that life will never be the same and 
that you will have to constantly battle against local and central government. 
Where we live in Lancashire (the fourth biggest local authority in the UK) care 
services are provided on the basis of fiscal constraint and bureaucratic 
process – not on the needs of the disabled individual. The current 
administration in Westminster is strong on rhetoric but weak on implementation. 
There are new initiatives constantly being launched, usually before the last 
one has been put into effect.

The higher the level of care provided by unpaid family carers, the less 
support the local authority will provide – "flogging the willing horse" and 
"emotional blackmail" are phrases that spring to mind.

Caring will seriously damage your health and wealth and you will become 
increasingly socially isolated. Things such as holidays, visits to the theatre, 
cinema, concerts, dining out, etc that once you took for granted become rare 
treats. We currently have to spend over £1,500 per month to ensure our son is 
transported safely and securely to his essential therapy sessions. We have a 
complaint lodged with the county council, but this situation resulted from a 
transport review last July, and is still unresolved. Transport services are 
part of the environment directorate and adult services do not share information 
with other departments, despite it being required in multi-agency, 
multi-disciplinary working.

I would accept that since the publication of the valuing people white paper <> 
in 2001, there has been considerable improvement to the quality of life of 
people with mild or moderate learning disabilities. But individuals with more 
profound and complex disabilities have experienced a deterioration in the level 
of service and support they receive.

If it was not for the close support of family in running our business, neither 
my wife or myself could work. As it is I work three days a week and my wife 
works two – it's not easy and sometimes the wheels come off, but we cope. Work 
is actually a form of respite for us, but for most carers, who have to rely on 
benefits such as the woefully inadequate carer's allowance, and who have lost 
pension rights and are unable to work, due entirely to their roles as unpaid 
carers, they can easily find themselves consigned to a life of poverty.

All carers have the underlying worry of who will look after their loved ones 
when they can no longer carry on. If the cared-for individual dies and his or 
her benefits cease, how will the former carers be able to pick up their lives 
again?

• John Pearson lives in Preston
 