
The following correction was was printed in the Guardian's Corrections and 
clarifications column, Tuesday 28 July 2009

In the article below about football friendlies as money-spinners we said that 
Celtic recently made their first trip to Australia. In fact,Celtic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic>, along with Arsenal, played in 
Australia in a four-team friendly tournament in 1977.



At the national stadium from this evening Tottenham, Celtic, Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> and the champions of Egypt, Al 
Ahly, will begin competing for a trophy nobody has won before and which may 
never be won again after the tournament ends on Sunday. The inaugural Wembley 
Cup, it is safe to say, lacks prestige but that is of little concern to the 
four clubs involved considering the other rewards.

Each is receiving a cut of one of the most lucrative close-season tournaments 
ever, with one analyst valuing it at £8m-£9m. A large chunk of that comes from 
broadcast deals that will see the four-match event (Spurs play Barcelona in the 
marquee fixture this evening), televised in more than 90 countries. At a time 
when clubs are travelling further to boost their global profile in pre-season, 
the guaranteed TV coverage was a huge attraction.

The tournament has also been given a sheen by the presence of Barcelona but 
even without the European champions the event was always going to attract 
interest, put together as it has been by IMG, the international marketing 
company whose clients range from Kate Moss to Roger Federer. This is their 
first foray into football tournaments but the ambition is the same; to promote 
and enhance the profiles of those involved.

"There is a growing rationalisation among clubs regarding how their 
pre-seasons should be structured," says Shiva Misra, IMG's vice president of 
media football. "They want it to be more professional, more upmarket and know 
they can get that through tournaments such as this. But, of course, the Wembley 
Cup also provides clubs with the chance to promote their brand to an 
international audience, which is crucial at a time when the opportunity to sign 
foreign players and attract foreign customers is greater than ever."

Hence the involvement of Al Ahly <https://www.theguardian.com/football/alahly>
, whose fixtures against Celtic tomorrow and Barcelona will no doubt catch the 
eye in Africa. Celtic in particular will hope to benefit from the exposure, 
having already taken a first trip to Australia this month to promote the club's 
name.

They are not the only side from these shores to have been Down Under in recent 
weeks, with Fulham and Wolves also making the journey. In total 11Premier League
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> clubs are playing games 
outside of Europe this pre-season, with 20 countries being visited by the 
sides. Burnley, Chelsea and, starting tomorrow, Everton, are undertaking 
warm-up games in north America, while Manchester United and Liverpool have made 
their regular treks to the far east. Manchester City have taken their newly 
acquired galaxy of stars to South Africa.

Overseas tours are far from new – Everton and Manchester United went to Asia 
as long ago as 1989 – but they are undoubtedly more common. That is hardly a 
surprise considering the riches on offer – United are expected to make about 
£4m from their visit to Malaysia, South Korea and China while Chelsea and 
Liverpool will secure close to £3m from their excursions.

Those outside the elite do not command such fees but there is still a worth in 
crossing continents, such is the customer base on offer. In 2007 the Premier 
League secured a £625m deal for its overseas TV rights for the three seasons 
from 2007-08, double the value of the previous contract.

According to the accountancy firm Deloitte, 55% of that deal is generated in 
the Far East so it is no shock the league has set up its own tournament, the 
Asia Trophy, which this year is being held in Beijing and includes Hull, West 
Ham and, a week after the Wembley Cup, Spurs.

The financial rewards of competing are relatively modest – each club will earn 
about £600,000 – but the long-term benefits are greater, as Portsmouth, winners 
of the first Asia Trophy in 2007, can testify.

"We've seen a big rise since then in the number of people from Asia visiting 
our website," says Lucius Peart, Pompey's head of operations. "These are new 
supporters and customers for us. The hope is to build on this on and off the 
pitch and make Portsmouth a global name."

That is a sentiment espoused not only by marketing men but also by managers, 
including Sir Alex Ferguson who could justifiably have blocked the United squad 
from boarding a plane this summer after last year when Wayne Rooney was forced 
to miss the start of the season with a virus he picked up during the club's 
visit to Nigeria in August for a friendly with Portsmouth.

But the Scot is, instead, understanding of the club's reasons for spanning 
large distances during this period. "It's part of the bigger picture for 
United," he reflected recently. "We're a club with global support and with that 
comes an obligation."

Arsenal, in contrast, have never been outside of Europe for pre-season during 
Arsène Wenger's time at the club, instead opting to visit countries such as 
Germany and Austria, where they are right now.

But Wenger does appreciate the need to raise the profile of the club, as 
demonstrated by Arsenal's hosting of the Emirates Cup since 2007. Like its 
Wembley equivalent, the event involves four teams and is spread over a weekend, 
this year's taking place on 1-2 August and featuring Rangers, Atlético Madrid 
and Paris St-Germain.

The tournament lacks Wembley's rewards, generating around £5m – little more 
than half that of its counterpart – and is broadcast to only 40 countries. 
However the principal intention, of getting Arsenal noticed abroad, is being 
served. "The Emirates Cup has proved to be a winning formula for us," says 
Arsenal's head of marketing Angus Kinnear.

"It not only gives our supporters the opportunity to watch two very good 
pre-season matches from only £25, but also provides the team with high-quality 
preparation. Together with the fact it generates the club a healthy degree of 
revenue."

And that is what it always comes back to. Misra is keen to stress not only the 
sporting benefits of the Wembley Cup, but also the opportunity IMG feels it 
offers to spectators. "People do not often get the chance to see Barcelona in 
the flesh for less than £30."

Yet, ultimately, money and marketing opportunities are the main reasons why an 
African and a Spanish club will be playing in north London this weekend, and 
for the same reasons a host of English clubs will be getting down to business 
much further afield.
 