
 'This is my basket for a lazy, stay-at-home Sunday. I've been cooking for a 
living for over 25 years, so there's no question of elaborate, 
preparation-heavy meals. At my restaurant (Les Halles, New York) I may be a 
hyperactive control-freak, but at home I get in touch with my inner lazy 
hippie. I do NOT want to find myself scrubbing out a lot of dirty pots or 
packing tuna tartare into metal rings - that's work, not play. I want to stay 
as close to comatose as possible - the whole day.

I'll usually have a toasted bagel with Philadelphia cream cheese and Nova 
smoked salmon for breakfast, while I read the papers: The New York Times for 
what's happening - and the NY Post for fun. The newspapers can serve as a 
handy-dandy tablecloth spread over the bed to protect it from dripped sauce. 
I'll spend some time writing and smoking Marlboro Reds followed by down-time 
smoking weed and watching TV in bed. A ham sandwich looms as a lunch 
possibility along with a bottle of Kronenbourg beer - I would prefer to drink 
Guinness, but only on tap and only in Dublin.

If I get the munchies, I have two Krispy Kreme donuts. And I love slow-stewed 
and braised dishes made from the less lovely cuts of meat. Veal shank is one of 
my favourites. For dinner, I'll make Osso Bucco Milanese with saffron risotto, 
garnished with freshly grated orange zest and herbs. I love how this dish goes 
on the fire raw and ugly and mellows into something wonderful. It's easy, needs 
only two pots, and - except for the risotto - can simmer while I doze, nap, 
watch the latest trial on Court TV. I'll make the risotto at the last minute. 
Like all great stews, it tastes better the next day, so I'll look forward to 
leftovers which I can add an egg yolk to with some orange zest, flour, egg wash 
and fresh bread crumbs from the baguette - and I'll make arancini di riso : 
little fried rice balls, for a snack.'

 Bagel 

 Foods based on refined wheat flour such as this tend to precipitate surges in 
the hormone insulin, which in turn can cause an assortment of undesirable 
effects including weight gain, raised levels of unhealthy blood fats, and an 
increased risk of heart disease and diabetes. Bagel, schmagel, I say.

 Krispy Kreme Donuts 

 Doughnuts are made from refined sugar and starch, and will almost certainly 
contain a hefty dose of heart-stopping trans fats too. From a health 
perspective, this American invention is about as close to a weapon of mass 
destruction as one is ever likely to find.

 Philadelphia cream cheese 

 Soft cheeses and many processed foods can contain a fair dose of trans fatty 
acids. Excessive consumption of trans fatty acids is thought to be an 
instigator of chronic conditions such as heart disease and diabetes.

 Baguette 

 Weight for weight, French bread releases sugar almost as quickly into the 
bloodstream as pure sugar. The refining process also denudes the flour on which 
this bread is based of much of its fibre and nutrients. Generally, I'm 
enthusiastic about the traditional French diet, but see the baguette as a bit 
of an aberration that is best consumed in limited quantities only.

 Nova Smoked Salmon 

 Salmon is a fish naturally rich in omega-3 fats that have been linked with a 
range of benefits including relative protection from heart disease, prostate 
cancer and depression. This smoked salmon is probably the healthiest item in 
Anthony's basket.

 Ham 

 Pork is usually an intensively reared meat, and its transformation to ham may 
taint it with quantities of salt, sugar and chemical additives. Roast organic 
pork (with an optional dab of mustard for taste) would be a better meat for 
Anthony to pig out on.

Kronenbourg 

 Even quite modest alcohol intakes seem to have been linked with a hastening 
of our demise. However, I do think this should be taken in the context of the 
diet as a whole. Unfortunately, in Anthony's case, there seems to be little 
cause for comfort in this respect.

 Risotto rice 

 Another refined starch that is likely to destabilise the body's chemistry and 
has precious little to offer in other respects. However, I think Anthony is 
doing the right thing by using this fodder as an accompaniment to, rather than 
the basis for, a meal.

 Marlboro Reds 

 Cigarette smoking, apart from its well-known life-curtailing effects, may 
dull the senses of taste and smell. Anthony's tobacco habit may erode his 
enjoyment of food.

 Weed 

 Marijuana is renowned for its ability to stimulate the appetite, and 
generally for fat and sugar-laden fare such as Krispy Kreme Donuts.
 