
A cement mixer with anti-bank and anti-government slogans painted on the side 
crashing into the gates of Ireland's parliament became the iconic 
representation of Irish anger against the country's multibillion euro bank 
rescue package.

News organisations, both print and electronic, across the world focused on the 
sight of the truck smashing into the barrier outside Leinster House in Dublin's 
Kildare Street as the ultimate symbol of revolt against the unfair and 
economically crippling measures the Irish government has deployed to save its 
banking system.

Yet what the global media failed to noticed or indeed report was the 
numerically small band of protesters outside Dáil Éireann on the same day that 
a bankrupt builder from the west ofIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> decided to ram his vehicle into the 
parliament's entrance. There were in fact only around 150 demonstrators 
gathered at the front of the Dáil, a figure that perhaps said more about Irish 
attitudes to the present economic crisis afflicting the Republic than a 
disgruntled builder battering down the gates.

A colleague of mine from the BBC who is leaving its Ireland operation for a 
job with the EU in Brussels and who comes from Dublin made the most telling 
remark about the day of the cement-mixer attack. Pointing to the lack of crowds 
baying for politicians' and bankers' blood outside the Dail she quipped that 
the Irish were "too busy whining about the politicians and the bankers on the 
Joe Duffy Show" to go out demonstrating.

Duffy hosts one of the most popular radio talk shows on the Irish state 
broadcasting network RTE. Talk radio in Ireland is huge and has, in a 
socio-cultural sense, long replaced the priest and the confessional as the 
place where the Republic bares its soul. Pioneered by the veteran broadcaster 
Gay Byrne, phone-in radio has given Irish listeners the chance to gripe, whinge 
and whine against every institution in the state on a daily basis.

Arguably the most popular target of Irish ire on the airwaves of RTE and a 
host of other privately funded talk radio stations are banks and bankers. 
Listeners rage day in, day out against financial institutions that have 
received staggering quantities of public money – the overall bill for rescuing 
the banks is expected to exceed an incredible €50bn.

Their hatred of banks is compounded by the fact that these same businesses 
refuse to lend money to small enterprises, have withdrawn overdrafts to 
customers and charge exorbitant fees to those going into the red or even 
sending out a letter or statement.

In these circumstances outside observers might expect banks to be trashed and 
politicians bombarded with eggs and flour, as was the case in Iceland last 
month. Cement-mixer man however is an anomaly; the majority of the Irish 
electorate will, with grudging bitterness, accept their lot.

Because they know that if the current Fianna Fáil/Green party coalition was 
kicked out of office tomorrow the alternative Fine Gael/Labour government would 
in all likelihood have to introduce harsh fiscal measures on the same lines as 
those Brian Cowen's administration is going to impose on the Irish people in 
December's budget.

The Irish, just like the post-68 student generations, are no longer revolting. 
The Republic's debt-laden, still property-owning obsessed, conservative 
citizens are more terrified of having to hand over control of their economy to 
the IMF than the forthcoming budget of brutal cuts and increased taxes.

The Greeks may riot in the street but the Irish prefer to ring up radio 
stations instead.
 