
Look out of the window and, in all but the bleakest of concrete jungles, you 
are sure to see something green. A blade of grass, a leaf, a plant. Even in the 
dryness of the desert, green cacti grow. Seen from space, the Earth is a blue 
and green ball. OK, there might not be many fluffy green animals, but insects, 
reptiles and amphibians are well camouflaged in the colour, as are tropical 
birds.

With all of nature’s bounty around us, then, surely green was an easy colour 
for the first artists and dyers to replicate? Strangely, no. The neolithic 
people of northern Europe made a “green” dye from birch tree leaves, but it was 
really more of a sludgy brown. The ancient Egyptians got closer, using ground 
malachite in painting, but it was expensive and tended to turn black. They 
fudged the issue when it came to clothes, cleverly dying them yellow (with 
saffron), then blue (with woad) to make green.
 Schweinfurt green, also known as emerald or Paris green, was used in 
wallpaper and is said to have killed Napoleon Bonaparte. Photograph: Alamy 
The ancient Greeks didn’t have much time for green, often lumping it in with 
blue if they thought about it at all, and rarely painting with it. The Romans 
were much bigger fans, using a green earth pigment. They also used verdigris, 
which they made by soaking copper plates in wine (an endlessly useful 
substance, if a bit of a waste of a good vintage). The resulting colour was 
used in paintings, mosaics and glass. And, far from considering it the same 
colour as blue, there were 10 words in Latin for different shades of green. 
Nero – the leek-eating, emerald-collecting emperor – apparently loved the 
colour, which may have had something to do with that.

The Chinese also discovered a way to make a kind of green from the days of the 
Eastern Han dynasty (AD25-220), producing pottery with a sea-green celadon 
glaze, thanks to iron oxide in the clay. In Europe in the middle ages, clothes 
were turned green with vegetal dyes – ferns, buckthorn berries, the juice of 
nettles and leeks, ash leaves, alder bark – but they faded or changed colour 
when washed or exposed to sunlight. And craftsmen couldn’t cheat like the 
Egyptians – medieval guilds rules meant that dyers working with blue couldn’t 
work with yellow too.

Thanks to the unstable nature of the dyes, the colour green was considered 
deceptive, and became associated with games of chance – which is why card 
tables and snooker tables are covered with green baize today. It was also 
linked with greed – Judas, who betrayed Jesus for 30 pieces of silver, is often 
depicted wearing green. The money theme continued in 1861, when the reverse of 
the US dollar bill turned green.
 Green has been used for traffic lights since 1868, when gas-powered lights 
were erected in front of the Houses of Parliament in London. Photograph: Kelvin 
Murray/Getty Images 
But, as befitting an ominipresent colour, green has many meanings. From late 
antiquity, it has also been the colour of hope – marriageable and pregnant 
women wore green dresses, such as the bride in Jan van Eyck’s Arnolfini 
Portrait, and babies were wrapped in green swaddling clothes. It was also a 
solidly prosperous colour, worn by merchants, bankers - and the Mona Lisa. The 
nobility wore red – think of the green benches in the House of Commons and the 
red ones in the House of Lords. Long-suffering peasants, of course, were stuck 
with brown and grey.

It is also a contradictory colour: it means health and vitality, but it also 
sickliness, poison and disease. It represents love, youth and inexperience, but 
also envy, madness and the devil. It is sacred in Islam, so used widely in art 
and architecture – though never in carpets (too precious to tread on). In the 
Bible, on the other hand, it is barely mentioned.

Synthetic green pigments and dyes were produced for the first time in the 18th 
century. The upside was that they were brighter and lasted longer than the 
earlier mineral and vegetable colours; the downside was that many were deadly 
(well, swings and roundabouts). For example, Schweinfurt green, also known as 
emerald or Paris green, was used in wallpaper and upholstery in the 19th 
century and contained high levels of arsenic. Wallpaper is even said to have 
killed Napoleon Bonaparte. Progress comes at a high price …

Synthetic greens continued to improve in brightness and range. The colour was 
embraced by the Impressionists, partly because it became available in tubes so 
they could paint nature in situ. That is not to say it was yet entirely safe – 
Monet’s use of emerald green may have contributed to his blindness in later 
life.

The invention of the colour purple
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/mar/12/the-invention-of-the-colour-purple>
Green gradually stabilised and is now used in the most mundane contexts, such 
as road signs and – perhaps ironically – safety signs. It has been used for 
traffic lights since 1868, when gas-powered lights were erected in front of the 
Houses of Parliament in London (the first electric ones went up in Salt Lake 
City, Utah, in 1912). And, of course, since the 70s it has been the colour of 
environmentalism, chosen as it represents nature – nature that, finally, has 
been bottled.
 