
My mother and I should probably swap gardens. My small back garden would be 
ideal for her and her large, sprawling one is the stuff of my dreams. I can 
hear her bristling at the very thought, but the truth is, her garden has become 
too big for her and I have outgrown mine.

This isn’t going to happen for many reasons but, seeing as I can’t take over 
her garden, what to do with one that is slowly taking charge of itself? First 
off, acknowledge that the garden doesn’t belong to you; you belong to it. And 
that the garden is not going to pot if you don’t weed it or cut the grass – 
rather, you are, and that’s OK.

Gardens left to do their own thing are very healthy spaces. Wildlife thrives 
on what we perceive as a mess: weeds are great for pollinators, long grass is 
best for beetles, and un-dug soil is at its peak of happiness for the soil food 
web. Call it “doing aMonbiot <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/georgemonbiot>
”, if you like – you’re adopting re-wilding principles. Plus, so long as you 
keep your bed edges tidy and mow a path through your overgrown lawn, you will 
be amazed by what you can get away with elsewhere.

Some plants will disappear altogether, while others will just get on with 
their lot. Self-seeders, poppies,Alchemilla mollis, Geranium pratense ‘Mrs 
Kendal Clark’, foxgloves, strawberries, parsnips, aquilegias, alliums and a 
host of others will happily plant themselves where they see fit. This might not 
always be to your plan, but they’ll give you something to cheer about even 
among the most thuggish of weeds. Divide and multiply any tough perennials that 
work, fill all the gaps, and console yourself with the knowledge that very 
stylish gardens often have limited palettes.

How to grow vegetables on a balcony | Alys Fowler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/11/how-to-grow-vegetables-on-a-balcony-alys-fowler>
If the watering can is too much to manage, install an irrigation system: 
they’ve come down in price, are easy to programme and take away all the hassle. 
And if you can’t weed vast stretches, the trick is to slow them down as best as 
you can: if nothing else, just chop off the seed heads. Mulching will slow 
weeds’ progress, too, so spread in late winter, and again in early spring, when 
there’s space around perennials and before the worst weeds are up. (My mother, 
incidentally, swears byStrulch <https://www.strulch.co.uk>, which is very 
lightweight, so long as you have someone to move the bags to various locations, 
you can spread it with little effort.) Mind you, it’s also fine to let some 
bits of the garden go completely, but do frame your view. This works the other 
way round, too: if you are unsure where to start in an overgrown garden, first 
work on the bit you get to look at most.

Finally, observe the oldest gardening rule in the book, as put rather 
brilliantly by Edith Wharton: “Each step away from the house should be a nearer 
approach to nature.” In other words, keep the area around the back door pretty 
and ordered, and loosen your grip on everything else.
 