
One of the distinctive aspects of British culture is that the word 
"intellectual" seems to be regarded as a term of abuse.WH Auden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/whauden> summed it up neatly when he wrote: 
"To the man-in-the-street, who, I'm sorry to say, / Is a keen observer of 
life,/ The word 'Intellectual' suggests right away/ A man who's untrue to his 
wife." 

Auden wasn't alone in thinking that intellectuals suffer from ethical 
deficiencies. The journalist and historian Paul Johnson once devoted an entire 
book,Intellectuals: from Marx and Tolstoy to Sartre and Chomsky (2000), to 
proving that some of the 20th century's most prominent thinkers were moral 
cretins. And in his bookThe Intellectuals and the Masses (Faber, 1992) the 
literary critic John Carey argued that most of our culture's esteemed thinkers 
over several centuries despised the masses and devoted much of their efforts to 
excluding the hoi-polloi from cultural life. Both Johnson and Carey were 
pushing at an open door. Britain is a country in which the word "intellectual" 
is often preceded by the sneering adjective "so-called", where smart people are 
put down because they are "too clever by half" and where a cerebral politician 
(David Willetts) was for years saddled with the soubriquet "Two Brains". It's a 
society in which creative engineers are labelled "boffins" and kids with a 
talent for mathematics or computer programming are "nerds". As far as the Brits 
are concerned, intellectuals begin at Calais and gravitate to Paris, where the 
fact that they are lionised in its cafes and salons is seen as proof that the 
French, despite their cheese- and wine-making skills, are fundamentally 
unsound. Given this nasty linguistic undercurrent, a Martian anthropologist 
would be forgiven for thinking that Britain was a nation of knuckle-dragging 
troglodytes rather than a cockpit of vibrant cultural life and home to some of 
the world's best universities, most creative artists, liveliest publications 
and greatest theatres and museums.

The fact that a nation that lives by its considerable wits should be in denial 
about its reliance on the life of the mind is truly weird. It's what led the 
historian of ideas Stefan Collini to postulate what he calls the "absence 
thesis". This has two dimensions – temporal and geographical. In the first, 
contemporary figures are regarded as just pale reflections of the great figures 
of the past: thusChristopher Hitchens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/christopher-hitchens> and Martin Amis, say, 
are pygmies compared with George Orwell and Aldous Huxley. Richard Posner, 
another student of public intellectuals, describes this as measuring today's 
average against yesterday's peak. In either case, it conveniently ignores the 
fact that the heroes of the past were often undervalued by their contemporaries 
as mere pale reflections of the "really" great figures of an even more distant 
past. The geographical dimension of the absence thesis is reflected in the 
belief that intellectuals begin at Calais. But, as Collini observes, "the 
frequently encountered claim that there are no intellectuals in Britain is 
generally advanced by those who, were they living in certain other societies, 
would unhesitatingly be regarded as intellectuals".

As a historian, Collini smells an ideological rat here, and traces the odour 
to an ideological belief in British exceptionalism. What it amounts to is the 
belief that the course of British history has been so exceptionally smooth – 
with its adaptable aristocracy, (relatively) tolerant church, apolitical 
military and reformist bourgeoisie – that there was no call for the evolution 
of an oppositional intelligentsia. So the fact that there are no intellectuals 
in Britain is something to be proud of. It's a byproduct of the Whig 
interpretation of history.

This strikes me as baloney, mostly derived from a comprehensive 
misunderstanding of other cultures – a species of what Collini calls "Dreyfus 
envy", after the celebrated late 19th-century affair in which intellectuals 
took on the French establishment and won. Intellectuals may enjoy a higher 
celebrity status across the Channel but I can see little evidence that France 
is more governed by ideas than is Britain. Part of the problem is that our 
stereotypical image of the public intellectual is a continental one – and 
largely embodied by Jean-Paul Sartre and his long-time accomplice,Simone de 
Beauvoir <https://www.theguardian.com/books/simonedebeauvoir>. The fact that 
(as we discovered after their deaths) they were devious, manipulative, 
hypocritical and – in Sartre's case at least – ludicrously credulous about 
authoritarian regimes has tarnished their lustre somewhat. But much the same 
could be said of many of the other public intellectuals of yesteryear: think of 
Arthur Koestler, who specialised in treating people abominably while writing 
the sublimeDarkness at Noon, or of the British intellectuals of the 1930s who 
so admired Stalin, even as he was slaughtering his own people.

So let us cast off the inferiority complex towards the cerebral continent and 
move on to more interesting questions. What, for example, is a public 
intellectual? In his study of the species, the American legal scholar Richard 
Posner defines them as "intellectuals who opine to an educated public on 
questions of… political or ideological concern". It's not just enough to be 
interested in ideas, therefore; to count as a public intellectual (or PI, for 
short) one must participate in debate to clarify issues, expose the errors of 
other public intellectuals, draw attention to neglected issues and generally 
vivify public discussion. The French polymath Pierre Bourdieu saw PIs as 
thinkers who are independent of those in power, critical of received ideas, 
demolishers of "simplistic either-ors" and respecters of "the complexity of 
problems". The Palestinian literary critic Edward Said saw the public 
intellectual as "the scoffer whose place it is publicly to raise embarrassing 
questions, to confront orthodoxy and dogma, to be someone who cannot easily be 
co-opted by governments or corporations".

None of these definitions is sharp enough to be very useful: any ranter with a 
megaphone and a mastery of rhetoric could qualify. In his bookAbsent Minds: 
Intellectuals in Britain (Oxford, 2006), Collini goes to the other extreme, 
arguing that a public intellectual is someone who first achieves a level of 
creative or scholarly achievement and then uses available media to engage with 
the broader concerns of wider publics. So the novelist Ian McEwan, say, would 
qualify but a widely read newspaper columnist might not.

What this highlights is the intrinsic imprecision of the concept of the public 
intellectual. Faced with this, most analysts of the phenomenon fall back on 
measures of the impact that individual thinkers make on the public 
consciousness. In his survey of American public intellectuals,Public 
Intellectuals: a Study of Decline (Harvard, 2003), for example, Posner had the 
plausible idea of trying to rank over 500 candidates who had been prominent 
between 1995 and 2000, using media mentions, web hits and scholarly citations. 
But he immediately ran into the problem that the third metric wasn't 
appropriate for many of them. The Nobel laureate Gary Becker had over 5,000 
scholarly citations while theNew York Times columnist David Brooks had none, 
but who is to say that Brooks is the less influential intellectual?

But at least Posner did his own research. Most other surveys of public 
intellectuals seem to be done by polling readers of highbrow publications. For 
example in 2004Prospect magazine conducted a poll to find "Britain's top 100 
public intellectuals 
<http://www.palimpsest.org.uk/forum/archive/index.php/t-474.html>". This 
produced the usual suspects (Tariq Ali, Melvyn Bragg, Terry Eagleton, John 
Gray, Christopher Hitchens, Lisa Jardine, Roger Scruton, George Steiner) but 
also a few left-field candidates (the musician Brian Eno, for example, as well 
as TV executive David Elstein and Robert Cooper, the cerebral diplomat who was 
the brains behind Tony Blair's doctrine of interventionism).

Four years later Prospect teamed up with the American magazine Foreign Affairs 
with the aim of identifying "the 100 most important public intellectuals 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Top_100_Public_Intellectuals_Poll> that are still 
alive and active in public life". The resulting list was compiled via a 
readers' poll and purported to be global, so perhaps it wasn't entirely 
surprising that only eight Brits (Kwame Anthony Appiah, Richard Dawkins, Salman 
Rushdie, Christopher Hitchens, Martin Wolf, Tony Judt, Niall Ferguson and James 
Lovelock) figured on it. But the more one examined the list, the wackier it 
seemed. For example, it suggested that the world's greatest living public 
intellectual was Fethullah Gülen. Eh? Wikipedia reveals that he is "a Turkish 
preacher, author, educator, and Muslim scholar living in self-imposed exile in 
Pennsylvania". No 3 was a guy called Yusuf al-Qaradawi, who is apparently an 
Egyptian Islamic theologian, while No 5 was a Pakistani barrister named 
Chaudhry Aitzaz Ahsan and No 7 was Abdolkarim Soroush, an Iranian Islamic 
scholar of whose existence I had until that point remained blissfully unaware. 
I could go on but you will get the point. Recognising that they had been 
shafted by some clever flash-mobbing, the erudite editors ofProspect and 
Foreign Affairs tried to salvage something from the wreckage in a later 
edition. Noting that the definition of public intellectual remained 
"satisfyingly vague", they set up what the racing fraternity would call a 
stewards' inquiry to "weigh up the field on three criteria: novelty, real-world 
impact, and intellectual pizzazz". The result: theworld's leading intellectual  
<http://www.prospectmagazine.co.uk/tag/public-intellectuals/>turned out to be 
General David Petraeus, architect of the US "surge" in Iraq, currently in 
charge of the fiasco in Afghanistan and scheduled to become head of the CIA in 
September.

This is the kind of thing that gives superficiality a bad name. How, for 
example, would one measure novelty, let alone "intellectual pizzazz"? But if 
public polling is vulnerable to the kind of ballot-stuffing that made nonsense 
of theProspect/Foreign Affairs survey, and if Posner's more rigorous metrics 
are inadequate, is it possible to come up with any listing of significant 
public intellectuals that is not, in one way or another, arbitrary?

In an attempt to answer the question, I tried a different tack by analysing 
the lists of contributors to serious English-language print or online 
publications (including theLondon Review of Books, the New York Review of Books
, major broadsheet newspapers, some widely read blogs and other sources), 
looking for British thinkers. I then added to these the names of British 
intellectuals drawn from earlier surveys byProspect and Posner. The result was 
a list of just over 300 people (grouped by their primary profession) whose 
ideas are deemed worthy of public attention by the gatekeepers of the 
publications I surveyed.

A list like this has a certain voyeuristic fascination, and will doubtless be 
seen as arbitrary by those who find themselves – or their favourites – 
excluded. It also comes with a health warning. Compiling it makes one realise 
how difficult it is to make an assessment of the impact that any particular 
individual has on the public consciousness. The philosopher Onora O'Neill has 
influenced the thinking of many of us with her coruscating insight. But so too 
has the playwrightMichael Frayn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/michael-frayn>. Both have had a 
significant impact on our culture. But who has been more influential? 
Impossible to say. Similarly, with his Radio 4 seriesIn Our Time, Melvyn Bragg 
has done sterling service in injecting serious ideas into public consciousness. 
Is he therefore a more significant public intellectual than the unobtrusive 
editor of theLondon Review of Books, Mary-Kay Wilmers? Who knows?

So a list like this is a starting point for a discussion, not a conclusion. It 
raises some intriguing questions. Take the gender balance, for example. Only 
around a quarter of the intellectuals listed are women. Does this mean that 
British cultural life is unusually male-dominated? Actually, it suggests the 
opposite. Only 9% of the list of the world's "Top 100 intellectuals" produced by
Prospect and Foreign Affairs were women. And of Posner's list of 546 public 
intellectuals just 10% were women. The other intriguing feature of our list is 
the relative importance of different professions. (Again, this comes with a 
caveat, because in many cases it's not easy to determine what the "primary" 
profession of an individual is: many intellectuals write both fiction and 
non-fiction, for example – which is how Hilary Mantel and Jonathan Raban find 
themselves in the same category: authors.)

But if the list is anything to go by, then the dominant professions from which 
contemporary British public intellectuals are drawn are journalists (20%), 
writers (19%), historians (14%) and critics (13%).

A big surprise is the relatively poor showing of thinkers whom one would 
expect to be making a significant impact on public discourse – philosophers 
(4%), scientists (4%), economists (3%) and politicians (2%). But the main 
conclusion to be drawn from this survey is that the trope that intellectuals 
begin at Calais is simply wrong. The British aversion to the I-word seems to be 
at odds with the facts. This country has an impressive array of lively, 
creative and argumentative minds. And if you doubt that, just watch them take 
this thesis to pieces.

Britain's top 300 intellectuals: the list 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/may/08/top-300-british-intellectuals> 
 