
Odds about Willie Mullins becoming the champion jumps trainer in Britain 
shortened dramatically on Tuesday as word leaked out that he would bring some 
of the biggest names in his stable over for next week’s Grand National meeting. 
While the Irishman had already discussed his plan to runAnnie Power, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/15/annie-power-wins-champion-hurdle-cheltenham-festival>
 he now says Vautour and Douvan, two of his other Cheltenham Festival winners, 
will join her on the ferry, along with Nichols Canyon, Black Hercules and 
others.

That represents a complete turnaround in Mullins’s approach to Aintree, whose 
three days tend not to be graced by his very best horses. His Cheltenham heroes 
and heroines are normally saved for Punchestown at the end of April and that 
was the only track he mentioned as a target forDouvan in the immediate 
aftermath of that horse’s recent success in the Arkle Trophy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/15/xxxxx>.

“We’ll be bringing a lot of our horses to Aintree 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/aintree>,” Mullins said in the Fairyhouse 
winner’s enclosure. “If they all appear to be fine, they will run.” Alas, that 
does not include the flashy novice hurdler Min, who has not recovered from his 
Cheltenham exertions and is done for the season.

Bookmakers anticipated Mullins’s announcement by a few hours. He had been on 
offer at 5-4 in the champion trainer market on Tuesday morning but was cut to 
just 1-3 by Paddy Power shortly after 1pm, other firms making similar cuts to 
his odds over the next hour.

Mullins’s change of approach can only be seen as a sign of his interest in 
becoming the first Irish-based trainer for more than 60 years to land the 
British title. Vincent O’Brien, one of the greatest trainers who ever lived, 
has been the only one to achieve that feat since the second world war, being 
champion in consecutive years to the summer of 1954, largely by dint of winning 
the Grand National in both seasons.

Mullins had a superlative Cheltenham, where he won seven races including the 
Champion Hurdle, and now trailsPaul Nicholls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/paul-nicholls> by just over £150,000. As 
Nicholls himself noted on Tuesday: “That sort of money is just one race at 
Aintree.”

Nicholls is the reigning champion, has won the title nine times in the past 10 
years and plans a spirited defence over the last three weeks of this season. 
But he acknowledged that he will not have the material to oppose Mullins 
directly in some of next week’s better-quality contests.

“We’ll have plenty of good chances, like we did at Cheltenham,” the trainer 
said from his Somerset base. “We’ve just not got those Grade One horses for the 
really top races.

“But there’s a lot of prize money to come, at places like Perth and Ayr and 
Sandown. A lot could happen.”

Min loss spares bookies at Cheltenham but Festival suffers three fatalities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/15/cheltenham-festival-min-bookmakers-fatalities>
The last time Nicholls was involved in a close-fought title scrap at this 
stage of the season, in 2012, he delivered a knockout blow by landing the 
National with Neptune Collonges, his only winner to date of the famous race. He 
expects to have six runners this time in an event that might be said to be a 
weak spot for Mullins. Although the Irishman won it with Hedgehunter in 2005, 
he has remarkably failed to win a single handicap chase in Britain in the 
intervening 11 years, despite averaging around 10 runners a year in such 
contests.

Nicholls has this week covered some of his schooling fences in spruce to make 
them appear like Aintree’s fences and schooled four of his National contenders 
over them on Tuesday. The only exceptions were Rocky Creek, an Aintree regular, 
and Wonderful Charm, who was schooled earlier in the week.

All went well, he reports. “They’re all capable of running tidy races. 
Silviniaco Conti’s my number one, he’s a proper Grade One horse.” Noel Fehily, 
retained by the chestnut’s owners, will ride, while Sam Twiston-Davies will be 
aboard Wonderful Charm.

As Twiston-Davies is Nicholls’ main jockey, that will lead some to imagine 
that Wonderful Charm is no lower than second in the trainer’s pecking order for 
the race, but Nicholls says riding arrangements for some of these horses were 
well established earlier in the season. Sean Bowen has been the regular rider 
of Just A Par and won last year’s Bet365 Gold Cup on him, while Nick Scholfield 
has been Unioniste’s jockey all winter.

Rocky Creek will be partnered for the first time by Andy Thornton. That leaves 
only Black Thunder short of a jockey and indeed an owner, since he is entered 
to be sold in Aintree’s auction next week, just two days before lining up in 
the National, and is sure to be of interest to anyone who fancies owning a 
runner in the race.
 