
Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> have confirmed the 
signing of Willian on a five-year deal having been successful in their pursuit 
of a work permit for the Brazil forward.

"I'm very happy to be here, it's been a dream of mine to come and play here," 
said the 25-year-old, who will wear the No22 shirt. "Chelsea are one of the 
best clubs in the world, and now I'm going to play for one of the best managers 
in the world, so I'm very happy and looking forward to it."

The London club struck a £32m agreement with the ailing Anzhi Makhachkala last 
week for the 25-year-old, trumping Tottenham Hotspur in the process despite the 
player havingundergone a medical with Spurs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/aug/23/tottenham-chelsea-willian> 
last Thursday. The Chelsea owner, Roman Abramovich, made a personal call to his 
fellow Russian oligarch, Suleyman Kerimov, the Anzhi owner, to smooth the deal, 
albeit for a slightly higher price than that previously agreed with Tottenham.

While that prompted a furious reaction at White Hart Lane, Chelsea busied 
themselves preparing a case for Willian to be granted a permit under the 
"exceptional talent" clause as he is not a regular with Brazil. The manager, 
José Mourinho, supplied evidence on his behalf at the hearing on Wednesday with 
the panel duly convinced there is merit in the forward plying his trade in the 
Premier League.

Willian began his career in his homeland with Corinthians before moving to 
Europe with Shakhtar Donetsk in 2007. He made over 100 appearances for the 
Ukrainians and attracted interest from English clubs, before transferring to 
Anzhi in January. However, Kerimov has since withdrawn his previously lavish 
funding from the Dagestan club, which has prompted a fire-sale of their best 
talent over the summer.

Another Anzhi player, Samuel Eto'o 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/samuel-etoo>, remains in talks with 
Chelsea over a potential one-year contract at Stamford Bridge to be reunited 
with Mourinho, with whom he won the European Cup while at Internazionale in 
2010. The veteran Cameroon international is expected to waive the chance of a 
return to San Siro by moving to London on a short-term deal, with Chelsea now 
resigned to missing out on their principal summer target, Manchester United's 
Wayne Rooney.

The London club have reiterated that Juan Mata is not for sale despite Arsène 
Wenger suggesting on Tuesday that the playmaker was "on the market". The 
Spaniard, who is still working on gaining match fitness under Mourinho 
following a pre-season that started late after the Confederations Cup, has 
played a bit-part role under the Portuguese to date and his father and agent, 
Juan sr, was a guest in the Emirates Stadium directors' box at Tuesday's 
Champions League qualifier against Fenerbahce.

Wenger had almost signed Mata two years ago only for the Spaniard to join 
Chelsea. "I have heard like you, because I watched the game last night [between 
Manchester United and Chelsea] that Juan Mata could be on the market," said the 
Arsenal manager in the aftermath of his side's 2-0 success over the Turks. "I 
don't know ... there is anyway a reluctance in England to sell to each other. I 
like him."

But, while Mata has yet to make his mark under Mourinho, the Chelsea manager 
will not part with a midfielder who claimed the club's player of the year award 
in each of his two full seasons at the club, and any interest expressed in the 
25-year-old ahead of Monday's transfer deadline will be knocked back.

Tottenham Hotspur had also hoped to prise Mata from Stamford Bridge, though 
their manager Andre Villas-Boas — who was in charge at Chelsea when the 
Spaniard was signed in 2011 — has admitted any enquiry would have been given 
short shrift by their London rivals.

"First, Chelsea wouldn't sell to Tottenham in any way or form, as they think 
that we are title contenders," said the Portuguese, whose side are yet to drop 
a point in the Premier League this season. "Mata is a great, great player – 
player of the season last season – very, very important player for Chelsea. 
They're just not going to strengthen another team that, in their opinion, are 
rivals for the title."
 