
On the eve of a contest that will determine who leads Fianna Fáil into its 
most disastrous ever general election, outgoing ministers had the look of 
condemned men about them. But instead of their last meal before facing the drop 
they were consoling themselves with a pint of the black stuff inside Buswell's 
hotel, which overlooks the Irish parliament.

In the place where so much intrigue and plots have been hatched over the years 
the education minister, Batt O'Keeffe, could be seen enjoying a pint of 
Guinness along with two others in the twilight atmosphere of the Lobby Bar.

Behind him a former Fianna Fáil special adviser mused on the prospects of who 
will lead them into battle on 25 February and what they will do to rescue the 
party when they endure historic losses at the polls.

Fianna Fáil's best tactic according to the long-standing party activist and 
strategist will be to declare a "political ceasefire" with whatever government 
comes to power in Dublin at the end of next month.

"We will give them two years if they stick broadly to our plans for economic 
recovery," the Fianna Fáil stalwart predicted, out of earshot of O'Keeffe or 
any of his staff.

This means that Fianna Fáil will not vote against the expected Fine Gael-led 
coalition that will take charge of the country's dire economic circumstances. 
It would be the equivalent of Ed Miliband granting David Cameron and Nick Clegg 
two years' grace in the House of Commons, an absence of political war 
unthinkable in British politics.

It is unthinkable too in the mindset of Fianna Fáil – the most successful 
party in westernEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> since 
the second world war. The Soldiers of Destiny have, like the Tories in Britain 
or the Christian Democrats in Germany, always regarded themselves as the 
natural party of government. No, it is stronger than that. Fianna Fáil's 
expectation to be in government was until very recently like a monarch who 
believed in the Divine Right of Kings.

Yet here they are in these extraordinary times not hinting but rather heavily 
briefing that they will not cause trouble for their political opponents in the 
management of the economy.

All this points to a new, chastened, humbler post-election Fianna Fáil, almost 
certainly to be led (if we believe our party backroom man) by ex-foreign 
minister Micheál Martin after their drubbing the polls.

Expect then post-February to hear lots of talk from Fianna Fáil about the 
"national interest" and "putting the country first" as they declare a cessation 
of hostilities in the Dáil and let the Fine Gael leader, and whatever coalition 
he can form, sort out the mess the Irish public blames this dying 
administration for.

In between now and this reborn Fianna Fáil, the party's activists are dreading 
having to face angry voters on the doorsteps. Our Fianna Fáil veteran sounds 
relieved that he will be semi-detached from this campaign after recalling 
anecdotes about party colleagues having buckets of water thrown over them or 
having to run from pet dogs being set upon them.

Even if such tales are apocryphal no one in the party is looking forward to 
going on the stump and selling the message this time around, he adds gloomily.

The projections of the number-crunchers inside Fianna Fáil are grim – the 
party will lose at least half of its 71 seats in the election.

They could be out of power for at least two administrations if Fine Gael and 
Labour can come to a working arrangement and even manage to turn Ireland's 
fortunes around.

In the meantime, the only consolation for Fianna Fáil's foot soldiers and its 
high command (other than ministers seeking comfort in a pint) is that 
repackaging themselves as patriots who will put country above party may reclaim 
some ground – albeit a task that could take up to a decade to achieve.
 