
England have been in this country for almost three weeks and for the first 
time they are about to encounter those oft‑quoted “Indian conditions”. In 
Mumbai there was green grass on the pitch; the ball hurried through nicely – 
for those with bats in their hands – and in the land of the spinner the ball 
seldom deviated a jot upon landing.

As Moeen Ali, who was still valuable to a frequently beleaguered fielding 
captain at the Wankhede Stadium, observed about this tournament: “There’s been 
some good pitches for spinners to bowl on. Every time Adil [Rashid] and I have 
watched the games we’ve been saying: ‘We’d love to be bowling on that pitch.’”

Moeen was referring to games in Nagpur, Kolkata, Dharamsala and Bangalore. But 
not those in Mumbai, where there might be a wet ball, no turn and enough bounce 
for avaricious batsmen to lever the ball over the boundary. Moeen is hoping and 
expecting that will change in Delhi. For certain there will be less bounce from 
the pitch and it is possible that the ball will turn. The par score will be 
considerably lower than in Mumbai.

Joe Root leads the way as England record stunning World Twenty20 win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/18/england-south-africa-world-twenty20-match-report>
Moeen and Rashid may well enjoy bowling here and there is the possibility that 
Liam Dawson, the Hampshire all-rounder catapulted into the squad at the 11th 
hour, might get a game alongside the other two spinners.

By the same token the Afghanistan team will not be so disappointed by the 
likely conditions for the match on Wednesday.

They do not lack quality in the spin department. Mohammad Nabi, the 
off-spinner, is a wily old campaigner prepared to bowl the “difficult” overs in 
the powerplay and towards the end of the innings. The 17-year-old leg-spinner 
Rashid Khan has enormous potential – and a good googly – even if he was smashed 
for 29 in an over by AB de Villiers on Sunday (he should have completed his 
spell by then). And they have a competent left-armer in Amir Hanza as well as a 
makeshift wrist-spinner in Sami Shenwari.

So Delhi has true “Indian conditions” which may suit Afghanistan as well as 
Moeen and Rashid. Those conditions extend to a nagging uncertainty about the 
schedule for the remainder of the World T20.

Just before the tournament began – to the frustration of fans, media and 
players – there were doubts over whether the Feroz Kotla ground was fit to hold 
World T20 matches. These have resurfaced because one of the stands may be 
deemed unsafe and would therefore have to remain empty. This would be an 
embarrassment for the InternationalCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Council and the BCCI, especially in 
a prestigious semi-final, which is due to take place here on 30 March. It would 
be equally embarrassing and logistically tricky to move that semi-final at such 
short notice. So the Indian adventure continues.
 