
I'll Be Your Mirror: Yeah Yeah Yeahs, London

The Yeah Yeah Yeahs <https://www.theguardian.com/music/yeahyeahyeahs> emerged 
in that wave of New York creativity that brought forth talents as various as 
Jeffrey Lewis, Adam Green, the Strokes and Liars, and the trio have somehow 
managed to take their mixture of thriftstore glamour and minimal goth rock from 
the bar gigs of the city to infinitely more couture-friendly milieus. Now a 
major-label band, while keeping their souls intact, their new album Mosquito 
finds them slick, mature, but never complacent. They are also elder statesmen, 
and fittingly curate this I'll Be Your Mirror one-dayer. Here, black jeans rock 
comes from Jon Spencer, while there are nods to techno (Locust; the Field) and 
even dub reggae (Jah Shaka).

Alexandra Palace, N8, Sat

JR

Valerie June, nr York

Even though the Black Keys <https://www.theguardian.com/music/black-keys> are 
a sell-out attraction at the biggest venues in the world, singer-guitarist Dan 
Auerbach can't stop working, so he produces artists at the band's rigorously 
authentic Easy Eye studios. It was here that Auerbach co-wrote and produced 
Locked Down, the best Dr John album in 35 years, and also where he contributed 
his considerable skills to the debut album from Valerie June, a great singer 
and player from Jackson, Tennessee, the city made famous by Johnny and June 
Carter Cash. Valerie June, true enough, has won country awards, but as her 
debut album reveals, she can turn her hand to raw Harry Smith Anthology-style 
folk, and (as the single Wanna Be On Your Mind demonstrates) to an earnest, and 
period-perfect southern soul. It's a wide remit, for sure, but her live 
performances show just how effortlessly Valerie June pulls it together.

The Band Room, Ferndale, Fri; touring to 16 May

JR

Angel Haze, London

A prolific releaser of mixtapes, not to mention a voluble participant in 
social media,Angel Haze <https://www.theguardian.com/music/angel-haze> invites 
you into her world pretty readily, but you need to know it's not an easy ride 
once you're there; her Classick mix offered a take on Eminem's Cleanin' Out My 
Closet that contained a terrifying account of her childhood sexual abuse. Nor 
are former pals such as Azealia Banks (another female MC whose flow owes 
something to Missy Elliott) immune from the sharp end of her talent. Haze's 
song On The Edge didn't so much diss Banks as minutely critique every facet of 
her personality and career, not least her failure to yet deliver her debut 
album. Odd then, that Haze should have cancelled all of her tour save this 
London date (where she's playing alongside a live band) in order to concentrate 
on finishing her own, but that will only make the experience more valued by 
those who do manage to make it in.

The Scala, N1, Tue 

JR

Ravi Coltrane, Cheltenham

In the past, the saxophonist Ravi Coltrane would most likely have been 
somebody else's sideman on a Saturday afternoon Cheltenham jazz festival bill 
dominated by the great trumpeter Dave Douglas (1.30pm) and exciting singer 
Gregory Porter (5.45pm), but not any more. Coltrane junior spent some quiet 
years developing his own jazz career, as a self-effacing, steadily competent 
postbopper quite different from his trailblazing father. As on last year's Blue 
Note Records debut Spirit Fiction, he is joined at Cheltenham by an open-minded 
kindred soul in trumpeter Ralph Alessi, while sometime Steve Coleman piano 
partner David Virelles completes the group.

Jazz Arena, Montpellier Gardens, Sat 4.30pm

JF

Avishai Cohen With Strings, London

Chick Corea didn't turn his virtuoso bassist Avishai Cohen into a composer 
(the fundamentals of that craft had been in place for a long time), but the 
pianist seems to have done plenty to ensure the young Israeli's simmering 
talent came to the boil. It was a smart piece of talent-spotting, since by the 
late 90s Cohen was revealing a striking compositional independence, from 
deploying unusual combinations of instruments and tone-colours to juxtaposing 
American jazz and non-western music, and drawing on Latin, funk and Jewish folk 
traditions. For this new jazz/chamber-music project, Cohen reassesses all that 
and opens some new doors, too, in fusing his current jazz trio (with pianist 
Nitai Hershkovits and drummer Ofri Nehemya) with a string quartet featuring two 
violas, plus oboe. His chemistry of tranquil, lullaby-like vocals, haunting 
romantic themes and thrilling improv exchanges with his partners make this a 
show for all kinds of music-lovers.

Barbican Hall, EC2, Tue

JF

A Scream And An Outrage, London

The ENO premiered his first opera; the Britten Sinfonia has commissioned a 
number of his works; and now Nico Muhly (pictured) gets the run of the Barbican 
for a weekend. Whether you like or loathe the music of this 31-year-old New 
York-based composer, he's hard to ignore, and A Scream And An Outrage, the 
three days of concerts he's curated, places him and his work in the context of 
his mostly American contemporaries. Among those appearing over the six sessions 
that make up the weekend are the BBC Singers and Symphony Orchestra (Fri); Bang 
On A Can Allstars, Calder Quartet, Britten Sinfonia and Villagers (11 May); The 
Sixteen and Philip Glass (12 May), and Muhly himself. There will be eight world 
and European premieres, including two works each by Muhly and David Lang, one 
by Julia Wolfe, and four new Etudes for piano by Glass, with all 20 Etudes 
being played during the weekend.

Barbican Hall and LSO St Luke's, EC2, Fri to 12 May

AC
 