
Devotees of all kinds of crossword (cruciverbalists, some people coyly call 
them) will today be saluting the memory of a Liverpool man who emigrated to the 
United States, abandoned onion farming for journalism, became editor of the New 
York World, and on 21 December 21, 1913 filled a spare space in his paper with 
a device that he called a word cross, thus ensuring his name would be honoured 
today as the inventor of crosswords.

Only curmudgeons would point out at this moment that this claim is a little 
dubious. Arthur Wynne himself was quick to acknowledge that the idea was as old 
as the language, and the origins of the puzzle that he created can be plausibly 
shown to go back at least as far as Pompeii. And though his New York World 
puzzles continued, it was not until two young men calledSimon and Schuster 
<http://www.simonandschuster.com/>, whose publishing house would go on to give 
usErnest Hemingway 
<http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/literature/laureates/1954/hemingway-bio.html>
 andScott Fitzgerald 
<http://www.biography.com/people/f-scott-fitzgerald-9296261>, put puzzles into 
a book 11 years later that they really caught on.

The first newspaper in Britain to use them seems to have been the Sunday 
Express in 1925. The then Manchester Guardian followed four years later, 13 
months ahead of the Times.

But it also has to be said that crosswords today bear about as much 
resemblance to Wynne's pioneering number as does the Goldberg Variations to 
Chopsticks. Wynne's puzzle was shaped like a diamond. All you had to do was to 
fill in the answers to questions like "the plural of is" (3) and "what artists 
learn to do" (4) – even if one or two demanded more erudition ("the fibre of 
the gomuti palm", the answer to which was "doh".)

Today's familiar black squares were in those days unknown. The art form has 
evolved in different ways in different countries, but here there are now 
essentially three varieties: the quick (as in today's Guardian Review,) the 
cryptic, below the weather on the penultimate page of this section, and the 
supercryptic, for ace solvers only, like Azed in tomorrow's Observer.

The quick is sometimes thought to be simple but that isn't always the case: a 
clue may simply say "draw", but that's a word whose alternative meanings 
command a whole column in any thesaurus.

It's the cryptic and supercryptic, though, that are serious business. Over the 
years, ingenious hands have developed more and more techniques for making their 
solvers sweat. The Observer was the pacemaker here, unleashing on its customers 
first Torquemada and, after him, Ximenes, both named after Spanish inquisitors. 
Ximenes was Derrick Somerset Macnutt, who taught me Greek at Christ's Hospital 
school, not a happy experience for either of us. He was one of a school that 
favoured strict rules for crosswords, which he embodied in a book call Ximenes 
On the Art of the Crossword, published in 1966.

Some setters still stick to these rules. Others favour the far more 
libertarian style embodied in the work of John Graham, Araucaria of the 
Guardian,who died in November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/2013/nov/26/araucaria-crossword-setter-john-graham-dies>
. John was an orthodox Anglican minister, but in crossword terms he was a 
joyous heretic, who, strict Ximeneans might have considered, deserved to be 
burned at the stake. Most of his Guardian faithful will tell you there never 
was, and never will be, a setter to match Araucaria. But some of the younger 
setters, who revere him as the master, take even greater liberties from time to 
time.

That's not to say they don't observe rules. It is still the case, in most 
instances, that a clue will contain a definition, equivalent to the word or 
words you need to install, and a cryptic variation to point you towards it. Or 
often, at first, away from it: since this is a world in which fiendish is a 
term of approval and the work of its best protagonists is admired for a 
phenomenon, rare in most trades, that might be called honest deception. In his 
2003 book Pretty Girl in Crimson Rose (8), Sandy Balfour describes his 
girlfriend's struggles to get him to solve cryptic crosswords. "That," she 
says, rejecting a proffered solution, "is what they want you to think it 
means." A clue may include the words "Greek character", which will usually 
indicate the presence of such letters as mu, nu or pi. Yet the letters you need 
in this case may make up the name Plato.

Some of the tricks of the trade are now ancient. The use, for instance, of 
anagrams, whose presence is often indicated by words such as mangled, messy or 
mutilated. Hugh Stephenson, the Guardian's crossword editor, has three pages 
listing such devices in his book Secrets of the Setters. Some enthusiasts 
disparage the anagram, yet it helps the solver to get the game under way, and 
at its best can be an enrichment of life – as when carthorse yields orchestra, 
or Manchester City becomes synthetic cream (they were playing that way at the 
time), or Britney Spears, Presbyterians. There are also standard cliches which 
solvers soon spot – a soldier may give you RE, or perhaps GI; an L may give you 
a learner (as in L plates for learner drivers), although it might also mean 
left, large, lake or Latin. Hugh Stephenson lists these, too.

One quickly learns to distrust a word like flower, which may mean a daisy or 
daffodil, but may mean a river (rivers flow: geddit?)

Yet what makes a good setter is above all, ingenuity and invention; so brand 
new tricks are entering the language of crosswords all the time. And it's when 
a setter comes up with a clue that baffles you for 45 minutes and makes you 
gasp when you solve it that the pleasure of crosswords reaches its peak. There 
were several in the Guardian prize crossword a week ago, concocted by Paul, a 
devout Araucarian. For instance, the unXimenean "Tommy Cooper" (1, 4, 2, 7, 4) 
the answer to which I can say, since the competition is closed, is "a name to 
conjure with". Our hero today, Arthur Wynne (born Everton 1871, died 
Clearwater, Florida 1945) would surely have marvelled at that.

Ten favourite clues

1 Amundsen's forwarding address (4)

2 Bar of soap? (6,6)

3 HIJKLMNO? (5)

4 Ie what oil sheik said cheekily unto girl in gin palace (4,2,1,4,4, 
4,3,5,2,1,5,4,4,2)

5 I say nothing (3)

6 (7)

7 O (8,6)

8 O hark the herald angels sing the boy's descent which lifted up the world 
(5,9,7, 5,6,2,5,3,6,2,3,6)

9 Poetic scene with chaste Lord Archer vegetating (3, 3, 8, 12)

10Silent film star's scene at Little Bighorn, as delivered by Spooner (6, 6)

Answers:

1 MUSH. (What Amundsen the polar explorer said to his dogs) – Bunthorne

2 ROVER'S RETURN (the pub in Coronation Street) – source not found; picked out 
by Colin Dexter, creator of the crossword-loving Morse – source not found

3 WATER (H to O = H20) – source not found

4 WHAT IS A NICE GIRL LIKE YOU DOING IN A PLACE LIKE THIS, EH? (anagram) – 
Bunthorne

5 EGO (I=Ego; say= eg; nothing= 0) - Enigmatist

6 MISSING. (Ie, the clue is missing) – source not found. This has also been 
used to give the answer "clueless".

7 CIRCULAR LETTER. Source not found

8 WHILE SHEPHERDS WATCHED THEIR FLOCKS BY NIGHT ALL SEATED ON THE GROUND 
(anagram) – Araucaria

9 THE OLD VICARAGE, GRANTCHESTER. Occurs in poem by Rupert Brooke: "chaste 
Lord Archer vegetating" is an anagram for it. The then recently disgraced Lord 
Archer lived there. – Araucaria

10 BUSTER KEATON: which Dr Spooner, who allegedly mixed up opening consonants, 
might have registered as "Custer beaten." – Paul

Araucaria, Bunthorne, Enigmatist and Paul are Guardian setters.
 