
This was a year that tested – largely to destruction – the notion you can have 
stability and quiet in the absence of a Middle East peace process. Instead, 
2014 in Israel and thePalestinian territories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/palestinian-territories> was marked by a 
return to conflict in Gaza, which claimed over 2,200 lives, by increasing 
violence and tension on both sides, continued Israeli settlement building, and 
the introduction of a worrying religious aspect to the tensions between 
Israelis and Palestinians.

The fulcrum around which all this turned was the breakdown of renewed 
US-brokered attempts to move towards a final settlement of the conflict, which 
collapsed in April amid mutual recriminations afterIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> reneged on an agreement to release a 
third batch of long-term Palestinian prisoners held in Israeli jails.

That in turn triggered unilateral Palestinian efforts to advance moves towards 
statehood in international institutions that as the year progressed saw a 
number of European states recognise Palestinian statehood – if only 
symbolically – led by Sweden and followed by a non-binding vote in the UK 
parliament.

If the collapse of the peace process was acrimonious, events took a darker 
turn with the kidnap and murder of three teenage yeshiva students – Eyal 
Yifrach, Naftali Frenkel and Gilad Shaar – from a hitchhiking spot outside the 
West Bank settlement bloc of Gush Etzion.

The hunt for the youths – who had been murdered within hours of being captured 
– and their Palestinian abductors gripped Israel as security forces rounded up 
hundreds of Palestinians, many associated with the militant group Hamas.

The tone of a year, one feature of which was a grim undercurrent of racist 
incidents and rhetoric directed at Palestinians and Israeli Arabs, would be 
graphically underlined on the night following the teenagers’ funeral, attended 
by thousands. A young Palestinian from the east Jerusalem neighbourhood of Beit 
Hanina – Mohammed Abu Khdeir – was kidnapped and burned alive by Jewish 
extremists in revenge, prompting serious rioting in Jerusalem.

The Israeli crackdown on Hamas on the West Bank had other serious 
consequences. Responding in part to that – and more widely to an 
intensification of the blockade in Gaza following Egyptian efforts to close the 
smuggling tunnels into the coastal enclave – Israel and the militant factions 
in Gaza slipped into a familiar escalation of rocket fire out of Gaza and 
Israeli strikes that lead quickly to the third Gaza conflict since 2008 – 
dubbed by Israel Operation Protective Edge.

Launched on 8 July, it was quickly clear that neither Israel nor Hamas had 
defined exit strategies for the conflict. Despite an eventual ground invasion, 
it was clear that prime minister Binyamin Netanyahu had no intention of 
listening to hardliners in his government who believed that either Hamas could 
be defeated or Gaza reconquered.

Although both sides declared victory in the aftermath of the seven-week war, 
Hamas remained in power and – at the year’s end – the long siege of Gaza was 
still largely in place with reconstruction moving at a snail’s pace.

Away from Hamas-ruled Gaza, the Palestinian president Mahmoud Abbas, on the 
West Bank, pushed ahead with unilateral and incremental moves towards securing 
recognition of a Palestinian state at the UN and other international 
institutions.

If the diplomatic front saw Palestinian gains, for the Netanyahu government, 
the year saw growing international isolation, not least in Washington where 
relations with the Obama administration reached a new low.

Meanwhile, riots continued in east Jerusalem, stoked both by new settlements 
in Palestinian neighbourhoods and by tension over the holy site in the Old 
City, revered by Muslims as the Noble Sanctuary and by Jews as the Temple 
Mount. A campaign by far-right Jewish religious activist, including Israeli 
lawmakers, for prayer rights at the site saw clashes and restrictions on access 
for Palestinians that led to charges that the government was planning to change 
the status quo at the site, denied by Netanyahu.

That issue in turn was linked to a series of deadly attacks on Jews in the 
autumn and early winter, including two using cars, the attempted assassination 
of a Jewish activist and several stabbings that culminated in the killing of 
four rabbis and a Druze policeman at a west Jerusalem synagogue.

Tensions within Netanyahu’s fractious governing coalition finally boiled over. 
By December Netanyahu fired both his justice minister Tzipi Livni and finance 
minister Yair Lapid and initiated steps towards snap elections in March. Those, 
in turn, were widely being presented as a referendum on Netanyahu’s time in 
office. Perhaps, too, a referendum on one of the most difficult years in the 
last decade.

Peter Beaumont is the Guardian’s Jerusalem correspondent
 