
On 15 October 1968 in Mexico City’s Estadio Olímpico Universitario, David 
Hemery inspired the BBC’s incomparable David Coleman to the zenith of his 
facility for conveying his exhilaration at British success in the sport he 
cherished above all others – and in that elation also to commit a faux pas for 
which he quickly apologised but nonetheless spawned a tradition for ruthlessly 
lampooning commentary gaffes that reached its peak the following decade when 
Private Eye launched Colemanballs.

16 October 1968: David Hemery hurdles into history in Mexico
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/oct/17/david-hemery-hurdles-olympics-1968>
As the tall, blond 400m hurdler extended his fluent, graceful stride up the 
home straight, Coleman’s excitement was palpable and infectious but any 
analysis of the words he used indicates that the delivery at immortal moments 
such as these is far more significant than the content. “And it’s David Hemery 
in the lead for Great Britain,” Coleman said, his voice rapidly increasing in 
tone and speed like a plane hurtling down the runway beyond the point of no 
return before take-off. “It’s Hemery Great Britain, it’s Hemery Great Britain, 
it’s Hemery with one barrier to go,” he continued. And then his pitch soared 
even more: “And David Hemery is going to take the gold. David Hemery wins for 
Britain! Hemery takes the gold, in second place Hennige and who cares who’s 
third? It doesn’t matter.”

It did matter, of course, because the identity of the man who won bronze was 
Britain’s other finalist, John Sherwood, the husband of Sheila Sherwood who had 
won the silver medal in the long jump the day before. But Coleman’s instinctive 
relegation of Sherwood’s achievement was not malicious in spirit and wholly 
forgivable given the circumstances. The men finishing in third, fourth, fifth 
and sixth were separated by only a tenth of a second and the first three of 
them were awarded the same time. When the slow motion replay demonstrated that 
Sherwood had taken third place ahead of the USA’s world-record holder Geoffrey 
Vanderstock, Coleman paid the Yorkshireman a generous tribute.

Before he made amends to Sherwood though, Coleman finished his race 
commentary. “Hemery won it all the way,” he enthused. “Hemery won that from 
start to finish. He killed the rest. He paralysed them.” His margin of victory 
was more than eight metres, he set a new world record and he became the first 
Briton to win the event dubbed “the mankiller” since David George Brownlow 
Cecil, Lord Burghley, had set an Olympic record in the final in the Amsterdam 
Games in 1928.

In a felicitous coincidence Cecil, who by then had succeeded his father to 
become the sixth Marquess of Exeter, led the official party and honoured Hemery 
by hanging the gold medal around his neck. In 1936 Burghley, in full evening 
dress, had completed a 400-yard lap of the Queen Mary in 57 seconds and from 
1943-45 served as the Governor of Bermuda.

How Hemery, the man with the sixth fastest personal best among the eight 
finalists, came to be on top of the podium, also owed a debt to a visit to 
Bermuda and to a happy transatlantic accordance, this one between two 
extraordinary and complementary coaches who, though they were based more than 
3,000 miles apart and who were to meet only once – on the eve of the 1972 Games 
– moulded a champion and one of the greatest performances in Olympic history.

Hemery was brought up in Frinton on Sea on the Essex coast in the late 1940s 
and early 50s. His father had been the New South Wales schoolboy long jump 
champion but his membership of what his son called “a narrow religious sect” 
proscribed continuing with athletics and on his return to Britain, which he had 
left at the age of two, he established himself in private practice as a 
chartered accountant. From Hemery’s descriptions, he and his three siblings 
enjoyed an idyllically sporty childhood, his father building goals, cricket 
nets and high jump stands in the family’s back garden. There were also, he 
wrote in his autobiography, “occasional swims in the freezing North Sea, long 
walks on the high sea wall and standing long jumps from it to the beach below 
[which] provided considerable physical activity”.

The defining moment in his life came when he was 12 in 1957 and his father was 
offered a job in Colorado Springs. The Hemery children were consulted about the 
move and, after deciding to go, stayed there for six months before his father 
accepted another position in Boston. The four children – Judy, David, John and 
Anthea – were enrolled at Thayer Academy in Braintree, Massachusetts and the 
boys excelled in sport, David becoming an accomplished miler, half-miler and 
prolific centre-forward in the soccer team.

“In 1961,” he wrote, “my father decided that the school should have hurdles. 
Without too much thought of whether he could afford such generosity, he donated 
a complete set. He had no idea what this gift was to reap. Perhaps because of 
my time at Frinton, where I had hurdled over breakwaters on the beach at five, 
I took to hurdling like a duck to water.”

When he graduated from Thayer in 1962 he was awarded a prize for being the 
school’s best all-round sportsman but in his only year as a high hurdler felt 
that he never mastered the discipline, recording 16.5sec as his personal best. 
In June that year the family returned to England, moving to Moor Park in 
Hertfordshire where David joined Ruislip & NorthwoodAthletics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> Club (which became Hillingdon AC 
in 1966 when it merged with Finchley Harriers). When Hemery’s father inquired 
about a hurdles coach, David was sent to Hurlingham Park track in Putney to 
meet Fred Housden.

Housden had been a scrum-half for Blackheath, an international pole vaulter 
and high hurdler before the 1914-18 war and after Cambridge had taught 
mathematics at Harrow until his retirement in the early 1950s. When Hemery met 
him, the coach was 70 and immediately began to address the athlete’s flaw, 
“floating in space” over hurdles instead of maintaining his forward momentum. 
They worked for three evenings a week over the summer of 1962 while Hemery 
spent the weekdays employed by the National Westminster Bank.

He spent hours practicing starts, adjusted his technique and built up 
leg-strength. His times for the 120-yard high hurdles began to demonstrate a 
dramatic improvement, falling from 15.6sec over 3ft 3in barriers to 14.7sec 
over 3ft 6in hurdles. In the AAA Indoor Championships at Wembley he won the 
Wall’s Trophy for the best performance for an athlete aged 21 or under but 
towards the end of the year the family had decided to return to the United 
States. “Neither John nor Anthea could settle in England at that time,” he 
wrote of his two younger siblings. “They had picked up American accents and 
were told ‘go home Yank’ and made to feel distinctly unwanted. Their American 
friends and the informal student-teacher relationships in the States made them 
long for that side of the pond.”

But when they arrived back in Boston, the job his father had understood to be 
guaranteed fell through and the family received a further setback when they 
were scammed into investing in “phony” scheme. David worked for the next 18 
months in the computer department of the National Shawmut Bank, chipping his 
income into the family pool while his father built up a new private practice 
from scratch.

A year later he took a holiday with his brother to Bermuda during “college 
week” and found the contrast between the students’ outlook and his own a shock. 
He felt “almost like a 40-year-old banker”, he said, and it made him consider 
his future. His propensity for hard work, study and his determination to better 
himself had already led to evening courses in banking, now he decided to catch 
up on his lost two years by applying to Boston University, where he was 
accepted on an engineering degree course and found Billy Smith, the coach of 
the university’s track team who was a friend of his high school coach.

At college he made swift progress as a member of the one-mile relay team and 
over a varying hurdles distances from 50 to 600 yards. With Housden focusing on 
technique, Smith worked on strength and stamina in a regime that often included 
30 100-yard dashes, a seven-mile run and ended with seven 220-yard sprints. He 
amassed victories throughout his freshman and sophomore years and during his 
senior year gave this snapshot of Smith’s dedication and philosophy. “One day a 
blizzard started at about noon. By 3pm quite a lot of snow had fallen and it 
was still coming down. I asked [Billy] what he thought I should do – weight 
training and/or a few exercises or should I take the day off? He paused, then 
pushing the door open, said: ‘Out there is the road to Mexico.’” So Hemery went 
outside and pounded out a series of half-miles on the boards while Smith stood 
at the side of the track, ankle-deep in snow.

In the summer of 1966 he returned to England to compete and train under 
Housden, running 14.3sec to win the inter-counties championship high hurdles. 
Picked for Great Britain he won the same race in a meet against the USSR and 
became Commonwealth Games champion over the 3ft 6in barriers in Jamaica. Later 
that year he decided to focus on the 440-yard discipline, running a variety of 
600- and 500-yard races at indoor meets during the winter season but tore his 
left hamstring on his return to the high hurdles in February 1967. He attempted 
comebacks every couple of weeks but repeatedly broke down when lengthening his 
jog to a stride. In the end Smith told him to rest until August to allow it to 
heal properly and he had to sit out the European summer season.

In August he resumed training on the sand bar at Powder Point, beginning 
slowly but gaining in confidence as his leg withstood gradual accelerations of 
pace. Over the winter he concentrated on stamina work in cross country races, 
indoors over 600 yards in the hurdles and anchoring the mile-relay on the flat. 
On 10 April 1968 in his first outdoors meeting of the season Hemery equalled 
his personal best 51.8sec in the 440-yard hurdles and nine days later set a new 
British record of 50.7. In May he won the 120-yard and 440-yard hurdles at the 
New England Championships and in June the longer race at the National 
Collegiates in Berkeley, California breaking the tape from lane one in his best 
yet, 49.8.

“Unbeaten and in first-class condition,” Hemery wrote, “Billy Smith handed me 
on to Fred Housden.” Back in England and based at his brother’s flat near 
Crystal Palace, Hemery began further technical work at the athletics stadium to 
iron out the remaining glitch with his stride pattern. “ I take 13 strides 
between the intermediate hurdles,” he wrote. “No one can run at full speed for 
long, no matter how fit he is. As a consequence of slowing down one’s stride 
length becomes shorter. In order to clear a hurdle fast and smoothly, an 
athlete must take off an exact distance from the barrier. At some point in the 
race therefore an extra stride or two must go in between each set of hurdles. 
One extra, and the hurdler must take off from his other leg; two extra and he 
will be leaping from the same leg. My hurdling was less than adequate from my 
left leg. I therefore had to go for two extra, that is, 15 strides from about 
halfway through the race.” With the refinement underway Hemery won the AAA 
Championships over 440 yards at White City to qualify for theOlympic Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games> and moved on to hill work.

Four weeks before the Games opened he flew to Mexico City with the other 
members of the British team selected for the 400m and longer distances to 
acclimatize to the altitude and was there when the Mexican army massacred 
protestors in the Plaza de las Tres Culturas 10 days before the opening 
ceremony. Despite numerous protests that the Games should not go ahead, the 
International Olympic Committee refused to bow to pressure. In the athletes 
village and on the practice tracks, Hemery’s body slowly began to get used to 
the paucity of oxygen. In the dormitory, he devoted himself to study, poring 
over his training diary, drawing pictures of the track and writing down exactly 
what he wanted to accomplish in the heats, semi-final and final.

In the run-up to competing, Hemery received letters from both Housden and 
Smith. The former, as was his custom, wrote in verse, referencing the two USA 
runners, Geoff Vanderstock and Ron Whitney, who were ranked No1 and 2 in the 
world, and the work they had done in mastering the change down to 15 strides 
between hurdles:

“When others quail

And Geoff looks pale

And Ronnie’s knees are quaking.

Then is the time

To heed my rhyme

And take to record making.

You know the point

Where out of joint

Your chopping may go wonky,

So don’t lose speed

But keep the lead,

Each clearance honky-tonky.”

Smith was equally positive, accurately predicting: “You’ll run 48.1sec or 48.2 
and no one else can do that. The others are 1,000 hills and sand dunes behind 
you and it is too late to catch up. Your preparation has been perfect. It seems 
like we’ve been through and over this whole thing 100 times – but we know we’re 
right. We might be the only two people in the world to know it but it is true.”

His plan for the heat was merely to qualify for the semi-final and relax into 
the groove of 15 strides between hurdles after 200m. This he did, but not 
without a scare when he looked behind him after clearing the last hurdle to see 
three competitors closing in on him. He finished second in 50.3sec. In one of 
the other heats Whitney ran 49sec dead and tried to psyche out everyone else in 
the competition with his nonchalance, barely exhaling with any conspicuous 
strenuous effort and waving to the crowd. Hemery was drawn in lane six in his 
semi, with Whitney in the lane outside him, and the American again came home 
first with Gerhrad Hennige second and the Briton third. In the other race 
Sherwood set a new Commonwealth record of 49.3sec, also to finish third.

The day of the final was wet and cold. Hemery and Sherwood were taken to the 
stadium two hours before the race in case of traffic congestion and took refuge 
in the British team’s medical room, lying on the cot beds under grey blankets 
for warmth as the national coach, Denis Watts, and Great Britain’s silver 
medallist at Tokyo, John Cooper, chain-smoked. They tried to crack jokes but 
Hemery recalled the tension – and the blanket – brought him out into a cold 
sweat. The natural inclination was to start their warm-ups, just to allow them 
the comfort of something to take their minds off the race, but knew that they 
had to conserve their energy until as late as possible. “My fingers and feet 
were damp and freezing cold,” he wrote. “I felt weak, my breath was short and I 
felt a slight constriction in my throat. The back of my neck ached a bit and my 
prevailing thoughts were of impending unpleasantness.”

With 50 minutes to go they headed to the warm-up track and Hemery took off his 
shoes to jog on the grass. The feeling of the wet surface conjured up a mental 
picture of his training on the sand at Powder Point and the enthusiasm and 
vigour he experienced there when he was returning from injury the year before. 
When they finally made their way into the stadium to register their vest 
numbers, they were made to wait in the pen for 10 minutes. As the other 
finalists began to shake their limbs and jog the eight-yard length of the cage 
to warm up, Hemery laid down on a bench. Finally they were allowed on to the 
track, checked their blocks, practised a start, hyperventilated to draw as much 
oxygen as they could into their lungs, stripped off their tracksuits and waited 
for the starter to whistle.

In lane six again, Hemery took a few strides out of his blocks on the command 
of “stand-up, please” after a false-start outside him. They waited for the gun 
the second time and Hemery found his rhythm from the start. “First hurdle came 
spot on,” he remembered. “Fast and relaxed.” By the third hurdle he had passed 
Whitney in lane seven and only Sherwood in lane eight remained in his vision. 
After the sixth hurdle, when he changed to 15 strides, he lost sight of his 
compatriot so for the last 190m he was running blind. “I started to question 
whether it would be possible to maintain so much effort and not die before the 
end,” he said. “For one step my pace eased but instantly a flash came through 
my mind, ‘this is the Olympic final – you can’t let up now’.”

On he went, panicking when he heard a foot splash, which he estimated to be 
very close to him on his left. Smith had told him to “go at the last hurdle as 
if it were the first of a 110m spring hurdle race” but only remembered the 
advice after he had cleared it. Even so he managed to change gear into a sprint 
for the final 45m. He dipped at the line but because he had not looked to his 
left over the last metres was not wholly convinced that someone had not passed 
him on the inside. It was only when he saw a BBC camera crew racing towards him 
that he became convinced that he had won.

And not just won, but thrashed the field in 48.12sec, to take the world record 
by eight-tenths of a second. “I believe,” wrote the Times’s correspondent Neil 
Allen the next day, “this was the outstanding British athletics performance of 
all time.”

Afterwards Hemery said that he had “run scared” for 48.1sec. Among all his 
other achievements that day was that never for a second did his demeanour 
betray anything other than supreme talent, confidence and judgment.

What the Guardian said

The Guardian, October 16 1968

Dave Hemery, aged 24, brought Britain her first gold medal of the Olympics 
here this evening with a performance that staggered the crowd and left his 
rivals shattered. He won the 400 metres hurdles in 41.8sec, slicing the 
phenomenal amount of seven-tenths of a second off the world record by Geoff 
Vanderstock (America) one of those left in the wake. Hemery won the race by 12 
yards and one of the first men to congratulate him was Lord Exeter who last won 
this Olympic title for Britain in Amsterdam in 1928.

Kendra Harrison sets 100m hurdles world record at Anniversary Games
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/22/kendra-harrison-anniversary-games-usain-bolt>
Hemery, out of the American mould of hurdlers – he has been studying at Boston 
University – led all the way. He went into the second flight just ahead, pushed 
hard down the back straight and for a few moments just before he had to change 
from 13 strides between hurdles to 15 strides, I feared he had overdone things.

But rather than lose ground he gained it and along the straight Hemery, 
perfection at every obstacle, was out on his own while the rest panted and 
struggled for minor prizes.

At the finish Hemery was in no way distressed. He nodded and raised his hand 
to salute the crowd as though he knew it was going to happen. The evening was 
chill and damp – it was the weather for the British not the Americans nor the 
Italians. And the performance of Hemery showed too how much he has been keeping 
secret during the early rounds of the competition. It was a barely credible 
performance. Something to rank along with Herb Elliott’s 1,500 metres win in 
the Rome Olympics and with the two medal-winning performances of Peter Snell in 
Tokyo. No words are too great in praise of this performance.

What happened next

Hemery never quite reached the heights of Mexico 68 again, although he did win 
silver in the 4x400m relay and bronze in the 400m hurdles in the Munich Games 
four years later. The following year he won the first ever British Superstars 
competition, a title he won again in 1976.
 