
At 34, Ashish Thakkar has built a global corporation and is chair of the 
United Nations Foundation’sGlobal Entrepreneurs Council 
<http://www.unfoundation.org/who-we-are/experts/global-entrepreneurs-council/?referrer=http://www.unfoundation.org/who-we-are/experts/global-entrepreneurs-council/>
 – substantial achievements for anyone his age. But Thakkar’s beginnings make 
them even more impressive. At 15, he was living in Uganda as a refugee of the 
Rwandan genocide and had dropped out of school.

He was born in Leicester after his parents fled from Uganda in 1972 when Idi 
Amin ordered the expulsion of the country’s south Asian minority. Missing 
Africa, Thakkar’s parents moved back to the continent – this time to Rwanda – 
in 1993.

However, come 1994, 12-year-old Thakkar and his family found themselves among 
more than 1,200 people sheltering from the genocide in the Hôtel des Mille 
Collines (the setting of the film, Hotel Rwanda).


The family managed to escape to Kampala, Uganda, but Thakkar’s parents, who 
had rebuilt their lives between 1972 and 1994, had now lost everything again.


Speaking on Monday at a conference in Cape Town, South Africa, run by the Dell 
Women’s Entrepreneur Network, Thakkar explained how the challenge of finding 
the seed money to start a business is even tougher for refugees. As a teenager 
in Uganda, people avoided his family for fear they would ask for a favour.


So, aged 15, and frustrated by this situation, Thakkar dropped out of school 
to start in business. “I wanted to help [my family] and I was trying 
desperately to get a loan and I ended up borrowing $5,000 from three different 
people.” He spent half of the loan flying to Dubai where he bought computer 
parts - equipment that was tough to get hold of in Uganda. He then sold the 
parts back in Uganda, making a small profit.


'I was taken aback by the attitudes towards working mums'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/jun/13/attitudes-towards-working-mums>
Thakkar quickly saw there was a more efficient way to run his business: he set 
up an office in Dubai and sold technology equipment to businesses in Africa. By 
scaling up this simple method of buying and selling, Thakkar created the Mara 
Group, which (although it does not publish its figures) is said to be valued at 
$1bn. Over the past 20 years the group has diversified with investments in 
sectors including telecoms, banking, property and agriculture. The business now 
operates in 25 African countries and employs around 11,000 people.


Thakkar emphasises the power of partnerships, particularly where they mix 
global success with local knowledge. With that in mind he moved into investment 
in 2013, partnering with Bob Diamond, former UK boss of Barclays. Together they 
foundedAtlas Mara <http://atlasmara.com/>, which invests in African financial 
services firms. The business, which was listed on the London Stock Exchange, 
raised $625m from investors.


Thakkar’s business acumen and networking skills are clear, but he says profit 
is not how he defines success. Instead, he says it is “defined by the number of 
lives you’re touching and making a difference to”.


Thakkar launched the Mara Foundation, a social enterprise, in 2009. Having 
experienced the struggle of access to funding when starting a business, he 
wanted to create an organisation that mentors and supports small business 
across Africa, with a focus on young and women entrepreneurs.


“To see the response I got as a young entrepreneur, to see the response my mum 
and sisters got as women entrepreneurs: it was never a level playing field,” he 
says.


The Mara Foundation’s mentoring initiatives include Mara Mentor, a free online 
mentoring platform, Mara One-on-One, which connects startups with established 
entrepreneurs, and Mara Women, which focuses on connecting female entrepreneurs.


As part of his work as chairman of the UN Foundation’s Global Entrepreneurs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/entrepreneurs> Council, Thakkar will 
travel to refugee camps in Jordan in August. He is going to seek examples of 
entrepreneurialism that he has heard are growing in the camps, such as gown 
rental businesses, barbers and hairdressers.


“Being a refugee makes you more hungry. And it’s a different type of hunger, 
it’s not like ‘yeah yeah, I want to be an entrepreneur’. It’s like, ‘I need to 
make a living. I need to survive’. That puts you in a very different mindset.”


Emma Featherstone’s flights and accommodation were paid for by Dell, who 
hosted a conference in Cape Town to discuss howwomen can grow their businesses

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 