
Asli Erdoğan, one of Turkey’s most celebrated novelists, was released from 
jail Thursday, looking exhausted after 132 days of pre-trial detention, 
declaring that she could barely believe she was free.

The writer has been in prison on charges of terror propaganda on account of 
her links to a pro-Kurdish newspaper, in a case that has caused an 
international outcry over freedom of expression.

Cafeteria manager jailed for insulting Turkish president, lawyer says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/26/cafeteria-manager-jailed-insulting-turkish-president-recep-tayyip-erdogan>
“I do not realise it yet, I am in shock,” she said, appearing drawn, tired and 
emotional in front of the Bakirkoy women’s prison in Istanbul.

“They take you and throw you into a hole. It’s very hard, it’s like I’m still 
inside,” she added, before bursting into tears.

An Istanbul court ordered that Erdoğan and Necmiye Alpay, an internationally 
prominent linguist, be released.

The pair were taken into custody in August as part of a probe into the now 
shut-down newspaper Ozgur Gundem, which Turkish authorities say is a mouthpiece 
for the outlawed Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK).

But the fate of Erdoğan and Alpay, author of widely praised translations of 
Western novels into Turkish who had been in custody for 120 days, is still 
unclear.

The case against them remains active and they could still face life 
imprisonment if convicted. The next hearing is scheduled for 2 January.

Asked by reporters what she had missed most in prison, Erdoğan – no relation 
to President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, the name is common inTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> – replied without hesitation: “The 
sea... dancing, ballet, classical music.”

Turks and Kurds are trapped in a spiral that suits the hardliners | Elif Shafak
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/17/turks-and-kurds-are-trapped-spiral-suits-hardliners-elif-shafak>
The court also ordered the release of Ozgur Gundem’s editorial director Zana 
Kaya.


But it then emerged that a leading investigative journalist had been detained 
in a separate case. Ahmet Sik is accused of making “terror propaganda” and 
denigrating the Turkish Republic, the judicial authorities and police said, 
according to state-run Anadolu news agency.

He was arrested over a succession of tweets about the PKK, as well as articles 
for the Cumhuriyet opposition daily that criticised Turkish secret services.

Earlier Thursday, in her defence statement to a packed court in Istanbul, 
Erdoğan ridiculed the charges against her. “I will defend myself as if the laws 
existed,” she said, quoted by the Hurriyet daily.

“I am a writer and the purpose of my existence is to tell a story.”

Erdoğan, 49, and Alpay, 70, and seven other suspects – who could also face 
life in jail – linked to Ozgur Gundem have been charged in the case but not all 
have been under arrest.

Erdoğan has published several well-received novels including “The City in 
Crimson Cloak”, which has also been translated into English.

“They are being prosecuted for writings and thoughts that are in no way 
reprehensible according to Turkish law,” said Baris Yarkadas, Istanbul MP for 
the opposition Republican People’s Party (CHP).

Activists worry about a drastically worsening climate for journalists in 
Turkey, in particular since the state of emergency imposed in the wake of the 
July 15 coup attempt to topple President Erdoğan.

According to the P24 Platform for Independent Journalism, 118 journalists have 
been arrested during the state of emergency, 80 of them within the coup probe.

The author of several books, Sik is one of the best-known journalists in the 
country and had already endured a lengthy spell in jail from 2011-2012.


He was imprisoned for 375 days during the investigation into the so-called 
Ergenekon alleged coup plot against the government.

That case was strongly supported by Fethullah Gulen, the US-based cleric whom 
Ankara blames for the failed putsch against President Erdogan.

But the convictions were quashed and suspects released amid accusations Gulen 
had perverted the process.

He has won numerous awards, including the UNESCO/Guillermo Cano World Press 
Freedom Prize in 2014.

Sik’s books include one of the few full-scale investigations into the group of 
Gulen, the former ally of President Erdogan and now his arch foe.

The book, called “The Imam’s Army” examines how Gulen supporters infiltrated 
the Turkish bureaucracy and built up an alliance with the ruling party that has 
since collapsed.

The book had not even been published when Sik was arrested in March 2011 and 
was eventually released in November 2011 under the title “000Kitap” 
(“000Book”), causing a sensation with its author still in jail.
 