
Julie Ward, poet, theatre-worker and former community activist, is the Labour 
and Co-op MEP for the north west of England - a huge region, covering 7 million 
people.

How did you get your job?

When the coalition government was elected in 2010 I could see that arts, 
libraries, the youth service and everything else I cared about was going to be 
cut and so I joined the Labour Party as I wanted to stand up for social 
justice. I had been running European youth exchange projects and somehow I got 
onto the list to stand as an MEP. I was elected in May 2014.

What’s a typical day?

Four days a week, I work in the European parliament, and then from Friday to 
Sunday I work in my constituency. In the parliament, I go in very early, for 
example I’m involved with the European Internet Forum, working on issues such 
as child safety, so I might have a breakfast meeting about those concerns. 
After that, there’s more meetings with staff, colleagues, trade unions, 
business leaders, members of civil society and so on. I might spend time 
contributing to policy papers such as our current LGBTI strategy, and then 
there will be committee meetings. I’m on three committees and the meetings are 
generally three sessions over two days, each three hours long. In the 
parliament we have very direct contact with people who come to give testimonies 
about some of the crises we’re experiencing, such as the refugee crisis. It’s 
pretty much walking, talking, eating, policy-making. It’s a lot of peanuts, 
olives and crisps, and missed lunch breaks.

What are the best and worst parts of your job?

The best is being able to be a voice for people who have no voice - I choose 
to do a lot of work on human rights, especially women’s rights, children’s 
rights and the rights of people with disabilities. When I was selected, no-one 
knew who I was, but I have committed to being an accessible public servant. I’m 
very reachable in real life and on social media. I also love working with 
people from 28 different countries and finding common ground through consensus 
politics. This is grown-up politics. It’s very energising.

The worst is seeing the ‘grandstanding’ that happens in the plenary. A lot of 
MEPs who don’t believe in the European project love being on film. They make 
sure they speak in the parliament and then they tweet that out as though this 
is the real job of a parliamentarian, but actually the real work is done in the 
committees and the Eurosceptics hardly ever attend the committees. The next 
worst thing is that you can’t get a decent cup of tea in Brussels. I’ve given 
up drinking tea there.

Can you give us examples of any common stereotypes and misunderstandings?

One of the stereotypes of an MEP is that we are remote and distant. I’m trying 
to change that. When I’m not at the parliament in Europe, I’m often in my 
constituency. I spoke on a platform with Jeremy Corbyn on May Day in Burnley, 
for instance, and the day before that I spent four hours knocking on doors in 
the rain, ahead of local elections.

In the UK we have neglected to tell the true story about Europe, about how and 
why the EU was created to maintain peace after the carnage of two world wars. 
Yes the EU is a trading bloc but you can’t trade with people if you are 
fighting them so trade ensures peaceful relations. We are ambassadors for our 
regions and help bring jobs and investment to the areas that need it most.

We need a big public education project about what it means to be European. 
Getting artists and entertainers to make a song and dance about the EU, is 
probably the best solution as people need to fall in love with the European 
Project again.

Did you have any expectations about life as an MEP which have changed since 
you’ve been elected?

I thought I would be able to go home regularly but that isn’t possible when 
you represent a huge constituency like mine which stretches from Crewe to 
Carlisle. I have a little house in a tiny village high up in the North Pennine 
hills with no public transport nearby so I can only manage about one night at 
home every 3 weeks. I also do a lot of international work which I did not 
expect, meeting parliamentarians from other countries outside the EU. For 
example I have some responsibilities for relations with Bosnia Herzegovina and 
Kosovo, and last year I spoke in the French Senate on behalf of Rwandan 
genocide victims. The biggest surprise was all the human rights work that has 
come my way. I was able to get a Bahraini blogger released from prison because 
of my actions and have criticised other governments that are closing down civil 
society.

How do we get more women into the field?

European politics is grownup and female-friendly. Over half the Labour MEPs 
are women and we have a female leader, Glenis Willmott. So I think Europe is 
where it’s at for women, because consensus politics is modern, progressive, 
courteous, peaceful and pragmatic politics, absolutely concerned with finding 
common ground rather than with differences. I wish we had a similar system in 
the UK. I think that the male-dominated, braying, shouty, adversarial style of 
politics in the UK is very off-putting for women, so we need to challenge the 
actual culture of the political class.
 