
It is well-documented that Stem (science, technology, engineering and maths) 
industries are not fiercely populated by women. According to theWomen’s 
Engineering Society <http://www.wes.org.uk/>, just 6% of the engineering 
workforce is female. At Brompton Bicycle we have experienced a similar struggle 
to find female engineers: at the moment we have one in a team of 17 – something 
we are keen to change.

A balanced team is imperative for any business. For most, ourselves included, 
50% of the target market is female. It makes no sense to have a workforce that 
is predominantly made up of men catering for a consumer base made up of both 
sexes in equal parts. We are aware that we are in danger of missing out on 
innovations that could make a huge difference to our customers.

But, as a business, how do you kick the image of an industry stereotypically 
made up of men in greasy boiler suits and become more appealing to those women 
who you need on your side? This is an industry-wide issue, in which education 
plays a significant role. However I believe that there are steps that 
individual businesses can take towards building a workforce that truly 
represents their customer base.

Build from the ground up

Be proactive in encouraging more women into the industry. This all begins with 
education. Devise initiatives that help to position engineering as an 
attractive career choice for the young generations and raise awareness about 
the excitement and benefits a career in the industry can offer.

Get local schools into your factories; show them the modern environment that 
engineers now work in and that there are opportunities for girls to break out 
of the confines of stereotypical career choices.

Brompton Bicycle opens its doors to students as part of our industry insight 
days. All of the activities available offer a genuine insight into our 
business, so students gain a solid understanding of where they could fit in and 
how engineering embraces our modern world; how it grabs and excites people to 
make a difference.

Employ a mentoring scheme

It is extremely important to support people through their careers, 
particularly when they are in a minority. For a mentee, the gift of having 
someone to listen, advise, challenge and nurture productive thinking is 
invaluable. It also gives mentors a great opportunity to see the business and 
industry through a fresh pair of eyes and understand the challenges faced by 
women.

Set the tone from the top

Whether it’s your intention or not, you create your company culture and set 
the tone from the top. Your policies need to be fair, consistent and 
well-communicated, while senior figures must be vocal about their desire for a 
gender-balanced workplace.


We turned to Investors in People (IIP) <https://www.investorsinpeople.com//> 
to help guide us through this, reinforce our policies to get the best from all 
of our people. Working with the IIP has really helped people to feel there’s a 
consistent approach across the workplace, as we make decisions using the same 
guidelines and standards.

Be flexible

Offer flexible working options not just to working mothers but to anyone with 
caring responsibilities. This will help crush many of the barriers that are 
preventing women from entering and remaining in work while caregiving.

A recent study <http://timewisefoundation.org.uk/our-work/research/>, 
conducted by Timewise and the Joseph Rowntree Foundation, found that 46% of 
workers want to work flexibly to fit in with modern life, but few jobs offer 
this.

Provide strong female role models

Pressure group Sciencegrrl found that when asked to name a female role model 
in engineering and science,one in 10 people named male engineer Isambard 
Kingdom Brunel 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/jobs/10735201/Lack-of-female-role-models-highlighted-as-one-in-10-name-man-when-asked-for-famous-women-engineer-or-scientist.html>
.

There is clearly a strong need for more female role models in Stem. To 
encourage more women to join your organisation, make sure you shout about those 
who are at the top levels. This communicates to potential employees that you 
value equality and that your definition of a leader isn’t bound by gender.

Strategic business benefits

We are aware of the skills deficit in the UK and understand that to thrive, we 
must find a successionary pool of new talent and expertise. By making a name 
for ourselves as an educational advocate at the strategic and national level we 
aim to ensure a pipeline for the future of engineers, female and male.

There is no one-size-fits all solution, but businesses that pay attention to 
how they manage their people for inclusivity will reap the financial benefits 
in the longer term.
 