
How did you get your job? 
I’m self-employed, but started out working in a glass blowing studio. I got in 
touch with the studio to ask for a two-week work experience, which turned into 
a year-long placement. I did this alongside a part-time job in customer service 
and I eventually got a paid role which varied from two to six days a week 
depending on the workload of the studio. After five years I decided to bite the 
bullet and make my own work.

What does a typical day involve?
No day is the same. I can be doing any of the following; blowing, cutting, 
grinding or polishing glass, doing design work on a computer, emailing people, 
meeting with clients, sketching ideas and designs, experimenting with ideas. 
The ideal is to be making and being engaged in the creative side all the time.

What are the best and worst parts of your job?
The best part is the making. I love glass. I love making glass. I adore being 
sat on the bench working with the hot glass. The next best thing is having 
completed a piece and being happy with it, even better than that, a client 
being happy with it and paying for it.

The worst part is all the admin involved. I didn’t realise that I’d have to do 
so much when I started out. Constant emailing, application writing and computer 
based work. It’s my least favourite part, as it takes me away from my creative 
time.

Can you give us examples of any common stereotypes and misunderstandings?
People often assume I spend all day every day glass blowing or other wonderful 
things. While this would be awesome, and yes I do sometimes. I actually don’t 
get to blow glass as often as I like.

Each day in front of the furnace is expensive so the day has to be carefully 
planned to make sure I get the best out of my time in the studio. There is a 
lot of time before and after the blowing or sculpting of a piece of work. 
Designing and redesigning, cutting, many stages of grinding, polishing and also 
engraving. And the whole way through the process one small thing can destroy 
the piece and you need to start all over again. It can be quite stressful and 
emotional, especially when you invest so much of yourself into the work. But it 
is so worth it when you create something beautiful. Particularly when it is 
enjoyed by others.

How do we get more women into the field?
To get and keep more women in glass, I think we really just need to encourage 
and support each other. Glass blowing in particular lends itself well to this 
as most of the time you need at least one assistant, who tends to be someone 
looking to develop their skills further. I have people that assist me and I 
still assist others. It’s the perfect way to work and support others as well as 
develop your own skills.

To support women and to get more in the field, we need to invest in those that 
are doing it now. To be honest, glass and creative jobs are not particularly 
financially rewarding and those that do struggle on, do it for the pure love 
and passion for it. The support that is needed now is financial.

I’m not saying just give away money. I’m saying: buy that beautiful handmade 
piece of glass, commission a bespoke piece for a special occasion, for your 
home, for your office, pass on the details of something beautiful you have seen 
if you think you know someone else will like it. Support for those doing it now 
means those that could be doing it in the future can learn from them.

You can also help get more women into the field by buying that beautiful 
piece! Not only will you have something wonderful, you will have contributed to 
keeping the maker doing what they’re doing as well as making it possible for 
the future makers to learn from them.

http://www.gemmatruman.co.uk/ <http://www.gemmatruman.co.uk/>


Talk to us on Twitter via @GdnWomenLeaders 
<https://twitter.com/GdnWomenLeaders> and sign up 
<https://register.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/> to become a member of 
the Women in Leadership network and receive our newsletter.

 