
Earlier this year, The Lie Tree became the first novel for young people to win 
the prestigious Costa Book of the Year prize since Philip Pullman’s The Amber 
Spyglass in 2001. If, like me, you were left hooked and desperate for another 
chance to slide down the rabbit-hole into the wonderland of Frances Hardinge’s 
freewheeling, distinctive imagination, you could do worse than A Face Like 
Glass.

As in The Lie Tree, Hardinge populates an enclosed, claustrophobic world – the 
setting is an underground city, a labyrinth of tunnels, called Caverna – with 
forceful, fully-rounded personalities. A Face Like Glass probes many of the 
same themes as The Lie Tree, including the silencing of women’s voices, and the 
consequent self-directed misogyny that can ensue. Like The Lie Tree, Neverfell, 
the heroine of A Face Like Glass, is an independent, resourceful and frequently 
overlooked character.

During the opening vignette, a character called Grandible discovers a child in 
his cheese tunnels. As many lesser stony-countenanced old men with hearts of 
gold in children’s literature before him, a wave of pity moves him to take her 
in and make Neverfell his apprentice.

Entrapment is a recurring motif (light is provided in this subterranean world 
by ‘flytraps’, predatory plants which depend on human breath to emit 
luminescence), and the novel’s inciting incident occurs when Neverfell 
discovers a gap in Grandible’s tunnels while pursuing a rabbit (in a possible 
sideways nod to Lewis Carroll), and escapes into Caverna.

It soon emerges that this is a world where characters are incapable of 
spontaneously producing faces as babies, and must be painstakingly taught a 
series of ‘Faces’ (the number and breadth determined by one’s social class) by 
‘Facesmiths.’ Neverfell, however, is unable to lie, because her face always 
shows exactly what she is feeling – she has “a face like glass”.

One of the most joyous aspects of A Face Like Glass is that, from a brilliant 
premise, Hardinge goes on to weave a richly textured world in which that 
premise fits naturally, and the reader is able to suspend their disbelief. A 
world of: Cartographers whose convoluted speech – worthy of a James Joyce-style 
stream of consciousness – is considered too dangerous to listen to for longer 
than five minutes; of True Wines which can obliterate and resurrect particular 
memories; of True Cheeses; of ‘Stackfalter Sturtons’ and an enigmatic 
‘Kleptomancer’.

An effective technique is the use of narrative voices. The existence of Faces 
means any character’s apparent emotions and motivations are opaque at all times 
– except Neverfell, into whose thoughts and feelings Hardinge allows the reader 
to peer. Intriguingly, Hardinge also occasionally lets the reader see things 
from the perspective of the tyrannical Grand Steward himself, making him less 
remote but more terrifying, as he possesses the proud, aloof indifference of an 
immortal.

Perhaps more than others, the fantasy genre lends itself to well-worn clichés. 
Fortunately, A Face Like Glass eschews and reworks any predictable tropes – 
except perhaps the recruiting of a fellowship of unlikely allies.

The motif of “spiders”, both real and metaphorical, is repeated throughout the 
novel, building a real sense of menace as the narrative unfolds. You are left 
with the nightmarish impression that Hardinge’s heroine is becoming enmeshed in 
a web of trickery and falsehoods. It is also far from clear who exactly – if 
anyone – is tugging at the strands at the centre of the web.

A limitation is Neverfell’s clear-eyed innocence. As well as creating huge 
sympathy for her, this has a powerful effect in terms of the plot, as Neverfell 
locates friendship and humanity in characters which the reader might be 
inclined to mistrust – indeed, it seems to draw redeeming qualities out of 
characters who are naturally selfish and cruel. In addition, by presenting the 
injustices of the world in the novel, in particular the demeaning treatment and 
dehumanisation of the ‘drudges’, through the eyes of an innocent, the reader is 
confronted with them as though for the first time, rather like the filtering 
through Scout’s eyes in To Kill a Mockingbird. Yet I found myself as a reader 
questioning whether this was believably compatible with the suspicion-drenched 
existence Grandible had imposed upon her, and her increasing doubts in her own 
memories. This is particularly true of Neverfell’s naïve navigation of the 
Machiavellian world of Court politics.

Something else a later Hardinge may have tweaked is the tendency towards a 
tightly satisfying conclusion – perhaps inevitable given how intricately 
plotted A Face Like Glass is – whereas The Lie Tree chafes against any neat 
resolution.

Nevertheless, it is hard to find fault with a novel where brilliant ideas and 
exuberant language detonate on each page like recalcitrant True Wines.

 * Buy this book at the Guardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/391271/>  