
A few weeks ago, I got back from my honeymoon - an, extravagant, once in a 
lifetime fortnight in Hawaii.

I know that I’m disgustingly lucky, and now karmically obligated to spend all 
subsequent holidays in static caravans in North Wales in November. The sun was 
hot, the sky was blue, and the people who got up at 5AM to reserve their pool 
loungers were reassuringly belligerent. But at first it was hard to unwind, 
even over a breakfast piña colada.

I found it hard to lose myself in my books and kept twitchily checking 
Twitter, where everyone was living ten hours in the future and being admirably 
industrious while I lazed about.

Is it time to stop giving so much of a damn at work?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2016/mar/09/is-it-time-to-stop-giving-so-much-of-a-damn-at-work>
After the first week, I started to breathe out. I’d just got into lunch beers 
and afternoon naps when it was time to get on a plane and come home. In a 
matter of days I was stiff, sleep deprived and sobbing in the arrivals hall at 
Heathrow as I tried to find a minicab driver who was claiming that we’d told 
him we were flying into Gatwick.

It was like we’d never been away. I spent the next few days catching up on 
work, bumping into furniture and sleeping for 16 hours a night, while people 
asked “How was it? Two weeks off - you must be so rested!”

We ask a lot of our holidays. In a week - two, if we’re very lucky - we expect 
to relax and recharge, returning rested and excited about our futures. But we 
usually end up jetlagged and resentful, with nothing to show for our trip but 
some weird European aniseed biscuits that no-one wants to eat.

In order for time off to be effective, boosting our health and our career 
prospects, we need to go away for longer. It’s time to reconsider the 
sabbatical.

Traditionally, sabbaticals have been for academics to embark upon a period of 
study or travel that will enhance their work. But I suspect that now we’re not 
working nine to five, but from emails in bed at 7AM to a quick late night check 
for anything that might come up in the morning meeting, our need is greater 
than ever before. But employers aren’t typically set up to give us big career 
breaks while leaving our jobs open. How can we make it happen?

My friend Becky, a 32-year-old PR specialist, got lucky. “About three years 
ago, I got made redundant from my job as a marketing manager. Even though I’d 
been talking about leaving for a
while to set up my own business, I freaked out, and immediately found another 
job in a similar field.

That job fell through, so, not knowing what to do I went to Thailand, planning 
to spend a fortnight crying and panicking on the beach. Three months later I 
was still there, and finding the headspace to start planning my future. Now I 
realise that regular resting and training is what keeps you excited about what 
you do. It’s really focused my mind and made me excited about my career again.”

Ria, 40, a gallery manager and curator says: “I was talking to my boss about 
dream exhibitions, and the shows we’d put on if we had the time and resources. 
It was a fairly fanciful conversation, but I talked about how much I’d love to 
put together something on contemporary art in Mexico, and I couldn’t let go of 
the idea.

We are working harder than ever and it’s killing us. We need more chill time | 
Gaby Hinsliff
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/nov/27/working-harder-more-chill-time-long-hours>
She was incredibly supportive, and helped me make a plan - I went out there 
for three months, finding pieces and doing some work remotely. I had to save 
up, and do some teaching on the side to supplement my income, but I had an 
amazing trip, and genuinely felt reenergised - I discovered my passion for my 
job all over again.”

It feels like we’re all working harder than ever, hours, we struggle to feel 
secure in our jobs and we’re at risk of burn out.

Working culture would have to undergo a seismic change in order to support an 
increase in employees taking sabbaticals - but the potential gains in 
productivity and happiness at work might make it worthwhile.

In 2014, Richard Branson announced <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business- 
29356627> that some Virgin workers would be allowed to take as much holiday as 
they wanted, based on a similar, successful model at Netflix HQ. His thinking 
is that as long as the work gets done, no-one needs to be in the office longer 
than necessary.

Stressed and exhausted: spot the signs of burnout before it hits you
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2016/jan/21/spot-the-signs-of-burnout-before-it-hits-you>
If you add up all the half hours spent sipping coffee at your desk waiting for 
responses to unanswered emails, the 50 minutes of your lunch hour that get 
coopted into someone else’s unnecessary meeting, the post 6PM “We can’t leave 
until the boss has gone” skulk, you’ve probably got a solid month that you 
should be able to take back.

We can’t possibly work any harder - but we’d all like the opportunity to work 
smarter, feel healthier and bring some true enthusiasm to our work. I suspect 
sabbaticals are the answer.

Talk to us on Twitter via @GdnWomenLeaders 
<https://twitter.com/GdnWomenLeaders> and sign up 
<https://register.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/> to become a member of 
the Women in Leadership network and receive our newsletter.
 