
In 1983, my girlfriend and I left Cape Town to travel to London. I had made 
the decision to leave South Africa a year previously, when I graduated from 
university and received yet another set of call-up papers to the army. In 1983 
there was a sense of things moving. The subsequent clampdown had not yet 
happened. The state of emergency had not been declared. Troops were not yet, by 
and large, occupying the townships. When the former prime minister John Vorster 
died, we had a Vossie's gevrek! (Vorster's dead!) party on Llandudno Beach 
outside Cape Town. Anything seemed possible.

It seemed perfectly possible, for example, to discard the life I had and to 
hitchhike to England, to be someone else. I gave away everything I owned except 
for my rucksack, sleeping bag, tent and stove, and a wad of travellers' 
cheques. Ostensibly I was leaving for "political" reasons, to avoid being 
conscripted into the apartheid army. But the truth was that I wanted to go - I 
had a sense of a bigger world out there. And so we did.

New Year's Day 1990. My girlfriend and I have taken the first steps towards 
creating a home in London by buying part of a house near Arsenal Football Club. 
She is attempting to teach me the basics of crosswords.

"Take 'Pretty girl in crimson rose'," she says. "Eight letters. What does it 
mean?"

"It means," she continues, "that we have a pretty girl and she is wearing 
something red, or pink. She is wearing something that suits her prettiness. 
Prettiness, girls, roses - they all go together."

I nod. "Got it," I say. 

"It means," says my girlfriend, "nothing of the sort." 

I nod again and smile encouragingly. I am keeping up. 

"That,"she says, "is what they want you to think it means. What it actually 
means is either the first word or the last word. What it actually means is 
'rose'."

Outside in the street, Arsenal fans are shuffling by after a game. It is 
already dark but I can tell from the suppressed hum of satisfaction that 
Arsenal won.

"So give me another word for crimson." 

"Red?" 

"Very good." 

She writes down R E - - - - - D on a piece of paper. She looks at me 
expectantly.

"And pretty girl?" 

"You?" 

"I'm not a girl." 

Outside the window a football crowd thins. 

"Belle. Belle is another word for 'pretty girl'. And then we put belle, which 
means pretty girl, inside red, which means crimson, and we get R E B E L L E D, 
Rebelled. Et voilà."

"Rebelled means rose?" 

"It does." 

In reading a crossword clue it is sometimes necessary to take a different 
approach. I recently, for example, spent long hours looking at "Hormone red in 
Lana Turner (9)". I even went so far as to look up some of the things that Lana 
Turner is purported to have said, including, "A successful man is one who makes 
more money than a wife can spend. A successful woman is one who can find such a 
man."

"Yeah, right," snorted my girlfriend, who was with me at the time, and is not 
a fan of the philosophical musings of Hollywood stars from the 1940s and 1950s. 
It was only when I took another approach that I got it. The other approach was 
to think of "Turner" as the anagram indicator: the anagram was of "red in 
Lana", and the answer was that well-known hormone, adrenalin.

At this time anagrams seem to me the poor cousins of the crossword world, 
although in fact they need not be. I am beginning to realise that the art of 
the anagram is not the process of finding the "other words", but the process of 
telling the story that encapsulates the words. "Girlfriend", for example, is an 
anagram of "direr fling", or "fling rider", or "rifling red", or a whole host 
of other seemingly unconnected words. The art of the setter is to take those 
unconnected words and bind them with his wit.

My next lesson in crosswords takes place in Chad in the summer of 1991. The 
person who teaches me more about crosswords here works for a British NGO. She 
has a copy of the Guardian, and is telling me that it is the crossword that 
defines the character of the newspaper. This is a new idea to me.

"The Guardian crossword is not," she says, "like the Telegraph. This is not 
only a matter of taste. It's a question of style and of personality. It is a 
matter of attitude, and of how you understand the world."

Many years later a managing editor of the Times told me the old newspaper 
maxim: "They come for the news; they stay for the features." And in particular 
they stay for the obituaries and the crossword.

I am not yet ready to form allegiances on the basis of obituaries, but I am 
interested to know more about crosswords. My friend says, "It makes such a 
difference if you know who the setter is. If you know that, you're halfway 
there."

The setter in this case is Rufus. Sitting in Chad it does not seem possible to 
me to know someone called Rufus, but my teacher seems to think she does.

"He's one of the easiest," she says. "That's why I like him. That's not his 
real name," she adds.

That night I look again at Rufus. I am armed with two things: one is the 
knowledge that he is one of "the easiest"; the other is that, if you know the 
setter, you are halfway there. A clue catches my eye. "Émigré beaten up by the 
authorities (6)". By now I know enough to recognise an anagram. "Regime," I say 
to myself, as I fall asleep.

This is where I date my beginning. 

In the spring of 1994, South Africa held its first democratic elections. Many 
years later I learned that the Guardian setter, Araucaria, composed a puzzle to 
mark the occasion. It was puzzle number 20014, and according to the preamble it 
was, "A tribute on election day to the fighters for democracy, especially 
martyrs such as 6, 16 and 3." 6, 16, and 3 were Ruth First, Steve Biko and 
Chris Hani, all great leaders murdered in the course of the struggle for 
national liberation. Other heroes of this particular struggle who found their 
way into the puzzle were Alan Paton, and Helen Joseph and Joe Slovo (who, 
touchingly I thought, shared a clue). Then there was the triumvirate who more 
than any others transformed the African National Congress from the voice of 
plaintive nationalism to the mass movement it became, and the party of 
government it now is: Nelson Mandela, Walter Sisulu and the late Oliver Tambo. 
There was also space for Cyril Ramaphosa, who led the negotiations that 
resulted in the new democracy.

The idea for the puzzle came to Araucaria late, and he had to telephone John 
Perkin, the editor, and ask him, as it were, to hold the back page for a 
"special". Perkin remembered the moment vividly, and was able to tell me both 
the puzzle number (20014) and that Araucaria had used Guardian grid number 40. 
Recently I asked Araucaria why he did it, and his answer was typically direct. 
"These were people I thought Guardian readers should know," he said.

He said this with strength and conviction, with the moral force of his life as 
a priest, and with a hint of anger, and it was only afterwards that it occurred 
to me that "should" in this context can have more than one meaning.

Crosswords tell stories. But who is telling the story? Is it the solver, or is 
it the setter? A good clue will send the solver shooting off into a variety of 
orbits, but he will always come back to the same point. In the end, all that is 
required is that he think of a synonym for the definition. How hard can that be?

For some years I imagined I might move to the US, where the crossword and the 
hard-boiled thriller were invented, but American crosswords didn't do it for 
me. The New York Times puzzle lacks the narrative quality of British puzzles. 
Its clues are too literal, its meanings too obvious. They lack also a common 
vocabulary, the difference between cricket, perhaps, and baseball.

In January 1998, the New York Times crossword editor, Will Shortz, allowed a 
young man to propose to his girlfriend by putting a message into the crossword. 
Shortz was a little suspicious when Bill Gottlieb called him. "At first," 
Shortz told me, "I thought I couldn't do this. I couldn't let the Times be used 
for something so personal. But then I called him up, and he seemed to me to be 
an earnest and sincere young man, and completely in love with Emily. I agreed."

"So anyway," Gottlieb told me, "Emily's doing the puzzle and I'm reading the 
rest of the paper and pretending not to know anything, and watching as she 
becomes suspicious. She fills in her name, and then my name. And then one 
answer is 'Will you marry me?' and she gets that. And then we had 'Yes' as an 
answer. And the clue for 'Yes' was 'Hoped for answer to "Will you marry me?" '

"And by then," Gottlieb continued, "she knew something was up, and that's when 
I asked her, properly, to marry me.

"And I said 'yes'," said Emily. 

As an art form, the cryptic puzzle has been appropriated by the British; they 
have written the rules in their own image. What appealed to me was not only the 
general idea of British crosswords, but the particular form they take in 
British broadsheets, the Guardian in particular.

I am not, for example, a Telegraph person. I do like, though, the story of how 
the long-time editor of its crossword got into trouble for this clue: "Outcry 
at Tory assassination (4,6)". The answer is BLUE MURDER. It is not, on the face 
of it, an objectionable clue. But it appeared in the Telegraph on July 30 1990, 
the day that Ian Gow, a junior minister in Margaret Thatcher's government, was 
blown up in the driveway of his home by the Provisional IRA. Under the 
circumstances, it is not surprising that some people took offence, although the 
editor's defence - that the clue had been prepared weeks before, and she had no 
foreknowledge of it - is not unreasonable.

How much greater, one wonders, would have been the offence, had the same clue 
been phrased as it appeared in the Guardian recently. "Clamour for Tory 
assassination (4, 6)" has a much more sinister edge, and leaves one in no doubt 
as to the political sympathies of the setter, and his presumed readership. 
(Actually that should be "their" readership. Gemini, the setter, is not one, 
but two people.)

Since it was crosswords that offered me a grip on the seemingly blank cliff 
face of Britain, I started teaching myself about them and the people who create 
and solve them. I was curious about how they worked, and I was curious to ask 
the question that had been bothering me since Chad. Can a crossword have a 
personality? Who are the setters? Who is Rufus?

I meet Rufus in a London pub. He comes complete with notes and anecdotes, and 
is very helpful. He was born in Wolverhampton in 1932, and left school at 15 to 
join the navy. When he resigned, he became an entertainment officer, a redcoat 
at Butlin's. For the past 40-odd years he has been making his living as a 
comedy-magician, which is, he says, "as good a definition of a crossword 
compiler as any".

Rufus is famous in the crossword world for the sheer volume of his output. He 
has had more than 57,000 puzzles published, at an average output of 38 puzzles 
each week. He has been cataloguing, first on cards and now on a computer, all 
his clues since 1963. I ask him about "émigré" and he is able to look it up and 
tell me when and where it was published (the Guardian, 1991). Similarly, I ask 
about "Pretty girl in crimson rose (8)", and he is able to tell me that it is 
not one of his. "But I did use 'Pretty girl in red and rose (8)' in the early 
1980s," he says, "and 'Rose, a lovely girl in crimson (8)' in 1997. They are 
all pretty much the same thing."

Like other setters, Rufus has several other pseudonyms: Hodge in the 
Independent and Dante in the FT. He shows me a letter (subtitled "my 
favourite!") to the Guardian dating from March 1992. It reads: "For me, 
Araucaria is the Beethoven of setters - immensely impressive, but laboured and 
heavy footed at times. Too many of his clues are tortuous and meaningless. The 
incomparable Rufus, on the other hand, is Mozart -- concise, elegant, witty, 
sparkling..."

Like all professional entertainers, Rufus takes the business of self-promotion 
seriously. He gives me a list of favourites, some by himself, some by others, 
and then tells me one that is not on the list, which he credits to the author, 
Ian Polley.

"Wrinkled old retainer," he says, "seven letters." 

I am some way off the mark. 

"Scrotum," says Rufus, with a chuckle. 

I arranged to meet the Guardian setter, Pasquale, in a pub near Waterloo 
station. Pasquale is a friendly, gentle man who works for Oxford University 
Press. Like Rufus he is known for his prodigious output, and claims to "set a 
clue every three hours or so" (including sleeping hours). I am eager to meet 
him because of his puzzles, but also because he is one of the few people to 
have criticised Araucaria in print. Pasquale's particular criticism is that 
Araucaria strays too far from the rules, and is sometimes guilty of grammatical 
unsoundness. He is, the accusation goes, prone to creating clues that could 
only be clues, clues in which the surface meaning is too far removed from 
everyday usage. That said, like everyone else he enjoys doing Araucaria's 
puzzles.

Pasquale is a setter on several national papers, but he also edits the puzzles 
of the Church Times, for which Araucaria sets. "I don't do it much any more," 
Araucaria tells me. "He keeps changing my clues, which I don't much like. Of 
course," he adds, "we have had a long-standing war over this."

Pasquale and I eventually meet for supper in a pub south of the Thames. I ask 
him about his criticism of Araucaria, and his face lights up. "I've got the 
prize puzzle," he says, "on Saturday. Have a look at it. It's my comment on 
some of Araucaria's clues."

The prize puzzle in the Guardian is mostly set by Araucaria, but sometimes 
others get a look-in. Bunthorne may have one a month. Enigmatist from time to 
time. Occasionally Paul. And now Pasquale.

"Do the puzzle," he says. And then, as all setters do from time to time, he 
has a moment of doubt about the clue. "It's a quotation," he adds, "a bit 
obscure. But it is in the dictionary. I think people will get it. I think it 
will be all right." ("All right" is an expression setters use frequently, as a 
euphemism for "fair".)

And so I get the paper and look eagerly for the clue, which is: "See cluer's 
use of rare, silly pseudo-lingo - absurd nonsense from 4 (10, 5, 5, 5, 9)". I 
can see the reprimand. Silly pseudo-lingo and all that. But the quote? I have a 
moment of doubt. If this is to be a good clue, then both the solution and the 
surface meaning must feed each other. It will not do for the answer to have 
nothing to do with "cluers" and their (alleged) silly pseudo-lingo. It must 
somehow complete the story.

And when I get it, of course, it does. 

The answer to 4 down in this puzzle is Chomsky. So we can put that into the 
clue: "See cluer's use of rare, silly pseudo-lingo - absurd nonsense from 
Chomsky (10, 5, 5, 5, 9)". Something Chomsky said, then, and an anagram 
indicated by "absurd".

The answer is COLOURLESS GREEN IDEAS SLEEP FURIOUSLY, an anagram of "See 
cluer's use of rare, silly pseudo-lingo". This, many Guardian solvers will 
know, is the sentence with which Noam Chomsky announced his arrival as a force 
to be reckoned with in the field of linguistics, the example he chose to 
demonstrate that sentence might be grammatical without being meaningful. The 
reprimand is complete. "Good grief," says Araucaria when I ask him. "Was that 
about me? I did solve the puzzle - I don't always - but it passed me by 
completely."

Araucaria is now an old man, but he continues his prodigious output of 15 
crosswords each month, as he has for 45 years. He is a stylist, and his 
reputation for fiendish complexity is matched only by his reputation for 
fairness, which is to say he will not knowingly cut corners in a clue.

Araucaria wrote the clue that Nick Smith in a letter to the Guardian on 
January 21 2001 claimed to be "the best crossword clue ever". Consider two 
pieces of information that would have been readily available to Guardian 
readers such as Nick at the time. The first is that in 2000, 13 years after he 
told it, Jeffrey Archer's lie about Monica Coghlan came back to haunt him. The 
second is that, before his subsequent trial and conviction, Archer retired from 
the public eye and took refuge in the Old Vicarage, Grantchester.

And so to the clue: "Poetical scene has surprisingly chaste Lord Archer 
vegetating (3, 3, 8, 12)". The answer is The Old Vicarage, Grantchester, a 
"surprising" anagram of "chaste Lord Archer vegetating", or as Nick Smith put 
it to me, "the most perfect clue, probably the best ever".

Why? Those who don't do crosswords may think this a small point. But those who 
do will know that legitimate 26-letter anagrams are few and far between. They 
will know that clues calling on such a range of knowledge for their solution 
come along only now and then. They will have experienced the tedium of simple 
anagrams. And they will know that, somewhere in this clue - and in the puzzle 
that surrounded it, for the theme of the day was English verse - a particular 
kind of genius is at work.

I asked Araucaria to re-create for me the process of creating this clue. 
Although he has now acquired a computer and may on occasion use it, he prefers 
to do his anagrams with an old Scrabble set. He spills the pieces on to the 
table in the sitting room of his small house, and spells out The Old Vicarage 
Grantchester before scraping the rest of the pieces back into their box. As he 
does so, I detect a change in him. From being a shy and quietly-spoken man, he 
takes on a mantle of authority. The set of his mouth changes. His fingers 
caress the Scrabble pieces and I notice that some of them are so worn that he 
has had to ink in the letters again.

"Lord Archer came first," he told me with a twinkle, and he removes from the 
jumble of letters the ones that make up the two words. "And he had been in the 
news a lot. I think they call it a flair for publicity." He pauses and moves 
the letters around on the rosewood coffee table. "And I thought it would be 
interesting to do something with Lord Archer."

But I can see that he is not really thinking about me, or about Archer. His 
mind is calculating other anagrams, his fingers dancing from one to another 
like a jazz pianist groping for a song.

"But it didn't leave me much," he says, a little affronted that he should be 
left with so few letters. Those that remain are T, H, E, V, I, C, A, G, E, G, 
A, N, T, E, S, T. "Not very much at all."

Again he casts his hands across them, mixing times and keys, playing snatches 
from forgotten clues. "At first I got the word 'teach' and I was trying to 
think what to do with 'teach'. And of course I had 'ing'. But 'teach' or 
'teaching' didn't lead anywhere. What have they to do with Archer? So the clue 
only came when I worked out that I could have 'chaste'. And I knew immediately 
that 'chaste' and 'Lord Archer' could make something interesting. And so I took 
'chaste' out" - which he does as he speaks -"and I was left with this lot." And 
he looks down at these letters and again I notice the twinkle in his eye: T, E, 
V, I, G, E, G, A, N, T. "And then I had it."

Araucaria and I look at each other, and I see that the look in his eye is not 
just a twinkle. There is something else there, a suggestion of sterner stuff, 
and a knowledge that he is straying into territory where only the braver 
setters go. He is making a political statement. He is delivering a reprimand to 
Archer and all his vain, dishonest ilk, and he is doing it in the most 
delicate, most imaginative manner possible. And in doing so he is giving rein 
to a notion of romance and of patriotism to which I do not believe Lord Archer 
can begin to aspire.

Some months later, after Archer had been convicted, a Guardian reader in the 
Netherlands remembered the Araucaria clue and proposed a new clue."Now that 
[Archer] has changed addresses" he wrote, "may I suggest an update: Where 
shaken Archer's 'I'm noble!' palls (1,8,6,4)". The answer, of course, is: A 
Belmarsh prison cell.

In the early winter of 2001, I decided that I wanted a puzzle about me to 
appear in the Guardian for my 40th birthday, and I wanted Araucaria to set it.

As a theme I chose "thrillers". I gave Araucaria a list of words. He got most 
of them in, but there were some he left out. He didn't find a place for 
"English". Nor did he fit in "previously undiscovered meanings", although of 
course the puzzle, like all crossword puzzles, is about just such meanings. But 
he did get in "hero" and "Sandy", "thriller" and "autobiography". I asked for 
Guardian grid 40, but Araucaria was of the view that this is a lousy grid and 
did not offer enough variety of word length. Instead, he used grid 28.

When Araucaria sends me the puzzle, it arrives in a form I have not previously 
seen. The clues are on the left-hand side of the page. The solutions are on the 
right, together with various forms of crossword annotation to explain each 
answer. "I hope you think it's all right," he says. "I think it is. I think it 
should be OK." Along with crosswords, Araucaria has long since mastered the art 
of the understatement.

My puzzle appears in the Guardian on February 16 2002, puzzle number 22445. I 
rise early and hurry to the newsagent, where I buy up the entire stock of 
Guardians. I take them home and spread one out on the kitchen table. To 
forestall a lurking panic attack and to make sure there are no typing errors, I 
quickly fill in the grid. It all looks fine. I am a little nervous, though. Now 
that I see it in print, I am not sure whether it will stand the scrutiny of 
thousands of solvers. Will they spot some glaring error that neither Araucaria, 
nor I, nor the Guardian editor have seen?

I am still gazing at it, with a grin on my face and a certain melancholy in my 
heart, when the children come down to have their breakfast.

"Happy birthday, Daddy." 

"Look," I say, "I'm in the paper." 

"Are you? Where?" 

They cluster round me, and I show them the grid, complete with my name. 

They look disappointed. 

"That's not you, Daddy," says my younger daughter. "That's a crossword puzzle."

Children have a way of seeing through things. 

My girlfriend was more understanding. 

"Nice one," she said, and it was. 

Nine days after the puzzle appeared in the Guardian, a list of the winners 
appeared. I called them all, to see what they thought. Three couldn't remember 
the puzzle. They send in 10 or 15 entries a week, and a puzzle is forgotten as 
soon as it is finished. Two thought it was great, but both immediately made 
self-deprecating jokes.

"I think that of everything by Araucaria," said one. "He seems to be head and 
shoulders above the rest."

"Isn't he lovely?" asked the other. "Everything he does is so witty." 

The former is 22 and studying mathematics. The latter is 76, and has been 
doing crosswords for more than half a century. It seemed to me entirely 
appropriate that this puzzle should have brought pleasure to people so 
different in age.

Talking to these setters and solvers, however, I realise that I still have 
some way to go before my range of reference points equals theirs. I look 
forward to the journey

· This is an edited extract from Pretty Girl In Crimson Rose (8): A Memoir Of 
Love, Exile And Crosswords, by Sandy Balfour, published by Atlantic Books on 
February 13 at £12.99. To order a copy for the special price of £10.99, plus UK 
p&p, call 0870 066 7979.

· Answer to crossword clue: Wit and wisdom
 