
There's a line in The Art of Flight <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1646967/>, 
last winter's hit, big-budget snowboarding film, when pro snowboarder Travis 
Rice and his team are showing their helicopter pilot, on a big map, where they 
want to be dropped – at the top of a remote peak in the wildest Patagonian 
backcountry, to ride some of the world's steepest, most isolated, and most 
terrifying mountain terrain. With wide eyes and a shocked expression, the pilot 
responds, "What planet the fuck areyou from?"

I'm kind of thinking the same thing about Travis when, at 5.30am on a dark, 
freezing cold morning in his home town of Jackson Hole, Wyoming, I'm getting my 
gear on and carrying my snowboard to the hotel car park – on his recommendation.

At the start of last season, at the time of release of the game-changing film, 
which took two years, 2,600 hours of footage (much of it shot with a 
groundbreaking 1,050-frames-per-second high-definition camera), and an 
estimated $2m, to make, I interviewed Travis, to get some ideas for the trip to 
Jackson I had planned.

"Jackson has the best free-riding in North America," he told me. "It's amazing 
and beautiful. But it's not just the mountains: it has a unique location and 
weather, and there's a really amazing community here."
 Way out west … the Million Dollar Cowboy Bar in central Jackson. Photograph: 
Frank Lukasseck/Corbis 
Unlike Colorado's and Utah's clustered resorts, Jackson is isolated, sitting 
at the western reaches of Wyoming, America's 10th-biggest but least populous 
state, between the Great Plains and the Rocky Mountains, near the Yellowstone 
national park, and the border with Idaho.

"Whistler is amazing but has crazy crowds, with that influx of people coming 
up from the city [Vancouver]. In Jackson, the nearest city [Salt Lake City] is 
four hours away. It's cut off so you don't get that influx," Travis said.

Even so, Jackson is a lot busier than it used to be. The first ski runs opened 
here in the 1960s, on a local hill called Snow King, right next to the old wild 
west town of Jackson. And while its few slow chair lifts and mellow pistes make 
for a fun, old-fashioned ski morning, it's now far surpassed by the Jackson 
Hole Mountain Resort, 12 miles north-west of town, which boasts 2,500 acres of 
inbound riding, 116 trails, summit elevation of 3,185m and a fancy lift system, 
plus average annual snowfall of 459 inches (11.65m).

When Travis talks about the amazing freeriding, though, he's referring to the 
surrounding terrain, in Grand Teton national park and its 50-mile long Teton 
Range, backcountry for which Jackson has become renowned among serious skiers. 
There are some very challenging lines, called things like Death Canyon and 
Apocalypse, as well as the famous Grand Teton, that involve touring long 
distances, vertical ascents with ropes and ice axes, and overnight camping.

So when I asked Travis where I should ride, to get a taste of what locals do, 
I was thankful he suggested an easier option: "The Pass. It's a really great 
place to ride if you don't feel like paying for a lift ticket. You just drive 
up to the top of the Pass, hike up the hill, and there's 30-40 slopes you can 
ride back down to the road. Then you hitch-hike back up to the start."
 The Guch approaching a jump. Photograph: Gemma Bowes 
So my boyfriend and I find ourselves shivering and stamping our feet under a 
starry sky at 7am by the side of the Teton Pass Highway, the main road out of 
Jackson towards Idaho, hooking our equipment on to backpacks as dawn creeps 
over the horizon. Many of Jackson's service workers live over the state border 
in Idaho, where property is cheaper, so hiking the pass for a quick blast 
through the trees is just something they do on their way to work, much like a 
morning jog.

One of them is Eric Henderson, "Hende", who shows us the way. We stomp along 
behind him up through the forest beside a popular run, Glory Bowl. After 
climbing for an hour and 20 minutes he insists we rest at the top in a little 
igloo-like hut, covered with snow and invisible from the outside. These huts 
are apparently dotted all over the mountains and used by local snowboarders to 
enjoy a beer or a spliff as well as to shelter from blizzards.

Our descent lasts just 10 minutes but is fabulous, with deep powder and no one 
else in sight, and we easily hitch a ride back to our car. Then we drive into 
Idaho for breakfast, because we like saying we're driving to Idaho for 
breakfast, and because we've heard good things about the pancakes and French 
toast atSun Dog Cafe <http://www.cafesundog.com/Sun_Dog/Home.html> in Victor.

A ski trip to western America is not like an Alpine holiday. In the forests 
around Jackson, encountering a bear is a real possibility, and as we sit on the 
ski bus one day the driver is radioed a message: "There's a moose lurking 
around the junction. Be careful!"

Short of a few gunslingers (though there are plenty here who look the type), 
the wild west is still seemingly alive and well, and it's not surprising that 
Quentin Tarantino shot scenes in his new film Django Unchained here. Many 1800s 
facades remain, and there are dozens of shops selling western antiques, Native 
American turquoise and silver jewellery and crafts (Cayuse 
<http://cayusewa.com/> stocks authentic Sioux fringed leather tunics), and 
Pendelton blankets 
<http://www.pendleton-usa.com/category/Home-Blankets/Blankets/1821/pc/1816.uts>.
 Banana pancakes for breakfast at the Sun Dog Cafe, Victor, Idaho. Photograph: 
Gemma Bowes 
In the Million Dollar Cowboy Bar 
<http://www.milliondollarcowboybar.com/history.htm>, housed in an 1890s 
building on the main square and a bar since the 1930s, western memorabilia 
covers the walls, the bar top is inlaid with silver dollars, the bar stools are 
made from saddles, and Hank Williams, Glen Campbell and Willie Nelson have all 
played. I'd choose it for my last beer on earth.

And then there's The Wort <http://www.worthotel.com/>, still the best, most 
historic, hotel in town. It was a once a gambling den, and has cowgirl-themed 
suites, mooseheads on the wall and live bluegrass on Tuesdays. The Wort family 
who created it in the 1940s are considered local heroes.

Jackson has always been a town of heroes, though now they tend to be of the 
wintersports variety. The earliest were among the Shoshone and Blackfoot Native 
Americans who hunted in the valley for centuries before the first beaver 
trappers arrived in the early 19th century. Explorers, scientists and map 
makers came in the 1870s, and bachelor homesteaders arrived in 1884, later 
followed by families. In the 1900s came the first dude ranchers, offering a 
"western experience" to wealthy east-coasters.

There have been rodeo stars and wranglers, mountaineers and adventurers. And 
characters like Paul Petzoldt, who brought the town fame when he claimed the 
(much debated) first ascent of the 4,197m Grand Teton in 1924, at the age of 
16, in cowboy boots; and the five women who ran the all-female town council in 
the 1920s with what was called "petticoat power". A touch of liberalism in 
redneck territory.

Today there's a strong huntin', shootin' and fishin' lifestyle thing going on 
still (Wyoming is staunchly Republican, and 96% white), and taxidermy is so 
prolific in Jackson that you might want to avoid going shopping there if you're 
a member of Peta – or "People Eat Tasty Animals" as the T-shirts in the local 
giftshops have it. They also sell stuffed arctic foxes, bears, hats made from 
racoons with their faces left on, chairs made from old guns, and even a 
Barbie-sized canoe paddled by three stuffed squirrels – perfect for the 
mantelpiece.
 The Guch, in Jackson Hole Photograph: Gemma Bowes 
But it does have its alternative side, with galleries, skate shops, 
independent breweries, and theLotus Cafe 
<http://www.tetonlotuscafe.com/Lotus_Cafe/Welcome.html>, a 
raw/veggie/organic/healthfood cafe where I have a fantastic coconut and cashew 
vegetable biryani.

There are lots of good Asian restaurants. Travis's favourite is Teton Thai in 
the resort village, where we have a most delicious meal.

"I love this place so much they wanted to name a dish after me," he says. "You 
know, like the Travis rice. But I told them it has to be noodles. I just prefer 
the noodles ..."

One night I'm invited to attend Goat (goatevent.com <http://goatevent.com/>), 
a networking weekend that's like a mini TED on snow. Among the charity workers, 
eco-activists, internet entrepreneurs and artists, Travis is there. He tells me 
about his website, the Asymbol Gallery (asymbolgallery.com 
<http://www.asymbolgallery.com/>), which sells graffiti- and skate-influenced 
artwork and boardsports photography. He's also created a new snowboarding 
competition, Supernatural, which, funnily enough, he has just won, and has a 
classy new cocktail bar,The Rose <http://therosejh.com/>, in Jackson's old pink 
playhouse. He's certainly making the most of his opportunities, and of living 
in a town with lots of dollars sloshing around.

For Jackson is an increasingly prosperous resort. Harrison Ford and Calista 
Flockhart own property here, Uma Thurman, Sandra Bullock and Justin Timberlake 
come, as does former World Bank president James Wolfensohn. We meet people who 
work from home, but in high level finance. The affluent are arriving in droves.
 Local hero Travis Rice. Photograph: Cameron Spencer/Getty Images 
Whether that's because they like visiting the national elk sanctuary, or 
because of Wyoming's tax breaks and complete lack of state income tax, I 
wouldn't dare to guess. But the laid-back outdoors enthusiasts who also live 
here, only on a budget, are worried about increasing property prices, and hope 
Jackson won't go the way of blingy Aspen, with its heated pavements.

For them, this town is still all about the wilderness. To explore it myself, I 
hire a guide, Brendan, for a day, to explore the off-piste terrain within the 
resort, hiking Cody Peak, Powder Eight, and Four Pines several times for steep 
and deep powder runs. (All these slopes are visible from the lifts, however, 
and could be found by following locals.) There is plenty of unpisted terrain 
within the resort boundary, but those who hire a guide are allowed to hike, ski 
tour or splitboard into Teton national park.

That the snowboarding skills of one of the world's best riders were borne of 
such incredible landscapes, figures. As Travis says: "The kids get real good 
real fast here."

Son of a local ski patroller, Travis switched from skiing to snowboarding at 
five, was backflipping off cat-tracks at 10, and has spent the past decade 
winning big air competitions and jumping out of moving helicopters for his 
films. He also had a helping hand.

Back in the early 1990s, when snowboarding was just developing out of the 
southern Californian skate-scene, one of the new sport's stars, Bryan Iguchi, 
or "The Guch", shocked his peers by announcing he was quitting California and 
moving to little-known, middle-of-nowhere Jackson. His sponsor, snowboard maker 
Burton, promptly dropped him.

The fact that the Guch now works at one of Jackson's Japanese restaurants, 
Sudachi Sushi <http://www.sudachijh.com/>, might suggest the story ended there, 
but the world eventually came around to his idea that snowboarding, even 
freestyle, should be about the mountains, not just the board park. As local 
guide Zahan Billimoria puts it: "The industry had no clue that idea had 
traction. But they were totally wrong. The Art of Flight shows the proof is in 
the pudding. It's borne from what Bryan started 15 years ago."

When I meet Bryan for a day's riding, he explains. "I came here in '95 with 
kind of a vision. I grew up in southern California where the mountains are 
featureless, so we decided we'd build board parks to do jumps, and it really 
accelerated the progression of riding. But my dream was to find a place that 
had natural terrain to ride, and I found that in Jackson. In the beginning it 
was just seen as this extreme, skiers' place."

Having visited on a school trip aged 17, he moved there four years later, 
after travelling the world for competitions and photo shoots,– though he still 
does that now, as well as the sushi.

"It turned out to be even better than I remembered, the unlimited backcountry. 
I had a vision of riding the mountain like a park. To be honest I might not 
have fulfilled what I thought the potential was myself, but Travis has 
definitely exceeded it."

The Guch spotted Travis young and became his mentor, taking him on his first 
trips into the backcountry, by snowmobile.

The day we meet, sadly, the powder has turned to slush, so going into the 
backcountry is out, but The Guch says he doesn't necessarily need to do the 
"biggest, gnarliest things" out in the wild. I follow him around the resort 
slopes, steep tree runs, natural half pipes like Dick's Ditch, parks and paths, 
watching him pull tricks off everything and dance into the air.

"I still have that skateboard mentality," he says, "looking for features to 
hit."

He likes doing a long line straight down, with "a couple of thousand feet of 
jumping opportunities", from the infamous Corbet's Couloir, a steep chute 
reached by dropping in from an overhang a couple of metres above. I proudly 
admit I did it earlier in the week. Travis did it aged six, apparently.

"The kids starting out now are going to have so much fun," he says. "When I 
came here it was a very small snowboarding scene. It's now my 17th season. 
During that time Jackson Hole has slowly been put on the snowboarders' map, 
largely thanks to Travis. But snowboarders were always the underdogs and I like 
that, the subculture. I hope Jackson keeps living slightly in the shadow, even 
though I doubt it will lose what it is. There's a lifetime's amount to explore 
here, and I love it like I did the first time I started."

I couldn't agree more, and so we head off for one more run.

• Flights were provided by American Airlines (0844 499 7300, 
americanairlines.co.uk <http://www.americanairlines.co.uk>), which flies to 
Jackson Hole via Dallas or Denver from £650. Accommodation was provided by The 
Alpine House (+1 307 739 1570,alpinehouse.com <http://alpinehouse.com/>, 
doubles from $145), The Wort Hotel (+1 800 322 2727,worthotel.com 
<http://www.worthotel.com/>, doubles from $209) and Hotel Terra (+1 307 739 
4000,hotelterrajacksonhole.com <http://hotelterrajacksonhole.com/>, doubles 
from $335. Snow + Rock (snowandrock.com <http://www.snowandrock.com/>) lent 
Gemma a T-Rice Lib Tech snowboard. Read more about the resort at
jacksonholehistory.org <http://www.jacksonholehistory.org>
 