
John Berger, one of the most influential writers of his generation, has died 
at 90 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/02/john-berger-art-critic-and-author-dies-aged-90>
. The Booker prize-winning author of titles including Ways of Seeing, G and A 
Painter of our Time helped transform the way people looked at and perceived art.

Artist, visionary and writer - John Berger is undimmed at 90
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/05/john-berger-at-90-ways-of-seeing-sally-potter>
Here are some of the art critic and novelist’s most memorable quotes.

Men look at women. Women watch themselves being looked at.”

Every city has a sex and an age which have nothing to do with demography. Rome 
is feminine. So is Odessa. London is a teenager, an urchin, and in this hasn’t 
changed since the time of Dickens. Paris, I believe, is a man in his twenties 
in love with an older woman.”

The relation between what we see and what we know is never settled. Each 
evening we see the sun set. We know that the earth is turning away from it. Yet 
the knowledge, the explanation, never quite fits the sight.”

When we read a story, we inhabit it. The covers of the book are like a roof 
and four walls. What is to happen next will take place within the four walls of 
the story. And this is possible because the story’s voice makes everything its 
own.”

What makes photography a strange invention – with unforeseeable consequences – 
is that its primary raw materials are light and time.”

The poverty of our century is unlike that of any other. It is not, as poverty 
was before, the result of natural scarcity, but of a set of priorities imposed 
upon the rest of the world by the rich. Consequently, the modern poor are not 
pitied … but written off as trash. The twentieth-century consumer economy has 
produced the first culture for which a beggar is a reminder of nothing.”

You painted a naked woman because you enjoyed looking at her, put a mirror in 
her hand and you called the painting Vanity, thus morally condemning the woman 
whose nakedness you had depicted for you own pleasure.”

Hope is not a form of guarantee; it’s a form of energy, and very frequently 
that energy is strongest in circumstances that are very dark.”

To be desired is perhaps the closest anybody in this life can reach to feeling 
immortal.”

The past is the one thing we are not prisoners of. We can do with the past 
exactly what we wish. What we can’t do is to change its consequences.”

“A man’s death makes everything certain about him. Of course, secrets may die 
with him. And of course, a hundred years later somebody looking through some 
papers may discover a fact which throws a totally different light on his life 
and of which all the people who attended his funeral were ignorant. Death 
changes the facts qualitatively but not quantitatively. One does not know more 
facts about a man because he is dead. But what one already knows hardens and 
becomes definite. We cannot hope for ambiguities to be clarified, we cannot 
hope for further change, we cannot hope for more. We are now the protagonists 
and we have to make up our minds.”
 