
The women's rights and gender equality in focus series of the Global 
development section launched in February 2014 to provide a specific focus on 
the pressing issues affecting women, girls and transgender people around the 
world, and the critical work being carried out by women's rights movements.
 Ford Foundation logo Photograph: Ford Foundation 
The series was made possible by funding from the Ford Foundation 
<http://www.fordfoundation.org/> and Mama Cash <http://www.mamacash.org>, which 
is also an advisory partner. The site is editorially independent of any 
external support.

Along with Mama Cash, the Guardian is also working in partnership with the 
Association for Women's Rights in Development (Awid), as we are united in our 
belief that the rights of women and girls are not only necessary in and of 
themselves, but that they are central to ending the challenges the world faces 
today.

The Guardian is solely responsible for all journalistic output. As partners, 
Mama Cash and Awid they will offer the Guardian editorial team ideas and help 
link the team with diverse women's rights advocates, organisations and 
movements.

About Mama Cash <http://www.mamacash.org>

 mamacash logo Photograph: mamacash 
Founded in 1983, Mama Cash is the oldest international women's fund and one of 
just a few dedicated exclusively to advancing women's and girls' human rights 
globally. Over the past 30 years, Mama Cash has made grants to more than 6,000 
women's, girls' and transgender rights groups around the world. Mama Cash 
brings to this site strong networks and connections to women's, girls', and 
transgender rights movements, from smaller, emerging and grassroots groups to 
larger and established organisations and networks. These are the voices from 
which we draw expertise, knowledge, and innovative solutions to global issues.

About the Association for Women's Rights in Development (AWID) 
<http://www.awid.org>

 Awid logo Photograph: Awid 
AWID is an international feminist membership organisation committed to 
achieving gender equality, sustainable development and women's human rights. It 
brings to this project 30 years of experience and a global network of thousands 
of members dedicated to building collective power to advance women's rights and 
gender equality worldwide.
 