
I recently read a piece on Harvard Business Review 
<https://hbr.org/2015/08/the-research-is-clear-long-hours-backfire-for-people-and-for-companies>
 that used Moby Dick as a metaphor for overwork. While it brought back memories 
of my college Hawthorne and Melville class, it also got me thinking about my 
own experiences of overwork, and why I decided to uproot my family and moved 
600 miles away.

Before joining my current employer, I worked independently in the San 
Francisco Bay area, where I was born, raised, and had deep family and community 
ties. A home office gave me the flexibility to be around for my daughters’ 
activities, from school to Girl Scouts and sports practice.

Professionally, serving on the board of AIGA San Francisco <http://aigasf.org/>
, writing for industry publications and working with creatives across the 
country fed my soul. In a nutshell, it was fulfilling.

When I began talks with what I thought was a prospective client, I had no 
intention of moving or working full time for just one company. I follow the 
news.More and more women are choosing to work independently 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/jun/22/working-parents-freelance-poll> 
in order to do work they love and be in control of both their time and careers. 
Not a day went by where I didn’t read articles touting productivity tips for 
freelancers and reporting on the continued growth of the freelance economy. I 
presumed that this was the best and only option for me.

From my seat in the bustling epicentre of Silicon Valley, with professional 
opportunity all around, the thought of moving back in-house, especially 
hundreds of miles away to Portland, never entered my mind.

So what happened?

I wasn’t looking for change, so I was blindsided by the opportunity. I thought 
long and hard, and then some more, about what this would mean for my daughters, 
for my husband’s career, and my own – not to mention leaving my tight-knit 
family.

While the decision to move was one of the hardest I’ve ever made, according to 
a recent study byResearch Now for Mayflower 
<http://www.mayflower.com/about-us/news/survey-reveals-families-relocating-for-womans-job>
 I am not alone. The survey found that the majority of women were willing to 
relocate their families for their job.


The prospective position was hugely tempting professionally. But I was 
concerned that I would be losing any sense of balance, and moving back into a 
culture of stress. Having covered agency news and advertising work for years, I 
knew about the long hours, the job-hopping, the burnout. No thanks. At this 
point in my life and my girls’ lives, I can honestly say there are more 
important things for me than to live and breathe work.

I spent two days at the company, interviewing the people I might work with. My 
last meeting with the global CEO sealed the deal. And by deal, I’m not talking 
salary or benefits. Rather, I saw that this organisation valued company culture 
from the top-down. It became clear that I could fulfil my professional needs 
and be present with my family.

I discovered, to my surprise, that going in-house does not have to mean giving 
up control – not when leadership values culture, focuses on results, and allows 
employees to control their workdays. It’s win-win for everyone—companies, 
clients, families.

I’ve realised that flexibility, new challenges and meaningful work are the 
reasons many women choose to quit an in-house job – but they can also be 
reasons for taking one.

The key is to find the right fit, which brings me back to culture. I couldn’t 
agree more with Lucy Jameson’s recent article, where she explains whyculture is 
the biggest advantage in business today 
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2015/oct/06/why-an-open-culture-could-be-the-key-to-business-success>
. “Why? Because it is the hardest thing to replicate. Competitors can imitate 
product and match price overnight, but culture takes energy, commitment and 
years to build.”

I’m happy to report that my inclinations about my new employer were correct. 
Culture is paramount to producing great work. Tuning out on weekends makes for 
better workdays. Acknowledging that we all have lives outside of the agency 
does more for workplace culture than a ping-pong table and free lunch.

And so here I am in the Pacific Northwest working for an agency. This weekend 
there are games to watch and hikes to take. Monday, I’m all in.



 <http://www.possible.com>
 