
After a youthful flirtation with television, a near-disastrous relationship 
with Hollywood and a failed marriage, the actor Anne Bancroft, who has died 
aged 73, fled the west coast and returned home to New York. It was 1959 and in 
her own words "life was a shambles ... I was terribly immature. I was going 
steadily downhill in terms of self-respect and dignity". She needed to reclaim 
her life and career.

Happily, it worked and within three years she had won Tonys for her Broadway 
roles in Two for the Seesaw and as Annie Sullivan in The Miracle Worker. When 
the latter was transferred to the screen by its author William Gibson and 
director Arthur Penn, she again took the demanding role of Helen Keller's 
teacher, winning the best actress Oscar in 1963.

This success relaunched her career, leading to prestige roles in the theatre 
including Mother Courage, Sister Jeanne in The Devils and Regina Giddens in The 
Little Foxes. There were film roles too, in The Pumpkin Eater (1964) and, most 
famously, as the seductive Mrs Robinson in the modish and popular The Graduate 
(1967). This movie, in which Dustin Hoffman made his screen debut, became so 
closely associated with Bancroft as a 1960s archetype that it somewhat obscured 
her subsequent career.

She was also famously married to the Jewish actor-director Mel Brooks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mel-brooks> whose mother, told that he was 
going to marry an Italian-American Catholic, replied "bring the girl over, I'll 
be in the kitchen - with my head in the oven". Despite these and other comments 
about a mis-match, the marriage proved one of the most stable in show business. 
It was also creative, and Brooks served as executive producer on movies in 
which Bancroft excelled, including The Elephant Man (1980) and the two-hander 
84 Charing Cross Road (1986). These and other films made for his own company 
redeemed his often frantic comedies, three of which involved Bancroft. In 
Silent Movie (1976) she - among other stars - glamorously played herself as a 
highlight of the film. Sadly, she was less well served when co-starring 
opposite Brooks in his lumpen remake of the Ernst Lubitsch classic To Be or Not 
to Be (1983) and by her cameo appearance in his dire spoof Dracula: Dead and 
Loving It (1995).

Bancroft was born in the Bronx to a working class family. It was the height of 
the depression, but even when her father became unemployed in the late 1930s, 
Anna was allowed tap dancing lessons, then enrolled at the American Academy of 
Dramatic Arts. Her graduation piece was seen by the actress Frances Fuller, who 
recommended the 18 year old for television work. Bancroft debuted as Anne Marno 
in The Torrents of Spring and when a popular radio show The Goldbergs 
transferred to television she became a member of the TV family, working 
steadily for two years.

Having helped a fellow actor with a screen test, it was Bancroft who got the 
call from 20th Century Fox offering a $20,000-a-year contract. It was to prove 
a mixed blessing. Under her new name Anne Bancroft she made her movie debut in 
Don't Bother to Knock, made in 1952 but held up for a year. Within five years 
she made 15 films, as various as Demetrius and the Gladiators, a baseball movie 
The Kid from Left Field and Gorilla at Large (1954). There were several routine 
westerns, modest thrillers including Jacques Tourneur's Nightfall, plus the 
dismal The Girl in Black Silk Stockings (1957). By this time she admitted to 
over indulging in alcohol and being unhappily married to someone "who calls 
himself an actor but whose real occupation is playing a rich boy". She was also 
in psychoanalysis.

The road back involved work with a vocal coach, regular attendance at The 
Actors Studio and study with Herbert Berghof. Plus three sessions a week with 
her therapist. Then came a triumphant return to acting, playing first opposite 
a difficult Henry Fonda, followed by the explosive and physically demanding 
role in The Miracle Worker. When the film version was announced, the backers 
wanted either Elizabeth Taylor or Audrey Hepburn, but Penn refused and budgeted 
it at only $500,000, shooting in New Jersey. At 31 Bancroft became an Oscar 
winner and in the words of one critic, "she left Hollywood a failure and 
returned a star".

Her subsequent career was far from conventional. Her intelligence and fierce 
independence ensured that she never conformed to movie stardom. Working at her 
own pace and inclination, she turned down Funny Girl, which subsequently made 
Barbra Streisand famous. She played Mother Courage on stage and waited two 
years for a new film that was shot in Britain.

Harold Pinter adapted the Pumpkin Eater from Penelope Mortimer's novel 
depicting the disintegration of a marriage. The rather cold, over-stylised 
direction by Jack Clayton could not obscure the riveting central performances 
by James Mason and Bancroft. Her harrowing portrayal as the distressed wife won 
her the 1964 best actress award at the Cannes Film Festival, a Bafta film award 
and the second of her five Oscar nominations.

In 1966 she took the lead in John Ford's last movie, 7 Women. It was a 
curiosity that failed commercially. The same fate did not await The Graduate. 
The rapacious Mrs Robinson gained her another Oscar nomination and the third of 
her seven Bafta nominations as best actress.

It was also a commercial success and she and director Mike Nichols worked 
together again on The Little Foxes. Then Bancroft, who had married Brooks in 
1964, took extended time off from work, giving birth to their son Maximilian in 
1968.

She returned to the screen in 1972, playing Jenny Churchill in Young Winston, 
prompting Richard Attenborough to describe her as "the greatest actress of her 
generation". Two years later she starred in the Neil Simon comedy, The Prisoner 
of Second Avenue - a welcome return to comedy where she was perfectly cast 
opposite the frenetic Jack Lemmon.

Her seesaw career took a downturn with the dull The Hindenburg (1975), in 
which she played a Countess, and hit rock bottom with the garish revenge 
thriller Lipstick (1976). She was, more happily, herself in Silent Movie and as 
Mary Magdalene in Franco Zeffirelli's mini-series Jesus of Nazareth. Her luck 
improved when Audrey Hepburn declined the role of the prima ballerina in The 
Turning Point (1977), giving Bancroft a substantial role as the bitchy rival to 
Shirley Maclaine.

After another long career gap, she returned to the screen with Fatso (1980), 
which she also wrote and directed. It was little shown and she was grateful for 
the tellingly elegant role of Mrs Kendal in The Elephant Man. This was her 
second film with Anthony Hopkins and they were reunited - albeit from opposite 
sides of the Atlantic - for the rather less distinguished 84 Charing Cross Road 
(1986).

She was busy on the screen during the 1980s, working little in the theatre 
after a disappointing response to Golda, another play by William Gibson. There 
were substantial roles in Garbo Talks (1984) and as the Mother Superior in 
Agnes of God (1985). She was an altogether different Ma in Torch Song Trilogy 
(1988), where an over-the -top performance was a mixed blessing in a high camp 
version of a theatrical success.

There was a touch of Mrs Robinson in her flirtatious role in the comedy You're 
a Fool Bert Rigby and in her mellower Kate Jerome in the television version of 
Neil Simon's Broadway Bound (1991). Throughout that decade she broke her 
tradition of long absences between movie roles, notching up a couple of 
appearances - often in character parts - each year. Amidst Hollywood's welter 
of juvenile, special effects-led films her warmth, intelligence and stylish 
presence became somewhat sidelined. She took the title role in the TV drama Mrs 
Cage and had a fun time in the oddball comedy Honeymoon in Vegas (both 1992). 
There were fraught moments in the thrillers Malice and a remake of Luc Besson's 
Nikita re-titled Assassin. In this she played the role originally created by 
Jeanne Moreau, an actress of similar sophistication. She was wasted as a doctor 
in Mr Jones, which director Mike Figgis disowned after studio interference.

There were further television dramas, The Mother (1994), Homecoming (1996) and 
most potent of all Deep in My Heart (1999) for which she received an Emmy as 
best supporting actress. There was a nonsensical desire on the part of 
directors to cast her years above her attractive self: she played a centenarian 
in The Oldest Living Confederate Widow Tells All and a great aunt in the 
worthily dull How to Make an American Quilt.

Among her gallery of elderly grotesques none was more triumphant than the 
terrifying Mrs Dinsmoor in the stylish updating of Great Expectation (1998). 
There were few such lush movies to be had, but she made a feisty, inherently 
corrupt senator in GI Jane and was ideally cast voicing the Queen in the 
animated hit Antz.

There were also documentaries to narrate and the inevitable personal 
appearances saluting husband Brooks and co-star Dustin Hoffman or indeed the 
whole history of American cinema in the AFI's 100 Years, 100 Movies.

Bancroft could always be relied on to add a touch of class to movies - 
especially if they had literary, religious or social themes and she kept busy 
with Up at the Villa, the factually-based Haven and Edward Norton's directorial 
debut Keeping the Faith. Some lighter relief came with the smart comedy 
Heartbreakers (2001), where she was played dual roles in a story about mother 
and daughter con artists who relieve widowers of their wealth. She played the 
third side of the triangle, belatedly revealed as one of the tricksters.

It was a reminder of her comedic talent - something that had been rewarded by 
a lifetime achievement in the 1996 American Comedy Awards, but which Hollywood 
had not sufficiently recognised during her long career. Perhaps one comedian in 
the Bancroft-Brooks household was considered enough.

· Anne Bancroft, actor, born Anna Marina Louisa Italiano, September 17 1931; 
died June 6 2005
 