
If you are a regular solver of the Guardian’s cryptic crossword, you are 
advised to click away now. If you have already solved it, then a) 
congratulations and b) pour yourself a cup of something soothing, if you didn’t 
do so as soon as you saw the name of the setter.

It is, to put it mildly, a surprise to see Araucaria’s name underneath a 
puzzle on Wednesday. This is a pseudonym known even to those Guardian readers 
who are not addicted to the paper’s puzzles.

Araucaria <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/araucaria> – also known as the 
Rev John Galbraith Graham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/2013/nov/26/araucaria-crossword-setter-john-graham-dies>
 – is the only Guardian crossword setter to have received the MBE and chosen a 
set of Desert Island discs. He crossed over from the puzzle to the news pages 
last January when he announced that he had oesophageal cancer.

With characteristic chutzpah, this announcement took the form of Guardian 
cryptic crossword No 25,842 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/25842>, which first appeared in 
1 Across magazine, and came with the special message “Araucaria has 18 down of 
the 19”. I found solving it an experience which was at first sombre, but 
finally cheering, not least because of the thought of Araucaria responding to 
the prognosis by looking for anagrams.

He went on to set a further 25 puzzles and died on 26 November 2013. So 
there’s nothing the least cryptic about the appearance today of a final 
Araucaria puzzle: No 26,427 is a memorial and was, as the rubric explains, 
“finished by a friend”.

That friend is fellow Guardian setter Philistine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/jan/31/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-philistine>
. Araucaria had completed a grid which, Philistine remembers, he “tore out 
carefully from a sheet of A4 while I was at his bedside in hospital”. He had 
completed a grid full of answers, but didn’t feel he had the concentration to 
complete it with the clues. So the two men did what setters do; they discussed 
the words(solvers look away now). Araucaria was delighted to have constructed a 
grid with a top row containing ADMIRAL and SKIPPER – both nautical terms, of 
course, and also both butterflies (the theme of the puzzle). Philistine queried 
a couple of entries: SHIRRALEE and IN SE. Not expressions we use everyday, to 
be sure, but Araucaria insisted that Guardian solvers would know them both 
already, or would benefit from discovering them in the course of solving.

(This is reminiscent of his puzzle No 20,014, a tribute to South African 
anti-apartheid campaigners including Ruth First, Steve Biko and Chris Hani. 
Araucaria described them as “martyrs” in the puzzle and explained that they 
“were people I thought Guardian readers should know”.)

I wondered whether Philistine attempted to write the clues in the style of his 
late friend. He told me that he did, but that the same “probably applies in 
most of my puzzles and possibly in those of many other crossword compilers”.

The most touching clue is surely the one which also gives the theme: 25 
across. BUTTERFLY is clued as “It’s what it does to another Rev (9)”. Our Rev 
is the Rev John Graham; the other is William Archibald Spooner, in whose fabled 
phrasing the insect in question might “flutter by”. Here a lover of wordplay 
expresses our love for another – in wordplay.

The emotional part of the process didn’t hit Philistine until he saw the proof 
copy of the completed puzzle. “It put into sharp relief the magnitude of the 
loss to the crossword community of his departure,” he says.

• This article was amended on 27 November 2014 to credit 1 Across magazine.

 