 Pakistan deserves and desperately needs a new start. It is a proud country 
with a proud people badly let down by successive governments, civilian and 
military. Deep frustration with this difficult history explains popular 
acceptance within the country of General Musharraf's October coup - the fourth 
major military intervention since independence in 1947.
Yet the military cannot solve Pakistan's long-term problems, and last November 
Commonwealth leaders strongly backed Britain's condemnation of the coup. There 
can be no such thing as a "good coup". To pretend otherwise would be to send a 
green light to generals waiting in the wings of other fragile democracies all 
over the world. But Britain never wanted to turn its back onPakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan>. It is too important a country. We 
have much shared history.

We are not seeking a restoration of the old discredited democracy. Rather, we 
are seeking the construction of a genuinely new democracy: one which can 
provide stability and sound government for the future. Only in this way will 
prosperity and security be secured for all Pakistanis, rather than just a 
select few. Only in this way will all Pakistanis come to have a real stake in 
the evolution of their national institutions.

General Musharraf says he is committed to building a democratic future. We 
welcome this. Britain is ready to listen, engage and provide practical help so 
long as real democratic progress be comes irreversible. Charles Guthrie, the 
UK's chief of defence staff, will be exploring these issues and important 
regional security matters when he pays a working visit to Pakistan this week.

But I must emphasise that it is up to General Musharraf to convince us. The 
British government will respond constructively, provided that he demonstrates 
by his actions that he is a military ruler of a new type, one who plans to give 
his power away to a new and better democracy. A realistic and publicly 
announced timetable is required.

The second most important factor is economic reform - not only about the right 
to do business but also enshrining and enforcing obligations to pay wages, 
taxes and debts. Without a strong economy any reformed political and 
institutional structure will, in the long term, be built on sand.

Maximum transparency and real accountability in all avenues of a national life 
are vital. Corrosive corruption has a become institutionalised, especially in 
politics and in business. This has to be eradicated.

 R eforms in the civil service, the police and the judiciary, and in the 
management of public and private enterprise, are essential for ordinary 
Pakistanis to have wholehearted confidence that their country really is being 
rebuilt for the future.

Britain still seeks to provide funding and other practical assistance for this 
reform process and to en courage international institutions to do the same. For 
example we are prepared to fund expert help in a fair voter registration system.

Equally vital is the spirit in which the law is applied. The tradition of 
"winner take all" must be broken. In guaranteeing press freedoms, government 
must be prepared to take criticism and to refrain from using its power to 
intimidate, as both civilian and military predecessors have done in the past. 
Any trial of the deposed prime minister, Nawaz Sharif, must be fair and open, 
not a show trial or a means of settling old scores.

We want to see regional peace, stability and prosperity within south Asia. 
This means a Pakistan that is at peace with its neighbours, one that avoids 
exacerbating military (especially nuclear) tensions and one that is willing to 
tackle terrorism. The recent hijacking of an Indian Airlines aircraft was a 
grim reminder of the shadow which international terrorism casts.

Pakistan must not involve itself in aggression or cross border terrorism over 
Kashmir, as it did in Kargil last year. General Guthrie will be underlining the 
importance of regional security during his visit. Britain wants to see General 
Musharraf resume the stalled Lahore process, begun last February by prime 
ministers Vajpayee and Sharif, to seek an equitable settlement to the Kashmir 
dispute.

We have no illusions about the problems that face Pakistan. But if General 
Musharraf genuinely tackles them in an ordered and timetabled manner, Britain 
will be willing to engage in a constructive way to help.

If he is genuine, General Musharraf will find us a friend. If he is not, 
Pakistan's future will be bleak.

 Peter Hain is minister of state at the foreign office and Labour MP for Neath.
 