
The taxi drivers at Geneva airport were doing a brisk trade early on Friday 
morning. “Everyone wants to go to Verbier,” one said. “Two and a half hours’ 
drive and then you find the snow. This morning, just after 6am, I took four 
guys who came in from Gatwick just for the weekend. The weather is good for 
business.”

Yesterday pockets of northern Britain were hit by heavy snow showers, while 
the south awaited the wrath of Angus, the first named storm of the season. But 
in European ski resorts, the falling white powder was being greeted with joy, 
as the continent anticipated some of the best pre-Christmas skiing for years. 
Verbier, one of Switzerland’s premier ski resorts, is not alone in being 
blessed with snow. Across the Alps, the white stuff is falling in rare 
abundance.

“It’s incredible, the best start to a season I can remember,” said Veronica 
Hamilton, site manager for the Evolution2 ski school in the upmarket French 
resort of Val d’Isère.

In neighbouring Tignes, its glacier opened on 1 October and the slopes below 
it are now groomed with real snow, rather than the artificial stuff they might 
expect to be using so low down at this time of year. Elsewhere in France, Val 
Thorens, Montgenèvre and Chamonix are among the resorts that kicked off their 
seasons this weekend, considerably earlier than normal.

And even these resorts are comparatively late to the party. Last week skiing 
could be had, albeit for a limited time and on a limited number of runs, in 
places as diverse as Feldburg in Germany, Zermatt inSwitzerland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/switzerland>, Senales in Italy and Austria’s 
Obergurgl region. There was even early season skiing in Scotland. The Lecht in 
the Cairngorms managed to open three lifts last Sunday.

Skiers will remember that two years ago the snow also fell early. But a long, 
warm, dry spell dented their hopes of it turning into a memorable season. 
Several major French resorts were even closed on Christmas Day.

Last season was even worse. Many resorts struggled for snow – real or 
artificial – until mid-January. A dry summer had depleted reservoirs, so the 
snow cannon had no ammunition.

“The start of last season was probably the worst one in my memory,” said Dan 
Fox, managing director of skiweekends.com who has been in the business for more 
than a quarter of a century. By contrast, this year’s summer has been wetter 
and temperatures in November have stayed lower. The forecast for much of Europe 
is for more snow in the coming fortnight. There have been huge dumps this 
weekend over much of the Alps.

On Saturday morning, Olaf Adamec, who runs the Evolution2 ski school in 
Morzine in France’s Portes Du Soleil ski region, was sitting inside a coffee 
shop in the town centre looking up at the sky. The heavy overnight rain was 
turning to snow and the nursery slopes were being bleached white before his 
eyes.

Adamec said the high-altitude resort of Avoriaz above the town already has 
more than a metre of snow on its slopes. “I went up there last weekend with my 
kids and it was mad. Everyone was up there ski-touring.” At only 1,000 metres, 
Morzine is rated a low-altitude resort. “We never have snow at this time of 
year,” said Andy Green, who runs airport taxi-shuttle service skitransfers.com. 
“By the end of the day, you can guarantee there will be a delivery truck in a 
ditch somewhere.”

Traffic problems aside, locals are convinced this is shaping up to be a 
promising season. “You talk to the old guys and they say there are a lot of 
berries on the trees,” Adamec said. “They say this is so the birds can feed 
themselves because it’s going to be a long, cold winter.”

Rarely has a strong season been needed more. This year, Christmas Day and New 
Year’s Day fall on a Sunday. For an industry that operates mainly Saturday to 
Saturday, this is a real problem. Few people want to travel on Christmas Eve or 
New’s Year Eve. But the promise of exceptional conditions might just change 
their minds. “The last two years have been appalling in terms of early snow,” 
said Frank McCusker, chief executive of the Ski Club of Great Britain. “If you 
were looking to go skiing in December or the early part of January, it was not 
a great experience. If it happens one year, people think it’s not going to 
happen again, but two years in a row and they get very concerned. This is going 
to give a tremendous boost to confidence.”

Another concern is sterling’s abject slide against the euro. Almost 1.2 
million Britons enjoy a ski holiday each year. If they take fright at the high 
cost, an already fragile industry will be left reeling. True, currency 
fluctuations are nothing new. “But it’s the speed of change this time,” Fox 
said. “The pound has gone from €1.40 last winter to starting this winter at 
€1.15, if we are lucky. It’s that change that makes people uncomfortable.”

Surveys conducted by the Ski Club suggest avid skiers will not be deterred by 
more expensive holidays. But around a fifth believe they will rein in their 
spending. “They will spend less on après-ski or, rather than stay in a 
four-star hotel, go for a three-star,” McCusker said. This is a gloomy 
prediction for an industry operating on the margins, having slashed prices as a 
result of intense competition and the emerging threat of Airbnb. “There’s a 
real nervousness around booking ski holidays now,” Fox said. “The big operators 
were discounting very early this year.”

A glance at some of the chalet deals currently on offer confirms this view. A 
pre-Christmas week in Verbier can be had for under £500 all in, including 
flights and meals. Chalet operators that sold holidays aggressively over the 
summer are now ruing their success. Having priced their holidays in sterling, 
they face a crippling spike in costs.

“They sold a lot of holidays against an exchange rate they are now not going 
to achieve, so they’re not going to make any money,” Fox said. “Hopefully, no 
operator will crash this season, but a lot of the smaller operators may decide 
to call it a day, with the result that the chalet market will become 
increasingly expensive.”

And this is all before the UK leaves the EU. Currently, most ski holiday 
operators effectively employ their staff in the UK and, under European law, 
second them to the country where they are working. They pay them a minimum wage 
that complies with UK law and pay tax in the UK.

But, in 2014, Switzerland insisted all chalet staff had to be paid the Swiss 
minimum wage. This took the minimum wage of the average chalet worker to 
£24,000 a year. “All the chalet operators dropped Switzerland apart from the 
high-end guys,” Fox said. Austria has followed suit with similar consequences.

Fox said: “At the point we say we are leaving the EU, the French can quite 
rightly turn round and say: ‘Stuff you, EU law doesn’t apply to the UK any 
more, you’re in France so you stick to French law.’ The consequence of this is 
that chalet operators are going to have a very, very substantial increase in 
costs. There is really a fear that the chalet model is severely at risk over 
the next few years.”

And yet in Morzine yesterday, as the snow fell and the town was transformed 
into a picture perfect postcard, the focus was on the season ahead. Ski hire 
shops, bars and restaurants were scrambling to be ready for the unexpected 
early start. The town, normally somnolent in November, was starting to come 
alive.Global warming, currency crashes and Brexit may be threatening havoc on 
the industry but, for now at least, the future can wait. There is a lot of 
powder to be found.
 