
A court in Bahrain <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bahrain> has ordered the 
country’s main Shia opposition group to be dissolved in a further crackdown on 
dissent in the strategically important western-allied kingdom.

The order against al-Wefaq marks one of the sharpest blows yet against civil 
society activists in the Sunni-ruled island nation, which was rocked by 
widespread protests led by its Shia majority demanding political reforms five 
years ago.

Bahrain, which hosts the US navy’s Fifth Fleet, crushed the 2011 protests with 
help from its larger neighbours, Saudi Arabia and United Arab Emirates. But 
ongoing, low-level and occasionally violent unrest continues to agitate the 
kingdom despite reforms put in place following the Arab spring-inspired 
uprising.

Bahrain torture ‘ignored’ by UK-funded monitor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/16/bahrain-torture-foreign-office-criticised>
Bahraini dailies al-Ayam and al-Wasat said Sunday’s ruling calls for the 
group’s assets to be liquidated and transferred to the state treasury. Al-Wefaq 
representatives could not immediately be reached, and government officials did 
not respond to a request for comment.

Brian Dooley, director for human rights defenders at the Washington-based 
Human Rights First <http://www.humanrightsfirst.org/>, described the court 
ruling as the “government’s single most repressive act of the last five years”. 
He said: “Today’s decision is a dangerous mistake, leaving no real outlet for 
peaceful grievance left in Bahrain. The kingdom’s government has told its 
people that from now on not only are you not allowed rights, you’re not allowed 
to complain about it.”

Authorities suspended al-Wefaq’s activities and froze its funds last month, 
accusing the group of creating “a new generation that carries the spirit of 
hatred” and of having links with “sectarian and extremist political parties 
that adopt terrorism”.

Abdullah al-Shamlawi, a lawyer who had been defending al-Wefaq, said at the 
time that the order came “out of the blue”. He has denied all the allegations. 
He and other members of the defence team pulled out of the case after the judge 
refused to allow them access to al-Wefaq’s offices to prepare their defence.

On Sunday, he referred to media reports of the court ruling because, as far as 
he understood, no one was in court to represent al-Wefaq.

An appeals court in May more than doubled a prison sentence against the 
group’s secretary general, Sheikh Ali Salman, following his conviction on 
charges that included incitement and insulting the interior ministry. Other 
activists who were not already behind bars on earlier convictions have been 
targeted in recent weeks.

Prominent human rights advocate Nabeel Rajab 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/13/bahrain-detains-rights-activist-un-official-criticises-repression>
 was detained last month on a charge of spreading “false news” and has since 
received medical treatment for an irregular heartbeat. Activist Zainab 
al-Khawaja fled to Denmark after being released from prison on humanitarian 
grounds. Her activist father remains imprisoned on a life sentence for his role 
in the 2011 protests.

Authorities last month stripped the citizenship of the country’s leading Shia 
cleric, Sheikh Isa Qassim, prompting protests by his supporters. Officials 
accuse him of creating a sectarian atmosphere and of forming groups that 
“follow foreign religious ideologies and political entities”. That charge was 
an apparent reference to Shia powerhouse Iran, which Bahrain and its Gulf 
allies see as a destabilising rival stoking unrest in the kingdom. Iran denies 
interfering in Bahraini affairs. Its supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, 
has called the move against Qassim “blatant foolishness and insanity”.

The situation in Bahrain is raising alarm in Washington. A bipartisan group of 
US senators earlier this month wrote to the secretary of state, John Kerry, to 
express concern about the Bahraini government’s targeting of peaceful political 
opponents and civil society activists, saying the situation could destabilise 
the US ally, spark violence and encourage meddling by Iran. A state department 
report sent to Congress days earlier found Bahrain had fallen short in 
implementing political and human rights reforms recommended by an independent 
commission in the wake of the 2011 unrest.
 