
Hassan Ali Salman is a stocky, fit-looking young man. But he flailed in vain 
as the police officers grabbed him, one forcing his T-shirt roughly up over his 
head as three or four others laid in with their wooden batons, dragging and 
pushing him to a line of waiting Land Cruisers and more helmeted cops.

Behind him, on a bare breezeblock wall, crudely drawn nooses encircle the 
names Hamad and Khalifa – in reference to the king ofBahrain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bahrain> and his uncle the prime minister – 
alongside graffiti demanding their execution and the overthrow of the regime.

The recent scene in Sitra, a short drive from central Manama, the capital, 
provided an ugly glimpse into the cat-and-mouse routine of protests and 
repression in this Gulf island state. Filmed secretly,posted on YouTube 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NNSOG1OuqPM> and distributed on Twitter, it 
exposes what Bahrain's western-backed government prefers foreigners not to see.

In the nearby cemetery lies the grave of Zainab al-Juma, a disabled woman who 
died in July after inhaling tear gas from a police grenade. The black flag that 
marks her "martyrdom" hangs limp in the hot, still air. Another local victim 
was Ahmed Farhan, shot in March, his brains spilling out of his shattered head
live on camera <http://arabrevolution.posterous.com/private/lqayCHomkt>as 
horrified screams sounded all around.

Bahrain is far quieter now than during its brief exposure to the winds of the 
Arab spring in February and March, but unrest continues. Every night cries of 
"Allahu Akbar" (God is greatest) echo through the villages of a Shia underclass 
that has chafed under the Sunni Al Khalifa dynasty since the country's 
independence from Britain in 1971.

"We go up on to the roofs and shout and then try to march to the entrance of 
our village," said Abu Ali, a thirtysomething accountant and former prisoner 
from Karzakan who supports al-Wifaq, the Islamist movement demanding democracy 
and equal rights for all. "The repression is getting worse."

Haydar, from nearby Diraz, described a savage beating, curses and threats of 
rape as he was forced to kiss the boots of the police officers who tormented 
him on 26 June. "They pulled my shirt over my head and every hundred metres 
they hit me in the face and kicked me," he said.

Captain Ahmed of Manama's police special forces unit insists his job is simply 
to "protect citizens" and that he and his men are reluctant to make arrests or 
use force. "If we catch someone they are in trouble," he said. "They can lose 
their job or be thrown out of their studies and that will be on their files for 
good. Of course we take action if they try to harm us."

The night the Guardian joined his four-vehicle patrol the radio network 
reported small crowds gathering but there were no beatings or shootings. Young 
men waiting in the shadows in Sanabis, part of a Shia "triangle of 
steadfastness", ran off when the Land Cruisers roared up, blue lights flashing 
as the police officers scrambled out, helmet visors down, to demolish the 
makeshift roadblocks, their gas grenade launchers at the ready.

"It's not just kids," a police lieutenant said. "They are organised quite 
professionally with co-ordinated actions in different places at the same time." 
Still, this is basically a public order problem, not a war or – despite the 
brave rhetoric – a Palestinian-style intifada. Ahmed hopes Bahraini 
municipalities will respond to police requests to remove the wheels from 
rubbish bins to stop them being used to barricade roads.

Central Manama is calm. Pearl Roundabout in the commercial heart of the city 
has been wiped off the map 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/mar/18/bahrain-destroys-pearl-roundabout>
, its famous statue has been destroyed and the only clue to its status as 
Manama's "Tahrir Square" are two or three armoured cars and a refuse cart 
emblazoned with the name of a radical Shia leader, Hassan Mushayma, a bogeyman 
for the regime and for Sunnis.

Yet underlying tensions remain. Pearl has been renamed Farouq junction, an 
epithet attached to the seventh-century Sunni Caliph Omar: Shia complain this 
was intended to provoke them, given their view of Omar as a bitter rival of 
Ali, the father of Shia Islam. It's one of the signifiers of doctrinal 
disagreements, dominance and prejudice that are part of the sectarian fabric of 
Bahraini life. Another is that state TV broadcasts only the Sunni call to 
prayer.

Sheikh Ali Salman, al-Wifaq's leader, prefers to talk of universal rights. 
"What Bahrainis want is the same as people elsewhere in the Arab world," he 
said. "The government succeeded to some extent in portraying what happened here 
as a Shia-Sunni clash, though it was less successful in convincing anyone that 
there was Iranian involvement. It also tried to show that the opposition were 
terrorists. But there is one basic conflict – between those who support 
democracy and those who want to maintain the current dictatorship."

Al-Wifaq withdrew its 18 members from the 40-seat parliament in protest at the 
first killings of demonstrators in February, but remains committed to peaceful 
change. Enemies dismiss its moderate image and claim it is no different from 
Shia hardliners such as Mushayma, who called for a republic to replace the Al 
Khalifa dynasty, launched a campaign of civil disobedience and destroyed a 
dialogue between the opposition and the reformist Crown Prince Salman that 
might – just – have defused the crisis.

The crackdown began in earnest on 15 March when most foreign journalists had 
been thrown out or diverted to Libya.

"It was an anti-Shia pogrom," said Hala, an activist who helped plan the Pearl 
Roundabout protests. "Arrests began at two or three in the morning. People were 
dragged out of bed by armed men in ski masks and their houses smashed up. The 
Mukhabarat [secret police] set up a Twitter account and named people as 
traitors so that when they tried to leave the country they were picked up." 
Hundreds remain in prison.

Dismissals of some 2,000 people who stayed away from work during the unrest 
began at the same time. The destruction of around 30 Shia mosques has sharpened 
the sense of sectarian polarisation.

Under pressure from the US, trials have been moved from military to civilian 
courts and two al-Wifaq MPs and a lawyer were freed at the weekend amid signs 
that more detainees would be released. But doctors and nurses from the 
Salmaniya hospital still face charges of occupying the building, hiding 
weapons, refusing to treat Sunni patients and inciting protests.

Sunnis talk of boycotting Shia shops and Shia night workers complain of being 
stopped by police on their way home. "Even among lawyers there are tensions," 
said a Sunni who defends Shia clients. "I am very pessimistic," sighed Jassim, 
a Shia taxi driver whose startling cockney accent is a souvenir of years of 
work at the RAF base on Muharraq. "Things are much worse then before." Shia 
journalists are smeared as traitors and fear harassment or worse if they cover 
Sunni events.

"It's been a big setback for all of us in Bahrain," concluded Munira Fakhro, a 
Sunni member of the secular opposition Wa'ad party, whose leader Ibrahim Sharif 
is also behind bars. "We will either come out safe despite our wounds or the 
situation will deteriorate further." Another middle-class professional woman 
reflected gloomily: "We sank very low. If we go any further people will start 
to leave. We were tearing ourselves apart."

Two things seem certain: repression without reform will not solve Bahrain's 
problems and its citizen journalists will keep the story alive. "They are doing 
our job for us," said a local photographer who works for international news 
agencies. "They set up webcams in the villages where there are clashes. It's 
hard to get in and if you do you risk being arrested or hit by a tear gas 
grenade or worse. If the police catch you they make you erase your pictures. It 
happened to me once. After all, they are the ones with the guns."

Some names in this report have been changed

• This article was amended on 10 August 2011 to clarify and attribute 
complaints about the renaming of Pearl Roundabout.
 