
Olympic gymnast Beth Tweddle <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/beth-tweddle> 
has had a successful operation on her neck after becoming the latest celebrity 
to be injured on Channel 4’s ski-jumping reality show The Jump.

The bronze medal winner at the 2012 Olympics had surgery to fuse fractured 
vertebrae after being airlifted to hospital following a crash during training 
on Saturday afternoon.


In a statement, Tweddle’s parents, Ann and Jerry, said they were grateful the 
operation had been a success after a “scary time”.

“The early medical indications were positive as Beth was able to move her 
hands and feet despite being in a lot of discomfort,” they said.


“At 8pm last night Beth was taken down for surgery where they took a piece of 
bone from her hip and used it to fuse the two vertebrae that were fractured, 
along with pinning them together.

Tweddle is one of seven contestants to have been injured just two episodes in 
to the third series of the show. Fellow Olympian, swimmer Rebecca Adlington, 
has already retired from the competition after dislocating her shoulder 
following a crash during filming for the first episode, as has Holby City actor 
Tina Hobley, who fractured her arm in two places this week.

Heather Mills, the former wife of Sir Paul McCartney, and The Wanted singer 
Tom Parker have been drafted in as replacements.

Linford Christie, Louisa Lytton, Sid Owen, Mark-Francis Vandelli and James 
Argent have all also suffered injuries during filming.

Speaking from her hospital bed in Austria, Tweddle added: “Thank you so much 
for your support and concern. The last 48 hours have been very scary but all 
the messages have really helped to keep me positive. I will keep you updated on 
my progress.”

Despite attracting attention for its many celebrity casualties, with some 
using Twitter to call for the show to be axed, The Jump’s viewing figures have 
fallen, down 400,000 to 1.9m for the second episode.

The outcry has failed to translate into complaints, with Ofcom and Channel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> receiving just 12 between them 
about Sunday night’s episode. As usual, Ofcom will assess the complaints before 
deciding whether to launch an investigation.

Channel 4 said in a statement: “All events are planned with thorough health 
and safety procedures in place and the competitors’ safety is always of the 
upmost importance.

“There will always be an element of risk when competing in winter sports but 
all competitors undergo rigorous training and instruction with health and 
safety experts present. No competitor is cleared to take part unless the 
trainers deem their ability as proficient.”
 