
A new European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> regulation that 
came into force on 1 May is causing chaos among holidaymakers heading to 
Switzerland who hire a car.

The rule bans EU citizens from driving non-EU registered hire cars in the EU. 
But withSwitzerland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/switzerland>, a 
non-member, at the heart of Europe there are problems at car hire offices: a 
Swiss-registered hire car cannot be driven across the border to France, 
Germany, Italy or Austria by an EU citizen (such as a Briton). If the driver 
behind the wheel is Swiss, that it is permissible – as it is if the hirer has 
come from outside the EU. One company we contacted in Zurich called the change 
“completely ridiculous”. Some are having to stock French or German-registered 
cars; others are telling clients they can’t leave the country.

Guardian Money was first alerted to the issue by reader Jackie Greaney from 
West Molesey. When she arrived at the Alamo car rental desk at Zurich airport 
earlier this month, she was told she could not take the car she had booked 
across the border to Germany: “Luckily one car hire company had a German 
registered car which we could hire – at an extortionate rate. This change in 
the law has not been well publicised. Can you tell me what law this actually 
is?” she asked us.

She’s not alone. Few car hire firms appear to know anything about the change. 
On the Holiday Autos website this week, hirers making Swiss bookings were being 
warned only that they could not take the car into Albania and other non-EU 
countries. AutoEurope similarly made no mention of this significant new 
restriction in its terms when we looked. When we posed as a customer trying to 
make a booking, staff at the Sixt office at Zurich airport told us to note on 
our online booking that we intended to leave the EU, in which case we would be 
given a German-registered car. They couldn’t say why.

The European parliament office in London pointed us to a document 
<http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32015R2446&from=EN>
 entitled Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/2446, which details changes 
to yarn and to sugar. Let’s just say it’s not exactly comprehensible to the 
average reader. A European commission spokeswoman said: “EU citizens should try 
to inform the car rental company in advance if they intend to … drive into the 
EU. It is the responsibility of the company to provide a car that complies both 
with customs rules and also with traffic rules … Car rental companies in 
Switzerland are already providing EU-plated cars for EU citizens in order to 
comply with the new customs rules.”
 