
Israel’s prime minister, Binyamin Netanyahu, has acknowledged 
<http://www.timesofisrael.com/netanyahu-admits-taking-40000-from-mimran-not-e1-million/>
 receiving a $40,000 donation from a French businessman on trial in France for 
alleged fraud.


The admission follows weeks of increasingly embarrassing revelations about 
Netanyahu’s relationship with Arnaud Mimran, one of the main defendants in a 
trial in Paris over an alleged €283 (£222m) scam involving the trade of carbon 
credits.

Mimran claimed in court that he had given Netanyahu more than €1m in campaign 
contributions in 2001, when the Israeli leader was not in public office.

Netanyahu’s office vehemently denied the €1m claim, describing it as a 
“baseless lie”, but did acknowledge receipt of $40,000.

“There was no contribution by Mimran to Netanyahu’s election campaign,” said a 
statement from the PM’s office. “In August 2001, when Mr Netanyahu was a 
private citizen, Mimran contributed $40,000 to the fund for public activities 
for Mr Netanyahu, which included media appearances and numerous educational 
campaigns abroad in favour of Israel, and made in accordance with the law.”

An Israeli justice ministry spokeswoman said that the attorney general, 
Avichai Mandelblit, had ordered an examination of Mimran’s testimony 
“immediately after he became aware of it.”.

In an earlier statement, Netanyahu’s office said: “Mr Mimran, who is on trial 
for fraud in the range of several hundreds of millions of dollars” was “trying 
to divert attention by means of another fraud” by accusing the prime minister.

The relationship between Mimran and Netanyahu has drawn increasing attention 
in recent weeks. Mimran was asked in court why he went to Israel 10 times in 
2009, replying that he had gone to meet the Israeli prime minister.


Investigative reports <http://www.haaretz.com/israel-news/.premium-1.714474> 
have focused on both the trial and the relationship, with pictures of Netanyahu 
as a guest on Mimran’s yacht.


According to a record of court proceedings published last month by the Israeli 
newspaper Haaretz, Mimran was asked about his relationship with Netanyahu. He 
replied: “He was then between things, he was the former prime minister and was 
waiting to be prime minister in the future. During this period, he would come 
to France and sometimes we would go together for a vacation in southern France. 
When he was in Paris, he lived at my place.”

That claim appears to be corroborated by a photograph of Mimran and Netanyahu 
on Mimran’s yacht.

Netanyahu and his wife, Sara, have become embroiled in a series of 
controversies about how their wealthy lifestyle is funded.A police 
investigation that concluded last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/30/israeli-police-are-considering-charges-against-sara-netanyahu-say-reports>
 focused, reports said, on whether the state was defrauded into paying for 
private expenses at the Netanyahus’ family home in Caesarea, including billing 
for food and private chef.

The Israeli state comptroller has issued a critical repor 
<http://www.jpost.com/Israel-News/Politics-And-Diplomacy/Comptroller-blasts-PM-for-Bibi-Tours-Affair-454841>
t on Netanyahu’s foreign trips, some with his wife and children, in 2003-05, 
when he was finance minister in Ariel Sharon’s government.

“Trips by Mr Netanyahu and his family, funded by external bodies during the 
period in which he served as finance minister, deviated from regulations on the 
subject and as such could give the appearance of obtaining a benefit, or of a 
conflict of interest,” the report said.

Among individuals who had funded Netanyahu in this foreign-trips affair, the 
report said, was a prominent British businessman. The Netanyahus have always 
strenuously denied any suggestion of wrongdoing.

Netanyahu left the prime minister’s office in 1999 after being defeated by 
Labour’s Ehud Barak. In 2002, he became foreign minister in then-prime minister 
Ariel Sharon’s government, and assumed the office of PM again in March 2009.

 