
Research has shown that when it comes to first impressions we have seconds, 
not minutes, to create that positive connection. As a professionally trained 
actor, I have learned how to use non-verbal communication to make an instant 
impact, and I have spent 15 years sharing the actors’ toolbox with people in 
the corporate world.

Many of the successful, confident women I work with had previously been 
unaware of the extent to which minor changes can revolutionise not only how 
people feel, but also others’ reaction to them.

So what can you do to make an impact? Let’s start with how you use your body. 
Actors are trained to use their physicality to tell a particular story. If you 
want clients and colleagues to see you as competent, powerful and effective, 
you should spend less time fretting about what you say and more time thinking 
about how you behave. What are your physical habits? Which of them work for 
you? Which might you want to change?

Being aware of how you use your body not only affects how you are perceived 
but also how you feel. Walking into the room with a smile on your face makes 
you look relaxed and confident, and also releases neurotransmitters such as 
dopamine, endorphins and serotonin, all of which help you feel positive and 
more able to cope with pressure.

So what can you do to perform with greater confidence when presenting, meeting 
a client, walking into an interview, contributing to a discussion or working 
the room at a networking event?

Get ready to take up space

“Alphas” will find all kinds of ways to take up space. Notice what the most 
confident, charismatic people in the room do. Copy their strategies and note 
what difference it makes to how you feel and how others respond to you. Try 
reaching out your hand further as you go for a handshake, standing taller or 
sitting forward with your arms on the table in a meeting.

I often see women standing with one leg crossed in front of the other. This 
makes the body imbalanced, making it impossible to stand tall and encourages 
tilting the head to one side (a sign of submission). Try planting both feet on 
the ground, standing straight and tall. Notice what difference this makes.

Posture doesn’t just affect how you are perceived. Before a high pressure 
event, take a few minutes to stand in a tall expansive pose. It will vastly 
increase your chances of performing well by reducing cortisone (the stress 
hormone) and increasing testosterone levels.

Lighting up the room

Turn your presence, focus and energy levels up to the max from the moment you 
walk into the room. At a recent actors’ networking event, I was fascinated to 
see that not one person stood to the side, smiled halfheartedly, or took out 
their phone to hide behind.

They used full beam smiles, strong eye contact, tall posture, “mirror and 
match” body language and firm handshakes. The room buzzed with energy. Is this 
because all actors are natural extroverts who never feel nervous? Absolutely 
not, it’s because they know exactly what to do to build rapport and express 
confidence. This is simply down to awareness and practice and you can do it 
too. Avoid those quietly bumbling moments while your audience gather for your 
presentation. Greet as many of them as possible, as they arrive. Get eye 
contact, shake hands, smile and connect.

Breathing

To perform well at work, conscious breathing can be a powerful tool. Practice 
at home: lie down with your hand on your abdomen. Does your belly rise as you 
breathe in and fall as you breathe out? It should, so if not, practice every 
day until it does. You have just created the perfect strategy for controlling 
nerves. Take a moment before an important event to breathe slowly, deep into 
your abdomen. This stops the flight or fight response in its tracks, enabling 
you to think clearly and perform at your best.

There are so many adjustments we can all make to change the story of who we 
are. My advice is to approach every situation with curiosity and a sense of 
playfulness. Keep asking yourself, “what works for me?”.

Sarah Perugia <http://www.daylightconsultancy.co.uk> is an actor, 
communication skills trainer and executive coach. She tweets@sarahperugia 
<https://twitter.com/sarahperugia>
 