
Imagine something that will change everything irreversibly. Something that 
will bring disaster on everything and everyone around you. Something that 
doesn’t need to be invoked, that shouldn’t be invoked, but that will still be 
invoked because, asTerry Pratchett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/terrypratchett> explains in Thief of Time:

Some humans would do anything to see if it was possible to do it. If you put a 
large switch in some caves somewhere, with a sign on it saying 
‘End-of-the-World Switch. PLEASE DO NOT TOUCH’, the paint wouldn’t even have 
time to dry.

Imagine also a world in which “democracy at work” is really just reckless and 
mindless chaos. Imagine a world in which one of the chief aspects of humanity 
is, as noted by Death (a character with so much gravitas that he always speaks 
with caps-lock on): “ARROGANCE, PRIDE AND STUPIDITY.”

Sounds familiar, doesn’t it? So familiar that reading Thief of Time after the 
Brexit vote is a strange, disconcerting experience for me. I’ve just finished 
the novel and I felt at times that Pratchett,who died in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/12/terry-pratchett-author-of-the-discworld-series-dies-aged-66>
, must have foreseen our current sad story. But it also felt like he was 
bringing good news. Alongside a few stern words about our collective idiocy, 
the great writer had a message of hope. Someone in Thief of Time does 
inevitably push that awful button – which in fact concerns a clock that traps 
time rather than cuing Article 50– buthe reassures us with: “We can learn. 
That’s how humans become humans.” We may do bad things, but there’s also 
something about humanity that helps us go on.

Happy birthday Terry Pratchett: how well do you know his books? – quiz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/28/happy-birthday-terry-pratchett-how-well-do-you-know-his-books-quiz>
It’s a comforting thought. But even without my current political obsessions 
and fears, I’m certain that I’d find other kinds of solace in this wonderful 
novel. Pratchett understood human nature, for better or for worse. I imagine 
future generations will be seeing their own mistakes in this novel, just as 
clearly as I’ve seen our own. And I find such thoughts comforting: there’s 
nothing new about folly. Humans have always got it wrong, but we’ve generally 
muddled through too.

There are other reasons to find hope in Thief of Time, chief among them that 
it’s a delight to read. The story is as complicated, daft, hilarious and 
satisfying as vintage PG Wodehouse: part kung fu epic, part philosophical 
novel, part mind-bending experiment with chaos theory (and a piss-take of those 
three things). Pratchett has an admirable ability to land home truths, be very 
silly and also very wise all in one go:

Wen considered the nature of time and understood the universe that is, instant 
by instant, recreated anew. Therefore, he understood, there is in truth no 
past, only a memory of the past. Blink your eyes and the world you see next did 
not exist when you closed them. Therefore, he said, the only appropriate state 
of mind is surprise. The only appropriate state of the heart is joy. The sky 
you see now, you have never seen before. The perfect moment is now. Be glad of 
it.

Yes, it’s a lampoon. But it’s also full of warmth and sympathy. The same is 
true of the rest of the book. Pratchett may think us fools – but he still likes 
us. That too is consoling.

I’d suggest we can even find hope in the very fact that this novel was 
written. It’s a fillip for anyone who believes in the craft of writing, that 
practice brings you closer to perfection and that experience and age can be as 
important as youthful exuberance. This was Terry Pratchett’s 26th book, 
published in 2002, during his 54th year, and arguably marks the peak of his 
career. I’m sure it will come to be regarded as one of his masterpieces.

When it was released, AS Byatt suggested that it should win the Man Booker 
prize <http://januarymagazine.com/profiles/tpratchett2002.html>. She also made 
the splendid suggestion thatat the age of 12, everyone in Britain should be 
given a Terry Pratchett book <http://julie-phillips.com/wp/?p=723>, like this 
one, to read and enjoy. I imagine Britain would be a better, kinder and more 
sensible place if that were to come to pass. Although, I know, that’s probably 
too much to hope.
 