
Once read, John Berger’s To the Wedding exerts a talismanic power. Both 
Michael Ondaatje and Colum McCann have confessed to an almost superstitious 
reverence for it, such was the profundity of its impact upon them. I have 
reread it many, many times since stumbling across Berger’s fiction some 20 
years ago and, I hope, will continue to do so. A book of rare tenderness and 
compassion, To the Wedding is nothing short of magical in its power to 
rejuvenate the spirit.

To The Wedding is a short book but a long read. Like poetry, Berger’s 
paragraphs ask to be read slowly and reflected upon. The chorus of voices in 
the book come to the story’s blind narrator unbidden. A seller oftamata – 
trinkets purported to bring good luck to those who wear them – he is a 
elliptical, laconic presence. There are no flourishes of wordsmithery here, no 
elaborate plot structures, no intricate character psychologies. Berger simply 
allows each person to speak, drawing them in words the same way a good artist 
would, in spare, true lines.

John Berger: ‘Writing is an off-shoot of something deeper’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/dec/12/john-berger-writing-is-an-off-shoot-of-something-deeper>
The premise of the story is heartbreaking. A mother and father travel 
separately across Europe to their daughter Ninon’s wedding in Italy, in the 
knowledge that the beautiful, vibrant 23-year-old will soon die of a terminal 
illness. Yet the book is not a tragedy, it is a celebration. Through an 
accumulation of moments in the lives of the characters, the reader is brought 
through their sadness. With every line, Berger builds towards an authentic 
transcendence.

Ninon’s father Jean makes his journey by motorbike, and Berger describes the 
thrilling immediacy of this mode of travel wonderfully. The passages about the 
Zen-like attentiveness to the moment required to ride are also instructive on 
how to live. “Everything’s a question of how you lean,” Ninon recalls her 
father telling her:

In a corner situation it’s the straight that demands least energy and so our 
fight starts. By tipping our weight over into the bend, we shift the bike’s 
center of gravity and this counteracts the centrifugal force and the Law of 
Inertia! Birds do the same thing in the air. Except that birds, Papa says, are 
not in the air to make journeys — it’s where they live!

Jean’s estranged wife Zdena travels by train, and enjoys a brief but deeply 
affecting friendship with a fellow passenger, a connection that brings her a 
degree of respite from her anguish. Throughout the elliptical narrative, we 
also glimpse moments from Ninon’s relationship with her fiance Gino: their 
first meeting, falling in love, the devastation caused when Ninon is diagnosed, 
and the acceptance and hope they find in the face of death.

My own attachment to Berger’s book stems from discovering it soon after my son 
was born. At that time, Jean’s relationship with Ninon perfectly articulated 
the earthshaking appearance of paternal love. Since that first reading, I’ve 
come to understand something else: that entering so deeply into the lives of 
others is a demonstration of compassion, and so of hope. As Mary Oliver’s poem 
says,The Real Prayers Are Not the Words, But the Attention That Comes First 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/features/audio/detail/75124>. In difficult 
times, true hope is to be found in noticing and appreciating the details, in 
slowing down to let the fleeting, tiny moments of our lives unfurl and finding 
poetry there. To The Wedding is a book made up of these shining moments.
 