
Bavaria has long attracted reclusive kings, skiers and, for 16-days each year, 
ardent beer lovers. Now, a spate of interesting refurbs has started to attract 
the attention of Germany's style-conscious city-dwellers, who are heading 
south-east in much the same way Brits are gravitating towards reinterpreted 
country inns.

Two non-skiers, my boyfriend and I boarded a train in Paris and arrived in 
Munich just six hours later. After an 80km drive south, we foundBerge, a hotel 
converted from a 14th-century bakery in the village of Aschau im Chiemgau, just 
minutes from the cable cars of the Kampenwand mountain. The island palaces of 
Chiemsee lake are nearby and there are plenty of other ways for non-skiers to 
get out of the sauna and into the snow.

Berge was converted into 16 self-catering apartments by local furniture 
designer Nils Holger Moormann. The service is very hands-off: you let yourself 
in and make yourself at home. Our first-floor studio was all black and bleached 
wood and handcrafted furniture: exposed stonework, lime-washed walls, scuffed 
floorboards and a modern shower room – even the loo-roll holder was a patented 
design. The raised double bed was built into a panelled alcove, surrounded by 
wooden drawers and recessed storage (don't leave your gear lying around: 
crumpled clothes and travel detritus will spoil the effect).

On the spartan kitchen counter, we found a brown paper bag containing dried 
pasta, a tin of tomatoes, one dried chilli and one garlic clove, packaged in a 
perfect little white envelope. A bottle of wine and two glasses stood on 
placemats. It's simple, efficient, effective.
 Berge 
On our first afternoon, we hired snowshoes from the local sports shop, 
Steigenberger 
<http://www.condition-steigenberger.de/home/condition-steigenberger-bergsport-laufsport-chiemgau-dynafit-competenz-center-patagonia-shop-gesundheitsmanagement-tourenski-rennsportski-wintersport-lawinensicherheit.html>
, and arranged a guided hike of the Prien valley. Our guide,Benedikt 
<http://www.bene-tours.de/>, kitted us out with equipment and we began a steady 
climb to a summit with panoramic views. Benedikt explained that Aschau is a 
well-kept secret in Bavaria. Traditionally, weekenders from Munich tend to head 
straight for the resort of Garmisch-Partenkirchen, which feeds Germany's 
highest mountain, Zugspitze. As a result, the paths were completely untrodden 
and, but for our voices and the steady crunch of our snowshoes, we walked in 
snow-muffled silence the entire afternoon. As well as pristine alpine paths, 
there are double-track, crosscountry ski trails that wind through forests and 
across gently undulating fields in the area. (Crosscountry sets can be hired 
for €12 a day from the village shop.)

There is a good supermarket in town, but if you don't fancy the faff of 
self-catering, there's a handful of candlelit and cavernous restaurants ready 
to dispel any stereotypes about stodgy Bavarian food. Our waitress at Zum 
Baumbach (zum-baumbach.de <http://www.zum-baumbach.de/html/restaurant.html>) 
provided translations for the numerous freshwater fish on offer: pike, perch, 
rainbow trout – all from nearby lake Chiemsee. In summer , you can cycle to the 
lake and buy your fish straight from the fisheries on the shore.

After two nights in Aschau, we drove 50km west to Tannerhof in Bayrischzell. 
This hotel has been in the same family for four generations and has recently 
undergone a major facelift by Munich-based architect Florian Nagler. A 
maternity hospital during the second world war, and a rehab centre for 
over-worked city dwellers in the 90s, Tannerhof is now a homely yet stylish 
"bio-hotel". The main building is a converted 18th-century farmhouse with two 
dining rooms (one for the liquid fasters, one for the rest of us), a spa and a 
modern, colourful communal area with an open fire, board games, a vintage 
Wurlitzer jukebox and a fleet of wooden tricycles. Kids are free to pedal up 
and down the wide glass corridor that links the old building with the new wing.
 Mood indigo … Das Kranzbach's 'blue' games room 
We were staying in Nagler's latest addition to the hotel, four three-storey 
wooden huts amid the pines behind the main building. The wood-panelled room was 
simple and colourful: the bed was covered in liquorice-striped Missoni 
blankets. From our top-floor window, we could see a field of llama and highland 
cattle, and a steady stream of tobogganers hurtling down a long, perfectly 
pitched slope.

We walked into the village, paid €2 to hire an old-fashioned wooden sledge and 
joined in the fun for a couple of hours before heading back to the hotel. To 
warm up, we slipped into the wood-fired sauna, lined with beautiful reclaimed 
1940s tiles. The food that evening was healthy and fresh – kale-and-bean stew 
(minus the sausage), followed byMilchreis (rice pudding) with passionfruit. 
Guests can take part in daily exercise sessions, ranging from aquarobics to 
pilates and guided hikes, but you're equally welcome to just kick back in front 
of the fire with a glass of wine and a book. Stylish, affordable, 
child-friendly and organic, with skiing and sledging right on the doorstep, 
this hotel was a real find.

Our third and final stop was Das Kranzbach, once the country seat of exiled 
English aristocrat Mary Portman. Completed in 1915, the imposing building sits 
on a plateau near the village of Krün in the upper Elmau valley, and was built 
to align with the Zugspitze mountain. It is surrounded by 130,000 square metres 
of protected upland meadow – most of it threaded with crosscountry tracks.

The stern frontage and steep gabled roofs belie an opulent, playful interior 
completed in 2011 by award-winning designer Isle Crawford (studioilse.com 
<http://www.studioilse.com/>). The founding editor of Elle Decoration, Crawford 
was the creative genius behind two of the UK's best modern coaching inns:The 
Olde Bell near Maidenhead <http://www.theoldebell.co.uk/> and The Crown in 
Amersham <http://www.thecrownamersham.com/>.
 Das Kranzbach 
The ground floor of the hotel is divided into distinct zones: red, blue and 
yellow. The comforting smells of woodsmoke and apple strudel waft through the 
red room, where a giant banqueting table is flanked by red windsor chairs. 
Sculptural paper lanterns dangle above a deep-seated velvet chesterfield in the 
yellow room, and giant Anglepoise lamps create pools of light in the moody, 
midnight-blue games room. The floors are swathed in vintage Berber rugs.

Though the communal areas are showy, I got the impression that Crawford had 
blown the budget by the time she reached the bedrooms, which feel slightly 
stuffy and dated. And the service is less personal: I was told off for 
attempting to play the vintage bar billiards table ("It's for decoration"). But 
luxury comes in the form of an immense open-air hot tub (try it in the snow). 
And the food is top notch. For breakfast, we chiselled chunks of alpine 
honeycomb straight from the frame. There were baskets full of freshly baked 
pretzels, hunks of butteryBergekase (mountain cheese) and slices of crumbly 
cake.

All of which called for another workout. We spent the next two days 
cross-country skiing through alpine pastures (ski equipment is available free 
of charge for guests). At 1,200m, we found Elmauer Alm, a small hut with a fire 
and gingham tablecloths that served stews, schnitzels, rhubarbschorle (a 
non-alcoholic spritzer) and mulled wine.

More than once, we tumbled out of the tracks and landed face-down in the piles 
of fresh snow. When it comes to this part of the German Alps, snow will always 
be the big draw but this new breed of accommodation – from chic self-catering 
apartments, to a family-friendly, organic retreat or modern take on the stately 
country pile – helps up the ante for skiers and non-skiers alike.

• Accommodation provided by Berge (+49 8052 90 45 17, moormann-berge.de 
<http://www.moormann-berge.de/>), self-catering chalets from €170 a night; 
Tannerhof (+49 8023 810,natur-hotel-tannerhof.de 
<http://natur-hotel-tannerhof.de/>), hut rooms from €125 a night; and Das 
Kransbach (+49 8823 928 000,daskranzbach.de <http://www.daskranzbach.de/>), 
doubles from €136. Travel was provided by Rail Europe (0844 848 4078,
raileurope.co.uk <http://www.raileurope.co.uk/>), London to Munich from £139 
return
 