
Acquiring a literary archive can be a difficult, time-consuming task but it 
does not normally entail heavy farmwork. Tomorrow the British Library's head of 
modern manuscripts heads off on what is more like an adventure than a business 
trip to obtain the papers and other materials associated with one of Britain's 
greatest living writers,John Berger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/john-berger>.

Berger, a novelist, thinker, artist and art critic still very much working at 
the age of 82, has agreed to give his lifetime archive to the nation – donating 
it free to the British Library. But there is a quid pro quo. TheBritish Library 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/british-library> will have to come to 
Berger's remote farm high in the French Alps to sort through and retrieve the 
boxes of papers, drafts and correspondence from his stables.

And since the library's Jamie Andrews is coming during harvest time, he can 
help with the haymaking. "I'm hoping it will be fun," said Andrews, a little 
nervously. "Nice way to spend the weekend, haymaking with John Berger. As long 
as he's not expecting some brawny farmer type to turn up, because that's really 
not me." Getting Berger's papers free is a coup for the British Library in a 
competitive field, especially with the US.

The Harry Ransom archive in Austin, Texas, has bought the archives of British 
literary figures such as Julian Barnes, while three years ago Salman Rushdie 
sold his literary papers to Emory University in Atlanta.

Andrews sets off tomorrow by plane before getting a train to within 45 miles 
of the farm Berger has lived in since the mid-1970s. He will then hire a car 
and hopes for the best. "There are no road names by the time you get up there, 
so I think it'll be a bit hit and miss. I dare say I'll be asking in local bars 
where the famous English writer lives." Andrews will spend the time with Berger 
and his wife Beverly sorting through what could be a vast archive relating to 
Berger's long literary career which takes in more than a dozen works of fiction 
– including the Booker prizewinning G in 1972 – and a huge number of articles, 
essay collections and pieces of art criticism.

Andrews does indeed have the look of a man more comfortable in a library than 
a field, so he has been reading up on the subject."It seems to me a fair 
exchange. If he's giving us this incredible archive for free to the nation then 
the least I can do is roll up my sleeves and help out with the harvesting."

Berger, a Marxist, began his career as the enfant terrible of art criticism 
when he wrote for the New Statesman and went on to transform the way so many 
people actually look at art with his 1972 BBC series, Ways of Seeing. One of 
his most acclaimed collections is called About Looking, in which he manages to 
make his sophisticated and complex insights accessible and understandable.

Andrews expects to be away for about four days during which he will be giving 
Twitter and Audioboo updates on the British Library's website. Once the archive 
is safely at the British Library it will be quarantined. "Having been stored in 
a stable we're not quite sure what condition it'll be in and what else will be 
coming along with it in terms of insects or anything," he said.

He accepts that the British Library does not have right to major archives just 
because of what it is, but he believes the library has raised its game and has 
scored some notable recent successes with Harold Pinter, Ted Hughes, NF Simpson 
and Graham Swift.

He is particularly proud about Berger, who last year reminded people he was 
still working by being longlisted for the Booker prize, for From A to X, and 
recalled the first contact four years ago.

"I rang him, very nervously... I wasn't really too sure how he would take to 
the request.

"I guess I eventually made him comfortable with the idea of what it would mean 
to have his archive at the British Library, what we'd be able to do in terms of 
preserving it in perpetuity ‑ and also the fact that it would be alongside the 
archives of so many other great writers."

As others see him

Author Michael Ondaatje compares him to writers like DH Lawrence, "who use 
every form to express themselves. He's reacting to the real world ... All his 
books have broken the vessel they were written within in some way.''

Publisher Liz Calder was there the night he won the Booker prize in 1972. He 
attacked Booker McConnell for their colonial past and gave half the prize money 
to the Black Panthers. Calder said: "While his speech [that night] was intense 
and angry and passionate ... it was never a wild rant."

Art critic Peter Fuller commended Berger's "consistent testimony to a possible 
future other than a capitalist one'', in an era of communist witch-hunts and 
cold war hysteria.Isabelle Chevallot
 