 Britain is moving towards normal relations with Pakistan next week after being 
one of the most outspoken critics of its military coup that overthrew an 
unpopular elected government last October.
The overture comes at a sensitive time, with relations between Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> and India strained over the hijack 
of an Indian plane last month.

The man being deputed to talk to the military-controlled administration in 
Islamabad is Sir Charles Guthrie, chief of the British defence staff, who 
starts a three-day visit to Pakistan on Thursday.

It is rare for a military man to be used for such a diplomatic role but during 
the conflicts with Iraq and Serbia in the course of the 90s Sir Charles became 
close to British ministers.

He has been delegated to discuss with the leader of the October 12 coup, 
General Pervez Musharraf, the prospects for return to democracy and ways to 
reduce tension with India.

The Pakistan-India dispute over Kashmir is seen by the foreign secretary, 
Robin Cook, as one of the most dangerous flashpoints in the world. Both states 
have nuclear devices - though their ability to deliver them to a remote target 
is uncertain - but the more immediate worry is terrorism.

The emotional heat generated by the issue of Kashmir's status has led to the 
murders of foreign visitors in Kashmir and December's hijack of the Indian 
airliner carrying 155 people. One passenger was killed by the hijackers, who 
supported Pakistan's claim to Kashmir.

The foreign office hopes that Sir Charles's visit will not ruffle feathers in 
India. Stephen Byers, Britain's secretary of state for trade and industry, 
briefed the Indian foreign minister, Jaswant Singh, in Delhi yesterday, telling 
him that the defence chief will deliver a blunt message to Gen Musharraf.

The foreign office said it was not backtracking on its criticism of the coup 
but was seeking to nudge Pakistan towards setting a timetable for a return to 
democracy. The coup ousted Nawaz Sharif, the prime minister, who now faces a 
show trial.

If Pakistan moves towards democracy, Britain is offering to help it reform 
institutions such as its police and judiciary.

The foreign office also wants to encourage Pakistan and India to resume talks 
over the future of Kashmir. The Muslim-majority state is claimed by Pakistan 
but ruled by India, which has never held a promised referendum to ascertain 
what Kashmir's people would prefer.

Peter Hain, the foreign office minister, said: "It is absolutely vital that 
Pakistan be a stable country rather than a haven for terrorists, source for 
regional insecurity and threat to neighbouring countries or base for Islamic 
extremism."

He added: "This is not a return to business as usual. Speaking as one military 
man to another, Charlies Guthrie will be making clear to Gen Musharraf that 
Britain does not approve of military coups and wants to see an irreversible 
time frame for a return to democracy."

Right after Gen Musharraf took over, Mr Cook said that no coup was acceptable. 
If the west accepts a coup in one country, he believes, it will encourage 
disaffected officers elsewhere.

Mr Cook took a lead in persuading Commonwealth leaders in November to make 
clear their unease by suspending Pakistan from all Commonwealth bodies, though 
they stopped short of expulsion.

Discussions between Pakistan and Britain on economic aid were also frozen. 

But the US, after initially condemning the coup, softened its line, seeing Gen 
Musharraf as in many ways preferable to Mr Sharif, whose government was widely 
accused of corruption.

Britain retains influence in Pakistan through direct aid, European Union aid 
and significant arms sales. Arms sales continued after coup. A British 
government spokesman said yesterday that each arms licence is examined on merit 
and that Pakistan had legitimate defence interests.

Sir Charles will press Pakistan to sign the comprehensive nuclear test ban 
treaty.

He will also urge the leadership to ensure that Mr Sharif will not face a show 
trial but one that is open and fair.

He is being held on charges of attempted murder for allegedly trying to 
prevent the landing of a plane carrying Gen Musharraf back to Pakistan just 
before the coup.

But more charges are almost certain as a big corruption investigation is 
proceeding against the former prime minister and his entourage.
 