
A British woman has died in the French Alps after she lost control while 
skiing, careered off-piste and collided with a tree.

Anne Clayton, 54, died after she set off on a moderate-level blue run while on 
holiday with her sons Stephen, 22, and Andrew, 19, at La Plagne, in the Savoy 
region of the Alps.

“We have skied all of our lives – she was a good skier,” Stephen Clayton said. 
“It was not a difficult run but because it rained, it was quite icy. She lost 
control and dropped 20ft off the piste and made contact with a tree.”

The trio had arrived at La Plagne <http://www.laplagnet.com/> on Saturday and 
were enjoying their second full day in the mountains when the tragedy happened 
at about 11.30am on Monday. Medics pronounced Clayton dead at the scene, 
according to reports.

Clayton, a widow from Poynton, Cheshire, had dedicated herself to charity work 
since the death of her husband, Bob, 12 years ago. She was a keen volunteer 
with a night-time charity, theManchester Street Angels 
<http://www.manchesterstreetangels.com/>, which helps vulnerable and lost 
people in the city at night and had also been to Bulgaria and Romania to 
deliver supplies with Operation Christmas Child.

Paying tribute to his mother, Stephen Clayton said: “She really looked after 
us and was a really caring person. She also helped out at various food banks 
around our local area. She was known for her voluntary work.

“Mum was very caring and would not do anything for herself unless it benefited 
other people. She was always ready to do a lot for others. She had a lot of 
close friends that we have had to tell. She was very popular. She loved life 
and just got things done.”

An investigation into Clayton’s death is under way at La Plagne, according to 
reports. Her sons are due to speak to French police about the incident. 
Pictures of the family on holiday showed them all wearing helmets and goggles.

Manchester Street Angels paid tribute to Clayton on its Facebook page: “We 
share this news with a very heavy heart. Our very dear friend & amazing angel 
has sadly passed away. God needed a true Angel to join him. Sending all our 
love to her family, friends & fellow Angels. Gone but never forgotten.”

A Foreign and Commonwealth Office spokesman said: “We are supporting the 
family of a British national and remain in contact with the French authorities.”
 