 The foreign secretary, Robin Cook, yesterday pressed Iran to take a less 
hostile approach to the Middle East peace process during the first visit to 
Britain by a senior Iranian minister since the revolution 20 years ago.
The arrival of Kamal Kharrazi, the Iranian foreign minister, was met with 
protests by Jewish groups and Iranian dissidents.

Iran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> caused consternation at the end 
of last month in Israel - a sometime ally - when it suddenly adopted a strident 
tone, with one leader calling for the state's eradication.

Mr Kharrazi met Tony Blair at Downing Street before two hours of talks with Mr 
Cook.

The visit is part of a gradual restoration in relations between the two 
countries, and could eventually pave the way for the reopening of links between 
the US and Iran.

The improvement in British-Iranian relations began two years ago when the 
Iranian government distanced itself from the clerical fatwa issued against the 
British author Salman Rushdie in 1989 for alleged blasphemous writing.

But US sources claim Iran has stepped up arms and funds to groups such as 
Hizbullah, which is fighting in southern Lebanon, and a se nior foreign office 
spokesman confirmed that there were continued contacts between Iran and groups 
violently opposed to the Middle East peace process.

The foreign office spokesman defended the British-Iran link, saying: "We think 
it is better to put our views across than cut them off." He added that recent 
hardline rhetoric against Israel had to be seen in the context of the Iranian 
elections, in six weeks' time.

Mr Cook, who negotiated with Iran in 1998 to get the government to distance 
itself from the fatwa, raised the issue of Mr Rushdie at yesterday's meeting. 
The foreign secretary has been criticised for failing to win a commitment to 
suppress organisations inside Iran still offering a bounty for the author's 
assassination.

Mr Cook also pressed Mr Kharrazi to ensure a fair trial for a group of Jewish 
and Muslim Iranians alleged to have spied for Israel.

The president of the Board of Deputies of British Jews, Eldred Tabachnik, 
yesterday expressed concern about the 13 Iranian Jews in detention: "No charges 
have been proferred and they have, nonetheless, been held for almost a year."

Mr Blair's spokesman said yesterday's visit should not be interpreted as a 
sign that Britain endorsed everything going on inside Iran.
 