
I recently attended a speaking engagement for a group of professional women in 
the technology industry. Chatting to them at the event, I was shocked to hear 
about the apparent ageism, as well as sexism, that some of them had experienced 
in their working environment.


In one particular organisation, women “of a certain age” are regularly 
described as “grannies” and written off with the proverbial bonnet and shawl, 
while young male “wolves” are thrown all the opportunities. In many cases, 
older women, despite their qualifications and experience, are not deemed worthy 
of representing their companies at many business conferences and other public 
forums.

I am not yet a “granny” but most of the women I know who have achieved this 
title are, quite rightly, very proud of it. With age comes a new set of wit and 
wisdom, so it is upsetting to see their status so openly derided in a 
professional environment.

As I turn sixty next year, I have begun to notice how society is already 
beginning to pigeonhole me. The assumption is that your role as a professional 
will end, or at least slow down. On the contrary, the reality for many people 
in my age group, particularly if you have had a career change or work 
freelance, giving up work is not an option, whether we would like to or not.

For those who choose to retire, many remain active in their communities, do 
voluntary work and help look after younger family members. Some of us do this 
as well as continuing to work full or part time. We are often caught up in a 
generational sandwich, dealing with both elderly and infirm parents as well as 
the demands of offspring who are not yet entirely off our hands.

Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> manage this stage of 
life spectacularly well, often providing the much needed emotional counterpoint 
between the generations. Our ability to multitask does not diminish with age 
and it is the transferable skills of balancing family, friends and professional 
life which are invaluable in the workplace. We often care more, are less 
self-centred and have more energy and creativity post-menopause than we did 
when we were juggling work and young families.

My generation has been brought up to believe in a world where anything is 
possible and achievable. We are at one with new technology; particularly social 
networking which is an extension of what we have done since the beginning of 
time – from the campfire to the kitchen table. “Jam and Jerusalem” is the 
preserve of an almost bygone era and these days you are just as likely to use 
the Women’s Institute to sharpen up your public speaking abilities as you are 
to show off your baking skills. Times have changed, but don’t assume that we 
haven’t changed and adapted with them.

The fact is that we women are marvellously accomplished and capable of passing 
on our skills to the next generation seamlessly and effortlessly, whatever our 
age. Some do it publicly, accomplished actors like Dame Judi Dench, Dame Helen 
Mirren and Lily Tomlin for example, who perform with such strong and controlled 
beauty and grace. Others take public and prominent office, like Hilary Clinton, 
Angela Merkel and Christine LaGarde.

Being “a certain age” is a licence to truly be yourself. When it comes to the 
workplace, nobody has the right to make assumptions about our abilities based 
purely on age, and any organisation that “puts granny in the corner” is truly 
missing a trick.
 