 Cabinet ministers are embroiled in one of the biggest internal disputes since 
Labour came to power, over a proposal to lift restrictions on arms sales to 
Pakistan, according to leaked cabinet office papers.
Minutes from a cabinet office meeting last month reveal that the defence 
secretary, Geoff Hoon, and the trade and industry secretary, Stephen Byers, are 
pressing for an end to a freeze on 80 arms exports licences imposed after last 
October's military coup.

But the foreign secretary, Robin Cook, and the international development 
secretary, Clare Short, are implacably opposed and still committed to the 
principle of an "ethical foreign policy".

Mr Cook led the campaign to have Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> suspended from almost every 
Commonwealth body following the coup.

The whole arms issue is one of the most emotive facing Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> ministers and MPs, exposing the 
faultline between support for the defence industry and support for democratic 
government and genuine aid projects.

"If we lose this, it will be Indonesia next, and Nigeria after that," said a 
junior minister opposed to arms sales to Pakistan being fully restored. "This 
is the filthy end of foreign policy."

Downing Street will have to adjudicate, though the minister said Tony Blair's 
track record had been poor on arms, tending to side with the powerful DTI and 
the ministry of defence axis.

The arms issue will gain urgency with the expected arrival tomorrow of the 
British defence chief, Sir Charles Guthrie, in Pakistan to meet the new leader, 
General Pervez Musharraf, for the first high-level talks between the two 
countries since the coup. A US delegation arrives the same day.

Although no arms embargo was formally imposed by Britain, the foreign office 
confirmed yesterday that no new applications for export licences had been 
approved since the coup.

The leaked minutes disclose that senior civil servants from the DTI, MoD, 
foreign office, department of international development, treasury and customs 
and excise met at the cabinet office on December 8.

The minutes, dated the following day, record that "as part of our initial 
response to the October coup, the government decided to keep all current arms 
export applications for Pakistan under review until the situation becomes 
clearer. As a result, there are something like 80 pending applications and 
exporters are becoming increasingly impatient and suspicious."

The minutes note: "EU partners seem to be doing business as usual and show no 
signs of wanting to contemplate an arms embargo."

Crucially, they add: "MoD and DTI, therefore, wish to expedite the 
consideration of these applications in the normal way. FO and Dfid will consult 
their ministers and report back."

More cabinet papers show that Mr Cook "agreed strongly" that there should be 
no return to the normal flow of military hardware until Pakistan provided firm 
commitments.

Another said Ms Short was "strongly opposed to the Whitehall consensus in 
favour of processing outstanding export licence applications to Pakistan. The 
secretary of state's [Ms Short's] view is that it is outrageous to consider 
arms exports before the International Monetary Fund programme and aid have been 
re-engaged."

The IMF and World Bank suspended all transactions after the coup and said they 
would not resume talks until democracy was restored. Ms Short also suspended a 
£20m aid programme.

One Whitehall source said papers crossing his desk showed that Mr Cook, who 
ran into trouble last year over the sale of Hawks to Indonesia, had been 
battling regularly against breaches of his ethical foreign policy but three 
times out of four lost out to the DTI-MoD axis. He was then put in the 
embarrassing position of having to defend a government policy he did not agree 
with.

British companies sold £2bn in military hardware worldwide in 1998.
 