
David Cameron was being both a post-modern and traditional Tory when he 
finally allowed himself to be interviewed by the Jewish Chronicle the other 
day. Unsurprisingly for such a deft chameleon, the encounter generated a front 
pageheadline 
<http://www.thejc.com/LoginForm.aspx?ParentId=m11s18&SecId=18&AId=51138&ATypeId=1>
: "Cameron: My values are Jewish."

As the JC notes the Conservative leader's privileged roots do not suggest 
"much empathy for Jewish concerns" and he has yet to bring a Michael Levy or a 
Brownite Ronnie Cohen into the inner circle. Brainy Oliver Letwin was already 
there, but on tap, not on top.

How wrong can people be? Mr Cameron gives good empathy. He argues that Jews 
should instinctively respond to his vision of social responsibility in a 
fractured society - "we're all in it together, it's not just government that 
has the answers, it's stronger families, stronger communities."

At least one of his best and oldest friends, Andrew Feldman, is Jewish, he 
told the newspaper. Ken Livingstone is not a chum, but Cameron does not believe 
(as the JCsuggested 
<http://commentisfree.theguardian.com/david_rowan/2007/03/augustus_melmotte_would_have_r.html>
 this month) that Lord Levy has been a victim of anti-semitism.

Instead his multicultural message is that equal citizens should not confine 
themselves to what he called "silos" - or be confined to them. "Britain isn't a 
community of communities."

It may seem odd that a party which made the secularised Benjamin Disraeli 
<http://www.pm.gov.uk/output/Page146.asp> its leader 140 years ago (Michael 
Howard too in 2003), and keeps Dizzy in its pantheon, should have to reassure 
the Jewish community. But the Tories long tolerated an anti-semitic strain. Not 
everyone laughed when Harold Macmillanjoked 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/magazine/4349324.stm> that the Thatcher cabinet 
contained ''more Estonians than Etonians.'' No longer true of the posh 
Cameroons, incidentally, which feature a generous quota ofOld Etonians 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Old_Etonians>.

Only this month Martin Gilbert, Winston Churchill's official biographer, was 
forced to defend the great man from misplaced charges of anti-semitism, even 
though Hitler's nemesis had been a consistent Zionist, friend and defender of 
Jews (including Dreyfus) for most of his long career. Several helped bankroll 
him in ways that would be frowned on now.

Like Mr Cameron (and Labour leaders including Tony Blair) Churchill detected a 
century ago the "high sense of corporate responsibility" in Britain's 
aspiringly integrated Jewish community. By the late 30s, one of Churchill's 
four guidelines, so Gilbert wrote in the Spectator, was good citizenship. 
Another was to avoid exclusivity in favour of "mingling as much as possible" 
except in matters of religion.

The third, topical when uttered, was to urge Jews to embrace Zionism rather 
than Bolshevism. The fourth remains more relevant. Jews are entitled to use 
their influence to bear on governments that persecute Jews, Churchill declared 
at a time when Nazi propaganda was already directed against the former colonial 
secretary and creator of Middle East states as a Zionist. Nasty websites still 
say Winston's mum was really Jenny Jacobson, though her family arrived in 
America in 1717.

Circumstances change and the JC's pursuit of Cameron was triggered last summer 
by shadow foreign secretary, William Hague'sinsistence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardianpolitics/story/0,,1835824,00.html> that 
some Israeli responses to Hizbullah's attacks from Lebanon were 
"disproportionate". Cameron told the JC that Hague was right and his Jewish 
Tory critics wrong.

Is the growth of Jewish settlements in combination with Israel's security wall 
hindering the two-state solution? he added, rubbing home his stance as the 
"candid friend". Most PMs, certainly Churchill, would have endorsed that 
declaration of independence, though both Thatcher and Blair have been strongly 
pro-Israel. Secular Zionism was once a leftwing cause in Britain, but British 
Jews have not automatically voted left as they long did in the US.

Yet Mr Cameron's delicate balancing act highlights a post-modern dilemma which 
the Churchills, Attlees or Balfours would not have understood, but he must 
address. How does a national party leader show sympathy or respect to myriad 
minority causes, to Muslims as well as Jews, while seeking to bind the nation 
together?

Secular melting pot theory assumed we would all gradually mingle in growing 
material security. But even in affluence, even in America, religious 
particularism has proved resilient, nationalism equally so elsewhere. 
Catholics, evangelical Anglicans, Muslims and Jews may quarrel with each other 
over politics and theology. But they often unite against the secularists on 
abortion, gay marriage or (in the Lords last week) on adoption.

It is our pale version of the ''culture wars'' which divide the United States 
and threaten its constitutional settlement that separates church and state. 
Since this separation may be America's single most important political 
contribution to the modern world, its practical tribute to the 18th century 
Enlightenment, it would be an awful irony to see it lost there too just when 
Islam is struggling to shake off its baleful pre-modern legacy.
 