
In 1999, Caroline Aherne, then at the peak of her powers, following a 
triumphant first run ofThe Royle Family, 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/comedy/theroylefamily/> met a young comedian, David 
Walliams. They flirted at the Groucho Club, lying side by side on the snooker 
table, before going back to Aherne's house in Notting Hill for more drinks. 
There, as Elvis crooned in the background, she gave Walliams some advice: 
"Whatever you do, don't lose your anonymity. It's the most terrible thing to 
lose."

No one can doubt that Aherne meant it. In 2001, after three impeccable series 
ofThe Royle Family, she announced she was quitting television 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/entertainment/1268158.stm>, aged 37. (She chose, in 
either a curious, or ingeniously meta, touch, to useHello! as the organ to make 
this revelation.) She left for Australia, came back to the UK and, in 2006, 
sold up in London and moved to the south Manchester suburb of Timperley, where 
she lives round the corner from her mum, Maureen, and brother, Patrick.

Aherne's sardonic narration can be heard on Channel 4's Gogglebox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/mar/06/gogglebox-television-watches-audience>
, but, in contrast to Walliams, she has practically disappeared from view this 
past decade.

The 50-year-old Aherne's return to the headlines is not a cause for 
celebration. Sadly, it is not because of a new television show – though she is 
said to have been writing again with her regular collaborator, Craig Cash. 
Instead, it emerged that she is recovering from chemotherapy for lung cancer. 
The condition was diagnosed at the end of last year and is understood to be 
hereditary. This is the third time she has had to deal with cancer, having had 
retinoblastoma, a sight defect, as a baby and also bladder cancer.

With Aherne's aversion to publicity, her decision to speak at an event in 
Manchester on 26 June, organised by all the cancer-care providers in the city, 
is a significant one. Her reasons were both personal and philanthropic. "I've 
had cancer and my brother's had cancer and we know how it affects people," she 
said for the launch of the initiative. "It's truly shocking to learn that 
Manchester came bottom out of 150 areas in England for premature deaths from 
cancer. Our survival rates are 25% lower than the national average and the 
number of people getting lung cancer is a third higher."

There has been some discussion in recent times, notably around the deaths of 
American actors James Gandolfini and Philip Seymour Hoffman, of our tendency to 
grieve over the travails of celebrities – essentially strangers. Perhaps we are 
mourning the loss of an irreplaceable talent. Maybe, some speculate loftily, we 
are preparing for when we have to go through similar emotional upheavals 
ourselves.

News of Aherne's illness, however, has provoked a particularly heartfelt 
emotional outpouring – yes, on Twitter, but also in the real world. Again, part 
of this is down to the fondness that people feel towards her work, first as the 
faux-naive chatshow host Mrs Merton, and then in her portrayal of Denise, the 
self-absorbed but surprisingly likable daughter inThe Royle Family.

More than that, though, was the spirit of those programmes, both of which she 
wrote with Cash and Henry Normal. Although clearly tack-sharp – she has an IQ 
of 176 – the comedy ofThe Royle Family, in particular, is tender and often very 
moving. "She loved the daftness of people," noted Walliams, who had a 
turbulent, year-long relationship with Aherne, in the bookInside Little Britain
. "So she would watchTrisha and point out the silly things people said but her 
observations were affectionate. Full of warmth. There was no intellectual 
snobbery about her. Or superior class judgment. She is from that world and 
loves it."

Likewise, when she filmed The Mrs Merton Show, which ran for five series from 
1995, Aherne insisted that the audience be primarily old ladies, rather than 
the younger crowd that typically came in for comedy shows. She was adamant that 
it was not elderly biddies but the celebrities she interviewed, memorably, 
Debbie McGee, Carol Thatcher and George Best, who should be on the receiving 
end of "a warm and gentle kicking".

For the feature-length documentary The Royle Family: Behind the Sofa, Aherne 
and Cash gave a rare insight into their writing process. Cash would turn up at 
Aherne's house and they'd watch Jeremy Kyle. They would then deconstructThe X 
Factor or whatever had been on TV the previous evening, which would keep them 
busy untilLoose Women. Chips and gravy for lunch and if they wrote one decent 
line they might take the rest of the day off.

"It's just such a good quality, laziness," said Aherne. "It's underestimated. 
You don't see enough of it on the telly."

Much of the material for The Royle Family came from Aherne's own nearest and 
dearest. Her father, Bert, was an alcoholic and sometimes violent with it. He 
worked on the railways, died in 1995, and he bequeathed some of his comic 
grouchiness to Ricky Tomlinson's Jim Royle. Maureen was an Irish immigrant, 
too, and the family lived first in London before moving to a council house in 
Wythenshawe, Manchester, when Aherne was two.

Aherne's brother, Patrick, who is 18 months older, also suffered from 
retinoblastoma. They bickered growing up but have become, she has said, "best 
of friends". Aherne once asked her brother: "Imagine you met a beautiful woman 
and she had a gorgeous, perfect body. But no head. How long do you reckon you 
could go out with her for?" Patrick mulled it over for a few seconds and said: 
"About a week."

Aherne did well at her convent school – nine As in her O-levels – and studied 
drama at Liverpool Polytechnic. After graduating, she returned to Manchester, 
working at the pirate radio station KFM. Other DJs included Terry Christian and 
Jon Ronson, but Aherne made an immediate connection with Cash. The first day 
they met, she wrote in her diary: "I've just met the funniest man in the 
world." Everyone at the station was fired in 1990 as KFM went legitimate, so 
Aherne and Cash decided to develop a comic character she had come up with: an 
Irish nun called Sister Mary Immaculate. Mrs Merton, initially an agony aunt, 
followed not long after.

When Aherne announced her "retirement" in 2001, she said: "Celebrity is just a 
game… I can't be arsed playing it any more because I've decided I'm no good at 
it." She was not wrong. In 1994, Aherne married New Order's bassist Peter Hook 
in a wedding chapel in Las Vegas; two years later they split. She went through 
a series of intense doomed relationships, which, as her fame increased, began 
to attract tabloid attention, though, strangely, not her liaison with Walliams, 
whom she told her mother was a gay friend. Aherne does not have children, 
though Denise twice became pregnant onThe Royle Family. "I can't have babies in 
real life," she said on theBehind the Sofa documentary. "So it was lovely to 
write myself in being pregnant."

Aherne's drinking was a recurring problem: a bottle of asti spumante was her 
rider forThe Mrs Merton Show. More seriously, in July 1998, she mixed three 
bottles of champagne with antidepressants; a suicide attempt that ended in a 
month's rehab at the Priory. "I actually have no recollection of it," she said 
later. "Finding out what I'd done was like finding out I'd stabbed 15 people. I 
would never knowingly hurt people in that way."

Creatively, at least, Aherne has always known her own mind. At the first 
read-through forThe Royle Family, BBC executives pointed out that not very much 
happened, there was no beginning, middle or end, and perhaps Aherne might like 
to make another series ofMrs Merton instead. But she held firm. When the pilot 
didn't turn out exactly to her liking, she offered to buy it back from the BBC. 
Aherne has always been relaxed with money – she has been known to hand out £50 
or £100 to the homeless – but the fee was £200,000 and the programme aired 
unchanged.

Aherne's move to Australia was prompted in part by her falling out with Cash, 
but the rift did not last long. And Cash now seems to be the one last link to 
her previous life. Last week, both John Thomson and Charlie Higson, friends and 
colleagues of Aherne's fromThe Fast Show – where the weather was reliably 
"Scorchio!" – wished her well while at the same time admitting that they had 
not seen her for three years and a decade respectively.

The details we have of Aherne's life now are scarce and random. She doesn't go 
out much except to a local Italian restaurant. In 2012, she went on holiday to 
Benidorm with her mother on a Monarch flight. She's given up smoking. Anonymity 
obviously suited her and we can only be saddened about her reasons for having 
to give it up.
 