
Sunday clothes and paperwork, bridal chests, wedding dresses and embroidered 
tablecloths, documents, maps and harvest records, china, grains, seeds, cured 
meats, cheeses and preserves … these were the treasures those who lived in 
Alpine villages such as Chamonix in the early 1800s would do anything to 
protect. Valuable things, obtained through hard work or passed down through 
generations, not easy to come by in the cold, high pastures, where half the 
year is lived under snow.

It wasn't thieves, rats or snow that people worried they might lose these 
heirlooms and produce to: their main concern was fire. Buildings were 
wooden and because fires were necessary, farmhouses often burned. To protect 
them, French and Swiss farmers who constructed Alpine farms, mainly between 
1776 and 1828, also added a separate outbuilding, raised to prevent rodents 
getting in, and out of the reach of potential flames. They called thesemazots. 
At the turn of the 20th century, grain stores were built from brick, so mazots 
became obsolete. Many disappeared, though good examples remain in Les Bois 
(where one dates from 1726), Le Lavancher, Argentière, Le Tour and Montroc.

With their small balconies, shutters and friezes, those that remain are so 
cute chalet operators couldn't fail to see their potential as holiday rentals, 
and now some are available to rent, and newly built copies have also been made. 
Chamonix, as the Alps' largest town, seems to have more than most resorts and 
also boasts a passionate mazot converter: Colleen Olianti, who runs the 
Collineige ski and chalet company. She has transformed three mazots into 
romantic, stylish boltholes, alongside her larger chalets.
 Brigitte's in summer, and the mazot's interior 
The one I stayed in last March, Brigitte's Mazot, is very cute and just for 
two; it's down an icy path through the garden behind the main Chalet Les 
Mazots, not a mazot itself, but a gorgeous 1930s chalet with eight bedrooms 
(sleeping 14), individually rented by other guests.

Brigitte is a posh wendy house for grown ups, I realised as we squeezed 
ourselves inside the nine-metre-squared space, which somehow fits a double bed, 
a tiny table, chair and stool, a teeny bathroom with shower, two slender 
wardrobes, three shelves, and a kitchenette, with fridge, hob and coffee maker. 
Quality bed linen and blankets made it cosy; thick white robes and towels and 
Occidente toiletries added luxury; framed Chamonix posters and photographs and 
piles of snow on the balcony let us know we were in the Alps – and unlike most 
sheds, there was not a grassy rake or spidery plant pot in sight.

It was adorable, but as soon as we had unpacked the effect was spoilt by all 
our ski gear hanging everywhere – not much of it would fit in the cupboards. 
Thankfully, mazot guests can also use the lounge and dining room in the Chalet 
Les Mazots, a lovely wood-panelled home full of antique chairs, chests and 
cabinets, built by a family of silk manufacturers from Leon who chose the 
location for their farm for its south-facing views of Mont Blanc. There's 
another larger mazot in the garden, Stephen's Mazot, with an upstairs lounge 
with sofa bed and a bedroom downstairs, accessed via a ladder; and on the 
other side of town towards Argentière, near the Flégère lift, Mazot Les Tines, 
a truly gorgeous one with a bedroom upstairs in the sleeping loft, and two 
mattresses on a mezzanine that can sleep two kids.

We ate lovely winey meals and afternoon tea with cake and champagne beside the 
fire with a fun American guest who reminded us of Roger [Sterling] from Mad Men 
and who'd been visiting the chalet for 20 years or so, for heli-skiing and 
off-piste adventures with Colleen's husband, Jean-Marie, a renowned local ski 
guide, who guests can hire.

Though skiing in Chamonix usually involves travelling to one of the different 
ski areas spread up and down the valley, because the mazot was in walking 
distance of the Brevent lift, we skied that area twice, and the town centre was 
a 10-minute walk away. A couple of nights in the mazot felt like enough, so 
it's probably best combined with a chalet but it would be wonderful in summer 
with the doors and windows flung open, and in spring, when Chamonix's ski 
touring is at its peak, there's still plenty of snow but the sun shines and 
evenings on the balcony would be almost toasty.

• Accommodation was provided by Collineige (01483 579242, collineige.com 
<http://www.collineige.com/>). Availability from late February for Brigitte's, 
from €480 per week; Stephen's, from mid February, from €550; Mazot Les Tines, 
from 10 February, 31 March and in April, from €900. Prices self-catering only. 
The nearest airport is Geneva. Rail Europe (raileurope.co.uk 
<http://www.raileurope.co.uk/>) serves the area with trains from London St 
Pancras
 