
With seven of America's 10 most-visited resorts, Colorado is the powerhouse of 
US skiing. Destinations such as Vail, Breckenridge and Keystone each draw more 
than a million skiers each season with their large, immaculately kept ski 
areas, expensive restaurants and good chances of a celebrity sighting. Hardcore 
skiers flock in growing numbers to cult destinations such as Powderhorn and 
Silverton, to test their mettle on the steeps then party hard in the wild-west 
bars.

But at the original Colorado ski resort, all is quiet. Smoke puffs from the 
chimneys of little log cabins. Sunlight sparkles on a snow-covered trail that 
runs from the cabins to the slopes, through sedate woodland of blue spruce, 
aspen and fir. This is Pioneer, which opened in 1939 – the state's first resort 
– offering a basic rope-tow at first, then Colorado's first chairlift.

Today it is something of a ghost resort, the lifts long closed, the slopes 
left to deer and bobcat. The few skiers have to be prepared to skin up the 
steep hill through deep snow. But it remains a wonderful place to stay, largely 
thanks to the efforts of Matt and Leah Whiting, who have owned Pioneer since 
2001 and have given the original guest cabins a new lease of life, lovingly 
renovating the retro furniture and fittings. For European visitors, these are 
the wild west cabins of the imagination, with tin roofs, little porches, red 
doors, and window boxes decorated with crimson ribbons.

"When it opened, it cost $1 a day to ski here – quite a lot of money for the 
time," says Matt as he shows me around. There were just four runs, including 
the Big Dipper, a treacherous 45-degree expert run with a 3,900ft vertical 
drop. The one-seater chairlift was adapted from a piece of redundant mining 
machinery, bought for just $50. The buckets for transporting ore were replaced 
by seats, and the whole thing was powered by an old Cadillac engine. "People 
came from all over, from Texas and Oklahoma – but they must have had quite a 
rude awakening when they got here. The ski area was very steep."

The hiatus in skiing during the war put paid to Pioneer's initial popularity. 
Then in the early 1950s, as tourism resumed, a bigger resort was created at 
Crested Butte, 10 miles up the road, offering easier skiing for all abilities. 
The Pioneer chair last whirred into action in 1952, before being dismantled and 
taken off to its new neighbour.

But eight cabins still stand: four studio-style ones sleeping four, built in 
the 1930s; and four larger ones sleeping six added in the late 1960s. They're 
strung out in a line above Cement Creek, with names like Cottonwood, Red Fox 
and Oh-Be-Joyful. Ours, Wild Rose, has an open-plan living space with a 
kitchen, woodburner, sofas covered in quilts and a double bed all sharing one 
room. A mezzanine, reached by a ladder, has another bed that's ideal for kids. 
The sofas and bedhead are made from peeled logs; antique skis and old tin 
adverts for gasoline, Chrysler and fast food decorate the dark timber walls.

Rather than feeling like a cramped bedsit, it somehow has a Little House on 
the Prairie charm. I love curling up in bed that night listening to the crackle 
of the woodburner and the whistle of the kettle on the stove while my partner 
makes our dinner right next to me.

The next morning we fry eggs from the local store for breakfast, then pull 
back the checked curtains to see fat snowflakes falling. By the time we reach 
Crested Butte Mountain Resort, a 15-minute drive away, it's clear this is going 
to be one of those powder days that excite the locals as much as the tourists. 
During our first blizzardy chairlift ride up, the guy beside me leans over and 
grins: "So you called in sick at work too, huh?".

With its long rolling stretches of blue and red runs, the majority of the 
resort is perfect for intermediates, but there are some fun tree sections, and 
almost 30 double-black-diamond runs (though for a time the lifts accessing them 
are closed because of strong winds) and some challenging off-piste slopes.

After a day of powder, we drive down the hill to the historic town of Crested 
Butte, which feels very different from the more famous Colorado resorts. While 
Aspen, Breckenridge and Telluride were silver mining towns, with imposing red 
brick buildings signifying their wealth, Crested Butte was a coal town, more 
cheaply built in wood. Main Street today is a long row of well-preserved 
clapboard buildings, colourfully painted and fronted with wooden boardwalks.

A self-guided historic walking tour of the town, following numbered 
information boards, takes us to old 1800s homes and boarding houses, saloons, 
the old Company Store (now a wine bar), all with facades that would make Clint 
Eastwood feel at home.
 Crested Butte Photograph: Walter Bibikow/Getty Images/Lonely Planet Images 
When the coal mine shut in 1952, the town began to focus on skiing and outdoor 
pursuits, and they remain at its heart. It's still a cheaper place for ski nuts 
to move to than the glitzy resorts, and outdoorsy folk from all over the US 
have migrated here not just to get their adrenalin kicks, but also to bring up 
families. That, coupled with a thriving arts and music scene, half a dozen 
parades and festivals a year, endless fancy dress events and opportunities for 
silliness and fun mean the town has a distinctly relaxed, alternative 
atmosphere.

The shopping is low-key, with hippy stores and homemade crafts rather than fur 
coats and high fashion. Many people ride around on super-fat-tyre pushbikes 
that can handle the snow; stacks of them wait unlocked outside every spit 'n' 
sawdust drinking hole.

The consensus among residents is that the financial crash saved Crested Butte 
from turning into another Aspen or Telluride, both of which were once 
counter-cultural hubs but are now playgrounds for the wealthy. Nevertheless, 
there's a thriving food scene here: we scoff platters of superior sushi rolls at
Lo Bar <http://www.thelobar.com/> in a dark, bordello-style interior that later 
becomes a club; we eat steak atSoupçon <http://soupconrestaurant.com/>, a 
French fine-dining place that has introduced snails to the wild west; and we 
slurp cocktails at the sultryDogwod Cocktail Cabin 
<http://thedogwoodcocktailcabin.com/>.

The skiing may not be as extensive as on other Colorado mountains, but there's 
enough to keep you busy for a few days – making it an ideal stop on a road trip 
around several resorts.

After four hours' drive south through empty snowy plains, we reach Telluride, 
which has some of the best skiing in the entire US, and the New Sheridan, a 
smart red brick reinvention of a historic 1895 inn, that's also home to the 
town's oldest bar. It's a great place to stay, a boutique hotel exuding the 
style and character that so much US ski accommodation lacks.
 Dunton Hot Springs 
It's just down the street from the site of Butch Cassidy's first heist, on 
June 24 1889, and we decide to follow in the outlaw's footsteps, driving on 20 
miles south to the ghost town where he's said to have hidden following the bank 
robbery. From the outside, the 18 wooden buildings of Dunton Hot Springs look 
much as they would have done when Cassidy got here (and his name is carved on 
the bar in the saloon). Dunton had been established four years earlier, a busy 
mining camp of 300 souls. By 1918, though, it was deserted – abandoned, like so 
many others across the state, after a collapse in silver prices.

Dunton was a hippy hangout, offering cheap accommodation to passing bikers and 
aspiring poets, when, in 1994, it was bought by Christoph Henkel, a German-born 
businessman. The Henkel company owns household brands including Persil and 
Pritt. He and his art dealer wife Katrin spent the next seven years making 
Dunton into the high-end designer retreat it is today. Pieces from her 
collection – huge photographs by David LaChapelle and Terry Evans – adorn the 
walls of a large playroom/dancehall/cinema equipped with bean bags and 
Pendelton blankets.

Next door the main bar and dining room has a cowboy vibe, with a traditional 
tin ceiling and bar stools made of saddles. There are cosy touches such as 
woodburners, roaring fires and a basket of curly-toed felt slippers by the 
door, along with a pile of ice skates. In winter a mini ice rink is created in 
the garden and that, combined with the natural thermal waters that bubble up 
from the ground into the spa shed, the cross-country ski trails and the 
surrounding aspen-clad hills perfect for snowshoeing, means there's no need for 
guests to drive into Telluride to get their kicks.

Our cabin has much in common with the one at the Pioneer – rough-hewn logs, 
cosy rugs – but this is a more deliberately styled version, with Ren 
toiletries, a Rajasthani wedding bed, and an Indian gown on the wall. Others 
have kitsch cowgirl-pattern curtains, or wolfskins; one even has a copper 
slipper bath salvaged from the settlement's brothel, which burnt down in the 
1980s while being used as a crystal meth lab.
 Wild Rose cabin interior 
Today there's a yoga studio and a library cabin with floor-to-ceiling shelves, 
a bearskin rug and buffalo horns on the walls. The library was created by the 
owner for his book-loving wife as a surprise birthday present. It's an almost 
absurdly luxurious reimagining of the wild west – with prices to match – yet 
the sense of history is strong. We stay for just a night, feasting on Rocky 
Mountain elk chops with green chilli cheddar polenta then setting out along a 
path cut like a canyon between high snow banks to our own, tiny, Colorado cabin.

Getting there
Flights were provided by British Airways (ba.com 
<http://www.britishairways.com/travel/globalgateway.jsp/global/public/en_>) 
which flies from Heathrow to Denver from £720 return in winter. Internal 
flights from Denver to Gunnison/Crested Butte from $413 return with United (
united.com 
<https://www.united.com/web/en-US/default.aspx?root=1&SID=80DFC677B8424AFD9CB125C0A66B9567>
).

Where to stay
Accommodation was provided by Pioneer Guest Cabins (+1 970 349 5517, 
pioneerguestcabins.com <http://www.pioneerguestcabins.com/>), cabins sleeping 
four cost from $119 a night; Dunton Hot Springs (+1 970 882 4800,
duntonhotsprings.com <http://duntonhotsprings.com/>), cabins for two from $600 
all-inclusive; and the New Sherdian (+1 800 200 1891,newsheridan.com 
<http://www.newsheridan.com/>) in Telluride, doubles from £95 room-only. 

Further information
colorado.com <http://www.colorado.com/> and visitcrestedbutte.com 
<http://www.visitcrestedbutte.com/>
 