
A hundred years is a long time; it is a long time even in the life of a 
newspaper, and to look back on it is to take in not only a vast development in 
the thing itself, but a great slice in the life of the nation, in the progress 
and adjustment of the world. In the general development the newspaper, as an 
institution, has played its part, and no small part, and the particular 
newspaper with which I personally am concerned has also played its part, it is 
to be hoped, not without some usefulness. I have had my share in it for a 
little more than 50 years; I have been its responsible editor for only a few 
months short of its last half-century; I remember vividly its 50th birthday; I 
now have the happiness to share in the celebration of its 100th. I can 
therefore speak of it with a certain intimacy of acquaintance. I have myself 
been part of it and entered into its inner courts. That is perhaps a reason 
why, on this occasion, I should write in my own name, as in some sort a 
spectator, rather than in the name of the paper as a member of its working 
staff.

In all living things there must be a certain unity, a principle of vitality 
and growth. It is so with a newspaper, and the more complete and clear this 
unity the more vigorous and fruitful the growth. I ask myself what the paper 
stood for when first I knew it, what it has stood for since and stands for now. 
A newspaper has two sides to it. It is a business, like any other, and has to 
pay in the material sense in order to live. But it is much more than a 
business; it is an institution; it reflects and it influences the life of a 
whole community; it may affect even wider destinies. It is, in its way, an 
instrument of government. It plays on the minds and consciences of men. It may 
educate, stimulate, assist, or it may do the opposite. It has, therefore, a 
moral as well as a material existence, and its character and influence are in 
the main determined by the balance of these two forces. It may make profit or 
power its first object, or it may conceive itself as fulfilling a higher and 
more exacting function.

I think I may honestly say that, from the day of its foundation, there has not 
been much doubt as to which way the balance tipped as far as regards the 
conduct of the paper whose fine tradition I inherited and which I have had the 
honour to serve through all my working life. Had it not been so, personally, I 
could not have served it. Character is a subtle affair, and has many shades and 
sides to it. It is not a thing to be much talked about, but rather to be felt. 
It is the slow deposit of past actions and ideals. It is for each man his most 
precious possession, and so it is for that latest growth of time, the 
newspaper. Fundamentally it implies honesty, cleanness, courage, fairness, a 
sense of duty to the reader and the community. A newspaper is of necessity 
something of a monopoly, and its first duty is to shun the temptations of 
monopoly. Its primary office is the gathering of news. At the peril of its soul 
it must see that the supply is not tainted. Neither in what it gives, nor in 
what it does not give, nor in the mode of presentation must the unclouded face 
of truth suffer wrong. Comment is free, but facts are sacred. "Propaganda", so 
called, by this means is hateful. The voice of opponents no less than that of 
friends has a right to be heard. Comment also is justly subject to a 
self-imposed restraint. It is well to be frank; it is even better to be fair. 
This is an ideal. Achievement in such matters is hardly given to man. We can 
but try, ask pardon for shortcomings, and there leave the matter.

But, granted a sufficiency of grace, to what further conquests may we look, 
what purpose serve, what task envisage? It is a large question, and cannot be 
fully answered. We are faced with a new and enormous power and a growing one. 
Whither is the young giant tending? What gifts does he bring? How will he 
exercise his privilege and powers? What influence will he exercise on the minds 
of men and on our public life? It cannot be pretended that an assured and 
entirely satisfactory answer can be given to such questions. Experience is in 
some respects disquieting. The development has not been all in the direction 
which we should most desire. One of the virtues, perhaps almost the chief 
virtue, of a newspaper is its independence. Whatever its position or character, 
at least it should have a soul of its own. But the tendency of newspapers, as 
of other businesses, in these days is towards amalgamation. In proportion, as 
the function of a newspaper has developed and its organisation expanded, so 
have its costs increased. The smaller newspapers have had a hard struggle; many 
of them have disappeared. In their place we have great organisations 
controlling a whole series of publications of various kinds and even of 
differing or opposing politics. The process may be inevitable, but clearly 
there are drawbacks. As organisation grows personality may tend to disappear. 
It is much to control one newspaper well; it is perhaps beyond the reach of any 
man, or any body of men, to control half a dozen with equal success. It is 
possible to exaggerate the danger, for the public is not undiscerning. It 
recognises the authentic voices of conscience and conviction when it finds 
them, and it has a shrewd intuition of what to accept and what to discount.

This is a matter which in the end must settle itself, and those who cherish 
the older ideal of a newspaper need not be dismayed. They have only to make 
their papers good enough in order to win, as well as to merit, success, and the 
resources of a newspaper are not wholly measured in pounds, shillings, and 
pence. Of course the thing can only be done by competence all round, and by 
that spirit of co-operation right through the working staff which only a common 
ideal can inspire.

There are people who think you can run a newspaper about as easily as you can 
poke a fire, and that knowledge, training, and aptitude are superfluous 
endowments. There have even been experiments on this assumption, and they have 
not met with success. There must be competence, to start with, on the business 
side, just as there must be in any large undertaking, but it is a mistake to 
suppose that the business side of a paper should dominate, as sometimes 
happens, not without distressing consequences. A newspaper, to be of value, 
should be a unity, and every part of it should equally understand and respond 
to the purposes and ideals which animate it. Between its two sides there should 
be a happy marriage, and editor and business manager should march hand in hand, 
the first, be it well understood, just an inch or two in advance. Of the staff, 
much the same thing may be said. They should be a friendly company. They need 
not, of course, agree on every point, but they should share in the general 
purpose and inheritance. A paper is built up upon their common and successive 
labours, and their work should never be task work, never merely dictated. They 
should be like a racing boat's crew, pulling well together, each man doing his 
best because he likes it, and with a common and glorious goal.

That is the path of self-respect and pleasure; it is also the path of success. 
And what a work it is! How multiform, how responsive to every need and every 
incident of life! What illimitable possibilities of achievement and of 
excellence! People talk of "journalese" as though a journalist were of 
necessity a pretentious and sloppy writer; he may be, on the contrary, and very 
often is, one of the best in the world. At least he should not be content to be 
much less. And then the developments. Every year, almost every day, may see 
growth and fresh accomplishments, and with a paper that is really alive, it not 
only may, but does. Let anyone take a file of this paper, or for that matter 
any one of half a dozen other papers, and compare its whole make-up and leading 
features today with what they were five years ago, 10 years ago, 20 years ago, 
and he will realise how large has been the growth, how considerable the 
achievement. And this is what makes the work of a newspaper worthy and 
interesting. It has so many sides, it touches life at so many points, at every 
one there is such possibility on improvement and excellence. To the man, 
whatever his place on the paper, whether on the editorial or business, or even 
what may be regarded as the mechanical side - this also vitally important in 
its place - nothing should satisfy short of the best, and the best must always 
seem a little ahead of the actual. It is here that ability counts and that 
character counts, and it is on these that a newspaper, like every great 
undertaking, if it is to be worthy of its power and duty, must rely.
 