
Guardian News & Media produces a variety of content with funding from outside 
parties. These sources of revenue allow us to explore topics that we hope are 
of interest to Guardian and Observer readers. The presentation of the content 
makes clear how the content has been commissioned and produced, and who has 
funded it.

One of three labels will appear on this content: ‘Supported by’, ‘Paid 
content/Paid for by’, or ‘Advertiser content/from our advertisers’.

1) Supported by

‘Supported by’ is used to describe editorially independent content. We accept 
funding from third parties both for new projects and for content we are already 
producing. Before funding is agreed with a client, relevant senior editors are 
consulted about its suitability and the editor-in-chief has the final say on 
whether a funding deal is accepted. A client whose branding appears on 
editorial content may have a role in suggesting what kind of topics are 
covered, but the commissioning editor is not obliged to accept ideas from the 
funder. The content is written and edited by Guardian and Observer journalists, 
or those approved by GNM, to the same standards expected in all of our 
journalism. GNM will not show copy to funders for approval.

‘Supported by’ is also used to describe editorially independent content that 
the Guardian has produced with funding from foundations around the world who 
support specific projects. Examples of foundation funding include:

- A grant from The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation to help support the 
Guardian’s Global Development site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development>

- A grant from the Rockefeller Foundation to support the Guardian’s Cities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities> project

2) Paid content/paid for by

‘Paid content/paid for by’ is used to describe advertisement features that are 
paid for and controlled by the advertiser rather than the publisher and are 
subject to regulation by the Advertising Standards Authority in the UK, the 
Federal Trade Commission in the US and the Advertising Standards Bureau in 
Australia. This content is produced by commercial departments and does not 
involve GNM staff journalists.

3) ‘Advertiser content’ or content ‘from our advertisers’

‘Advertiser content/content from our advertisers’ is used to describe 
advertisement features that are paid for and produced by the advertiser rather 
than the publisher. They are subject to regulation by the Advertising Standards 
Authority in the UK, the Federal Trade Commission in the US and the Advertising 
Standards Bureau in Australia. This content is created by advertisers and 
hosted by the Guardian and does not involve GNM staff journalists.
 