
Here’s Adrian Bell, the first crossword setter for the Times, talking to the 
BBC about how he switched career from gentleman farmer to pioneering puzzler:

So then my father came to me. We were sitting in the country, trying to farm 
with a pair of horses, and he said: ‘Look, my boy, you’re going to make up 
crossword puzzles for the Times.’

‘But Father,’ I said, ‘I haven’t even solved a crossword puzzle.’ 

‘Well,’ he said, ‘you’ve got just 10 days to learn!’

You don’t need the audio to hear Bell’s old-school tones: the expression 
“crossword puzzles” tells you all you need to know. We call them “crosswords” 
nowadays. That, and sometimes “puzzles”. Or there again ... well, it all 
depends.


On Friday, Shuchi Upadhyay’s Crossword Unclued 
<http://www.crosswordunclued.com/2008/09/faq.html>, the most relentlessly 
interesting crossword blog,raised the question 
<http://www.crosswordunclued.com/2015/03/a-puzzling-difference-between-crossword.html>
 of how we refer to the things that I now want to finish this sentence without 
naming – you know the ones: with clues, and (usually) numbers and white and 
(usually) black squares.


The post at that blog uses all of the posts at this one to examine who uses 
what terminology to refer to our favourite waste of time, and I couldn’t be 
more excited about it. If I’ve ever been a corpus before, I’m not aware of it 
... and I would be aware of it.


And I’m certainly aware of denoting crosswords differently depending on 
context. What about you? Before you answer, a few thoughts.


Crossword puzzle

“Crossword puzzle” is used by British people of the past, when novelty 
justified wordiness, and by some American people of the present day for reasons 
unknown. For me, the second word has a limp, superfluous air bordering on the 
irritating. Not quite like “dictionary book”, but getting there.


Mind you, someone doesn’t find it superfluous:

 My first NGram search 
Crossword

Right: for me, “crossword” is the default. When I’m talking to non-solvers, or 
they to me, “crossword” is how we all make ourselves understood. “The Guardian 
Crossword Blog”. Assuming, that is, that we don’t need to distinguish between 
different types of crossword, of which more below.

Puzzle

And “puzzle” is what I use when I’m happiest, most relaxed. The people I’m 
probably talking to probably also have a more-than-passing interest in 
crosswords, despite – or rather because of – the vagueness of “puzzle”.


I hope someone has something enlightening to share about the tendency of 
people to use more generic terms as their involvement in a topic increases: a 
seasoned restorer of hulls referring to everything from a raft to a schooner as 
a “boat”, a hardcore sysadmin referring to your desktop as a “box”, and 
crossword devotees expressing enthusiasm for the latest “puzzle” they’ve 
encountered.


Other

“Cryptic crossword”, as used in print to help the reader navigating through 
newsprint, is even more revealing of context. When it’s not a caption, either 
the speaker doesn’t solve cryptic crosswords, or is talking to someone who 
doesn’t. It’s a warning flare: yep, we’re dealing withthose ones here. 


The name of the series – “started this week’s Listener 
<http://listenercrossword.com/> yet?” indicates a shared compulsion bordering 
on the reportable. “Cryptic” alone, or the name of the setter – “Enigmatist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/oct/13/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-enigmatist>
’s a right so-and-so today, isn’t he?” – is less alarming.


Cryptic crossword puzzle

This one is only used by characters in sitcoms written by non-solvers and can 
safely be ignored. Or can it? These are my impressions. What are yours?

 