
David Nobbs, whose death was announced yesterday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/aug/09/david-nobbs-reginald-perrin-creator-dies>
, noticed things. Things such as crosswords.
David Nobbs (@DavidNobbs) 
Crossword clue I saw in an Australian paper. 'Opposite of salt'. I wrestled 
with it for three hours. The answer was 'Pepper'.
 <https://twitter.com/DavidNobbs/status/266602875701047296> November 8, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/DavidNobbs/status/266602875701047296> 
Nobbs got into puzzles during his national service, when “Nothing happened. 
Nobody told us where to go. Nobody gave us anything to do.”


We ate and slept and slept and ate and lolled on our pits (beds). We read 
books. We did crosswords. We amused ourselves. We abused ourselves.

Solving was in the family; in his autobiography, the delightfully titled I 
Didn’t Get Where I Am Today, he writes with pride of his 95-year-old mother 
“doing the Daily Telegraph crossword (and not their quick one) every day.”

It’s in his fiction that crosswords sing. In the novel Going Gently 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/aug/12/fiction.reviews3>, Kate Copson 
wonders which of her sons has killed her husband and starts to suspect Nigel ...

A man who compiled crosswords would certainly be capable of a murder of this 
kind.

... before looking for clues in wordplay. It’s Nobbs’s solvers rather than his 
setters, though, whose crossword experiences are most revealing. He builds them 
into his characters’ routines, in particular Reginald Perrin’s, such that any 
little variation in the crossword part of the day assumes disturbing import.

This sentence from the first Perrin novel, with our hero sitting “over a 
wheel” on the delayed and dilapidated 8.16 from Climthorpe, is as poignant as 
sentences get:

The shaking caused his socks to fall down over his ankles, and it was hard to 
fill in the crossword legibly.

Even when he does get to solve, the ordeal is humiliating. Fellow commuter 
Peter Cartwright typically announces “Finished” before the train has even 
reached Raynes Park, leaving Perrin uttering such abasements as, “I’m stuck on 
the top left-hand corner. I just don’t know any Bolivian poets.”


Presently, the in-house doctor at Sunshine Desserts asks Perrin if he has lost 
his zest, correctly anticipating some symptoms ...

Can’t finish the crossword like you used to? Nasty taste in the mornings? Keep 
thinking about naked sportswomen?

... before describing himself as similarly afflicted, and baffled as to the 
reason. As Perrin starts to properly lose both zest and marbles, the crossword 
becomes a kind of miniature psychiatrist. His brow puckered “in a passable 
imitation of thought”, he fills its squares not with answers, but with 
biography ...

In the spaces of the crossword he wrote: ‘My name is Reginald Iolanthe Perrin. 
My mother couldn’t appear in our local Gilbert and Sullivan Society production 
of Iolanthe, because I was on the way, so they named me after it instead. I’m 
glad it wasn’t the Pirates of Penzance.’

... then with dark plotting, and later the silent pleading of: “I am not a 
mere tool of the capitalist society”. All futile, but the illusion of having 
solved successfully at least irritates Peter Cartwright. In the Return of 
Reginald Perrin, when Perrin has faked his death and reappeared as Martin 
Wellbourne, he needs to make some grand, meaningful life changes if he is to 
remain incognito:

He didn’t do the crossword on the train, because that’s what Reggie would have 
done.


In Nobbs’s writing, the crossword is preposterous: a daily intellectual demand 
tackled by those whose lives have left them too battered to solve it, and who 
remain forever compelled to try.

Crosswords have lost their funniest commentator; I will enjoy the tribute 
puzzle as soon as one of the real-life Nigels has compiled it.
 