
“Hell, ain’t nothing strange when Colored go crazy,” a character observes in 
Cynthia Bond’s debut novel, Ruby. “Strange is when we don’t.” But the crazy 
does seem unlikely when we are first introduced to Ruby Bell. How does a black 
woman in the 1960s, with enough beauty and light enough skin to enjoy 
privileges others would dream of, end up urinating and howling in the streets 
and fleeing ghosts?

As it turns out, the crazy is not so strange at all: Ruby is a harrowing book 
about sexual abuse, religious hypocrisy and satanism. It would be safe to 
disregard the review quoted at the front of the UK edition that recommended it 
for beach reading.

Ruby by Cynthia Bond review – a survivor's story of love, madness and Satanism
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/17/ruby-cynthia-bond-review-survivors-story-love-madness-satanism>
At 53, Cynthia Bond is not an average first-time author, but Ruby is not an 
average debut. Fifteen years in the making, and originally 900 pages long, Bond 
divided it into a trilogy on her first agent’s advice. Ruby is the first 
volume, and follows a preternaturally beautiful woman who escapes a small-town 
life to the vapid glamour of upper-class New York. Soon after her reluctant 
return to Liberty, Texas – “Not only do her shit not stink, way she act, she 
ready to sell it by the ounce”, one character gripes – the town is gripped by 
schadenfreude when she descends into a raging madness, brought on by memories 
of her harrowing childhood.

The book arrived quietly in US bookstores in 2014, with good reviews but muted 
sales – until a few months later, when Bond got the phone call that turned 
sales around.

“‘Hello, Cynthia, this is Oprah Winfrey’,” says Bond, in a spot-on Oprah 
impersonation. “I just screamed! She told me she loved my book. It was the 
first one she had chosen personally for her book club in a year and a half.” 
When it was announced that Ruby would be part ofOprah’s 2.0 book club 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oprah%27s_Book_Club_2.0>, the novel landed on 
the New York Times bestseller list, and film and TV rights were optioned by 
Winfrey’s production company Harpo Films. Then in the UK, Bond landed a spot on 
the shortlist for the Baileys prize for women’s fiction. Not bad, for a first 
book.

Ruby does not read like a debut; there is a lyricism to Bond’s writing 
comparable to Gabriel García Márquez or perhaps Isabel Allende. A melting pot 
of Creole culture, southern twang, voodoo and even some Jewish mythology, Ruby 
feels rich, even magical, at times. Even the ugliest characters talk with a 
sonorous charm: “You sound like you been batter-dipped and fried in 
wrongfulness,” says one. The picture she paints of Liberty – dirt poor, but 
rich in belief and sanctimony – is a believable one; the horrors she portrays 
there even more so.

Born in Texas, Bond grew up surrounded by books and what she calls “black 
literati”; with two academic parents, their home was a hub of cultural and 
political discourse. Her cousin was the late civil rights leaderJulian Bond 
<http://www.naacp.org/preview/pages/julian-bond>, Maya Angelou dropped by “to 
sing the blues, and eat rice and beans”. “I was the most precocious child,” 
Bond groans. “I leapt on her lap and said: ‘Miss Angelou, whydoes the caged 
bird sing?’ My parents were probably so embarrassed.”


Bond’s father wandered the house reciting Shakespeare and she peeked into 
books like The Valley of the Dolls and Lolita, but it was Bond’s mother who fed 
her the beginnings of Ruby. Her mother grew up in the real Liberty, one of the 
oldest towns in Texas, on a farm growing cotton and sugar cane. “My mother has 
these little scars on her body from farming … we’d point to a scar and say: 
‘Tell us that one’. She’d tell us these stories again and again. Her body was 
our favourite chapter book. I grew up feeling like I was born in Liberty, like 
I’d grown up there”. While writing Ruby, she visited the town for the first 
time: the realities of the place, and its surrounding piney woods, overtook the 
location she had pictured in her head and changed Ruby completely.

Real history weighs heavily on Cynthia Bond, and so too on her book. She is 
very clear that Ruby is fiction, but there are equally clear affinities with 
her own background: like Ruby, Bond’s family were fair-skinned enough that 
“when they went north, they passed for white”. Her grandfather – born in the 
same year asthe Emancipation Proclamation 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emancipation_Proclamation> to a slave owner and 
a slave – would correct the driver when he was told he didn’t need to sit at 
the back of the bus. In one scene in the novel, Ruby glimpses signs of Martin 
Luther King’s 1963 March on Washington; Bond herself, who was seven when King 
was assassinated, spent her childhood “playing ‘funeral’ because with Dr King 
and Kennedy, it was all I saw on the news.”

In the novel, Ruby’s aunt is lynched by the Ku Klux Klan. This too has its 
real-life echo. When Bond was nine, she learned about her own aunt, Carrie: 
“She worked in a white man’s home and he took a liking to her. It happened so 
often then, who knows if it was love? But he built a house for her and I think 
it was that act, that it wasn’t just sex on the side, that was when … ” her 
voice drifts off. Carrie was 18 when she was murdered, lynched by Liberty’s 
sheriff and his fellow Klansmen. “Ruby is fiction,” Bond clarifies. “I have 
taken this truth and filled in blanks and added things that were never there. 
But yes, the basic story is true.”


It is a terrifying thought, but no one is a complete monster
Cynthia Bond 
“A woman must have money and a room of her own if she is to write fiction,” 
Virginia Woolf once wrote. To Bond, this is a ridiculous ideal. She wrote Ruby
everywhere: first in a community writing class, then in cafes (she thanks three 
baristas in the afterword), even a partly renovated church when she was in 
between offices. She frequently talks about writing as something done to her, 
rather than by her; of feeling pains in her head and arms as she wrote a scene 
where a character is beaten to death, and negotiating aloud with a fictional 
paedophile to to let her go home to her daughter.

“I know it sounds insane,” she says, not sounding like she cares very much if 
anyone thinks so. “But I really live it, taste it. That’s why it is so hard. I 
love diving into the DNA of something. But you have to … feel horrible things … 
what makes a paedophile attracted to a child, the sadistic pleasure that 
someone gets from hurting someone. I feel everything. God, I really wish I was 
a good drinker,” she says and laughs. “I get why so many writers are 
alcoholics! Me, I just ate a lot of chocolate.”


As the book progresses, it becomes apparent that, like Ruby, most of Liberty’s 
ostracised were at one point sane, but have been driven out of a God-fearing 
society controlled by an unseen web of satanism. It is not an easy read: there 
is only one depiction of consensual sex, but there are many of child abuse. But 
much of horror in the book comes not from the acts themselves, but from the 
knowledge that the men performing them are also unremarkable, as in real life. 
As Ruby notes, dully: “The wolves were also normal men, which made it the most 
horrible of all … those men were a part of the wheel of the world and helped it 
turn.”

“It is a terrifying thought, but no one is a complete monster,” Bond says. 
“Most people are neither good or bad. The people that do horrific things are 
not lurking in the shadows, drooling – they’re the people around you, hiding in 
plain sight.”

Ruby feels like an angry book, though Bond herself does not seem so. She is 
black, bisexual, a survivor of abuse herself, and has weathered most prejudices 
firsthand; but mostly she talks about the injustices others face, especially in 
her work with homeless LGBT youth in LA. But Ruby is at its best when picking 
apart the hypocrisies peddled by America’s religious right – its obsession with 
sex, its eagerness to denounce others. Raised atheist by a mother who had grown 
up “believing that the apocalypse was happening next Saturday”, Bond has no 
time for dogma that says evil is somehow preordained: “I really believe we have 
choice. You may come from a hard life, but there will be a moment where you 
come to a choice of who you are going to be. I don’t believe evil exists. 
Horrific acts exist, but you always have choice of whether you will do that or 
not.”

Bond is working on the second book in the Ruby trilogy, and is due to submit a 
manuscript in September. “I haven’t felt that second-novel fear yet. When it 
comes to the final edits, maybe I will,” she says, smiling. “I am just happy to 
be with the characters again.” The whole experience has taught her – an 
“intensely self-critical” person – to let her next book go. “You are never 
satisfied,” she says. “I think all authors want to go into bookstores and write 
in the margin. Now I know how little control authors have after writing the 
thing - publicity, sales – you can’t grow attached, or you will lose your mind.”
 