 The international community's approach to the intractable problem of Jammu and 
Kashmir is, by and large, to ignore it. Since 1948-49, when UN resolutions 
seeking to end the territory's post-Raj partition and facilitate a plebiscite 
came to nothing, both India and Pakistan have entrenched on either side of the 
Line of Control. Two wars and an 11-year-old insurgency which has claimed an 
estimated 25,000 lives have not altered this crude balance of power. India has 
consistently rebuffed international mediation efforts, insisting it is an 
internal matter. The fact that its authority is upheld through a repressive 
military presence and that Kashmiris conducted a mass boycott of last October's 
national elections is apparently no contradiction to Delhi's stubborn way of 
thinking.
Pakistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan>, occupying Azad ("free") 
Kashmir and Gilgit and the Northern Territories, doggedly maintains its own, 
unrealistic claim to sovereignty over all Kashmir, India's only majority Muslim 
state, and appeals for the world's support. It regularly tests its pretensions 
and India's defences through armed border incursions and proxy terrorism, 
responsibility for which it implausibly but persistently denies. Both 
governments refuse to countenance the idea of an independent, united Kashmir. 
Both exploit the issue for their own domestic ends.

Long though the problem has been allowed to fester, neither India and 
Pakistan's criminally delinquent behaviour, nor international apathy, can 
continue much longer. As the Christmas hijacking of an Indian plane 
demonstrated, militant Islamic fundamentalists are already internationalising 
the Kashmir question, whatever Delhi may say. In many cases, these people hail 
not from Kashmir but from Afghanistan, Iran, the Gulf, even Britain. They do 
not belong to the tolerant, multicultural tradition of pre-partition 
Kashmiriyat . And although they may have the backing of elements within 
Pakistan's security apparatus, Islamabad cannot ultimately control them either. 
Such fanatics apart, Kashmir in any case demands international action. Both 
India and Pakistan are nuclear-armed these days; the next Indo-Pakistan war 
over Kashmir may not be containable. This is one reason why Bill Clinton, who 
declared a "personal interest" in resolving last summer'sKashmir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/kashmir> border crisis, may visit India this 
March. He should not hesitate to step in forcefully and, if necessary, knock 
some heads together.
 