
The Rock provides, quite literally, an impregnable fortress for data centres. 
Gibraltar’s success in attracting and retaining banking and e-gaming companies 
– firms which are among the most demanding with regard to the speed and 
reliability of data services – depends on its special capabilities and assets. 
Industry and government leaders are now guiding Gibraltar’s diversification to 
other kinds of companies reliant on dependable, high-quality data storage and 
transfer.

As in other areas, Gibraltar’s eclectic history and fortuitous topography are 
wedded with modern developments. At the literal centre of it all is the 
celebrated Admiralty Tunnel; dug through the Rock in 1893 by the British Navy, 
and used as operational headquarters by General Eisenhower during World War II, 
the tunnel now houses a very secure data storage facility. Occupying a 3000m2 
space split up into 80 separate rooms, the facility is owned by Continent 8, a 
winner of numerous industry awards.

Other innovative data centres include CUBE, which emphasises 24/7 customer and 
tech support, as well as security – physical and network alike – and worst-case 
disaster recovery plans. The extra offerings of such companies accentuate the 
competitive edge Gibraltar is seeking to attain when it comes to seamless 
integration of product and support in the ICT sector.

In general, if there’s a potential challenge or cost driver, chances are the 
Rock’s tech-savvy entrepreneurs have already thought of it. Take Sapphire 
Networks, located in the heart of Gibraltar’s business district, Europort. 
Along with its strong presence in the internet business, Sapphire is a leading 
provider of data centre services. The company has used its location near the 
waterfront to its advantage to ensure optimal cooling of hardware. Indeed, 
Sapphire today boasts Gibraltar’s only chilled water-cooled co-location 
facility. The result has been proven in a track record of absolute continuity, 
regardless of external incidents. When a fire at the Waterport power station in 
2014 blacked out most of Gibraltar, e-gaming tenants at the company’s Europort 
and Atlantic Suites, the largest commercial complex in Gibraltar, continued to 
operate without interruption.

Sapphire Networks continues to grow

Run by Lawrence Isola, who also manages the prestigious Europort office 
complex, home to online gaming firms such as bwin, Sapphire Networks embodies 
the all-purpose, internationally-oriented nature of Gibraltar’s ICT sector. The 
company’s worldwide network reach and capabilities have grown dramatically in 
recent years, aided by its membership in some of the world’s largest internet 
exchange points. The top nine UK ISPs by subscriber numbers are peered with 
Sapphire Networks in the London Internet Exchange (LINX), providing a direct 
connection to 20.5 million broadband subscribers to the UK-facing companies who 
choose to make the Rock their home.
 