
David Jenkins, the former bishop of Durham best known for expressing doubts 
about the virgin birth and the physical resurrection of Christ, has died aged 
91.

Jenkins, who was consecrated in 1984, caused an uproar when he compared the 
resurrection to a “conjuring trick with bones”. His comments, which were widely 
misquoted, triggered accusations of blasphemy.


In a pre-recorded interview for BBC radio shortly after becoming bishop, 
Jenkins said: “I am bothered about what I call God and conjuring tricks. I am 
not clear that God manoeuvres physical things. I am clear that he works 
miracles through personal responses and faith.”


After being reminded that, according to the New Testament, Jesus rose from the 
tomb, Jenkins replied: “All I said [was], ‘Was it literally physical?’ After 
all, a conjuring trick with bones only proves that somebody is clever at a 
conjuring trick with bones.”


He also told a BBC presenter that he doubted God would have arranged a virgin 
birth or for Jesus to walk on water.


The appointment of Jenkins, who was known for his heterodox views as a priest, 
was criticised by some Church of England traditionalists, with about 12,000 
people signing a petition against his consecration.


Two nights after the ceremony at York Minster, the spectacular cathedral was 
struck by lightning and gutted in a resulting fire. Some interpreted the 
disaster as divine disapproval.

As bishop of Durham, Jenkins was also a fierce critic of the Conservative 
government, saying it was wedded to market values at the expense of social 
justice.


The tabloid press dubbed him the “barmy bishop”. He later said 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6Yb6wuX81UQ>: “I did expect more audible and 
visible support from many people on the higher ranks of the church. I got a lot 
behind the scenes, of course, but I did find myself somehow looking as if I was 
the only person saying these questions had ever come up.”


After he retired as bishop in 1994, he continued to serve as an honorary 
assistant bishop in the diocese of Ripon and Leeds. In 2005, he blessed a civil 
partnership between two gay men despite a church ban on such blessings.


Stuart Bain, the archdeacon of Sunderland, paid tribute to Jenkins as an 
inspirational bishop. “Who could possibly forget his electrifying sermon at his 
enthronement, which happened during the miners’ strike in 1984, and his less 
than flattering comments about Ian MacGregor, the head of the N[ational] C[oal] 
B[oard]? The first and only time I have ever heard spontaneous applause during 
a sermon in Durham Cathedral,” he said.
“David was never shy of making political statements, but it was clear to me 
that this was driven by a clear belief in social justice rooted so often in the 
teaching of the Old Testament prophets.”
 