
Despite their obvious debt to the Beatles, the Monkees were one of the most 
successful and well-loved pop groups of the late 1960s. Their only British 
member wasDavy Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/music/davy-jones>, a former 
child actor, who has died after a heart attack, aged 66.

The independent producers Bob Rafelson and Bert Schneider 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/dec/14/bert-schneider> came up with the 
idea of a television series featuring the antics of a pop group that would 
issue singles and albums in tandem with the show. Auditions were held in 
Hollywood for "four insane boys", and Jones was one of the first in line. He 
was eventually chosen, along with three Americans: Peter Tork and Michael 
Nesmith were accomplished rock guitarists, while Micky Dolenz, like Jones, had 
been a child actor.

Clearly inspired by the Beatles, and in particular their 1964 film A Hard 
Day's Night, The Monkees quickly climbed the television ratings in the US after 
the show's launch in 1966. The misgivings of critics were partly assuaged by 
the quality of the songs provided for the group by the cream of New York's pop 
composers, including Neil Diamond and Carole King. Each Monkee was given some 
personality traits, with Jones playing the cheeky chappie, with an accent that 
most Americans could mistake for Liverpudlian.

The accompanying singles were equally successful and there were six 
million-sellers in less than two years. Lead vocals were shared, with Jones 
giving his best performance on Daydream Believer, composed by John Stewart, 
from the 1967 album Pisces, Aquarius, Capricorn & Jones Ltd. This was to be the 
artistic and commercial peak for the group, as the second television series 
attracted fewer viewers and the Monkees' attempt at artistic freedom, The 
Birds, the Bees & the Monkees (1968) impressed neither critics nor record 
buyers. The band also toured the US, but their enthusiasm for Jimi Hendrix, 
whom they invited to open the show, was not shared by their fans, who booed him 
off stage.

The group made an ambitious anti-war comedy film, Head (1968) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/apr/28/monkees-head-jack-nicholson-interview>
, with Rafelson and Jack Nicholson, but soon afterwards they began to fall 
apart. Both Tork and Nesmith left in 1969, leaving Jones and Dolenz to record 
the final album, Changes, in 1970. The group was finally dissolved in 1971.

Jones was born in Openshaw, Manchester. He showed early talent as an actor and 
at 14 he was chosen to join the cast of Granada TV's soap opera Coronation 
Street. Jones played Colin Lomax, the chirpy grandson of the matriarch Ena 
Sharples. This role led to three small parts in the police series Z-Cars. Jones 
then pursued a career as an apprentice jockey, but returned to the stage after 
successfully auditioning to take over the part of the Artful Dodger in Lionel 
Bart's musical Oliver!

He was in the cast when the London production transferred to Broadway in 1963. 
In February 1964 a "Brit" edition of the Ed Sullivan Show included the cast of 
Oliver! alongside the Beatles. Jones later told an interviewer that the 
adulation that greeted the Fab Four gave him the ambition to become a pop star. 
The Sullivan show led to a contract with Screen Gems, the small-screen 
subsidiary of Columbia Pictures. Jones appeared in two television series and 
made an album for the in-house record label before Screen Gems bought in to the 
concept of the Monkees.

In the early 1970s, he continued to perform as a solo singer and in 1975 he 
briefly formed a new group with Dolenz, Tommy Boyce and Bobby Hart, the 
composers of the Monkees' theme song. During the following decade he 
occasionally returned to the stage, playing in a 1977 London production of The 
Point!, by the singer-songwriter Harry Nilsson. He traded on his Monkee 
heritage with cameo roles in episodes of several US TV series and also appeared 
in revivals of Oliver!, this time as Fagin.

In the years after the demise of the Monkees, demand grew for a reunion. Jones 
was the most enthusiastic about a new tour, while Nesmith was obdurate in his 
refusal. Finally, in 1987, MTV broadcast the original series, albums were 
reissued and Jones, Dolenz and Tork played a series of concerts. A new album, 
Pool It! appeared in 1988 and a further tour took place shortly afterwards. A
45th anniversary reunion tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/may/20/the-monkees-review> went ahead 
last year, and Jones was still happy to be performing: "Wherever I go, people 
still shout out: 'Hey, hey, we're the Monkees!'," he said. "And I never tire of 
that."

Jones is survived by his third wife, Jessica, and four daughters from his two 
earlier marriages.

• David Thomas Jones, actor, singer and songwriter, born 30 December 1945; 
died 29 February 2012
 