
A LONG-TERM PROJECT ON SHORT-TERM THINKING

Six o’clock on Monday evening, and a crowd has gathered at the Picturehouse 
off Piccadilly Circus. An eclectic lot. Strikingly so. A more diverse mix than 
you see at many films these days, when mainstream releases are each aimed at 
their own particular demographic. Here, a mix of men and women, all ages, hip 
kids in skinny jeans, old buffers in egg-and-bacon blazers. Businessmen, 
musicians, comedians, doctors. Publishers, bloggers, writers, and journalists. 
Administrators, Test players, ex-players, club players. Those are only the ones 
I talk too. There are many more too. They’re all cricket fans, and all here to 
see anew documentary, Death of a Gentleman <http://deathofagentlemanfilm.com>. 

Screen One at the Picturehouse seats 650, and tonight almost every spot is 
taken. Call it a loose coalition of the disaffected. Some concerned, some 
curious, some furious. All in agreement that something is up with the sport 
they love, all with their own opinions about what, exactly, that something is. 
There are as many different answers as there are people in the room. Here’s 
Michael Holding, talking about the lack of support for West Indian cricket. 
Here’s Gideon Haigh, talking about the greed of the administrators. Here’s 
Peter Borren, captain of the Netherlands, talking about the decisionto cut the 
associate nations from the World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/22/associate-nations-cricket-world-twenty20-ireland-scotland>
.

Too little coverage on terrestrial TV. Too few amateur players. Too many 
amateur administrators. Too many flat pitches. Too much T20. Too much ODI 
cricket. Too many meaningless Test matches. Too little state school cricket. 
Too many overworked players. Too many overpaid players. Too many counties. Too 
many empty stands. Too many exploited fans. Too much self-interest. Too much 
temptation. Too much money. Too much corruption.

Odds are that if you’re interested, you’ll already have heard something about 
Death of a Gentleman. That, for instance, the England and Wales Cricket Board 
refused to let one of its employees be in it. Thatthe MCC decided not to host a 
screening at Lord’s for fear of aggravating the ECB 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sport/cricket/article-3164567/England-women-s-cricket-chief-Clare-Connor-silenced-ECB.html>
. That, after one early screening, the crowd broke out into a chorus of boos 
and jeers when the ECB president, Giles Clarke, popped up on screen for a final 
time at the end of the movie.

The film has been made – disclosure – by two friends of mine, Sam Collins and 
Jarrod Kimber. They started work on it back in 2011, when they travelled 
together to cover Australia’s home Test series against India. Back then they 
were thinking of making a movie about the state of Test cricket, based in part 
on the experiences of their friend Ed Cowan, who made his Test debut that very 
winter. They wanted to ask whether the sport they love is really at risk of 
dying, as so many say it is. It was the year of the 2,000th Test, and so it 
seemed a good time to do it.

At one point in the film, Clarke tells Collins that all the complaints he is 
making now are the same, verbatim, as those raised in the Editor’s Notes of 
Wisden way back at the beginning of the 20th century. And he’s likely right.
Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> has always been in a crisis 
of one kind or another. And, had they been around to do it, Collins and Kimber 
could have made a film about the death of Test cricket in the 1920s, the 1960s, 
or 1970s. But in the end their film came to be about much more than that one 
issue. It focused instead on problems that are very much of our time. 
Unavoidably so, Collins says, because in the three years they were filming it, 
the spot-fixing scandal engulfed the Indian Premier League, the ICC decided to 
shrink the World Cup, and India, Australia, and England carved up control of 
the ICC between the three of them.

“We very quickly realised,” Collins says, “that every single problem in the 
game comes back to short-term thinking by the people who run it.”

They focused in particular on Clarke, who has overseen one of the most 
successful periods in the history of English cricket, and who also sold the 
ECB’s broadcasting rights to Sky, andsigned a five-year deal with Allen Stanford
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2008/dec/17/stanford-series-ecb-andy-bull>
. And Narayanaswami Srinivasan, ICC chairman, the most influential man in world 
cricket, andalso one accused of violent homophobia by his own son 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/11/the-spin-kevin-pietersen-icc-chairman>
, whose son-in-law was banned from cricket for life over bringing the game into 
disrepute, and who has effectively been barred from running his own national 
board by the Supreme Court of India. Both are interviewed in the film. 
Srinivasan is evasive. Clarke bullish.

Trust is a fragile thing, easy to break and almost impossible to repair. The 
film asks whether, after everything they have done, Srinivasan and Clarke have 
earned it. Giving evidence against them, Lalit Modi, founder of the Indian 
Premier League, now living in exile in London. Modi is a human corkscrew. He 
twists his arguments to suit his own ends. His unreliability as a source 
touches on the biggest difficulty facing anyone who wants to delve into the 
mess at the ICC. It all appears to be black and white from a distance. But when 
you get up close, you find many shades of grey. The politics of it are only a 
little less complicated than those of Schleswig-Holstein.

The ICC is a magic eye painting in reverse. The more you look, the less clear 
it becomes. Srinivasan, for instance, has been cleared to run the ICC by the 
same Supreme Court that barred him from running the BCCI. Clarke has sold the 
rights to Sky. But there isn’t a terrestrial broadcaster who wants them anyway.

The achievement of Death of a Gentleman is that it finds a way to cut through 
this confusion, and to reach a clear conclusion. Collins and Kimber argue that 
the ICC needs to adoptthe reforms suggested by Lord Woolf, the former Lord 
Chief Justice of England and Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2012/feb/02/world-cricket-forum>, in 
his 2012 report into the governance of the game. Woolf stated that then “the 
ICC reacts as though it is primarily a members’ club”, that “its interest in 
enhancing the global development of the game is secondary”. Since Woolf wrote 
those words, the situation has got worse.

The film has arrived at the right time, in the wake of recent events at Fifa, 
and on the back of a surge of anger among cricket fans around the world. Twenty 
thousand people signed a petition calling for the ICC to reconsider its 
decision to cut the associate nations out of the next World Cup. It ignored the 
petition, just as it effectively ignored Lord Woolf.

Collins and Kimber have launched a campaign alongside their film, Change 
Cricket <http://www.changecricket.com>. They say that the ICC needs to be 
independent, transparent, accountable, and equitable. Call it optimistic. Call 
it idealistic. But they’re right. At least that much is black and white. 
Because right now there are an awful lot of angry and disappointed cricket fans 
around the world, many more than the 650 who made that screening. However many 
sign up, my guess is that the ICC still won’t listen. But its sponsors might, 
and it is, as always in these things, the sponsors who can best effect change.

Death of a Gentleman is out now, and on at various venues around the country 
<http://deathofagentlemanfilm.com/screenings>. If you care about cricket, you 
should see it.

• This is an extract taken from the Spin, the Guardian’s weekly cricket email, 
to subscribe just visit this page, find ‘The Spin’ and follow the instructions 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/email-prefs>.
 