 The actor Declan Mulholland, who has died of a heart attack aged 66, was 
described by one critic as "a rotund, Irish Tweedledum with a fine line in 
comic delivery". His roly-poly presence was ideal for Shakespeare, and for some 
years he appeared with the Royal Shakespeare Company in comedy roles. He was 
also seen as being just right for the Royal Court theatre of the time, where he 
worked for Lindsay Anderson.
There were also appearances in the west end with directors like Joan 
Littlewood, Ronald Eyre and Tony Richardson. They loved the fact that his rough 
and ready Belfast background, which never left him, made him perfect for 
certain parts. Several hundred television roles included Father Ted, Casualty 
and Lovejoy.

Declan was born and brought up in the Falls Road area of Belfast, one of five 
children. At one point, the family could not pay his school fees, but the head 
teacher said that Declan was such a bright boy that he could stay - and the 
family could pay when they could afford it.

He left school at 15 to work in the Belfast shipyards. The poverty of his 
childhood and his early working experiences politicised him, and shaped his 
philosophy for the rest of his life. In the early 1950s, he came to England as 
a delegate to a peace conference. He liked what he saw and moved to London. 
Once in the capital, he joined the young Communist league and got himself a job 
at Pinewood studios helping to build sets. The film industry intrigued him.

Like many leftwing youngsters interested in the arts, he found his way to 
Unity theatre. There he designed sets, learned about lighting and soon found 
himself acting. It was at that point that Declan decided that he wanted to be a 
professional actor - work at the Unity was unpaid. Even when his professional 
career burgeoned, he always worked at Unity whenever possible. In 1975, the 
theatre burned down in mysterious circumstances; Declan championed its revival 
and became chairman of the organisation, producing several shows in various 
venues in the name of the Unity theatre.

In the late 1970s, he left the Communist party, having decided that the 
Anarchist movement suited his ideas better. Peter O'Toole had become a friend 
and was always happy if there was a part for Declan in his films. "We worked 
together in many films, television plays and in the theatre. He was a joy to be 
with. Highly intelligent and a great companion," he said.

Declan Mulholland's physique belied the depth of the man. Those who took the 
trouble to look beneath the surface found an admirable mind and character. He 
is survived by his sister, Vera.

Declan Mulholland, actor, born December 1932; died June 29, 1999
 