
Lack of diversity is one of the biggest issues threatening the advertising 
industry today. Not only does this challenge the credibility of the industry, 
it also means that the businesses themselves are not being run as effectively 
as they could be. Research fromMcKinsey 
<http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/organization/why_diversity_matters> has 
proven that diverse businesses deliver 35% better results than non-diverse 
businesses.


For much of my career in advertising, I have been part of a management team 
consisting primarily of white university-educated men, with the addition of the 
odd token woman. In the past, I justified my hiring policy by saying that I 
have always hired the best person for the job, but I have come to realise how 
short-sighted this is. This is why I’ve spent the last few years to finding new 
and better ways to solve the diversity issue.

How to recognise and overcome your unconscious bias
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2015/dec/14/recognise-overcome-unconscious-bias>
How do you hire a diverse workforce?

My advice first and foremost would be to consider each hire based on the value 
they can add to the team, rather than simply in a specific role. It is not 
always about hiring the best person for the role, rather the best person for 
the team as a whole. If you have gaps in diversity, then task those who are 
filling the role with finding candidates who can fill those gaps. Make it 
compulsory for all roles to have a shortlist that at least contains one strong 
male candidate and one strong female candidate.

Review every stage of your recruitment process. What kind of job profile do 
you send out? It is commonly quoted that female candidates only apply for jobs 
if they think they fulfil 100% of the requirements (whereas men will apply if 
they fulfil 60%). Avoid advertising a role based on meeting an extensive list 
of previous experience and focus on what they need to achieve in the future.

Finally, ensure that you have built an environment where everyone can thrive 
and have a voice within the business.

Go against your bias – and teach others to do the same

The first thing you need to do is get people to understand that they have 
unconscious bias. Get them to take the test developed byHarvard 
<https://implicit.harvard.edu/implicit/takeatest.html>. Making people conscious 
of it is the first step, then offer them training and implement processes that 
seek to rid them of that bias.

Be aware of the fact that most people will unconsciously hire someone in their 
own image. Encourage others to look for complementary, varied skill sets that 
will make the team stronger.

Make it as easy as possible for parents to thrive in the business. Only hold 
meetings between 10am and 4pm and never go to the pub after a meeting as it 
excludes parents from the conversation that is certain to continue afterwards. 
Ban sending emails between 6pm and 8am and offer everyone flexible working if 
it is suitable for their job role.

Consider each hire based on the value they can add to the team.

Work out what skills and attributes are missing from your current team

Keep a database at every level to measure how well you are doing. Make it part 
of the board agenda to review this on a regular basis and understand changes 
that need to happen. Obviously the first place to look is at the board itself. 
There is no silver bullet at senior level, although I believe it is no longer 
acceptable to have an all-male board. Bring in non executives if you have to 
and make it part of their role to help increase diversity at board level.

Ultimately, culture change is never easy. But if you challenge everyone in the 
organisation to constantly look at ways to both attract minorities and ensure 
that they can thrive, you will soon see positive change within your business.

Daniele Fiandaca is co-founder of Token Man <http://www.tokenman.org/> and is 
one of the team behindThe Great British Diversity Experiment 
<http://www.thegreatbritishdiversityexperiment.com/>
 