
'It's really all about speed, isn't it?" My husband has come to a breathless 
stop beside me, at the bottom of the red Slalombacken slope in the resort of 
Ramundberget, close to the Norwegian border in western Sweden.

"I was on rails!" He beams, face flushed with adrenaline and wind-chill. It 
dawns on me that the moment has arrived. After a good decade of capable but 
stiffly cautious downhill skiing, my gracefully maturing life partner has 
unlocked the elusive secret of "the flow" – the exhilarating harmony of 
movement, gravity and control that we are on the slopes to pursue.

But the irony of the timing of my husband's eureka moment is quite enjoyable 
in itself. This trip was conceived as an escape from the trappings and expense 
of downhill skiing. Ostensibly, we had had enough of the risks and thrills of 
the slope, and had come to the Funäsfjällen ski area to explore the vast and 
varied network of Nordic ski trails for which it is famous.

What you expect from Nordic, or cross-country, skiing is hours of hypnotic 
gliding through the stark, silent beauty of forest and fell, bathed in slanted 
light and interrupted only by the left-right swishy rhythm of effort and the 
occasional nod to a lone fellow enthusiast. This is the sport in its original 
form, pure and virtuous.

"Let's do Slalombacken again," shouts my husband over the din of the T-bar 
lift as it drags us towards the summit.

The truth is that we love both meditation and adrenaline, and that 
Funäsfjällen is the perfect place to have it all. Its five small downhill 
resorts are both exciting and manageable, and linked by 300km of beautifully 
prepared trails that comprise the Nordic Ski Centre – and a further 450km of 
marked touring trails.

Each resort offers enough for many days' varied skiing, and a comprehensive 
lift pass gives access to the lot. A car-free week is possible, but it would 
involve some thought and planning as the ski-bus service between resorts is 
infrequent. For us, a group of six aged between two and 64, the week would have 
been a struggle without the 4x4 monster that brought us on the mountainous 
journey from Oslo. Either way, it's sensible to choose a base to adventure 
from. We settled on Ramundberget, northernmost of the five, a low-key, friendly 
and well-established resort with offerings for all ages and inclinations.
 Maria (left) and family take a hot chocolate break 
The eponymous mountain rises like a whale out of a shallow forest sea, and 
though the slopes down its flanks are relatively short, so are the lift queues. 
Forest trails weave between ravines, black moguls and easy traverses. Toddlers 
learn the ropes on the gentle incline of LillRamis, while older children are 
well-looked-after in finely graded group lessons. Then families do lunchtime 
child swaps in the spacious warming hut, where packed lunches mingle with a 
basic hot food menu and toddlers jump on piles of jackets. (More refined 
options are available in the charmingFjällgården 
<http://www.fjallgarden.se/swe/index.htm> hotel, or in the striking circular 
Tusen – Thousand – restaurant near the summit.)

Cross-country novices can explore the gentle valley landscape before setting 
off on more adventurous highland trails. The summit waffle hut at Kariknallen 
is a good place to aim for, best reached via a ridgetop touring ski trail. For 
the faint of heart there is also a daily tow tractor.

For all the daytime options, there's not much nightlife in Funäsfjällen, which 
is modelled on a well-established Swedish tradition of family skiing: 
self-catered chalets in quiet clusters among the trees. Revellers are better 
off a few hours north in Åre, Sweden's most extensive and lively resort, where 
timber-slatted bars cater to a steady stream of urbanites.

More often than not, Swedish ski chalets are a bit anonymous and charmless, 
facilitators of a week's inhabitation without excess or fuss. But PS 
Arkitektur, a small Stockholm-based architecture firm, is working to change 
that. We are luxuriating in a Fjällhuset (Fell House), one of a handful of 
types of simple, prefabricated barn-style chalet – with stylish wood and 
monochrome interiors – built here by the company.
 The cool Fjällhuset interior 
Deceptively simple in form, it is an understated declaration of love to the 
landscape that puts the extensive commercial competition to shame. And its 
location, a mere 20m from the nearest trail, is perfect – Fjällhuset will make 
you want to go cross-country skiing. As we watch dusk fall over the glowing 
mountains through the chalet's picture window, we find the pull of a more 
subtle adventure gradually replacing the instant thrill of the slopes.

Our lift passes expired, we shove a grumbling toddler into a baby sleigh and 
get our anoraks on for a whole-family outing. The forecast is quite fierce, so 
we forgo the open fell and opt for a long loop around the forest's edge in 
Ljusnedal, 20km to the south. The plan is to turn back early to prevent 
overexertion, but as the wind dissipates into an exquisite, sunny day, we are 
lulled into a hypnotic rhythm of movement. A singing eight-year-old leads our 
single file along the wavy edge of the high fell, and a gruelling final climb 
is rewarded by several thrilling miles of the gentle, wobbly descent so 
particular to Nordic skiing. In a race against the dark, we spend our last 
energies in a final sprint to the car.

It is impossible to know whether the first skis humans invented – they are 
thought to predate the wheel – instilled their users with the same collective 
unity of purpose and connection to the landscape: the notion of the sublime was 
more probably born of leisure than necessity. For their sake, though, I hope it 
did.

• Norwegian Airlines (norwegian.com <http://norwegian.com/>) flies from 
Gatwick to Trondheim in Norway, about a three-hour drive from Funäsfjällen, 
from £57 return. A week at the Bruksvallarna 724 chalet, which sleeps seven, 
costs from £650. For bookings and information on ski passes, hire and lessons, 
call +46 684 15580 or visitfunasfjallen.se/vinter/english 
<http://www.funasfjallen.se/vinter/english/> 
 