
If you set out to create the most complicated spelling system in the world, 
then you could hardly do better than English.

English spelling was messed about with in the 15th century when it became 
reinstated as our official language. Foreign printers with imperfect knowledge 
of English compounded the felony during the Bible wars of the 16th century, and 
the early lexicographers made little attempt to match spellings consistently 
with the sounds they were supposed to represent. Not much has changed since 
then – which seems unbelievable when you consider what a forward-thinking and 
innovative nation we are.

The Guardian’s recent style change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mind-your-language/2014/nov/21/mind-your-language-center-or-centre>
 in adopting American spellings when referring to specific American placenames 
such as One World Trade Center excited much debate among the members of the 
English Spelling Society: some wondered if this was at long last a first step 
towards reforming English spelling – one of the most difficult orthographies in 
the world.

Consider the pronunciation of sound, southern and soup (ou) or blue, shoe, 
flew, through, you, two, too, gnu (oo): the spellings for identical sounds have 
ended up exceptionally varied. And the other side of the coin is that one 
letter combination can represent more than one sound (ei – weird, receive; ou – 
loud, should; ie – believe, tried). Not only is it often difficult to predict 
the spelling from the pronunciation, you can’t always tell the pronunciation 
from the spelling – this is the “double whammy” of English spelling.

Does this matter? If we were on a mission to pursue regularity for its own 
sake, then clearly not, but there is growing evidence that our uniquely 
unpredictable spelling system has economic and social costs.

A cross-European team led by Professor Philip Seymour from Dundee University, 
which investigated literacy acquisition rates in 13 languages in 2001, 
concluded: “Children from a majority of European countries become accurate and 
fluent in foundation level reading before the end of the first school year … 
The rate of development in English is more than twice as slow.” (British 
Journal of Psychology)

Other studies, such as Eraldo Paulesu’s in 2001 (Science Magazine) which 
compared dyslexia in Italian, English, and French college students, show that 
dyslexic English speakers suffer disproportionately compared with speakers of 
other languages, and one report points to the overall link between difficulty 
in acquiring literacy and the “depth” (irregularity) of a spelling system.

The English Spelling Society’s hopes for reform may be premature, but the 
Guardian’s style change does provide an opportunity to promote discussion and 
examine certain facts. British English is not the only spelling convention. US 
spelling, used by the majority of maternal English speakers, is to a degree 
more phonemic than British.

The Guardian’s style change also helps us to reflect upon previous attempts at 
spelling reform in the USA, namely the efforts of the reformer Noah Webster, 
whose work is encapsulated in his American Dictionary of the EnglishLanguage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/language> and its modern derivatives. 
Webster’s proposals for simplifying and regularising spelling were strongly 
supported by Theodore Roosevelt, but were brought to an abrupt end by the House 
of Representatives in 1906. Nevertheless, some of his proposals remain in US 
spelling conventions. If they had been implemented in full, our spelling would 
be far more regular and predictable than it remains on both sides of the 
Atlantic.

The English Spelling Society would admit that it is not much nearer achieving 
its objectives now than when it was founded in 1908, but change may be in the 
wind, driven by the growing evidence of traditional spelling’s economic and 
social costs and the enormous flow of ideas across the English-speaking world 
via the internet.

The obstacles to reform of English spelling are admittedly daunting: spelling 
change in any language is always resisted; English is spoken in many 
independent countries, some of whom don’t always cooperate with each other, and 
there are many local English dialects. It is unlikely that governments will be 
in the vanguard of reform as there are few votes in it.

An alternative approach to modernisation, being actively considered by the 
society in cooperation with its sister organisation the American Literacy 
Council, is to try to open up the question of spelling reform to a wider 
audience by means of an International English Spelling Congress.

The congress would represent a wide range of people throughout the world 
broadly sympathetic to English spelling reform. Following extensive 
consultation and expert input, it would approve a preferred alternative to 
traditional spelling. The hope is that such an alternative system, if it gained 
sufficient acceptance in the wider English-speaking world, would run alongside 
traditional spelling and eventually replace it. This alternative approach may 
have greater chance of success than any government initiative.

We are planning to invite a wide range of newspapers to participate in the 
congress and hope that the Guardian will be among them. For further information 
on the society’s activities please visitwww.spellingsociety.org <>.

Stephen Linstead is chair of the English Spelling Society.
 