
If you are under 18 and love reading, or you run or are part of a school or 
library book group, thenyou should enter the Guardian young critics competition
. This article shows you exactly how to do it.

Guardian children's fiction prize 2016, the longlist – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2016/jul/08/guardian-childrens-fiction-prize-2016-longlist>
All you have to do is write and submit a book review (maximum 500 words) on 
one of the eight fabulous books longlisted for the Guardian children’s fiction 
prize 2016, as chosen by this year’s judges David Almond, SF Said and Kate 
Saunders.You can find more information in the Guardian children’s fiction prize 
longlist gallery of covers, blurbs and judges’ comments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2016/jul/08/guardian-childrens-fiction-prize-2016-longlist>
.

The Guardian children’s fiction prize longlist 2016:

1. Zana Fraillon, Bone Sparrow 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/the-bone-sparrow.html> (Hatchette)

2. Alex Wheatle, Crongton Knights 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/crongton-knights.html> (Atom)

3. Malorie Blackman, Chasing The Stars  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/heart-break-girl.html>(Penguin)

4. Tanya Landman, Hell and Highwater 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/hell-and-high-water-339342.html> (Walker)

5. Brian Selznick, The Marvels 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/the-marvels.html> (Scholastic)

6. Giancarlo Gemin, Sweet Pizza 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/sweet-pizza.html> (Nosy Crow)

7. Martin Stewart, Riverkeep <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/riverkeep.html> 
(Penguin)

8. Bonnie-Sue Hitchcock, The Smell of Other People’s Houses 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/smell-of-other-people-s-houses.html> (Faber)

This list deserves to be read not only by young people, but by anyone who 
values good writing and powerful stories
David Almond, Guardian children's fiction prize judge 2016 
So if you are under 18, attend a school in the UK or are home educated in the 
UK and love reading, you can enter the young critics competition. The first 
thing you need to do is carefully read the terms and conditions at the bottom 
of this page.

Next write your review (max 500 words) on one of the Guardian children’s 
fiction prize 2016 longlisted books.


Make sure your review reaches us by 17 October 2016. 10 winning individual 
entries and one winning school will be selected by a panel of judges including 
Guardian children’s books editor Julia Eccleshare and at least one external 
judge. When picking the winners, the judges will be looking for the most 
interesting, entertaining and thought-provoking reviews.

If you want to read the most exciting new writing in the world today, read 
this wonderful longlist!
SF Said, Guardian children's fiction prize judge 2016 
There are two ways to enter:

1. You can enter on your own by filling out the form below including your 
review of a Longlisted Book.

Or:

2. enter as part of a school or library group if you and at least three other 
students from your school or library all submit reviews (ie four or more 
reviews in total). The school that is judged to have the strongest overall 
group of entries will win a prize – there will also be one runner up prize in 
this category (see below). In order for a review to be entered as part of a 
school group, that review must be submitted, either online or by post, together 
with at least three other reviews by other eligible students from the same 
school.Teachers and school librarians: if you would like to send in your school 
or library’s reviews on paper rather than electronically, please print the form 
below, fill it in and send the form plus your students’ reviews to Young 
Critics Competition, c/o Matt Smith, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, 
London, N1 9GU. Please note that if your group entry consists of more than four 
reviews, you will need to send them in via email to
childrensfictionprize@theguardian.com 
<mailto:childrensfictionprize@theguardian.com> (you can also ask any questions 
about the comp using this email address).

The prizes

So what do you win? The 10 individual winners will each receive a complete set 
of the eight longlisted books, a £20National Book Tokens 
<http://www.nationalbooktokens.com/> gift card and will be invited to attend 
the literary star-studded award ceremony which is due to take place in London 
on Thursday 17 November 2016, 18:30 – 20:30 (the “Award Ceremony”).

The winning school or library book group will be invited to spend a day at the 
Guardian Education Centre: up to 30 students (chosen by the winning school’s 
Head of English, or equivalent) from the winning school will have the chance to 
edit and print the day’s news at the Guardian Education Centre in London. Due 
to high demand, the winning school must be available to attend the Guardian 
Education Centre onFriday 20 January 2017, the date is non-transferable. In 
addition, the winning school will receive 10 complete sets of the eight 
longlisted books, a £150National Book Tokens 
<http://www.nationalbooktokens.com/> gift card as well as being invited (up to 
10 students plus three teachers) to the Award Ceremony on 17 November 2016. The
runner up will receive a complete set of the eight longlisted books and also be 
invited to the Award Ceremony (up to five students plus two teachers).

The eight longlisted books are amazingly wide-ranging in tone and subject
Kate Saunders, Guardian children's fiction prize judge 2016 
If you have any questions about the competition or how to enter, please email 
childrensfictionprize@theguardian.com 
<mailto:childrensfictionprize@theguardian.com>. If you have any problems 
filling in the form or concerns that your review hasn’t come through to us then 
you can email it instead tochildrensfictionprize@theguardian.com 
<mailto:childrensfictionprize@theguardian.com>, making sure to give your name, 
age, parent’s contact number and parent’s email.If you have any problems 
filling in the form or concerns that your review hasn’t come through to us then 
you can email it instead tochildrensfictionprize@theguardian.com 
<mailto:childrensfictionprize@theguardian.com>, making sure to give your name, 
age, parent’s contact number and parent’s email.

Good luck everyone, here’s the entry form. Do read the terms and conditions 
that follow before entering:

Terms and conditions


Entering the Competition

 * The Guardian Young Critics Competition 2016 (the “Competition”) is open to 
students aged 18 or under on 17 November 2016 (i.e born on or after 17 November 
1998) who attend a school in the UK or are home educated in the UK. Entrants 
aged 13 or under must provide contact details for their parent or legal 
guardian when submitting their Competition entry. The Competition is not open 
to employees, or family members of employees, of Guardian News & Media Limited 
(“GNM” or “Promoter”) or any other individual who is connected with the 
Competition.

 * Entrants into the Competition shall be deemed to have accepted these Terms 
and Conditions. 
 * To enter the Competition you must: 
a) Write a review, no more than 500 words in length, of one of the books in 
the Guardian Children’s Fiction Prize 2016 longlist (the “Longlisted Books” – 
details of which are set out on the list above);

b) Complete all the details requested within the form above including your 
age, the name of your schooland (for entrants aged 13 or under) contact details 
for your parent or legal guardian;

c) Submit your form and review(s) online or, for school group entries only 
(which must be organised by a teacher at the school and include at least four 
reviews by eligible students from the same school), you also have the option of 
sending your form and reviews to us by post – Young Critics Competition, c/o 
Matt Smith, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London, N1 9GU. For school 
group entries submitted by post, please ensure the form and reviews are sent as 
one submission in a single envelope.

 * No purchase is necessary. If you have any questions about how to enter or 
otherwise in connection with the Competition, please email us at 
childrensfictionprize@theguardian.com. 
 * Only one entry per person. Entries on behalf of another person will not be 
accepted and joint submissions are not allowed. You are responsible for the 
cost (if any) of sending your Competition entry to us. 
 * We accept no responsibility for entries that are lost, delayed, misdirected 
or incomplete or cannot be delivered or entered for any technical or other 
reason. Proof of delivery of the entry is not proof of receipt by us. 
 * The Competition opens at 09:00 on 8 July 2016 and closes at 23:59 on 17 
October 2016. Entries received outside this time period will not be considered. 
We reserve the right in our absolute discretion to extend the closing date 
where the entries received are of insufficient quality. 
 * You own the copyright to your Competition entry as its author. 
 * By submitting an entry to the Competition, you give us (GNM): 
a. Permission for your entry to be published on our websites including but not 
limited to theguardian.com (“GNM Websites”) and on any social media account 
controlled by us, including but not limited to Facebook and Twitter accounts 
(“GNM Social Media Accounts”), and you grant us a non-exclusive, royalty-free, 
worldwide licence to use and publish your Competition entry in electronic 
format (including on GNM Websites and GNM Social Media Accounts) and hard copy 
(including in our publications) for purposes connected with the Competition, 
and to adapt the entry to enable such publication (including to crop or 
otherwise edit it for such purposes), and you hereby irrevocably waive, for our 
benefit, all moral rights in the entry to which you are entitled; and

b. The right to use your name and county of residence for the sole purpose of 
identifying you as the author of your entry and/or as a winner of the 
Competition.

 * Your entry must not be copied, must not contain any third-party materials 
and/or content that you do not have permission to use and must not be obscene, 
defamatory, distasteful, offensive, or in breach of any applicable law or 
regulation, or in breach of any confidentiality obligations owed by you to 
third parties. If we have reason to believe your entry is in breach of this 
paragraph 10 then we may not consider it and may disqualify it. 
 * We may disqualify your Competition entry for the following reasons: your 
entry does not comply with these Terms and Conditions; you are not eligible to 
enter the Competition; or you cannot be contacted. In the event of 
disqualification, we may select a new winner in accordance with the selection 
processes outlined below. 
Picking the winners

 * A panel of judges, including at least one member who is independent of GNM, 
will select 10 winning individual entries, one winning and one runner up school 
entry from all valid entries received in accordance with these Terms and 
Conditions. A “school entry” is a group of four or more individual entries 
received from eligible students who attend the same school. Full details of the 
judging process and the names of the judges are available on request to 
childrensfictionprize@theguardian.com. 
 * When choosing the winners, the judges will be looking for the most 
interesting, entertaining and thought-provoking book reviews. 
 * The judges will select the 10 winning individual entries and the winning 
and runner up school entries on or before 2 November 2016. The judges’ decision 
is final and no correspondence will be entered into. 
The Prizes


 * The 10 individual winners will each receive a complete set of the eight 
longlisted books, a £20 National Book Tokens gift card and will be invited to 
attend the award ceremony which is due to take place in London on Thursday 17 
November 2016, 18:30 – 20:30 (the “Award Ceremony”). The winning school will be 
invited to spend a day at the Guardian: up to 30 students (chosen by the 
winning school’s Head of English, or equivalent) from the winning school will 
have the chance to edit and print the day’s news at the Guardian Education 
Centre in London on Friday 20 January 2017. Due to high demand, the winning 
school must be available to attend the Guardian Education Centre on Friday 20 
January 2017. In addition, the winning school will receive 10 complete sets of 
the eight longlisted books, a £150 National Book Tokens gift card as well as 
(up to 10 students plus 3 teachers) being invited to the Award Ceremony. The 
runner up will receive a complete set of the eight longlisted books and also be 
invited to the Award Ceremony (up to 5 students plus 2 teachers). 
 * We accept no responsibility for any costs associated with the specified 
prizes that are not expressly included in the prizes. In particular, travel to 
and from the Guardian Education Centre for the 30 chosen students from the 
winning school must be arranged and funded by the winning school. The visit to 
the Guardian Education Centre by the winning school must take place on Friday 
20 January 2017. 
 * The winners (or their parent/legal guardian in the case of a winner aged 13 
or under) will be notified by phone or email on or before 4 November 2016 and 
given details of how to claim their prize. If a winner does not respond to us 
within 14 days of being notified of their win, the winner’s prize will be 
forfeited and we shall be entitled to select another winner in accordance with 
the process described above (and that winner will also have to respond to 
notification of their win within 14 days or else they will also forfeit their 
prize). If a winner rejects their prize or their entry is invalid or in breach 
of these terms, the winner’s prize will be forfeited and we shall be entitled 
to select another winner. 
 * The name and county of the winners, in addition to their winning entries 
may be published, in which case such information shall remain available until 
October 2018. 
 * Except for the visit to the Guardian Education Centre by the 30 chosen 
students from the winning school, the prizes, (if not collected at the Award 
Ceremony) will be sent to the winners by 30th November 2016. The prizes are 
non-exchangeable, non-transferable and not redeemable for cash or any other 
prize. We reserve the right to substitute the specified prizes with 
alternatives of similar value in the event that the specified prizes are not 
available. 
Some other rules

 * The individual winners and the winning and runner up schools may be 
required to take part in promotional activity related to the Competition and 
the winners shall participate in such activity on the Promoter’s reasonable 
request, subject (in the case of individual winners) to the approval of 
parents/legal guardians. The winners consent (subject, in the case of 
individual winners, to the approval of parents/legal guardians) to the use by 
the Promoter and its related companies, both before and after the closing date 
of the Competition for an unlimited time, of the winner’s voice, image, 
photograph and name for publicity purposes (in any medium, including still 
photographs and films, and on the internet, including any websites hosted by 
the Promoter and its related companies) and in advertising, marketing or 
promotional material without additional compensation or prior notice and, in 
entering the Competition, all entrants consent to the same. 
 * The Promoter shall use and take care of any personal information you supply 
to it as described in its privacy policy, a copy of which can be seen at
http://www.theguardian.com/help/privacy-policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/privacy-policy> and in accordance with data 
protection legislation. By entering the Competition, you agree to the 
collection, retention, usage and distribution of your personal information in 
order to process and contact you about your Competition entry, and for the 
purposes outlined in paragraph 18 above. 
 * We accept no responsibility for any damage, loss, liabilities, injury or 
disappointment incurred or suffered by you as a result of entering the 
Competition or accepting the prize. We further disclaim liability for any 
injury or damage to your or any other person’s computer relating to or 
resulting from participation in or downloading any materials in connection with 
the Competition. Nothing in these Terms and Conditions shall exclude the 
liability of Guardian News & Media Limited under law for fraud or fraudulent 
misrepresentation, or for death or personal injury resulting from its 
negligence. 
 * We reserve the right at any time and from time to time to modify or 
discontinue, temporarily or permanently, this Competition with or without prior 
notice due to reasons outside its reasonable control (including, without 
limitation, in the case of anticipated, suspected or actual fraud). The 
decision of Guardian News & Media Limited in all matters relating to the 
Competition is final and no correspondence will be entered into. 
 * We shall not be liable for any failure to comply with our obligations 
relating to this Competition where the failure is caused by something outside 
our reasonable control. Such circumstances shall include, but not be limited 
to, weather conditions, fire, flood, hurricane, strike, industrial dispute, 
war, hostilities, political unrest, riots, civil commotion, inevitable 
accidents, supervening legislation or any other circumstances amounting to 
force majeure. 
 * The Competition and these Terms and Conditions will be governed by English 
law and entrants to the Competition submit to the non-exclusive jurisdiction of 
the English courts. 
 * Promoter: Guardian News & Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London, 
N1 9GU. 
If you have any problems filling in the form or concerns that your review 
hasn’t come through to us then you can email it instead to
childrensfictionprize@theguardian.com 
<mailto:childrensfictionprize@theguardian.com>, making sure to give your name, 
age, parent’s contact number and parent’s email. Good luck!
 