
MP Sarah Champion had a Dagenham moment this week. Her bill, proposing that 
companies with more than 250 employees be forced to publish details of any 
gender pay gaps, was passed by 258 votes to eight. Finally, section 78 of the 
Equal Pay act can be enforced - women will no longer have to guess how much 
more the guy sitting opposite them is earning, now they’ll know for sure. It’s 
a step in the right direction but it feels rather like the beginning of the 
marathon rather than the beginning of the end.

Watching Champion’s speech the thing that strikes you is that she’s surrounded 
by female MPs. They’re the ones shouting encouragement, laughing at the jokes 
and snorting at her entirely justified dismissal of the government’s Think, 
Act, Report initiative. Usually the House of Commons has more of a baritone to 
it and while today was a nice change, it does make you ask - where are the men?

In the last year just five companies have published their pay gap data. Making 
this public reporting mandatory is supposed to shame big organisations into 
taking action on equal pay, to start looking at the causes of these 
discrepancies and ironing them out. I’ve written before that greater 
transparency can only be a good thing, both for individuals and companies, but 
I wonder if simply reporting on the pay gap will be enough to end it. We’re 
assuming that businesses with a serious gap will be shamed into sorting it out 
but what if the gap doesn’t look that serious?

Accountancy firm PWC is one of the few big corporates that has voluntarily 
signed up to reporting on its gender pay gap. Across the entire firm the gap is 
15.1% (below the national average of 19.4%), however when you compare like for 
like, so those doing the same job, the gap shrinks to just 2.5%. Just 2.5%. 
Hardly seems shameful does it? It could be anything which causes a gap that 
small, after all it’s going to be very difficult to always have people on 
exactly the same pay - there are allowances for experience and skill. If you 
were one of the silent male MPs today would you look at that 2.5% and really 
believe there was a problem? But it is. 2.5% might start small but it adds up 
to thousands, particularly when you’re at the top of your profession.

Sarah Churchman, PWC’s head of diversity, says that a pay review is just part 
of the firm’s diversity strategy. She knows that alone it’s not enough to know 
there’s a problem, you must also be committed to solving it. But what about all 
of those who are currently hiding behind anonymity? Today’s bill might force 
their behaviour to change but I’m doubtful it will change the mindset behind 
the inequality.


I’m worried that, like in parliament today, equal pay reporting will become a 
cacophony of female voices, ignored by the pale and male ears of those in 
power. The only way it will work is if women use the available information to 
take their own steps towards equal pay and vote with their feet. Look up your 
company and compare it to others, if they’re lagging behind go and work 
somewhere that has actually proved its commitment to women. Investigate your 
supply chain and ditch those suppliers who seem to have no problem paying their 
female workers less. Shame won’t be enough to change the mindset of many 
organisations, they need to be hit where it hurts - in the loss of talent and 
revenue.
 