
Stamp duty <https://www.theguardian.com/money/stampduty> is a tax charged by 
the government when you buy property or shares. There are different kinds of 
stamp duty, which apply to different purchases.

Stamp duty on homes and land

Stamp duty land tax (SDLT) is charged on the purchase of houses, flats and 
other land and buildings. The tax, often referred to simply as stamp duty, has 
existed in various forms since the 1690s.

How much you will pay

The tax is currently graded into six bands and represents a percentage of a 
property’s purchase price. On properties costing up to £125,000 there is 
currently no duty to pay. After that there are five stamp duty tiers:

• £125,000 – £250,000 = 1%

• £250,001 – £500,000 = 3%

• £500,001 – £1m = 4%

• £1m – £2m = 5%

• More than £2m = 7%

Your stamp duty bill is calculated on what is known as a “slab structure” 
rather than being charged on a sliding scale – this means if your property 
costs between £250,001 and £500,000 you pay 3% of the entire value, not just 3% 
on the portion that goes over the £250,000 threshold. This is unlike income 
tax, where you pay a different tax rate on different portions of your earnings.

This can make for huge jumps in the tax charged if you only pay a little more 
for a property. For example, if you pay £250,000 for your home, your stamp duty 
bill will be £2,500. However, if you pay £250,001 you jump to the 3% band and 
your tax bill trebles to £7,500.03.

Minimising your bill

Rather than buying somewhere for a price just over one of the thresholds and 
facing a large bill, it might seem like a good idea to agree a lower purchase 
price and a separate price for items such as the carpets and curtains. However, 
the forms you need to fill in now contain questions designed to weed out 
instances where a property price has been kept artificially low.

Paying the tax

SDLT is a self-assessed tax, so it is the responsibility of the individual 
buyer to ensure that they have accurately calculated and paid their liability. 
The return can be filled inonline or on paper 
<http://www.hmrc.gov.uk/SDLT/return/online.htm>. In reality, most of this will 
be carried out as part of the duties of the buyer’s solicitor. The tax must be 
paid within 30 days of the effective date of the transaction, which in most 
circumstances is the date of completion on the property. Once the Land Registry 
has received a certificate from HMRC that the duty has been paid, it will 
register the new ownership of the property.

Stamp duty on shares

Stamp duty is also payable on shares. If you buy them through a stockbroker 
the transaction is usually “paperless” and carried out via the electronic 
settlement and registration system, known as Crest. For these transactions you 
would pay a stamp duty reserve tax (SDRT).

If you buy stocks and shares for £1,000 or less, you don’t normally need to 
pay any stamp duty at all – or even tell HMRC about the transaction. SDRT is 
charged at a flat rate of 0.5% of the amount you pay for your shares, and is 
rounded up to the nearest penny. Your stockbroker will take care of paying the 
tax, and will subsequently bill you.

If you invest in a unit trust or an open-ended investment company (Oeic), the 
fund managers pay the SDRT. This is taken into account when the unit price is 
set.Chapter 15 of the Stamp Taxes Manual <http://www.hmrc.gov.uk/so/manual.pdf> 
offers more detailed information.

If you use paper stock transfer forms for buying shares you will pay plain 
stamp duty, not SDRT. This is also charged at 0.5%, but is rounded up to the 
nearest £5. You are responsible for paying stamp duty to the HMRC directly.

Aim shares

Shares listed on the Alternative Investment Market (Aim) do not attract stamp 
duty when you purchase them. This is designed to encourage investment in small 
and growing businesses. These are, however, riskier shares than those listed on 
the main FTSE indices, so will only be part of experienced investors’ 
portfolios.
 