
Selling a home can be a long and complex process, but there are certain steps 
you can follow to make it as smooth as possible.

Find out how much your home is worth

Ask a selection of estate agents to value your property, and look in your 
local paper’s property section and online to find out the asking price of 
similar homes. Alternatively, you can get an online estimate from a site like
Zoopla <http://www.zoopla.co.uk/home-values/>, or pay for a detailed report from
Hometrack 
<http://www.hometrack.com/uk/products/property-market-intelligence/property-valuation-report/>
. Remember that the final price it sells for will not necessarily be as much as 
the asking price.

Decide whether to use an estate agent

Nearly all of us trying to sell our homes do so through an agency. Estate 
agents bring properties on to the market and introduce buyers. However, you can
market the property yourself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/jul/07/how-sell-house-online> to avoid 
agent’s fees, which can be between 1.5% and 4% of the sale price of the 
property. If you do opt to use an agent, don’t just choose the one that gives 
the highest valuation – think about which one you got on with best, what you’ve 
heard from other people, and which one you’ve seen the most Sold signs for. 
Don’t be afraid to try to negotiate a lower fee.

Prepare your home

Make sure your home looks its best for any viewings. Tidy any mess and clear 
unwanted clutter to maximise space. If you have time, you may wish to try to 
make the decoration as neutral as possible to attract buyers, and make any 
minor repairs such as fixing leaking taps. Also have all your household bills 
on hand for prospective buyers to view.

Wait for offers

The estate agent will get in touch with you when an offer has been made on 
your property – he or she must tell you about every offer that is made, 
regardless of whether you are likely to accept it. Your agent should be able to 
advise you whether it is a good offer, but the final decision is up to you.

Accept an offer

When you are happy with an offer you can accept it “subject to survey and 
contract”. Your estate agent will then write to you, the buyer and both sets of 
solicitors to confirm the property sale, and request that the solicitors draw 
up a draft contract. At this point, you do not legally have to take the 
property off the market, but your buyer may ask you to do so.

Instruct a solicitor

You need to appoint a solicitor or conveyancer who will do the legal work 
involved in the sale. They will, for example, release details of the deeds to 
your buyer’s solicitors and draw up a contract of sale.

Be prepared to let the buyer’s surveyor into your home

This will usually happen a few days after the offer has been made and will be 
organised through your estate agent, if you are using one. The agent should let 
you know when the surveyor is coming round, and should be able to hand over the 
keys so you don’t have to be in.

Renegotiate the price if necessary

If the buyer’s survey reveals lots of work that needs doing on the property, 
he or she may want to renegotiate the offer. This will be done through your 
solicitors. Be realistic when discussing the price – if you know work needs 
doing it might be fair to reduce the price accordingly. Ask your buyer to show 
you quotes for the work needed from at least two contractors and consider 
whether you could carry out the repairs yourself. If, however, you cannot reach 
a compromise with the buyer, you are within your rights to pull out of the 
sale. Be aware that you may actually lose money by starting the selling process 
again

Exchange contracts and decide on a completion date

This is when you become legally committed to the sale. You need to sign the 
contract and your solicitor will do the rest. At this point the buyer should 
pay a deposit, usually around 10% of the sale price, to your solicitor.

Organise your move

You will have to move out of the property on the day the sale completes, so 
it’s time to book a removal van and start packing.

Complete

This is where you hand over the keys and say a final farewell to your old home.
 