
What is an annuity?

An annuity is simply a contract: your saved pot of “defined-contribution” 
pension money, built up over your working life, is traded for an annual income 
for life when you retire.

How much you get depends on a large number of factors: the size of your 
pension pot, your age, any illnesses you have, whether you’ve smoked (or still 
smoke) and whether you want the policy to pay to your partner should you die 
first, as well as interest rates, inflation and the demand for gilts 
(government bonds).

Whatever income you get will be taxed every month. It will normally pay out 
until you die (unless you choose a fixed-term annuity). Live a long, healthy 
life and you’re quids in: die a year after buying it, and that saved money can 
disappear into the pension company’s pockets.

Different types of annuity

One thing that influences the monthly income you can get is the type of 
annuity you choose. Your main choices are:

Level annuity: This pays out a set sum every month until you die. The amount 
will not change so is in danger of being eroded by inflation.

Percentage increasing annuity: This will rise by a fixed percentage, usually 
3% a year, for a set number of years, usually for a decade but it can be 
longer. You will have to pay for this guaranteed uplift, so you will get around 
20% to 30% less a month at the outset.

RPI-linked annuity: At a hefty cost, your monthly payout will rise in line 
with inflation and protect you from losing your purchasing power. But you can 
end up with less if general prices begin to fall.

Enhanced/impaired annuity: Take out one of these if you’ve suffered a 
debilitating illness that is likely to shorten your life. The insurer will 
usually raise the payouts because the chances are that it will not have to pay 
out for as long as to a healthy buyer. Your income could 10% to 15% more than 
on a standard annuity.

Joint annuity: This lets you buy an income for your partner for after you die. 
It may be attractive but you will receive a lower payout.

According to the Money Advice Service (MAS) annuity comparison tables 
<https://annuities.moneyadviceservice.org.uk/xml/annuitiesMAS/an_form.cfm> in 
December 2014, a £100,000 pension pot from a 65 year-old non-smoking man would 
pay out £501 a month. Plump instead for a 50% joint annuity – paying out half 
the pension to a non-smoking spouse or partner from the time you die until they 
do, and that £501 is reduced to £459 a month. Choose a joint annuity paying out 
100% after you die, and the monthly payout falls to £413.

If your partner is a lot younger than you the original annuity payout will be 
smaller because of the increased chance of the partner living longer.

Shop around and take the open-market option

What you get for your money will also depend hugely on who provides your 
annuity. According to the MAS annuity comparison tables in December 2014, a 
£100,000 pension pot from a 65-year non-smoking woman would unlock £501 a month 
from Hodge Lifetime for a basic level annuity but only £431 from Aviva. Pick a 
3% increasing annuity, instead, and the sums drop to £337 from Canada Life and 
£284 from Aviva. However, go for an RPI-linked annuity and your best deal is 
Saga at £299 a month; the worst is Aviva again, at just £232 a month.

Comparing rates for your annuity can easily increase your income by a fifth. 
Usethe MAS annuity comparison tool 
<https://annuities.moneyadviceservice.org.uk/xml/annuitiesMAS/an_form.cfm> to 
compare rates from different providers.

A riskier option

Conventional level annuities offer the safety of a fixed income but the 
trade-off is that you have no control over the future investment of your 
pension fund. If you are prepared to take some risk in return for growth, you 
could consider an investment-linked annuity.

In a nutshell, what you get each month is based on the stock markets: if 
returns are robust, your income will rise. However, if the stock market 
crashes, your income can plummet. You can pay for a “floor” to be installed, 
though, to prevent big losses.

You can always hedge your bets and buy more than one annuity: for example, you 
could spend £150,000 on an ordinary level annuity and £75,000 on an 
investment-linked annuity.

Go for a guarantee

Another option on the table is a guaranteed annuity, offering payments for a 
fixed period of, say, five years, regardless of whether you live or die. If you 
die within the set period, your partner or whoever you’ve nominated on the 
policy will be paid out the balance of the guarantee.

The postcode effect

Increasingly insurers are applying “postcode pricing” to applications for 
policies. If you’ve lived in a less affluent area where statistically you’re 
more likely to have had a manual job, this could boost your income by around 5%.

Insurers Legal & General, Norwich Union and Prudential all offer enhancements 
if you live in an area such as Glasgow, wherelife expectancy is lower than 
average 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2014/apr/16/commonwealth-games-2014-glasgow-lowest-life-expectancy-uk>
l. On the other hand, residents of Kensington & Chelsea could find themselves 
with much less as their life expectancy is greater.

Restrictions on access

You no longer have to buy an annuity or go into income drawdown with your 
pension fund before your 75th birthday and, from April 2015, all restrictions 
on your access to your pension pot will be removed.

This means you can delay making a decision about buying an annuity for as long 
as you like, and keep your pension invested in the stock market, drawing down 
income as and when you wish. Alternatively, you could immediately take 100% of 
your pot as cash - just bear in mind that you can only take 25% of this sum 
free from income tax. The other 75% will be classed as income you have earned 
in a single tax year by HMRC, and taxed accordingly.

Alternatively, if you would like a guaranteed level of income while 
maintaining the potential of your pot to grow after you retire, you could opt 
for a variable annuity. Variable annuities, also known as “third way” pensions, 
set out to offer the best of conventional annuities (a guaranteed income) with 
the flexibility of income drawdown (the potential for investment growth). As a 
rule, they allow some of your investment gain to be locked in at regular 
intervals but they carry a cost: annual charges of as much as 3.5%.

Take advice

If you’re unsure about any aspect of your annuity, and what you should be 
doing if you’re wondering whether you’re buying the right kind of annuity, is 
taking specialist financial advice. Make sure your adviser is properly 
qualified to deal with pension arrangements.

You can find a local adviser on the website unbiased.co.uk 
<http://www.unbiased.co.uk>
 