
ALBER ELBAZ, LANVIN

The permanent collection the École Nationale Supérieure des Beaux-Arts, Paris, 
France.

"The Beaux-Arts de Paris, where we hold the Lanvin shows, is a very special 
place. It inspires me. The school, founded in the 17th century, owns one of the 
largest public collections of art in France. Its spirit of transmission, the 
idea of handing know-how from teacher to the next generation of artist over 
four centuries, moves me.Art <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> 
galleries give a great insight to a city's culture. When I'm travelling the 
world for work I hope to find enough time to catch galleries and paintings."

CAROL LIM, KENZO

Ellsworth Kelly, Matthew Marks Gallery, New York, US. April 2011
 Ellsworth Kelly's Colors for a Large Wall, 1951 
"I find the space in galleries really inspiring. I go to the Met in New York 
about three times a year, and the Getty in LA, because I love what the 
architecture has created. My dad came to Tate Modern with me a couple of years 
ago. We were in the line for the Edvard Munch exhibition, but he said that he'd 
prefer to wander round the building and just buy the catalogue. These places 
where you can go for the art, or equally for a picnic, they're like community 
centres. Art is a real influence for Humberto [Leon] and me. When we joined 
Kenzo, an Ellsworth Kelly [top] show started lots of thoughts for us. And 
Hockney at the Royal Academy – particularly his iPad drawings. They triggered 
inspiration and opened conversations."

GEOFFREY J FINCH, ANTIPODIUM

Jeff Koons, Gagosian Gallery, New York, US. July 2013
 Balloon Rabbit by Jeff Koons. Photograph: Cindy Ord/Getty Images 
"Art always has a profound impact on what I'm doing in the studio. A/ W14's 
colours were reviewed after seeing the Chapman brothers' paintings at the 
Serpentine in December – they're just so good! A still life at Amsterdam's 
Rijksmuseum has been playing on my mind since I was there a month ago. The Jeff 
Koons [above] show in New York last summer impacted on how S/ S14 came 
together. Our seasonal artist collaborations have had a massive impact on my 
aesthetic – perhaps most with graphic design duo Craig & Karl, whose sense of 
colour, line and humour are endlessly inspiring."

MARGARET HOWELL

Charlotte Perriand: From Photography to Interior Design, the Petit Palais, 
Paris, France. June 2011
 Designer Margaret Howell. Photograph: Sophia Evans 
"One powerful image I particularly remember was the back view of a 
construction worker sitting on a metal girder. A close-up of a steel bolt and 
his well-used trouser pockets. Shot in black and white and rich with the 
authenticity of real life. And there were snaps of Perriand, sunbathing on a 
pebbled beach, or looking out over snow-covered mountains. She is, for me, the 
essence of a free-spirited woman, strong and modern, but also timeless – an 
inspiration."

DOMENICO DOLCE AND STEFANO GABBANA

Piero Fornasetti: 100 Anni di Follia Pratica at La Triennale di Milano, Milan, 
Italy. November 2013
 Domenico Dolce and Stefano Gabbana 
"We spent hours at the Piero Fornasetti exhibition 
<http://www.fornasetti.com/en/visitshop/cento-anni-di-follia-pratica-triennale-milano/>
 in Milan last year. Entering into his world is super exciting. We love and 
collect everything from his art. He was such an important artist and his wit 
inspires our fashion and stores. Our new boutique on New Bond Street in London 
is full of hand-painted furniture we personally selected from the Fornasetti 
collections."

ROLAND MOURET

Jordi Colomer: The American Soup at Musée des Abattoirs, Toulouse, France. 
December 2013
 Roland Mouret. Photograph: Richard Young/Rex 
"Just before Christmas, at Musée des Abattoirs, I saw a film by Spanish artist 
Jordi Colomer 
<http://www.jordicolomer.com/?lg=2&id=2&nid=110&PHPSESSID=g70om0ot15quqk2hg0phal6ei2>
 called The American Soup [about a temporary pre-fab housing estate in Normandy 
constructed after the second world war that is still inhabited today]. Hard 
work and careful order, repeated over years, a feeling of dedication in 
people's houses. It gave me such a huge sense of the love and care that people 
have around one another, and the difference it makes. It's a moment I will not 
easily lose and I had a better Christmas for it."

PAUL BERNSTOCK AND THELMA SPEIRS

David Hockney: Me Draw on iPad, Louisiana Museum of Modern Art, Copenhagen, 
Denmark. April 2011
 Untitled, a 2009 iPad drawing by David Hockney. Photograph: Fondation Pierre 
Berge-Yves Saint-Laurent/EPA 
"A few of years ago we were in Copenhagen and went to visit the David 
Hockney's Me Draw on Ipad exhibition [below] at the Louisiana Museum. We have 
always been big fans of Hockney's work and loved that he was enthusiastically 
embracing a new medium and that the work existed in a non-traditional way. The 
Louisiana is a magical place in beautiful grounds on the edge of Denmark's sea, 
the Øresund."

ANTONIO BERARDI

Facing the Modern: The Portrait in Vienna 1900, National Gallery, London, UK. 
November 2013

"The Vienna exhibition contained works by Egon Schiele and Death And Life by 
Gustav Klimt, which was the first time it had been exhibited outside Austria – 
a real coup.
 Richard Gerstl's Self-Portrait, laughing. Photograph: Imagno/Getty Images 
"The first thing I saw on entering the gallery was a piece entitled 
Self-Portrait Laughing [above] by a little-known Austrian painter and designer 
called Richard Gerstl. It was one of the most inspiring and evocative pieces I 
have seen. Joyous in its colours and subject, sad because the young artist 
killed himself not long after. I left the exhibition after seeing this and 
returned a few days later to see the rest. After looking at such a powerful 
piece of art, the rest would have not had the same impact. It is a memory I 
carry with me always: unexpected, inspiring, optimistic, triste yet joyous all 
at the same time."

VIVIENNE WESTWOOD

The permanent collection at The Wallace Collection, London, UK
 Jean-Honoré Fragonard's The Swing (1767), from The Wallace Collection 
"I visit the Wallace Collection in particular for the 17th-century painters 
like Titian and Velázquez. They have such wonderful things in there, but then 
you also have the three 18th-century geniuses: Boucher, Watteau and Fragonard 
[below]. All three say so much of that age – Boucher's pretty things; Watteau's 
work inspired by the Commedia dell'arte.

"There are two fantastic Boucher as you come up the stairs – one is Apollo 
about to get into his chariot, surrounded by all the nymphs as he rises from 
the ocean. It's absolutely fantastic. Boucher is really sentimental, but you 
can't call him kitsch because he has such incredible facility. Playful but 
cynical somehow. He comes from an age that was very convenient for painters; 
all that mythology was part of a way of communicating in those days.

"To look at a painting is to enter a world. I love that 18th-century version 
of the pagan world. It's a delight. The only place to find ideas is by looking 
at what people did in the past. It's the way you can be original. Nothing comes 
from a vacuum; it is impossible to be creative unless you have a link with the 
past and tradition. You should constantly try to understand the world in which 
you live from the perspective of the way people saw things in the past. The 
art-lover is a freedom-fighter for a better world. Great art aims at perfection 
and is timeless; there is no progress in art."

PETER JENSEN

Louisiana Museum of Modern Art, Copenhagen, Denmark, and the Hepworth 
Wakefield gallery, Wakefield, UK.
 Spring 1966 by Barbara Hepworth at The Hepworth, Wakefield. Photograph: Peter 
Macdiarmid/Getty/Hepworth Wakefield 
"There are two galleries I have a close bond with. The first is the Louisiana; 
it's just outside Copenhagen with a view overlooking the sea to Sweden and in 
the summer you can have a picnic in the garden looking at the sculptures. It 
truly is a great place with a lot of ground-breaking exhibitions and a 
permanent collection. It was the first museum in the world to show Andy 
Warhol's early drawings.

"The other place is the Hepworth museum in Wakefield. We did a collection for 
spring/summer 2013 that had Barbara Hepworth as the muse and we were asked to 
show this collection as an evening event in the museum. Truly, it was just 
amazing being around her work [below] and walking through a space that has been 
designed to fit this grand work by this little woman. I loved it and thought 
that what I did was so small in comparison to this art."

CHRISTOPHER SHANNON

Centre of the Creative Universe: Liverpool and the Avant-Garde, Tate 
Liverpool, Liverpool, UK. February 2007
 Rineke Dijkstra’s Buzz club video installation 
"I saw Rineke Dijkstra's Buzz club video [above] at the Tate Liverpool a few 
years ago. It was exciting to see it projected so big in the city it was made 
in – I remember older kids at school going to the Buzz and being jealous. It's 
amazing that someone from outside the city caught that moment and the stills 
are so well known. She manages to observe and not imply judgment. I love that 
about her work."

ALICE TEMPERLEY

The permanent collection at the Louvre, Paris, France. 
 Egpytian funerary figurines in the Louvre, Paris. Photograph: De 
Agostini/Getty 
"When I'm in Paris I always walk up from the Place de la Concorde to the 
Louvre. I have a routine where I go to the cafe and sit and people-watch and 
then on to look at the ancient Egyptian jewellery and art [above]. Last time I 
went to see the Greek Agora sculptures, which were beautiful, but the room was 
so cold. Then I go to the bookshop before heading to the shops on Rue de 
Rivoli. It's a busy museum so you have to time it just right, either early or 
the last hour before it closes."

JONATHAN SAUNDERS

Sensation, Royal Academy, London, UK. September 1997
 The Sensation show at the Royal Academy in 1997 
"This show of work from Charles Saatchi's collection, including work by many 
of the Young British Artists such as Tracey Emin and Michael Landy, has been 
incredibly influential on my work throughout the years. As was the OMA/Progress 
exhibition at the Barbican in 2011, which created a portrait of the work of Rem 
Koolhaas and his architectural practice."

ERDEM

Permanent collection at the Victoria & Albert Museum, London, UK
 Samson Slaying a Philistine by Giambologna in the Victoria & Albert Museum, 
London. Photograph: Alex Segre/Alamy 
"I find inspiration in a lot of things. Two places that have recently inspired 
me are the Frieze art fair last October, where there's a huge amount of 
excitement and newness, and the V&A Museum, which has everything to do with the 
past. I'm obsessed with the Medieval & Renaissance rooms [above] – they house 
European art and culture from 300 to 1600 and include Donatello sculptures, 
Henry VIII's furnishings and Leonardo da Vinci's notebooks."
 