
When Victoria Thompson presented to the board at work in March 2016, she was 
worried that one of them would turn around and say: “Why are you here?”

Like many who have climbed the professional ladder, the head of product at 
publisher Emap, was experiencing “imposter syndrome” – an overwhelming feeling 
of self-doubt and fear that someone will suddenly out you as a career fraud.

“I started as a PA to the editor and now I’m in a head of product role,” says 
Thompson. “I often think: am I winging it and does everyone know I’m winging 
it?”


Clinical psychologist Dr Rachel Andrew says that underlying this feeling of 
self-doubt is often a core belief that if others knew the real us, or knew what 
we were really like, they would see that we are actually not up to the job. 
“Alongside these beliefs come feelings of anxiety and fear, and behaviour to 
keep us safe from others finding this out.” As a result, she says, we tend to 
work harder and put in longer hours. Andrew says this then creates a cycle 
where those experiencing imposter syndrome have to keep up this extra-high 
level of work in fear of being exposed as a career fraud.


David Nichols, a brand manager at greetings card subscription service 
CardNest, says he can trace this agonising self-doubt back to his childhood 
school days, when “every school report talked of this under-confidence”. When 
Nichols started his first job in marketing, he was overwhelmed by this feeling.


“Even though I’d worked hard to get good experience under my belt, had good 
personable and communication skills, I still wondered what I had done to get 
hired in the first place,” he says. “The praise I received for my work ran off 
me, and I could only focus – or worry about – the negative, highly possible 
fact that someday soon, I’d be found out and asked to leave.”

Dr Valerie Young, an expert on imposter syndrome and author of The Secret 
Thoughts of Successful Women, says there’s one important characteristic that 
all those experiencing such chronic self-doubt have in common. “People who feel 
like impostors have unsustainably high self-expectations around competence. No 
one likes to fail, but impostors experience shame when they fail.”

Dr Andrew believes it can sometimes stem from growing up in a family with very 
high expectations about school performance.

“They may have then developed a belief that in order to be accepted they need 
to do well,” she says. “If you then put this person in a workplace where there 
are similar expectations then they will operate in the same way. But underlying 
this great work ethic may be a belief that others would not accept them if they 
knew the real them.”

It was following a breakdown at work that John Binns, a former partner at a 
major professional services firm and now an independent wellbeing and 
resilience adviser, realised that he had been experiencing imposter syndrome 
for years.

“I often felt I was lucky to become a partner,” he says. “I wasn’t sure if I 
deserved it.” It was when he was being eased back into the business following 
the breakdown that he finally felt he was justified to be in his job. “I 
remember one partner saying ‘John, we’re looking for you to be up and running 
like you were 18 months ago, you’re really valuable to us’. That positive 
messaging helped enormously as I recognised that the firm wouldn’t have said 
that to someone who was an imposter. There’s a pattern of perceptions you think 
about and if they’re not challenged then you can believe them to be true.”

Imposter syndrome tends to affect women more than men. Women are more likely 
to internalise failure, mistakes and criticism while men are more likely to 
attribute these things to factors outside of themselves, explains Dr Young. “If 
your boss says your report was inadequate, what we [women] hear is ‘I’m 
inadequate’,” she says.

This column will change your life: do you feel a fraud?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/nov/09/impostor-syndrome-oliver-burkeman>
So how can we knock these moments of agonising self-doubt on the head? “The 
next time you have an impostor feeling, remind yourself that70% of people have 
experienced feelings of fraudulence 
<http://bsris.swu.ac.th/journal/i6/6-6_Jaruwan_73-92.pdf> – many of them 
award-winning actors and authors, CEOs and people with PhDs,” says Dr Young. 
She also recommends learning to think differently about failure, competence and 
fear. “Your impostor voice responds to a huge new assignment with: ‘Oh my god, 
I have no idea what I’m doing.’ The reframe is: ‘Wow, I’m really going to learn 
a lot.’ Non-impostors realise that everyone has the right to have good days and 
bad, wins and losses, and that some skills come more easily than others. You 
may pick up learning a language or analysing a financial report easily, but 
have to work at public speaking or writing. A medical director told me she felt 
like an impostor because the other people on the executive team were: 
‘brilliantly articulate, and I’m not’. My response was, maybe you’re not. So 
what? You can’t be brilliant at everything.”

Career coach Penny Davenport suggests noting your career achievements. “Have 
you pulled off any major deals or organised big events? How many times have you 
been promoted or headhunted? These achievements speak to you and what you 
offer.”

This has worked for Thompson, who says she’s started to bat off this 
persistent feeling of self-doubt. “I think after a few years when you’ve done 
work that’s proven itself and build up your reputation, it becomes a bit 
easier. Also, when I’ve spoken to friends about it, they’re all feeling the 
same way so you realise how common it is.”


Nichols says he forces himself to look at the bigger picture to identify the 
defining moments that prove that he’s not a fraud and that he has something to 
offer. “The greatest thing I ever did was to trust my instincts – they’re 
normally always bang on.”

Thompson says she also tries thinking logically about it. “The chances that 
we’re all master criminals is insane,” laughs Thompson. “I think most people 
have a tendency to think that they’ve been lucky or have had a good 
relationship with someone to give them a job. You have to remind yourself of 
the realities.”

The next time you’re hit with a wave of imposter syndrome and have convinced 
yourself that you don’t deserve to be in your job, recognise the feeling for 
what it is and resolve to break the cycle.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 