
My father, Felix Franks, who has died aged 90, changed the way scientists 
understood water and introduced new ways of freeze-drying vaccines and of 
administering insulin.

He was born Felix Frankfurther, in Berlin. His father, Paul, was a fine 
musician but obliged to run the family textile business. His mother, Henriette, 
died in 1931 and his father later married Nina Lachman, also a keen musician.

As the storm clouds of nazism gathered, the young Felix became aware of things 
changing. His teacher appeared in uniform and ordered the children to give the 
Heil Hitler salute. After Kristallnacht, Felix and his two sisters, Beate and 
Eva, were dispatched on a Kindertransport, reaching Southampton in April 1939. 
Through a remarkable combination of circumstances his parents also reached 
Britain two days before the second world war broke out. The family lodged 
together in boarding houses around Hampstead, north London.

In 1943, Felix signed up for the army, changing his surname to Franks. He 
fought in the D-day landings and witnessed the liberation of Belsen. In 1945, 
waiting to be demobbed, Felix saw a note in the barracks seeking fluent German 
speakers for “interesting duties”. He was taken back to the UK, trained in 
espionage and spent two years working undercover in the Soviet zone ofGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>.

In 1948 Felix became naturalised and went to study physical chemistry at 
London University on an ex-serviceman’s grant. In 1950 he married a fellow 
refugee, Hedy Werner.

Upon graduation he worked both in industry and as a lecturer, gaining his PhD 
at Birkbeck University. His earliest substantive post was at Bradford 
University, followed by later academic roles in Nottingham and Cambridge. This 
was interspersed with work for Unilever and a Nasa fellowship in the US at 
Carnegie Mellon University, Pennsylvania.

His early research career focused on the physical properties of water; he 
built up as complete a picture as possible of the properties of the water 
molecule. His magnum opus was a seven-volume work on the physical chemistry of 
aqueous solutions – giving him the nickname “Water Franks” in the scientific 
community. This is how many came to know him, through the numerous publications 
he edited, bringing together as much knowledge as possible. He also wrote a 
book,Polywater 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1981/08/30/books/ice-nine-russian-style.html> 
(1981),about the alleged Soviet discovery of a different form of water with a 
higher boiling point that had become the focus of cold war tension, but was 
exposed as a hoax.

In later years he became an entrepreneur, developing preservation 
technologies. His first applied cloud physics to store solutions, unfrozen and 
uncontaminated, down to -30°C. His second was developing new freeze-drying 
techniques for the vaccines, pharmaceuticals and biotech industries. He set up 
a business in Cambridge with contracts from major pharmaceutical companies. 
Together with a US biotech company Felix also worked on developing stable 
insulin that could be inhaled, promising an end to daily injections.

He retired in 2000 and moved to be closer to his family in London. Felix was 
an accomplished pianist and cellist who played in chamber music and orchestral 
ensembles into his late 80s. He loved to organise outings and reunions, 
frequently taking the entire family on summer holidays to the South Tyrol, 
where he had spent happy times as a child.

He is survived by Hedy, his daughters, Carolyn and me, and five grandchildren.
 