
This Tuesday it will be exactly 50 years since Cassius Clay shook up the world 
by defeating Sonny Liston to become the youngest heavyweight champion. He did 
so again shortly after, when he changed his name toMuhammad Ali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/muhammad-ali>. The anniversary of the fight 
will be marked by an exhibition in Miami, where it took place, featuring 
previously unseen photographs. But the images we have are vivid enough.

The emptiness in Liston's eyes, stripped of empathy, as he held up two fingers 
in prediction at the weigh-in. Ali, temporarily blinded in the fifth round, 
pawing for his opponent's head as hooks like tsunamis crashed round his head. 
Liston slumped on his stool in surrender at the finish. And Ali – so young, 
brilliant and pretty – tumbling towards the ropes above the press seats, 
demanding his triumph be acknowledged.

But something else has stuck, too: Ali's depiction of Liston as a plodding 
bear. Liston's first-round defeat in the rematch sent his reputation deeperinto 
a tailspin. Afterwards Rocky Marciano called it a "black eye for boxing" while a
Boxing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> Illustrated editorial 
remarked: "Nobody wants to be reminded of Sonny Liston. The idea is to forget 
him."

History has not forgotten Liston but it has downgraded him. In doing so it 
also downgrades Ali's victory, one of the finest of his career.

True, one can make a case that Ali's third-round knockout of Cleveland 
Williams in 1966 was better. There has rarely been a more balletic 
demonstration of the art of rendering a man unconscious. But this was not the 
Williams who troubled Liston in 1959 and 1960; in 1964 he was shot in the 
stomach by police, suffered permanent kidney damage and lost 10 feet of his 
small intestine.

Others will cite the Thrilla in Manilla, Ali's third fight against Joe 
Frazier, in the heat and steam-bath humidity of the Philippines. The courage of 
both men as they journeyed past exhaustion and dangerously close to mutually 
assured destruction was chilling. But their first fight, which Ali lost, was 
even better.

Then there is the Rumble in the Jungle when Ali – 32 and slowing – showed 
tremendous bravery to allow George Foreman to tee off wrecking-ball hooks while 
he lounged on the ropes, before picking him off and knocking him out. But Ali 
was a 7-1 underdog for Liston; against Foreman he was 3-1. Once you have 
confronted one bully the next one is never quite as scary.

Liston was a bully. And by 1964 he was considered unbeatable. He had lost once 
in 36 bouts – and that defeat in 1954, during which he suffered a broken jaw 
but ploughed on, merely added to his reputation. One contemporary profile said 
he was "surprisingly fast, remarkably quick" and noted his punishing jab while 
the former heavyweight champion Joe Louis admitted, "I'm glad he wasn't around 
when I was fighting."

Liston was tough because he had it tough. Born in a cardboard-walled shack on 
a plantation, the second youngest of 25, he told Boxing Illustrated in 1964: 
"On the good days I ate. On the bad ones I told my stomach to forget it." There 
were plenty of bad days even after he found boxing in jail: he was arrested 18 
times between 1950 and 1959 on suspicions of rape, robbery and speeding.

Watching Ali face Liston is to watch him grow into greatness. In the first 
round he is initially wary but after slipping several jabs he cuts loose with a 
blurring combination that staggers his opponent. The second round was Liston's 
but by the third he had been cut under a cheekbone. Some reporters had wondered 
if Liston could bleed. Now they had their answer.

In the fifth, as liniment on Liston's gloves scorched his eyes and he could 
see only a foggy outline of the most dangerous fighter in the world, Ali 
fiddled and survived. In his autobiography, Ali remembered: "I could barely 
make out his image but I ducked, pedalled and danced away. Then I heard someone 
scream from ringside: 'Beat that nigger's ass, Sonny' … Somehow that made me 
more determined."

A round later Liston retired on his stool. He had been lured into complacency 
by Ali's clowning and years of dominance. Such was his power, he had fought 
only 13 minutes and seven seconds in the previous 3½ years and he expected Ali 
to wither like the others. He did not train properly, sparred intermittently 
and consumed hot dogs, popcorn and beer. He had nothing left. His age was also 
against him. Officially he was 31 but his arrest records suggest he was at 
least 36.

Ali was not to know any of this. The nerves and fears of his entourage were 
his nerves and fears too. As Doctor Ferdie Pacheco later explained: "I was with 
him against Frazier, all three fights, against Foreman … this was the only time 
I saw him nervous … he had no idea if he could do what he had been saying he 
could do."

Soon he knew and the world knew. Afterwards Joe Louis called it the biggest 
upset in heavyweight history. Ali had forecast his triumph with the certainty 
of a soap-box preacher proclaiming the end of the world. In Miami he not only 
talked the talk but walked the walk.
 