
Eagle's Nest - Val d'Isère, France

One of the most iconic chalets in the mountains is found two minutes from the 
edge of the famousLa Face piste and has a fabulous lookout over the resort. 
Spread over four floors, it comes with its own swimming pool, sauna and steam 
room, the six double bedrooms all have integrated sound systems and the top 
floor is given entirely to the living space.

There's a large south-facing terrace and the mezzanine level is designated for 
home cinema use. Laurent Perrier is served with canapes every evening. Less of 
a splurge is Chalet Mathilda, which also comes with a pool, very snazzy 
interior, champagne reception every evening, five-course meals but not quite 
such an eye-watering price tag.

· Scott Dunn (020-8682 5050, scottdunn.com <http://www.scottdunn.com>) has 
seven nights' chalet-board from £2,195pp inc business class BA flights and 
transfers. Chalet Mathilda costs £1,455pp on the same basis but without 
business flights.

Chalet Les Sorbiers - Courchevel, France

The centrepiece of the new Mr and Mrs Smith ski chalet's collection (launched 
this week) is this larchwood and stone chalet sleeping 10. Traditional from the 
outside, it has a contemporary Alpine interior with the high-ceilinged living 
space set round a central gas fire.

Antler chandeliers, antique sledges and even a stuffed bear watch over 
proceedings but leave you to enjoy the home cinema for yourselves. There is an 
outdoor hot tub on the terrace but if you want to really pamper yourself you 
can check in to the exclusive spa in the adjoining Kilimanjaro hotel.

· Mr and Mrs Smith (0845 034 0700, mrandmrssmith.com/ski 
<http://www.mrandmrssmith.com/ski>) has seven nights' chalet-board from 
£2,468pp exc flights.

Heli-skiing - Chilcotin Mountains, Canada

The ultimate in luxury has got to be heli-skiing, and Canadian specialists TLH 
combines it with a picturesque hideaway lodge on the shores of Tyaughton Lake 
in one of the remotest corners of the Canadian Rockies. Wake up in the morning 
to views of 3,000m-plus snow-covered peaks, sling on your ski boots as the 
rotors start turning, then clock up some serious vertical.

The regular package includes 100,000 vertical feet of heli-skiing.

· Elemental Adventure (020-7836 3547, eaheliskiing.com 
<http://www.eaheliskiing.com>) has seven nights' full-board from £3,200pp inc 
transfers but not international flights.

Tivoli Lodge - Davos, Swizerland

This new ski-in ski-out designer chalet sleeping 12 is more private boutique 
hotel than traditional ski chalet. With over 700 sq m of living space, 
including a kids' games room, it does the oh-so-trendy thing of traditional 
outside and unashamedly contemporary within.

The indoor swimming pool, complete with jetstream and waterfall, is in a 
separate wing which also houses a hot tub and sauna. The dining room is 
fabulous for entertaining and you will never tire of the views over the 
Engadine peaks.

· Descent International (020-7384 3854, descent.co.uk 
<http://www.descent.co.uk>) offers seven nights' chalet-board from £2,050pp 
excluding flights.

Aspen - Colorado, US

Still the most high-profile of all the US ski resorts, Aspen is a celebrity 
hotspot - Jack Nicholson, Kevin Costner, Cameron Diaz, Justin Timberlake, Seal 
and his wife, Heidi Klum, are all regulars. However, this former silver-mining 
town is not just for A-listers, though you could be forgiven for feeling like 
one at the St Regis hotel, which offers elegant old-school American hospitality.

The see and be seen crowd hang out at the Sky Hotel, where you can indulge in 
people-watching at the Altitude 910 bar, before retreating to the grandeur of 
the St Regis. Lift passes aren't cheap but the exchange rate at least means you 
should be able to eat relatively cheaply - outside the Regis. Try the Italian 
Mezzalun on E Cooper Avenue.

· Seven nights' B&B from £1,825pp, inc flights and transfers (01273 224 060, 
skisafari.com <http://www.skisafari.com>).
 