
Mention flexible working and people have certain ideas. A rosy picture of 
conference calls in pyjamas, lunchtime swims, maybe a desk under a tree in the 
back garden. Gliding through our inbox in peace at 8am and logging off by 4pm. 
These are all ideas had by people who have never actually done flexible 
working, of course, but we can’t let the dream die.


Especially not now the government has announced that flexible working is the 
key to tackling the gender pay gap.A report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/22/gender-pay-gap-has-barely-shrunk-in-four-years-say-mps>
 last month by the women and equalities select committee, chaired by 
Conservative MP Maria Miller, identified the lack of flexible working 
opportunities – including variable start and finish times, working from home, 
or the option to work fewer days – as the main driver of the enduring pay 
difference between men and women (still at a dismal 19.2% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/22/gender-pay-gap-has-barely-shrunk-in-four-years-say-mps>
).


The money vs happiness debate: how much are you worth?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2015/dec/21/the-money-vs-happiness-debate-how-much-are-you-worth>
It makes sense. For mothers returning to work from maternity leave, those few 
hours of leeway can be the difference between career confidence and a career 
abandoned. Flexibility gives part-time workers (42% of women work part-time, 
and 12% of men) extra opportunity, and makes the daily grind bearable for staff 
whose dreams don’t begin and end with their LinkedIn page.


But flexible isn’t always easy. Without the supple attitudes and nimble 
management to match, trying to make a formerly 9-to-5 job work on new terms can 
be like trying to do a yogic backbend without warming up first.


First there is the risk of resentment from colleagues back in the office, who 
are convinced you really are writing that report from a spa or leaving early to 
go shopping. There is also the worry you will become the phantom colleague, 
just a disembodied name in people’s inboxes who nobody ever remembers to invite 
to the Christmas party.


“One of the biggest pitfalls is that many managers don’t have the skills to 
manage performance effectively for flexible workers,” warns Patrick Woodman, 
head of research at the Chartered Management Institute. “They need to measure 
performance on the outcomes of the work, not on the time spent or how much they 
see them around the office. It’s all too easy to lapse into an ‘out of sight, 
out of mind’ approach.”


While we might know we’re more productive in the quiet calm of our own homes, 
the fear of being considered a slacker can turn into digital presenteeism – 
replying to emails long after you should have logged off, as a way of waving a 
flag that says “Here I am! Still doing my job!” And it’s all too easy for 
managers to take advantage.

When Caroline Davey, a senior creative at an advertising agency, took a 
promotion after returning from maternity leave, flexible working quickly became 
working for free. “I wanted to believe the management’s praise that I could do 
the job brilliantly in four days, but I couldn’t,” she says. “I worked one or 
two hours extra the days I was there, and missed my son’s bedtime most nights. 
And on that day off, I had calls and emails marked urgent. I didn’t want anyone 
to think I was incompetent – especially because after maternity leave you feel 
your mind has slowed down, and you’re scared everyone else will realise.”


As a freelancer, I’m a fan of flexible working by default. But as someone who 
frequently goes an entire working day talking to nobody except the house 
plants, I also know the power of human contact. I know the benefit of having an 
ally across the desk who can tell you if an email reads well, if a client is 
being unreasonable, if the idea you had at lunch is genius or ridiculous – all 
chatter that is often sacrificed when you’re working at digital arm’s length.


“For those companies that can make flexi-working work, I firmly believe they 
have a more productive team, happier employees and a really energetic 
business,” says Joely Carey, an editorial director. “But for it to have a 
positive impact on a business everyone needs to be on board, from the top down. 
You have to be uber organised otherwise it will fail, with meetings going 
unattended, projects being mishandled or creativity being stifled because of a 
lack of connection between the teams.”


Technology needs to be flexible enough to cope with the load, too. Skype needs 
to work, files need to be accessible, the IT team needs to be easily 
contactable. People need to learn to use email in a way that’s personable, not 
just “Action this by EOP, regards” perfunctory.

And, of course, attitudes need to change along with legislation. The bums on 
seats brigade needs to see flexible working as a real option for everyone, not 
the preserve of working mothers. But there’s a way to go;researchers in 
Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/03/flexible-working-helps-women-succeed-but-makes-men-unhappy-study-finds>
 earlier this year found that men were twice as likely as women to have their 
requests for flexible working rejected, while those working flexibly were less 
likely than women to feel secure in their jobs and confident about future 
promotion.

So perhaps the biggest risk of flexible working is that we don’t embrace it 
wholly enough? If women are willing to be flexible and accept change, while 
masculinity splinters the moment it steps outside the office, both sides could 
end up losing. It’s the same old girdle, disguised as a lycra leotard.


“Flexible working is an important part of closing the gender pay gap, but it’s 
not the only measure,” says Woodman. “The government is bringing forward 
regulations that willrequire large companies to report on how they pay men and 
women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2016/mar/22/women-inequality-gender-pay-gap-workplace>
, which is going to put a real spotlight on the gender pay gap. Transparency is 
the most powerful driver of change we have.”


Talk to us on Twitter via @GdnWomenLeaders 
<https://twitter.com/GdnWomenLeaders> and sign up 
<https://register.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/> to become a member of 
the Women in Leadership network and receive our newsletter.
 