
Yellowstone Chalet, St Foy, France

When I first went skiing, chalets were so small, and ski clothes so big that 
my brother and I could hardly fit in the same room when we were both wearing 
our C&A salopettes. In fact, our matching ski suits were so bulky that, instead 
of taking up space in the family suitcase, Mum made us wear them on the 
aeroplane. It was great fun, though the chalet was never luxurious (we slept in 
bunk beds) and the food was always meagre, prepared by a girl who would clearly 
rather have been skiing by day or drinking her body weight in beer by night. 
Anyway, it's all changed. I can fit my ski suit in my luggage, for one thing, 
and chalets are more like five-star boutique hotels. At the least that's what 
the Yellowstone Chalet in Sainte Foy is like.

It's spacious enough to take a little while to get to know your way around it, 
but cosy enough to pad around barefoot, thanks to under-floor heating 
everywhere. It's built from local wood and stone, with huge limed wood beams, a 
giant-size fireplace in the sitting room, high ceilings and a balcony on three 
sides to admire the view over the Tarentaise Valley.

There's also wifi access, a television room, and a gym (in case skiing all day 
isn't enough exercise for you) as well as a sauna, and an open-air Jacuzzi, 
where you can sit at night in deliciously boiling bubbles and admire the 
distant lights of Les Arcs.

The bedrooms all have soft pillows and crisp linens on the beds, flat-screen 
TVs, and the en suite bathrooms have two basins (I don't know why that feels so 
luxurious, but it does), squashy white towelling robes, a huge bath and Elemis 
goodies to soothe tired muscles.

There are three full-time staff and a chef. Everything is done for you, as in 
a luxury hotel, but you have the run of the place, and can help yourself to 
anything in the kitchen whenever you feel like it. On arrival, you're offered a 
Kir Royale and canapes. The food is excellent; locally sourced, fresh, 
plentiful and varied. Breakfast is huge: porridge, warm croissants, proper 
coffee, bacon or a perfectly cooked boiled egg - and newspapers. Tea is 
homemade goodies like muffins or caramel mud cake.

Aperitifs - the bar and its well stocked cellar are always open - are served 
before dinner, which is superlative: perfectly pink Beef Wellington, rack of 
lamb with mango and mint salsa, spinach tagliatelle with Roquefort and walnut 
cream, then peach and cherry trifle, or Grand Marnier pancakes, and then cheese 
and more wine. Of course, if this doesn't appeal, you can request different 
meals in advance.

There's an excellent concierge service too, which will do everything for you 
apart from the actual skiing. They will pre-book your boots, skis, passes and 
guides, organise a helicopter transfer, a massage in your chalet, or Pilates, 
or reflexology, or husky rides, or ice-climbing or snowmobiling ...

 The little details: Speakers for your iPod are concealed within the art works 
on the wall. Complimentary transfers let you ski in the neighbouring resorts of 
Val d'Isere, Tignes, La Rosiere and Les Arcs.

 OTT: Jacuzzi with in-built CD player so you can practice your singing in the 
bath.

The firm: Premiere Neige (0870 383 1000; yellowstonechalet.com 
<http://www.yellowstonechalet.com>) has nine chalets in St Foy, but the 
super-luxury Yellowstone operates separately.

The damage: You can book the whole chalet, sleeping up to 15, from £10,250 to 
£20,250 per week, or a double room from £850pp, with food and wine but not 
flights.
Kate Johnson

Haus Glacier, Zermatt, Switzerland

In its two French resorts, Val d'Isere and Meribel, chalet company VIP has 
built up a collection of traditional, cosy chalets with such comforting names 
as the Farmhouse and Brioche. Expanding into Switzerland, however, this small 
company (classier sister firm of Snowline) has forsaken rustica for smaller, 
apartment-style buildings located in the heart of urban Zermatt. Well, in the 
village centre.

Given that the new Haus Glacier was converted from a language school before 
the start of last season - and is bang on the main street - it feels 
surprisingly quiet and swish. It doesn't have the olde Swisse charm of the 
nearby Chalet Gamatchi, but it is comfortable and modern, and easing the pain 
of the trek to hire skis or boots, it has uniquely convenient access: a lift 
straight from the chalet to the heart of the ski shop. It's handy for nightlife 
too: the T-Bar club is only about 10m further across the street.

Haus Glacier's massive flat-screen TV has its satellite channels tuned to news 
in the morning, maybe hinting that this is a chalet more aimed at the executive 
weekend away. VIP says all its chalets have generously proportioned living 
areas, high quality sound systems and an open balcony or terrace for soaking up 
the late-season sun.

The Zermatt chalets are in the vein of Malmaison hotels: not excessively 
luxurious but neatly done, minimalist and with nothing out of place. In 
particular, Haus Bor has eye-catching design and furniture. When I visited, we 
ate well, although not all the dishes were quite at restaurant level. The house 
wines are very decent and you can trade up.

The little details: Champagne and excellent canapes on tap. Massages, costing 
extra, are guaranteed available in chalet each night.

OTT: The electronically controlled, jet-cleaning and blow-drying toilet in 
another VIP chalet, Haus Bor. Just don't let some joker slip off with the 
remote.

The firm: VIP (08701 123 119; vip-chalets.com <http://www.vip-chalets.com>) 
has a total of 19 chalets in Val d'Isere, Meribel and Zermatt.

The damage: VIP offers seven nights at Haus Glacier in Zermatt from £699 per 
person on a catered basis, including return BA flights from Gatwick and 
transfers.
Gwyn Topham

Chalet Du Cret, Val D'isere, France

So this is what it must be like to be Roman Abramovich. Guests at the Chalet 
du Cret enjoy Perrier Jouet champagne and U'Luvka vodka on tap, and for the 
duration of their stay are attended to by cool, black-clad henchmen and the odd 
glamorous eastern European hostess, ready to discreetly furnish such essentials 
as hand warmers, water and chocolate bars.

Little wonder that the company behind it, Descent International, has become a 
favourite with billionaires and celebrities. The identities of guests are kept 
strictly secret, except for when Victoria Beckham stayed at Descent's chalet in 
Courchevel - the 150 paparazzi camped outside were a bit of a giveaway.

There are typically four or five staff in each chalet, including a full-time 
chef. Among Cret's hosts is an ex-policeman who collects us from Geneva in a 
4x4. It turns out that this isn't the only transfer he does: we get driven the 
few hundred metres to the lifts in the morning, where we are presented with our 
skis, lift passes and sun cream, and introduced to our instructors (the best in 
Val, we're assured). We can't fail to ski well: this is tackling the mountains 
in much the same way as the royal family once shot tigers.

At the end of the day, as we reach the bottom of the home run, the chalet 
manager - think a cross between the Milk Tray man and Jeeves - is already there 
to pick up my skis, drive me home, and even try to unbuckle my boots. I'm too 
embarrassed to let him, but I guess you could get used to it.

The chalet itself puts the average stripped pine interior to shame. This 
building has been around for hundreds of years, and was lately converted from 
its most recent incarnation as an upmarket restaurant. It has got all the 
atmosphere a Francophile snob could want, hiding artfully installed facilities. 
The discreet, modern kitchen is fitted with chefs in mind (for once this is 
chalet food that genuinely could be described as top restaurant quality). An 
upstairs lounge room has the kind of solid desk and sleek computer terminal 
that blends in enough to not startle the holidaying guest, but still is 
reassuringly executive, should you suddenly feel the need to sell your stake in 
Gazprom.

There is art on some walls, enormous stuffed stags on others. A great log fire 
is always burning. The soft white Russian down duvets are so snug that one 
night I don't even realise that I've left the balcony door open, and sleep 
through a snowstorm coming into my room.

Outside, we splash around in the hot tub, a few metres away from a 
centuries-old chapel that now comes with the property - ski wedding, anyone?

The little details: Rather than anything so infra dig as guests struggling 
down to the ski hire shop, the staff of Ogier Sport (Val's best, according to 
Descent) come to the chalet with skis and boots that magically fit.

OTT: All who stay can enjoy a five-course meal at which every course - from 
soup to dessert - is accompanied by a differing vintage of Perrier Jouet 
champagne. Oh, champagne is used in the cooking, too. Beyond that, it's only 
the limits of your imagination and offshore bank account: from little treats 
such as ice karting through to (literally) parachuting in a Father Christmas.

The firm: Descent has 17 chalets in resorts including Val d'Isere, Meribel, 
Klosters, Courchevel, Les Gets, St Moritz and Zermatt.

The damage: Descent chalets are priced for exclusive bookings only. A week at 
the Chalet du Cret in Val d'Isere sleeping 12 costs from £23,340-£43,465.
Gwyn Topham

Chalet Chloe, Breckenridge, USA

Opened in 2006, Chalet Chloe offers a completely different version of luxury 
from the likes of Descent or VIP. Gone are the suave black uniforms and vintage 
champagnes, replaced by friendly hosts, the owner dropping by to say hello with 
his toddler giggling on his shoulders (this is the eponymous Chloe), and a 
fridge stocked with beer for you to help yourself to.

That's not to say this isn't a properly posh pad though. You go up the grand 
wooden entrance steps into a huge vaulted open-plan living area, with leather 
sofas arranged around a colossal fireplace built of local rock and exposed 
timbers overhead. The US-proportioned beds are piled high with pillows, the 
robes are soft and fluffy, there's free Wi-Fi throughout, the double-basins 
made from stunning polished granite. Dinners are gourmet four-course affairs, 
cooked in front of you in the open-plan kitchen.

The chalet is just 400m from the lifts at Peak Eight, a rarity in spread-out 
Breckenridge. In the ski room, there's a selection of brand new Salomon 
products waiting for you to try them out, free of charge and boot warmers to 
make sure your feet are toasty in the morning.

It's surrounded by tall, snow-covered pine trees, which sway and whisper as 
you sit in the outdoor hot tub looking up at the stars.

Really it's all about the service though - the hosts, Huw and Arsula, are 
constantly on hand to run you around the resort, rustle up some freshly baked 
cookies, or locate a particular DVD for you to crash out in front of in the 
lounge. It's not at all like a five-star hotel but is all the more relaxing 
because of it.

The little details: Humidifiers in every room help avoid sore throats and dry 
skin at this altitude - Breckenridge is at 2,925m.

OTT: Breakfasts so giant they make a lie-down more appealing than the ski 
slopes - bacon, eggs, muffins, burritos, pancakes omelettes, and so on.

The firm: Kokopelli Ski holidays (00 1 970 453 2575; skiresortchalets.com 
<http://www.skiresortchalets.com> has two chalets in Breckenridge and one in 
Vail.

The damage: The current exchange rate makes staying here a real bargain. The 
whole chalet, sleeping 12, costs from $1,659 to $2,595 a night. Doubles cost 
$309, including breakfasts, teas, dinners and wine, which works out at £75 per 
person per night.
Tom Robbins 
 