
The condemnation of M. Zola yesterday to a year's imprisonment will come as a 
shock to every generous mind. At a time whenFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> is torn by doubts as to the 
integrity of the chiefs of her army, which have been confirmed by the efforts 
of the Cabinet, the War Office, and the Chambers to stifle discussion, M. Zola 
alone of all Frenchmen has had the courage to accuse the War Office of 
double-dealing, with the express purpose of compelling inquiry into the facts 
of the case.

It was a heroic act. M. Zola had everything to lose — the popularity which he 
has earned by years of toil and upon which as a novelist he has to depend for a 
livelihood, and even his personal liberty. On the other hand, he had nothing to 
gain but the satisfaction of having repaired a judicial error and rescued an 
innocent man from a horrible captivity. Yet, in the teeth of the Government and 
of public opinion, M. Zola took up the cause of Dreyfus, and by his outspoken 
denunciations of the War Office authorities drove the Government to prosecute 
him. This was not all. When the trial began it became evident that the 
defendant was to be hindered in every way from proving his case. If the 
courts-martial whose good faith M. Zola impugned had been unsatisfactory, his 
own trial before a civil court was to degenerate into a shameful burlesque. At 
the pleasure of the judge, witnesses might be cross-examined for the defendant 
or they might be told to keep silence; military witnesses might discuss the 
Dreyfus affair if they wished to pledge their honour that Dreyfus was guilty, 
but other witnesses must respect the chose jugée; generals in uniform might 
address the jury in impassioned terms, and then hold their peace when asked to 
substantiate their assertions; if a witness gave evidence reflecting on the War 
Office, the head of the Bar must apologise to the generals present and assure 
them of his sympathy.

Such scenes as have occurred during the past fifteen days in the Paris Court 
of Assizes would be thought incredible on the stage or in a novel, and yet, 
after this mockery of justice, M. Zola is condemned. It speaks volumes for the 
dogged bravery of the man that he should have fought this cause to the last, 
and his glory is the disgrace of those who have deliberately trampled on the 
law to bring about his fall.

[Emile Zola was sentenced to one year's imprisonment after writing "J'accuse", 
an open letter to the French government accusing it of anti-semitism in the 
Dreyfus affair. Captain Alfred Dreyfus, a Jewish officer in the French Army, 
had been wrongly convicted of treason four years earlier. Zola fled to England 
but returned to Paris when charges were dropped.]
 