
The latest episode in our series of classic reports comes from the Guardian on 
9 March 1971, and reports on Joe Frazier's defeat ofMuhammad Ali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/muhammad-ali> in a match up billed 'The 
Fight of the Century'

When the mountain came to Muhammad
by Hugh McIlvanney

In the middle of Tuesday afternoon the lobby of the New Yorker Hotel in 
Manhattan was so crowded that people who wanted to stay on the ground floor 
were riding in elevators to take a rest from the jostling. One man tried to 
reduce the crush by elbowing his way through the bodies shouting warnings. 
"You're creating a fire hazard," he yelled. "Get back! You'll have to move 
back. Somebody could get killed here." No one moved and he turned away 
hopelessly. "All this," he said, "for a beaten fighter."

A few minutes later the door of one of the express elevators opened and the 
beaten fighter stepped out and attempted to make his way to the street within a 
straining ring of his black friends and attendants. He was taller than almost 
anyone else in the lobby, so that his disembodied face rode above the swaying 
crowd, composed and detached, the lips pursed in a patient expression. He 
remained undisturbed, signing the pieces of paper that were pushed at him, when 
his protectors had to give up on their first effort to force him through the 
main doors. The pressure eased when at last he reached the pavement. Most of 
the mob fell in behind him, scurrying to compensate for the length of his 
stride. There were at least 200 people with him when he turned out of 8th 
Avenue into the hard wind of 34th Street on his way to the basement garage of 
the hotel. A tiny black boy, thin as a stick, was held high in his mother's 
arms for a glimpse.

"Hey Muhammad, hey Muhammad," he called. Then in desperation: "Hey Cassius 
Clay.' Ali's eyes rolled round slowly in mock rebuke. It took long minutes for 
the police and his friends to extricate him sufficiently to squeeze him into a 
black cadillac. "Oh Jennifer," an attractive black girl said to her white 
friend as the car door closed. "I saw him. I saw him." The white girl laughed. 
"I touched him." she said.

"Muhammad, you're beautiful," a young white man shouted from the fringe. 
"You'll be back. You're coming back." Ali turned towards him and winked above 
the hard ball of swelling on his right cheek. As the car edged out and swung 
tentatively across to the other side of the street, someone muttered that after 
all Frazier had won the fight. A big man with red hair and a brown outdoor face 
spun round on the voice. "He won't win next time. Believe me. Frazier won't win 
next time."

It was a moment that no one but Ali could have created, a scene that had 
little to do with the usual mobbing of a celebrity. Pop singers and film actors 
can have young girls scrambling to touch them, but they don't make 16-stone 
building workers tighten at the throat and offer emotional declarations of 
faith. Perhaps the most remarkable aspect of that utterly remarkable 
heavyweight championship fight in Madison Square Gardens is that defeat, far 
from diminishing Ali in the eyes of his admirers has deepened their feelings 
far beyond the normal limits of public respect and affection.

That suggestion will represent sentimental rubbish to many people, but they 
are the people who have always been immune to Ali. By no means all of them are 
racists, blatant or latent. Nor are they necessarily so superficial that they 
can only see him as a loud-mouthed boor. What is common to most of his 
detractors is a failure to let themselves become attuned to his spirit, to his 
dream. To those of us who believe in him, such a failure is astonishing. The 
beauty of his physical performances, his whole impact as a performer, are 
inseparable from his bizarre but ultimately heroic vision of himself. Arthur 
Miller's salesman is not the only man who has to dream. Whoever you are it 
comes with the territory. The world would be uninhabitable if all of us dreamt 
on the epic scale of Ali but it would be a considerably drabber place if one 
among us had not done so.

That was why all the sadness of last Monday night was diluted, even 
transformed, by Ali's refusal to let his dream be tarnished. Against an 
opponent of genuine nobility, one of the most honest wills ever put to work in 
the prize ring or anywhere else, he stayed true to himself and everyone who 
identifies with him. He fought a unique fight, one that was almost baroque in 
the intricacy of its stratagems. And when all his elaborate attempts to conceal 
the total erosion of his leg speed, to reduce some of his weaker rounds to a 
vacuum of restful play-acting to "con"Joe Frazier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/joe-frazier> into believing him far stronger 
and less vulnerable than he was. When all these failed, he took the 
consequences with magnificent courage.

The white American reporters who screamed "Kill the sonofabitch, take his head 
off, his time's here now," were blinding themselves to the truth of what was 
happening in the ring as much as the hotel maid who said, "So the big mouth got 
hit good," and offered a smile that was an invitation to dance on a grave.

They wasted a crucifixion, but if they think that is what they got they are 
bad judges of the genre. The big man came out bigger than he went in. He lost. 
There should be no doubt about that. His own claim that he thought he won nine 
rounds, and therefore the fight, was a confirmation of continuing pride rather 
than a logical analysis.

Exactly the same interpretation must be put on his opinion that if he had 
fought Joe Frazier before the politicians put him out of boxing four years ago, 
Frazier "would have licked me quicker because I wasn't as strong as I am now." 
To say otherwise, as I certainly would, clearly would be seen by Ali as an 
admission that he is in decline. That, for such a man at the age of 29, is 
unthinkable. Inevitable, in the midst of all his generous words about Frazier, 
he finds himself saying that he would have done better with "a referee from 
England or Scotland and judges from Japan and Germany" in place of the 
officials appointed by "the authorities that took my title away, guys who are a 
lot more friendly toward the Veterans of Foreign Wars than the Muslims."

Newspaper stories which gave the impression that he was ranting about having 
been robbed were ridiculous distortions. During an hour and a half in his hotel 
suite on the twenty-fifth floor of the New Yorker Hotel on Tuesday I heard him 
correct several interviewers who called him "champ". "I ain't the champ," he 
said quietly. "Joe's the champ, I call him champ now, not before but I do now. 
I ain't protestin'. He's a good, tough fighter. Not a great boxer but great at 
his own thing. He puts pressure on you all night, cuts off the ring, and he's 
the best hitter I ever met. I always thought of him as a nice fella. What I 
said before, that was to do with the fight. Just the fight. I got to know him 
pretty good from travelling up from Philadelphia before he fought Jimmy Ellis. 
I was low on money that day and he loaned me a hundred dollars. He's a nice man 
with a family, just another brother workin' to make a living."

Ali was lying back low in an armchair that had been placed to suit the 
television crews that had just left. He wore a fawn and beige wool shirt and 
blue slacks. His eyes were heavy and his voice was subdued. He said he was sore 
rather than tired. The worst pain was at the top of his right hip, where 
Frazier's left hooks had made regular contact. They had hurt him more and there 
than in the body, he said, contradicting those who had concluded wincingly at 
ringside that he would be "pissing blood for a week."

He was suffering less than might have been expected from the bruise on his jaw 
and kept telling us proudly that it was the only real mark on him. His hands 
were sore and he extended his right one lightly clenched when anyone wished him 
luck. He would talk quietly for a while and then fall into silence, glancing 
absently through a newspaper . Three men who said they were from Blackpool, and 
gave no reason to question it, had come to deliver an obscenely large stick of 
rock with "Muhammad Ali" printed through it. "What you tryin' to do?' he asked 
smiling. "Give me the sugar diabetes?' "If you had licked this, you'd lick 
Frazier," one of the three told him. The line sounded no better than it had at 
rehearsal.

Ali had more practical explanations of what went wrong. "If I knew then what I 
know now I would have done different. If I knew I was going to lose those 
rounds when I played about I wouldn't have fooled around so much."

This came across as wishful rationalisation of something that was forced upon 
him. Such contradictions, the tendency to submerge yesterday's facts in today's 
feelings, come naturally to him. He is an existential thinker. The truth is 
that the use he made of his equipment in this fight, though inevitably riddled 
with all kinds of dangerous exaggerations, was basically the approach that 
offered him the best hope of winning. No one knew better than he did that his 
legs had lost the elastic agility and inexhaustible fluency they once had. He 
knew he could not invalidate Frazier's strength and rhythm by the once 
favourite technique of "surrounding" his man, dancing outside the range of his 
opponent's punches while using his speed, reach and precise timing to pour in 
his own. At his best that unequalled mobility had made him as secure as a 
dive-bomber attacking a wagon train. But a long look at his training in Miami 
had left me sadly convinced that his foot speed was a memory, that against 
Frazier he would be obliged to fight flat-footed for much of the time.

It was equally obvious that if he allowed this realisation to commit him to a 
straightforward slugging war, there would be only one winner and it would not 
be Ali. He had always sought, and always previously found, a highly specific 
solution to the problems posed by each opponent, and here he appeared to decide 
that he had more of chance of overwhelming Frazier with his personality than 
with his pared-down talent. In the past he has concentrated on psyching himself 
into invincibility. Here the emphasis was on psyching Frazier out of belief in 
himself.

From the moment of entry into the ring Ali set out to persuade Frazier that he 
was taking on impossible odds. The two corners told a story. Yank Durham, 
Frazier's manager, brought in the minimum help. Ali had half-a-dozen corner 
men, all clad in aggressive scarlet uniforms. A lesser fighter might have been 
unnerved by the sight of such a red army. But this one was content with the 
knowledge that Ali would be alone when the bell went. He was only mildly 
irritated when Ali, gliding sideways past his corner, muttered contemptuous 
predictions.

When the bell did go, the big man started well; exploiting the anticipated 
clumsiness of Frazier's early moves with accurate jabs and right crosses. As 
Frazier pressed in close, Ali smothered his attacks, tangling up the arms and 
employing the advantage in height to lean on the smaller man's neck and 
shoulders. If the thunderous hooks got home to the body, Ali exposed his 
mouthpiece and shook his head in dismissal of their efforts, implying that the 
hitter was punching himself out. In fact Ali was being hurt. He simply takes 
hurt rather well.

Despite a substantial improvement in Frazier's work by the third, he could 
not, in my judgement, have won more than two or – at the absolute outside – 
three rounds up to and including the ninth. Ali had avoided draining himself 
too severely in this early period, especially in the sixth and eighth, by 
filling in time with some highly calculated comedy. He held a glove against 
Frazier's forehead, seeking to ward him off with insulting ease, or stood 
against the ropes with both hands down, eluding many punches and frowning 
pityingly over those that landed. Occasionally he rapped his man's face with 
playful little flurries of his right hand. Spectators who felt that his tactics 
were insanely hazardous did not appreciate how careful he had to be with his 
energy.Boxing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> positively is much 
more tiring than boxing negatively. Ali knew that if he tried to attack 
vigorously in every round he would burn out fast. He was more confident of his 
endurance than his destructive strength, so he gambled on breaking Frazier's 
spirit rather than his body. It was the boldest bluff imaginable.

This strange mixture of sharp aggression and farcical histrionics went very 
near to winning the fight. Ali had a superb ninth round, drawing traces of 
blood around Frazier's nose and mouth and adding to the already distinct 
swellings around the eyes. When Frazier staggered back, his mouth open in an 
almost drunken grin, after taking jolting hooks and uppercuts to the head, the 
fight seemed to have swung decisively.

But all this time, in his most frustrating moments, one simple statement could 
be read into everything Frazier did: "My time is coming." Now it had arrived. 
He rallied in the tenth and in the eleventh he took control. At last the left 
hook reached Ali, who had wearied himself in the ninth, and soon he was 
staggering around the ring at a crazily reclining angle, like a surf-rider 
before he loses the board. "What surprised me most was how often Joe caught me 
with the hook, with good ones after the eleventh," he said later. His ability 
to withstand a punch is prodigious, however, and Frazier could not put him down.

For the next two rounds he was catching but not disastrously and in the 
fourteenth, managing perhaps the best footwork he had shown all night, he boxed 
beautifully and won the round comfortably. But he had done his grandstanding 
too early. In the fifteenth his legs were leaden; Frazier punished him 
immediately and before the round had gone a minute a sickeningly violent left 
hook smashed across the right side of Ali's face, instantly increasing the 
swelling that had developed there earlier and lifting him flat on his back with 
his legs kicking high towards the ring lights.

Now came one of his worst and greatest moments. Any possible ambiguity about 
the result was removed by that punch, but so were the unjustified doubts about 
Ali's heart. Any man would have been entitled to stay prostrate after such a 
blow, but he rolled over without hesitation, was up at the count of two and 
when he had taken the compulsory eight he went straight at Frazier to hold on 
through the rest of a brutal round. I found it impossible to give Ali less than 
six rounds, with probably two even, but the eleventh and the fifteenth were won 
so easily by Frazier that he was well in front at the finish.

Joe Frazier, a thoroughly pleasant and admirable man, is also a champion fit 
to share a ring with any who have held the world heavyweight title. "I have 
fought anybody y'all put in front of me and God knows I beat them," he said 
afterwards. "What more can I do? Now I got to live a little man. I've been 
working for 10 long years."

Both men say they want to meet again – "All we need is six million dollars 
split evenly down the middle," says Yank Durham – and the odds are that all the 
objections of lawyers and politicians and wives will not prevent a second 
collision. "Next time would be different," Ali said in his hotel room. "Myself 
would make it different. When you get as big as I got in this game you get 
intoxicated with so-called greatness. You think you just have to run three 
miles a day. That's all I did for this fight. And I didn't rest properly, 
didn't train as hard as I used to. You convince yourself you'll get by on 
natural talent, that it will all just explode in there on the night. But it 
don't. Next time I'd run more, get the legs right. That would make it 
different."

Unfortunately one remembers the same self-criticism of his preparation for 
Oscar Bonavena. The signs are that he is no longer capable of driving himself 
through the endless training that maintained his unrivalled condition, that he 
no longer has the obsessive, unsuffering enthusiasm for it. He, too, wanted to 
get home to his hacienda style house in New Jersey and live an ordinary life 
for a while, "washing the dishes, putting out the garbage, landscaping the 
backyard. We been whipped. Maybe we'll get a little peace now."

But he was not about to abandon those people who were waiting for him down in 
the lobby. "I've never thought of losing, but now that it's happened the only 
thing is to do right. That's my obligation to all the people who believe in me. 
We all have to take defeats in life. We lose loved ones, or a man loses his 
property or his job. All kinds of things set us back, but life goes on. If 
so-called great people can take these defeats, whatever they are without 
cracking, the others are encouraged. They feel strong.

"If I had lost again I'd say "That's it. I've had my day.'' You don't go mad. 
You don't shoot yourself. Soon this will be old news. People got lives to lead, 
bills to pay, mouths to feed. Maybe a plane will go down with 90 persons on it. 
Or a great man will be assassinated. That will be more important than Ali 
losing. I never wanted to lose, never thought I would, but the thing that 
matters is how you lose. I'm not crying. My friends should not cry."

The last time I saw him before he went home he was at the wheel of a 
caravan-bus that was taking his entourage to New Jersey. As it pulled away 
through the crowds he gave a slow little smile and waved, like royalty. How 
else would he wave?
 