
It takes a rare purity of spirit to irrigate the moral and aesthetic desert 
that is forever threatening to engulf the world of heavyweight boxing. What we 
saw in Quezon City, capital of the Philippines, in midweek represented a 
shining flood of that purity. To say so is not to claim that the third and last 
meeting of Joe Frazier andMuhammad Ali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/muhammad-ali> would leave all who witnessed 
it ready to embrace the values of the prize-ring. Those 40-odd minutes of 
unremitting violence must have had the opposite effect on many. They would 
recoil from the thought that two men who were formidable in so many ways should 
seek to express themselves through an exchange of suffering, and especially 
they would wince at the sight of Frazier, his marvellous body reduced to a 
dilapidated, lurching vehicle for his unyielding will, reeling blindly in the 
murderous crossfire of the world champion's final assaults.

But whatever misgivings remain about the social validity of professional 
boxing, there is no room to doubt the worth, the simple nobility of what 
Frazier and Ali extracted from their harsh context in which they found 
themselves at the Quezon Coliseum on Wednesday morning. There was nothing 
morbid or sadistic about the thrill that their performances sent through the 
blood.

What we felt was awe at the spectacle of extraordinary men setting new limits 
for themselves, pushing back the boundaries of their courage, their physical 
and psychological capacity.

With the dramatic images of the fight still filling the memory, there is deep 
reluctance to listen to all the feverish plans for moving Ali's big top on to 
another exotic fairground.

Naturally, that cosmic promoter, Don King, a hawk in peacock's feathers, is 
eager to swoop on some more of the millions that are waiting to be snatched 
around the world. He talks of Munich as having "the inside track" but admits to 
a special fancy for Haiti, where even the unsavoury caravan that has attached 
itself to Ali's heavyweight championship might look wholesome against the local 
fauna. There are, he assures us, still plenty of governments sufficiently 
ambiguous about the distinction between prestige and notoriety to want to 
invest in his kind of promotion. Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Indonesia, Iran … the 
names flow from him like guarantees from a snake-oil salesman.

However, Mr King's anxiety to put the show on the road again is not shared by 
its star. Ali's mumblings on Wednesday about imminent retirement invited as 
much scepticism as his demands 24 hours later that the purse for his next 
appearance should be $25m. But his confession of profound weariness, his pleas 
for a genuine rest at the end of 12 months that have seen him box 63 
championship rounds and accumulate gross earnings of more than £7m, were 
convincing enough.

The morning's work in the Philippines had drained him as none of his previous 
50 fights – not even his two defeats, the first epic with Frazier and the night 
Ken Norton broke his jaw – had drained him. No champion in history has ever had 
access to a greater storeroom of physical and spiritual reserves, but Frazier 
seemed to have emptied it, to have forced Ali to lift the floorboards and 
scrape the very foundations of his nature for the last traces of strength.

Ali's subsequent assertion that he wanted to retire as early as the tenth 
round was familiar hyperbole, but there was an aching honesty about a later 
admission: "I felt like quittin' at the end of the fourteenth, well, not like 
quittin' but like I didn't want to go no more." On the way back to the dressing 
room, his face had the greyness of terminal exhaustion and he moved as if the 
marrow of his bones had been replaced by mercury.

At first he dismissed any suggestion of talking to reporters, but then he 
heard that Frazier, with bruised flesh around his eyes pressing against dark 
glasses, had undertaken the ordeal. So Ali struggled off his back and pulled on 
a pair of black slacks. He could not manage his shoes, so he shuffled to the 
press conference with only his white boxing socks on his feet, leaning heavily 
on his attendants and bodyguards.

Once there, his monologue was muted, solemn and shot through with a direct, 
poetic eloquence far removed from the doggerel of his more superficial moods, 
and when he said that going into the thirteenth and fourteenth rounds against a 
man like Frazier was "the next thing to dyin'" it did not ring false.

As always, he bore minimal evidence of the war he had won (only the small 
lumps and discolourations around the eyes were conspicuous), but he said he 
hurt everywhere, and each pain was echoed by a tribute to the unique opponent 
who had inflicted it.

"Don't let me ever again hear anybody put Joe Frazier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/joe-frazier> down," he had said in his 
dressing room. "That is a man."

Since Ali's own tongue is the one that has lacerated Frazier most vindictively 
and unjustly, we were anxious to believe in the permanence of his conversation 
to reality. "Joe Frazier is a real, real fighter. He is the toughest man in the 
world. Nobody can put pressure on me like he can, can take what I gave and come 
back to hurt me. If I'd taken the punches he took in there I'd have quit long 
before he did. He is a man."

In the evening they demonstrated their recuperative powers in characteristic 
ways, Ali by calling on President Ferdinand Marcos, Frazier by turning up at a 
party of his friends in the Hyatt Hotel. A warmth too basic to be called 
anything but love went out to him as he entered the room with his wife, 
Florence.

He was wearing a dinner suit with the collar of the dress shirt open wide. 
"You all havin' a good time?" he called through the microphone. "You all 
boogyin' right on in there?" Then he sang a rock song about having a good thing 
and not wanting to lose it. He had the championship of the world once and lost 
it, but the best thing he has he can never lose. It is the undecorated grace of 
his nature.

When he had finished dancing with his wife and one of his younger daughters, 
he was asked if his feud with Ali had exhausted itself of bitterness, if there 
would be a mellowing of feeling now. "I sure hope so," he said. "I sure do hope 
so."

Perhaps Ali at last will help to realise the hope of friendliness, will 
finally stop allowing obsession with his own ego to distort the huge respect he 
has always felt for the greatest of his adversaries. In the ring that respect 
was unmistakable. The fight had an intense dignity, unblemished by any attempt 
on Ali's part to con or ridicule his opponent.

Everything he did was an admission that he was in with an equal.

After a smoothly effective start, he was frequently made to suffer in the 
middle rounds, driven into the corners by an aggression as insistent as fire, 
hammered by left hooks of a ferocity that put his title seriously at hazard.

His retaliation was vehement, of course, but it was hard to see how the three 
Filipino officials (whose scoring of rounds, leaving out those that were even, 
showed 8-4, 8-4, and 8-3 in Ali's favour) came to have him much better than 
level entering the thirteenth. That round virtually concluded the argument, 
opening with a superb right hand to the jaw that sent Frazier's gum shield into 
the crowd and ending with the challenger's upper face so cruelly swollen that 
he was unable to see the blows that were smashing into his head. The fourteenth 
painfully confirmed the obvious: that no one can fight Muhammad Ail by braille.

Frazier is now being pressed to retire, and the most fervent urgings come from 
those who admire him most, who do not wish to see his greatness rewarded with 
irreversible damage to the body and brain. And if Joe goes, can Ali, who is 33 
and feeling it, be far behind?

He does not have to be told that their destinies have been inextricably 
linked. "I couldn't be what I am without him and he couldn't be what he is 
without me," says Ali. "We been a pretty good team over the last five years."

There is no one around who could develop a comparable rivalry with him. George 
Foreman was psychologically dismantled in Zaire. Now, he is a tortured and 
remote figure who refuses to take the fights that might rebuild his confidence. 
"I got to talk to George, get him back on his feet," says Ali, adding that he 
would welcome the Texan as his next opponent. But for the moment, Foreman, who 
only a short year ago loomed like an ogre of invincibility, stays out of sight, 
not so much sulking as demoralised, an Achilles whose tent has fallen about his 
ears.

In contrast, Ken Norton, who was devoured by Foreman in five minutes, has been 
a ubiquitous and muscular presence in the Philippines. He beat Ali once, and 
took the champion to a photo-finish in the return, but Norton at 31 looks a lot 
less hungry than he did. He has played a stud in a film and must have found it 
an untaxing role, for he is surrounded by attractive women of all shades 
wherever he goes.

With Smokin' Joe gone and Foreman discredited, Ali would find it increasingly 
hard to invest his doings with a sense of universal drama. The likelihood is 
that after one or two more fights he will depart the stage and devote himself 
to such trivia as a $5bn export business between America and Asia that he 
promises to supervise.

His passing will surely have a cataclysmic effect. The championship he holds 
can never hope to mean as much without him. What happened in Quezon City may 
prove to have been a kind of requiem for the heavyweight division.
 