
The latest installment in our series of classic reports was published in The 
Observer on Sunday September 17 1978. Two days previouslyMuhammad Ali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/muhammad-ali>, aged 36, had become the first 
three-time heavyweight champion in history. His opponent, Leon Spinks, had 
taken the world title off Ali earlier in 1978 winning a decision over 15 rounds 
in Las Vegas. The rematch described here was the final peak of Ali's glorious 
career. He retired the following June, before returning for his ignominious 
final series of fights against Larry Holmes and Trevor Berbick. Here then was 
Ali in his pomp for the final time, a master of his domain, making "suckers" of 
the press. He had just founded WORLD, the World Organization for Right, 
Liberty, and Dignity, and the confidence with which he speaks of the future 
here makes a stark, sad contrast with his condition in the years still to 
unfold.

The author is Hugh McIlvanney, Observer Sport correspondent between 1962 and 
1993. McIlvanney was one of the last of the great boxing writers of the old 
school, joining the likes of George Plimpton, Hunter S Thompson and Norman 
Mailer by the ringside at Ali's feet. 

There was just too much history bearing down on Leon Spinks in the New Orleans 
Superdrome on Friday night, and he was left feeling as mesmerised and helpless 
as a boy trying to shovel against an avalanche. Muhammad Ali's Third Coming to 
the heavyweight championship of the world was an exercise not so much in 
brilliance as in contrived inevitability. He and half the people on the planet 
wanted this victory so badly that Ali, having tortured his 36-year-old body in 
training to the point where it was once again an outrageous instrument of his 
dreams, was able to spit on the calendar and turn the fierce youthfulness of 
Spinks into something humiliatingly self-destructive.

Seven months ago, the 25-year-old from the St Louis ghetto looked like an 
inescapable Nemesis, a force strong and irreverent enough to close an era as he 
swarmed brutally through the disintegrating remnants of his boyhood hero's 
resistance to take the title in Las Vegas. On Friday night he looked what his 
record said he should be: a brave and powerful novice, burdened with 
inexperience and the extreme limitations of a recently converted amateur.

These 15 rounds were less of a championship match than a procession, a New 
Orleans parade without a jazz band. There was scarcely a hint of serious 
discomfort as Ali rode the juggernaut of his ambition to the limits of 
uniqueness in his sport, to a success that made him the first heavyweight to 
take the title three times, and did so, unbelievably, more than 14 years after 
he first made monkeys of the forecasters by draining the ogre out of Sonny 
Liston. Here, after a first round in which his punches were extravagantly 
mistimed, he swiftly found distance and rhythm and established a pattern that 
frustrated and all but demoralised his opponent.

Even when the three Louisiana officials had taken the fifth round away from 
Ali because they felt his holding during those three minutes amounted to 
fouling, none of them could leave him with a total of fewer than 10 rounds. The 
referee, Lucien Joubert, gave ten to Ali, and four to Spinks, with one even, 
and so did one of the judges, Ernest Cojoe, while the second judge, Herman 
Duitreix, had it 11-4 with no even rounds.

Few of the unofficial cards at ringside could credit the loser with any more, 
and many gave him less. It was a tribute to the persistence of his spirit that 
he took the fourteenth, and perhaps the fifteenth, too, as Ali's legs and arms 
began to tire after 40 minutes of astonishing fluency. But, leaving out the 
question of rule violations in the fifth, it was hard to accept that the 
defending champion had done more than share any of the other rounds.

Spinks had come to the ring with more handicaps than any young boxer could be 
expected to carry in only the ninth fight of his professional career. There 
were about 70,000 people in the soaring vastness of the Superdome (easily the 
largest indoor crowd boxing has known), and most of them – from the celebrities 
like Jackie Onassis and President Carter's mother, John Travolta and Kris 
Kristofferson, to beer-slugging red-necks on upper tiers so remote that they 
might have been in the next county – were vociferously prejudiced.

Spinks was booed as he ducked through the ropes as champion, and, as if Ali's 
friends weren't enough of a problem, his own corner was such an overcrowded 
Babel of confusing advice that the one man most likely to provide a 
constructive theme between rounds walked away from the chaos after the sixth. 
George Benton, an outstanding middleweight when he fought out of Philadelphia, 
and now a skilled tutor who did much to channel Spinks's natural violence into 
profitable aggression in Las Vegas, had said during the champion's haphazard 
training that he was being prevented from offering maximum assistance.

'They're cutting my throat, stopping me from helping the kid,' he had said 
then. Now, as he moved disconsolately through the hysteria of the ringside 
audience, he muttered: 'What can I do? There are 10 people up there in that 
corner. What can I do? There are too many amateurs up there.'

That was true, and the sad fact was that the boy wearing the gloves looked 
like one of them. Spinks had affected an unworried grin, showing the gum-shield 
like a surrogate denture, as Ali danced away from his charges or repelled him 
with flicking jabs, and single and double hooks in the early rounds.

But his depression became blatant as Ali's strength refused to wane as the 
older man blended glimpses of his former foot and hand speed with punishing 
improvisations learned over 18 hard years against the toughest men in the 
world, tricks that enabled him to war as well as box with such as Liston, Joe 
Frazier and George Foreman. Spinks felt the heel of the glove and the bare 
hardness of the forearm more than once. Above all, he found his most hopeful 
rushes smothered at birth by the holding that Ali has developed to a level 
where it has less in common with a boxer's survival technique than a wrestler's 
belligerence.

Lucien Joubert, perhaps responding to the collective desire that came down in 
clamorous waves from the rim of the arena and with silent force from the 
countless committed millions beyond permitted far more of that clutching, 
hauling and spinning than had been seen last February, and the challenger 
benefited from the referee's leniency.

But such questionable passages would have been rendered insignificant if Ali 
had not linked them with surges of selective, effective attacking, circling 
fleetly and watchfully, jabbing with increasing confidence and accuracy, 
sometimes hooking off the jab, releasing the occasional brisk combination of 
hooks and uppercuts, looking to land overhand rights, the flourishing Shuffle 
always adding to his overall control, causing his victim's eyes to cloud with 
the realisation that the discrepancy in class was irreversible.

Spinks had indicated during the preliminaries a heavy awareness of what an 
ordeal the evening would be. Ali was solemnly, almost morosely, 
undemonstrative, and any Muslim praying he did was unaccompanied by conspicuous 
gesture (he may, of course, have been relying on the celestial canvassing of 
his manager, Herbert Muhammad, son of the founder of the Black Muslims, who 
spent the entire contest with his eyes cast down and his lips moving 
noiselessly while Angelo Dundee, Bundini Brown and the others in the corner 
jabbered and whooped).

After dropping on to his knees and closing his eyes for a long Catholic 
prayer, Spinks spent nearly a full minute before the first bell embracing his 
brother Michael, a fellow Olympic champion in Montreal. He appeared 
uncharacteristically conscious of the weight of the occasion, and that 
impression was reinforced later when he admitted to interviewing journalists 
that he had been unable to concentrate with the intensity that a title defence 
demands.

'My body was ready, but my mind wasn't on the fight,' he said, and quickly 
became bellicose when pressed on the strangeness of that admission 'Maybe it 
was because l had a lot of other things on my mind, a lot of problems that come 
with the heavyweight championship.' he offered eventually. 'Who knows, I don't. 
That just wasn't me in there, period. But I won't cry because I have lost once, 
it won't keep me from sleeping or from going back to the gym.'

Nor did it keep him from congratulating Ali or declaring that the master is 
still his idol. Ali in turn described Spinks as a gentleman and made the 
familiar prediction that the man he had just out-classed would end up as 
champion after he had gone. He made it clear, however, that he was in no hurry 
to step aside. 'The title is too hard to get,' he said. 'I'm not going to give 
it up without thinking. I'm going to sit down for six or eight months and think 
about it. Then I'll decide whether to fight again. I would never want to go out 
a loser. I've always planned to be the first black man to retire undefeated, 
and to do it now after being champion three times would be something no one 
could ever equal. I have made suckers out of all of you. I was training three 
months before you knew it.

'That couldn't have been Ali in that ring tonight. It couldn't have been the 
old man, the washed-up 36-year-old fighter dancing through 15 rounds against a 
25-year-old boy. M-a-a-a-a-a-n, that was a miracle, and can you imagine what it 
means. I was great in defeat, what will I be to the peoples of the world after 
this. I'm going to get on with setting up my WORLD organisation to help the 
poor folks of the world, to help the hungry and those with diseases and famines 
and all kinds of troubles.

'If you think I have done something now, wait till you see what I do as 
president of WORLD. We now have tax-exemption, we now have a charter. We're 
going to have offices all round the world, an office in the Kremlin, an office 
in Bangladesh. I'm going to Moscow in about another month to see President 
Brezhnev. I told him I'd go back to see him after I regained my title. About 16 
presidents of various nations have now given their approval. WORLD, it's going 
to be doing good to people all over the globe.'

When he turned to the influences that had done him good in the Superdome he 
began with Allah and went on by way of Dick Gregory and his vitamin-charged 
juices to the Muslim doctor who had prescribed 'half-a-pint of ice-cream and a 
big hunk of honey 30 minutes before the fight'. That last declaration of faith 
produced smiles around the room but no sneers. If Ali decided he could make it 
across the Okinawa Deep in a pair of old wellies we would have to rate his 
chances only slightly worse than evens.
 