
Four Israeli soldiers killed in a truck ramming in Jerusalem by a Palestinian 
assailant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/08/truck-rammed-into-pedestrians-jerusalem>
 have been buried as Israeli police said they had arrested nine people in 
connection with the attack.

The victims of Sunday’s attack have been named as Lt Yael Yekutiel, 20, of 
Givatayim, and cadets Shir Hajaj, 22, from the settlement of Maale Adumim, 
Shira Tzur, 20, from Haifa, and Erez Orbach, 20, who came from the West Bank 
settlement of Alon Shvut and was a US-Israeli citizen.

The nine detained included family members of Fadi al-Qanbar, the Palestinian 
who drove his truck into a group of soldiers disembarking from a bus at a 
popular tourist viewpoint in Jerusalem during a visit organised for trainee 
officers.

The attack also left a fifth soldier in a coma in intensive care and 17 other 
people injured.

The UN security council joined other world leaders in condemning the attack. 
“The members of the security council condemned in the strongest terms the 
terrorist attack in Jerusalem,” the UN said.

Hajaj’s mother, Meirav, told Israeli media that when the family learned of the 
attack they had initially thought tourists would have been the target, not 
realising that Shir was also visiting the promenade.

“We stood by the door, praying that they (the officers tasked with informing 
soldiers’ families of their death) wouldn’t come,” she told the Ynet news site. 
<http://www.ynetnews.com/articles/0,7340,L-4904960,00.html> “And every minute 
they didn’t come, we said it was a good thing. I called hospitals, local IDF 
[Israel Defence Forces] offices and everywhere else.

Her father added: “These are our children, we send them to the army knowing 
they may not come back. Did I ever think this would happen to me? Never.”

The attack, the deadliest in months, came at a time of warnings about growing 
tensions, not least over Donald Trump’s controversial plan to move the US 
embassy to Jerusalem, andcalls from some rightwing Israeli ministers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/03/far-right-israel-minister-naftali-bennett-bill-annex-maale-adumim-settlement-palestinian-territories>
 to annex parts of the occupied Palestinian territories.

The attack drew a confused and angry response from Israeli political figures 
and analysts, with Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu and his defence 
minister Avigdor Lieberman trying to connect it to Islamic State.

Despite some similarities to truck attacks in Berlin and Nice in 2016, which 
were claimed by Isis, the use of vehicles by Palestinian attackers for deadly 
assaults has a history that predates last year.

Others said the ramming appeared to have had more in common with the wave of 
lone-wolf attacks that have taken place in Israel and thePalestinian territories
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/palestinian-territories> over the past 15 
months.

No one has claimed responsibility for the attack, and Palestinians with no 
known links to Isis have carried out ramming attacks in the past.

The attack was welcomed, however, in statements by the Islamist group Hamas. 
“This truck attack shows that any attempt to put a stop to the resistance will 
fail,” the group’s military wing tweeted.

Qanbar’s sister said: “He didn’t belong to any group or political movement. He 
carried out the attack on his own.”

Israeli police said the driver was from Jabel Mukaber, an area of 
Israeli-occupied East Jerusalem not far from the scene of the attack. Some 
media reports suggested Israeli licence plates on the vehicle meant it had been 
stolen.

Qanbar was shot dead by other soldiers and a tour guide. 

Graphic security camera footage shot from a distance showed the truck racing 
towards a group of soldiers standing by their bus and then driving through the 
group, scattering bodies. After a few seconds the truck is seen reversing into 
them.

Commenting on the arrests after the attack, a police spokeswoman, Luba Samri, 
said five of the attacker’s relatives were among those detained. They are all 
from Jabel Mukaber.

Police used concrete slabs on Monday to block some entrances to the 
neighbourhood, and a police officer checked each departing vehicle.

 Overnight, officers said, Palestinians shot fireworks at Israeli forces at a 
police post near the neighbourhood.

The attack came amid a charged mood in Israel after last week’s manslaughter 
conviction for an Israeli soldier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/04/elor-azaria-israeli-soldier-exposed-faultlines>
 who fatally shot a wounded Palestinian attacker.
 