
Hopes rose on Tuesday night of an end to the month-long war in Gaza, with 
officials from Hamas and other groups expressing cautious optimism that a deal 
would be made withIsrael <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> before the 
current 72-hour ceasefire ends on Wednesday evening.

After a day of conflicting reports about Egyptian mediators' efforts to narrow 
the gap between the two sides, Ihab al-Ghossein, a seniorHamas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hamas> official and spokesman in Gaza, said 
he was optimistic.

"This time at least it is a real negotiation. There is talking and discussion 
about all our points and hopefully we will have an agreement. I'm optimistic 
there will be something," he said.

Hassan Abdu, of the smaller Palestinian Islamic Jihad group, said there had 
been "positive developments," though he warned that the two sides, who are 
talking in Cairo through Egyptian mediators, were still some way from a deal.

An official from the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine said he too 
believed an agreement would be reached. A spokesman from Fatah – Hamas's 
factional rival – put the chances of peace at "50-50".

Though all said the negotiations were tough, the tone of the statements was 
very different from those made by officials inGaza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gaza> during the previous 72-hour ceasefire 
last week. At least 20 Palestinians died and two Israelis were injured in 
renewed airstrikes and rocket attacks after the last ceasefire – the seventh – 
expired on Friday.

Israel broke off the talks after Hamas refused to extend the truce, saying it 
would not negotiate under fire.

More than 1,900 Palestinians, mostly civilians, have died in the month-long 
conflict so far. Sixty-four Israeli soldiers have been killed and three 
civilians have been killed in Israel. Tens of thousands of people have been 
made homeless in Gaza and around a quarter of the 1.8 million population of the 
overcrowded coastal enclave remain displaced.

Israel has demanded the disarmament of Hamas, which took de facto control in 
Gaza in 2007 after winning Palestinian elections in 2006.

An Israeli military source said that Israel saw the complete demilitarisation 
of Hamas and other militant groups in Gaza as being firmly on the table. "We 
cannot come to Cairo and not [ask for] demilitarisation. Right now our stance 
is firm: we want to see Gaza demilitarised," he said. "Israel is ready to live 
with Hamas in Gaza, but we are not ready to live with [a] Hamas with the 
ability to rearm again, to rebuild its military infrastructure."

Despite rhetoric threatening renewed conflict on both sides, options for both 
Israel and Hamas are in fact limited. Hamas is isolated diplomatically and 
weakened financially. Israel's anti-missile defence systems have proved 
effective and the wave of popularity for the organisation that the war has 
prompted in Gaza may ebb fast.

In Israel, many were surprised by the casualties sustained by troops who 
entered Gaza to seek and destroy cross-border tunnels. A new military operation 
involving a more ambitious deployment of ground forces into densely populated 
urban areas would be extremely costly for troops and civilians and would be 
likely to provoke global outrage.

The talks centre on the lifting of the blockade of Gaza imposed by Israel 
eight years ago, the key demand of the 12-man Palestinian delegation.

"We are not making demands, we are looking for our rights: lifting the siege, 
opening our borders, implementing past agreements, releasing prisoners," said 
Ghossein.

One key Palestinian demand is the construction of a sea port and reopening of 
an airport, as agreed in the Oslo agreements more than 20 years ago.

"We will not give Israel the security it wants until they lift the siege 
totally," said Abdu, of Palestinian Islamic Jihad.

Cairo-based diplomatic sources said the two sides were still some way from an 
agreement, and warned that a deal still may not be reached by the end of the 
current truce. Egypt, which brokered the three-day truce, has urged the warring 
sides to make every effort to reach "a comprehensive and permanent ceasefire".

Israeli media reported that Binyamin Netanyahu, the Israeli prime minister, 
had held separate meetings with hardline members of his coalition to convince 
them to accept the outlines of a deal.

Netanyahu has said that the military operation – code named Protective Edge – 
would continue until Israel was guaranteed "peace and security".

Daniel Nisman, a security analyst for the Levantine Group in Tel Aviv, said 
Israel was willing to engage with most Palestinian demands.

"It's really too early to call these talks yet," said Nisman. "Israel is 
really looking to play ball – with the exception of the airport. Many of us are 
quite puzzled about that – it's causing a lot of trouble here [in Israel]. It's 
seen as the equivalent of extortion."

The Israeli military source said that discussion of a port and airport should 
be carried out in peace negotiations with the Palestinians as a whole - the 
latest round of which was abandoned earlier this year – and not in Cairo.

Separately, it appears likely that Cairo will agree to ease restrictions on 
the Rafah border crossing between Gaza and Egypt's Sinai peninsula if 
Palestinian Authority forces loyal to President Mahmoud Abbas deploy along 
Gaza's border with Israel.

The negotiations are taking place at the headquarters of Egypt's general 
intelligence directorate, which has brokered past ceasefires between Hamas and 
Israel. The Palestinians and Israelis sit in different rooms and never see each 
other, officials attending the talks said.

There has been intense discussion in Cairo, officials in Gaza said, on whether 
issues such as the release of prisoners held in Israeli jails, most of whom are 
from Hamas, should be part of any overall deal or kept separate.

Hamas is demanding the release of about 100 prisoners, including dozens of 
members of parliament, possibly in return for the remains of two Israeli 
soldiers.

Another key issue is the flow of money into Gaza, currently blocked by Israel. 
It is believed that Israel had objected to a proposal from Qatar to move cash 
into Gaza to pay civil servants loyal to Hamas and for some reconstruction.

A further contentious issue is the import of cement and other building 
supplies, which Israel fears could be used to construct more cross-border 
tunnels.
 