 "If I'd been ugly," said George Best, who has died aged 59, "you'd never have 
heard of Pele."
His dazzling career for Manchester United and Northern Ireland might even have 
lasted as long as Pele's had his romantic life not taken precedence over his 
football. Instead, his increasingly heavy drinking and womanising caught up 
with him all too quickly.

In his mid-20s, when he should ideally have been moving towards his peak, 
things went dismally awry. He had prematurely retired, and when he returned to 
play for Fulham and in Los Angeles, his girth had increased, the dynamic 
acceleration had gone and the game was deprived of his marvellous virtuosity.

Best was arguably the finest player produced in Britain since the war. A 
compound of almost every talent, the ultimate irony of his career was that 
although he shone so brightly in the European Cup, he would never appear in the 
World Cup finals.

This was doubly ironic in that, when it became easier for European teams to 
qualify with two rather than one team in the eliminating group going through, 
Best had vanished from the game. Behind him, he left an infinity of memories.

Where to start? The sensational goal he scored at Old Trafford, against 
Sheffield United in 1971? Picking the ball up on the right, he headed 
diagonally across the pitch towards goal, leaving man after man in his wake, 
before shooting past the goalkeeper. Sheffield United fans have argued since 
then that an injury to a key defender facilitated the goal, but who else could 
have scored it?

More memorable still, perhaps, was the goal with which he turned the tide in 
the 1968 European Cup final at Wembley between Manchester United and Benfica of 
Lisbon.

United, initially ahead, had seemed to tire towards the end of normal time and 
looked in danger of losing. Scarcely had extra time begun, however, than Best 
had spun past a defender with devastating turn, tacked outside the goalkeeper 
and run the ball into the net. United went on to win the game with ease, 4-1, 
becoming the first English team to take the European Cup.

There were glorious goals in his 31 appearances for Northern Ireland. The 
Wembley match in 1970 when he spun away from his club colleague, the 
limpet-like Nobby Stiles, left him for dead and beat the England goalkeeper. He 
did it in Belfast, his native city, the following year against England's Gordon 
Banks, whipping the ball almost out of his arms before scoring a goal that was 
dubiously disallowed.

Best wasn't tall, he wasn't large - yet there seemed nothing he couldn't do on 
a football field. His ball control was exquisite. In a pub, he could flip up a 
coin and catch it in his breast pocket. By rights, he should have been 
negligible in the air, yet he could outjump a 6ft defender to score goals.

He began as a winger, equally at home on right or left (although chiefly 
right-footed), but developed into a player who could operate right the way 
across the front line or in midfield if it came to that.

Born in Belfast, he was hardly out of school when he was snapped up by 
Manchester United and arrived at Old Trafford with his chum, Eric McMordie. 
Both were so homesick that they were back in Belfast in a flash. McMordie 
eventually returned to play for Middlesbrough. Best was persuaded to go back to 
Manchester, and was eventually put in the care of a motherly and sympathetic 
landlady.

It might be fair to say that his parental legacy was a somewhat shaky one. Of 
his natural intelligence and ebullient humour, there was never any doubt. Those 
of us who knew him as a 17-year-old prodigy will remember his modesty and 
charm. The moustache and sideburns he affected in his earlier days with United 
might have been seen as a challenge to a more sedate older generation, but he 
never evinced the louche and loutish behaviour of stars as would follow him, 
such as Paul Gascoigne, with whom he was destined to cross swords.

His first division debut at Manchester United came in April 1963 on the wing. 
The following April, he won his first cap for Northern Ireland in Belfast, 
against Wales. In the 1964-65 season, he played a major role in United's 
capture of the championship, scoring 10 goals in his 41 games. Another 
championship medal would follow in the 1966-67 season.

In all, Best played 42 games and scored another 10 goals. He would do still 
better in the following season, getting 28 goals in his 41 League games.

Was the finest game he ever played not the European Cup Final of 1968 against 
Benfica but the time he ran them ragged in Lisbon in the same competition in 
1966? As Pat Crerand, the tough Glaswegian right-half who was Best's protector 
in those days, put it: "Besty just went daft."

But he did it in the most positive and coruscating way. After six minutes, he 
headed in a free kick by the United left back, Tony Dunne. When David Herd 
headed on a long kick from the keeper, Ulsterman Harry Gregg, Best dashed past 
a formidable centre back and scored again. Gregg must have been particularly 
pleased. He was wont to recall playing in a training game against the then 
slender and unknown young Best: "And he done me." Which promptly happened again.

"This was our finest hour," said the Churchillian manager Matt Busby as his 
United ran out 5-1 winners, although the cup eluded them that year and an 
injury to Best caused him to miss a tie against Partizan Belgrade, who were 
surprise semi-final winners.

Best, Denis Law and Bobby Charlton were the stars of a conquering United team, 
though the players tended to divide into camps; Celtic and English. There was 
never much love lost between Best and the more disciplined, conventional 
Charlton. Once, in a pub, Best threw eggs at a portrait of Charlton that hung 
on the wall.

In 1968, Best was deservedly voted European Footballer of the Year, and might 
have been seen to have reached his peak - a sublime compound of pace, courage, 
skill, balance and invention.

But off the field, his lifestyle became increasingly self-indulgent. He drank, 
he gambled, he had an infinity of girlfriends - among them two Miss Englands 
and, reportedly, a just married bride whom he took upstairs from a hotel bar 
while his team-mates plied her husband with drink.

Busby could do little with him, and that little was manifestly too late. Best 
would say later that when called into Busby's office to be chastised, he would 
simply look beyond the manager and count the emblems on the wallpaper.

There was a particularly scandalous weekend when he refused to travel with the 
team to London for a match against Chelsea. Instead, he went down himself to 
north London and spent the weekend in the Islington flat of a well known 
actress, Sinead Cusack, while photographers massed outside.

In 1969 Busby retired, but controversially kept an office at Old Trafford, 
overshadowing his successors, the former left-half, Wilf McGuinness, and the 
ex-manager of Leicester City, Frank O'Farrell. Neither could handle aGeorge Best
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/george-best> now virtually in freefall, 
whatever his sporadic brilliance.

The situation was exacerbated by the fact that, although he continued to play 
wonderfully well for a time, the team was disintegrating around him. "My goals 
became all important, because others weren't scoring them so frequently," he 
said. "Instead of revolving around me, the team now depended on me and I lacked 
the maturity to handle it. I began to drink more heavily, and on the field my 
list of bookings grew longer as my temper grew shorter."

Sometimes, you could hardly blame him. After United, in Buenos Aires in 1968, 
met Estudiantes de la Plata in the first leg of the so called Inter-continental 
Championship, Best admitted that, with a quarter of an hour gone, he simply 
ceased trying to play because the Argentines' endless, largely unpunished, 
fouling made it impossible. In the return match at Old Trafford, his temper 
snapped and he was sent off.

What could be done with Best? O'Farrell, for a time, had insisted he return to 
life under the care of his old landlady, but that could hardly last. Best built 
himself a house outside Manchester, where women were wont to turn up at the 
door. Best did not turn up for training throughout the first week of 1972. 
O'Farrell fined him, telling him to leave his house and stay with Mrs Fullaway.

"When the bad times started, I couldn't bear the thought of going out on the 
pitch," Best said. "I used to drink so I didn't t have to think about it. Which 
came first? The bad times then the drinking, or the drinking then the bad 
times? I'm still sure it was the thought of playing in a bad team, of not 
winning anything, of not having a chance to play in Europe that drove me to it.

"All right, you could say that if I'd trained and lived properly, United might 
have stood a better chance of doing well. That's true, but I just couldn't see 
myself doing it single-handed."

Twice Best announced he would retire and twice he changed his mind - but the 
sustained breaks from training were fatal. He put on weight that he was never 
able to lose, and his spectacular pace disappeared. His last game for 
Manchester United was at Queens Park Rangers on New Year's Day 1974. A spiteful 
crowd got on his back, and a great star was brought low.

Now it was downhill all the way. He played a few games for Stockport County 
and then, accompanied by his wife Angie, a devotee of jigsaw puzzles, he 
decamped to California to play for the Los Angeles Aztecs. When I visited him 
there, he was as cheerful and genial as ever. Running along the beach, he 
observed that people on it might say: "Who's George Best?"

That was in the summer of 1976. Later that year he went back to England and, 
along with Bobby Moore, turned out for Fulham, playing 42 games in two seasons 
and scoring eight goals. He was inevitably slower, but still skilful and adroit.

Retiring, he became an after-dinner speaker and a television pundit. There 
were sad, drunken episodes, one of which saw him carted away in a police van, 
and briefly imprisoned. One woman after another did her best to care for him 
and reform him, but it seldom lasted long.

By March 2000, when apparent liver failure put him in much pain and in 
hospital, he was married to his second wife, 27-year-old Alex, from whom he was 
divorced in 2004. In July 2002, he underwent a protracted liver transplant 
operation in which, over 10 hours, 40 pints of blood were transfused into his 
body.

His glorious footballing days were far distant, but his allure remained.

He is survived by his son, Calum, from his first marriage.

George Best, footballer, born May 22 1946; died November 25 2005.
 