 From the Eastons' home, some things look and feel like the English 
countryside: rolling, green hills; the damp smell of a recent rain; muddy 
wellingtons; stables with names such as 'Rosie' and 'Alice' on the gates; and 
the sound of soft-spoken English.
Anne Easton grew up in Kent. James Easton's family left London for Essex when 
he was 14. They knew they did not want to raise a family in a town.

So it was not surprising that, five years after moving to Israel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> in 1972, they left their flat in 
Jerusalem for the Golan Heights, then viewed as a gorgeously pristine backwater 
that needed to be settled to enhance the security of the Jewish state. The 
Israeli Labour party was then sending many young activists there, telling them 
they were pioneers doing their national duty.

But the main attractions for the Eastons were the lush landscape and the 
prospect of a house with a decent garden. Six children and 15 horses later, 
they feel at home in this community of some 50 families on the southern tip of 
the Golan Heights - the crux of the dispute which Israeli and Syrian 
negotiators once again began trying to settle yesterday in Washington.

All here know that the resumption of those talks, defunct for the past four 
years, was made possible only by the expression of willingness by the Israeli 
prime minister, Ehud Barak, to withdraw from most or all of the Golan, which 
Israel captured from Syria in 1967 in the six-day war. And that means that the 
Eastons, like most of the 17,000 Israelis who have settled on the Golan 
Heights, would have to up sticks and start again elsewhere.

It is a hard concept for the Eastons to swallow - and one they say they will 
fight as best they can.

Though she trained as a pharmacologist, in 1981 Mrs Easton took advantage of 
the wide open spaces and started training horses. She opened a therapeutic 
riding school that caters for disabled people.

'I grew up around horses in England, where it's part of the culture - kind of 
a religion,' says Mrs Easton, as she leads the last of the trotters inside for 
the afternoon. But the majestic view from the stables is a reminder that this a 
world away from the British Isles. Soaring mountains that are a patchwork of 
green forests, sandy dunes, and the snowcapped Mt Hermon present a 
topographical masterpiece that seems to combine the peaks of Europe with the 
deserts of Arabia. Up ahead are Syria and Lebanon. Below, to the west, is the 
sea of Galilee, sparkling like a sapphire on a sunny winter afternoon.

That is where Mr Easton spends his days, surveying the quality of fish life in 
the sea of Galilee at the Israel Oceanographic and Limnological Research 
Company. Since the study of lakes is his speciality - he is studying for a PhD 
in fish ecology - the quality of water in the Bible's famous lake that Israelis 
call the Kinneret is one of his biggest concerns about making a peace deal with 
Syria.

'I can see the Syrians building large pumping stations or taking water from 
the [river] Jordan after a peace agreement is reached, and no one will be able 
to stop them,' says Mr Easton. 'That could very seriously affect our water, and 
about 40% of the nation's supply is from the Kinneret. In an area where water 
is of major strategic value, it should be that they have absolutely no access 
to the Kinneret or the Jordan in the peace agreement.

'The problem is he [Mr Barak] has already given the Golan away.'

Not exactly. Even if Mr Barak signs a peace deal with the Syrian president, 
Hafez al-Assad, for the return of the Golan, he will have to get the approval 
of the majority of Israelis before he fulfils his side of the agreement. As a 
candidate, Mr Barak had volunteered that he would present the peace deal over 
the Golan to Israelis in a referendum.

But more hawkish politicians beat him to it. By law, any Israeli leader who 
wants to relinquish a part of Israel proper - including the Golan, which was 
officially annexed to Israel in 1981 - must bring the question to Israeli 
voters first.

Mr Barak has already begun assigning key officials in the Labour party to run 
a campaign to persuade the public of the wisdom of giving up the Golan in 
return for peace with Syria

 and therefore with neighbouring Lebanon, where Israel has been embroiled in a 
war of attrition with guerrilla groups such as Hizbullah for more than 15 
years. This year promises a battle for the hearts and minds of Israelis - many 
of whom, like the Eastons, say they want peace but want to keep the land they 
have come to call their own.

'I do think peace is important, but I don't think it's more important than 
anything else,' says Mrs Easton, offering mint tea and biscuits in a kitchen 
dotted with blue china cups that make a visitor feel closer to Staffordshire 
than Syria.

'It seems like all Syria is interested in is having the Golan back as a matter 
of respect. It's such a big sacrifice to make,' she adds. 'My parents are 
aghast. 'Give up your home?' You don't do that - certainly not in England.'

And yet, they and others here know that it will be hard to argue against a 
chance to end Israel's unpopular war in Lebanon, which has touched their lives 
as much as anyone else's. In recent years, they have been to several funerals 
of young soldiers from the community who have died in the fighting. Two of 
their children have been through the army, while two more are approaching the 
age of mandatory service.

And for their youngest, a 12-year-old son, the concerns are of any schoolboy: 
fears of losing friends when they have to move to a new place; a new school. 
But those are particulars that no one here wants to talk about. The Eastons say 
they cannot even think about where they would move if they are forced to leave, 
and are not interested in the national debate over compensation for lost homes.

'I don't know how you can compensate people for 25 years of living here,' says 
Mrs Easton. 'People have planted orchards. There is a real attachment to the 
land, and it's a tough life being a farmer.' Around their agricultural 
settlement, residents are still planting new mangos.

But such acts of denial of the political situation clash with what Mrs Easton 
says is an air of defeat. 'I must confess that there's a feeling of pessimism 
there that the race has been run,' she says.

However, the Golan Residents Committee has already launched a protest campaign 
to fight Mr Barak's plans. And some want to take it further than that.

'This used to be called the 'wild west' of Israel, because people chase around 
with horses and there are a lot of eccentric people here,' Mrs Easton says, 
'and some people are ready to sit on the roof with a gun and refuse to leave.' 
But she and her husband believe most settlers here would not and should not 
resort to violence against their own soldiers.

'What I plan to do, in as civilised a way as possible, is to show people the 
importance of the Golan,' Mr Easton says. 'I think a lot of people here are 
like us. We'll put up as strong a fight as possible - but if the Israeli people 
decide we have to leave, then we'll go.'
 