
So many of our current working patterns are hugely outdated. The idea of “nine 
to five” was conceived during the industrial revolution, prior to the invention 
of electricity, never mind the internet. Our culture of presenteeism was born 
out of conformity, rather than evolving working patterns into what we truly 
need, both in terms of motivation and productivity.


Large organisations embrace a fixed regime of regimented hours and a single 
office space because it enables them to retain control over their workforce. 
Big businesses that allow employees to work from home on Wednesdays, leave 
early on a Friday, or work a four-day week are not offering true flexibility, 
they are merely extending the leash. But the tide is turning: people are now 
taking the matter of work-life balance into their own hands.One in seven 
workers in the UK has chosen self-employment 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/publications/research/key-issues-parliament-2015/work/self-employment/>
 as the most effective means to take control.

The future of work is flexible and the only way to embrace flexibility is to 
trust those who work with you

Running a business that champions a new style of working, I am frequently 
asked to define “the future of work”. While there are many different answers, I 
firmly believe that one thing will define the high-achieving individuals and 
organisations in the future: empathy.

In order for an employee to feel connected to and motivated bytheir employer, 
mutual understanding is crucial. This requires the employer to truly empathise 
with the person behind the employee, and appreciate the richness and complexity 
of their lives outside of work. Failure to do so may encourage the employee to 
seek out a more “caring” work environment, or follow the growing trend towards 
self-employment.

Anyone who has led a team or simply been part of a working group, knows it’s 
more productive and more enjoyable to work with highly motivated and 
enthusiastic individuals. I can’t speak for others, but when everything in my 
life is well balanced, I am able truly to enjoy what I do, uninhibited by guilt 
or any other barrier that may get in the way.

Rapid developments in technology and the prevalence of Wi-Fi mean we have 
reached a tipping point where we can work far more flexibly. The future of work 
is flexible, and the only way to embrace flexibility is to trust those who work 
with you and to be genuinely empathetic about their circumstances.

Can empathy really work in a business world dominated by testosterone?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2014/jun/18/empathy-secret-revolutionise-business>
As companies increasingly buy in specialist resource for the task in hand 
rather than adding fixed overheads through full-time staff, the 
decentralisation of the workforce is a growing trend. I believe in a 
decentralised future, and my focus is on building a community of talented and 
ambitious individuals who create their own work styles. They work remotely 
towards shared outputs but are connected through trust, mutual respect and 
empathy to create the very highest quality of work. They are motivated by the 
freedom to deliver work on their terms and are redefining the rules for the 
next generation of workers.

In the new world, businesses, clients and employers will simply care about 
finding the best person for the job. Trust and respect will be cornerstones, 
and as operating in virtual teams becomes commonplace, everyone will come to 
care about output more than input.

Presenteeism will be a thing of the past. We will respect each other’s lives, 
children, hobbies, travel, health, elderly parents, or simply personal 
preferences, and in doing so empathise with the individuals behind the output. 
We will look back at the world in 2015 and wonder why on earth it took us so 
long.
 