
So, where?

In the thickly forested slopes of the Low Tatras mountains, Jasná is 
Slovakia’s number one ski resort. Though travel guides sometimes file the 
region under eastern Europe, locals prefer to think of themselves as central 
Europe, having long since shaken off the iron curtain and invested in a lift 
system every bit as modern as that of its Alpine neighbours. Jasná is just a 
40-minute drive from the nearest airport, Poprad Tatry, and is also within 
three hours from the low-cost hubs of Bratislava and Kosice, plus Krakow in 
Poland.

Why try it?

It’s never been easier or quicker to reach this little-known gem, thanks to 
new flights from Luton to Poprad withWizz Air 
<https://wizzair.com/en-GB/FlightSearch> (from about £55 return). Once there, 
you can expect stunning landscapes, well-groomed pistes and a warm welcome in a 
resort that has yet to be overrun with tourists. Best of all, it’s still 
seriously cheap – beer is €2 a pint on the mountain, €1 in town. Val d’Isère 
this ain’t.

Mountain lowdown
 Picturesque Mount Chopok 
Jasná’s pistes tumble from the north and south sides of Mount Chopok. At 2,000 
metres, this picturesque peak won’t challenge the glaciers of France and 
Austria for altitude, but winters here are cold and with €160m recently 
invested in infrastructure and snowmaking, you can be confident of hitting good 
conditions.

The modern lift system covers 40km and is divided into four areas – Lucky, 
Zaharadky, Biela Put and Otupne – which does away with end-of-day bottlenecks. 
There’s the typical mix of express chairlifts, gondolas and drag lifts, and the 
tree-lined runs are among the most scenic in Europe – the views over the wooded 
Tatras are a constant reminder that you’re not in France.
 Jasná has plenty of gentler slopes, beginners and families 
With plenty of gentler slopes, beginners and families are well-catered-for; 
experienced skiers and snowboarders can make for one of 12 off-piste “freeride 
zones”, which offer challenging natural terrain with fantastic tree runs. Stick 
within the resort boundaries and you will always come back to a lift line or 
track. Unlike in the Alps, moreover, there are fresh powder lines to be had 
long after a snowfall.

And apart from skiing?

There are limited options at the base of the mountain; most of the action 
takes place in the nearby town of Liptovsky Mikulas, which has a bowling alley, 
a cinema and a go-karting track – and these are all great value, with not a 
stag do in sight. For a local experience, try an ice hockey match, or lounge in 
the Tatralandia aquapark (entrance free with a ski pass).

Après any good?
 The Happy End bar 
Up in the resort, the Happy End bar <http://happy-end.sk/en/> is the only 
watering hole of note. It’s a huge venue/restaurant that hosts occasional 
events and is open till 5pm in the week and till the early hours Thursday to 
Saturday during the season. Again, for more entertainment, downtown Liptovsky 
Mikulas is the place. There are numerous restaurants, and some ludicrously 
cheap boozers. Grab a steak at Route 66 before hitting the nightclub upstairs 
for sequins and Europop.

What to eat?

After a full day on the hill, you’ll welcome a plate of Slovakian comfort 
food, invariably heavy on garlic and stodge. Trybryndzové halušky – potato 
dumplings with goat’s cheese – and settle in for the inevitable food coma. 
Fortunately, the locals have an effective antidote: Zlaty Bazant, a local 
pilsner served ice cold at a price that’s as refreshing as the taste.

Where to stay

UK-based chalet holiday operator Propaganda 
<http://www.snowboardslovakia.co.uk/> has four properties in the Jasná area 
(from £159pp for seven nights, including breakfast, transfers and guiding). 
Another UK-owned agency,Ski Jasna <http://www.skijasna.co.uk/>, offers 
hand-picked hotels, B&Bs and apartments (from £165pp for seven nights).

The nitty gritty

Jasná has 42km of pistes and 28 lifts. Highest altitude 2,024m

Good for: value, scenery, families, culture, quick transfers

Limitations: not as vast, high, or snow-sure as the Alpine super resorts; not 
much après in the resort itself

Costs: lift pass adult £147 a week, child £114; beer €2

• Green runs 0

• Blue runs 13

• Red runs 15

• Black runs 6

Limitations: not ideal for beginners, and transfers can be slow

• More information at jasna.sk <http://www.jasna.sk/en/> and jasnaskipass.com 
<http://www.jasnaskipass.com/>
 