
So, where?
Pretty Puy-Saint-Vincent sits on the edge of the Ecrins national park in the 
southern French Alps, not far from the Italian border. The closest airport is 
Turin, less than two hours away, or add another hour to drive from Grenoble or 
Chambéry. A small UK company, Snowbizz, established a base here in 1986 and 
offers full family packages to the resort.

Why try it?
When it comes to family ski holidays, it doesn’t get much better. Little ones 
(six months to 11 years) are well cared-for at the morning ski school, all-day 
crèche and evening kiddie club, all a few steps from the shops, bars, and ski 
lifts. In fact, nothing at this compact resort is more than a short walk away. 
Except for the French school holidays, the pistes are not crowded and queues 
rare. Even absolute beginners should quickly feel confident enough to get high 
up the mountain and wind down a long, gentle green run, or even tackle one of 
the blues. And ski passes are among the cheapest in the Alps.

Mountain lowdown

 Puy Saint Vincent has three skiing levels up to 2,750 metres. Photograph: 
Michel Lyotier/Snowbizz 
The resort is on three levels – 1,400, 1,600 and 1,800 metres – and skiing 
extends to 2,750 metres. The ski area is easy to navigate, with most runs 
leading past the main resort, Puy 1600. There’s a snow park and boardercross, 
and advanced skiers will be challenged by a wide choice of reds and two blacks 
– one tricky for its sheer steepness, the other for its moguls. There’s plenty 
of off-piste through larch forest, but professional guides are recommended for 
the big off-piste challenges of Narreyroux valley and the Col du Bal. Puy is 
known for late-season snow and an average 300 days a year of sunshine. The 
whole ski area is in the sun until mid-afternoon.

Related: Great little ski resorts: Alpbach, Tyrol, Austria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/feb/07/great-little-ski-resorts-alpbach-tyrol-austria>

And apart from skiing?
Despite its size, Puy has the usual winter fun options and more. The nightly 
snake gliss (toboggan train) is a perfect way for non-skiers to enjoy a 
thrilling, high-speed descent (€10). Or try a night skiddoo tour (€70 for one 
driver or €80 with a passenger), which does two loops, the second quite speedy. 
There’s lots of cross-country skiing, or join a snowshoeing tour (€35 a day, 
€24 half-day). The snowshoeing guide, Cyril, also does a moonlit expedition, 
where you’ll stop to build a fire and enjoy mulled wine, local delicacies and 
stargazing (€28). Kids will love the trampolines, sledging and 28C outdoor 
pool, heated to (speedos please gentlemen). All activities can be arranged by 
Michel at Snowbizz or at the Puy 1600 tourist office.

Après any good?
This is a family resort, so there are no noisy clubs, though there’s a nice 
buzz at Le Pub on the ground floor of the Sun Vallée apartments. At L’Ours 
Brun, you can have a beer while watching the children bomb down the mini 
sledging slope. In the school holidays, older children can join a weekly 
torchlit procession, with free mulled wine or hot chocolate for spectators. 
There’s a special Santa one at Christmas. While the après is relatively tame 
for grown-ups, kids can party at the Snowbizz Kiddie Club, with a pizza party, 
talent show, pirate night and disco (two hours each evening, £40 per child for 
six nights).

Where to eat

 La Chaumiere, Puy Saint Vincent Photograph: PR 
Tuck into fondue and raclette by the fire at La Chaumière in Puy 1600: the 
fondue bourguignonne for two (€22 a head) could easily feed four – and there 
are child-pleasing pizzas and chocolate brownies, too. Order other delicious 
alpine favourites, such as tartiflette (€9, serves two) and cheese and génépi 
tart (€14, serves four), from the hugely popularMaison Artisanale de la 
Vallouise. Place your order the day before and take away piping hot food, ready 
to eat. The two mountain restaurants, lunch only, have mains at around €12 and 
daily specials. There’s an excellent bakery, too.

Where to stay
The ski-in, ski-out Sun Vallée apartments are in the heart of Puy 1600. 
Sleeping between two and six, the 65 apartments all have balconies, bathrooms 
with bath or shower, separate toilet, dishwasher, TV and Wi-Fi. From £1,477 a 
week for a family of four, including flights, or from £500 accommodation only, 
with Snowbizz.
• More information from snowbizz.co.uk <http://snowbizz.co.uk/>, and 
ski.puysaintvincent.com <http://ski.puysaintvincent.com/>

The nitty gritty


Puy-Saint-Vincent has 75km of pistes, 7 chairlifts, 5 draglifts, highest 
altitude 2,750m
Good for families with young children and early teens, beginners and 
intermediates, late season snow, and value
Lift pass adult £130 a week; child £105
Beer €3.50
Runs Green 4, blue 13, red 14, black 2
Limitations Not much nightlife and the long, slow drag lift (La Draille) is 
tough on the legs.

 