
Er, where?

At the centre of the Grand Tourmalet ski area in the French Pyrenees, 
purpose-built La Mongie is defiantly 1970s in style and appearance, which won’t 
appeal to everybody. But the resort sits among imposing peaks that culminate in 
the 2,877-metre Pic du Midi de Bigorre, whose summit observatory looks every 
bit the lair of a James Bond villain. Fly to Pau (1½ hours away), Toulouse or 
Biarritz (both 2½ hours away). The nearest railway station is at Lourdes.

Why try it?
 La Mongie ski resort sits among imposing peaks. Photograph: Alamy 
With a quirky vibe, and prices considerably cheaper than the Alps, La Mongie 
offers a very varied range of skiing. It’s basically an open bowl that’s great 
for families and intermediates, and there’s challenging off-piste skiing. For 
gentler skiing, the neighbouring resort of Barèges is a pretty and authentic 
mountain village, below tree-lined slopes. La Mongie sits at 1,800m but there 
is skiing down to 1,250m and up to 2,500m and it’s pretty snow sure.

Mountain lowdown

The Pic du Midi can be accessed by cable car from the centre of town, and from 
its summit there are various challenging descents for confident skiers and snow 
boarders. It’s worth anyone’s while to ride up to the observatory for the 
panorama, which stretches from Catalonia to the Basque Country. Freeriders will 
love not just the Pic du Midi but also the surprisingly large array of side- 
and backcountry terrain. For intermediates there is an enticing selection of 
often sunny, uncrowded pistes (the long, blue-graded Bergers is a classic). The 
more than adequate selection of beginners’ slopes are easily accessible in the 
centre of La Mongie. And the wide, open blue runs off the Col du Tourmalet are 
on the iconic Tour de France route come summer.
 Chapel on the slopes of La Mongie. Photograph: Alamy 
Off the hill?

There’s not a huge amount to see or do in La Mongie itself, but 30 minutes 
down the hill is the attractive spa town of Bagnères-de-Bigorre with one of the 
best spas in the French Pyrenees in the form ofAquensis 
<http://www.aquensis.fr/> (two hours €17.50). The naturally heated swimming 
pool (complete with waterfalls, chutes and jets) is a great place to relax 
after a few days’ energetic skiing, and there’s also a wellness centre and gym.

Après any good?

The bar at Le Schuss 
<http://www.pyrenees-tourmalet.com/restauration/restaurants-traditionnels-lamongie-schuss.html#_=_>
 in the centre of town is always busy, or check out the friendly L’Igloo, which 
is popular with locals, although its small size means it can be a bit jammed at 
times.

Where do I eat?

Just outside La Mongie is one of the area’s best mountain restaurants, L’Etape 
du Berger. It’s now run by Eric Abadie, a bear of a man whose father-in-law 
started the restaurant in 1969. Meats used in the kitchen come from animals 
that graze the sunny mountain slopes in summer.

Where to stay?
 Staying at the observatory isn’t cheap – but the views and location are 
pricelss Photograph: PR 
The observatory <http://www.picdumidi.com/nuits-au-sommet/> offers pricey 
stays in single or double rooms. The €399 for two price includes dinner, 
breakfast, a tour of the observatory, incredible sunsets and jaw-dropping views 
(no Bond villain, though). In recent years the region has seen excellent 
snowfalls, and because most of the accommodation in La Mongie is ski in/ski 
out, it’s a good choice for those who like to spend most of their holiday 
actually skiing.Hôtel Crète Blanche <http://www.la-crete-blanche.fr/> (doubles 
from €84 room-only) remains a classic of 1970s style: all that’s needed to 
complete the picture is Brigitte Bardot and Serge Gainsbourg sipping martinis 
in the bar, clad in tight ski pants and sucking on Gauloises. It’s not the 
classic chocolate box mountain hotel, but still an authentic piece of French 
ski culture. Or try online specialistPyrenees Collection 
<http://www.pyreneescollection.co.uk/ski/winterhome.htm> 
(pyreneescollection.co.uk). A week self-catering in a two-bedroom flat in
Résidence Le Pic du Midi 
<http://www.pyreneescollection.co.uk/ski/La-Mongie/Ski-Apartments/Le-Pic-du-Midi.htm>
 costs from £685, including Eurotunnel crossing.

The nitty gritty


100km of pistes in La Mongie and Barèges, served by 32 lifts. Highest altitude 
2,500m

Good for budget skiers, beginners, intermediates, and freeriders looking for a 
challenge

Costs
Lift pass adult from €170 for six days, child from €150
Beer €5

• Green runs 17
• Blue runs 24
• Red runs 21
• Black runs 6
Limitations 
Not much nightlife, and not everyone will appreciate the 1970s architecture
 