
Before work, before breakfast, before acknowledging a loved one, the first 
thing many readers do on a Monday is pick up their paper, bypass the news, 
features and other bumf and go directly to their appointment with Rufus. On 
Wednesday the crossword setter turns 80.

Some setters torment; Rufus teases, and is in his fourth decade of doing so to 
Guardian solvers. He holds five Guinness crosswording records and is, to my 
knowledge, the Guardian's only setter to have appeared in Doctor Who. He was 
also the first to spot that BRITNEY SPEARS is an anagram of PRESBYTERIANS.

Rufus is often described as "gentle", but don't make the mistake of thinking 
him a pushover pussycat. Rather, his clues are always fair and typically short 
– one solver cited as a favourite the eight-letter "Bird nuts (6)". Each is a 
miniature puzzle and a talent for misdirection is unsurprising given one of 
Rufus's other careers; he says that "as an ex-professional magician I like to 
entertain by misleading." In magic, as in crosswords, the fun is being shown 
one thing in the knowledge that something entirely different is really going 
on. But while the magician maintains illusions, the setter aims to yield 
gracefully.

His other noms de guerre – "Rufus" reflects the initials of his real-world 
name Roger F Squires – hint at fragments of a preposterously packed life: the 
former member of the Fleet Air Arm has also set as Icarus "to remember how 
lucky I was to survive a ditching, escaping from a sinking aircraft 60ft under 
the sea" and as a nightclub entertainer, he was El Squalido.

As a setter, incidentally, he is hardly squalid – but unlike the clean fun of 
American crosswords, British cryptics are unlicensed dens where anything goes, 
and Rufus can be as happily risque as the rest, as with "All of a tingle, 
perhaps, from such a beating (12)".

Having passed the two-million clue mark in 2007 – with "Two girls, one on each 
knee (7)" – Rufus hasn't now the time for nightclubs. He sets in his garage, to 
ensure a work/life balance, surrounded by reference books and with "windows 
overlooking our garden, the Ironbridge Gorge and the woods on the far bank of 
the Severn".

This is also the home of his colossal database – every clue he has set, filed 
in a card index that rivals Bob Monkhouse's famous joke book. Smooth and terse, 
Rufus is perhaps crosswords' Monkhouse, a complement to Araucaria's Billy 
Connolly or Paul's Stewart Lee.

I tend to advise fans of the quick crossword who are considering the leap to 
cryptics to try Rufus. Those same solvers think I'm deranged when I say that 
cryptic clues are easier than quick ones, but while "Disposition (6)" could be 
TEMPER or TALENT or SPIRIT, Rufus's "Kind disposition (6)" requires a word 
indicated by both halves of the clue, which can only be NATURE.

That's the essence of cryptics right there: a surface meaning that diverts you 
into pondering kind dispositions before you stop thinking about Richard Briers 
and experience the pleasure of the penny dropping. Likewise, this week's "Pound 
of sultanas (5)".

As one devotee told me, "it doesn't matter how many years one has been 
solving, or what level of solving ability one has reached, a Rufus puzzle is 
the best start to a cryptic solving week there is."

The answers to the clues above are CUCKOO, FLAGELLATION, PATELLA and HAREM. 
Alan Connor's interview with Rufus is published today at theGuardian crossword 
blog 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/feb/22/meet-the-setter-rufus>
.
 