
Harper Lee, who has died aged 89 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/19/harper-lee-author-to-kill-a-mockingbird-dies-alabama>
, was the author of To Kill a Mockingbird. Her story of race relations and 
legal injustice set in the American south in the 1930s, first published in 
1960, won the Pulitzer prize for fiction in 1961, was made into an 
Oscar-winning film in 1962 and went on to sell more than 40m copies worldwide. 
It has never been out of print and is perhaps the most widely loved American 
novel of the past half-century. The book was seen by many as saying something 
good, something important about America itself.

The story Lee wanted to tell, which took her more than seven years to 
complete, was about a black man, Tom Robinson, accused of raping a white woman 
in a small town in south-western Alabama, which Lee named Maycomb. It was 
loosely based on a case in 1933 of a black man in her home town of Monroeville 
who was convicted of rape. A death sentence was commuted to life imprisonment, 
and the defendant died in 1937. Lee also drew upon the infamous Scottsboro case 
of 1931 in which nine black teenagers were accused of the rape of two white 
girls. At the time, there were still Scottsboro defendants under sentence of 
death (the last of them was pardoned by the Alabama governor, George Wallace, 
in 1976).

Related: Harper Lee – a life in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/gallery/2016/feb/19/harper-lee-a-life-in-pictures>

Lee was writing in the aftermath of the 1954 supreme court ruling in Brown v 
Board of Education <https://www.theguardian.com/usa/brown/0,,1216081,00.html> 
which ended legal segregation in public schools in the US. It was a time of 
growing racial tension in Alabama. In 1955Rosa Parks  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/2005/oct/25/guardianobituaries.usa>was arrested 
in Montgomery for refusing to sit at the back of a bus, and the ensuing bus 
boycott grabbed the attention of the world. A year later, the home of the Rev 
Martin Luther King Jr was bombed, and there was rioting in Tuscaloosa when a 
black woman tried to enrol at the University of Alabama. To Kill a Mockingbird 
rode high on the New York Times bestseller lists while white students at the 
University of Mississippi rioted to prevent integration, and a line of jeering 
white protesters tried to stop Charlayne Hunter from attending the University 
of Georgia.

Central to Lee’s message of hope and reconciliation was the figure of Atticus 
Finch, an idealised tribute to her father, Amasa, a lawyer, who spoke to 
American ideals, conservatively articulated. He was memorably played byGregory 
Peck <http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/2003/jun/14/guardianobituaries.film>in the 
film. The novel also required some rearrangement of Lee’s family life. Her 
unsympathetic mother disappeared, leaving Finch a widower. Various older 
siblings were also dispatched, to be replaced by Jem, a sensitive older brother 
and perfect foil for the novel’s heroine, Scout. Filled with the spirit of the 
emerging civil rights movement, Jem is restless for change and sickened at the 
slow pace of progress.
 Gregory Peck, left front, and Brock Peters, right front, in the 1962 film 
version of To Kill a Mockingbird. Photograph: Everett Collection/Rex 
Amasa had played a role in commuting the death sentence in the 1933 case. It 
was his first and last criminal case. But he was no liberal in matters of race 
relations – nor, as proprietor-editor of the local weekly newspaper, the Monroe 
Journal, could he afford to be. Though the Ku Klux Klan was active across 
Alabama, and racial intimidation was common, it is part of Lee’s story of race 
relations in the south that in the novel, the Klan is faced down easily and 
relations between black and white people are still largely courteous, agitated 
only by rural and lower-class whites. In fact, the Methodist church in Alabama 
was only dragged, reluctantly, out of its segregationist stance in the 1950s, 
and then it was Amasa’s daughter Alice who took a prominent role in the 
church’s turn towards racial justice.

Within Lee’s fable there was a didactic novel and a Sunday school lesson in 
the ways of Alabama injustice and the need for tolerance. And there was a sly, 
sharply etched satire of local mores. Going to church was Maycomb’s “principal 
recreation”. At a missionary tea party, where “fragrant ladies rocked slowly, 
fanned gently, and drank cool water”, Mrs Merriweather complains of her black 
house servant Sophy, but out of Christian kindness decides to keep her on at 
$1.25 a week.

Related: Harper Lee quotes: 10 of the best 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/19/harper-lee-quotes-10-of-the-best>

Lee remained true to the book’s underlying liberal values, though its message 
of hope was already something of an anachronism in the 1960s. Despite its 
popularity, To Kill a Mockingbird has been targeted repeatedly for exclusion 
from school libraries. African-American parents in Oklahoma objected to the use 
of the word “nigger” and forced the school board to remove the book from 
reading lists. A parent in Alabama objected to the use of “damn”; another 
complained at the word “piss”. In Hanover county, Virginia, it joined The 
Wizard of Oz and Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm on a list of banned books.

There is an easy use in the novel of what Americans call the N-word. “Don’t 
say nigger, Scout. That’s common,” remarks Atticus. But almost everyone does, 
from the silly “nigger-talk” which the black cook Calpurnia deplores, to the 
“nigger” snowman built by the children. But what Scout learns about hatred is 
an education in itself. The book came under further attack in the wake of the 
publicity storm that accompanied its 50th anniversary. The Wall Street Journal 
weighed in with a dismissal of its “bloodless liberal humanism”. And in the New 
Yorker, Malcolm Gladwell went further with a denunciation of the “Jim Crow 
liberalism” of Finch. As with the recent editing of Mark Twain’s Adventures of 
Huckleberry Finn, a cleansed and inoffensive edition of To Kill a Mockingbird 
seems inevitable.
 Harper Lee with Gregory Peck on the set of the film of To Kill a Mockingbird. 
Photograph: Bettmann/Corbis 
The publication in 2015 of Go Set a Watchman, marketed as a sequel to To Kill 
a Mockingbird, made Lee briefly the most widely discussed writer in the 
English-speaking world. Sales of more than 1.1m copies were reported in the US 
in the first week after publication, although reviews were decidedly mixed. 
Philip Hensher called it “an interesting document and a pretty bad novel”.

Nelle Harper Lee <https://www.theguardian.com/books/harper-lee> (Nelle was 
Ellen, the name of her maternal grandmother, spelled backwards), the youngest 
of four children, was born and grew up in Monroeville, a town of fewer than 
3,000 souls. It was a two-hour drive to reach the next town. The streets were 
unpaved and there were few cars and no traffic lights. Monroeville in Lee’s 
childhood was racially segregated and Monroe county was “dry”, though 
bootleggers passed by now and then.

Lee told the legal and racial narrative of To Kill a Mockingbird through the 
eyes of a sissified little boy, Dill, who speaks in a high-pitched voice and 
dresses like Little Lord Fauntleroy, and Scout, a barefoot tomboy with short 
hair who wears dungarees and is always up for a fight with annoying and 
condescending boys. He is a “little chicken-breasted runt”. She is “Miss 
Frippy-britches”. They are inseparable. Everyone assumes they are going to 
marry. Dill was based on Lee’s childhood friend Truman Persons, who changed his 
name to Capote when his mother remarried, and Scout was Lee.

The relationship between Dill and Scout is one of the most charming in 
American fiction. Capote and Lee were next-door neighbours on South Alabama 
Avenue, a block south of Courthouse Square in Monroeville. Their friendship was 
based on loneliness and mutual regard. Lee, who was a model for the tomboyish 
Idabel in Capote’s first novel, Other Voices, Other Rooms, was two years older 
than him. The bookish Lee household was sober with Methodist piety. Lee’s 
mother, Fanny, played classical music on the piano, tended her flowers, and had 
little time for the turbulent world of her youngest daughter.

The only book in the Faulk household next door, where Truman lived with 
relatives, was the Bible. Little Truman had been summarily dumped in 
Monroeville when his mother walked out and headed north to New York. His 
father, Arch, was a part-time bootlegger who brought cases of bourbon on his 
occasional visits. The Faulk household consisted of four unmarried siblings, 
assorted children, a black servant named Callie, and a treehouse where Lee and 
Capote took turns writing stories on an old Underwood typewriter.

Lee got out of Monroeville as soon as she decently could. She followed Alice 
to Huntingdon, a private Methodist college for women in Montgomery. She stuck 
it out for a year, then in 1946 transferred to the University of Alabama in 
Tuscaloosa, where she studied literature, history, journalism and law. The 
university was renowned for its dedication to football, and while there Lee 
wrote satirical articles in an undergraduate magazine and belonged to the Chi 
Omega sorority.
 Harper Lee visiting Holcomb, Kansas, with her friend Truman Capote, 1967, for 
the filming of In Cold Blood. Photograph: Steve Schapiro/Corbis 
She enrolled in the law school of the University of Alabama in 1947. There 
were no more than a dozen women among the 100 entrants, and Lee, who usually 
dressed down (no make-up, her hair pulled back behind her ears, wearing a loose 
jumper, a skirt and loafers) made no friends and was thoroughly disengaged. 
None of her contemporaries at the law school, interviewed years later, could 
remember her. Her father, sensing that his daughter was losing interest in the 
law, encouraged her to take up a place on an overseas exchange programme.

Lee is said to have spent the next academic year at Oxford. Some sources 
suggest that she held a Fulbright scholarship, but the Fulbright Commission has 
no record of it, and Oxford has no record of Lee ever matriculating. Her time 
there was spent somewhat more prosaically in an extramural studies summer 
programme devoted to 20th-century Europe.

She returned to Tuscaloosa for her second year at law school but left in 1949 
without taking a degree. By late 1950 she had settled in New York and worked in 
a series of low-paid jobs (bookstore clerk, airline reservation clerk) while 
beginning to write. After several years of frustration, a friend of Capote’s, 
Michael Brown, gave Lee a bumper Christmas present – enough money to give up 
her job and focus on writing full time. Brown also steered her towards an 
agent, Maurice Crain. She wrote and rewrote short stories, but Crain suggested 
she write a novel. He liked the first draft, titled Go Set a Watchman, but 
advised a different title: Atticus might be better.

Lee was already at work on a second novel when the manuscript of Atticus was 
sent to the publishers JB Lippincott, where the editor Tay Hohoff liked it, but 
thought extensive revisions were needed. Lee complied and received a contract 
from Lippincott with an advance of several thousand dollars. She had not at 
that point published anything. Hohoff agreed with Lee that To Kill a 
Mockingbird was a better title. Disliking the near-universal tendency to 
pronounce her name Nelle as “Nellie”, Lee decided to publish under the name 
Harper Lee. When it was finally published, in July 1960, it was marketed and 
reviewed as a trade book for adults but went on to sell an astonishing 500,000 
copies in the year after publication.

Monroeville was “dizzy with excitement” over the book. Lee denied the story 
had anything to do with the town, and returned to New York. As her celebrity 
grew with the award of a Pulitzer, Monroeville warmed to the community’s most 
celebrated daughter. There was much gossip about the real identities of the 
novel’s characters.

These days in Monroeville, few traces of Lee’s world remain. There is an 
ice-cream shop where the family home once stood. The large, rambling building 
next door where Capote lived is a rubble-filled lot. Boo Radley’s oak has been 
unsentimentally cut down. The courthouse where Finch defended Robinson was 
saved from demolition in the 1960s, and is now a museum of Lee and Capote 
memorabilia. Each summer a theatrical adaptation of Lee’s novel is performed by 
amateur actors on the courthouse lawn, moving indoors for the trial scene. The 
jury is drawn from local white men.

For decades, Lee maintained a public silence. “I am still alive, though very 
quiet,” she wrote in 1995. In a forthright and brief refusal to provide an 
introduction to the 35th anniversary edition of To Kill a Mockingbird, she 
affirmed her commitment to the novel – and to her privacy.
 Harper Lee at the White House to receive the Presidential Medal of Freedom, 
2007. Photograph: Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images 
One hapless reporter for a British newspaper presented Lee with a box of 
chocolates in the hope of turning polite gratitude into an interview. “Thank 
you so much,” Lee replied. “You are most kind. We’re just going to feed the 
ducks but call me the next time you are here. We have a lot of history here. 
You will enjoy it.” She gave no interviews, and was a master of the polite 
southern ways of saying no, though she attended Capote’s Black and White Ball 
in 1966 and received an honorary degree at the University of Alabama in 1990, 
saying nothing and smiling to the warm applause of the assembled community. 
Receiving a literary award in Los Angeles in 2005, presented by Brock Peters, 
the actor who played Robinson in the movie, an elderly woman with short white 
hair and thick square glasses leaned towards the microphone and said: “Thank 
you all from the bottom of my heart.” And then sat down.

Few knew what Lee looked like. The invitation to Los Angeles had come from 
Peck’s widow, Veronique. While working on location in Monroeville during the 
shooting of Robert Mulligan’s film, the Pecks had become close friends with 
Lee, a friendship that endured. She gave Peck her father’s watch as a thank you 
for his Oscar-winning performance as Finch. The movie pleased Lee deeply: “I 
think it is one of the best translations of a book to film ever made.”

Lee played golf, lived in New York City and spent part of every winter in 
Monroeville with Alice, who had joined their father’s legal practice. She moved 
back to Monroeville in 2005, lived briefly with her sister, and when her health 
deteriorated after a stroke in 2007, she moved into sheltered accommodation. In 
2013 she sued her literary agent for allegedly duping her into assigning him 
the copyright of To Kill a Mockingbird. The following year she agreed that it 
could be issued as an ebook.

Bennett Miller’s 2005 biographical film Capote triggered a fresh flurry of 
interest in Lee. In 1959, after a particularly brutal multiple murder at a 
farmhouse in Holcomb, Kansas, Lee had accompanied Capote when he visited the 
town to investigate the crime. He played down her role, referring to Lee as his 
“assistant researchist”, but she undoubtedly enabled Capote to win the 
confidence of midwesterners made uneasy by his mannered cosmopolitanism. A 
childhood in rural Alabama made her comfortable with people who owned guns, 
drove pick-ups and did not read The New Yorker.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Archive footage of Harper Lee at 1962 To Kill a Mockingbird premiere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/video/2016/feb/19/harper-lee-dead-1962-to-kill-a-mocking-bird-premiere-video>
On the first trip to Kansas, with a murderer still at loose in the community, 
Capote asked Lee to get a gun permit, thinking she might also be his armed 
guard. But the 150 pages of notes she compiled on the murders inclined her to a 
darker and more nuanced picture of the lives of the four victims, all members 
of the Clutter family. They were certainly the victims of an atrocious crime, 
but for Capote, any complication of their victimhood was an unwanted 
distraction. As played by Catherine Keener in the film, Lee is a friend, but 
also a truth-teller. Subtle details in Dan Futterman’s screenplay reveal 
Capote’s lies and self-deception, and Lee’s cool-eyed honesty. “I did 
everything I could,” Capote (played by Philip Seymour Hoffman) gasps, 
regretting that he has failed to save the killers, Dick Hickock and Perry 
Smith, from hanging. “The fact is,” Lee replies, “you didn’t want to.”

Lee did not want to have anything to do with Miller’s movie and declined to 
meet Keener. But she contacted the actor after it was released to say how much 
she had enjoyed the film and admired Keener’s and Hoffman’s performances.

After Alice died in 2014, Tonja B Carter, who had worked for the family law 
firm in Monroeville, assumed responsibility for Lee’s affairs. She pursued 
Lee’s interests with vigour, suing the town museum for infringing copyright on 
the sale of Mockingbird-branded merchandise. It was Carter who, three years 
after the Watchman manuscript had been identified by a Christie’s appraiser, in 
a safe deposit box in Monroeville, arranged for its publication by 
HarperCollins.

To Kill a Mockingbird has largely retained its place in the affections of 
readers, especially younger ones, and their parents – all the more remarkable 
in that it is a book that takes the side of tolerance: “Scout, you’ll get along 
better with all kinds of folks. You never really understand a person until you 
consider things from his point of view.” “Sir?” “Until you climb into his skin 
and walk around in it.” At the novel’s moral heart, there is a small-town 
southern lawyer who wants to show his children that the man with real courage 
is not a man with a gun in his hand. Interesting stuff for a popular novel in 
America. That Atticus Finch appears as a segregationist and a hypocrite in Go 
Set a Watchman challenged many readers’ preference for a simpler and more 
virtuous America. Lee understood that virtue is not simple.

• Nelle Harper Lee, novelist, born 28 April 1926; died 19 February 2016
 