
My husband, Harry Jones, who has died aged 86, was a committed teacher and 
college principal at sixth-form and technical colleges, and in adult education.

Harry was born and brought up in County Durham, the son of William Jones, a 
miner, and his wife, May (nee Cowley). His father was sent down the pit at the 
age of 12 to be the family breadwinner. Harry’s mother left her village school 
at 14 but was a great reader. Raised on the estate of the Backhouses, the 
Darlington bankers, where her mother was housekeeper and her father coachman, 
May had access to their library, and thanks to this, Harry benefited from a 
pre-school education.

Unemployment in Durham caused the family to move in 1940 to Coventry, where 
they experienced wartime air raids. Grammar schools were then fee paying, with 
a few bright children selected for special places, and Harry gained one at King 
Edward VI school, Nuneaton.

It was a disrupted secondary education. The school was bombed, so for some 
time pupils went to school only on Tuesdays and Thursdays, to receive work to 
be done at home. Even when full-time schooling resumed, there were no 
laboratories, gymnasium or library. Nevertheless Harry was an exceptional 
student. As well as achieving academic success, he was captain of rugby, 
selected for Warwickshire’s under-18s, editor of the school magazine, and 
played Prospero and Bottom in school plays. He won prizes for public speaking 
and as the best all-round sportsman.

After national service as a technical instructor – he claimed the army taught 
him to teach in six weeks – he went to Birmingham University, where he and I 
met. First as a lecturer in English at West Bromwich and then as senior 
lecturer in liberal studies at Ipswich, he supported the movement to liberalise 
traditional technical colleges, which eventually led to the formation of new 
universities.

As head of department at Northampton College of Further Education, vice 
principal at Dacorum College, Hemel Hempstead and principal at Borehamwood 
College of Further Education, he developed a vision of a student-centred 
combination of sixth-form college, technical college and adult education, 
acting as a resource for the whole community. This he worked to create as 
principal from 1978 at Isle College, Wisbech. Encouraging staff to engage in 
the life of the town, he was an active member of local organisations, published 
local history studies, and gave talks to local societies.

In retirement from 1993, he enjoyed literature, theatre, film, music, politics 
and football. Open to new ideas, he developed expertise with the computer and 
the internet. He supported theLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party, to which he believed he 
owed his opportunities in life. Nothing, though, ranked in importance with 
support for his family.

He is survived by me, and by our sons, Gavin and Duncan, and five 
grandchildren, Edward, Natasha, Louise, Sara and Jeremy.
 