
It was just another day at school when I first met this incredible book. It 
was raining at break time and I decided to visit the library. A book cover 
caught my eye; I was intrigued by the single word title, HATE. Over the next 
day and a half, this piece of fiction opened my eyes to what this small but 
powerful word really means. Rather depressingly, if you look up in a thesaurus 
synonyms of the word ‘hate’ there are more than forty five of them; words like 
vitriol, rancour, enmity and repugnance, and that is almost the same number as 
for love.

Alan Gibbons was inspired to write Hate after meeting Sylvia Lancaster, the 
mother of Sophie Lancaster who was murdered in 2008 in Bacup, not a million 
miles from where I live. What was the reason for such a repulsive act? Sophie 
and her boyfriend were attacked for expressing their individuality in the way 
they dressed. How contemptible is that?

The book tells the story of Eve, whose older sister Rosie was killed when 
walking home one night with her boyfriend, and is obviously a direct homage to 
Sophie Lancaster. On the night that Rosie was killed, witnesses stood by and 
let it happen. Understandably, Eve finds it impossible to understand how these 
people could do that and she herself experiences feelings of hate. This section 
raised an important question in my mind- would I have had the guts to stand up 
to those thugs or would I have been too frightened? I am still not sure I know 
the answer to that. This story also shows how hate not only damages the 
attacked but also the whole society. Respect and acceptance are the only cures.

Hate crime can take so many forms including cyber bullying on social media, 
homophobia and racism and, at the end of the day, PSHE lessons and learning 
about events such as the Holocaust, although incredibly important, can only 
take young people so far in their understanding. In my opinion, books such as 
this one, where the language and style of writing feel so natural and where the 
story is so gripping, should also be part of our curriculum. So I hope every 
school library in the land, if not the world, decides to stock Hate. Then 
perhaps just like me, people will come across this jewel of a story one rainy 
break time, and let it change their thinking forever.

 * Buy this book at the Guardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/hate-258041.html>
 