
It may not be a big a social issue like workplace harassment or the gender pay 
gap, but it still affects women at work. The diet bore: a woman (usually – 
thanks to gendered pressure to be thin) who talks non-stop about her treat day 
and her half-pound weight loss. She may take an interest in your food too, 
suggesting you’re “naughty” for eating chocolate or congratulating you on 
picking a salad for lunch. Worst case scenario, it’s a whole office of them, 
filling their cubicles with weight loss certificates and bringing in sugar-free 
vegan cupcakes on their birthdays.

While chatting about counting calories seems benign to some people, it creates 
a hostile workplace for others. One woman I spoke to, who works in publishing, 
spent six years in what she calls “a vortex of competitive dieting”. Her boss 
fished employees’ food wrappers out of the bin in order to read the calorie 
content aloud, and special occasions were miserable. “The rare times we had 
treats, everyone would keep score of how many had been eaten and by whom. It 
was all I could do not to shout ‘It’s only a Kit Kat!’”

According to the 2014 British Social Attitudes survey, 10 million women in the 
UK feel 'depressed' about their bodies

Another, who works in marketing, had a temporary contract in an office where 
staff constantly talked about cutting out carbs and stared at her sandwiches in 
horrified fascination. She was returning to work following cancer treatment 
that had caused her to gain weight, and her colleagues’ conversations affected 
her mental health. “Their constant talk about needing to be skinny made me 
absolutely hate my body. Whenever I passed a mirror, I stopped to be disgusted 
at how fat I was.” What makes these conversations so insidious is that they 
reinforce the all-too-prevalent idea that thinness is linked to self-worth. 
According to the 2014 British Social Attitudes survey,10 million women in the 
UK feel “depressed” about their bodies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/oct/14/women-body-image-anxiety-improve-body-confidence>
.

Helen O’Byrne, an independent HR consultant, points out that diet talk often 
fits the Acas definition of harassment, which is “unwanted conduct affecting 
the dignity of men and women in the workplace”. Someone with an eating 
disorder, or who is being singled out as the only woman, may also have a 
disability or gender discrimination claim. Whatever the exact details, O’Byrne 
says it’s best for employees to start with an informal approach, as most 
perpetrators are likely to be oblivious rather than malicious. “I’d say 
something like, ‘When you took that wrapper out of my bin I found it 
humiliating, I don’t know if that was your intention’.”

If that doesn’t help, she recommends keeping a record of each exchange and how 
it made you feel, which you can later show to a senior manager or HR department 
as part of a formal complaint. Some women balk at taking this step out of a 
fear of retaliation or because weight is such a sensitive issue, but O’Byrne 
says it’s worth thinking about the bigger picture. “You might as well try to 
address it because if you leave, somebody else will probably walk into the same 
position.” For managers trying to turn around this kind of environment, she 
says open communication is vital. “You need to create a culture where people 
feel comfortable raising concerns with you. But also when you see inappropriate 
behaviour, tackle it, don’t ignore it.”

Body language at work: how to connect, inspire and project confidence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2015/dec/10/body-language-work-project-confidence>
If nothing changes, you may still need to leave. “It’s great if you can 
resolve the problem,” O’Byrne says. “But put your own wellbeing first. You’re 
at work too long to be unhappy.” In the meantime, don’t despair. One journalist 
told me that spending her lunch breaks with people who had a good relationship 
with food helped her to rise above the incessant diet commentary of her boss. 
And the publishing professional I spoke to had perhaps the sagest advice of 
all: “Don’t feel obliged to join in or start a diet of your own. Carbs are 
fine. Kit Kats are fine. Honest.”
 