
Looking up and across the mountain from the window of Engelberg's 
Titlis-Stübli bubble lift as it took us up out of the grey gloom and into the 
bright blue, sunny yonder, I was properly cheered to notice that a great deal 
of time and effort had been put into carving a heartfelt message in the snow 
adjacent to the scary-looking ski-jump facility.

"Well Done Dominique!" it said in 8ft letters, penned, I guessed, by a 
tenacious, youthful committee of off-piste sign-writers using a combination of 
shovels, up-ended skis and poles.

Dominique Gisin, an Engelberg local, had just won first place in a big 
downhill race, and the community was celebrating the achievement by writing her 
name large in an area of snow that faced the town square and was floodlit at 
night. Ah, I thought to myself as I headed onwards and upwards. That's nice.

Later that same day, during another spectacular cable-car ride on the other 
side of the mountain, I looked down into the disappearing valley and couldn't 
help noticing a different but equally outstanding example of opportunist 
snow-graffiti. On a large piece of flat land, just by the lift station, broad 
and wide enough to be a small car park, some aspirant Alpine Keith Haring had 
etched a massive representation of the male reproductive organ into the frozen 
white. Complete with what I had to admit was a pretty good attempt at pubic 
hair. Ah, I thought. Now I get this place.

Engelberg, you see, is that kind of winter resort: a wholesome, unaffected 
town of downhill demons and benign hooligans. A young, fun place that plays 
hard and skis even harder,

In Engelberg (population just 400) the local heroes are ski bums, ski jumpers, 
slalom and Super-G specialists, medal winners and nascent champions - not 
obnoxiously flash types spraying champagne. This is not oligarch-centric 
Courchevel or ostentatious Verbier. Engelberg (it means "Angel Mountain" by the 
way) is not buttoned up and grimly formal like nearby St Moritz.

Nor is it the family-orientated, all-can-do resort of, say, Les Deux Alpes 
(families and apathetic sorts will probably be put off by the town's slightly 
awkward, inconvenient layout that means there's a two-minute shuttle bus ride 
or a 15-minute hike to the main lift station every morning) and it doesn't bray 
with sturdy, blonde Tanias and tanked-up, ruddy-faced Henrys like Val d'Isère.

The agenda here is: get up early, ski all day, eat well and then party until 
you fall over. Repeat for seven days or a long weekend. Yes, getting up the 
mountain can be a bit of a kerfuffle (there seemed to be a lot of transferring, 
staircases, lift-pass interludes), but once you're at the top of the 
10,000-feet-high Titlis glacier, the skiing is pretty decent with a total of 
82km of pisted runs - 30% per cent beginner slopes, 60% for intermediates and 
10% for advanced nutters.

At more than 6,000 feet down and eight miles long, one sequence of runs claims 
to be among the longest vertical drops in Switzerland. If you have blue skies 
and soft afternoon snow like we did, clattering down from the very top of the 
hill into the village is a truly glorious experience.

On day two, accompanied by a guide, we did the spectacular Galtiberg off-piste 
run (a must for any intermediate or better visitor) and had it all - 
magnificent ice falls, untracked powder fields, thrillingly precarious tree 
skiing and a dinky little train ride at the end - to ourselves.

Along for the ride that day was Niklas Möller, the 28-year-old Swedish-born 
hotelier behind Engelberg's newest hostelry, called simply Ski Lodge Engelberg. 
Niklas recognised the resort's niche appeal and saw a potential gap in the 
market for its unpretentious but upbeat demographic when he first came to the 
town as a student aged 18. He had skied all over Europe in the toniest, most 
upmarket destinations, but something about this monastery town with its cheese 
factory and gimmicky cable car system touched a nerve.

Niklas loved the train journey from Zurich - change at Lucerne on to the cute 
Stans-Engelberg railway, which lurches into a comically extreme gradient on its 
final few kilometres - and relished the skiing and the fact that Engelberg 
eschewed package tours and groups, preferring to enjoy something of a 
best-kept-secret reputation among the winter sports cognoscenti. (Although it 
has long been highly regarded by the Swiss).

In fact, Niklas liked the place so much that he deferred his studies for a 
term and put in a season as a ski bum. After graduating he went into finance, 
working for a private equity outfit in London, but a decade on, cannily quit 
his job (just as the markets were starting to look dodgy) and, in 2007, teaming 
up with two Swedish partners, secured the lease on the hotel next to the 
Engelberg railway station.

The young, ambitious team - Niklas, Carl-Johan, Jenny and Johan - set about 
simplifying, uncluttering, de-Tyrolising the décor, smartening up bedrooms, 
adding a hot tub and a sauna (they are Swedish, remember) putting in a funky 
bar and establishing a contemporary feel to the dining.

After the first overbooked season, the hotel grew to include an adjacent 
property, a further 40 beds and a quaint, hexagonal glass house in the garden 
where you can enjoy a private dinner. Now the Swedes are looking for similarly 
low-key ski destinations where they can open further Ski Lodge hotels and, very 
subtly, turn their concept into a brand.

"We wanted to create an atmosphere where, say, a 45-year-old guy who might 
have been a ski bum once in his life but now has a desk job, a family and a 
mortgage, can come and stay for a week and behave a little bit like a ski bum 
again," explains Niklas. (A ski bum eating very nice food and sleeping on nice 
plain white, freshly changed bed linen every day, that is.)

They've done a good job. Ski Lodge Engelberg is a basic, inoffensively trendy, 
clean and fresh place with a wholesome, energetic ambience. Staff are young, 
bright-eyed, wind tanned sorts and, right down to the bus boys and 
chambermaids, all excellent skiers who will take great delight in telling you 
where all the freshest dumps of powder are located on the mountain.

I have to report that the food is really excellent; no chalet-girl stodge 
here. This is the sort of modern, pan-European grub you'd order in, say a 
fashionable Shoreditch eaterie or a Stockholm gastro pub. During a three-night 
stay we ate our evening meals at the hotel twice, and despite the fact that it 
operated under the dubious sobriquet "Rukas - kick-ass restaurant" it was very 
good; veal with porcini baked onions and cream, mussels with leeks and dried 
local ham washed down with local monastery-brewed beer.

Here are some more unusual things about Engelberg: locals claim that spring 
skiing goes on almost until summer. Because the town is at an altitude of 
1,000m, and is the first large mountain range the weather systems hit when they 
come in from the north-west, it gets snowed on a lot. Heavy falls, which 
usually start in November, typically continue until the end of April.

In the Spindle nightclub, Engelberg claims to have the oldest disco in 
Switzerland (and from what I could hear, the oldest playlist to match). 
Visitors looking for some peace, meanwhile, can find remote, novelty 
accommodation high up at Trübsee Lake where the Iglu hotel, a labyrinthine 
series of large domes constructed from hard-packed snow, offers hardy, 
experimental overnighters a bar (try the white gluwein) a fondue restaurant, a 
tabernacle (for mountain-top weddings), a hot tub and several lamb 
skin-upholstered bedrooms. I had a look around, and while finding the concept 
amusing I was very happy to be heading back to the hot bath and flatscreen 
telly in my room down in the resort.

And how about this? As far as I know, Engelberg is the only ski resort in 
Switzerland - and maybe the Alps - that has provided the backdrop for a 
Bollywood movie. I'm presuming that the Indian movie industry chose Engelberg 
because of the barmy circular "Rotair" rotating cable car.

It's the only one of its kind in Europe, and as a tourist attraction it pulls 
in loads of non-skiing Indian and Japanese pedestrians. The gently spinning, 
360-degree cable-car concept works best in the summer, when it gives hikers a 
glorious, ever-changing panorama as it climbs, although for winter sportsmen 
the car's constant movement means your skis and poles get tangled up as you 
ascend and you can lose your balance trying to straighten them up.

It also required considerable restraint on your reporter's behalf to not make 
like a fairground teddy boy and bellow out "scream if you wanna go faster, 
girls!" as we started our daffy twirl upwards and onwards.

• Swiss (0845 601 0956, swiss.com <http://www.swiss.com>) flies to Zurich from 
Birmingham, Heathrow, London City and Manchester from £99 rtn inc tax. From 
Zurich take the train to Engelberg via Lucerne (020-7420 49 00,swissrailways.com
 <http://www.swissrailways.com>). In winter Ski Lodge Engelberg (0041 786 75 33 
66), CHF 70. Three-course dinner CHF40. Iglu hotel at Trübsee Lake (+ 612 27 28,
iglu-dorf.com <http://www.iglu-dorf.com>).

Late-season ski deals

Lech, Austria
Iglu Ski has lopped over 50% off a seven-day package to Lech, in the Arlberg 
region, which includes return Innsbruck flights from Gatwick and full-board at 
the traditional Chalet Hotel Sonneck. Grub is provided in the wood-panelled 
dining room with views over Lech, and the candle-lit bar is a popular après-ski 
venue. £405pp for departure on 22 March, £470 for departure on 12 April.

• 0208 544 7114, Igluski.com <http://www.Igluski.com>.

Samoëns, France
La Source is one of the finest ski chalets in Europe, an impressive alpine 
barn that sleeps 12 at the foot of the Grand Massif ski area in Samoëns, less 
than an hour's drive from Geneva airport. Between 7 March and 4 April the rates 
have been halved, to £420pp per week (you can book by the room), all-inclusive. 
Paired with easyJet flights, this can come in under the £500 mark all in 
(flights for that period currently start at £37 return including taxes).

• See is.gd/kPyT <http://www.is.gd/kPyT> for details.

Bourg St Maurice, France
Snow camps offered by Animal (the ones who do the clothing and watch straps) 
offer guests the chance to chum up with the Animal pro-snowboard and ski team, 
including Olympic half-pipe contender Kate Foster, during week-long trips in 
the French Alps, staying at the Board'n'Lodge ecolodge in Bourg St Maurice, 
near Les Arcs, Tignes and Val d'Isère, where they'll teach you tricks. The week 
includes full board, transfers and lift passes, departing 14 March and 21 
March, and costs £690pp. EasyJet flights to Chambéry and Geneva over that 
period start at £36 return.

• 0203 239 8181, animalsnowcamp.com <http://www.animalsnowcamp.com>.

Banff, Canada
Crystal Ski has offers for the Canadian resort of Banff, a great all-round ski 
destination with heaps of backcountry in the Canadian Rockies, on the shores of 
the glacial Lake Louise. Two packages start from £599pp for 11 nights, 
including Gatwick-Calgary flights; the Mount Royal Hotel option on a room-only 
basis, and the Rocky Mountain chalets, which are fully catered.

• 0871 231 5659, crystalski.co.uk <http://www.crystalski.co.uk>.

Benji Lanyado
 