
In many businesses, a lack of communication and understanding between 
employees, management and finance teams can be the real reason budgets and 
proposals are turned down. So how can you get past this and turn that “no” into 
a “yes”? The solution is simple: learn to understand where they are coming 
from. In other words, “know thy enemy”.

Let’s start by looking at the role of the finance director. This is a hugely 
difficult job. The accounting part is straightforward, but pretty thankless: 
most reports get ignored and only get looked at when something is wrong.

The finance director is already juggling a huge amount of pressure and demands 
from all sides of the business

The finance director will also find themselves pulled every which way by 
stakeholders. Company directors rely heavily on the finance director, the 
managing director is focused on hitting profit targets, the staff want their 
interests to be protected (as do the creditors) and finally, the shareholders 
see the finance director as custodian of their interests.

In addition, it is the finance director who is in the firing line for 
compliance with regulatory issues such as money laundering or stock exchange 
filing. In many companies, the finance director will also be given overall 
responsible for a department that is totally different to their own, such IT or 
HR.

So the finance director is already juggling a huge amount of pressure and 
demands from all sides of the business. Then you drop in, wanting approval for 
your proposal or budget.

Here, the 80:20 rule often applies: the majority of projects don’t work and 
most initial budgets are woefully optimistic. If you don’t understand this, 
it’s game over before you’ve even started. If you want to build a better 
relationship with your finance department, and get a “yes” for your pet 
project, here are some guidelines to help you on your way.

 * Make a point of getting to know the finance team socially: include them in 
product launches, send them samples and keep them in the loop with business 
announcements. 
 * Find out what’s important to them. Every finance team has differing views 
on the key numbers and areas to monitor. You can then reference these in your 
pitch. 
 * Use this social connection to start pre-selling your project. Ask their 
advice to start getting buy-in. Remember that the finance director is faced 
with a myriad of requests every day, so you need to engage their interest and 
that means telling a story. Don’t assume they know everything about what you do 
or why this proposal is important. 
 * You may be passionate about your project, but don’t get carried away. You 
need to show that you understand business risk, so talk about the possible 
downsides and always have a plan B. 
 * Make sure you have the numbers to support your proposal. For investment 
requests, the key is payback: how long before the project returns the cash 
invested? Triple check any schedules add up and that they are consistent. It’s 
also crucial to documenting supporting assumptions, for example, web traffic or 
conversion growth. Be up to speed on any numbers your department has recently 
been given. What trends do they show? 
 * Understand the numbers. The most common mistake is failing to realize that 
profit isn’t cash. Financial directors are always trying to reduce what’s 
called working capital, which is money tied up with customers or in stock, less 
what is owed to suppliers. 
 * Don’t forget to bring a calculator for the inevitable questions: not your 
phone, a proper old-fashioned calculator. Show the team that you realise that 
this is all about the numbers. 
If, despite following these tips, the answer is still no, remember, this only 
means “not now”. Always rework your proposal and try again; timing can be 
everything when it comes to business and finance.

Johnny Martin FCA <http://www.johnnymartin.co.uk>, The Numbers Coach, is a 
British Library Business Centre partner where he runs regular workshops and he 
is a mentor for the School of Communication Arts. He is the author of
Understanding Your Business Finances. <http://www.johnnymartin.co.uk/workbook> 
He tweets@numberscoach <https://twitter.com/NumbersCoach>
 