
Perhaps this is just my inbuilt Peter Pan complex talking, but despite years 
outside the education system, to me September means one thing: the start of the 
new school year. January may be the traditional time of year for 
self-improvement, gym memberships and expensive, flash-in-the-pan hobbies, but 
the onset of autumn brings with it an inescapable urge to better yourself, step 
up - and of course buy new pens.

All of my major career decisions have taken place in September. As August drew 
to a close after a long, hedonistic post-university summer, I buckled down and 
started applying for jobs. The following September, I walked away from a 
company I hated and found a company I loved. Several years later, I took a deep 
breath and asked to go part time, to prepare for a terrifying but ultimately 
brilliant career change. The stories go on, but with one thing in common – the 
timing. Every September I reassess and ask myself whether I’m doing what I need 
to do to move forwards, or move up another school year, if you will.

In honour of the new “school year”, here are the first steps I’m taking in my 
annual career assessment.

Give up on presenteeism

We’ve all done it – stayed at our desks hours later than necessary in order to 
“make a good impression” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2015/jul/06/presenteeism-over-productivity-why-flexible-working-needs-a-rebrand>
 , or worse still, because we’re just copying everyone else. Presenteeism is 
based on second-guessing what your company leaders and managers want, and what 
will impress them. There is a far easier way of impressing the bosses: let them 
know about your achievements. If you’ve done something well – share it. The 
people furiously sending emails at 11pm may hate your guts, but that’s their 
problem, and I firmly believe that when it comes to business, it’s more 
important to be respected than to be liked.

Remember to be grateful

The mindfulness movement – and all the slightly twee messaging that comes with 
it – is still going strong. While I find most of it a complete waste of time (I 
already spend quite enough time staring out of the window letting my mind 
wander, thanks all the same) I do think that being aware of the positive things 
in your life is always a good thing.

We’re conditioned to moan about work. The commute is too long, my manager is 
annoying, I don’t get paid enough, my to-do list is endless … Yes, it’s 
probably all true to some extent and yes, pouring another glass and letting rip 
about your awful boss can be hugely cathartic. In the midst of all this, it’s 
important to remember what you do like about your work. If all you know is what 
you hate and what you don’t want, you’re unlikely to ever find a job that 
fulfils you. Stop and think about what you love, then you can work out how to 
spend more time doing it.

Walk away

For many of us, the majority of the working day involves sitting in front of a 
computer, staring at a brightly lit screen. First things first: turn down the 
brightness. Too much glare is stressful for your eyes and will make them feel 
dry and tired. Now, get up and walk away from your screen. Maybe you’re having 
a hugely busy day and all you can spare is five minutes, but that is better 
than nothing. If possible, go outside, stretch your legs and breathe some fresh 
air into your lungs. This is an oft-repeated mantra, but one that most of us 
still fail to embrace. Make it a habit – every day at 3pm, instead of reaching 
for the coffee or the nearest sugar rush, get up and go for a quick walk. Or 
just make sure you always leave your desk for lunch.What you lose in time, 
you’ll make up in productivity 
<http://business.time.com/2012/07/16/the-lunch-hour-necessity-or-nuisance/>. 

Map out your career path

A careers adviser ran through this exercise with me years ago when I was 
struggling to work out how to bring about the career change I so desperately 
wanted. It works like this: at one end of a piece of paper, write down where 
you are now. At the other end, write down where you want to be; this could be 
something simple like “get promoted in January” or something big like “start my 
own PR business” or “get my first novel published”. In the middle of the sheet 
of paper, write down all the things you’re currently doing to further your 
career (additional training, education or networking groups, for example) then 
ask yourself if each of these is helping you get from one side of the paper to 
the other. Cross out anything that isn’t helping you get closer to your goal. 
Then concentrate on working out the small steps that can fill the gaps and 
that, together, will help you to map a clear route forwards.

It sounds simple but, for me at least, it was a hugely effective way of 
working out how to concentrate my energy on achieving my goal, rather than 
coasting along with no clear direction.

Buy some new stationery

Come on, it’s September. It would be rude not to. 
 