 In late August and early September, as John Kerry's campaign for president hit 
one low point after another, bloggers of all stripes took to the web with 
pointed political advice for the candidate. They told him how he should attack 
Bush and how he should hone his message. They even wrote sample speeches for 
the candidate.
On September 13, for instance, Zackpunk, a regular contributor to the 
political junkie websiteDaily Kos <http://www.dailykos.com/>, wrote in his 
"diary" - a kind of miniblog within the larger site - that while listening to 
Al Franken on the radio, two disparate facts about the Bush presidency fused 
together in his mind. One was the story, first reported by Bob Woodward, that 
when Bush told his secretary of state, Colin Powell, that he planned to invade 
Iraq, Powell warned the president that "you'll own it all". The other was 
Bush's campaign promotion of an "ownership society."

These two facts, Zackpunk said, left a "huge opening for Kerry", with an ideal 
speech from the senator looking something like this: "Mr President, Colin 
Powell told you about this war that 'if you break it, you own it'. And now 
you're going around talking about an 'ownership society'. Well, Mr President, 
let me tell you what you own. A million jobs lost. You own that. A thousand 
soldiers lost. You own that. 1.4 million new people living below the poverty 
line. You own that. 1.2 million less people covered by health insurance. You 
own that. A 17% medicare increase. You own that. Health care costs 
skyrocketing. You own that. The tax burden increasing amongst the middle class. 
You own that. Mr President, if you want to talk about an ownership society, 
let's talk about what you own."

The speech was a powerful, specific, fact-filled indictment of Bush. And on 
Daily Kos, when someone writes something as brilliant as that in a diary, other 
readers begin noticing, and if it's good enough the post can land on the Kos 
front page. That's what happened in this case, and Kerry's campaign seemed to 
notice. In a speech two days later, Kerry said, "At that convention in New York 
the other week, President Bush talked about his ownership society. Well, Mr 
President, when it comes to your record, we agree - you own it." Kerry went on 
to enumerate Bush's mistakes and label his term the "excuses presidency, never 
wrong, never responsible, never to blame".

It's possible that the Kerry people came upon their speech independently of 
Daily Kos, but Markos Moulitsas Zuniga, the site's owner, says that he suspects 
Kerry is listening. "It's not that they're listening to Markos," he says. 
"They're realizing that there's this huge community out there that has good 
ideas. There are 400 or 500 diary entries a day. If one in a thousand diary 
entries has something of value, that's a good idea every couple of days."

Today, it seems that every online political junkie secretly - if not openly - 
believes he's James Carville, a strategist possessed of such uncontested 
political genius that a particular candidate would be crazy not to listen to 
his advice, especially if that particular candidate is John Kerry. It's 
possible to find people on the web who'll claim that they could do at least as 
good a job in winning political races as the veteran consultants on the inside. 
So what if these people have never worked in any actual campaign? At least some 
of them were warning, months ago, that the Swift Boat Veterans for Truth would 
be a problem for Kerry and that he should respond hard and fast - an idea that 
Kerry's team would have been wise to consider.

How is it possible that amateur political junkies are potentially having an 
effect on actual campaigns? The answer is that the internet has fundamentally 
changed politics as we know it. There is just so much out there that we didn't 
have access to four years ago: polling data, fundraising data, media-buy data; 
instant access to every TV ad and press release and unguarded gaffe and 
well-timed leak to jolt the campaign; insider dish on what the media's covering 
and what it's not covering and why; and perhaps most fun of all, there are 
massive online communities in which hundreds of thousands of people submit 
their mostly corny, often silly and sometimes unimaginably brilliant ideas for 
how this candidate or that should run his campaign. "As a political junkie," 
says Moulitsas, "this is heaven for me."

"I don't think that most people delude themselves into thinking they're 
actually James Carville," says Michael Cornfield, senior research consultant at 
thePew Internet & American Life Project <http://www.pewinternet.org/>. "But for 
many of them it's gratifying to pore over the poll data and all this other data 
and think about what you would have done. You know what I'd compare it to? It's 
like fantasy football. I don't mean to suggest that people are trivialising it, 
but politics does have these game-like aspects to it, and it can be gratifying 
in a number of ways to play the game."

Jerome Armstrong, who runs the popular left-leaning blog, MyDD.com 
<http://www.mydd.com/>, is 40 years old, and for much of his life he followed 
politics only "on the periphery," he says. Only in the last few years has he 
come to see both the necessity and the excitement of civic participation, and 
in that short time he's taken to the game with all the gusto of a natural.

Armstrong was an early fan of Howard Dean, and Dean's campaign manager, Joe 
Trippi, was an early fan of Armstrong's blog; the match was eventually 
consummated in Burlington, Vermont, where, during Dean's rise and fall, 
Armstrong decamped to work for the campaign. Now Armstrong is a full-fledged 
political consultant. He and Moulitsas have set up a firm to advise politicians 
on how to use the web to outmanoeuvre their opponents, much as Armstrong (and 
many others) helped Dean to do in his campaign.

Armstrong's interest in web campaigns is genuine, and given his background 
with Dean, he is just as qualified, if not more so, as any veteran consultant 
to advise a candidate looking for online expertise. But Armstrong has educated 
himself in much more than the mechanics of web campaigns. Like Moulitsas, he's 
a political polymath, the kind of guy who can recite every competitive House 
race this year, and if you've got time he may well tell you the various 
candidates' fundraising records, their support in the party, and recent polling 
data for their race.

"I've been looking at the House races for about the last three or four days," 
he said last week, launching into a detailed discussion of the Democratic 
party's chances of regaining control of the chamber in November. "It looks 
really close. If the whole thing goes like 3% toward the Democrats, they could 
win like 20 seats." (That's just his top-line estimate. See here ... and here 
for a much, much more in-depth analysis.)

Armstrong's House forecast is based on polling data he's culled from news 
sources all over the web, and fundraising data he got from thefederal election 
commission (FEC)'s website <http://www.fec.gov/>. "What I've been doing is, 
I've been looking at where the Republican attack money is going," Armstrong 
says. "Like I've been looking into how the Republican leadership PACs 
[political action committees] are distributing money, which House races they're 
targeting. That way you see which races are competitive."

Four years ago, it may have been possible to collect this data, but it would 
have been more difficult than it is today, and, anyway, without the 
distribution platform of blogs, doing this kind of research would have been 
pointless then.

"Ten years ago you'd have to go down to the FEC and get their filings and put 
it all in a big book and bring it back," Armstrong notes. "Maybe like 100 
people in the country would have seen it. This year, here I am just a blogger 
getting this stuff, and since I've got the time and the resources I can look 
into this."

Moulitsas concurs. On the web, it's springtime for number crunchers. "I've 
always been a political junkie," he says. "But never before like this. There's 
no way I could have kept up with a Senate race in South Dakota, or a House race 
in Nevada, it just was not possible. Now, every newspaper's online, and with
Google News 
<http://news.google.com/news?q=federal+election+commission+&hl=en&lr=&ie=UTF-8&sa=N&tab=wn>
 I can have all this stuff e-mailed to me when news happens. I've set up all 
sorts of keywords. I'm always getting all this stuff. It's a whole different 
environment."

In the grand scheme of technological progress, increased access by bloggers to 
political information isn't the most astounding development. Glenn Reynolds, 
the University of Tennessee law professor who runs the popular, rightish blog
Instapundit <http://www.instapundit.com/>, notes that "if you look at a more 
general picture of the world recently, the difference between amateurs and 
professionals has vanished in a whole lot of ways. For instance, look at music 
- it used to be you only knew about studio stuff if you were a serious 
musician. The amateur would never know about it. But now you can set these 
things up at home. The insider tricks aren't insider tricks anymore, now that 
outsiders have access to the knowledge".

A similar thing has occurred in film and photography with the advent of 
digital imaging, or in journalism with the advent of the web and of blogs 
themselves. Why should political strategy be any different?

The web's metamorphosis into a haven for armchair strategists seems all the 
more natural when you consider the fetishisation of political operatives that 
has increasingly become the obsession of all media covering modern elections. 
It's well established that there are not nearly as many stories about policy 
today as there are about campaigns and the personalities who people them. John 
Kerry's capacity to run a presidential campaign is deemed at least as important 
as his capacity to, you know, run the country.

The success of the DA Pennebaker film The War Room, and K Street, and 
especially The West Wing - a TV show created by a political junkie as a gift to 
the rest of us afflicted with the bug - just underlines the point. One of the 
hottest video games in recent months has beenThe Political Machine 
<http://www.politicalmachine.com/game.asp?c=1&u=0>, which is no doubt the first 
game ever to feature as its primary villain the vexing mathematics of the 
electoral college. And finally, for proof that we are ever more concerned about 
the horse race rather than the issues of the presidential race, look no further 
than the talking heads on cable news, constantly plumbing the depths of a sole 
overarching political-strategy story line, "What should candidate X do next?"

The amateurs playing politics online often come off smarter than those on TV, 
and you can interact with them, which makes playing the game fun. Because they 
are now actually involved in assisting political campaigns, it wouldn't be 
correct to include Moulitsas and Armstrong in this group of "amateurs". But 
they're definitely not professionals in the mould of the veteran experts 
advising either of the presidential campaigns or the political parties, and 
certainly their readers - who are apprised of much of the information that they 
collect - are amateurs. In this sense, what we're seeing in this election cycle 
is truly novel. Amateurs, the political junkies whose interest in politics used 
to go unfulfilled, now find themselves holding some of the mightiest data in 
politics, the kind of dish they used to drool over.

It would be a bit too credulous to conclude that these developments will prove 
to be a boon to political campaigns and, more pressingly, to the quality of 
American politics. So far, bloggers and the readers of blogs have been most 
influential to campaigns through fundraising - especially for Dean, Kerry, Bush 
and many congressional candidates - and, in a few instances, they've affected 
the news cycle, most recently in their flogging of CBS News' now-discredited 
Bush National Guard memos. In the Dean campaign, Trippi and other advisers 
professed to rely on the readers of the officialHoward Dean blog 
<http://deancalltoaction.blogspot.com/> for at least some strategic advice. 
We'll never know if this advice ultimately helped Dean, propelling him to a 
position that he never would have attained without help from the bloggers, or 
whether, in the end, the cultish Dean movement drove people away from Dean and 
did in his candidacy.

There is no easy way to measure the "quality" of the political strategy 
generated on the web in the comment section of sites like MyDD or DailyKos. 
"It's all over the map," notes John Judis, the New Republic editor whose last 
book, The Emerging Democratic Majority, written with the political analyst Ruy 
Teixeira, serves as the basis for the popular blogDonkey Rising 
<http://www.emergingdemocraticmajorityweblog.com/donkeyrising/>. "It's just 
like in sports. Who's to say what's a good idea and what's not?"

But Judis also believes that much of the strategy offered up by denizens of 
lefty blogs is earnest, "flowing from a genuine political commitment", and is 
not out of the "the sheer pursuit of consultancy as an abstract skill". As 
such, he says, it wouldn't hurt political campaigns to monitor some of what's 
going on online.

There is evidence that this is occurring, as witnessed by Zackpunk's ownership 
speech. But even if the blog audience does not serve up fresh strategic advice 
every day, it's at least useful to look at what the people online are saying if 
you're trying to attract them to your campaign, says Stirling Newberry, who 
blogs at theBlogging of the President <http://www.bopnews.com/>. 

"People are expert consumers, and it's much easier to find out what people 
really think about something like a consumer product if you observe them," 
Newberry says. If you go to a fan site devoted to motorcycles, you'll find out 
what's on the minds of potential motorcycle consumers. Likewise, if you go to a 
site devoted to politics, you'll find out what's bothering potential consumers 
of a political message - and you'll discover their problems even if their 
specific ideas or suggestions for improving that product aren't very astute. 
"People really talk about the things they're worried about," Newberry says. "A 
lot of people say that by watching these sites Kerry should have known that 
Swift Boats were going to be very important. He should have done something."

One problem with amateurs holding the tools of professionals, though, is that 
they may not quite understand how to use them. During the past few weeks, 
there's been a spirited discussion between some bloggers over how to interpret 
and account for the volatility in some presidential campaign polls, especially 
a recent Gallup poll showing a huge Bush lead. Ruy Teixeira, the polling expert 
at Donkey Rising, has argued convincingly that the Gallup poll is off because 
it over-sampled Republicans in its calculation of voters "likely" to cast a 
ballot in November. Mickey Kaus, the resident blogger atSlate 
<http://slate.msn.com/>, called that thesis nonsense, and offered just as 
convincing a theory to support Gallup's numbers.

Such a fight, let's note, was unlikely to have come up four years ago. Then, 
we didn't have as many polls with which to compare one single aberrant poll, 
and far fewer people were interested in the mechanics of polling. We've now got 
inside access to dozens of polls and sites that collect and analyse polls, from 
the indispensableElectoral-Vote.com <http://electoral-vote.com/> to 
PollingReport.com <http://pollingreport.com/> to Real Clear Politics 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/> to Donkey Rising. If you're an online 
politics junkie these days, you likely consume at least half a dozen new polls 
for breakfast each morning.

But what's an amateur to do in the case of a real question about the proper 
way to use these new tools? Maybe there is a place online for real experts, 
people who specialise in such previously cloistered fields as opinion polling. 
Online, you sometimes see some very bitter, partisan fights over polls, with no 
small number of people charging that certain surveys are rigged.

Looking over this world recently, Mark Blumenthal, a veteran Democratic 
political consultant and pollster, decided that his professional voice needed 
to be added to the mix. He didn't blame the amateurs for their occasional 
ignorance about polling. It's not their fault, he says, that his industry 
hasn't engaged with the people online. But now, he adds, it's time for that 
collaboration. "My sense is there is a role for a source of information about 
polling. There's all this talk about manipulation, a conspiracy of the right or 
the left. Meanwhile, there's a community of social scientists who deeply care 
about how to draw a random sample, about getting things right. And the two 
groups aren't really talking to each other."

The best way to get the two sides talking to each other, Blumenthal 
recognised, would be by starting a blog of his own to discuss the ins and outs 
of polls. That's what he did last week with a site he callsMystery Pollster 
<http://mysterypollster.typepad.com/main/>, and on his first day, Blumenthal 
got a link from Mickey Kaus and 15,000 page views.

Blumenthal says he wants the site to serve as a bridge between the 
professional political consultants and the amateurs who populate the web, and 
judging by the comments people have left him so far, he says that may happen. 
"It's an experiment," he says of the project. "A six-week experiment, and then 
we'll see what happens. It sure does look like it's going to take up all my 
spare time until then."

· This article has been provided by Salon through a special arrangement with 
Guardian Newspapers Limited.
© Salon.com 2004

Visit the Salon site at salon.com <http://www.salon.com>
 