
There are certain culinary challenges to be chomped through before one can 
justly call oneself a grown-up. The courage to eat a pork pie without first 
dissecting it and removing every large shred of jelly only comes with age, as 
does the sudden, blinding realisation that, actually chips don't go with 
everything. The ability to order oysters without visibly congratulating oneself 
on one's sophistication requires a degree of self control rarely found in the 
under 25s.

Sorbet 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2011/jun/28/consider-the-sorbet>
, for me, was such a milestone. For years it was the kind of thing my mum would 
order – no match for the riot of double cream and sticky toffee chunks that was 
my seaside treat of choice. Then suddenly, out of the blue one hot Italian 
summer, I found myself craving the clean, sharp refreshment that only a 
sorbetto di limone could provide. It was the gastronomic equivalent of finding 
a first grey hair – sobering, but also undoubted proof of the kind of wisdom 
that only time can provide. And rather more pleasant.
In their aptly-titled volume, Ices: the Definitive Guide 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781904943464>
, Caroline and Robin Weir divide ices into creams (ice cream and gelati), water 
ices (sorbets and granitas) and hybrids, with a foot in both camps (parfaits 
and sherbets). Water ices are based on a flavoured sugar syrup rather than a 
custard – and are thus much quicker and easier to make. In fact, sorbets are 
the easiest ice of the lot: granitas must be beaten at regular intervals during 
the freezing process in order to develop their characteristic crystalline 
texture. Sorbets should, in theory, be smooth – which is less labour intensive, 
particularly if you're lucky enough to own a machine to take care of the 
churning side of things.

The Weirs' book contains scores of seductive recipes, many of which, I smugly 
think, would have been wasted on my younger self in any case –Campari and orange
 <http://cafefernando.com/hay-hay-its-donna-eats-sorbet-day/>, Earl Grey 
<http://tregothnan.co.uk/tea-plantation-bar/tea-recipes/tregothnan-earl-grey-sorbet/>
,tamarind 
<http://coconutraita.blogspot.com/2010/03/tamarind-and-lime-sorbet.html> – but, 
as the principle of the sorbet is the important thing, here I've decided to 
stick with the undisputed classic of the genre. As they point out, it's been a 
victim of its own popularity: "Beside the other exotic recipes, this sorbet 
still has a place because when made well it is superb … [but] when it isn't the 
Real McCoy it is instantly detectable."

Master lemon sorbet, and the whole freezer is your oyster (although please 
don't combine the two – that might just be the point at which sophistication 
tips into insanity).

The best and the zest
 Robin Weir lemon sorbet. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Having learned all I need to about sorbets at their expert knee, it seems only 
right that Caroline and Robin Weir's recipe should be the first I try. Like all 
of their sorbets, it uses a master sugar syrup recipe, made with equal parts 
sugar to water. While this is cooling, I juice 6 lemons, and zest half of them, 
then whisk in icing sugar and the finely chopped zest, and put it all in the 
fridge to chill. As the Weirs observe, lemon sorbet is tricky, because the 
fruit varies so much in size and sweetness – so the next step, stirring in 
sugar syrup and water to taste, must be done carefully, a little at a time, 
"until you have a true lemon flavour that is not too tart".

This also, of course, has the dubious benefit that, if the end result is too 
sweet, or too sharp, it's entirely my own fault. I then churn it in an ice 
cream maker, put it in the freezer to firm up … and wait impatiently. It may be 
chilly and damp outside, but I'm desperate to taste the fruit of my labours. 
Despite relying heavily on my judgement, the recipe doesn't disappoint – it's 
intensely flavoured with a nice smooth texture. "I like the bits of zest," my 
flatmate says later, when I coax her into a blind tasting. "They give it a more 
interesting texture."

The search for smoothness

As long as you get the juice to sugar ratio right (always taste your sorbet 
before you freeze it, however many times you've used the recipe), the main 
battle with sorbets is textural – how to achieve thatmelting smoothness 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/foodanddrink/8303585/The-Kitchen-Thinker-Sorbet.html>
 that sets them apart from the granita.Morfudd Richards 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/foodanddrink/recipes/5560714/Ice-cream-recipes-what-a-scoop.html>
, author ofLola's Ice Creams & Sundaes 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780091926328>
, reckons the secret is glucose syrup which, "prevents the crystallisation of 
sucrose" – in her recipe, she uses a rough ratio of 1 part syrup to 5 parts 
sugar. I must confess that I can't detect any difference though, delicious as 
her intensely zingy sorbet is: the texture is almost identical to the Weirs', 
except for the fact it lacks those little flecks of lemon zest that Anna 
enjoyed so much.
 Julia Child lemon sorbet. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Others swear by whipped egg white for a creamy consistency – which may well 
cross the slightly murky dividing line between sorbet and sherbet. 
Nevertheless, I giveJulia Child's recipe 
<http://www.starchefs.com/JChild/html/recipe_03.shtml> a go, folding in a 
couple of whites "lightly beaten to a foam" with a pinch of salt, just before 
freezing. The effect is odd – "it's a bit like snow," my tester observes. 
Pleasant, certainly, but curiously muted, as if the egg has stolen the sorbet's 
soul.
 Waitrose recipe lemon sorbet with vodka. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the 
Guardian 
The other solution, as is so often the case, involves alcohol 
<http://www.mollysmenu.us/?p=> – because it has such a low freezing point, it 
gives ices a softer texture. I try aWaitrose recipe 
<http://www.waitrose.com/home/recipes/recipe_directory/l/lemon_sorbet.html> 
using lemon vodka, but, although it definitely stops it setting quite so firmly 
(which, to be honest, hasn't been too much of a problem with any of the 
sorbets), the booze clouds the fresh flavour of the fruit. I like a Colonel as 
much as the next cocktail junkie, but sometimes, especially in the heat, pure 
refreshment is what I'm after. I conclude that, as long as you get enough air 
into the mix, and get it out of the freezer well in advance there's no need for 
any additives for a silky smooth sorbet.

Techniques and tweaks
 Morfudd Richards lemon sorbet. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Although all the recipes contain broadly similar ingredients (lemon, sugar and 
water – obviously), no two combine them in the same form. Julia Child makes a 
flavoured sugar by blitzing it with lemon zest, and then turns it into a syrup. 
Morfudd Richards infuses a sugar syrup with lemon zest, and then stirs in the 
juice, while Waitrose stirs the lemon juice and vodka into sugar syrup. I like 
the Weirs' approach best though; infusing a lemon juice and sugar mixture with 
zest to give a more complex flavour, and then adding tiny amounts of syrup to 
adjust it to exactly the right level of sweetness – it seems best suited to 
this capricious fruit, as well as the vagaries of individual taste.

Although I ignore the plethora of gussied-up lemon sorbet recipes which 
attempt to improve upon the simple perfection of this classic, I do try a
Ballymaloe recipe using lemon verbena 
<http://chocolateandzucchini.com/archives/2009/07/lemon_verbena_sorbet.php> 
leaves, on the basis that the herb is so intensely citric that it should 
enhance, rather than confuse the flavour of the fruit. It's elegant – perfect, 
as the introduction notes, to kick off a summer dinner party – but adds a 
distracting aromatic note. When it comes to lemon sorbet, less really is more.

Perfect lemon sorbet
 Felicity's perfect lemon sorbet. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Lemon sorbet is such a simple pleasure that it's a mistake to play around with 
it too much – instead, make sure you get the basics right. The only small 
adjustment I'd make to the Weirs' otherwise perfect recipe is to up the lemon 
content: you really can't make this ice too zingy. Spend time tweaking the 
balance of sweet and sour until it suits you, and beat it into smooth 
submission, and you'll be rewarded with one of summer's greatest pleasures. Now 
all we need is some sunshine.

Serves 6-8 

350g caster sugar
14 lemons, at least 5 unwaxed

1. Put 250g sugar into a pan with 250ml boiling water and heat, stirring, 
until the sugar has dissolved. Allow to bubble for a couple of minutes until 
slightly thickened, then set aside and allow to cool completely.

2. Zest the unwaxed lemons and finely chop the resulting peel. Juice all the 
lemons and strain to remove any pulp and stray pips. Add the chopped peel and 
stir in the rest of the sugar to dissolve. Chill in the fridge for a couple of 
hours.

3. Add equal amounts of syrup and cold water, 25ml at a time, and taste, until 
the flavour is to your liking – remember that freezing will mute it slightly, 
so it should be quite intense.

4. Put in an ice cream maker and churn according to instructions. 
Alternatively pour into a strong plastic box and put in the coldest part of the 
freezer. After 1 hour 30 minutes it should have frozen round the edges – take 
it out and beat vigorously with a fork, electric whisk or in a food processor 
until you have a uniformly textured icy slush. Put back in the freezer and 
repeat at least twice more every hour and a half, then freeze for at least 
another hour.

5. Transfer the sorbet to the fridge for 20 minutes before serving.

Is lemon sorbet genuinely the most refreshing thing on the planet, or a 
ubiquitous feature of tired restaurant menus? Which other flavours fight it for 
your affections – or is it ice cream's poor continental cousin as far as you're 
concerned?
 