
The recent Isabel Hardman totty debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/14/mp-totty-isabel-hardman> 
completely tore the plaster off the issue of sexism in the workplace.


Everyone from EverydaySexism’s Laura Bateman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/series/laura-bates-on-everyday-sexism>
 through to Edwina Currie joined in, dissecting whether Isabel’s decision to 
report the Tory MP was appropriate or whether she should have just accepted it 
as a compliment. Apparentlysharing on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/IsabelHardman/status/719805680207708160> was a definite no…

I run my own business. It’s just me and I have built a base of incredibly 
loyal, inspiring clients I love working with. But following the totty-gate 
furore I connected a sequence of events in my own professional life to a 
particular behaviour pattern.

A prospective client I recently met commented that my Twitter profile picture 
was a 7/10 but in person, I “deserved” an eight. Wow – thanks.

Another was surprised to learn I am a super-proud mum to a gorgeous 9- and 
7-year-old – because of my figure. Then there was the “good thigh gap” remark 
at a client Xmas party.

I cut my teeth in a global London PR agency, under two incredibly talented, 
motivating, driven male bosses. I can’t think of a single instance of sexism in 
10 years within our team or the business. I grew up between two brothers too, 
so am more than capable of handling myself.

I should also say that comments like this are the absolute exception to the 
rule; most of my male clients and many wonderful associates and colleagues 
would be mortified on my behalf.

But, in the brave new world of running my own business, where do I go when I 
come up against this kind of comment? I have no line manager, or HR team to go, 
no boss or team buffering me.

Can I create those safeguards? More importantly, should I have to? There’s an 
argument that says these are throw-away comments, intended to flatter or 
compliment. Can I truly extricate that from the other side of the piece, which 
says it utterly objectifies women and discounts everything else that you hope 
to stand for through your work?

Equally, what are my options in terms of responding to these? Do I challenge 
comments based on my appearance and run the risk of losing the client? The 
balance of power as a freelancer can be very fragile. Or do I tolerate it, 
shrug it off and try to ignore it.

Like many other women – and men – working for myself, my job involves building 
relationships, networking, presenting, and yes, making friends with associates 
and clients alike. I have to put myself out there, confidently, warmly.

But equally I need those boundaries in place. In no way is it acceptable for 
people to score your social media profiles. That really doesn’t count as work 
research in my books.

I haven’t cracked this yet. But if I look at my constantly growing network of 
female colleagues and friends opting to do their own thing, and coming up 
against this, here’s some thoughts:

Get a second opinion

Ask other professional women – employed and self-employedabout your 
experience. You can be quite isolated when you work for yourself, and find 
yourself questioning your own judgement at times. I spoke to a close friend who 
works in a massively male dominated global firm who was clear that the 
behaviour was utterly out of bounds. That helped guide my response.

Know when to walk away

I know that if someone is judging me purely on looks it doesn’t bode well for 
a long-term professional relationship. I’ll always be trying too hard to prove 
myself professionally so the uphill struggle will ultimately work against this. 
Equally I had no trust in his professional integrity based on his behaviour. As 
a prospect I made the decision to walk away from the business.

Know your own strength


I’m ashamed to say that on none of these occasions did I have the presence of 
mind to say it wasn’t ok for them to make comments. So am I therefore culpable 
of enabling it? Was it fear that held me back, or that in-built desire to both 
please and be perceived as in control? I wouldn’t take it from a mate so 
therefore I shouldn’t take it from a client. Will I respond more definitively 
if there’s a next time? I like to think so.

Talk to us on Twitter via @GdnWomenLeaders 
<https://twitter.com/GdnWomenLeaders> and sign up 
<https://register.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/> to become a member of 
the Women in Leadership network and receive our newsletter.
 