 A mystery surrounding manipulated recordings issued in the name of one of 
Britain's greatest 20th-century classical pianists was unravelled last night as 
the husband of Joyce Hatto appeared to admit that he had doctored productions 
of his wife's work to preserve her legacy.
Hatto, who died last year at 77 after a long battle with cancer, was revered 
as one of the special talents of British postwar piano recordings, albeit a 
reclusive one, who released more than 100 recordings from a private studio at 
her home. Yet earlier this month, her legend became contaminated when it 
emerged that some of her work was not original, but borrowed recordings from 
other notable pianists.

Yesterday, a letter emerged in which her husband, William Barrington-Coupe 
described an elaborate ploy to overdub her sessions because she had become too 
ill with cancer to reproduce her best work for CD. "Joyce was beginning to find 
playing very painful and making involuntary noises that would be too 
distressing for the listeners to hear," he wrote in the letter obtained by the 
classical music magazine Gramophone.

But she was, he said, "desperate to finish her life, which had been 
disappointing in so many ways, on a high note".

Explaining how he would insert the work of similar artists in small patches to 
cover the sounds his wife made, he said: "I became adept at this and, as all to 
often happens, gaining in confidence, I took larger portions of ready made 
material to ease the editing time. I am desperately unhappy that foolish 
decisions I made then to make her last months happier have dragged her name 
into the mire."

The dilemma for the couple emerged in the early 1980s, with the shift in 
technology from tape cassettes to CDs. In his letter to Robert von Bahr - a 
record company boss who found that one of his artists was copied on a Hatto 
recording - he said that by the time he understood how to master the CD 
technology his wife was unable to play like she once could.

Mr Barrington-Coupe attempted to transfer the original cassette recordings to 
the more modern technology, but could not to it well enough and so decided to 
re-record her work. But she was by now so ill, that she would grunt in pain as 
she played, and despite still practising rigorously, she was suffering a great 
deal.

Struggling to find a way to cover the passages which she simply could no 
longer play properly, he remembered hearing the story of Elisabeth Schwarzkopf 
covering the high notes for Kirsten Flagstad in the EMI recording of Wagner's 
Tristan und Isolde. He reasoned that he could apply a similar principle, and 
searched for pianists with the same style and sound as Hatto to use in patches 
where she would call out in pain. This worked, and soon Hatto's recordings 
would serve as a blueprint to be overlaid by similar recordings by other 
pianists, among them Laszlo Simon.

When a music critic from Gramophone loaded a Hatto recording of Liszt into his 
computer this month, iTunes identified the recording as a work by Simon on BIS 
Records. When he tried another disc, a Hatto recital of Rachmaninov, the 
computer listed it as a piece by Yefim Bronfman.

Tom Service, the Guardian's classical music critic, said the situation could 
not be compared to the Schwarzkopf case. "I'm afraid the situation is 
incomparable, however carried away someone may get because of the illness of a 
beloved."

When asked if he could provide a full list of which recordings contained 
borrowed material, Mr Barrington-Coupe said: "I'm tired, I'm not very well. 
I've closed the operation down, I've had the stock destroyed and I'm not 
producing any more. Now I just want a bit of peace."

Joyce Hatto died in June 2006, unaware of what her husband had done.

Obituary writers were glowing in their praise for Joyce Hatto:

Guardian "Joyce Hatto was one of the greatest pianists Britain has ever 
produced ... Her legacy is a discography that in quantity, musical range and 
consistent quality has been equalled by few pianists in history."

Times "At the time of her death, some 120 CDs had been issued. Scandalously 
underpublicised, they traverse the cornerstones of the piano repertoire and 
document a singular artist of superlative technique and interpretation."

Independent "She had been out of the public eye for 30 years, after being 
diagnosed with cancer in 1970, but her legacy is a large and remarkable body of 
late recordings, which ensures her a place in the collective consciousness. I 
know of no pianist in the world who is her superior musically or technically 
... I think she will have extraordinary posthumous acclaim."

Telegraph "Joyce Hatto was a pianist known for her deeply expressive and 
profoundly moving interpretations of the music of Liszt, Chopin and many other 
important composers."
 