
After 18 months of working for myself, I’ve headed back into a full time role 
at a sustainability think tank. But there’s one small twist. In the time since 
I went solo I’vemoved away from the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2015/aug/13/how-to-design-your-life-for-happiness>
, so my new Copenhagen-based office is filled with tall and tastefully dressed 
Danes with incredible bone structure. It’s like being on the set of a Nordic 
noir thriller, but with less murder and more Gantt charts.

As a freelancer, you get used to feeling like you’re just outside the pack. 
Being a foreigner in a new office shares many of the same traits, and I often 
imagine that I am a hobbit in the land of elves. Such is the difference in our 
relative stature and my inability to understand their entirely unfathomable 
language. There’s also the difference between expectation and reality

I’m currently six weeks into this new adventure, and whilst many of the 
characteristics of my Danish office feel indistinguishable from those in the UK 
(crap coffee; broken printer) there are a few significant features which really 
stand out, and not always in the way that I’d expect.

No time for presenteeism 

When the OECD released its Better Life Index 
<http://www.oecdbetterlifeindex.org/>, it placed Denmark firmly at the top in 
terms of work-life balance, noting that only 2 percent of Danes say they work 
very long hours compared to an average of 13 percent across the rest of the 
OECD. This correlates pretty accurately with the comings and goings in my 
office, with a small coda – just because they work less hours, doesn’t mean 
they work less hard.


Perhaps it’s the Viking blood coursing through their veins, but these guys 
seriously know how to get shit done before charging home on their bikes in time 
for a few hours of LEGO with the kids. It’s a ghost town at 5pm in my office.

Kindergarten waits for no man

Last week, my female colleague and I were able to take a client call at 4pm 
when my two male colleagues couldn’t. Why? ‘Kiddy pick-up. Next time.’ The fair 
and flexible childcare arrangements in Denmark mean that working parents of 
both sexes split the kindergarten run, child sick days, dentist visits and 
school plays.

And they do so unapologetically, because it’s a totally normal part of working 
life. Go figure.


Come rain or shine…

There are some things you can never take away from the working Danes, like 
communal lunches bang on midday, cycling to the office in sun or snow, and – if 
you’ve got in with the fun kids – en runde mere at the local bodega after hours.


TV shows like The Killing and Borgen may paint a picture of relentless grey 
skies, political (and actual) backstabbing, and only one style of knitwear, but 
they’re a happy lot – quick to laugh, generous in thought and action, and ready 
to help out a hopeless Brit.

To the unenlightened outsider, these elements feel like the makings of a 
pretty progressive nation when it comes to gender equality at work. So I put 
this to two of the other women in leadership roles at my office, and their take 
made me stop and think.

It’s true, they agree, that the national policies underpinning gender parity 
are significant enablers for women at work, but the job is far from done and 
dusted. As Marianne, a director with three kids under the age of seven, 
explained it to me, the levers around childcare make it possible for women like 
her to be in senior management positions but it doesn’t suddenly change what’s 
in our heads. “As women, we understand we have equal rights to a career, but it 
hasn’t really formed in our minds,” she explains.


There is an uneasy gap between legislation and expectation, giving women the 
opportunity to fly in their careers whilst the nation still gets to grips with 
what that actually looks like.

Henriette agrees that Denmark’s working culture has many benefits. Having 
previously run herown gig <http://geekgirlmag.dk/> in the digital sector for 
over a decade, heading into my office full time as our digital lead helps make 
her more ‘present’ when she’s at home. But she’s clear that Danish views on 
gender equality risk obscuring the need for us to keep pushing on. She makes a 
brilliant comparison with the rise of mobile phone technology by explaining 
that we had the handsets for 30 years before we knew what the social protocol 
was for using them on public transport. It’s the same for feminism, she 
explains, we have the tools to do whatever we want but we’re still defining the 
social conventions.

For years, the Brits have been brainwashed by a vision of Scandinavia that is 
filled with beautiful families deliriously joyful at work and home, so it’s a 
little disheartening – but not surprising – to find out that all is not quite 
as it seems . For all their happy-making, socially progressive policies, it’s 
important to remember that the Danes are still only one or two generations away 
from the time when women weren’t expected to flourish independently of men.


The UK seems to expect a lot from its Nordic neighbour, but unfettered gender 
equality within a handful of decades is perhaps a bit much to ask.

So when I joined the Danish office ranks, I also joined the Danish battle on 
gender equality that is sadly relatable for anyone who’s endured the UK’s 
pitiful crawl in the same direction. It turns out, just like the hobbits and 
the elves, there is more that unites us than divides us.

Katie McCrory <http://www.twitter.com/katie_mccrory> heads up strategic 
communications for Sustainia. She blogs about design thinking at
http://katiemccrorycph.tumblr.com <http://katiemccrorycph.tumblr.com>.
 