
Idris Elba <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/idris-elba> will star in a new 
Sky Atlantic drama Guerrilla about an underground cell in 1970s London by the 
Oscar-winning writer of 12 Years a Slave.


The six-part series by John Ridley will be Elba’s first TV drama since BBC1’s 
Luther <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/luther>. Elba will also be one 
of the executive producers on the show which will be co-produced by his 
production company, Green Door Pictures.

The series was announced by Sky on Wednesday, one of a number of new Sky 
dramas including projects involving Game of Thrones star John Bradley, Mad 
Men’s Christina Hendricks, Julia Stiles, Dawn French, Tim Roth, and The Crying 
Game director, Neil Jordan.

Elba said: “It’s been a longtime desire of mine to collaborate with Mr Ridley 
and his work here is nothing short of a masterclass in character-building and 
storytelling. TV is in for a treat.”

Guerrilla tells the story of a politically active couple who liberate a 
political prisoner and form a radical underground cell. Their target becomes 
the “black power desk”, a true life counterintelligence unit within the special 
branch.

Ridley said: “I am both humbled by and impressed with Idris’s passion towards 
bringing this story to life. I share his commitment for populating the culture 
with driven and complicated people of colour.”


Ridley will also executive produce and direct the first two episodes of the 
series which will air in the US on Showtime.

Sky’s head of drama, Anne Mensah, said: “Rarely does a project pitch the 
personal and the political in such a flawless combination. Guerrilla presents 
characters you will fall in love with but also a world and a part of black 
British history that is rarely tackled in such a bold and compelling manner.”


Dragons, gangsters and Cornish home cooking


Game of Thrones star John Bradley will appear in an epic medieval adventure, 
The Last Dragonslayer, based on the first of Jasper Fforde’s series of novels.

It will co-star Ellise Chappell and The Royle Family’s Ricky Tomlinson and air 
on Sky 1 at Christmas.

Tim Roth will appear with Christina Hendricks in a 10-part contemporary take 
on the western genre, Tin Star, written by acclaimed screenwriter Rowan Joffe. 
TheSky Atlantic <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-atlantic> series is set 
in the Rocky mountains and described as an “epic revenge thriller”.

Julia Stiles, Matt Damon’s co-star in the Bourne series of films, heads up Sky 
Atlantic’s Riviera, a 10-part thriller set in the south of France created by 
Oscar-winning writer and director Neil Jordan and based on an idea by former U2 
manager, Paul McGuinness.

Stiles plays a widow whose billionaire husband is killed in a yacht explosion, 
only to find that his fortune was built on crime, double-dealing and murder. 
She proves herself more than capable of filling his shoes.

Elsewhere, Dawn French will star in four-part drama Delicious for Sky 1, set 
in Cornwall and described as a “compelling story of love, heartbreak, food and 
female friendship”.

And Downton Abbey producer, Carnival Films, will make Jamestown, an eight-part 
Sky 1 series about the early days of the first British settlers in America, 
starring Max Beesley, Jason Flemyng and Dean Lennox Kelly.
 