
At the age of 23 I applied for full-time positions as a senior accountant with 
no intention of working five days a week. I had two pre-school children at the 
time and wanted to work three days a week maximum.

At the interview stage I raised the issue unashamedly; I wanted to be upfront 
about what would work for me and why I thought I would be good for the firm. 
Out of three job offers, I accepted the only one where I believed I could truly 
work flexibly, leaving the office for the nursery pick-up without having to 
sneak away from my desk.

This was a huge deal for me. I needed to work, but also wanted to spend time 
with my children while they were young. I didn’t want to miss out on school 
drop-offs and pick-ups, concerts, sports days, being a helper on school trips. 
But I also didn’t want to miss out on the opportunity of promotion or working 
on big projects with interesting clients.

Before the interviews, I prepared a plan of how I was going to make this work 
for me and the employer. I saw it, and still do, as a two-way agreement – the 
business flexing around me and me flexing around the business. At each 
interview I presented a clear plan with confidence, which at the time, not long 
after I’d returned to the workplace from maternity leave, was a big feat.

Fast forward a decade and last year I made partner at EY aged 33. EY was the 
only firm that seemed receptive to my plan; in fact, we spent time during that 
first interview talking about how we could make it work together. Importantly, 
the person interviewing me worked flexibly too – four days a week as a partner.

I appreciate that I’m one of the lucky ones - my plan worked out. Even 10 
years on, flexible hiring and working remains the exception rather than the 
rule for most. According to Timewise’s most recent “flexible working index”, 
just 8.7% of jobs advertised in the UK offer flexible working options, yet 79% 
of people searching for part time or flexible roles feel locked out of the jobs 
market. EY advertise all its job vacancies as “open to flexibility”.

What will help shift perceptions and behaviours, in addition to organisations 
updating their hiring policies, is talking more openly about how most of us 
organise our day around our responsibilities. We all have a life outside of 
work and we shouldn’t be embarrassed to talk about it, even during a job 
interview. Whether it be children, a hobby, a second job, a business venture or 
being a carer.

My diary is open to all and is candid. A physio appointment, a coffee with my 
mentee, taking my son to the orthodontist, a client board meeting and, more 
recently, medical appointments for my 95-year-old grandmother, whom I care for. 
I’ve taken the same approach with my clients and I’ve never had a bad reaction. 
They have lives outside of work too.

It’s a change in mindset, not just for employers but employees too. In the 
early days I was confident in my ability but I probably did have a 
preconception that working part-time would limit my career progression.

What I quickly realised was that if I took responsibility for my development, 
I could make sure that I got the same opportunities as if I was working 
full-time. So I put my hand up more frequently and offered solutions of how we 
could make it work. And it made me stand out – I was perhaps more willing to 
flex around the business and our clients because they flexed around me.
 