
India and Pakistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> began the new 
millennium in ill-temper as Delhi accused Islamabad of being behind the 
Christmas hijacking of an Indian plane.

Atal Behari Vajpayee, the Indian prime minister, said: "All the information 
now available with the government about the hijack and the subsequent 
developments makes it clear that it was an integral part of the Pakistan-backed 
campaign of terrorism."

An explosion in a busy vegetable market in the heart of Indian-ruled Kashmir 
that killed 15 people only stoked Indian anger at Pakistan. Indian officials 
said the target for the crude landmine was two vehicles carrying security 
officials who had come to shop for vegetables in Srinagar, summer capital of 
India's state of Jammu andKashmir <https://www.theguardian.com/world/kashmir>.

The state has been wracked by separatist violence from Kashmiri militants 
seeking independence or close union with Pakistan. India has accused Pakistan 
of lending military support to the militants, including in the clashes of last 
summer that led to sustained artillery duels, aerial dogfights that brought the 
two rivals to the brink of war. Kashmir already has been the source of two of 
the three wars betweenIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> and 
Pakistan.

The Christmas hijack of an Indian plane by Kashmiri militants now threatens to 
inflame relations between Delhi and Islamabad. The Indian government was 
criticised at the weekend for releasing three Kashmiri extremists from jail in 
exchange for the freeing of the 154 hostages aboard the Indian Airlines plane. 
Critics say the move will embolden guerrillas in Kashmir, India's only 
Muslim-majority state.

In today's explosion, two security men were among those killed, who were 
mostly vegetable sellers. The vehicles were severely damaged.

"It was a loud explosion and next I heard cries, the dead and wounded were all 
around. This is the most horrible moment of my life," said Joginder Singh, an 
Indian paramilitary soldier. The landmine exploded in Batmaloo suburb around 
10:30 am local time, three days after a week-long hijack crisis which had its 
roots in the Kashmiri conflict.

Separatist guerrillas launched a rebellion against Indian rule in the heart of 
the bitterly disputed Kashmir valley in January 1990. More than 25,000 people 
have been killed in the revolt, although Indian officials said last year that 
militancy had been contained.

The latest flare-up in the sub-continent marks the first foreign policy test 
for Pakistan's new military regime, led by General Pervez Musharraf, who seized 
power last October from prime minister Nawaz Sharif.

General Musharraf is believed to be the mastermind behind last summer's 
infiltration of Pakistani troops into Kashmir that triggered last summer's 
hostilities. He seized power after Mr Sharif was forced into a humiliating 
climbdown by the US and withdrew Pakistani forces from Kashmir.

 Patrick Barkham Editor, Work Unlimited Tel: (44) 0171 713 4672 Guardian 
Unlimited www.guardianunlimited.co.uk
 