
What projects do you currently have underway to promote the tourism sector
MTA’s projects revolve around a number of areas covering connectivity, 
marketing, quality product development and creation of a year-round calendar of 
events.

In terms of connectivity, we have improved airline accessibility by doubling 
the number of direct routes to reach 94 this year. In marketing, we are active 
in a vast number of markets spanning Europe, the Americas, Asia and the Middle 
East/North Africa with a mix of online and traditional marketing activities. 
Through quality product development, we are striving to stimulate upgrades in 
our hard and soft product and service offering, ranging from general 
infrastructural upgrades to investment in quality products and experiences 
supported by a better-trained workforce. The fourth and final pillar consists 
of the creation of a year-round calendar of events, aimed at giving prospective 
visitors more tangible reasons to visit the destination during all twelve 
months of the year.


Malta today is one of the least seasonal tourism destinations in the 
Mediterranean

How diversified is your tourism product portfolio?
Malta possesses a very diversified tourism portfolio which enables it to 
attract various segments throughout all four seasons and twelve months of the 
year. The Maltese tourism industry has always been very adept at exploiting the 
island’s multifaceted nature to attract different types of tourism. Indeed, 
Malta today is one of the least seasonal tourism destinations in the 
Mediterranean. Whilst our standing as an established summer season destination 
is undisputable, we still need to achieve more in establishing ourselves as a 
strong off-peak cultural and activity destination through more accurate 
targeting and positioning in the different markets from which we aspire to 
generate low season growth.

How do you strike a balance between promoting culture for high-end tourists 
while keeping up the sun and sea numbers?
It is all a question of achieving a balance between the different types of 
tourists in the destination’s portfolio. Diversification is all about a healthy 
mix of tourist profiles and this also extends to a varied mix of socio-economic 
profiles. The challenge is not to exclude the lower contributors but to achieve 
better mixes of high and lower end visitors in line with the destination’s 
varied offer. Such different profiles need not necessarily be in conflict with 
each other and are actually very important in assisting the destination acquire 
the relevant critical masses and economies of scale relevant for the long term 
sustainability of the industry.

How is the ‘Malta Goes Rural’ project going?
Rural holidays possess great potential as tourists increasingly search for 
authentic experiences which differentiate destinations. Malta has a small but 
interesting rural dimension, far more widespread in the north-west of the main 
island and on Gozo, which still preserves centuries-old traditions in terms of 
food production and the adaptation of the natural environment to the 
Mediterranean’s mild wet winters and warm dry summers. The project seeks to 
restore and present different facets of this rich heritage to add yet another 
dimension to the overall tourism offer.

What areas of improvement do you identify?
We are in constant touch with government and private sector investors to 
address areas that emerge from our numerous visitor surveys as meriting 
improvement. Transport, road infrastructure and beach facilities are the items 
that visitors mention most as needing upgrades and we make sure messages are 
sent to the right quarters. Various infrastructure works on roads have been 
undertaken, such as the main coast road, which will be completed at the latest 
by the end of this year.

Malta has a 7,000-year unbroken line of human development and activity, so 
cultural tourism needs to rise

How will you increase the number of arrivals in autumn and winter? 
Malta has a 7,000-year unbroken line of human development and activity, so 
cultural tourism needs to rise to become a very important cornerstone of our 
strategy. In the peak summer months, when the tourists’ main reason for travel 
to the Mediterranean centres round the sun and the sea, the cultural dimension 
is offered as an added bonus, generating an experience that surpasses 
expectations, thus leading to a perception of value for money.

In quieter months, the urban/cultural dimension takes precedence. This would 
enable the destination to tap into the fragmented nature of off-peak tourism, 
featuring, for example, religious sites, ecology, health facilities, music, and 
sports events.


Most tourists come from Western Europe. What other markets can be tapped?
Within Europe, Malta possesses strong potential for growth from many markets, 
particularly Scandinavia, eastern Europe, the Balkans, the eastern 
Mediterranean, and the Iberian Peninsula. Even Germany, which currently stands 
at number three in the tourist source markets, can grow by extending Malta’s 
appeal to a wider base of potential travellers.

Within Europe, Malta possesses strong potential for growth from many markets

Outside Europe, Malta is seeking to increase tourism traffic from established 
markets such as North America and Japan whilst also tapping newer markets such 
as China, South Korea, the Arabian Gulf, India, and Brazil. These markets are 
passing through periods of unprecedented growth in long-haul travel and Malta 
believes that it possesses the right product to attract sufficient streams of 
visitors from these markets as well, given their interest in culture and 
uniqueness.


And talking of travel, we have improved airline accessibility to the island 
this year by doubling the number of direct routes to 94.

What infrastructure challenges are there?
Infrastructural improvements are a continuous challenge in developed countries 
as economic growth and increased human economic and leisure activity place 
increased pressures on existing infrastructure which needs to be constantly 
updated and invested in. Malta is no different and addresses this with a 
healthy mix of public and private sector investments to ensure that it 
possesses an adequate infrastructural response to the sector’s needs.

Furthermore, our stated objective of spreading tourism more evenly throughout 
the year, and in different parts of the island, also has positive effects on 
easing infrastructural pressures as it reduces the extremes of peaks. Various 
separate infrastructural works on roads have been undertaken such as the coast 
main road which will be completed by latest end of this year. Other major 
interconnecting road works are planned thereafter.


What is your appraisal of national tourism policy for the period 2015-2020?
The tourism policy for 2015-2020 is the fruit of an extensive consultation 
exercise, and incorporates the tourism sector’s and civil society’s inputs and 
objectives for the development of tourism to Malta over the next few years.

It provides clear direction on the basis of a medium-term vision aimed at 
increasing Maltese tourism in a sustainable manner whilst enhancing Malta’s 
competitiveness on the basis of improved quality, managed tourism flows, 
reduced seasonality and adequate infrastructure development.

MTA is currently working to fully integrate the policy into its strategies to 
ensure that all its actions and activities are in line with the direction 
coming from the policy document.
 