 Israel has asked the US for cruise missiles as part of a $17bn security 
package which would compensate for ceding the Golan Heights under any 
Israeli-Syrian peace deal, according to reports from Tel Aviv yesterday.
The newspaper Ha'aretz reported that the Israeli defence minister, Amos Yaron, 
had requested cruise missile capability in a lengthy wish-list of military 
hardware presented to the Pentagon. The list also included Apache helicopters, 
electronic warfare jets, funding for an anti-missile defence system, and a 
ground station which would allowIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> to receive constantly updated data 
from US spy satellites.

"I think there will be some costs associated with the security 
rearrangements," the US president, Bill Clinton, said about the scale of 
Israel's request. "I'm not in a position to say what dollar amount I would ask 
our congress for."

State department officials said they could not discuss the details of the 
talks, but confirmed that Israel had put its extra military requirements on the 
table at the US-brokered talks between the Israeli prime minister, Ehud Barak, 
and the Syrian foreign minister, Farouk al-Shara'a in Shepherdstown, West 
Virginia.

Tony Cordesman, a Middle East specialist at the Centre for Strategic and 
International Studies in London, said that Israel was in the market for a 
deep-strike missile that would make up for the natural defensive barrier the 
Golan had provided since its capture in 1967. The Israeli military would 
ideally like a missile such as the Tomahawk, which could be launched from a 
submarine, making it less vulnerable to pre-emptive strikes.

However, the US would have serious reservations about giving Israel cruise 
missiles in view of their capacity to carry nuclear warheads, he said.

"The US is unlikely to do anything that would enhance Israel's nuclear 
capability," Mr Cordesman said. "It could offset all the strategic advantages 
of a peace agreement, not to mention the difficulties it would cause with our 
allies and with international law."

The export of US cruise missiles such as the Tomahawk would violate the 1987 
Missile Technology Control Regime, which bans the transfer of missiles with 
ranges of more than 300km. The Tomahawk has a range of up to 2,000km.

According to Ha'aretz, President Clinton has avoided making any specific 
promises, assuring Mr Barak only that the US would stand by Israel and help 
preserve the qualitative military advantage it currently enjoys against its 
regional rivals.

At the Shepherdstown talks, US diplomats scrambled to unravel an early agenda 
glitch; the Syrians, led by Mr Shara'a, had insisted that the fate of the Golan 
be negotiated first, while the Israeli delegation under Mr Barak wanted to 
begin with security issues.

After presiding over the first faltering day of talks, Mr Clinton said he 
would return to Sheperdstown yesterday afternoon to help Mr Barak and Mr 
Shara'a move forward.

"I think they're both very serious. I think they both want an agreement," Mr 
Clinton said. "I think there are difficult issues and we just have to hope that 
we work it out."

In a bizarre sideshow, Israeli negotiators have been lobbying their Syrian 
counterparts for the return of the remains of an Israeli spy executed in 
Damascus 35 years ago. The return of Eli Cohen's body has become a symbolic 
crusade, and Israeli officials have hinted that it would significantly improve 
Syria's image in the Jewish state, boosting the chances that any future peace 
deal would be ratified in an Israeli referendum.
 