
Israel’s prime minister has rejected a French peace initiative to break the 
impasse in negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians.


In a short statement issued a few hours before the start of the second 
Passover holiday in Israel, Binyamin Netanyahu’s office insisted formally that 
it saw no benefit to a proposed French peace conference mooted for later this 
year. The announcement comes ahead of asummit of foreign ministers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/21/france-to-hold-summit-on-israeli-palestinian-peace-process>
 at the end of May in Paris where participants had been expected to try and 
hammer out a “political horizon” to bring the two sides together later in the 
summer.

Israel-Palestine: outlook bleak as wave of violence passes six-month mark
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/31/israel-palestine-violence-knife-attacks-west-bank-gaza>
“Israel adheres to its position that the best way to resolve the conflict 
betweenIsrael <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> and the Palestinians 
is direct, bilateral negotiations,” the statement read. “Israel is ready to 
begin them immediately without preconditions. Any other diplomatic initiative 
distances the Palestinians from direct negotiations.”

The long-discussed French initiative for a peace conference had solidified in 
recent weeks against the background of over six months of deadly violence 
between the two sides. The announcement of the summit earlier in April came as 
the Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, indicated he would put on hold plans 
to seek a UN security council resolution condemning continued Israeli 
settlement-building in the occupiedPalestinian territories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/palestinian-territories> while the French 
initiative played out.

Neither Israel nor the Palestinians were to be invited to the summit on 30 
May, which is expected to include some 30 countries and international 
organisations – including the “Quartet” of the UN, the EU, Russia and the US – 
though they would be expected to attended the peace conference slated for later 
in the summer.

The latest round of peace talks between the two sides broke down in April 2014 
ahead of the Gaza conflict that year, in a period that has been marked by a 
sharp increase in instability and violence. Netanyahu’s rejection of the French 
proposal comes after reports that he was scathing about the planned summit 
asking what the point of it was.

Announcing the May summit, Jean-Marc Ayrault, the French foreign minister, 
insisted on the urgency of breathing new life into the moribund peace process.

“The two sides are further apart than ever,” said Ayrault last week. “There is 
no other solution to the conflict than establishing two states – one Israeli 
and the other Palestinian – living side by side in peace and safety with 
Jerusalem as a shared capital. We cannot do nothing. We have to act before it’s 
too late.”

The planned French peace conference had emerged at a time when the US 
administration had scotched hopes of any progress over peace negotiations while 
Barack Obama was still in office.
 