 The Israeli prime minister, Ehud Barak, returned from Washington yesterday to 
mounting domestic opposition to his plans to broker a peace accord with Syria, 
which would include an Israeli withdrawal from the Golan Heights.
In a week of Middle East peace talks in Shepherdstown, West Virginia, there 
were few signs of success - not so much as a handshake. And Israelis seem ever 
more reluctant to pay the price for that peace.

On the eve of Mr Barak's return, 200,000 protesters gathered in Tel Aviv to 
voice opposition to a withdrawal from the Golan Heights, home to about 17,000 
Israelis.

"People are watching this high drama in Shepherdstown and no one here knows 
what is being discussed," said Marla Van Meter, a spokeswoman for the Golan 
Residents Committee, which organised Monday night's protest.

"And yet this is as deep, as far-reaching a question for the people of Israel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> as it goes."

Syria's condition for making peace with Israel is the return of the Golan 
Heights, which Israel captured in the 1967 six-day war.

As that land-for-peace trade-off moves closer to becoming a reality, the 
number of Israelis willing to accept it appears to be shrinking. On Friday, an 
opinion poll for the Dahaf agency found that only 41% of Israelis would back a 
withdrawal from the Golan Heights in return for peace, down from 45% last month.

Mr Barak must convince Israelis to support any peace deal with Syria, which 
must pass a referendum before being implemented. His task appeared to grow more 
complicated yesterday when two of his cabinet ministers said they would quit if 
he agreed to a full withdrawal from the Golan.

The interior minister, Natan Sharansky, and the housing minister, Yitzhak 
Levy, both rightwingers in Mr Barak's broad coalition government, said they 
would leave his cabinet if he acceded to Syria's conditions.

Mr Sharanksy, a former Soviet prisoner of conscience, sat on the stage during 
Monday's rally, which was well attended by Russian immigrants, who make up 
about one insix Israelis. They are seen as a potentially worrying opposition to 
a peace deal on the Golan, as are members of Shas, the ultra-Orthodox party 
that represents mainly Jews of Middle Eastern descent.

Mr Barak may also find it difficult to maintain public support while making 
simultaneous concessions to the Syrians and the Palestinians.

While Mr Barak was discussing peace with Syria this past week in the US, his 
negotiators back home met Palestinian delegates in an attempt to come to an 
agreement on the framework of a "final status" accord, which Mr Barak and the 
Palestinian leader, Yasser Arafat, agreed would be completed by February 15.

Israel confirmed yesterday that it had agreed to give the Palestinian 
Authority civilian control over all Arab East Jerusalem neighbourhoods.

Though Palestinians have vowed to establish the capital of their state in East 
Jerusalem, most Israeli politicians - including Mr Barak -have pledged not to 
divide Jerusalem and to keep it under Israeli sovereignty.
 