
Her debut novel opens with the shocking scene of a teenage mother battered to 
death in front of her infant son, butJess Kidd <http://jesskidd.com/> makes no 
apology for the seam of darkness running through her black comedy Himself.

“When you set out to write something you don’t want to limit what you’re going 
to address by the idea that it might be a difficult subject, or it might be 
potentially controversial or whatever else,” Kidd says. “You want to feel that 
you have the freedom to express things.”


The mystery buried in the woods surrounding the little speck of a place Kidd 
has imagined on the west coast of Ireland features incest, prostitution and a 
vanished child, but stitched alongside the story of a life cut short is a 
rollicking tale of a hero’s return.


Twenty-six years after the murder of his mother Orla, long-haired, dark-eyed 
Mahony comes back to Mulderrig to investigate. Taking the starring role in an 
amateur production of JM Synge’s The Playboy of the Western World, he puts the 
womenfolk in a flutter and confronts the pillars of traditional male authority 
head on. The novel cuts between the mayhem unleashed in 1976 and the awful 
events of 1950, breaking down the barriers between mystery story and comedy of 
manners, mixing magical realism and crime fiction.


“It is a heavy load and I think that’s why it needed the comedy, otherwise it 
would have been relentless horror and misery, ”says Kidd. There is a strong 
tradition of gallows humour in Irish writing, she points out, that is “actually 
a way of absorbing these things that are very difficult to face. In a way, a 
lot of the dead and the supernatural happenings are a way of addressing the 
impossibility of processing what happens with death.”


One of the limitations of the crime genre that Kidd’s novel explores is the 
implicit suggestion that “you can solve things, you can package everything up, 
you can put this whole thing back together and you can confront death. But 
often it’s not the case, actually you can’t”.


Kidd’s own life resists packaging. Born in west London in 1973, she fell out 
of education while she was studying for her A-levels, a swerve she puts down to 
a combination of “boys and working”. An access course set her on the route to a 
degree in English at St Mary’s University in Twickenham, but she dropped out 
again when she found herself pregnant .


Looking after her daughter while working in a series of office jobs and in 
social care meant that completing her degree via the Open University was a slow 
process. It wasn’t until 2009, when Kidd landed a bursary for an MA in creative 
writing back at St Mary’s, that her fiction could emerge from the nooks and 
crannies of her crowded life.


For me the magic realism is very much linked with an oral tradition and 
folklore; that’s how I like to see it in my work
Jess Kidd 
As a child of the Irish diaspora, Kidd says it seemed obvious the novel should 
head into the west. She cites Ted Hughes, who said that something was “sealed 
off” when he moved from Mytholmroyd to Mexborough at the age of seven, leaving 
him a store of impressions he could keep returning to in his work. “In a way, a 
similar thing happened,” she explains, “because my very early memories of 
Ireland – I was one of those children who travels back and visits – were very 
vivid.”


An imaginary village in County Mayo also seemed like the perfect place to 
experiment with blending crime fiction with other elements. “For me the magic 
realism is very much linked with an oral tradition and folklore; that’s how I 
like to see it in my work. My mum’s one of 11 children and she’s a great 
storyteller, so there are loads of stories – it felt like a natural choice.”


Kidd remembers summers spent on the west coast of Ireland as a child, 
wandering around out the back of some relative’s farm, “convinced that 
everywhere I went was inhabited by different creatures and things like that … I 
was a fairly strange child, and I think this is partly why I’ve set it in 1976, 
because I certainly felt like I’d be going out with these stories in the back 
of my mind, of the things that might inhabit the landscape.”


For her protagonist, the streets of Mulderrig are inhabited by the puzzled 
ghosts of the village’s dead, who follow Mahony around as if searching for the 
answer to some half-forgotten question.


“I sat down for a long time and thought: ‘What would it be like to be dead?’” 
Kidd laughs. “And I decided – because I’ve got a terrible memory, I think it’s 
a left-handed thing – I decided it would be like having a slight amnesia, or 
something like that.”


As the novel began to take shape, Kidd found herself circling the sequence of 
questions that sparked the story of the outcast mother Orla, who seems to 
disappear with her child. “What if she didn’t want to go; what if she said: 
‘Actually I’m going to come into town with my child, I’m going to tell everyone 
who the father is – and how would they react to that?’ … From my own position 
and my own experiences as a single mother, those series of what-ifs went around 
my mind a lot.”


Another question that Kidd considered very carefully was the novel’s use of 
violence. “The original text was a lot more violent, and I worked very hard to 
get what I felt was the right balance and what was needful to get the story 
across.” When you’re combining genres, it’s a matter of fulfilling some of the 
reader’s expectations and denying others, she explains.


“So with crime fiction or with a mystery, the reader will expect to play along 
and be a detective as well, whereas with magic realism you have this, ‘I’m not 
going to give you the answers, it’s just happening’. You can’t ask questions 
about it, so you’ve got this reticent narrator who doesn’t want to give you all 
the clues.” There’s always a bit of excess, a bit of exaggeration with magic 
realism, “because that’s just the mode. But I think there are essential truths 
there that people are going to relate to.”


Kidd has already completed first drafts of two more novels. The first is a 
contemporary crime novel set in west London with a cast of Irish characters 
that she says has “gone a bit weird … I started off thinking I wouldn’t do any 
magic realism this time and it’s gone bonkers.” The next is an “all-out magic 
realist extravaganza set in Victorian London”, a gothic tale full of steampunk 
science and surgery which she describes with infectious enthusiasm. She’s 
clearly relishing the creative freedom afforded by a two-book deal.


“I kept writing with this idea that I think a lot of writers have,” Kidd says. 
“You make a deal with the universe and you say: ‘Well, I’m going to keep 
writing anyway, I don’t care.’ But you secretly do, you secretly really care … 
so it’s great. It has been a massive struggle. If I think back on how it’s been 
trying to work and study and bring up [her daughter] Eva and everything. It now 
facilitates being able to write full time, which is absolutely incredible, 
because I love it. I absolutely love it.


“I know a lot of writers have a love hate relationship with it, but because 
I’ve always fought so hard to get the time to write, now when I have the time I 
just keep coming up with novels.” She mimes reaching into a bag and pulling 
something out with a smile. “Here’s another one …”
• Himself is published by Canongate, priced £12.99. It is available from the 
Guardian bookshop for £10.65, including UK p&p 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/himself.html>.
 