
My friend and colleague Jon McQuilken was a geochemist and highly accomplished 
petroleum systems geoscientist with BritishGas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/gas> and then BG Group, an exploration 
organisation that was once part of the public utility. He presented at many 
international conferences, published widely on the petroleum systems of North 
Africa, and became a chartered geologist in 2014. He had retired from BG Group 
only four days before his sudden death, from a heart attack, aged 59.

Born at RAF Halton, Aylesbury, son of Norma (nee Hargreaves) and Thomas 
McQuilken, Jon had a varied and interesting life as a youngster as the family 
followed his father’s RAF assignments as a warrant officer. This included 
postings in locations ranging from Uxbridge, west London, to Changi, Singapore, 
before they finally settled in Beverley, east Yorkshire, where Jon completed 
his schooling at Longcroft comprehensive.

From an early age, he had an affinity with the outdoors and his appreciation 
of the natural environment was reflected in his passion for geology and 
understanding landscapes. He studied geochemistry at Liverpool University, then 
gained an MSc in mineral chemistry at Birmingham in 1980.

His first job was two years spent as a mineralogist at a South African mine, 
an experience that stayed with him for the rest of his life, after he witnessed 
first-hand the injustices of apartheid. His career with British Gas started at 
its Fulham research labs in 1982. He moved in 1990 to the exploration group at 
Marble Arch, and latterly to Thames Valley Park in Reading from 1991.

Jon was a caring friend. Among other things, he will be remembered for the 
number of occasions he participated in the BG Energy Challenge – a sports and 
problem-solving event for the global petroleum industry. It was not only the 
physical challenge that interested him but the fundraising too. Jon 
participated in this event for more than a decade, his tenacious character 
helping cajole his teammates into raising many thousands of pounds for their 
chosen charities,Care <https://www.care.org.uk/> and Sparks 
<http://www.sparks.org.uk/>.

Jon is survived by his partner, Daniela, by his children, James and Kate, from 
his marriage to Catherine, which ended in divorce, and by his mother, brother, 
Mark, and sister, Maureen.
 