
The Labour party has called on the government to immediately launch an inquiry 
into “improper interference in our democratic politics” after the disclosure
that an Israeli embassy official had plotted to “take down” UK MPs regarded as 
hostile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/07/israeli-diplomat-shai-masot-caught-on-camera-plotting-to-take-down-uk-mps>
.

The shadow foreign secretary, Emily Thornberry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/emily-thornberry>, said: “The exposure of 
an Israeli embassy official discussing how to bring down or discredit a 
government minister and other MPs because of their views on the Middle East is 
extremely disturbing.”

The Israeli ambassador, Mark Regev, has apologised to one of the MPs on the 
“hit list”, foreign office minister Sir Alan Duncan, describing the remarks as 
unacceptable. As a result, the Foreign Office said it regarded the matter as 
closed.

But Thornberry said: “It is simply not good enough for the Foreign Office to 
say the matter is closed. This is a national security issue.” As well as 
calling for an inquiry, she said the embassy official should be withdrawn.

The official, Shai Masot, who describes himself as a senior political officer, 
was caught on camera in an undercover sting by a reporter from the al-Jazeera 
investigative unit.

The embassy said Masot would shortly be ending his term of employment with the 
embassy. Masot had been speaking to Maria Strizzolo, a civil servant who was 
formerly an aide to another Conservative minister. Sources at the Department 
for Education said on Sunday they understood Strizzolo had resigned from her 
civil service post.

The revelations also provoked anger among many Conservative politicians. One 
former minister in David Cameron’s government said the embassy’s efforts to 
exert improper influence on British public life went far further than any plot 
to “take down” unhelpful members of parliament.

Writing anonymously in the Mail on Sunday, the former minister said: “British 
foreign policy is in hock to Israeli influence at the heart of our politics, 
and those in authority have ignored what is going on.

“For years the Conservative Friends of Israel (CFI) and Labour Friends of 
Israel <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> (LFI) have worked with – even 
for – the Israeli embassy to promote Israeli policy and thwart UK government 
policy and the actions of ministers who try to defend Palestinian rights.

“Lots of countries try to force their views on others, but what is scandalous 
in the UK is that instead of resisting it, successive governments have 
submitted to it, take donors’ money, and allowed Israeli influence-peddling to 
shape policy and even determine the fate of ministers.”

The former minister said there needed to be a full inquiry into the Israeli 
embassy’s links with CFI and LFI, and that while political parties should 
welcome funding from the UK’s Jewish community, they should not accept any 
engagement linked to Israel until it ceases new developments on Palestinian 
land.

“This opaque funding and underhand conduct is a national disgrace and 
humiliation and must be stamped out,” the former minister wrote.
 