
In resigning in protest at the government’s policy towards Gaza, Sayeeda Warsi 
has demonstrated a tremendous degree of courage and principle (Warsi attacks 
‘morally indefensible’ stand on Gaza as she quits coalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/aug/05/warsi-attacks-morally-indefensible-stand-gaza-quits-coalition>
, 6 August). Like Robin Cook and Clare Short who resigned from their 
ministerial positions in protest at the UK’s role in the Iraq war, Warsi 
believed it was unconscionable to continue to participate in a government that 
remains equivocal about the slaughter of innocent civilians in the Gaza Strip. 
While her resignation will inevitably be viewed with cynicism from certain 
quarters, it must not have been an easy decision for someone who holds the 
honour of being the first female Muslim member of cabinet.

By putting principles above politics, Warsi has sacrificed much of what she 
has dedicated a decade of her life to achieving. Her stance should be applauded 
and should instil courage in other conscientious politicians to take similar 
stances. 
Fahad Ansari
Birmingham

• Sayeeda Warsi has to be congratulated for her principled stand on the 
Palestinian-Israeli issue. Philip Hammond is wrong to say the UK government is 
doing everything to bring peace to this region. Efforts to establish a free and 
secure Palestinian state as demanded by the UN have continued without success 
for over 60 years. The last seven years have done nothing to dismantle illegal 
settlements. Warsi’s frustration is justified. It is not enough to sayIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> needs a secure state. Palestinians 
too need a secure state. The arms and military equipment supplied by UK 
government should not be used against civilians.
Ali Syed
Glasgow 

• Sayeeda Warsi is resigning on a point of principle; the first time this has 
happened since Peter Carrington did over the Falklands war in 1982. Most 
ministers in all parties have to be dragged kicking and screaming from office, 
clinging to it like limpets. She is to be congratulated. If we are truly to 
honour the dead of the first world war we should limit the production and sale 
of arms with none being sold to Israel or to either side in Syria or Ukraine.
Valerie Crew
Beckenham, Kent 

• Any resignation on a point of principle is to be applauded but the 
principles ofSayeeda Warsi <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sayeeda-warsi> 
would appear to be limited. She chooses to ignore one of the root causes of the 
conflict, which is the Hamas charter. The charter calls for the elimination of 
the Israeli state and its replacement by an Islamic one. This would involve the 
expulsion or killing of all Israeli Jews, so that instead of viewing 1,800 Arab 
deaths we could be viewing up to 5,000,000 Jewish ones.

The genocidal intent of Hamas <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hamas> 
obviously finds no place in Warsi’s consideration, and in choosing to ignore 
that intent her views are as morally indefensible as those of whom she accuses.
Paul Miller
London 

• Handwringing by Jimmy Carter and Mary Robinson (The blockade must go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/05/gaza-blockade-must-end-un-first-step-settlement>
, Comment, 6 August) is not enough. Time to call for unilateral recognition of 
Palestine as a state by the UK, then the EU and US, with Sayeeda Warsi as our 
first ambassador.
David Wheatley
Margate, Kent

• You describe Sayeeda Warsi’s resignation “as the act of a representative of 
Muslim Britain” (A matter of principle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/05/guardian-view-lady-warsi-resignation>
, Editorial, 6 August). Warsi represents her country, not her community. 
Moreover, your description places a question mark on her integrity – it implies 
that if Gazans were non-Muslim, Warsi would have thought twice before resigning.

It is a pity that the British media is not averse to ghettoising Britain’s 
Asian politicians to the confines of their religious community. Why can’t it 
accept that they too can rise above ethnicity and religion? Moreover, Britain’s 
ethnic politicians belong to many racial and religious groups, some with 
deep-rooted inter-communal rivalries. Any attempt to link their presence in 
government to their religion is bound to open up a Pandora’s box of 
sectarianism and communalism in British politics.
Randhir Singh Bains
Gants Hill, Essex

• Sayeeda Warsi’s departure from government may have left the cabinet even 
more dominated by a clique of “posh white men” from Eton but at least they were 
elected, unlike Lady Warsi (and her successor).
Malcolm Thick
Harwell, Oxfordshire 

• Since Sayeeda Warsi no longer has a role in government perhaps she could be 
appointed Middle East peace envoy. The current incumbent appears to have little 
interest in the job.
Keith Flett
London 
 