
Lisa Appignanesi writes: Quincy, in the Haute-Savoie, was not where John Berger
 <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/02/john-berger-obituary> made his 
first home in mainland Europe. In 1962 he moved to Geneva, where his then wife, 
Anya Bostock, was working. There, too, he met the photographer Jean Mohr, whose 
stark black-and-white images were central to several of his books. He also 
began to collaborate with the film director Alain Tanner, writing scripts for 
The Salamander (1971), The Middle of the World (1974) and Jonah Who Will Be 25 
in the Year 2000 (1976).

After his first novel, A Painter of Our Time (1958) – the story of an imagined 
refugee artist who returns to Hungary during the 1956 Revolution – had been 
recalled from bookshops through political pressure on the publishers, he spent 
less time in London. Initially there were periods spent working with various 
groups of artists in Provence.

In 1974, at the start of his marriage to Beverly Bancroft, he moved to Quincy, 
the agricultural village in the Alps which was to remain their family home. I 
first met John in the same year, as one of the four founders of the Writers and 
Readers Publishing Cooperative. He was one of several established writers who 
decided that small publishing, with decision-making in the hands of those who 
actually made what the industry sold, was a good thing.

John enjoyed collaboration. While he did not put money into the group himself, 
he made its financial existence easier by not taking advances when books were 
published, and was there to advise, finding pleasure in going to meetings when 
he went to London. I imagine that it was a similar pleasure to that he took in 
being part of the community in Quincy, where everyone participated in 
haymaking, and John’s table was ever busy with neighbours deliberating on 
problems or engaging in that gossip which is also storytelling.

Writers and Readers started an art list, republishing John’s backlist, 
including A Painter of Our Time. There was also the brilliant A Fortunate Man – 
standard reading for all GPs – and his new books. In the ways of 1970s 
collectives, the organisation fell apart in the early 80s. But John and I 
remained fast friends. We didn’t always agree on politics, but his sense of 
justice was ever an inspiration and his volcanic laugh a joy. We even went on 
to win the Scott Moncrieff prize for literary translation together, for Nella 
Bielski’s The Year Is ’42 (2004).

When Losing the Dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/24/losing-dead-lisa-appignanesi-review>
 (2014), a memoir about my parents’ war and its aftermath, came out he gave me 
a drawing he had made inspired by Rembrandt’s The Polish Rider. He was 
extraordinarily generous, and paid singular attention to young writers and 
artists, let alone to people needing a hand or a lift. A true listener, he said 
it was what his storytelling was all about. He listened with an ear for 
everything in the other, not only what was spoken. And he managed in his 
encounters and in his stories, as well as his essays, somehow to confront 
despair and turn it into hope.

Paul Gordon writes: The life and work of John Berger displayed an 
extraordinary range and power. While Permanent Red represented the writings of 
a young and angry man, the essays that followed, including The Moment of Cubism 
(1969), The White Bird (1983), About Looking (1991) and The Shape of a Pocket 
(2001), show a kinder writer, more humane. This is the Berger who wrote in 
2005, “I can’t tell you what art does and how it does it, but I know that art 
has often judged the judges, pleaded revenge to the innocent and shown to the 
future what the past has suffered, so that it has never been forgotten.”

His novels also reached new heights of lyricism as he got older, not just To 
the Wedding, but the equally evocative Here Is Where We Meet (2005), in which 
he hauntingly imagined encounters with people from his past. Then there is the 
sheer daring of Bento’s Sketchbook (2011), a wonderfully unclassifiable book, 
about the 17th-century philosopher Spinoza (the “Bento”’ of the title), about 
seeing, about drawing the world.
 