
For all his other accomplishments, as a photographer, film-maker, designer and 
champion of disabled people, Lord Snowdon, who has died aged 86, will be 
chiefly remembered as the commoner who married a princess. When, on 6 May 1960, 
the then Antony Armstrong-Jones marriedPrincess Margaret 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/princessmargaret>, Queen Elizabeth II’s younger 
sister, he became the first non-aristocrat to marry into the royal family for 
400 years; when they divorced 18 years later that set a modern precedent, too.

There was considerable public excitement that the princess, wayward, beautiful 
and previously unlucky in love, was to marry Armstrong-Jones, someone not only 
outside the usual milieu and not even from the ranks of the professions, but a 
society photographer.

In fact, Armstrong-Jones was by no means a parvenu. He came from the Welsh 
gentry, the son of a barrister and a society hostess. Having been educated at 
Eton and Cambridge, he was making his living as a portrait photographer of the 
rich and famous.

Nevertheless, as the 1960s dawned, his liaison with the princess was an early 
sign of the relaxation of some at least of the protocols of the stuffy and 
hidebound royal court. Had the public – or the royal family – known how the 
marriage would develop and eventually disintegrate in a welter of vitriol and 
promiscuity on both sides, the crowds who thronged the Mall to celebrate the 
nuptials would have been considerably reduced and less starry-eyed. At that 
stage, public cynicism about the royal fairytale had yet to set in.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Lord Snowdon dies aged 86 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2017/jan/13/lord-snowdon-former-husband-princess-margaret-photographer-dies-aged-86-video-obituary>
Antony, the second child and oldest son of Ronald Armstrong-Jones and his 
wife, Anne (nee Messel), was born in the fifth year of the couple’s marriage, 
at their home at Eaton Terrace in Belgravia, west London. The house had been 
the wedding gift of his mother’s father, a member of the Messel family: Oliver 
Messel, the theatre designer, was an uncle, and another ancestor was the 
Victorian artist and cartoonist Linley Sambourne.

The parents’ marriage was already breaking down as the boy was born, and 
collapsed acrimoniously within a year, with divorce following four years later, 
his mother subsequently moving to Ireland to marry the Earl of Rosse, and his 
father also remarrying and moving peripatetically between Wales and London. 
Antony and his sister found themselves shuttled between their feuding parents 
and, when with their mother, treated as distinctly inferior to the earl’s 
children. It was a loveless and emotionally starved childhood, exemplified when 
Antony contracted polio at the age of 16 in 1946 while on holiday in Wales and 
spent six months recuperating in Liverpool Royal Infirmary, unvisited by either 
parent. The illness left him with a permanent limp and, perhaps, a tendency to 
self-absorption.

It was unsurprising that he developed enthusiasms that were essentially 
solitary: a lifelong enthusiasm for gadgets and for photography, as well as a 
degree of emotional distance and wilfulness, often disguised by a coating of 
charm. In 1949, he went to Jesus College, Cambridge, to study architecture, but 
left after failing his exams, though only after coxing the university team to 
victory in the 1950 boat race.

Handsome, socially well-connected and ambitious, he set up as a photographer 
in London and started selling society and theatrical pictures – Laurence 
Olivier as Archie Rice was one – to magazines such as Tatler and Vogue, and to 
newspapers including the Daily Express. Eventually, invitations to take formal 
photographs of members of the royal family followed. His older rival Cecil 
Beaton, clearly feeling under threat from the young upstart, noted in his 
diary: “I don’t think AA Jones’s pictures are at all interesting, but his 
publicity value is terrific. It pays to be new in the field.” Unlike Beaton, AA 
Jones was also ostentatiously heterosexual and cut a swath through the debs and 
actresses of London society. “If it moves, he’ll have it,” was the word.

It was at one such photo session in 1958 that he met the young Princess 
Margaret, whose love life had been publicly thwarted three years earlier when 
she had been forced to abandon hopes of marriage to Group Captain Peter 
Townsend. The princess, unwillingly enduring the tedium of life at court – 
though she never objected to the privileges of royalty – was intrigued by the 
photographer’s relative lack of deference and his dashing willingness to whisk 
her anonymously down to his hideaway in Rotherhithe, south-east London, for 
clandestine evenings away from the palace. He charmed the Queen Mother and also 
won over her older sister, whose permission, as Queen since 1952, she needed to 
marry.

When it came, the wedding in Westminster Abbey was – not unlike the similarly 
ill-fated royal wedding 21 years later, between Charles and Diana – an occasion 
of great public celebration, televised and rounded off with balcony appearances 
before the crowds outside Buckingham Palace. Only a few people privately 
forecast problems. Noël Coward, who knew both parties, wrote in his diary: “He 
looks quite pretty but whether or not the marriage is entirely suitable remains 
to be seen.” The comptroller of the royal household bade farewell to the 
headstrong princess on her way to the abbey with “Goodbye, your royal 
highness,” adding under his breath: “And we hope for ever.”

Unnoticed, as the newly-weds celebrated their honeymoon on board the royal 
yacht Britannia, cruising the Caribbean, Camilla Fry, the wife of the 
bridegroom’s oldest friend, gave birth to a daughter. Only 44 years later did
Polly Higson 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/theroyalfamily/2059552/Lord-Snowdon-his-women-and-his-love-child.html>
 discover through a DNA test what society rumour had long alleged, that 
Armstrong-Jones was her father.

The couple returned to a stultifying life at court with minor official 
engagements, during which husband had to walk always several paces behind wife. 
He was part of the royal family and yet not royal, routinely sneered at and 
ignored by the servants who were resentful of his ambiguous position within the 
household.

In 1961 there was the consolation of ennoblement for Armstrong-Jones, 
henceforward known as the Earl of Snowdon in a nod towards his Welsh roots. 
Such was the deference of the day that when his effigy had been stolen from 
Madame Tussauds and placed in a telephone box the year before, members of the 
public who found it did not dare open the door in case they were intruding on a 
private call.

At formal dinners the princess was served first, bolting her food in the 
knowledge that none could continue eating after she had finished, nor leave 
before she did (when interested, she could stay into the early hours, when not, 
she could be staggeringly rude to both hosts and servants). At informal 
gatherings, the couple could listen to the Queen Mother’s prejudices about 
television programmes. Entertaining friends, such as Peter Sellers and his 
wife, Britt Ekland, at the royal apartment in Kensington Palace was a constant 
diversion. As, more intermittently, were their two children: a son, David, now 
Viscount Linley, born in 1961, and a daughter, Lady Sarah Armstrong-Jones 
(later Lady Sarah Chatto), born in 1964.

Snowdon sought to escape the royal routine with work, acquiring a contract for 
photographic assignments with the Sunday Times. It was an engagement that would 
last for nearly 30 years and would encompass a wide range of work for the 
paper’s magazine: not just celebrity portraits but startlingly original and 
empathetic documentary photos on issues such as poverty, disability and 
deprivation. That empathy was most vividly revealed in 1966 when he rushed, 
well in advance of the dictates of royal protocol, to comfort the relatives of 
victims ofthe Aberfan disaster 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/witness/october/21/newsid_3194000/3194860.stm>
, sitting with bereaved parents and making them cups of tea over several days 
after a slipping coal slurry tip engulfed the South Wales village school.

His design skills were used in the construction of the striking 1960s aviary 
at London Zoo 
<https://www.zsl.org/blogs/arts-and-culture/50-years-of-the-snowdon-aviary> 
and, later in the decade, in organising the investiture of Prince Charles as 
Prince of Wales at a ceremony in Caernarvon Castle, beneath a large and 
sweeping transparent awning, in July 1969. Snowdon could scarcely take his wife 
with him on assignments, and the couple drifted apart as he spent increasing 
periods away, often with a succession of female assistants and other lady 
friends. He seldom rang home. The princess herself took lovers during his 
absences. One of Snowdon’s closest friends was astonished to be propositioned 
one evening at dinner. “Let’s go to bed,” Margaret said suddenly. When he 
demurred, she edged closer and pouted: “Well, I think you could be a bit more 
cuddly. 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-1023475/Part-2-The-inside-story-Lord-Snowdons-marriage-Princess-Margaret-turned-open-war.html>
”

The estrangement started quite early and erupted into increasingly public 
spats, sometimes fuelled by alcohol and drugs on the princess’s part. When 
Snowdon made a documentary about dwarfism in 1971, the princess, acutely 
conscious of her short stature, took it as a personal slight.

At parties, he would cut her off in mid-conversation. “Shut up and let someone 
intelligent talk,” was one such sally. Another note, from husband to wife, 
apparently read: “You look like a Jewish manicurist and I hate you.” The royal 
family, well knowing the princess’s tantrums, tended to take his side.

The couple, having lived increasingly separate lives, parted in the mid-70s 
and were formally divorced in 1978. Margaret floated off into a largely empty 
life with unsuitable lovers such as the playboy Roddy Llewellyn and long 
holidays on Mustique, untila series of strokes precipitated her death in 
February 2002 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/feb/11/guardianobituaries.princessmargaret>
.

Snowdon himself was married again, almost immediately, to Lucy Lindsay-Hogg, 
the daughter of an Irish businessman and former wife of the film director 
Michael Lindsay-Hogg. She had formerly been one of his assistants, and the pair 
had conducted an affair for several years. Their daughter, Lady Frances 
Armstrong-Jones, was born seven months after their wedding. The marriage 
eventually foundered in 2000 after his wife grew tired of his serial adultery – 
one affair was with the Guardian journalist Ann Hills, who in 1997 took her own 
life. It had become clear that the elderly peer had fathered a child with his 
latest friend, Melanie Cable-Alexander, half his age, an editor on Country Life.
That liaison produced a son, Jasper Cable-Alexander, in 1998 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/theroyalfamily/2059552/Lord-Snowdon-his-women-and-his-love-child.html>
.

And there were other relationships, with the charity campaigner Marjorie 
Wallace 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2077071/Lord-Snowdons-mistress-Marjorie-Wallace-reveals-five-year-affair.html>
 andEmmy Hirst 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/columnists/article-229220/Snowdons-love-73.html>, 
who also eventually fell out with him. Snowdon’s biographer, Anne de Courcy, 
relates a trip to Russia by Snowdon and Hirst for Christmas 2004: “She had the 
embarrassing task of ringing the hotel management to say: ‘Lord Snowdon wants 
the adult television channel.’ In Britain such a choice would quite likely have 
made all the gossip columns, but in St Petersburg it passed unnoticed, a small 
example of a general lack of recognition that depressed him.”

Snowdon continued with his photography, working for the Daily Telegraph 
(1990-94) until his contract was terminated for being too expensive, and with 
his design work – a wooden wheelchair was one project. He also served on 
charities and, from 1995 to 2003, was provost of the Royal College of Art. He 
maintained his links with the royal family – taking the Queen’s official 
80th-birthday portrait – and, as part of what had always been an eclectic 
portfolio, the result of a driven nature and a need for cash, even photographed 
the winners of one of the Big Brother TV series. In 1999, Snowdon was given a 
life peerage as Baron Armstrong-Jones, of Nymans – named after the Sussex 
village where he kept a country home for many years – to enable him to continue 
sitting in the Lords.

De Courcy said of his marriage to Princess Margaret: “They were icons of the 
60s, in the vanguard of all that was new and exciting, effortlessly mingling 
the arts and the establishment ... Long before Buckingham Palace entertained 
them, writers, painters, journalists and dancers poured through the doors of 
Kensington Palace.” In so many ways, beyond the glittering lifestyle and 
celebrity guest list, the marriage for which Snowdon will be remembered, which 
took him into the heart of the royal family, was a dreadful harbinger of what 
was to come.

He is survived by his children.

• Antony Charles Robert Armstrong-Jones, 1st Earl of Snowdon, Baron 
Armstrong-Jones, photographer and campaigner for disabled people, born 7 March 
1930; died 13 January 2017
 