
When Earth, Wind & Fire shimmied into the charts and on to British television 
screens in May 1979 with Boogie Wonderland, they brought to an audience beyond 
the niche followers of soul a driving rhythm and glitzy glamour that ensured 
the band a massive and enduring hit. At their peak, Earth, Wind & Fire bestrode 
the popular music scene like a troupe of magnificently attired angels of funk, 
upbeat and apparently perpetually partying. Their slick blend of panache and 
optimism owed much to the songwriting, producing and vocals of Maurice White, 
who has died aged 74.

Earth, Wind & Fire’s infectious, disco-influenced songs, which also included 
Shining Star (1975) and After the Love Has Gone (1979), kept the band at the 
core of US popular culture throughout its most commercially successful period 
in the 70s and most of the 80s. Having now sold more than 90m albums, Earth, 
Wind & Fire continue to record and perform but White retired from the group in 
1995. He had been diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease, although he concealed 
this fact for several years.

White was born in Memphis, Tennessee. His father, Verdine, was a doctor and 
saxophone player. By his teenage years, Maurice was living in Chicago and 
working as a session drummer for the influential Chess label, where he played 
with a range of musicians including Muddy Waters, Buddy Guy, the Impressions and
 Etta James <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/jan/20/etta-james>. One 
song on which he played, Rescue Me <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ll6oGHecVg0>
 byFontella Bass  <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/dec/28/fontella-bass>
(1965), was a worldwide hit. In 1966 he joined a trio led by the jazz pianist 
Ramsey Lewis and went on to play on nine of Lewis’s albums: the 1966 song Hold 
It Right There won a Grammy for best R&B group performance.

White formed a songwriting team in 1969 with two other Chicago-based 
composers, Wade Flemons and Don Whitehead, who wrote music for television and 
radio commercials. Signing to the Capitol label, the trio called themselves the 
Salty Peppers and enjoyed moderate success with a 1969 single, La La Time. This 
was followed by a move to Los Angeles and a new band name, derived from three 
astrological elements. White’s younger brother, Verdine, a flamboyant bass 
player, joined the lineup a year later and remains a member. Another brother, 
Fred, also played drums with the band in its heyday.

It took until 1973 for Earth, Wind & Fire to find a mass audience: that year, 
the group’s fourth album, Head to the Sky, with its danceable, groove-heavy 
songs featuring horns and White’s kalimba, or African thumb piano, was the 
first of a series of huge-selling records.

Open Our Eyes (1974) and That’s the Way of the World (1975) consolidated this 
position, embedding the group’s recipe of soul, funk, R&B and disco in the 
American public’s affections. Boogie Wonderland, on which the band collaborated 
with the singing sister-act the Emotions, sold more than a million copies and 
was in the British singles charts for three months.

Their 1978 cover of the Beatles’ Got to Get You Into My Life, injected with 
the band’s distinctive and inventive strident brass and guitar riffs, won a 
Grammy.

White was a prolific composer and producer outside Earth, Wind & Fire, working 
with Deniece Williams, a former vocalist in Stevie Wonder’s band, the fusion 
band Weather Report, Barbra Streisand, Cher and Neil Diamond. He collaborated 
with Barry Manilow on Only in Chicago (1980). A self-titled solo album (1985) 
included a hit single in the form of a cover of Ben E King’s Stand By Me. White 
also wrote songs for films including the Eddie Murphy vehicle Coming to America 
(1988), produced albums by the jazz group the Urban Knights and wrote 
arrangements for the British group Cleopatra.

After his retirement, occasionally White appeared with Earth, Wind & Fire at 
key public celebrations, including the Grammy Awards Tribute to Funk event in 
2004. At an awards party in the same year, he and the soul singer Alicia Keys 
performed the 1978 single September. In his last major Earth, Wind & 
Fire-related project he oversaw a tribute album, Interpretations: Celebrating 
the Music of Earth, Wind & Fire (2007).

He won seven Grammy awards, with the band or as an individual performer; 
Earth, Wind & Fire will receive the Recording Academy’s lifetime achievement 
award this year.

Long before White retired from touring, Earth, Wind & Fire’s ebullient message 
had touched a generation. “We’ve touched so many people with these songs,” he 
reflected in 2000. “That was the whole objective, to try to inspire young 
people to believe in themselves and to follow through on their ideas.”

He is survived by his wife, his two sons, and his brothers Verdine and Fred.

• Maurice White, drummer, singer and songwriter, born 19 December 1941; died 4 
February 2016
 