
“Most preppers,” says Lincoln Miles, a dauntingly entrepreneurial 22-year-old 
in everyday fatigues, “are preparing for realistic scenarios. If your house was 
flooded and emergency services couldn’t get to you, could you survive? Does 
anybody even have spare bottles of water in the house? For most people, the 
answer is no.”

 Looking around his shop on an industrial estate in Bedfordshire, there is, I 
concede, plenty of handy stuff for the event of a flood: flat, non-sand 
sandbags that inflate when they come into contact with water; bottled water, of 
course, along with industrial quantities of beans and tinned tomatoes. Also, 
cold steel machetes, machetes that are not cold steel but have compasses in the 
handle, gas masks, thumbcuffs, Red Cross food packs for war zones, crossbows, 
camouflage outfits for all seasons and wire saws that will “bring down trees, 
go through bones”.


I breathe in sharply and clutch my imaginary pearls. “For hunters!” Miles 
clarifies. Of course, for hunters; nobody would be mapping out a plan to murder 
looters and marauders, then saw them up, in the event of a disaster. Who does 
that?

 Survivalism, or “prepping”, is huge in America for the off-griders. “Every 
town will have a convenience store and a prepping shop,” says Miles, who’s off 
to the US this week for a convention, and will be quite a curiosity there, I’d 
think, as the founder of the UK’s only one-stop apocalypse shop.


The American cultural fetish for establishing self-reliance by eating roadkill 
is the logical endpoint of a long history of distrusting government and its 
institutions. “I think a lot of it [in America] is people just distrusting the 
government,” says Miles, “but people are starting to realise here that, in 
times of need, the government is not always there. Look at the police cuts, the 
cuts to the NHS.”

In the UK, though, the picture is a little more mixed. It’s not all 
millenarian austerity fantasies. There are hobbyists who love bushcraft, 
building tree hides and lighting fires, finding your way back to the A1 with a 
compass, even though, vexingly, you could do that from almost anywhere using 
only your ears.


Tim Sweatman, 55, visited the store with his wife, Jung, 49 and sons Matthew, 
15, and James, 17. Sweatman road tests cars in Sweden and is fascinated by how 
remote you can be, how something as simple as smashing your vehicle into a tree 
can take you from modern life to dicing with the elements. James’s interest is 
more ludic; he works for a shop selling computer games where they dress up as 
soldiers whenever they have an army-flavoured new release. It’s like cos play 
or, as we used to say in the olden days, a dressing-up box. Matthew is trying 
to make a slingshot at home, but from the direction of his eyes, I’d say what 
he really wants is a crossbow. No way is Jung buying him a crossbow. “I’m not 
keen on it,” she says, mildly, diplomatically.

 Then there are hunters, mostly of small game – rabbits, pigeons, squirrels. I 
can’t imagine any cats getting hurt, although of course, the supermarkets are 
still open. Ryan Hornett, 23, and John French, 26, hunt with air rifles, always 
with permission from the landowner. “Otherwise, you’d get done for armed 
trespass,” says Hornett, equably. “There’s no distinction in the law between an 
air rifle and a real rifle.”


With his mild and winning manners, he doesn’t say this with a sense of 
grievance, more as if it’s information that will come in handy for me, when I 
buy an air rifle. The trick with a rabbit is to get its innards out as soon as 
possible, otherwise it spoils the meat. Skinning it is the easy bit. “Once 
you’ve made a hole in the skin, it’s like pulling off a jacket,” Hornett says, 
then buys a balaclava, which makes me sceptical. Even if a rabbit escaped and 
could identify him, it would be unlikely to press charges. “It just gets rid of 
your skin tones,” he explains.


He was an army cadet while at school, and learned a lot of fieldcraft; I, 
plainly, did not. The most complicated recipe French has ever attempted is 
barbecued pulled rabbit. It sounds like part of the new McDonalds wrap range. 
And yet … it’s more than hunting, isn’t it? Or at least, hunting would be more 
exciting if you had to do it because civilisation had ended. “We talk about it 
all the time, while we’re out,” Hornett says, “where we’d hide, where we’d go, 
who we’d take with us.”

 There’s a lot of emotional momentum in prepping. You see a box full of water 
purification tablets, and can’t help but think, if you needed those, and had 
actually bought them in advance, how satisfying would that be? And then, if 
your water was contaminated, you’d probably also need a big bag of rice. And 
inevitably, I’d better get this machete incase someone comes after my rice.

 The end of the world is peculiarly thrilling, or maybe that’s just me. My 
mother used to be a fabled stockpiler, and once had a cache of water in 
anticipation of Y2K which had gone past its sell-by date, then had to buy a 
fresh palate to mark the start of the Iraq war. “It’s fine,” she said 
defensively, “I can use it for washing.” I left the purification tablets 
because I felt silly, and just bought the thumbcuffs.
 