
We came to cornfields and a village called Arayu, full of savage dogs and 
surly-looking Tajiks and mud houses like those of Egyptian fellahin. This patch 
of cultivation was succeeded by a mighty red-cliffed gorge where there were 
caves in which we sheltered from the midday sun. But not for long. The path to 
Parian and Shahnaiz led up out of it, high over the mountain. At the watershed 
we turned still more to the north, going downhill again now and into a final 
narrow valley where the wind threw the spray from a river in our faces. It was 
spray from the Parian, the Upper Panjshir. We had made it ...

'Look,' said Hugh, 'it must be Thesiger.'

Coming towards us out of the great gorge where the river thundered was a small 
caravan like our own. He named an English explorer, a remarkable throwback to 
the Victorian era, a fluent speaker of Arabic, a very brave man, who has twice 
crossed the Empty Quarter and, apart from a few weeks every year, has passed 
his entire life among primitive peoples.

We had been on the march for a month. We were all rather jaded; the horses 
were galled because the drivers were careless of them, and their ribs stood out 
because they had been in places only fit for mules and forded innumerable 
torrents filled with slippery rocks as big as footballs; the drivers had run 
out of tobacco and were pining for their wives; there was no more sugar to put 
in the tea, no more jam, no more cigarettes and I was reading The Hound of the 
Baskervilles for the third time; all of us suffered from persistent dysentery. 
The ecstatic sensations we had experienced at a higher altitude were beginning 
to wear off. It was not a particularly gay party.

Thesiger's caravan was abreast of us now, his horses lurching to a standstill 
on the execrable track. They were deep-loaded with great wooden presses, marked 
'British Museum', and black tin trunks. The party consisted of two 
villainous-looking tribesmen dressed like royal mourners in long overcoats 
reaching to the ankles; a shivering Tajik cook, to whom some strange mutation 
had given bright red hair, unsuitably dressed for central Asia in crippling 
pointed brown shoes and natty socks supported by suspenders, but no trousers; 
the interpreter, a gloomy-looking middle-class Afghan in a coma of fatigue, 
wearing dark glasses, a double-breasted lounge suit and an American hat with 
stitching all over it; and Thesiger himself, a great, long-striding crag of a 
man, with an outcrop for a nose and bushy eyebrows, 45 years old and as hard as 
nails, in an old tweed jacket, a pair of thin grey cotton trousers, rope-soled 
Persian slippers and a woollen cap comforter. 'Turn round,' he said, 'you'll 
stay the night with us. We're going to kill some chickens.'

We tried to explain that we had to get to Kabul, that we wanted our mail, but 
our men, who professed to understand no English but were reluctant to pass 
through the gorges at night, had already turned the horses and were making for 
the collection of miserable hovels that was the nearest village. Soon we were 
sitting on a carpet under some mulberry trees, surrounded by the entire 
population, with all Thesiger's belongings piled up behind us. 'Can't speak a 
word of the language,' he said cheerfully. 'Know a lot of the Koran by heart 
but not a word of Persian. Still, it's not really necessary. Here, you,' he 
shouted at the cook, who had only entered his service the day before and had 
never seen another Englishman. 'Make some green tea and a lot of chicken and 
rice - three chickens.'

'No good bothering the interpreter,' he went on, 'the poor fellow's got a sty, 
that's why we only did 17 miles today.'

Soon the cook was back, semaphoring desperately. 'Speak up, can't understand a 
thing. You want sugar? Why don't you say so?' he produced a bunch of keys, like 
a housekeeper in some stately home ...

'That cook's going to die,' said Thesiger; 'hasn't got a coat and look at his 
feet. We're 9,000 feet if we're an inch here. How high's the Chamar Pass?' We 
told him 16,000 feet. 'Get yourself a coat and boots, do you hear?' he shouted 
in the direction of the camp fire.

After two hours the chickens arrived; they were like elastic, only the rice 
and gravy were delicious....

'England's going to pot,' said Thesiger, as Hugh and I lay smoking the 
interpreter's king-size cigarettes, the first for a fortnight. 'Look at this 
shirt, I've only had it three years, now it's splitting. Same with tailors; 
Gull and Croke made me a pair of whipcord trousers to go to the Atlas 
Mountains. Sixteen guineas - wore a hole in them in a fortnight. Bought half a 
dozen shotguns to give to my headmen, well-known make, 20 guineas apiece, 
absolute rubbish.'

He began to tell me about his Arabs. 'I give them powders for worms and that 
sort of thing.' I asked him about surgery. 'I take off fingers and there's a 
lot of surgery to be done. They're frightened of their own doctors because 
they're not clean.'

'Do you do it? Cutting off fingers?'

'Hundreds of them,' he said dreamily, for it was very late. 'Lord yes. Why, 
the other day I took out an eye. I enjoyed that. Let's turn in.'

The ground was like iron with sharp rocks sticking up out of it. We started to 
blow up our air-beds. 'God, you must be a couple of pansies,' said Thesiger.

· Extracted from A Short Walk in the Hindu Kush (Picador), reprinted by 
permission of HarperCollins. To order a copy for £7.99 with free UK p&p go to
observer.co.uk/bookshop <http://www.observer.co.uk/bookshop>

· A memorial service for Eric Newby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/eric-newby> will take place in a few months' 
time. Details will be published in Escape
 