 The leading Kashmiri militant released by India to end a bloody airline hijack 
vowed last night to fight to liberate the majority Muslim state from Indian 
rule.
In a speech that is bound to heighten tension between India and Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan>, Maulana Masood Azhar told some 
10,000 followers in a park in central Karachi that he would not rest until 
Kashmir had been "liberated".

Mr Azhar told the throng, many of whom were members of his militant group, the 
Marakat-ul-Mojahedin: "I have come here because this is my duty to tell you 
that Muslims should not rest in peace until we have destroyed America andIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>."

He said the five hijackers of the Indian Airlines jet, who he said were all 
Indian Kashmiris, had returned toKashmir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/kashmir> and were "preparing for their next 
assault".

Earlier yesterday, Islamic Jihad Council, an umbrella group for a dozen Muslim 
groups fighting Indian forces in Kashmir, insisted the freed hijackers were 
still in Afghanistan.

The ruling Taliban said that the hijackers, Mr Azhar and two other militants 
freed in the deal to release 155 hostages, Mushtaq Ahmed Zargar, an Indian 
Kashmiri, and Ahmed Umar Saeed Sheikh, a Pakistani-born British citizen, had 
all left the country.

The men took control of the Indian Airlines plane in the skies over India on 
December 24. One hostage was killed.

The hijackers have not been seen since they left Kandahar airport in southern 
Afghanistan. They were given 10 hours by Afghanistan's ruling Taliban to leave 
the country.

The conflicting claims over the whereabouts of the hijackers have fuelled 
Delhi's claims that Pakistan was involved in the incident, and have led to 
bitter exchanges which have plunged India's relations with Pakistan's new 
military ruler to a new low.

The ruler, General Pervez Musharraf, on Tuesday said India was launching a 
propaganda campaign against his country to deflect criticism over how New Delhi 
handled negotiations with the hostage-takers.

India's home minister, L K Advani, said India had "irrefutable evidence of 
Pakistan's involvement in cross-border terrorism and in this particular 
hijacking." But he did not offer details, and he said India has not yet offered 
the proof to other countries.

Pakistan has condemned the hijacking and denied involvement. Pakistan said 
after the hijacking that its border security was put on alert and the hijackers 
would be arrested if found.

On Wednesday, Pakistani officials demanded that India make public information 
it claims to have on the hijackers' identities.

"Fabrication of allegations without a shred of evidence is reprehensible," a 
Pakistani foreign ministry statement said.

Mr Azhar's speech in Karachi will further confirm India's suspicions, although 
Pakistan said Mr Azhar, whose father is a retired school teacher from 
Bawahalpur in eastern Punjab province, would be allowed to return to his 
homeland because he did not face any charges at home.

A fiery speaker and charismatic leader, the Pakistani-born cleric conducted a 
tour of British mosques shortly before his arrest in Febuary 1994.

Faisal Bodi, news editor of Q-News, a Muslim magazine, wrote in the Guardian 
that it was a measure of Mr Azhar's importance that his supporters have mounted 
two attempts to free him. A previous attempt ended in the killing of at least 
one of six western captives. Another four are missing, presumed dead.

Mr Bodi said that Mr Azhar is intensely popular among British Muslims: "In 
particular Azhar's recommendations that young men undergo military training in 
Afghanistan has found many a receptive ear - to the alarm of governments who 
fear it could swell the ranks of the indomitable international mojahedin. 
Naturally in a Muslim world which sees all that is western as irredeemably 
hostile, Azhar's reputation has grown since the US state department included on 
its list of terrorist organisations the Harkat-ul- Ansar, a group of which he 
was a leading ideologue."
 