
Over the years businesses have cottoned on to the fact that healthy employees 
are more productive and creative in the workplace. Cycle to work schemes, 
office gyms and healthy food options in staff canteens have more than your 
wellbeing in mind. However, the latest techniques to boost your productivity 
require minimal investment and no organisational or technical changes 
whatsoever. It’s all about your state of mind.

In its simplest form, state of mind is about understanding how your mind works 
so that you can deal with your thoughts in the right way, rather than reacting 
to, or becoming a victim of, them every day.


We live our adult life believing that our day-to-day experiences at home and 
in the office are a product of the situations around us, that there is nothing 
we can do about them. The reality is that our experiences are based on the 
thoughts we create in our heads about the situations and then, crucially, how 
we react to them. A simple understanding of how the mind works can ensure we 
deal with our thinking in a way that is useful to us.


It’s no coincidence that organisations from the likes of the US army to 
Microsoft are investing time in unlocking the power of understanding state of 
mind to improve the performance and wellbeing of their employees. Here are a 
few of their techniques you can try yourself:


Switch off the noise

The biggest thing I have learned is that a huge amount of our time is spent 
dealing with useless thoughts that fill our heads unnecessarily. This means we 
can’t think clearly and become stressed.

Once we know how to ignore these thoughts and see them for what they are, we 
can think more clearly and become more creative, less confrontational and work 
better. So think of your train of thought as a conveyor belt and your thoughts 
as the stuff on it – take what you want and let the rest pass.


Don’t shake up the glass


Confidence is a default trait in humans – you only have to look at young 
children to see that it’s something we are born with.

What happens over time, however, is that we become distracted by insecure 
thoughts and take them for real. We then work hard to become more confident, 
which tends to have the opposite effect.


Think of the mind as a glass of water with sand in it. The mind works best 
when it’s still, and the sand can fall to the bottom and separate. What we tend 
to do when we are not feeling confident and stressed is that we overwork our 
minds – we shake up the glass. Subsequently things become less clear and 
situations become harder to navigate.


So next time you are walking into a room to do a presentation in front of your 
boss or asking for the pay rise you deserve, try not to work the mind too hard. 
Let it settle and be calm, and get back to its factory settings.


Use your senses to navigate you


Creativity isn’t something you can force or schedule. Often our best ideas 
come to us when we are not thinking about being creative or looking for a new 
idea, say, when we are having a shower or going for a run.

In work, understanding your state of mind allows you to unlock creativity by 
getting your head into a place where you are open to new thinking and ideas.


Think of the best brainstorming sessions you have had. You get that feeling of 
buzz and excitement, ideas appear out of the blue – these are a result of a 
healthy, productive mind. As soon as you start experiencing a feeling of 
unease, slight irritation or being stuck, you’re allowing yourself to get into 
your own head.


Use your feelings as sensors to navigate around productive and unproductive 
thinking. If you are feeling good, go forward. If the feeling is not there, 
reverse and come back to neutral. In practical terms, if creativity doesn’t 
flow don’t push it. Take a break, forget about it and your mind will 
recalibrate itself for fresh thinking.


Once you understand how your mind works, the possibilities are endless.



Anya Layfield is the co-founder of the Women’s Wellbeing Conference 
<http://livelighter.me/the-womens-wellbeing-conference/>, taking place in 
London on 30-31 January. Tickets can be boughthere 
<https://www.eventbrite.com/e/the-womens-wellbeing-conference-the-uks-first-event-of-its-kind-tickets-19532194319>
.
 