
My father, Mohammed Ramzan (“Abu”), who has died aged 79, was a community 
activist and religious teacher in the Sufi tradition.

In 1969 on a trip to Pakistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> he 
met Barkat Ali, a former British Indian Army officer who had renounced the 
world, vowing to live the life of a fakir. Barkat Ali began a movement, 
Dar-ul-Ehsan (“House of Blessings”) with three aims: selfless service to all 
without discrimination,zikr or the rhythmic chanting of the names of Allah in 
communal worship and the active communication of Islam in what he considered 
its true form. Abu became hismurid (disciple) and was appointed Barkat Ali’s 
representative in the UK.

Abu was born in the village of Babyam in Kashmir, then part of 
British-controlled India, to Alma Bi and Mohammed Hussain, who were subsistence 
farmers. In 1960 his region was submerged and populations displaced to enable 
the development of the Mangla Dam, a major hydro-electric project. Young men 
were offered visas to Britain to help fill the labour shortage.

Abu arrived in 1962 and drove buses in Newcastle upon Tyne. However, early 
bouts of ill-health made him question his migration, and his search for meaning 
eventually led him to Barkat Ali. In 1973 he moved to Watford, Hertfordshire, 
where his mission really began. He campaigned for a mosque for the small Muslim 
community. His profile led to a racist attack while he was working as a local 
station ticket collector. Undeterred, he continued conveying the teachings of 
Barkat Ali and introducingIslam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam> to 
local authorities, schools, prisons and interfaith groups.

Since Sunni Islam has no priesthood, in the pre-internet age Abu’s pastoral 
mission changed lives. Many second-generation British-born Muslims, 
increasingly alienated by their parents’ values and finding no solace in 
mosques, turned to Abu for spiritual guidance, counselling and religious 
instruction. He had charisma and, unusually for his generation, he spoke fluent 
English without the subcontinental twang; young people felt a connection.

The front-room of our small terraced house was the centre of Abu’s life. On 
its carpet he would sit, patiently listening, rolling histasbih (prayer beads) 
in silent zikr, as individuals talked through their problems. Often we would 
host groups of people, of all sorts, and Abu would engage them in discussions 
on diverse topics. This would be followed by a meal of freshly baked chapatis 
and dahl, washed down with tea (all prepared by my mother Walit).

While he was firmly within the orthodox Sunni tradition, Abu differed from 
other Sufis in seeing no use in retreating from the world, thriving instead on 
robust discussion and frank, good-natured exchange. He had an ecumenical streak 
and was inspired by and sought to build bridges with the Shia branch of Islam 
in particular.

From 1980 until his retirement in 1998 he worked as a bus driver for the local 
college and was a familiar sight in Watford with his distinctive long beard and 
khaki prayer cap. His job suited him, he often said, because his appearance was 
a great conversation-starter.

Abu is survived by Walit, whom he married in 1965, their daughter, Tahira, and 
three sons, me, Azeem and Omar, and seven grandchildren.
 