
Hundreds of families have fled through heavy fighting in eastern Mosul to seek 
safety in nearby towns as the battle to recapture the last major city in Iraq 
held byIslamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> enters a new 
phase.


Government troops entered the outskirts of the city this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/01/iraqi-troops-enter-mosul-first-time-since-2014>
 for the first time since it was captured by Isis in 2014, in the first step of 
what is expected to be in a fierce – and prolonged – urban battle.

For the past two days, civilians have streamed eastwards, some carrying white 
flags and flashing victory signs at the government troops and tanks heading 
towards the city.

On Wednesday afternoon, exhausted and hungry families trudged along the road 
fromMosul <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mosul>, some carrying toddlers and 
pushing elderly relatives in wheelchairs. Most of the women covered their faces 
with niqabs; some of the men still wore the short trousers and long beards 
demanded by the Isis occupiers.

Ahmad, 56, was walking with his children in the direction of Kurdistan. 
“Everyone is fleeing – we were told to leave our houses because of the bombing. 
There was constant bombardment,” he told the Guardian.

Ahmad had managed to send some of his family to safety in Kurdistan when Isis 
launched its lightning attack on Mosul in the summer of 2014, but he himself 
had been trapped in the city – first by the fighting, and then because Isis 
confiscated his ID cards, making it impossible for him to cross their 
checkpoints.

“I was stuck under their rule,” he said. “Daesh was oppressive – they killed 
people in front of my very eyes.”
map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/11/mosul-1novemberupdate/giv-1406JMaARb4EYKic/>
On the outskirts of the eastern neighbourhood of Gogjali, Lieutenant Muntazar 
from the government counter-terrorism force stood, beneath an overpass, 
watching as columns of government trucks and tanks headed towards Mosul. The 
bridge was still wreathed in smoke from the piles of tyres set alight by Isis 
fighters to cover their retreat.

A dozen burnt-out cars littered the side of the road – either Isis suicide 
cars used in counter-attacks to slow down the government advance, or the 
remains of government airstrikes.


“We have cleaned Gogjali, but we haven’t killed many Daesh, because most of 
them fled towards Syria,” said Lt Muntazar, using the Arabic name for Isis.

As he spoke, his words were punctuated by the crash of intermittent artillery 
fire in the direction of the city. “We will be in centre of Mosul in days,” he 
said.

Meanwhile, the column of refugees headed west. According to the International 
Organisation for Migration, about 21,000 people have been displaced since the 
start of the campaign – not counting thousands of villagers captured by 
retreating jihadists for use as human shields.


Graffiti daubed on doors and walls gave a chilling reminder of the sectarian 
terror enforced by Isis: some were marked: “Sunni property – forbidden to 
enter, on the orders of the Islamic State.”


Others were marked with the word “rafidah” or “rejectors” – a derogatory term 
for Shia muslims. Many Shia homes and businesses were confiscated by Isis and 
handed to their supporters, and most of the city’s Shia population were killed 
or fled.

But concern has also been growing over the fate of civilians trapped in the 
fighting.

Nazir, 30, said he had seen many local people killed in the crossfire. “The 
bombardment has been very heavy. I saw four of my neighbour’s children die when 
a mortar hit them – I saw their bodies with my own eyes. I don’t know if the 
mortar was fired by the army or Daesh.”

Ghanem, 21, from the Sama neighbourhood, was walking hand in hand with his 
younger sister and brother. Until Isis came, Ghanem had been a student, but the 
Islamists banned him from studying, he said. “We fled because of the fighting 
but we don’t know where we are going.”


Asked what life was like under Daesh, Ghanem responded: “Very difficult.”

Another young man nearby raised his voice and said in English: “Black.” 

Nearby, a bearded old man pleaded with an Iraqi colonel: “Please find a place 
like a mosque for us to stay in for tonight – we have many children and it is 
cold. We have not eaten breakfast and lunch. When the soldiers forced us to 
leave our houses in Gogjali, they told us there would be food and a camp we can 
go to.”

One man was travelling against the flow: Abas Hamed, 44, had already taken his 
16-year-old son to a nearby village for treatment after he was hit by a stray 
bullet. Now he was returning to Gogjali for the rest of his family.

“My son was wounded by a bullet in our kitchen – I don’t know whether it was 
the army or Daesh that wounded him,” he said.

Whoever had fired the shot, he was glad that Isis had been driven from the 
town, he said. “Our life under Daesh rule was not good. I know of two people 
that were killed by Daesh after being accused of being peshmerga,” he said.

Now that Isis had gone, all Abas had to do was find some way for his family of 
eight to survive. He had 35,000 dinars – about $30 – and no idea where he could 
take his family to safety. “Life is difficult,” he said.
 