
Muhammad Ali <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/muhammad-ali> is 70 on Tuesday 
and those of us who were assembled in Atlanta, Georgia on the evening of 
19 July 1996 may be celebrating with a feeling of slight astonishment. Having 
watched the world's most famous sporting figure grasp the Olympic torch 
unsteadily in his right hand while his left shook uncontrollably with the 
symptom of Parkinson's disease as he stood under the rim of the stadium, we 
joined together that night in silent prayer that the stiff breeze would not 
fulfil its threat to blow the flame on to the sleeve of his white top in the 
long seconds before his ceremonial duty had been completed.

The prayers were heard, Ali escaped self-immolation and he was cheered to the 
heavens. But at that stage he did not look like a candidate for the old 
threescore-and-ten, and most of us probably believed we were witnessing his 
last public appearance. Now, a decade and a half later, the mixture of profound 
emotions evoked that night has been reawakened: complicated and often 
ambivalent feelings, not so straightforward as his present status, perhaps half 
a rung below Nelson Mandela, might suggest.

At the start, even before he spooked white America by embracing Islam, a lot 
of people got Cassius Clay wrong. Not from watching the 1960 Olympic Games in 
Rome, where the 18-year-old amateur from Louisville, Kentucky won the 
light-heavyweight gold medal with an impeccable performance, but from his 
behaviour after turning pro, and in particular during the build-up to his first 
world championship fight, against Sonny Liston in Miami Beach on 25 February 
1964.

Liston had taken the title from Floyd Patterson, whose good manners and 
humility led the white establishment to see him as a fine example of how 
negroes might thrive while still knowing their place but who lost his crown to 
an Arkansas sharecropper's son and convicted armed robber. Liston seemed to 
bear the physical scars of slavery on his burly frame and its mute resentments 
in his impassive gaze.

If you were a white teenager, several thousand miles away, listening to John 
Coltrane and wondering whether Malcolm X might not have a better handle on the 
civil rights struggle than the nonviolent Rev Martin Luther King, Liston seemed 
a particularly powerful emblem of Black America's demand not merely for justice 
but for a measure of redress. When Cassius Clay emerged as the principal 
contender for Liston's title amid an unstoppable barrage of cartoonish 
boasting, it was easy to conclude that the newcomer was merely acting out old 
and distasteful vaudeville stereotypes which would have no place in the new 
world. At the weigh-in for his first fight with Liston the 21-year-old Clay 
ranted and raved for half an hour. In response to such flagrant disrespect the 
expressionless Liston did little more than lift two fingers to the cameras to 
indicate the round in which he expected his opponent to fall. He looked the 
picture of dark nobility and stoicism. Clay looked like a flake.

Even those most directly involved in the struggle could get it wrong.

A few months earlier the New York‑based poet, playwright and militant activist 
LeRoi Jones (later known as Amiri Baraka) had written an essay for The Nation, 
the leftist weekly, in which he poured scorn on what he believed to be the 
desire of white America to see Patterson, their harmless surrogate, an 
"honorary white man", put down Liston, "the big black Negro in every white 
man's hallway … finally here to collect his pound of flesh".

There was no white man, Jones asserted, who actually wanted to fight Sonny 
Liston himself: "Though Cassius Clay has come from the Special Products 
Division of Madison Avenue to see what he could do." In other words, he was 
another "honorary white man". But a year later, with Clay installed as world 
champion and in the process of turning himself into Muhammad Ali, that view had 
changed. "[He] is not a fake," Jones wrote, "and even his blustering and 
playground poetry are valid, and demonstrate, as far as I'm concerned, that a 
new and more complicated generation has moved on to the scene."

The two fights with Liston are the mysterious rites on which the legend of 
Muhammad Ali was built. The subsequent meetings with Joe Frazier and George 
Foreman were better boxing matches but the contests in Florida and Maine 
astonished the world in a way that could have no parallel today, thanks to 
their social and cultural significance.

Styles make fights, Lennox Lewis used to say, meaning the contrast between 
styles. Liston versus Clay/Ali was a contrast in every conceivable dimension: 
family history, temperament, business connections, approach to the science of 
boxing itself. Here, too, was the past versus the future, and the past quit on 
its stool before the start of the seventh round in the first fight before 
succumbing to a half-cocked right cross, the famous "phantom punch", after 
1min 43sec of the opening round of the second, a moment of sporting history 
still scrutinised in case it should throw up new evidence of Ali's genius or 
Liston's corrupted soul.

Those were the nights during which Muhammad Ali broke out of his chrysalis, 
emerging into the light, ready to play his role in the social history of the 
20th century before the cocoon of infirmity closed around him. Once and 
forever, The Greatest. And forever young, as another 70-year-old sang. Happy 
birthday.

richard.williams@ guardian.co.uk twitter.com/@ rwilliams1947
 