
The Nobel peace prize laureate Shirin Ebadi has called on the head of Iran’s 
judiciary to step down aftera string of hunger strikes 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2017/01/irans-authorities-endangering-life-of-critically-ill-imprisoned-activist-by-refusing-hospital-transfer/>
 by political prisoners.


Ayatollah Sadeq Larijani is also facing mounting pressure from the government 
of Hassan Rouhani, which is demanding greater financial transparency.

Larijani was appointed by the supreme leader, cannot be summoned by MPs for 
questioning and is not directly accountable to the public. Under his watch the 
judiciary has made a number of high-profile arrests of dual nationals that are 
seen as undermining the president Rouhani’s advances on foreign policy.

Ebadi, a human rights lawyer and women’s rights activist living in exile in 
the UK, said she considered Larijani to be “directly responsible for the 
injustices and corruption” in the system.

She said that “in the name of religion and with the excuse of national 
security”, the judiciary was “overseeing a miscarriage of justice”.

“Civil and social activists and thinkers who voice criticism or protest are 
put in jail and condemned to lengthy prison sentences and torture and 
persecution, while criminals, serial killers and those involved in embezzlement 
continue to abuse people under the shadows of a corrupted judicial system,” she 
said in a statement posted on the website of theDefenders of Human Rights Centre
 <http://www.humanrights-ir.org/?lan=en>, of which she is president. 

“A considerable number of prisoners are those held on political or religious 
grounds. In what part of the world and according to what history, you would 
call this judicial system fair?”

This week Arash Sadeghi, a student activist serving a 15-year prison sentence, 
ended a 71-day hunger strike over the detention of his wife, Golrokh Ebrahimi 
Iraee, after she was released on bail. Iraee had beensentenced to six years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/06/golrokh-ebrahimi-iraee-iranian-writer-faces-long-jail-term-for-short-story-stoning-death>
 for writing an unpublished fictional story about stoning to death in Iran.

The case had sparked rare demonstrations near Tehran’s Evin prison. Amnesty 
said Sadeghi had lost 20kg (44lbs) while on hunger strike, and it called onIran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> to provide him with urgent specialised 
medical care for a kidney malfunction.

Other prisoners remain on hunger strike. Ali Shariati, given a five-year 
sentence for what Amnesty said was “peaceful activism, including his 
participation in a peaceful protest to condemn acid attacks against women in 
Iran”, has been refusing food since the end of October. Saeed Shirzad, who is 
in jail for protesting against child labour, and Nizar Zakka, a Lebanese 
citizen and IT expert accused of spying for the US, are also on hunger strikes.


Tara Sepehri Far, of Human Rights Watch, echoed Ebadi in condemning Larijani. 
“Iran’s judiciary regularly violates the rights of political prisoners, often 
charging them under ill-defined national security crimes,” she said.

“Larijani, as the head of the judiciary since 2009, is ultimately responsible 
for this dismal record. The reality in today’s Iran is that the judiciary often 
acts as a fundamental obstacle to justice, even threatening parliamentarians 
who have called for due process for arrested human rights defenders, which only 
shatters public trust in the institution.”

Amnesty’s Philip Luther said the Iranian authorities’ treatment of Sadeghi had 
been deplorable. “First they unjustly imprisoned him, then they ignored his 
legitimate protest against his wife’s unwarranted imprisonment for weeks, and 
now they are denying him urgent medical care,” he said. “They must stop 
endangering his health and his life and order his transfer to hospital 
immediately, pending his unconditional release.”

Iran’s judiciary has repeatedly denied claims of violations, saying criticism 
voiced from the west is hypocritical and that the US and the UK remain mute 
about rights abuses committed by allies such as Saudi Arabia and Bahrain.


Larijani belongs to an influential family and he is seen as a potential 
candidate to succeed the supreme leader, Ayatollah Alli Khamenei. One of his 
brothers is the head of Iran’s state-run human rights council; another is the 
parliamentary speaker.


Recently Rouhani and Larijani have been at odds over financial transparency. 
This week Rouhanitweeted 
<https://twitter.com/Rouhani_ir/status/816316244114731008> that his government 
was prepared to make its income and expenses public, “but on the other side, it 
also expects the judiciary to be transparent about its accounts too”.

In November an Iranian MP questioned a minister over allegations that Larijani 
possessed 63 personal bank accounts filled with public funds. The judiciary
later attempted to arrest the MP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2016/nov/28/iranian-judicial-authorities-attempt-arrest-of-mp-mahmoud-sadeghi>
 but was unsuccessful. Larijani has denied the allegations.
 