
The only sound as I slide along is the whoosh of metal blades on ice and the 
panting of the huskies. In every direction stretches a dazzling canvas of snow 
and pine with not a sign of habitation. We are intruders in this winterscape. 
Johan, the owner of the dog-sledding outfit, is our outrider, leading the way, 
surefooted as a deer as he careers ahead. Negotiating the bends between tree 
trunks at breakneck speed without the sleigh toppling brings shrieks of delight 
from the children. Three hours' flight away to the south the slopes of the Alps 
are crawling with humanity, but here in my native Norway we're far from that 
madding crowd.

I gave up trying to find our destination, Hemsedal 
<http://www.hemsedal.com/en/>, in the Lonely Planet guide. As far as I was 
aware it had been one of the country's most popular downhill ski resorts since 
the early 60s.Geilo <http://www.geilo.no/en/winter/> has made a slightly bigger 
name for itself on the cross-country circuit, but that still didn't explain why 
a forensic search yielded nothing. But, though this area is renowned locally as 
the "Scandinavian Alps", such reticence to boast about their assets is typical 
of the Norwegian approach to life.

The pared-back nature of daily life in a country boasting the third-largest 
sovereign wealth fund is quite a surprise. A predilection for bling in 
similarly oil-rich nations from Saudi Arabia to Iraq has kept London's Park 
Lane car dealers in business through three recessions. Not so the Norwegians, 
who favour a Volvo from neighbouring Sweden. Instead of squandering their North 
Sea bonanza they've invested it, ensuring future generations enjoy the high 
standards of free education and healthcare that are the envy of the world. 
There are few countries where adults still favour "family bunks" and standard 
bath towels are the size of dishcloths.

Thankfully there's a newfound thaw in my countrymen's icy resolve. Where once 
pine-clad apartments with strip lighting were the order of the day, our 
accommodation in the hamlet of Totteskogen offered luxury. Five minutes from 
the children's slopes and set among a cluster of cabins, our home for the week, 
called Dinabu, was a medley of stone and wood, with floor-to-ceiling glass 
framing the mountain view, underfloor heating and not one but two log fires 
along with a small sauna and a huge boot room to put wet ski gear in to dry. 
Privately owned mountain retreats like ours are let by their owners only for a 
proportion of the year, so personal touches are everywhere.
 A general view of the ski resort of Hemsedal in Norway taken from the top of 
the ski lift looking out towards the village. Photograph: Alamy 
Among downhill aficionados the word "flat" often finds its way into 
descriptions of Norway's skiing potential, yet as I sat on our sunny terrace 
surrounded by precipitous pinnacles I put such comments down to malicious 
propaganda. Hemsedal doesn't boast the challenges of the Alps – of the 45 runs 
the majority are green and blue, but there are enough reds and blacks to keep 
my fanatical husband and children happy.

My favourite was a long, leisurely blue, winding its way from the top of the 
mountain, that took a good 30 minutes to ski and was virtually empty until the 
lower slopes. The only company on the descent was the whistle of the wind, the 
swish of my skis and the endless anecdotes of my seven-year-old son, who has an 
unparalleled ability to gabble and ski simultaneously.

Despite my Nordic genes I'll never be a champion skier. I'm brimful of fear, 
with not a gung-ho vein in my body, but my family are a different matter. I 
realised a couple of years ago during our debut ski trip that I was set to be a 
ski widow. Molly and Dan, five and six at the time, couldn't wait to hurtle 
down the slopes at terrifying speed. Such was their aptitude that my husband 
took them down their first black run on that trip. Luckily I only found out 
about it afterwards. My own earliest ski memory dates back to my kindergarten 
sports day just outside Oslo. I was five years old and lost courage halfway 
down the snow steps carved into the slope for our "fun run". I sat down and 
wept, and the snickering of my classmates still echoes down the decades.
 Mariella and her children make snow angels. Photograph: Observer 
On a trip to the town's supermarket, we stocked up on local cheeses, fresh 
eggs, pickled herrings, rye bread and other northern culinary staples for 
breakfast and lunch. Thanks to our gifted chef Karl, who turned up each evening 
to whip up local delicacies, from halibut with roast pepper and crème fraîche 
coulis to spring chicken with a purée of root vegetables, we had little 
compulsion to set foot outside after dark. Instead we curled up by the fire 
playing a game of gin rummy.

The focus on daytime family fun, from dog sledding to heart-stopping 
snowmobile racing on a circuit high up on a mountain plateau, along with a host 
of English-speaking instructors to teach the kids at ski school, proved more 
than enough to keep us occupied.

Until this year relative inaccessibility (a four-hour drive or ski-bus 
transfer from Oslo airport) diminished Hemsedal's appeal. A new flight from 
Gatwick to Fagernes airport, Leirin – with a 75-minute transfer – changes that, 
but hopefully won't spell the end of the empty slopes we enjoyed.

After a week in the mountains we stopped off in Oslo for a night and 
discovered a lurch toward sophistication and development that is transforming 
the provincial city of my childhood into a hub of art, design and culinary 
experimentation. A dockland development, Tjuvholmen (Thieves Island, because it 
used to be populated by, you guessed it, thieves) faces out to the archipelago, 
with a boutique hotel,The Thief <http://thethief.com/en/>, along with 
restaurants, coffee bars, ice-cream stalls and shops, culminating in a surreal 
manmade sandy beach littered with contemporary sculptures. The latest addition 
to this sprawl of low-rise modernity is theAstrup Fearnley Museum of Modern Art 
<http://afmuseet.no/en/hjem>, a symphony of glass and wood designed by Renzo 
Piano <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/renzo-piano>, where Damien 
Hirst's butterflies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/apr/18/damien-hirst-butterflies-weirdly-uplifting>
 andTracey Emin <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/emin>'s tapestries 
hang among work by YSAs (Young Scandinavian Artists).

In Britain, we list perpetually toward the equator, convinced that we have 
more in common with our happy-go-lucky, laconic and increasingly bankrupt 
neighbours than our less-effervescent cousins towards the Arctic Circle. Yet as 
Scandinavia slowly conquers the globe with crime novels and TV series, design 
stores and fashion chains, you can't help wondering what other temptations 
they've been hiding from us.

Essentials

Mariella's holiday was provided by visitnorway.co.uk <http://visitnorway.co.uk>
. For more information on Hemsedal, go tohemsedal.com <http://hemsedal.com>. 
For details of holidays, go toski-norway.co.uk <http://ski-norway.co.uk>. 
Norwegian Air (norwegian.com <http://norwegian.com>) flies directly from 
various UK destinations to Oslo, with flights from £39 one way. SAS (
flysas.co.uk <http://flysas.co.uk>) also flies directly from various UK 
destinations to Oslo. A new charter will run every Sunday from 20 December to 
20 April. Book with Crystal Ski (crystalski.co.uk <http://crystalski.co.uk>)
 