
Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> yesterday drew 
a clear line between his presidency and that of George Bush in his support for 
women's rights, when he signed an equal pay law as his first piece of 
legislation yesterday.

In a celebration at the White House for women and labour activists, Obama paid 
tribute to a former supervisor at an Alabama tyre factory who fought for the 
legislation which bears her name.

The Lilly Ledbetter law, which allows workers greater latitude to sue their 
employers for unequal pay, had been blocked by Bush and opposed by Republican 
members of Congress, including presidential candidate John McCain.

The supreme court, in a 2007 decision, also rejected Ledbetter's efforts to 
seek redress after discovering she had been paid far less than male supervisors 
in her 19 years at the Goodyear tyre factory.

Yesterday, with Ledbetter at his side and wife, Michelle, looking on, Obama 
said the new law would help make amends.

"This one's for Lilly." he said handing Ledbetter a pen, and giving a 
thumbs-up sign to the audience.

"Making our economy work means making sure it works for everyone," Obama said. 
"That there are no second-class citizens in our workplaces and that it's not 
just unfair and illegal - but bad for business - to pay someone less because of 
their gender, age, race, ethnicity, religion or disability."

Ledbetter will not benefit from the law, but said she was glad other women 
would be protected. "That's what makes this fight worth fighting," she said.

Obama adopted Ledbetter's cause during his campaign. She spoke at the 
Democratic convention, and travelled with him on his whistlestop train journey 
to Washington for his inauguration.

She even got a ticket to an inaugural ball, where she danced with the 
president.

Ledbetter's cause was also adopted by the Democratic Congress. Hillary 
Clinton, the secretary of state, and Nancy Pelosi, the house speaker, were at 
the White House yesterday for the signing.

Under the new law, women now have six months after receiving any 
discriminatory pay cheque to seek redress.

Previously, women who discovered they were earning less than men in the same 
job had just six months after receiving their first pay cheque to seek legal 
remedy. That left women like Ledbetter, who had been working at the tyre 
factory for 19 years before learning her male counterparts were all earning 
more than her, out in the cold.

The White House said yesterday that Ledbetter lost more than $200,000 in 
salary, and even more in pension, in the course of her employment.

The new measure also applies to those who seek redress for pay discrimination 
based on race, religion, disability or age.
 