
Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> has signed an 
executive order to shut down the US military prison at Guantánamo Bay – the 
most potent symbol of excess in George Bush's "war on terror".

The new US president signed two other executive orders to review the use of 
military trials for terror suspects and ban the harshest interrogation 
techniques, such as waterboarding.

The three executive orders – on the second day of the new administration – 
showed that Obama was determined to move swiftly to implement some of his key 
campaign pledges. Administration staff applauded at the signing ceremony in the 
Oval Office.

"The message that we are sending around the world is that the United States 
intends to prosecute the ongoing struggle against violence and terrorism and we 
are going to do so vigilantly," Obama said. "We are going to do so effectively 
and we are going to do so in a manner that is consistent with our values and 
our ideals."

A draft copy of the order said: "In view of significant concerns raised by 
these detentions, both within the United States and internationally, prompt and 
appropriate disposition of the individuals currently detained at Guantánamo and 
closure of the facility would further the national security and foreign policy 
interests of the United States and the interests of justice."

[Read a PDF copy of the order] 
<http://image.theguardian.com/sys-files/Guardian/documents/2009/01/22/draft_order_closure_of_guantanamo_bay.pdf>

An estimated 245 men are being held at Guantánamo, a US naval base in Cuba. 
Most have been locked up for years without being charged with a crime. Obama's 
plans to review military trials of terror suspects and end harsh interrogations 
were being assembled even before he won the election in November.

The UN's torture investigator, Manfred Nowak, welcomed the move and said freed 
inmates should be allowed to sue the US if they had been mistreated. "Justice 
also means to look into the past," Nowak told the Associated Press. Nowak has 
previously said he has reliable accounts of torture at Guantánamo. Lawyers for 
two inmates, Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri and Mohammed Jawad, have said their 
clients were tortured.

In Saudi Arabia, families of the country's 13 remaining Guantánamo detainees 
rejoiced at the news.

"That was a humane decision. We're very optimistic," said Ali al-Sayari, whose 
son Abdullah, 28, has been there for eight years. The family has not heard from 
or about him for the past two years.

"Obama is correcting the mistakes of his predecessor," said Ali al-Shamrani, 
whose nephew Mohammed al-Shamrani has been in Guantánamo for eight years.

Obama's nominee to be the director of national intelligence is set to tell 
Congress there will be no torture, harsh interrogations or wiretaps without 
warrants under his command.

In remarks prepared for his confirmation hearing, retired Admiral Dennis Blair 
said he believed "torture is not moral, legal or effective".

The signing of the executive orders came as Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>, on her first day as 
secretary of state, pledged to pursue robust diplomacy and effective 
development to advance America's interests. About 1,000 state department 
employees gave Clinton a rousing welcome as she spoke at the main entrance to 
the building. She had been confirmed overwhelmingly in the job by the Senate.

"I will do all that I can working with you to make it abundantly clear that 
robust diplomacy and effective development are the best long-term tools for 
securing America's future," Clinton said. "I believe with all my heart that 
this is a new era for America."

Waiting for Clinton in her office was a letter of welcome and advice from her 
immediate predecessor, Condoleezza Rice, who was criticised by staff for not 
doing enough to increase funding for diplomats.

Obama is expected to name George Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jan/21/barack-obama-middle-east-george-mitchell>
, the former Senate Democratic leader, as his Middle East envoy. Mitchell, 75, 
who helped broker the Good Friday peace accords in Northern Ireland, led an 
international commission under former president Bill Clinton that investigated 
the causes of the second intifada in 2000.

In his first full day on the job, the president yesterday telephoned several 
Middle Eastern leaders including president Hosni Mubarak of Egypt and Ehud 
Olmert, the Israeli prime minister, in an indication that he will devote 
serious attention to the Middle East early on in his administration – in sharp 
contrast to Bush.
 