 What everyone remembers is the weather. The days following Labour's election 
victory in 1997 were uncommonly fine and the morning of Friday 2 May, when Tony 
Blair was photographed with some of his 101 new women MPs on the steps of 
Church House, Westminster, was no exception. The sky was blue, the sun shining 
and, though they were dizzy from a lack of sleep, most of those who made the 
photocall were glad to be caught in the moment for posterity, whatever they 
might have said about it since. They smiled, they waved and they looked at 
their leader and felt: anything is possible.
Many of them had not expected to be elected, even in the event of a Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> victory (the more unwinnable a 
seat, the more likely it was to have been fought by a woman); for these MPs, 
the day was especially strange. There was joy and excitement, but even as they 
pinched themselves, a soundtrack was already thrumming at the back of their 
minds. Where will I live? What will my husband do? When will I get back home?

For these women, the most pressing problem was not the chaos at the Palace of 
Westminster (with so many on the move, the place was the office equivalent of a 
refugee camp), but childcare. In the decade since the 'Blair's Babes' 
photograph was taken, plenty of commentators have unpicked the smiles of its 
subjects, suggesting that the more glazed among them masked ruthless ambition 
or a certain bitchy chilliness. Maybe so. But at least some of these women were 
grinning in the face of deep logistical anxiety. They said 'cheese' and 
pictured their abandoned children peering mournfully into an empty fridge.

To be fair, this analysis occurred to me only recently. The last time the 
infamous BB photo appeared - it was widely reprinted last February following 
the death of the ex-MP Fiona Jones from alcohol-related liver disease - I, like 
everyone else, looked at it and simply tried to count the stars and the 
dropouts (also, more meanly, I did a quick now and then of their wrinkles and 
jowls). Soon after, however, I began talking to some of these women in the 
flesh. As Blair prepared to leave office, I wanted to know how things stood for 
his so-called Babes 10 years on.

This is when I first began to hear their domestic nightmares. Thanks, 
sometimes, to their own actions and to a media that love a too-sharp stiletto 
heel, women MPs are often portrayed as Lady Macbeth types, yet here they were 
telling me about the ordinary stuff: their bills, their battles to find schools 
for their displaced children, their lonely menfolk. This was a surprise; I 
suppose I was expecting something a little more, well, high octane.

And beyond the bills? Things were darker. The House of Commons is a strange 
place: febrile, arcane and still overwhelmingly male. Its members are far from 
home: the place reeks of loneliness and - I do not think this an exaggeration - 
misery. Divorce rates are high; people drink more than they should. The more I 
talked to the class of '97, the more I wondered how those who were still there 
had managed to survive. I kept thinking of that bumper sticker that says: 'You 
don't have to be mad to work here, but it helps'.

It cannot be denied that the 101 Labour women who were elected to Parliament 
10 years ago have changed it beyond all recognition. But not nearly as much as 
they, or those who voted for them, would have liked.

After the general election of 1992, there were just 37 women Labour MPs, 13.7 
per cent of the parliamentary party; overall, 9.2 per cent of MPs were women. 
After 1997, when 101 women Labour MPs were returned, these figures swelled to 
24.2 per cent and 18.2 per cent respectively. The numbers dipped a little in 
2001, but in 2005, in spite of a slashed Labour majority, 27.5 per cent of 
Labour MPs were women, 19.8 per cent of the total.

I set out to talk to what I regard, though they might disagree, as a small but 
representative cross-section of women from the 1997 intake: some are members of 
the government, some backbenchers and some no longer MPs at all, having lost 
their seats in 2005. It's worth mentioning that several of the ex-MPs whom I 
approached refused to talk to me; what they had been through was, I gather, 
extremely painful; they did not fancy revisiting it. 'I'm a private citizen 
now,' said one.

This was a warning of what was to come. Some women MPs, like their male 
colleagues, find it hard to answer questions honestly or to admit to failure on 
any level; two of those I met were positively - hilariously - robotic in their 
responses. But they were a minority. Mostly, you sense that these women wanted 
their stories to be told. They needed, if you like, to bear witness.

I don't blame them. The last time someone pinched my bum in public, or 
remarked on the size of my breasts, or forced me to work all night, or told me 
I had to come into the office even though I was half-dying, I talked about it 
for days.

A new dawn?

In her office at Portcullis House, Claire Curtis-Thomas, MP for Crosby, tells 
me what she remembers of the day of the photograph (she's at the back, looking 
somewhat dazed). Was she ecstatic? Not exactly. 'I was in a state of shock,' 
she says. 'I was never meant to come here. I'd been told my seat was 
unwinnable. I kept telling the north-west office that I thought I'd do it and 
with a good majority. I subsequently found out that they'd labelled me 
clinically insane. They insisted that voters were telling me lies and I 
believed them, to the extent that my husband and I decided to go ahead and have 
another baby. When the results came out, I burst into tears.

'We lived in Crewe, but had committed to moving to Crosby during the campaign. 
I had two children, one with severe learning difficulties, and I was pregnant. 
When I arrived in Westminster, everybody else was going to champagne 
receptions, but I had appalling morning sickness. All I was interested in was 
finding the nearest toilet.'

Though a Blair loyalist, Curtis-Thomas is frank when it comes to talking about 
the downside of working in Parliament and, for her, there are plenty of 
downsides. When she first arrived at Westminster, she could not believe what 
she found (and bear in mind that, until 1997, she was the dean of a university 
department of engineering). It was neanderthal.

'Awful,' she says. 'Disgusting.' It wasn't just all the archaic idiosyncracies 
that she struggled to come to terms with - the fact, say, that in the Commons 
corridors, coat hangers are adorned with a red ribbon, on which a man can hang 
his sword - but the out-and-out sexism of colleagues. 'You could sense a 
fervent panic in the Serjeant at Arms office along the lines of 'What if they 
all menstruate at the same time?' I was always being told by the Tory men that 
it was nice to have a better class of totty around.'

She wasn't the only one. Beverley Hughes, MP for Stretford and Urmston and a 
Minister of State in the Home Office, was also appalled by what she found. 'I'd 
been used to that kind of environment, having run a metropolitan council. The 
Tory benches shouted things across the chamber at you, about your appearance or 
your size. A lot of it came from the front bench, though it wouldn't be picked 
up by the microphones. It was shocking, but it was routine.'

According to Barbara Follett, who won Stevenage: 'The Tories made gestures 
[she cups an imaginary pair of breasts]. Even on our side, the men would stick 
their hands out, so you'd sit on them. It was like stepping back in time. The 
worst offender was Nicholas Soames, though we worked out how to deal with him. 
His ex-wife had said that being made love to by Nicholas was like having a 
large wardrobe with a very small key fall on top of you. So we used to make a 
gesture [she mimes the turning of a small key]. That helped.'

It took most of the first term for this behaviour to disappear. The women 
toughed it out and worked hard on making the place feel less like a private 
club. 'We encouraged the public to come in,' says Fiona Mactaggart, MP for 
Slough. 'Because while that kind of behaviour might be fine behind closed 
doors, it's not in a public space which the citizens feel they own.'

Had she been surprised by the jeers? 'Ah!' she says. 'I have one advantage 
over my sisters; I'm a class traitor [Mactaggart is the daughter of a Tory 
baronet]. I'd been to a single-sex public school where people behaved badly so, 
no, it didn't. But it was distasteful.'

In this environment, how easily did women find their feet? Beverley Hughes 
likens the experience to going to university: the separation from home and 
family, the fact that previous experiences now seemed to count for nothing. 
'I'd been the head of a university department and the leader of a council. Now, 
suddenly, I was going backwards; my anchor points had gone. To be back on the 
bottom rung of the ladder at that age felt very peculiar.'

For the first few months, Westminster was in chaos. Even once offices were 
finally allocated, many of them did not have telephones (inexplicably, they had 
been sent away for cleaning). But after things had calmed down, many of the new 
MPs still felt at sea.

For one thing, the workload was intimidatingly huge. 'No one warns you how 
many people turn to you for help,' says Barbara Follett. As a constituency MP, 
she deals with 5,000 cases a year. For another, Westminster works in mysterious 
ways, ways that many women feel still naturally favour men. It wasn't just that 
the Speaker seemed reluctant to call women who were wearing trousers. 'There 
are really big exceptions to this,' says Beverley Hughes. 'But my feeling is 
still that women don't do the networking thing, at least not in terms of 
self-promotion. It's a terrible stereotype, this, but I do think women are more 
collegiate and supportive and less comfortable with saying "Look at me".'

This is the one point on which all 10 of the women I spoke to agreed: that 
they dislike the grandstanding the men indulge in and that they sometimes feel 
excluded from what appears to be a system of patronage. 'I was feeling grumpy 
early on,' says Fiona Mactaggart. 'I couldn't work out how to make things 
work.' In the end, she got a government job almost by accident. She sat next to 
Chris Smith at dinner and they got on. The next day, when his parliamentary 
private secretary Alice Mahon was sacked for voting against the government, 
Mactaggart was asked to replace her. 'It's a difficult place to work,' she 
says. 'You can't actually apply for a job. People have networks and if those 
networks operate out of smoky bars, they're probably excluding many women.'

Hazel Blears, MP for Salford, thinks the fact that fewer of the women were 
professional politicians worked against them. 'If you've come up through being 
a special adviser, you've got a fast track. If you've done something else with 
your life ... I've had no patronage and sometimes it does feel you have to work 
twice as hard.'

Blears credits her leg up into a government job to Anji Hunter, the former 
Number 10 gatekeeper. 'She didn't quite get me my job, but she encouraged me 
and was influential in getting me my first post.' (Blears is now the Minister 
without Portfolio.)

Some of those who are no longer in Parliament believe that it wasn't women who 
were discriminated against so much as those women outside the charmed circle. 
Helen Clark lost her Peterborough seat in 2005. 'Right from that first day when 
Tony addressed us all just before the photograph, there was a little band who 
were really snotty and snooty. I discovered later, thanks to the papers, that 
these were the women tipped to be the first Labour woman Prime Minister, the 
first Chancellor. They were well-connected. They were the poster girls and they 
got jobs because they were always going to get them. We all know who they are: 
Ruth [Kelly], Yvette [Cooper], Oona [King, who lost Bethnal Green in 2005], 
Claire Ward [who won Watford aged 24, and is now a whip] and Lorna [Fitzsimons, 
who lost Rochdale in 2005]. They were pushed. I thought it was a meritocracy, 
but it wasn't. I could have done the most wonderful speech. It would never have 
made any difference; I was always going to moulder on the backbenches.'

Jane Griffiths, former MP for Reading East (she was deselected by her local 
party in 2004), agrees. 'I realised that there was this group who'd be looked 
after and promoted. If you weren't in that, you'd struggle. You were pond life. 
In the chamber, you had to wait seven hours to be called to speak.' (This 
sounds like sour grapes, but two of the sitting MPs later admitted that these 
women, particularly Clark, had a hard time.)

Burning the midnight oil

Most women came into Parliament in 1997 determined to reduce the number of 
late sittings. They've been only partly successful. Following the reforms they 
helped to push through, Parliament now finishes at 7pm on Wednesdays and 6pm on 
Thursdays (though debates can still run on to 10pm at least). It used also to 
finish at 7pm on Tuesdays, but on 26 January 2005, opponents of the reforms 
managed to restore the old late Tuesday sittings. On Tuesdays, as on Mondays, 
Parliament now sits until 10pm.

'When the hours went back, that was the point at which a lot of women, like 
Helen Jackson [formerly MP for Sheffield Hillsborough], stood down,' says 
Barbara Follett. 'I nearly did, too. I resented the Tuesday change bitterly.' 
She sighs. 'But you're at the mercy of the Leader of the House and Jack Straw 
is one of the ones who likes the hours.'

Why do some of the men like the hours? 'The main thing is that it's macho to 
be seen to be here for half the night. Some of the Inverness people [i.e. those 
with constituencies far from London] feel they'd be lonely and the London MPs 
fear they'd be expected to do more constituency work in the evenings. But these 
people should look at the divorce rate. It's astronomically high. There was a 
rash of divorces after 1997, mainly among women.'

What effect does being at Westminster have on relationships? 'It's dire. A 
lasting memory for me of the first term was being in the women's room and 
seeing six women there talking to their partners or children, trying to do 
homework over the phone, while in the Chamber three people were talking 
complete nonsense. It was depressing. A lot of the time you're hanging around 
because some boy - I use the word advisedly - is playing a game.' Even now, 
Follett keeps a blanket in her office in case she ends up sleeping there.

'The hours are a disaster,' says Claire Curtis-Thomas. 'My 16-year-old is 
pragmatic. She misses me, but we spend the day texting. But my boy is eight and 
only just waking up to the fact that I go off for long periods. We do video 
conferencing. I look at their teeth every morning and arbitrate on 
domestic-strife issues.' Though she loves her work as an MP, it has had a 
'profound effect' on her relationship with her children and her husband.

'If you've had a row with your husband on the Sunday, there's no chance to 
make it up until a Thursday night if you're lucky. So you brood, you 
consolidate. There's a sense of hopelessness ... the system makes people feel 
hopeless and redundant. If you're exhausted, you're not robust enough to deal 
with other aspects of your life.'

Fiona Mactaggart is a single woman and does not have any children, but she, 
too, is angry that the Tuesday hours were restored. 'I remember in the early 
days, a lot of people voted drunk and I'm not having that,' she says. 'It's 
truly wrong. I just don't think it is sensible to vote on the future of our 
country late at night, after dinner, which might have involved wine. Some 
people like it because it means that someone else is running their social life. 
It's a very male thing. It's about being infantilised. Your life is run by the 
bell.'

In 2003, Mactaggart was treated for cancer. 'After I came back, the vote on 
Iraq was at 10 o'clock at night. That was the first time I'd been out of my 
house. I nearly fell over. There were tears pouring down my face because I was 
so tired.'

But there are those with other views. Beverley Hughes favours modernisation, 
but for the sake of other women rather than herself. 'I've always felt I should 
work all the hours I can while I am here and then just get home. My family 
aren't here, you see.' Her children are grown up now, but it is still a wrench 
to leave Manchester on a Monday morning. 'At a time when my husband and I 
should be having nice evenings together, he's on his own up there and I'm on my 
own down here.'

Gisela Stuart, MP for Edgbaston, and Helen Clark insist the hours are all part 
of the job. 'I don't have any ambition to have a social life in London,' says 
Stuart. 'If I get home in time to see the end of Newsnight, that's an early 
night.' Claire Ward, who has a 10-month-old baby, told me in no uncertain terms 
that she was against modernisation. 'This is the job I have taken on. I would 
never complain about it. I used to have a sleeping bag in the office and a few 
nights I kipped here, put two chairs together.' (The general consensus on women 
with views like Ward's is that they have gone native.)

Late sittings mean that a bar culture continues to flourish at Westminster, 
one that the husband of Fiona Jones believes helped to kill her. According to 
him, she 'hardly drank at all before she was elected'. In Parliament, however, 
she regularly drank whisky because, there, no one would raise an eyebrow at the 
smell of alcohol on her breath.

After being prosecuted for electoral fraud, a conviction that was subsequently 
overturned, and losing her Newark seat in 2001, Jones developed a serious vodka 
habit which killed her less than a month before her 50th birthday.

Helen Clark thinks the problem is no more serious than anywhere else. 'There's 
more booze drunk by lobby journalists than by politicians,' she says. 'One was 
sick over my shoes once.' Still, she knows of two other MPs besides Jones whose 
alcoholism killed them. Others admit that it is a serious problem; there are 
more than a few functioning alcoholics about the place.

'Absolutely there's a bar culture,' says Curtis-Thomas. 'If you've got 
ministers who like to drink, when are you going to speak to them? One of the 
great benefits of the reform of the House was on the bars; people went home 
early. I dislike that form of patronage. But that's a girlie position. A lot of 
business is done like that.'

Jane Griffiths believes that Jones was an extreme example, but that similar 
things are happening to other people, only perhaps more slowly: 'Of the ones 
who are in the bar all the time, several of them are ministers. I enjoyed the 
company, but I was conscious of how easily it could [tip into being a 
necessity].'

Drink can fuel late-night sexual harassment. 'Some of the men with power would 
be flirtatious, though it felt as though they were testing to see how you would 
respond. If you succumbed, or made your own advances, it would be the worse for 
you. It had to be on their terms.'

After Jones's death, Griffiths wrote about her friend on her blog. Soon after, 
an anonymous visitor posted a message noting that Jones had been too loyal to 
blow the lid on 'the persistent sexual harassment' she suffered from a 'senior 
cabinet minister'. Jones had previously told a tabloid that she had once been 
offered a ministerial job in exchange for sex.

Whipping it up

Thanks to dramas like House of Cards, parliamentary whips have long been seen, 
at least by the public, as brute enforcers. When I ask Claire Ward, a whip, if 
she is one for the thumbscrews, she denies it, though in the next breath she 
urges me to see the play Whipping It Up, in which a Tory chief whip uses foul 
means to ensure that his government wins a vote; her office had been on an 
outing to see it and, save for the bad language, had 'recognised it'.

No wonder, then, that several women later tell me how much they hate whipping, 
seeing it as an aggressively male way of maintaining discipline for all that, 
since 1998, the post of chief whip has been held by a woman. Some tell me how 
people were expected to vote even when, in one case, they were unconscious; 
others have been on the receiving end of what they regarded as bullying. 'It 
was like the Stasi,' says Helen Clark. 'You'd be told at 5pm on a Thursday that 
you had to go and see her [Hilary Armstrong, the then chief whip] at 9am on a 
Monday, so you'd spend the whole weekend feeling sick. Then it was a case of, 
'Now, Helen, you've got a marginal seat ... I'm sure you'd want ministers to 
come and support you in your election campaign ...' In other words, low-level 
threats were made.

Jane Griffiths regards the whips' office as 'malevolent' and she, like Clark, 
was a loyal Blairite, who only rarely voted against the government and not at 
all in the first term. 'You'd have a terrible time,' she says. 'It was like 
being at school. You'd get a message late on a Thursday and, for the whole 
weekend, you can't eat, you can't sleep. People settled scores by complaining 
about you to the whips. I was once told off for using inappropriate language. I 
didn't think that voting against the government was a badge of honour; I only 
did it as a matter of conscience. So it was quite shocking to be treated with 
so much contempt. It was [a case of], "Well, you've spoiled your record now 
..."'

But Barbara Follett insists that, though she has voted against her government 
19 times, she has never been bullied. 'They've always been perfectly polite 
when we've differed.' Fiona Mactaggart goes further: 'I think it's profoundly 
irresponsible of the media to say they're a malign force because it's the whips 
who make sure that what the public was promised is delivered.'

Some people insist that the whips are concerned with pastoral care as well as 
discipline but, so far as I could tell, this is rubbish. 'Whips are in the 
invidious position of saying, on the one hand, "I don't care if you're dying, 
get in and vote" and on the other, "Have you sorted your funeral out?"' says 
Claire Curtis-Thomas, who believes that MPs are in desperate need of some kind 
of pastoral system. 'There's a lot more misery here than elsewhere. Not a 
little; a lot. If you look at someone who's dysfunctional, they'd be living the 
sort of life that we are. There's a significant degree of problems, the kind 
you'd find in shift workers or long-distance lorry drivers. People are 
isolated, they're without networks because they're not here at weekends, and 
they're having to cope, alone, with a series of emotional difficulties.'

She also worries about members who lose their seats. 'It's catastrophic,' she 
says. 'We say, "Bugger off!". We have an absolute duty to care for one 
another.' At the next election, more women than men are likely to lose their 
jobs; women hold more marginal seats.

Ex-MPs would doubtless agree with Curtis-Thomas. Even Melanie Johnson, who is 
as uncritical of this government and Parliament in general as it is possible to 
be, admitted that she found losing her seat (Welwyn, in 2005) 'traumatic'. 
Helen Clark was one of the few who spoke up for Fiona Jones after her death, 
perhaps, in part, because she knows how it feels to be discarded by party 
high-ups. In a letter to the Guardian, she wrote of Jones's difficult 
relationship with her local party and its aftermath: 'What is, sadly, also all 
too familiar, is that the national Labour party regularly does a Pontius Pilate 
act and washes its hands.' In the same letter, Clark bemoaned the fact that MPs 
had no 'trade union rep' to whom they can go in times of crisis.

'After I lost my seat, I didn't hear a word from anyone except the whips' 
office, asking me if I could return my pager. I flung it in the bin and 
pretended I'd lost it. Then I received some sort of standard letter. That 
didn't go down very well with me.' Was she distressed at losing her seat? She 
must have been expecting it. 'I felt frightened because of the money. How the 
hell was I going to survive? I was 50. I didn't want to lose my house. You're 
given £30,000 resettlement, but it's amazing how quickly that goes.'

Through her deselection battles - she still isn't sure why her local party 
took against her - Jane Griffiths found that she was without support elsewhere, 
too. 'They completely threw me to the wolves,' she says. 'I asked for help, and 
the chief whip said, "That's your problem." It was disgraceful. I warned them 
the seat would be lost [the new candidate was a man with two convictions for 
gross indecency; in 2005, Reading East was taken by the Conservatives]. But I 
was inconvenient. I was expendable.'

Did her sex have anything to do with the way she was treated? 'The men in my 
constituency would not have done what they did to me to a man.' Hazel Blears 
concedes that people are dealt with in a 'peremptory' way and that it can take 
years to find new employment. 'We need a resettlement programme,' she says.

Highs and lows

I don't ask my interviewees political questions - I'm more interested in their 
experiences than in the nitty-gritty of, say, pensions policy - but I do ask 
them to tell me the political achievement of which they are most proud and that 
of which they're most ashamed. With the exception of Helen Clark, who says her 
disillusionment with Labour has been 'steady but acrid' and who insists she 
will not vote at the next election, all of them think that the government has 
done a great deal. In spite of all the difficulties, they love their work. So 
the highs are easy. Several people mention the minimum wage, others more 
personal things. Claire Curtis-Thomas is proud of the fact that the government 
has passed legislation to protect people with severe learning difficulties, so 
that if they are raped, a defence of consent will simply not be allowed. 'The 
relief that day was so profound and will last all my life,' she says. Barbara 
Follett, whose first husband was murdered in South Africa, cherishes the Labour 
amendment that banned all handguns. 'I just thought: that one's for you.'

The lows are more difficult to extract. These are politicians, after all. 
Barbara Follett is vehemently opposed to detention without trial, Claire 
Curtis-Thomas to the fact that the rules regarding a defendant's previous 
convictions have been changed. Gisela Stuart believes the government was wrong 
not to accept the Ombudsman's ruling that it was partly to blame for 85,000 
people losing some, or all, of their pensions between 1997 and 2005. Fiona 
Mactaggart, who used to be a minister at the Home Office, believes there are 
still too many mentally ill people in prison, simply because they have nowhere 
else to go.

Claire Ward will not answer this question at all and goes on robotically about 
the 'bigger picture'. Hazel Blears 'ums' and 'ahs' for so long that I start to 
feel embarrassed on her behalf. Melanie Johnson insists that she can't think of 
a single thing - in 10 years! - and looks disbelieving when I tell her that 
others have. Finally, she says: 'I wouldn't vote for PR in the devolved 
parliaments again!'

In the context of a decade of change, these responses are laughable. But 
perhaps more surprising is the fact that not a single one of them mentions the 
war; it is left to me to raise it and, when I do, they defend it, or limit 
themselves to criticising the American post-invasion masterplan. Barbara 
Follett tells me that her constituents encouraged her to vote for the war and 
that the 200 letters she has received that are against it are all 
'middle-class'.

'We're having a little moment about it,' she says. 'But collective guilt never 
solved a bloody thing. It's wankerish behaviour of a particularly British 
kind.' Only Fiona Mactaggart questions the legality of the war. 'I knew it was 
illegal under international law,' she says. 'But I think that sometimes you 
have to do things that are illegal.'

What of the future? The sitting MPs will be glad when the new leader - and 
they all assume it will be Gordon Brown - is finally installed. Some of them 
think that the Blair/Brown battle is a peculiarly male spectacle, others that 
this is just politics. Perhaps Barbara Follett has it best when she says: 'It 
is just politics. But what is the culture of politics? It's male. It's two 
swords apart, each man shouting at the other. It's the football-match approach.'

All of them tell me that women are less likely to be a member of one or other 
camp than their male colleagues. 'I can't be doing with all this campy stuff,' 
says Mactaggart. 'I want all this skulduggery to stop,' says Griffiths. The 
sitting MPs are bullish about the prospects of a 'revived' Conservative party - 
of course they are - the ex-MPs less so. Griffiths, still a loyal Labour voter, 
thinks there may be a hung parliament at the next election; Clark, more 
embittered, appears to relish the prospect that Labour might lose. The majority 
of them - Hughes and Ward the exceptions - would like to see a woman become the 
party's next deputy leader. 'I do hope we get some oestrogen in there,' says 
Curtis-Thomas.

Above all else, these MPs are determined to ensure that the numbers of women 
in Parliament continue to grow (this may be a faint hope if Labour does badly 
at the next election; David Cameron's plan to get more women selected is not, 
currently, proving to be very effective). It is not, they say, only about 
all-women shortlists - a 'necessary evil' according to Claire Ward - but about 
improving the way that Parliament looks from the outside; it needs to appear 
more accessible, more normal

The trouble is, to me, it is still looks - and feels - mighty weird. You walk 
the corridors and it reminds you irresistibly of a university hall of residence 
and most of us grew out of wanting to be in one of those years ago. And it is 
still unbelievably tough, not to say grim, for women in British politics.

'Women feel that if they come into politics, they'll lose their character, 
that they'll get trashed [by the press and other politicians],' says Barbara 
Follett, wearily. 'The stalkers, the death threats, the people assaulting you 
in the supermarket. Even your family will round on you.'

At this point, I'm waiting for a 'but', for a reavowal of the deep pride she 
has in her work. It never comes. She was in the chamber until the small hours. 
Tonight will be even later. Right now, poor thing, she just doesn't seem to 
have it in her.


Women power: females in politics

Women comprise 19.8 per cent of MPs, or 126 of the 646 total.

Labour has 96 female MPs out of 352, or 27.5 per cent; 17 of the 196 
Conservative MPs are women (9 per cent); Lib Dems have nine out of 63 (14 per 
cent).

There are 30 women ministers, 23 MPs and seven peers. Eight cabinet members 
and five government whips are women.

Women were first allowed to be candidates in 1918. The only one elected, 
Countess Constance Markievicz, was unable to take her seat because she was in 
prison suspected of conspiring with Germany during the First World War.

The first to take her seat was Nancy Astor, elected at a by-election in 1919. 
She said in her maiden speech: 'I do not want you to look on your lady Member 
as a fanatic or lunatic. I am simply trying to speak for hundreds of women and 
children throughout the country who cannot speak for themselves.'

Margaret Bondfield, a Labour MP, was the first woman in the Cabinet. She was 
Minister of Labour from 1929 until 1931.

Margaret Thatcher became Britain's first female Prime Minister in 1979. But 
the election returned the lowest number of women MPs for 30 years.

Jane Fulcher
 