
Ann Fenech, managing partner of Fenech & Fenech Advocates Malta

Malta has long been a trading post. Our harbours once played host to the 
galleons of the order of St. John, and later various mercantile vessels moored 
in the Grand Harbour which would ship goods around the Mediterranean basin. The 
British period in Malta saw the construction of our dry docks in a number of 
creeks in Grand Harbour, making Malta an important repair stop for the British 
naval fleet. This led to tremendous growth in the ship repair industry and 
associated trades in between the two World Wars.

The ship repair facilities available in Malta today are varied and cater for 
anything from 300 metre vessels to super yachts. We have also seen the 
establishment in Malta of important international players such as Oiltanking, 
who have invested in storage facilities, as well as the growth in bunkering 
services to vessels passing by en route to Suez or to Gibraltar, providing the 
added advantage of avoiding any deviation from the contractual route.

Maltese law gives owners and financiers of Maltese registered vessels a huge 
degree of comfort

Today, offering a number of marinas catering from the smallest to the largest 
super yacht, Malta offers first-class services backed by chandleries, suppliers 
and other service providers. Another important feather in the cap of maritime 
Malta is the International Maritime Law Institute (IMLI). This institute was 
set up in 1989 under the auspices of the International Maritime Organisation in 
collaboration with the government of Malta and has attracted hundreds of 
students from the four corners of the globe.

But the cherry on the cake of maritime Malta is its flag. The Maltese flag has 
risen slowly but surely to become the largest flag in Europe with over 55 
million tonnes registered. Contributory factors to this success include Malta’s 
whitelisting on the Paris Memorandum of Understanding (MoU), its membership of 
the International Maritime Organisation’s (IMO) legal committee and the “can 
do” attitude of its regulator.

However, one of the most important reasons to my mind is that the entire 
maritime sector is supported by a very robust legal system having its roots 
historically in Roman law but which has been, since the 1800s, heavily 
influenced by British statutes. Maltese law gives owners and financiers of 
Maltese-registered vessels a huge degree of comfort: in the event of an owner’s 
default, the law allows the financier to enforce his mortgage straight away by 
virtue of either a court-approved private sale or a judicial sale without 
lengthy legal procedures. This is also an advantage to owners, because it 
enables them to raise finance given the stability and solidity of our legal 
structures, now tried and tested through the latest most trying financial 
recession of 2008 through 2013, from which Malta proudly escaped unscathed.
 