
After seven years of a bitter and at times lethalrivalry between the two main 
Palestinian factions, Fatah andHamas <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hamas>, 
a historic Palestinian unity government has been sworn in , ending years of 
division.

The signing ceremony, which seems likely to complicate relations with the 
Palestinian Authority's international aid donors in Europe and the US and 
increase tensions withIsrael <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel>, was 
broadcast live in Gaza and the West Bank.

Despite the US secretary of state, John Kerry, telephoning the Palestinian 
president,Mahmoud Abbas <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mahmoud-abbas>, to 
express "concern about Hamas's role in any such government" ahead of the 
ceremony, the US said on Monday night that it would work with the new 
government but that it would be "watching closely to ensure that it upholds 
principles that President Abbas reiterated today", State Department spokeswoman 
Jen Psaki said.

Israel, which suspended peace negotiations in April when a surprise 
reconciliation deal was signed opening the way to the appointment of the new 
government, reacted angrily to the deal. The prime minister, Binyamin 
Netanyahu, chairing a security cabinet following the signing, told ministers: 
"Today, Abu Mazen [as President Mahmoud Abbas is known] said yes to terrorism 
and no to peace."

The meeting voted to authorise Netanyahu to impose unspecified sanctions 
against the Palestinian Authority, adding that it would now hold the 
Palestinian Authority "responsible" for any attacks originating from the Gaza 
Strip.

Israel also said it would act – including in the international community –to 
prevent Palestinian elections taking place which included the participation of 
Hamas.

Abbas, who heads the mainstream Fatah <https://www.theguardian.com/world/fatah>
 movement, has said the 17- member cabinet would comprise unaffiliated 
ministers and would strive to pursue peace, despite Hamas's refusal to accept 
co-existence with Israel.

"Today, and after announcing the government of national unity, we declare the 
end of division that caused catastrophic harm to our cause," Abbas said.

The announcement of the new government, ending a long and debilitating 
political and territorial division in Palestinian affairs, opens the way for 
long-delayed Palestinian elections, slated for 2015.

The ceremony took place hours after Israeli jets struck the site of what they 
said were two rocket launches from Gaza.

The new government will reunite Gaza and the West Bank under a single 
political authority for the first time since 2007, when Hamas – which won 
Palestinian legislative elections in 2006 – asserted control over the Gaza 
Strip, forcing out Fatah.

Since then the West Bank has been governed by Abbas and Fatah and Gaza by 
Hamas, which is regarded as a terrorist group in many capitals.

The swearing-in ceremony in the West Bank city of Ramallah came Netanyahu 
appealed to the international community not to rush into recognising the new 
government, largely made up of technocrats.

Netanyahu hit out at European governments for condemning a shooting attack on 
the Jewish museum in Brussels but responding with "ambiguity" to reconciliation 
between Fatah and Hamas.

"It is puzzling to me that governments in Europe that strongly criticise this 
act of murder speak with ambiguity and even friendliness about a unity 
government with Hamas, a terror organisation that carries out crimes like 
these," he said.

In a sign of the potential difficulties ahead, Israel refused three Gaza-based 
ministers permission to travel to the West Bank for the swearing-in.

The ceremony took place after several last-minute wrangles that threatened to 
delay the signing, including over who would be foreign minister and an attempt 
by Abbas to abolish the post of prisoners' minister, which was opposed by Hamas.

That dispute was resolved after it was agreed that the prisoners would remain 
within the government portfolio and would be held by prime minister Rami 
Hamdallah.

According to a draft obtained by AFP, the new government will have five 
ministers from Gaza, and will be headed by Hamdallah, , who will also hold the 
interior portfolio.

Abbas has already pledged that the new administration will abide by the 
principles laid down by the Middle East peace quartet in that it will recognise 
Israel, reject violence and abide by existing agreements.

Briefing reporters a few hours before the signing ceremony, Israel's 
intelligence minister, Yuval Steinlitz, a close ally of Netanyahu, insisted 
that the deal reasserting the Palestinian Authority's governance over Gaza 
placed an obligation on Abbas to demilitarise the coastal strip as part of the 
Oslo peace agreement.

Israel claims that factions in Gaza have up to 12,000 missiles and rockets 
under their control. "Enough of these tricks," Netanyahu said. "If this new 
Palestinian government has regained sovereignty over Gaza the first thing that 
Abbas should do is announce he is starting demilitarisation of Gaza."
 