
When you think of UKYA authors, several come to mind, but Lisa Heathfield 
always comes to mind for me. She’s the author of Seed and newly-released Paper 
Butterflies. One look at the book blogging community shows there was, and still 
is, plenty of excitement for Paper Butterflies, so I gave this book a read 
myself to see if I share in that same excitement.

June lives a dark, and secret, life at home with her stepmother and 
stepsister, and it’s a life not even her dad has any idea about. She feels as 
trapped as a butterfly in a net, until she meets Blister, a boy in the woods. 
June sees a tiny glimmer of hope that she might soon be able to fly away and be 
free, but at what cost could that freedom come?

Many people described this book as truly heartbreaking, and yet wonderful to 
read at the same time, and before opening this book up for the first time I 
thought it was a slightly far-fetched opinion. I was wrong; it’s a perfect 
description.

Be prepared for heartbreak. It’s so jam packed with words and expressions to 
toy with your emotions, and it’s written in a really beautiful, elegant way. 
Lisa’s got a really knack for writing books that are able to tug at your 
heartstrings and yet still keep you on tenterhooks.

I can really tell that there’s a lot of thought gone into this book and and I 
think that Lisa really deserves a lot of credit for this book.

The plot can get hazy at points, and it may not be for everyone, as with every 
book; you may not like it as much as I did. But for me personally, I really 
couldn’t put it down and even when I had to, I was thinking about the book. 
What is Blister going to do for June? What’s June going to do? Did that just 
happen?

I really like the relationship we saw unfold between June and Blister, and I 
really like seeing how their characters belong together within the book. As a 
reader, you really can see what happens between the two in a lot of detail.

Without question, Paper Butterflies is one of my favourite UKYA books this 
year and it’s definitely a book I recommend. Like I said, it may not be for 
everyone, but I really urge you to give it a try. Avoid all spoilers, just go 
into it knowing that there are emotions ahead and it’s got a huge backing and 
it’s got huge support from the book blogging community.

Definitely not one to miss.

 * Buy this book at the Guardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/415895/>  