
The power of influence has a huge impact on the choices we make and how we 
live our lives. More than ever before, we make decisions based on the views and 
recommendations of our peers, gathered in conversation or using websites such 
as TripAdvisor or PeerIndex. I recently arranged a weekend break to a fantastic 
hotel purely based on the fact that my friend told me she had a great time 
there.

Peer influence is also a powerful force in the working world, and can be 
instrumental in driving behaviour. Malcolm Gladwell described this type of 
influence as “the law of the few”, in his bookThe Tipping Point. He defined 
influential people as connectors, mavens or salespeople.

Connectors are peers who have lots of contacts and can make introductions for 
you. The mavens are those within our networks who we rely on to connect us to 
new information. These are the people who will tell you about the latest 
fashion or must-see film, and you listen and respect their opinions. Finally, 
the salespeople are the peers who can persuade you to take action.

Connecting with these influencers is an important part of business. However 
when it comes to the the office environment is is often the case that the 
higher up you go in an organisation, the more difficult it is to find people 
who can provide objectivity.

This is a common challenge among business owners. I spoke to Tina Brown, 
co-founder and managing director ofSchool Business Services 
<http://www.schoolbusinessservices.co.uk/> about this issue when she was 
considering whether to expand the business internationally. It seemed that 
everyone she spoke to for advice had a vested interest, whether that person was 
her husband, co-founder, other directors, or one of her friends. What she 
wanted was a totally objective viewpoint.

This was where a formal peer support group helped her. Brown is a member of 
Women Presidents’ Organization <http://www.womenpresidentsorg.com/>, a 
not-for-profit membership organisation focused purely on supporting women who 
run multi-million pound companies worldwide. By speaking to fellow 
entrepreneurs operating across different industry sectors, Brown was able to 
benefit from a number of opinions and shared experiences that were objective, 
useful and challenging.

Brown believes that “learning from peers should definitely be on your agenda”. 
“By tapping into the expertise of someone who’s already jumped the hurdles, you 
can cut to the chase much more efficiently, especially as time is precious,” 
she continues. “Trust plays a big part in the success of the group, which means 
that others are willing to open up, and be honest about what is working and 
what’s not working.”

For some, however, the idea of revealing any vulnerability in a group setting 
does not have much appeal. I experienced this during one of my expeditions to 
the north pole. The team consisted of 10 men, Susannah, an explorer from 
Sweden, and myself. On the first few days, when I was feeling exhausted at the 
end of the day, if I asked any of the men how they were feeling, they would 
always say they were on top form, even when they clearly looked tired. When I 
asked Susannah, she would honestly tell me how she felt. It took three or four 
days for the men to admit that it was ok to be honest too. This meant that if 
anyone was harbouring an injury or beginning to feel unwell we would be able to 
deal with it as a team, rather than let the situation get worse.

Creating a trusting environment is the key to ensuring that all parties can 
benefit from the invaluable support and advice that those who have lived 
through similar experiences can provide.

Here are three steps to creating a more trusting environment:

 * Small actions over time Trust is not created overnight; it develops through 
a series of small actions over time. So if you make a commitment to do 
something and you follow through as expected, it builds trust with others. 
 * Tell the truth as much as you can If someone asks for your opinion take a 
step back and ask whether you’re guilty of filtering your response or thinking 
“I better not say that because ...” or “how can I spin this?” Stop. Think again 
about what needs to happen and work out a way to tell the truth in a respectful 
way.

 * Respond positively to honesty When you are on the receiving end of someone 
else’s honesty, be aware of your reactions. Always take a few breaths and think 
through what they have said before you speak. Remember that responding with a 
question often has more power to influence than a statement.  