
A Minnesota judge overseeing Prince’s estate narrowed down the wide pool of 
potential heirs for the late superstar’s fortune on Friday, ruling out nearly 
30 claimants while ordering genetic testing for six purported family members.

Carver county judge Kevin Eide’s order requires genetic testing for Prince’s 
sister, Tyka Nelson, plus three half-siblings: Sharon Nelson, Norrine Nelson 
and John Nelson. Ken Abdo, the lawyer for the three half-siblings declined to 
comment. Tyka Nelson’s attorney did not immediately return a call.

Eide also ordered testing for Brianna Nelson, who has claimed to be Prince’s 
niece, and possible grand-niece Victoria Nelson. The pair has claimed Briana 
Nelson’s father was Prince’s half-brother. Their lawyer, Andrew Stoltman, 
declined to comment.

The A to Z of Prince
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/23/the-a-to-z-of-prince> 
It’s unclear why the judge did not order testing for Omar Baker or Alfred 
Jackson, two men who were listed as half-brothers in the original petition for 
the court to name a special administrator to the estate. But Eide’s order 
includes a note that the court “is not aware of any objection or dispute” that 
all six siblings or half-siblings are legitimate heirs.

Jackson’s lawyer, Justin Bruntjen, declined to comment. A lawyer for Baker 
could not be immediately reached.

Prince died 21 April  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/22/prince-obituary>of a drug 
overdose. The process of determining his heirs and dividing up his estate has 
fallen to the courts because he had no known children and left no will. A DNA 
test has already ruled out a Colorado prison inmate who claimed to be Prince’s 
son.

Barring any others who could come forward claiming ties, Eide’s order 
drastically limits who may benefit from Prince’s fortunes — an estimated $300 
million or more — or gain control of his legacy.

Among those excluded from potential heirship in Eide’s order are five 
unidentified people who claim that Prince was their biological father. One 
woman, who said she was adopted, claimedPrince 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/prince> was her father because “based upon 
the general description of the lifestyle of her biological parents, her 
fascination with the decedent and physical similarities.”

The order also tosses out a handful of claimants who alleged that Prince’s 
father was someone other than John L Nelson, who is listed in court records as 
Prince’s father.

Prince – a life in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2016/apr/21/prince-legacy-iconic-photographs-career>
Among those claimants was Venita Jackson Leverette, whose lawyer, James 
Selmer, called Eide’s decision “a travesty” and said he is considering an 
appeal. Selmer said that his client would be banned from undergoing testing 
while a man serving an eight-year prison sentence in Colorado was given a DNA 
test.

“The better course would be to allow people that have a plausible connection 
to him to have a blood test,” he said.

The four Prince siblings or half-siblings ordered to undergo genetic testing 
all claim John L Nelson as their father. Susan Link, head of estate planning 
for Minneapolis-based firm, Maslon, said the judge may have ordered them to be 
tested because of the claimants who said John L Nelson wasn’t actually Prince’s 
father — even though he threw out those claims.

The two that don’t need to be tested — Baker and Jackson — claim relation to 
Prince through a common mother, Mattie Shaw, but different fathers.
 