
When a writer you admire dies, rereading seems a normal courtesy and tribute. 
Occasionally, it may be prudent to resist going back: when Lawrence Durrell 
died, I preferred to remain with 40-year-old memories ofThe Alexandria Quartet 
rather than risk such lushness again. And sometimes the nature of the writer's 
oeuvre creates a problem of choice. This was the case withJohn Updike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/johnupdike>. I have only ever met one person 
– a distinguished arts journalist – who has read all Updike's 60-plus books; 
most of us, even long-term fans, probably score between 30 and 40. Should you 
choose one of those previously unopened? Or go for one you suspect you misread, 
or undervalued, at the time? Or one, likeCouples, which you might have read for 
somewhat non-literary reasons?

The decision eventually made itself. I had first read the Rabbit quartet in 
the autumn of 1991, in what felt near-perfect circumstances. I was on a book 
tour of the States, and bought the first volume,Rabbit, Run, in a Penguin 
edition at Heathrow airport. I picked up the others in different American 
cities, in chunky Fawcett Crest paperbacks, and read them as I criss-crossed 
the country; my bookmarks were the stubs of boarding passes. When released from 
publicity duties, I would either retreat inwards to Updike's prose, or outwards 
to walk ordinary American streets. This gave my reading, it felt, a deepening 
stereoscopy. And even when, too exhausted to do anything, I fell back on the 
hotel minibar and the television, I found I was only replicating Harry "Rabbit" 
Angstrom's preferred way of ingesting politics and current events. After three 
weeks, both Harry and I found ourselves in Florida, "death's favourite state", 
as he puts it in the final volume,Rabbit at Rest. Harry died; the book ended; 
my tour was over.

I came home convinced that the quartet was the best American novel of the 
postwar period. Nearly 20 years on, with Updike newly dead, and another 
American journey coming up, it was time to check on that judgment. By now those 
four volumes had been fused into a 1,516-page hardback under the overall title
Rabbit Angstrom. If the protagonist's nickname denotes a zigzagging creature of 
impulse and appetite, the angst of his Scandinavian surname indicates that 
Harry is also the bearer of a more metaphysical burden. Not that he is more 
than fleetingly aware of it; and the fact that he isn't makes him all the more 
emblematically American. John Cheever once said that Updike's characters 
performed their lives amid a landscape – a moral and spiritual one – of whose 
grandeur they were unaware.

Harry is a specific American, a high-school basketball star, 
department-store underling, linotype operator and, finally, Toyota car salesman 
in the decaying industrial town of Brewer, Pennsylvania (Updike based it on 
Reading, Pa, which he knew as a boy). Until Rabbit starts wintering in Florida 
in the final volume, he scarcely leaves Brewer – a location chosen to represent 
middle America by a New York film company inRabbit Redux. Harry is 
site-specific, slobbish, lust-driven, passive, patriotic, hard-hearted, 
prejudiced, puzzled, anxious. Yet familiarity renders him likeable – for his 
humour, his doggedness, his candour, his curiosity and his wrong-headed 
judgments – for example, preferring Perry Como to Frank Sinatra. But Updike was 
disappointed when readers went further and claimed they found Rabbit lovable: 
"My intention was never to make him – or any character – lovable." Instead, 
Harry is typical, and it takes an outsider to tell him so. An Australian 
doctor, asked by his wife Janice what is wrong with Rabbit's dicky heart, 
replies: "The usual thing, ma'am. It's tired and stiff and full of crud. It's a 
typical American heart, for his age and economic status etcetera." Harry's 
quiet role as an American everyman is publicly confirmed inRabbit at Rest when 
he is chosen for his second, brief moment of public fame: dressing up as Uncle 
Sam for a town parade.

Rereading the quartet, I was struck by how much of the book is about running 
away: Harry, Janice and Nelson all take off at different points, and all return 
defeatedly. (Updike explained thatRabbit, Run was partly a riposte to Kerouac's 
On the Road, and intended as a "realistic demonstration of what happens when a 
young American family man goes on the road" – ie, the family gets hurt, and the 
deserter slinks home.) I had forgotten how harshly transactional much of the 
sex was; how increasingly droll Rabbit becomes as he ages (Reagan reminds him 
of God, in that "you never knew how much he knew, nothing or everything", while 
Judaism "must be a great religion, once you get past the circumcision"); how 
masterfully Updike deploys free indirect style, switching us in and out of the 
main characters' consciousness; and how, instead of making each sequel merely 
sequential, he is constantly back-filling previous books with new information 
(the most extreme example being that we only get Janice's pre-Rabbit sexual 
history in the 2000 follow-up novellaRabbit Remembered – 40 years after we 
might have learned it).

What I remembered well was the audacity of Updike's starting-point. Harry is 
only 26, but past it: his brief years of sporting fame lie behind him, and he 
is already bored with Janice. On the second page, he refers to himself as 
"getting old" – and there are still several hundred thousand words to go. Even 
when he attains bovine contentment and material success inRabbit is Rich, it is 
against a general background of things being over before they had really begun. 
Each book is purposefully set at the dying of a decade – from the 1950s to the 
1980s – so there is little wider sense of fresh beginnings: the 1960s America of
Rabbit Redux isn't filled with love and peace and hopefulness, but with hatred, 
violence and craziness as the decade sours and dies. Perhaps America is itself 
dying, or at least being outpaced by the world: this is what Harry, and the 
novel, both wonder. What is American power if it can be defeated by the 
Vietcong; what is American inventiveness if it can be out-invented by the 
Japanese; what is American wealth when national debt piles up? InRabbit Redux 
Harry feels he has "come in on the end" of the American dream, "as the world 
shrank like an apple going bad"; by the start ofRabbit is Rich he feels "the 
great American ride is ending"; by the end ofRabbit at Rest "the whole free 
world is wearing out".

Whereas in my first reading I was overwhelmed by Updike's joy of description, 
his passionate attentiveness to such things as "the clunky suck of the 
refrigerator door opening and shutting" – by what he called, in the preface to 
hisThe Early Stories, "giving the mundane its beautiful due" – in my second I 
was increasingly aware of this underlying sense of things being already over, 
of the tug of dying and death. Thus the whole trajectory of Janice's life is an 
attempt to expiate the sin of having accidentally, drunkenly, drowned her baby. 
And while Harry imagines himself a genial and harmless life-enhancer, others 
see him quite differently. "Boy, you really have the touch of death, don't 
you?" his sort-of-whore girlfriend Ruth says at the end ofRabbit, Run. "Hold 
still. Just sit there. I see you very clear all of a sudden. You're Mr Death 
himself." Harry's son Nelson agrees with this analysis. InRabbit Redux, Harry 
is away on another sexual escapade when his house burns down, killing the 
runaway hippie Jill; teenage Nelson, equally smitten by the girl, thereafter 
treats his father as a simple murderer. And inRabbit at Rest Harry fears his 
female-killing curse is striking a third time when his rented Sunfish capsizes 
and his granddaughter Judy is nowhere to be seen. This time, as it happens, the 
hex is reversed: Judy is only hiding beneath the sail, and the scare triggers 
Rabbit's first heart attack, a dry run for his death.

And after death? Harry's intimations, not of immortality, but of the numinous, 
show up more clearly on rereading. Updike said that he couldn't quite give up 
on religion, because without the possibility or dream of something beyond and 
above, our terrestrial life became unendurable. Rabbit shares this vestigial 
need. "I don't not believe," he assures his dying lover Thelma, who replies, 
"That's not quite enough, I fear. Harry, darling." But it's all he can manage: 
"Hell, what I think about religion is ... is without a little of it, you'll 
sink." But this "little" doesn't find or express itself, as did Updike's, in 
churchgoing. God-believers in the quartet tend to be either crazies like 
Skeeter, fanatics, or pious post-Narcotics Anonymous droners like Nelson. Harry 
is not exactly a joined-up thinker, but he has an occasionally questing mind, a 
sense of what it might be if there were something beyond our heavy-footed 
sublunary existence. It's perhaps significant that the sport at which he 
excelled, which he plays in both the opening and closing pages of the 
tetralogy, involves a leaving of the ground and a reaching-up to something 
higher, if only to a skirted hoop. A greater reaching-up is offered by the US 
space programme, whose achievements (and failures) run through the book; Harry 
has a couch potato's fascination for it – as he does for the fate of the Dalai 
Lama, with whom he bizarrely, mock-heroically identifies. But there are also 
moments when Harry is able to recognise his longings more precisely. Beside the 
big stucco house belonging to Janice's parents there grew a large copper beech, 
which for many years shaded Harry and Janice's bedroom. When Nelson comes into 
occupation of the family house, inRabbit at Rest, he has the tree cut down. 
Harry doesn't argue; nor can he "tell the boy that the sound of the rain in 
that great beech had been the most religious experience of his life. That, and 
hitting a pure golf shot." In such moments Rabbit exemplifies a kind of 
suburban pantheism, giving the mundane its spiritual due.

Rabbit Angstrom has its imperfections. The second volume is usually considered 
the weakest of the four; and it's true that Skeeter's mau-mauing of whitey 
Rabbit goes on too long, and to decreasing effect. And there is a change in 
register after the first volume, where the hushed Joyceanism of his early mode 
– when he thought of himself as a short-story writer and poet, but not yet 
fully as a novelist – is to the fore. (Updike didn't realise that he was 
heading towards a tetralogy until after the second volume.) On the other hand, 
it's rare for a work of this length to get even better as it goes on, with
Rabbit at Rest the strongest and richest of the four books. In the last hundred 
pages or so, I found myself slowing deliberately, not so much because I didn't 
want the book to end, as because I didn't want Rabbit to die. (And when he 
does, his last words, to his shrieking son, are, maybe, also addressed 
consolingly to the reader: "All I can tell you is, it isn't so bad.") Any 
future historian wanting to understand the texture, smell, feel and meaning of 
bluey-white-collar life in ordinary America between the 1950s and the 1990s 
will need little more than the Rabbit quartet. But that implies only 
sociological rather than artistic virtue. So let's just repeat: still the 
greatest postwar American novel.

Rabbit Angstrom is published by the Everyman's Library at £25.
 