
Earlier this month Salesforce found a simple solution to the gender pay gap. 
It conducted a review of its staff’s salaries, and thenadjusted them accordingly
 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2015/11/salesforce-equal-pay-gender-gap/415050/>
 so that men and women in similar roles were earning similar amounts. The 
review came about after Cindy Robbins, senior vice president of Employee 
Success, and Leyla Seka, senior vice president of Desk.com, pointed out CEO 
Marc Benioff that female staff were probably being paid less. Initially 
sceptical, when Benioff realised what they were saying was true he went out of 
his way to fix it. But the company isn’t stopping there, it wants to create one 
of the most female-friendly cultures in tech.

Only 30% of Salesforce employees are women and few of those women are in 
influential positions. In 2013 The Women’s Surge programme was put into place 
by Benioff to force an increase of women in decision-making and influencer 
roles. Women must now make up at least 30% of the attendees at leadership and 
product strategy and investment meetings; a 50:50 split is the ultimate goal. 
Having women in the room is one thing; getting women to be seen and heard is 
another, especially in a culture where male voices are the norm. The key seems 
to be in numbers, the more women in the room, the more likely they are to talk..

“We see women stepping up and speaking up in our internal strategy meetings 
with Marc. They are banding together, and gaining confidence in bringing 
forward some great ideas,” says Robbins. “Leyla and I just look at each other 
and say: ‘it’s working’”.

The cultural shift is happening, yet Robbins and Seka knew it was not enough. 
They wanted to give women equal access to power and influence, ultimately 
enabling them to ascend in the company. The duo approached Benioff, challenging 
how Women’s Surge could succeed if Salesforce didn’t take a cold, hard look at 
their compensation packages. Women are either treated as equally valued or they 
are not. Benioff agreed.

The solution seems simple enough: women should be paid the same as their male 
counterparts. The reality is anything but simple. Salesforce has 17,000 
employees and the company has spentroughly $3million this year 
<http://fortune.com/2015/11/03/marissa-mayer-work-policy/> adjusting female 
salaries to match their male colleagues. Robbins and her team are in 
unchartered territory. “There is no framework for companies to do this. There 
is no right or wrong way. We have to unpack what has been done and we have to 
be thoughtful,” says Robbins.

While the pay gap exists among the genders, Robbins is careful to point out 
that the salary reviews should not be mistaken for a women’s only issue.

“We are focused on equal pay for every employee. Let’s not lose site about 
that. We are taking strides to develop the right approach moving forward,” says 
Robbins.

To gain this investment and make an expensive cultural shift, the timing had 
to be right. Robbins believes that the debate around gender equality has 
finally moved from philanthropic conversations to taking action. She points out 
that it’s no longer just women advocating for women, male executives have taken 
it upon themselves to develop programmes aimed at promoting their female 
employees and addressing the gender gap within the business.Equal pay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/equal-pay> is important but 
creating a real culture shift, that is Salesforce really putting its money 
where its mouth is.
 