
Beneath all the blood and the smoke in Saleem Haddad’s debut novel Guapa lies 
an overwhelming shame. But it’s not quite shame as we understand it in English: 
the little Arabic wordeib (عيب), which appears frequently in the book, 
encapsulates a cultural concept so particular that it takes a 10-minute 
discussion to explain.

Haddad is game, though: “Eib in Arab societies is like a social code,” he 
says. “It binds communities and creates boundaries and creates trust. But at 
the same time, it can be very constricting.” It is not like the widely usedharam
, a religious term for something forbidden in Islam. “Islamic law says this is 
forbidden, while this is allowed. Shame, however, is malleable. It is open to 
subversion. I wanted to explore how people could play with that.”

Guapa, described in the Guardian as “immensely readable … fluent, passionate 
and emotionally honest”, follows Rasa, a young gay man living in an unnamed 
Arab country, over a single day in the recent aftermath of a failed political 
uprising.

Rasa’s grandmother Teta has just discovered him in bed with his boyfriend 
Taymour, who tries to “play by the rules, one foot in and one foot out”. The 
book begins the morning after this shaming encounter: in the tense aftermath, 
Rasa, fretting about possible repercussions while dealing witheib, attempts to 
distract himself at work as a translator for western journalists. Moments of 
his past play out as he makes his way around the city on a day that he knows 
will end with Taymour’s wedding, to a mutual and unsuspecting female friend.

As a gay Arab man, Haddad is fascinated by shame, but was also once plagued 
with it: growing up he felt ashamed for not filling the ideal male role. Now 
33, living in London with his partner and his dog, he grew up burdened with the 
knowledge that he would not have children or continue the family lineage, in a 
society where stereotypes about the effeminacy of homosexual men abound. As 
Rasa observes in the novel, gay Arab men live a codified existence, where 
homosexuality is seen only in a slight lightness of the wrists, a fearful 
self-awareness in the eyes – and not in elaborate pride parades or overt 
flamboyance.

Guapa by Saleem Haddad review – an explosive debut
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/28/guapa-by-saleem-haddad-review> 
Haddad, in his own words, is a piece of human history. His Palestinian 
grandmother was born in Nazareth, then moved to Haifa and eventually Beirut 
after the Palestinians were expelled, where his father was born. During the 
Lebanese civil war, his father went to Baghdad, where he met Haddad’s 
Iraqi-German mother. During the Iran-Iraq war, the Haddads moved to Kuwait, 
where Saleem was born. During the Gulf war, when he was a child, they moved to 
Cyprus.


“When you are from so many different backgrounds, you often feel like you 
don’t belong anywhere. But I am part of a larger story,” he says. On his first 
day of school in Jordan, a child asked him whether he was Christian or Muslim 
(“Christian”), Palestinian or Jordanian (“Palestinian”). He was categorised 
accordingly and “discovered how I was understood in a wider context”.

This would not be the last time he was pigeonholed. At 18, he enrolled for 
university in Canada weeks before the 9/11 attacks: just as he finally had the 
freedom to explore his sexuality, he says, he was forced back into the closet, 
as he dealt with his peers scrutinising his Arabness. At a similar moment in 
Guapa, Rasa calls himself “the by-product of an oppressive culture, an 
ambassador of a people at war with civilisation”.

As “a good, middle-class Arab boy”, Haddad studied economics. He had wanted to 
do drama because he felt he would be a good actor. (“Being in the closet 
helps,” he jokes, with in a brief burst of campness.) Economics was a 
compromise for not studying medicine, but Haddad discovered an interest in 
poverty and development and began working for NGOs, particularlyMédecins Sans 
Frontières‎ <https://www.msf.org.uk/>, in Sri Lanka, Egypt, Yemen, Libya and 
Iraq.

While working for MSF, he wrote essays and articles, but never fiction. It 
wasn’t until 2010, when he was burned out by hard missions in Yemen and Iraq, 
that he returned the UK and began writing. “I needed a break. I needed to 
process everything,” he says. “When the revolutions happened, I felt a very 
strong urge to write a story like this, partly out of this sense that I was 
still struggling to find a space for my voice because I was so mixed up. So I 
put everything into this novel and it was a relief.”

His work made him “very political, very angry, very dark”. But then he tells a 
sweet anecdote about the moment that changed: once, when he returned to London 
after a stint in Iraq, his boyfriend dragged him to Borough market to sample 
“the best cupcake in the world”. Tired and sceptical, Haddad went along. 
“Suddenly, I knew this was him telling me to slow down and enjoy things. I knew 
I had to look at the world in a different way. I needed to channel the anger 
into understanding how people tick. I think if he hadn’t taught me to just be 
OK with enjoying things, even things as little as a cupcake, I wouldn’t have 
been able to write this book, a book about someone processing emotion.”

He was in London when the Arab spring began in 2011 and started writing Guapa 
that year while working full-time for an NGO. He would wake up at 6am to fit 
three hours of writing in every day before he went to the office, “whether it 
was London, Yemen or Libya”. By mid 2014, he had found an agent and by the end 
of that year he had a book deal.

But something wasn’t right about the manuscript and a week before submitting 
it to the publisher, he ripped it apart. “My boyfriend thought I was crazy – I 
turned our tiny London bedroom into a huge mind map of Post-it notes. It was 
some Beautiful Mind stuff. But it clicked for me. I knew where everything had 
to be.”

He came out 10 years ago via email to his parents, who immediately flew him to 
Abu Dhabi for a five-day interrogation so traumatic that Haddad says he doesn’t 
remember a lot of it. “I remember sitting in silence for hours as they yelled 
and cried. My mother printed out the Wikipedia page of homosexuality and they 
were going through it, trying to understand it. But there was nothing I could 
do.”

His parents have since read Guapa and are coming to terms with their son’s 
sexuality, he says. After a recent book launch in Lebanon, he even managed to 
wheedle his dad into joining him at a gay bar to celebrate. “He was like, ‘Oh 
it is not my place, it’s not for me.’ I had to tell him, ‘You are not going to 
get Aids just from going.’ And he came!” he says, still clearly delighted by 
the memory. “He sat in the bar and it was so important for him to see it was 
just a bar. No leather daddies tried to pull him into a corner. This whole 
process has been very positive.”

He struggles to pin down how much of Guapa is autobiographical: “Emotionally, 
it is very autobiographical. Plot-wise, less so.” Many parts of it, aside from 
the clear parallels with Haddad’s own story, feel true: the unnamed location 
could be any one of a number of Middle Eastern cities in the aftermath of a 
failed uprising. I read it assuming it was Egypt; Haddad, pleased, says:“Syrian 
people tell me it is Aleppo, Lebanese people say they saw this bit of graffiti 
in their neighbourhood, Jordanian people say the divisions between the east and 
west parts of the city are just like Amman. That is exactly what I wanted.”

Why? He didn’t want to expose any particular queer community to new scrutiny. 
“Whether it is house parties in Saudi Arabia, clubs in Beirut or coffee houses 
in the Gulf or north Africa, the thing I felt was most common was the idea of 
these underground spaces where the LGBT community can congregate.” So he 
created the smoky bar Guapa, with its basement drag show, from an amalgamation 
of various places across the Middle East.

Guapa has had an enthusiastic reception from readers as far apart as Italy, 
Brazil and India, and there are tentative plans to translate it into Arabic.He 
finds it alarming to suddenly have LGBT readers emailing him, asking for 
advice. (“It is quite hard because they relate to the book so much and I need 
to remind them, the book is the book and I am not Rasa!”)

When he first mooted the novel, “a few people said, ‘Listen, international 
fiction doesn’t really sell and gay fiction doesn’t really sell. And you’re 
combining the two.’ I kept telling them that there would be readers out there. 
I knew people who wanted this story.”

And he has been proved right. “It has been so overwhelming because all of this 
stuff I thought was just my own shit actually was stuff so many people are 
experiencing, all over the world.”

• Guapa is published by Europa Editions, priced £10.99. It is available from 
the Guardian bookshop for £9.01 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/guapa-465493.html>.
 