
Sam Leach, who has died aged 81, promoted beat dances around Liverpool in the 
early 1960s, including several with the Beatles. He was a firm believer in 
local talent and without him the Merseybeat scene would not have developed as 
it did.

Sam was born in Liverpool, son of Stanley Leach, a clerk working on the city 
docks, and his Canadian wife, Pauline. On leaving school, Sam worked for 
English Electric, but he hated being told what to do and resolved to become 
self-employed, embarking on a series of ventures that included damp-proofing 
properties and running a hair salon. He was perpetually optimistic, always 
expecting something good to turn up.

Sam loved rock’n’roll music and in the late 1950s started promoting shows in 
the Norris Green suburb of Liverpool. He moved to the city centre with regular 
nights at the Cassanova and established all-night sessions at the Iron Door, a 
rival club to the Cavern, in 1961. In the same year, he began Operation Big 
Beat nights at the Tower Ballroom, New Brighton, with attendances reaching 
4,000. He called his one man set-up the Leach Organisation.

Sam first saw the Beatles early in 1961 and was soon working with them, 
calling them the “boys with the atom beat”. He organised their first appearance 
in the south of England, at the Palais Ballroom in Aldershot, Hampshire, in 
December 1961. Unfortunately, he had not appreciated that his newspaper 
advertisement promoting the event had to be paid for in advance and so the 
local paper did not run it. Only 18 people turned up. The following night, back 
on Merseyside, the Beatles were in a furious mood at Hambleton Hall, Huyton, 
and would never have accepted Sam as a manager after what they considered a 
fiasco. Affectionately, though, they used to change the title line of Besame 
Mucho to “Besammy Leacho”.

Brian Epstein, who did become their manager, spoke at Sam’s wedding to Joan 
McEvoy in June 1962. That did not stop him outbidding Sam to book Little 
Richard for the Tower Ballroom. Possibly Little Richard’s agent Don Arden 
sensed there would be less hassle in getting money from Epstein. Sam’s finances 
usually lurched precariously from one show to the next. George Harrison once 
sent a letter to a fan telling how Sam had 10 bands booked for the next weekend 
and nowhere to put them.

In December 1980, Sam organised the memorial service and candlelit vigil for 
John Lennon outside St George’s Hall, Liverpool, less than a week after his 
death, a remarkable achievement. He spoke at many Beatles festivals and wrote a 
memoir, The Rocking City (1999). For a while, he managed a tribute band from 
Chicago, American English. He befriended the young blues guitarist Joe 
Bonamassa while on a visit to the US, and helped to establish him in the UK.

Sam and Joan divorced but remained on friendly terms and he was devoted to 
their children, Debbie, Paul, Tony and Samantha, who survive him.
 