
I have spent 42 years pushing against a patriarchy that tries to tell me what 
to look like, what to feel, who to demur to, and that there are many things 
that I can’t do because I’m female. The weaker sex? I gave birth. I wouldn’t be 
balled up on the ground if kicked in the groin. It’s tiring and it takes a 
toll. And I’ll keep pushing in my own steady way. For Thomas Frank (Trump has 
taken the White House – and he has the liberals to thank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-white-house-hillary-clinton-liberals>
, 10 November) to leave sexism out of his response piece wholesale (not one 
mention) and to choose to use the word “shrill” toward the end of his article, 
a word which conjures up images of women (when has a manever been called 
shrill?), leaves me frustrated and tired. Frank, whom I’m sure is a wonderful 
person in many respects, is as sexist as the next and hasn’t faced his own 
inner demons.

Whether or not you think Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> had the best interest of 
the lower class and working middle class in mind, for Frank to say that she 
isn’t really competent, that her email server was a real issue and that Biden 
would have been a better choice is just a cloak for his inability to face 
himself in the mirror.

To his credit, or to the detriment of at least of half of us, Frank is not 
alone in his unacknowledged sexism. Even when we pit a woman against the least 
competent candidate we could imagine, for arguably the most important job there 
is, our society as a whole can’t stomach voting for her. Voters literally 
stayed home from the polls rather than elect a woman. Let’s throw this Frank 
article in the virtual trash where it belongs, and instead read response 
articles penned by feminists (of all genders). We have work to do.
India Viola
Madison, Wisconsin, USA

• Amid the negativity and strong words about the result of the presidential 
election, it is important that we stay positive and true to our morals and 
standards, unlikeDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>
. As a young woman, feminist and member of the younger generation, I can 
certainly say that I will not tolerate Trump’s revolting words against women 
and those who don’t fit his mould of a perfect citizen. From this, I am 
reminded of the standards of how men should behave towards women: with respect 
and compassion.

The doom-and-gloom events of this year have taught and emphasised to me the 
importance of staying positive and not letting morals and standards slip 
because of the behaviour of a leader such as Trump. Furthermore, Hillary 
Clinton has shown, particularly to women and girls, that anything is possible 
if you truly believe, and that women can be and are champions for this. As she 
said in her speech, “there is still much work to be done” and the only way we 
will aid the work ahead is if we stand together with positive energy and hope 
against people like Trump’s fear and discrimination.
Eleanor Sutcliffe
Cambridge

• In an otherwise searching article (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/12/hillary-clinton-we-failed-her-sarah-churchwell>
, 12 November) Sarah Churchwell falls prey to the same negativism in attitudes 
toward women politicians that she’s writing about. While it is true that “a 
staggering 53% of white women voted against Clinton,” it is not true that “once 
again, a female candidate did not carry even the female vote”. Some 54% of 
women voted for Clinton – not all white, but all women.
Marcia Saunders
London

• Is it possible that we (who are appalled by his election) have 
underestimated Donald Trump? Is it possible that the rage, racism, boasts, 
unpleasant vilification of Hillary Clinton and ludicrous promises were his 
carefully calculated pose to woo those voters he recognised as disillusioned 
with the Washington establishment and longing for change? That the wall was 
never going to be built; that the secretary of state was never going to be sent 
to jail; that the clampdown on Muslim communities could be quietly overlooked; 
thatNato <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nato> would survive and trade 
treaties would remain untorn.

He is where he wants to be. He will have real power. He will use it to get 
what he really wants. He is a wheeler-dealer, a negotiator. He knows how to 
choose and use talented people who can deliver his goals. Let us by all means 
be fearful of what those goals might be, but let us also look beyond the 
smokescreen of his performance in the campaign. Listen to the change of tone of 
his carefully emollient victory speech. Remember how he outmanoeuvred the other 
contenders and shrugged off the disdain of the Republican hierarchy. Let us 
hope that American liberals will not write him off as a fool who cannot 
possibly survive.
Chris Harris
Lymington, Hampshire

• It is interesting to reflect that while all recent US presidents (even 
George W Bush) have made very public professions of attachment to the Christian 
faith, Donald Trump does not appear to share this. None of his frequent 
utterances over the last year have alluded to faith, and his actions and words 
during the election campaign were hardly those of a Christian adherent, quite 
the opposite. So we may reasonably assume that the Tea Party religious right, a 
key influence in his election, is now headed up by an amoral infidel. That 
would be one of the weirder outcomes of 8 November.
Robin Wendt
Chester

• How come liberals encourage violence while exercising their freedom of 
speech (Report, 12 November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/11/anti-trump-protests-weekend-new-york-trump-tower>
)? This is something I’ll never understand. You always speak of love and 
understanding when making conservatives knuckle under to your beliefs, yet when 
you don’t get your way after a fair election you unhinge like a crazed 
three-year old. Filth, property damage, foul language and disrespect for the 
individual and country. This is a liberal who loses. Your hypocrisy is 
staggering.
Kimberly Brockway
Random Lake, Wisconsin, USA

• The protesters in American cities all appear to be in the twenties. This is 
the generation, particularly if they are college-educated, who have been 
brought up on the shibboleths of political correctness, safe spaces and 
cultural appropriation, while being protected from viewpoints and literature 
running counter to their sensibilities. All of these are bound to trump 
democracy. They must be shell-shocked.
Edward Thomas
Eastbourne

• At a time of great uncertainty and anxiety following the election of Donald 
Trump, we should seek inspiration from the recent past. The “You say you want a 
revolution? 
<https://www.vam.ac.uk/exhibitions/you-say-you-want-a-revolution-records-and-rebels-1966-70>
” exhibition currently at the V&A museum charts the exhilarating optimism of 
the late 1960s, when millions of people tried to create a better world through 
music, fashion and positive social change and everything seemed possible. We 
must work to restore that spirit of hope.
Stan Labovitch
Windsor

• To all those who claimed (re Jeremy Corbyn) that attracting large, 
enthusiastic crowds was meaningless because it wouldn’t translate into votes… 
guess what?
Bruce Paley
Haverfordwest, Pembrokeshire

• Will there now be a rush of American babies named Donald or, even worse, 
Donalda as a result of Donald Trump’s victory?
Margaret Garland
Saffron Walden, Essex

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 