
The barrister, playwright and author Sir John Mortimer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/john-mortimer>, who has died aged 85, was 
a man for all the seasons that touched his Chilterns garden, where he lived 
as profusely as he wrote, in a spirit of unjudgmental generosity. His greatest 
achievement was to create, in Rumpole of the Bailey, a lawyer whom the world 
would love.

Though born in Hampstead, north London, John grew up in the house at Turville, 
near Henley, Oxfordshire, that he never really left. His father was an 
irascible, blind barrister, the Mortimer of Mortimer on Wills, Probate and 
Divorce. His mother, devoted and stoic, read aloud the sad, true stories of 
cruelty and passion between the wars contained in his father's briefs for the 
divorce court.

John, an only child, was sent to the Dragon school at Oxford, in a class with 
the historian EP Thompson and a "sour-faced boy who wouldn't share his tuck", 
who grew up to become a severe circuit judge and model for Rumpole's adversary, 
Judge Bullingdon. Home from Harrow, the teenager wracked his imagination to 
stage theatricals that his father might "see" – his contribution to the stiff 
upper-lipped family pretence that Clifford Mortimer was not blind. In Henley, 
he encountered with interest the bookshop-owning lesbians who had taken opium 
with Cocteau, and a prim, elderly lady who had, in her youth, urinated 
regularly upon pioneering sexologist Havelock Ellis.

He determined to be a writer, and on leaving school joined the Crown Film 
Unit, devising accounts of industrial and military Britain in wartime. But 
Clifford had other ideas, a clash captured in A Voyage Round My Father, the 
account by John of their relationship that first surfaced on BBC radio in 1963: 
"Father: ... if you were only a writer, who would you rub shoulders with? (with 
contempt) Other writers? You'll be far better off in the law. Son: I don't 
know. Father: No brilliance is needed in the law. Nothing but common sense, and 
relatively clean fingernails. Another thing, if you were a writer, think of 
your poor, unfortunate wife... Son: What? Father: She'd have you at home every 
day! In carpet slippers... Drinking tea and stumped for words! You'd be far 
better off down the tube each morning, and off to the law courts... the law of 
husband and wife may seem idiotic at first sight but when you get to know it, 
you'll find it can exercise a vague, medieval charm. Learn a little law, won't 
you? Just to please me. Son: It was my father's way to offer the law to me – 
the great stone column of authority which has been dragged by an adulterous, 
careless, negligent and half-criminal humanity down the ages – as if it were a 
small mechanical toy which might occupy half an hour on a rainy afternoon."

When Britain's other 1960s playwrights examined their fathers – Peter Nicholls 
despairingly in Forget-Me-Not Lane, David Mercer bitterly in After Heggarty - A 
Voyage Round My Father stood out, not only for its stagecraft and for Alec 
Guinness's central performance, but for the unquestioning love distilled in its 
lines for this man who had refused to show any to his son. Many young people 
ruin what would otherwise be talented and useful lives by devoting themselves 
to law, and John at the time felt himself to be one of them (he was always 
remarking on the irony of leaving the artificial atmosphere of the court at 
4.30pm for the real life of theatre rehearsals). Yet practice of law, although 
it sapped the early development of his writing skills, eventually gave him the 
experience which produced his greatest character.

After Brasenose College, Oxford, and at war's end, love and law came hand in 
hand. He was called to the bar in 1948 and in the following year married 
Penelope Fletcher, taking on her four existing children and adding two of their 
own. They wrote a travel book together, With Love and Lizards (1957) and novels 
separately, as he struggled to develop a practice. Soon he discovered a real 
talent for divorcing people (in those barbaric, fault-finding days before 
divorce reform), and for the arcane Chancery world in which time and talent is 
expended in deciding the validity of a will written on a duck egg, or the 
charitable status of a legacy to Trappist nuns.

After the series of half-hour radio plays, John adapted A Voyage Round My 
Father for television (1969, with Mark Dignam and Ian Richardson as father and 
son), then the stage (1971, with Guinness and Jeremy Brett) and then back into 
a film for television (1982, with Laurence Olivier and Alan Bates). It returned 
to the West End stage in 2006 with Derek Jacobi and Dominic Rowan. However, 
John's first stage success, A Dock Brief – set in the cells, where an 
incompetent barrister counsels himself and his convicted client – was rooted in 
his own nervousness about failure and his permanent terror at having 
responsibility for another's fate. For this reason, he avoided the criminal law 
until reform dried up his contested divorce work, and he had no alternative but 
to go "down the Bailey".

By the end of the 1960s he had a considerable reputation as a novelist (his 
first, Charade, drawing on his Crown Film Unit experience, and unrelated to the 
movie, appeared in 1947) and playwright, and had played an important role in 
the abolition of the death penalty and the passage of the Theatres Act, which 
saw off that bane of the British stage, the Lord Chamberlain's power of 
censorship – not that his own work had ever been in danger from this quarter.

An irony of his leadership of the anti-censorship movement was his profound 
belief that anything at all should be capable of being said about sex, coupled 
with his own reluctance to deal in his work with anything other than its 
consequence. Sex was an amusing but bemusing fact of life: "The whole business 
has been overestimated by the poets."

This was not, one feels, an attitude shared by Penelope. Theirs was, in fact, 
a remarkable marriage, although its final stages were somewhat bitterly 
reflected by Penelope in her novel The Home (1971). John, typically, celebrated 
more of the fun and laughter in his play Collaborators (1973), in which the 
couple metamorphosed into characters played by Glenda Jackson and John Wood.

By this time, John was a successful silk - he had become QC in 1966 - having 
reinvented himself as an advocate in murder trials. He found a macabre 
fascination in the pattern of bloodstains, and acquired a singular ability to 
charm expert prosecution witnesses out of their preconceptions. He was the 
greatest cross-examiner of such experts ("the art of cross-examination is not 
to examine crossly") and many alleged murderers owed their liberty to his 
ability to draw out a doubt in the apparently closed mind.

But nothing in the training of the English bar and bench had equipped it for 
the underground press, and when, in 1971, a largely unreadable magazine called 
Oz published a cartoon strip featuring Rupert Bear with an erection, its 
editors were treated as if they had committed treason. QCs, their cab-rank 
principles forgotten, fled from the proffered defence brief.

A few days before the trial – for conspiracy to corrupt public morals, an 
offence carrying a maximum of life imprisonment – Richard Neville and I showed 
John the offending publication while he was lunching a young woman, also named 
Penelope. They giggled. We begged him to take the case. "Goody," was his 
response.

Thus began his second life, as defender of the apparently indefensible, as 
creator of Rumpole and much else besides, and, from 1972, following his 
divorce, as husband of Penelope Gollop, Penny the second, and father of Emily 
and Rosie. His first wife died in 1999. Two autobiographies, Clinging to the 
Wreckage (1982) and Murderers and Other Friends (1994) speak of a life anchored 
in family, yet lived in a daily dramatic jumble of court cases, plays and 
television series, sharply observing the vanities of the world through the blur 
of diminishing eyesight.

John retired from the bar in 1981. Rumpole was the barrister he wanted to be, 
but wasn't. He was too nervous – petrified before a big case, and diffident 
about his own abilities. However, his final speeches, meticulously handwritten, 
were minor works of literature. Almost alone at the bar, he could laugh a case 
out of court (had he stayed, he would have made a fortune in libel defences). 
His forensic contribution to the Oz case was effectively to end censorship for 
the written word, first for literature, by arguing the appeal which freed Last 
Exit to Brooklyn (the 1964 novel by American author Hubert Selby Jr that was 
prosecuted under obscenity laws for its treatment of sex, drugs and violence), 
then by persuading the jury to reject the moral corruption charge, and going on 
to demolish, at the appeal, Judge Michael Argyle's directions on obscenity.

Of course pornography corrupted – starting with the policemen charged with 
enforcing the laws against it, many of whom were later jailed for taking 
bribes. John put on his wig and took off his glasses, so he could not see some 
of the trash he was called upon to defend with a success that drew rage from 
Mary Whitehouse and an extravagant attack from the Times, which claimed that no 
jury was immune to his charm.

The Williams committee on obscenity, reporting in 1980, agreed with Kenneth 
Tynan in crediting John with achieving a de facto freedom for the written word 
by his victorious defence of Inside Linda Lovelace (1973), a shabby little book 
that would have gone unnoticed had the DPP's office not decided to dignify it 
with a prosecution, after which it sold a million copies.

From dawn each day John would be at work on his supreme creation, Rumpole of 
the Bailey. Horace Rumpole had, like all great fictional characters, been 
composed from fragments of the real people John had worked with, his father, 
and James Burge (a mercurial Old Bailey junior who never quite recovered from 
the professional consequences of defending Stephen Ward during the Profumo 
scandal in 1963) and Jeremy Hutchinson, a mighty defence silk married at the 
time to Peggy Ashcroft.

In the hands of Leo McKern and Thames Television 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television> from 1978 to 1992 (after an 
initial appearance on the BBC in 1975), and in novels that continued till 2006, 
Rumpole achieved international acclaim. There are Rumpole societies of lawyers 
basking undeservedly in his popularity from Los Angeles to Perth. Rumpole is, 
perhaps, the first truly Dickensian character to emerge from the medium of 
television. There remains one great virtue about him - his independence - along 
with much that has, for good reason, passed away. If Rumpole returned today, he 
would still not be made a silk. The new appointments board displays a marked 
bias towards appointing prosecutors rather than defenders to the rank of Queens 
Counsel.

John worked on, long after leaving the bar, meticulous as ever. He came to the 
European court of human rights in Strasbourg with us in 1995 to research the 
law and the restaurants that feature in Rumpole and the Rights of Man, and more 
recent volumes had the bewildered barrister grappling with Asbos and terrorism 
control orders. Too full of ideas to sleep, he started work on a new film or 
novel or play – or all at the same time – at 5am, ending in time for long 
gossipy lunches with friends and family, followed by theatre and parties in 
London.

In the capital, he has in recent years served as culture's Queen Mother, 
gracing the National Theatre, the Royal Opera, the Royal Ivy and the Royal 
Court with his comfortingly unchanging, beaming presence. It is a sorry 
reflection on his political friends that he was never made Lord Mortimer of 
Turville, although he was knighted in 1998. Later works included tales of the 
opportunist Thatcherite politician Leslie Titmuss, Paradise Postponed (1985, 
televised 1986) and Titmuss Regained (1990, televised 1991); Summer's Lease 
(1988, televised 1989), set in Tuscany, and Dunster (1992), about an 
adversarial friendship that culminates in a court case. For Covent Garden he 
translated Die Fledermaus (1989), for the RSC, adapted A Christmas Carol 
(1994), and for OUP he produced The Oxford Book of Villains (1992).

The older he became, the more determined he was to cudgel his mind for any 
idea that might amuse a reader, while continuing to champion the causes for 
which he cared – the Howard League for Penal Reform, the Royal Court Theatre, 
and a holiday home for deprived children that he and Penny helped to establish 
in Turville.

Politically, his faith in liberal socialism wavered at the end. He had emerged 
from his one-member Communist cell at Harrow to a postwar Labour party he 
supported with increasing conviction as the Thatcher years changed Britain for 
the worse. Once the joker, jotting his contributions to the satirical BBC TV 
comedy That Was The Week That Was during idle afternoons in court in the early 
1960s, he and Penny teamed up with Harold Pinter and Antonia Fraser to found 
the 20 June group in 1987 – reviled almost as viciously in the Tory press as it 
was by those on the left who were not invited to join. Although saddened by the 
1992 election loss, he was increasingly uncertain about Tony Blair and his 
talent for turning the Labour into the war party. In 2005 he broke the habit of 
a lifetime, and voted Liberal Democrat.

The previous year an unauthorised biography by Graham Lord produced a 
delightful result. It stirred some embers, from which emerged, fully-formed, a 
lost son, the hidden fruit of a 60s affair with the actor Wendy Craig. It was a 
happy discovery for both men, and later a proper biography, A Voyage Round John 
Mortimer (2007), by Valerie Grove did her subject justice, capturing some of 
the pleasures of the Mortimer caravanserai: the long Sunday lunches at Turville 
in winter, the bluebell picnics in Chiltern woods every spring; the summer 
idylls in that part of Italy he dubbed Chiantishire.

In the last years, age wearied everything except his mind. His rotund face 
collapsed, his limbs and bladder gave up, bedtime became a ritual of 
excruciating pain, yet he continued writing and performing, as if for dear 
life. Mortimer's Miscellany ran for a month at the King's Head, Islington, 
north London, in 2007. A doctor's warning that the run might kill him only 
excited him at the prospect of dying like Dickens. He strove to keep his jokes 
up to date, although (like the law) they lagged by a decade. (Judge comes into 
court confessing he has left the judgment he is meant to read in his country 
cottage. "Fax it up, m'lord," says counsel. "Yes it does, rather.")

His final years brought reminders of his permanent contribution to the English 
stage, with the much praised production of Voyage with Jacobi, followed in 
2007-08 by Edward Fox in the double bill of Dock Brief and Edwin, first aired 
as a radio play in 1982, about a retired judge obsessed by the notion that his 
friend and neighbour may have been the father of his son. The house in Turville 
Heath had acquired a conservatory, for Olivier to pot earwigs in the television 
version of Voyage. Every weekend until his death it became a place of laughter 
and gossip and gumboots and children, with friends who felt privileged 
(although they were never made to feel privileged) to inspect the garden and 
walk in the wood and sip tea and champagne and talk of everything except 
Michelangelo, with the Renaissance man who had been saved from terminal 
decadence by his Reformation wife.

Much of his work in the last half of his life, and much of his continuing 
happiness, was inspired by Penny the second, whose enormous strengths of 
decency and determination creatively challenged his own vacillation and 
reluctance to make moral judgments. The result may be seen in his work, and in 
his family: actress Emily and model Rosie (daughters with Penny II); Radio 4 
producer Jeremy and social worker Sally (with Penny I) and law/IT consultant 
Ross Bentley, his long-lost son.

John Clifford Mortimer, barrister playwright and author, born 21 April 1923; 
died 16 January 2009
 