
I met a Kiwi woman in Europe in 2001 – in the mountains. After we’d been 
together for two months, she said: “This is great but, if you’re serious, I’m 
moving back to New Zealand.” We lived there for 10 years, but we moved back to 
Europe at the end of 2015.

Ohau, in Maori, means Windy. It’s pronounced O-how. The stickers all read 
“Ohau I love to ski”, or “Ohau I love to snowboard”. It’s a tiny resort right 
on South Island’s Lake Ohau, due south of Mount Cook, New Zealand’s highest 
peak.
 Ed Leigh. Photograph: Melody Sky 
It’s an adventure just getting to a New Zealand ski resort, let alone actually 
skiing there. There’s not a lot of infrastructure in the Southern Alps. You 
have to make your way there up windy roads, often with no barriers.

On paper, Ohau looks about as archaic and one-dimensional as it comes. It’s 
got one chair lift and a couple of little drag lifts for beginners. Even by New 
Zealand standards, it’s quite unknown. But in late July, August and September, 
Ohau has something very, very special.
 All the runs look out over the lake. 
Ohau is where I took my kids to learn to ski. It’s super easy and safe, but 
there’s lots of different terrain and it all just rolls back to this one lodge. 
You know that whatever happens to them, even if they have to slide, they’ll end 
up head-down at the bottom of the hill.

If you’re interested in free-riding, this lift accesses a ridge line that you 
can then hike as far as you want in either direction. The top half, on most 
days, gets really good snow and, on really good days, two or three times a 
year, it gets epic snow that runs right back down even beyond the chair lift. 
This means really, really good runs and they all look out over this pristine, 
turquoise lake, with the colours that you only get in the South Island of New 
Zealand.
 Ohau is a tiny, fairly unknown , resort. 
At sunset, Mount Cook’s south-west face reflects the sun and fires it back 
across the lake. If there’s no wind, you get this incredible reflection of all 
the mountains, and this sort of pink-purple diamond of Mount Cook reflected off 
the water.

The entire resort is run by one family, the Neilsons. Louise and Mike are the 
parents and their sons and daughters do various things at the lift, the 
restaurant or the lodge. The lodge sits right on the lake, with wonderful 1970s 
architecture. It’s all wood but really well-insulated, with glass around the 
north and east sides, so you can look over the lake and up to Mount Cook.
 Lake Ohau Lodge. 
You haven’t got any choices in Ohau, so it’s gotta be good. You’re an hour 
from the nearest town but there’s everything you want there: hot tubs, mountain 
boats, walking, skiing and snowboarding. And the food, included in your 
accommodation, is all locally sourced and really good.

There’s a week in August when the US ski team use Ohau as their base. The 
lodge only has 100 beds, but 70 of them will be filled with ski techs, ski 
testers and a couple of big-shot racers. But they all spend their time on one 
piste, which they prepare for racing, and the remaining 30 guests share the 
rest of the mountain. On that week, it can feel deserted, like your own private 
ski resort.
 View over the snow fields and lake. 
New Zealand is like a miniature world. On the southern tip of the South Island 
is Fjordland, which is just like Scandinavia. Then there are the Alps, which 
are just like the European Alps; the west coast is like Chile or Peru, with 
temperate rainforest; the east coast has plains, like Argentina; then Nelson, 
in the north, is unlike anywhere else. It does a great impression of other 
parts of the world in these micro environments, then adds a bit of New Zealand 
on top.
• Ski Sunday returns to BBC2 in January 2017
 