
When a skier is stock-still halfway down a piste, it usually means they are 
frozen with fear. They are unlikely to have stopped to "listen to the whispers 
of the mountain" – unless they are on the Paradiso piste in Corviglia, just 
above St Moritz, Switzerland. Welcome to the world's first yoga piste. Only in 
St Moritz, right? You could be forgiven for dismissing ski yoga as the latest 
gimmick for people with more money than sense (and there are certainly plenty 
of those here).

Holidays that combine skiing and yoga classes are nothing new, but doing yoga 
on skis takes the concept a step further. The Swiss yoga piste, also known as 
the chill-out slope, was dreamed up by Sabrina Nussbaum, a local ski instructor 
and yoga teacher. She noticed that her fellow ski instructors were taking up 
yoga after suffering knee and back injuries, and thought that everyone could 
benefit from skiing in a more "yogic" way.

Sabrina has selected four particularly scenic sites at which to do eight asanas
 (yoga postures). The slope is a red run and the sites themselves are 
off-piste, so beginners would struggle to reach them, but really the postures 
can be done anywhere on the mountain. You can pick up a "Yoga on Snow" leaflet 
at the surrounding ski lifts and follow the routine for free.

Or you can book a half- or full-day lesson with Sabrina or her colleague, 
Priska Hotz, both from theSuvretta Snowsports School 
<http://www.suvrettasnowsports.ch/> – some clients book a week, or even a whole 
month, of ski yoga. I spent a day with Sabrina, which included about six hours 
on the slopes, plus a 90-minute yoga class in the evening. Before I started, I 
was stiff and sore from the previous day's skiing, my first in two years. I was 
also a little nervous, because I seemed to have forgotten all my technique.

We started, appropriately, with a tadasana (mountain pose). I dropped my 
poles, stood up straight and closed my eyes. Sabrina told me to relax my feet 
and be aware of the mountain beneath them. It may have been the fresh air and 
sunshine, or the altitude, but I immediately felt relaxed and happy. After each 
pose, we skied for a while, applying the principles of theasana to the skiing. 
So first I tried to keep my feet flat and grounded, lifting my toes during 
difficult sections, rather than scrunching them up tight. It was incredible how 
much more control I had over my skis. Changing one simple thing, rather than 
trying to remember a dozen rules, was a revelation.

We stopped on top of an easy run to work on prana, or life force. This 
involved covering my ears and concentrating on my breathing. We skied down with 
our ears still covered, focusing on breathing calmly – quite difficult when you 
can't hear other skiers whizzing up behind you. We worked on breathing only 
through the nose for wide, gentle turns, or using "breath of fire" (a powerful, 
rhythmic pattern) for short, fast turns. The most useful exercise was 
remembering to exhale during fast or stressful moments, rather than holding the 
breath and tensing up.
 Rachel Dixon doing savasana, or relaxation, above the Engadine valley 
At lunchtimes, an array of expensive slopeside restaurants cater to the 
resort's super-wealthy clientele.La Marmite <http://www.mathisfood.ch/>, for 
example, which specialises in caviar and truffles and, at 2,486m, is Europe's 
highest gourmet restaurant – with prices to match. But we skied down to 
Clavatasch, a "hidden" restaurant near St Moritz's village neighbour, Celerina. 
The wooden building is a former cowshed and has a tiny kitchen serving cheap, 
local specialities such as barley soup – a tasty but suitably healthy dish. (It 
doesn't have a website – ask around for directions, though even some locals I 
spoke to had never heard of it.) Braulio, a herbal alpine liqueur, is a warming 
digestif that fires you up for an afternoon's skiing.

Equally, St Moritz Dorf (the upper, main part of town) is full of designer 
shops, five-star hotels and exclusive restaurants. But St Moritz Bad, down by 
the lake, is a better choice for a cheaper trip. I was staying there at Hotel 
Piz, a friendly place with a great pizzeria and a lively bar full of locals 
watching football. Across the road isVeltlinerkeller 
<http://www.veltlinerkeller-stmoritz.ch/site/>, a rustic restaurant that serves 
the carb-heavy dishes typical of the region, such aspizzoccheri – buckwheat 
pasta ribbons with swiss chard, potato and more cheese than you would 
ordinarily eat in a month. It is great fuel for all the activities available in 
St Moritz, the birthplace of winter sports tourism. I tried snowshoeing and 
cross-country skiing, and you can channel your inner Winter Olympian with 
bobsleigh, skeleton, curling and ice-skating.

Back on the slopes, we found a sheltered, sunny spot to do some sun 
salutations – a good way to warm up – then returned to the yoga piste for more 
skiing and assortedasanas: the powerful warrior pose; the muscle-loosening 
triangle stretch and forward bend; the tree pose for balance.

Whereas the previous day I had felt stressed and tired after a few hours, now 
I was calm and energised – I didn't want to stop. But it was time forsavasana, 
or relaxation, at a beautiful spot on the edge of the slope, overlooking a 
string of lakes in the Engadin valley. I lay on my back, feeling the sun on my 
face and my body supported by the fresh snow, listening to the swoosh of skiers 
and the whispered wind. Yoga on snow didn't feel like a gimmick – it felt like 
a whole different way of skiing.

• Accommodation was provided by Hotel Piz (+41 81 832 11 11, piz-stmoritz.ch 
<http://piz-stmoritz.ch/home.html>, doubles from £128 a night B&B). Flights 
were provided by Swiss Air (swiss.com 
<http://www.swiss.com/web/EN/Pages/index.aspx?Country=GB>) which flies from 
Heathrow, London City, Birmingham and Manchester to Zurich from £132 return. 
Train travel was provided by Swiss Railways: a return ticket from the airport 
to any Swiss destination costs £96 (swisstravelsystem.co.uk 
<http://www.swisstravelsystem.co.uk/index.php?affiliateid=189&system=GB>). Ski 
yoga tuition costs from £60 for a half day,engadin.stmoritz.ch 
<http://www.engadin.stmoritz.ch/winter/en/activities/sports/skiing-snowboarding/corviglia-skiing/yoga-on-snow/>
 