
“I am like a mountain goat!” says 24-year-old Ali Shah Farhang, smiling 
broadly. “When I was very young, I would walk for five hours every day to 
school and back, five hours across the peaks in all kinds of weather: minus 20 
degrees, through deep snow, all on my own. These mountains are in my blood.”


 The vibrant young Afghan is sharing the story of his rapid rise to sporting 
glory as we sit in bright, spring sunshine, drinking green chai from a battered 
thermos. We’re high up on a hillside by the crumbling shell of a hotel, looking 
out across the valley towards the toweringBuddha niches of Bamiyan 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Buddhas_of_Bamiyan>, in the Hazarajat region of 
central Afghanistan.
 Bamiyan, home to the Buddha niches. Photograph: Simon Urwin /Sidetracked.com 
 Pointing at the cliffs where the 6th-century statues were dynamited and 
destroyed by the Taliban in 2001, he explains: “When you live in a country like 
Afghanistan, you have a different way of thinking about danger. I think this is 
another one of the reasons why I am a good skier. I am a fearless person; I 
love the excitement of it all. I am a speed freak.”

 Growing up in the hamlet of Kushkak in the mountains nearby, Ali Shah was 
accustomed to spending the winter months working as a shepherd and tending to 
his family’s flock. That was until he picked up a pair of skis for the first 
time. “An Italian came to the Bamiyan Ski Club (a project funded by a 
charitable organisation to help develop tourism in the area) and I got the 
chance to go ski training, which was very serious, very tough. But I loved it. 
It came very naturally to me.”
 Ali Shah, Afghanistan’s number one skier. Photograph: Simon 
Urwin/Sidetracked.com 
 Four years on he now boasts the title of Afghanistan’s number one skier and 
reigning champion of the annualAfghan Ski Challenge 
<http://www.afghanskichallenge.com/>, the only competition of its kind in the 
country. “I feel freedom when I’m skiing; freedom from the restrictions and 
repressions of my country.”

 Alongside a small group of equally enthusiastic and talented countrymen, Ali 
Shah is now using his knowledge of the mountains and his skills on the snow 
working as a ski guide, serving the increasing number of foreigners who come to 
Bamiyan looking for an adrenaline fix with a difference.

 “I think Bamiyan is perhaps the fastest-growing ski destination in the 
world,” he jokes. “Before, no one came here, now every year in February and 
March we are welcoming more and more adventurous visitors from Australia, New 
Zealand, the UK, France, Germany, Switzerland and even the US, sometimes as 
many as 30 people in one month. They love the dry snow, the fast runs, the 
jumping from rocks when they go off-piste; Afghanistan is a real challenge, 
even for experienced skiers.”
 Adventurers on the slopes during a ski tour. Photograph: James 
Robertson/Sidetracked.com 
To access the vast swathes of virgin snow here, Ali Shah takes skiers on foot 
up the steep slopes of the Koh-e Baba range, part of theHindu Kush 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2006/oct/29/travelobituaries.travelbooks.escape>
, where peaks soar to almost 5,000 metres.

 “We are yet to build a ski lift,” he laughs. “So, it’s one hour to go up and 
just two minutes to get down again! But there are no complaints. I take lamb 
and chicken kebabs in my backpack to share during the climb. On the way we see 
beautiful landscapes and experience the local way of life: boys looking after 
their goats; people carrying water home on their donkeys. It’s totally unique.”

 Initially, there were fears among the more conservative members of the local 
population about westerners coming into their midst. “Some worried about 
infidels coming here, trying to change them to Christians, but their opinion 
soon changed,” he says. Now they are more likely to welcome travellers into 
their homes to drink tea and eat biscuits, while young village boys are 
particularly enthusiastic about going head to head on the slopes.
 Skis fashioned from planks of wood. Photograph: James 
Robertson/Sidetracked.com 
 “They decided to copy us – making their own skis from planks of wood and 
tying them to their shoes with fabric and rope. Skiing with them is all part of 
the fun of being here.”

 From his own humble beginnings, Ali Shah has now reached the lofty heights of 
an invitation to train in St Moritz, Switzerland, with a view to representing 
his homeland in the next Winter Olympics. “That’s my dream, to win a gold medal 
and be the hero of all Afghanistan.”

 He is just as eager to change the image of Bamiyan in the eyes of the world, 
“Forget about explosions, this is far away from the crazy mullahs. Come and see 
for yourselves. You will experience many great things, especially the real 
Afghan hospitality. Then, when you get home, you can show off your passport 
stamp, and best of all, tell your friends that you are one of the few people to 
have ever skied Afghanistan!


• Simon Urwin and James Robertson travelled with Untamed Borders (07532 139504,
untamedborders.com <http://www.untamedborders.com/north-east-india/>). The Ski 
Afghanistan 10-day trip to Bamiyan, in February 2015, costs £1,650 including 
internal flights, accommodation and guiding but not international flights or 
visas. The Afghan Ski Challenge package, from 22 February to 2 March 2015, 
costs £1,700 including internal flights, accommodation and guiding but not 
international flights or visas.

• Sidetracked Adventure Travel Magazine is a journal featuring a collection of 
personal stories of adventure travel, journeys and expeditions. View details of 
its printed magazinehere <http://www.sidetracked.com/volume-two/>.


 <http://www.untamedborders.com/>The Foreign Office advises against all but 
essential travel to Kabul and Bamiyan and all travel to many other parts of the 
country <https://www.gov.uk/foreign-travel-advice/afghanistan>

 