
I sat at the top of the mountain for more than three hours before flying down; 
I've got the sunburn and the haphazard video of the flight to prove it. 
Fortunately no broken bones, just a descent that scared me too much to attempt.

The starting pistol had gone earlier that morning in the Swiss village of 
Lodrino, about half an hour north ofLugano <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lugano>
. There was a motley crew of tough, weatherbeaten runners standing around, 
T-shirts broadcasting the previous races that they'd completed. Feeling rather 
out of my depth, I did my usual warm-up. As a regular 10km runner, I felt 
confident with my speed – but knew that the first five kilometres climbed no 
less than 1,500m.

I was greeted by the ascent almost immediately; my breathing became quickly 
laboured. Undeterred, I kept going. It wasn't really running. I flailed my arms 
around as the running poles of the other competitors swung this way and that. 
The steep, uneven steps had us in single file and we were leaning forward, 
hands on thighs. I copied the position of the other runners and tried to match 
them step for step. Pouring water over my head, I took a biscuit at the first 
refreshment stop. We were just 4km into the race now. Knowing that another 
7.5km lay ahead, I worried that I had started too quickly.

It took an average of three hours for the 300 competitors to reach the summit. 
At 2,190m above sea level, you're greeted with unbridled enthusiasm, buckets of 
isotonic drinks and plates of biscuits. This particular Swiss skyrace gives you 
the choice of the 21km up and down race (2,100m height gain/1,800m height 
descent), or to finish after 11.5km at the summit of Forcarella, before hiking 
down unhurried to the idyllic Lavertezzo. Given my inability to descend without 
hysterics, it was not a decision I struggled with.

With more than half of the canton of Ticino 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ticino>'s 2812.46 sq km covered in forests and 
mountains, skyrunning (running, as opposed to hiking, up and down mountains) is 
second nature to Swiss natives. For most of the day's competitors, scaling 
peaks and bounding down mountainsides was something they'd done since childhood 
– and it showed. They did it with the ease of mountain goats. For Brits, on the 
other hand, it takes a little more precaution and a lot more nerve.

Now labelled as its own discipline within the running community, skyrunning is 
becoming the next mass-participation event. But there's a downside: most races 
have extortionate entry fees, and transport to the far-flung mountains of the 
world isn't cheap. There is a solution – albeit a rather extreme, costly one. 
My boyfriend and I moved to Switzerland, placing us at the centre of the 
action, with a skyrace every weekend.

Today's action was centred on a rocky precipice above southern Switzerland's 
purportedly most picturesque valley,Valle Verzasca 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Valle_Verzasca> (you might know it from James 
Bond's dam bungee jump in the opening frames of GoldenEye 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mSvuHSqqGSw>); this marked the halfway 
checkpoint – or the welcome sight of the finishing mat if you were only doing 
the uphill race, as I was.

H
 Lavertezzo in the Valle Verzasca, Switzerland. Photograph: Alamy  ardy hikers 
had ventured up the mountain earlier that morning to lend support to the 
competitors. As one shouted to me that I was the first woman and nearing the 
finish, my spirits lifted momentarily – that is, until I looked up and saw the 
final kilometre literally rise up. I'd seen the course's altitude profile – I'd 
spent the car journey analysing it, in fact – but nothing could have prepared 
me for a kilometre at a gradient of 50%. This wasn't running; this was 
scrambling, climbing and heaving my weary body up and over rocks. When had I 
signed up for this? I wanted to impress at the finish – after all, this was a 
race – but I could barely bring myself to lift my feet as I crossed the finish 
line. With a skyrace, the climbs are never easy, and having grown up as a 
runner, I find being reduced to a walk humiliating and frustrating. But with an 
average gradient of 15% over the whole 11.5km and a maximum gradient of 50%, 
this isn't a regular uphill. Given the combination of the heat, the technical 
nature of the trail and my own competitive nature, my weak finish was probably 
to be expected.
"I think you've made the right choice!" said a runner as they continued over 
the summit, chucking water over their head. Perplexed and exhausted, I didn't 
immediately realise what they meant – that is, until I peered over the other 
side. The descent began with a near vertical snowy ravine. "Oh, God!" I said. 
Seeing my discomfort, the race organisers, recognising that I was not your 
regular Swiss mountain runner, allowed me the luxury of returning to the valley 
in a helicopter. Had it been a less glamorous way of leaving the mountaintop, I 
may have been a little embarrassed, but we're talking about a helicopter here. 
What could be a more exciting way to end the day?

For many, tackling a mountain race lies in knowing, or rather not knowing, 
what will greet you at the top. With our calendar now full of skyraces, it's 
time for me to face my fears and follow this advice: "Train your weaknesses, 
not your strengths."
 