
There are times when I miss Tony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair>. There are times when I look 
at our gloomy political landscape, peopled with unconvincing leaders, and shed 
a little tear that he isn’t there any more, with his big ideas, his zeal and 
his shiny TV teeth. Then I wake up from my anxiety dream, have a cold shower 
and realise I don’t need to miss him because he’s still bloodythere. Like a 
runaway political train, the man has been trying to run the entire world.

This week it was reported that Blair might step down from his role as envoy 
for the Quartet of Middle East peace negotiators – not because it places such a 
strain on the concept of irony, but because of alleged conflicts of interest 
with his Tony Blair Foundation, thought to have made £80m over the same period. 
It seems that striking highly secretive oil deals with sheikhs and sultans has 
proved just that little bit sexier than sorting out Palestine and its blockaded 
bus routes.

I mean, you can see how it happens. You start out with the best intentions in 
the world, as Blair probably did in the 1990s. You build some new schools, do 
some excellent work with Sure Start centres and Northern Ireland, then 
accidentally turn into Joan of Arc and kickstart a major war. Domestic politics 
starts looking whiny, and blamey, because everybody hates you, so you move on 
into a quiet retirement combo of Jerusalem, Saudi royals and private jets. One 
minute you’re having a quick shandy and a game of billiards with one of your 
oligarch mates; the next, you find you’ve sold them half a sub-Saharan country 
and a new transatlantic pipeline, and thrown in a book deal and dinner with a 
supermodel. And they haven’t even got their second round in yet.

Somewhere along the line, your personal manifesto quietly slips from 
“Education, Education, Education” into “Grease the wheels of dictatorships, 
grease the wheels of dictatorships, grease the wheels of dictatorships”. I 
understand it, I do. It could happen to any of us! So I wasn’t all that 
surprised when Blair said in a speech last weekend that, though democracy in 
the Middle East was important, it wasn’t any more important than efficacy, or 
“effective government taking effective decisions”. Indeed, if you’re trying to 
run a country unencumbered by the views and beliefs of the entire population of 
that country, as many of Tony’s new business partners are, democracy really 
could be a bit of a spanner in the works. Blair’s speech was given in Egypt, 
where he praised the highly effective work of his new pal President al-Sisi, 
with whom he’s been having some kind of unspecified relationship. Meanwhile, 
Amnesty International has reported a surge in harrowing incidents of torture 
and deaths in police custody since President al-Sisi came to power. Blair used 
to be the leader of theLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> 
party and won a landslide election victory: were we all smoking crack?

A biography published this week, Blair Inc: The Man Behind The Mask 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/blair-inc.html>, argues that he is the only 
British prime minister in history to merit a book about his lifeafter leaving 
power, given how much more power he has gained since he stopped being elected 
for it. What do we have to do to stop him? Stage some kind of intervention? I 
picture an industrial-sized shepherd’s crook coming on to the stage the next 
time he charges the International Sanitary Supply Association (yes, this 
happened) fifty grand to make a speech. It doesn’t always pan out like this for 
former leaders: Nicolas Sarkozy, once France’s “President Bling-Bling”, now runs
a monumentally boring Instagram account <https://instagram.com/nicolassarkozy>, 
filled with unblingy photos (“Here I am standing awkwardly in a laboratory 
visiting some scientists on National Microbe Day”).

Still, perhaps it will turn out that Blair has been playing a long game, 
befriending all these despots in order to pull off some massive revolution in 
which he shows them the error of their ways, like the Ghost of Christmas Past. 
Through his gentle guidance, the dictators will take the shackles off their 
repressed people and let everybody dance through the streets, forgetting money 
and remembering love. Or maybe it will turn out that he really is drunk on his 
own reflection and lining his sticky little pockets with the greatest love of 
all: mammon. Who can say for sure? But I’ve got an 80 million quid bet riding 
on the answer.

• Follow Sophie on Twitter <https://twitter.com/heawood>
 