
Architect Zaha Hadid's Z-shaped school in Brixton, south London, has beaten 
the hot favourite, the Olympic velodrome, to win the 16th annual RIBAStirling 
prize <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/stirling-prize> for 
architecture.

Victory for Evelyn Grace academy gives Hadid's practice a Stirling prize for 
the second year running, although it is the architect's first major building 
project in Britain. Last year her practice won for the Maxxi Museum of 21st 
Century Arts in Rome.

"Schools are among the first examples of architecture that everyone 
experiences and have a profound impact on all children as they grow up," said 
Hadid. "I am delighted that the Evelyn Grace academy has been so well received 
by all its students and staff."

The prestigious £20,000 award, handed over by the Royal Institute of British 
Architects, the Architects' Journal and construction products manufacturer 
Benchmark at a ceremony in Rotherham, is intended to celebrate the best new 
European building "built or designed in Britain". It was expected to go to 
Michael Hopkins's eye-catching east London Olympic venue, popularly known as 
"the Pringle". But Hadid's school triumphed with its bold approach to solving a 
difficult problem: how to bring four schools together on a small site under one 
"academy" umbrella. Evelyn Grace had to be squeezed into 1.4 hectares, while 
the average secondary school takes up more like 8ha. The school is also 
situated in the area of the capital with the highest crime rate in western 
Europe.

Rather than building the sort of glass atrium that has been adopted by many 
new schools, Hadid's team opted to spend the money on better-lit classrooms and 
corridors with more space. But her design does have one remarkable, central 
feature: a bright-red 100m sprint track running right through the site. There 
is also a multiuse Astroturf pitch, while another quiet corner is home to a 
wildflower garden.

RIBA president Angela Brady, who chaired the judges, said: "The Evelyn Grace 
academy is an exceptional example of what can be achieved when we invest 
carefully in a well-designed new school building. The result – a highly 
imaginative, exciting academy that shows the students, staff and local 
residents that they are valued – is what every school should and could be."

The school is run by the Ark (Absolute Return for Kids) Academy organisation, 
a charity set up by Arpad "Arki" Busson, the hedge-fund multimillionaire.

The final shortlist of the six rival structures competing for this year's 
award included not just Hopkins's velodrome, but Rab Bennetts's careful 
remodelling of the Royal Shakespeare and Swan Theatres in Stratford-on-Avon, an 
innovative cultural centre in Derry, the re-facing and transforming of a 1980s 
office building in north London, and the extension of the Folkwang Museum in 
Essen, Germany, byDavid Chipperfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/david-chipperfield> Architects, who 
have also won the Stirling prize before. This was the first year previous 
entrants were eligible for consideration and all six shortlisted practices had 
been shortlisted before.

Full coverage of the prizegiving ceremony will be broadcast in a special 
edition of BBC2'sCulture Show on Sunday.
 