
It’s traditional in November to write about the gender pay gap – I’ve spent 
the past three years doing just that. But this year, when I set out to discover 
whether women in tech are earning considerably less than their male peers, I 
was struck by something else. New research from US survey salary company Paysa 
shows that the first hurdle the tech world needs to overcome isn’t paying women 
fairly, it’s getting them into the company in the first place.

Paysa reviewed the pay of 1,143 job roles 
<https://www.paysa.com/blog/2016/08/29/alls-fair-in-tech-and-money/> at 63 
companies, a number that should have given it enough data to review the gender 
pay gap. However, of those 1,143 roles only 50 had close to an equal number of 
men and women doing them and, unsurprisingly, these jobs were in areas such as 
HR or administration. When all job roles were taken into consideration, women 
made up just 26% of the tech industry. So before companies can begin to analyse 
whether or not they are paid fairly, they have to ask themselves why they are 
finding it so hard to get women through the door in the first place.


The standard response is that it’s not the hiring companies’ fault. They pass 
the blame on to universities: if more women took computer science degrees there 
would be more women in tech. Universities pass the blame on to schools: not 
enough girls take Stem (science, technology, engineering and maths) subjects. 
And schools pass the blame on to parents and society: more girls would take 
Stem subjects if only their parents would stop buying them dolls for Christmas 
and advertising agencies didn’t assume all scientists were male.


The truth is we’re all to blame for the lack of girls leaving school with a 
desire to work in the technology industry, but the industry could certainly do 
more to help. As Meta Brown puts it in acolumn for Forbes 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/metabrown/#79345ebe5d5d>, the tech industry has 
got worse at bringing women into the fold. In the 1960s, nobody left university 
able to code. Those courses didn’t exist, so tech companies would hire smart 
people and train them. They invested in their staff from the get-go. Since 
there was no need to have a particular background to get into the industry, it 
attracted a wider range of people, not just in terms of gender but also 
backgrounds, interests and experiences. Today, it’s the same people from the 
same universities who have done the same degrees.


This bland recruitment strategy isn’t just bad for gender diversity, it’s bad 
for innovation. When you have a group of people whose life experiences all echo 
each other’s, you run the risk of them designing products exclusively for 
themselves and others like them. Perhaps if Apple had a slightly more diverse 
workforce it would have realised that aperiod tracker 
<https://www.wired.com/2015/09/finally-youll-able-track-period-ios/> would have 
made a good part of the health app, or thattesting the iWatch on different skin 
colours 
<http://bossip.com/1137485/race-matters-new-apple-watch-malfunctions-on-people-with-dark-skin-but-heres-why/>
 before it launched might have been a good idea.


Code like a girl: if you can learn to read music, you can learn to program
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/sep/08/code-like-a-girl-if-you-can-learn-to-read-music-you-can-learn-to-program>
Claiming that there aren’t enough women in tech because there aren’t enough of 
them taking computer science degrees is just laziness on the behalf of 
companies. We know that the number of women taking these degrees is falling as 
they are turned off by the idea of becoming developers.

 And it’s not got anything to do with the job itself. It’s a problem that 
stems from a lack of role models, a culture that’s more boys’ club than gender 
equality and a lack of interest in innovative hiring from the top of the 
organisation. If you want more women to have “developer” at the top of their 
career choices as they finish their A-levels, then everyone in the tech 
industry needs to make it a more female-friendly career.


Nearly every week I’m sent a press release about a new scheme that has been 
set up to get more women into tech. There are clubs that target young girls and 
bring role models into school. There are programmes that retrain stay-at-home 
mothers, helping them get back into the workplace. And there are numerous 
groups, networks and roundtables that try to support women already working in 
the industry. The key point of all these is that they are started and run by 
women. Occasionally, a few men will turn up to events or step forward to 
champion a programme that a woman in their organisation has thought up, but 
they are in the minority and their impact is minimal.


Getting more women into technology faces the same problem that getting equal 
pay through every industry does: men are scared that it will negatively impact 
them so they fail to support it. Instead, they behave as all scared humans do 
and protect their own, whether that’s people of the same gender, or those who 
went to the same university or who like the same pizza. What nobody talks about 
is that paying women more hasn’t resulted in men being paid less. There is room 
for everybody, whether they look like you or not. We just have to open the 
doors.


Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 