
John Fowles <https://www.theguardian.com/books/johnfowles> didn't regard The 
Magus as his greatest novel. The first he wrote but the second to be published 
(in 1966), it seemed to succeed in spite of its creator, who mused: "I have 
long learned to accept that the fiction that pleases me the least … persists in 
attracting a majority of my readers most."

For me, holiday-bound, in the late summer of 2004, the fat volume promised the 
perfect tribute to the islands I had cherished all my summers, from the age at 
which we can choose where we spend them. I fell in love in and with Greece when 
I was 19. The whisper of Athenian Greek still has much the same effect on me as 
does Russian on Jamie Lee Curtis …. They had our words first.

Written from the perspective of Nicholas Urfe, a young schoolteacher in the 
1950s, the novel's fictional "Phraxos", based on the island of Spetses where 
Fowles taught in a boarding school in 1951 and 52, is different in character 
from my beloved Paros. I had swapped the "pine-forest silences" of the Saronic 
isles for the blue and whitewashed circle that is the Cyclades in general, 
Paros in particular. But I recognised the "uncanny" silences and the stark 
beauty.

It was not the generous Aegean spring but the burnt melancholic landscape of 
early September that drew me to Paros. "The Greece of the islands is Circe 
still; so beautiful, quiet and empty that it verged on the terrifying." That 
summer The Magus captured it.

The novel, originally entitled The Godgame, makes a game of what is real and 
what is artifice, of perception and of identity. I read its central chapters on 
Logaras beach from where the early evening view of Naxos, across the bay, 
carves almost too clear, distorting distance with light; a constant play of 
real and mirage.

As the narrative challenged and re-challenged, the sun-baked pages became a 
diary of occasions on which I had flicked back, attempting to impose a 
structure on the shifting sands of the story. Ambre Solaire and olive oil 
stains gave it translucent page corners. Sometimes I became irritated by it, 
Urfe's trials, the seemingly endless series of deceptions by Conchis, too much 
for languorous days ("Were they twins or was that last night's drinks?"). 
Slowly, I allowed myself simply to experience rather than to understand.

Despite the plot's demands I found in its whole a source of nostalgia for 
things I had not realised I was missing and a tribute to those still Aegean 
afternoons. Ultimately, I found the disconnectedness of return to London: "In 
England we live in a domesticated relationship with what remains of our natural 
landscape … in Greece landscape and light are … so all-present ... that the 
relationship is immediately … one of passion." Nicholas's return was my own, 
every time.

The novel ends indeterminately. Fowles resisted demands placed on him for a 
definitive interpretation. Six years on I am OK with that.
 