
Susan Einzig, who has died aged 87, was one of the 20th century's key British 
book illustrators, and a central figure in the postwar London art scene. Best 
known for her illustrations for the children's novel Tom's Midnight Garden 
(1958), by Philippa Pearce, she illustrated for a range of authors and 
publishers and was a regularRadio Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-times> artist during its 
black-and-white heyday in the 1940s and 50s. She continued to paint, draw and 
exhibit until well into her 80s.

Born in Berlin, Einzig grew up in a Jewish middle-class family, in a spacious 
building that is now part of the city's university. Her father owned a garment 
factory and encouraged his daughter's artistic ambitions. She began art school 
at the age of 15 in a climate of growing antisemitism. In the spring of 1939, 
Einzig found herself on one of the last Kindertransport trains to reach Britain 
before the outbreak of war. Later she would learn of her father's death at the 
Nazi concentration camp at Theresienstadt; her mother managed to escape.

Enrolling as a student at London's Central School of Arts and Crafts, Einzig 
learned wood engraving under Gertrude Hermes and John Farleigh, and was taught 
drawing and illustration by Bernard Meninsky, William Roberts and Maurice 
Kesselman. After an unhappy evacuation to Yorkshire, she moved to Northampton, 
where the London art schools were temporarily resettled.

After the war she began to receive illustration commissions. "There was an 
upsurge in work and no one to do it," she told me. "I didn't feel that I could 
do it either but I was on the crest of a wave of optimism." Her first 
commission, in 1945, came from Noel Carrington and his Transatlantic Arts 
publishing venture. Norah Pulling's Mary Belinda and the Ten Aunts was 
illustrated by drawing directly on to lithographic plates for each of six 
colours. Carrington had pioneered the use of this process, known as 
autolithography, using it with his hugely successful Picture Puffin series. 
Einzig recalled the sense of privilege that she felt as she was sent to the 
special "artists' room" at Cowell's printers in Ipswich, where a team of 
skilled lithographers were put at her disposal in the production of this 
charming little book.

Needing to support herself with a "proper job", she took a part-time teaching 
post at Camberwell School ofArt <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art>, 
in south-east London, courtesy of the principal, William Johnson, who had 
taught her in Northampton. Among her students were Euan Uglow and Terry Scales. 
She was also put to work teaching ex-servicemen at Camberwell who had been 
given grants to retrain. These included the musicians Humphrey Lyttelton and 
Wally Fawkes.

It was at Camberwell that Einzig met the person who would be the greatest 
influence on her life, the charismatic, mercurial illustrator and painter, John 
Minton, who, along with Keith Vaughan, was also teaching there. "I was quickly 
drawn into this group," she said. "We all used to meet at weekends and draw 
each other. We went to the cinema and discovered the films of Jean Renoir, René 
Clair and Marcel Carné. We jived and jitterbugged to Humphrey Lyttelton's jazz 
band every Monday evening. We also got sucked into the drinking scene in Soho. 
It was all over within two or three years, but in my memory it seems to have 
been much longer."

Einzig took on numerous illustration commissions over the ensuing years, her 
distinctive black-and-white drawing style gradually shaking off the Minton 
influence and asserting its own elegant, literary identity. A lifelong love of 
theatre is often evident in the stage-like construction of many of her drawings.
 Susan Einzig's cover illustration for Tom's Midnight Garden 
The commission to illustrate Tom's Midnight Garden came about by chance: "I 
had been to see the children's book editor at Oxford University Press, who 
looked at my work and seemed very unsure about it. However, she gave me 
Philippa Pearce's manuscript to try to see if I could do it. I did two or three 
drawings and took them to show her, and then she asked me to do the book ... I 
was paid just a hundred pounds for the whole thing." Among the other titles she 
illustrated were Alphonse Daudet's Sappho: A Picture of Life in Paris, for the 
Folio Society in 1954, and E Nesbit's The Bastables, for Franklin Watts in 1966.

She joined the teaching staff of Chelsea School of Art, under Lawrence Gowing, 
continuing to teach there for more than 30 years. The list of her former 
students is long, and includes artists such as Sue Coe and Emma Chichester 
Clark, and the actor Alan Rickman.

Throughout her life she remained highly political and fiercely opposed to 
injustice in all its forms – she could never walk past a beggar without 
reaching for her purse. She was a loyal friend and an inspiring teacher.

She is survived by her daughter, Hetty, and two grandchildren.

• Susan Einzig, illustrator, painter and teacher, born 16 November 1922; died 
25 December 2009
 