
Syrian army command has said that Israel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> fired rockets at a military airport 
west of Damascus, the capital, and warned the Israeli government of 
repercussions after what it called a “flagrant” attack.


 State television quoted the army as saying several rockets were fired from an 
area near Lake Tiberias in northern Israel just after midnight which landed in 
the compound of the airport, a base for Republican Guards.

Body of Briton killed fighting Isis in Syria 'has been recovered'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/12/body-briton-ryan-lock-killed-fighting-isis-syria-recovered>
 “Syrian army command and armed forces warn Israel of the repercussions of the 
flagrant attack and stresses its continued fight against (this) terrorism and 
amputate the arms of the perpetrators,” the army command said in a statement.

 The statement did not disclose if there were any casualties, but said the 
rockets caused a fire.

 Earlier, state television said several explosions hit Mezzah military airport 
compound near Damascus and ambulances were rushed to the area, without giving 
details.

 The airport, located southwest of the capital, had been a base used to fire 
rockets at former rebel-held areas in the suburbs of Damascus.

Israel in the past has targeted positions of Lebanon’s powerful Hezbollah 
group insideSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> where the 
Iranian-backed group is heavily involved in fighting alongside the Syrian army.

 Israeli defence officials have voiced concern that Hezbollah’s experience in 
the Syrian civil war, where it has played a significant role and recently 
helped the Syrian army regain the eastern sector of the city of Aleppo, has 
strengthened it.

 Rebels operating in the area have said Hezbollah’s major arms supply route 
into Damascus from the Lebanese border has been targeted on several occasions 
in recent years by air strikes. This has included strikes on convoys of weapons 
and warehouses.

 Damascus airport was also hit by air strikes in 2013. Israel neither confirms 
nor denies involvement in striking targets inside Syria.

• This article was amended on 16 January 2017. An earlier version referred to 
Tel Aviv where the Israeli government was meant.
 