
Ten men arrived in Oman on Thursday after more than a decade detained without 
charge at Guantánamo Bay as theObama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> announced the next 
major step in its ongoing attempt to close the detention camp.

The transfer of the Yemeni citizens, announced first by Oman’s state media, 
reduced the Guantánamo population to 93 men, the first time since its inception 
as a detention facility that it has held fewer than 100 people. It is the 
largest single resettlement effort for Guantánamo detainees in a country not of 
the detainees’ origin.

One of the Yemenis, Fahd Ghazy, was 17 years old when he entered Guantánamo in 
February 2002.

Lee Wolosky, the US State Department’s special envoy for closing Guantánamo Bay
 <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/guantanamo-bay>, praised “sustained 
diplomatic engagement” and “our friends and partners in the Gulf” for the 
resettlement, and publicly forecast the next milestone.

“We expect to be in a position to empty Guantaánamo of all detainees who are 
currently approved for transfer by this summer,” Wolosky said Thursday, 
referring to at least 34 detainees.

Currently, the Guantánamo population consists of 10 men in the military 
tribunals process; 34 people approved for transfer out of Guantánamo; and 49 
so-called “forever prisoners”.

That final cohort are people who have never been charged with an offense and 
probably will never be but who the administration believes are too dangerous to 
release. Obama’s plans to close Guantánamo depend in large part on whittling 
down the number of “forever prisoners” through a quasi-parole board process and 
then transferring them out, either to their home countries, as withUK detainee 
Shaker Aamer in October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/30/shaker-aamer-released-from-guantanamo-bay>
, or to third countries, as with Thursday’s transfer of Yemenis to Oman.

But that mechanism, a process called the Periodic Review Board (PRB), has 
faced criticism internally and externallyfor taking too long 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/11/guantanamo-prisoner-release-delays-review-boards-closure>
. Four detainees are currently awaiting the board’s decisions on their fate. 
Hearing dates for five more detainees are scheduled through March.

Forty more “forever prisoners” have not undergone board reviews, something 
many within and outside of the administration consider an obstacle in the way 
of the genuine closure of Guantánamo.

Congress remains vociferously opposed to shutting Guantánamo down despite 
Obama’s entreaties, made most recently in Tuesday’s State of the Union address. 
The Senate armed services committee, led by Arizona Republican John McCain – 
whose views on closing Guantánamo have flipped multiple times since his 2008 
presidential opponent Obama came to office – is expected to hold a hearing on 
the closure in the coming weeks.

On Tuesday Mitch McConnell, the Senate majority leader, vowed to fight Obama’s 
plan to close Guantánamo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/12/mitch-mcconnell-guantanamo-bay-closure-barack-obama>
, saying: “I’m a supporter of Gitmo. I think it ought to stay open. I think we 
ought to add more terrorists to it and we ought to interrogate them there and 
if it is concluded that they should be tried, they should be tried by military 
commission … I’m a big fan of using Gitmo the way it has been used and I think 
hopefully he will fail in his effort to completely remove all of these bad guys 
from Guantánamo.”

Republican candidates for president are generally supportive of Guantánamo 
Bay. But Democratic frontrunner Hillary Clinton sent Obama a memo in January 
2013, weeks before she stepped down as secretary of state, urging him to 
intensify efforts to shut down Guantánamo. Her rival Bernie Sanders is also 
thought likely to seek its closure.

Four more detainees are expected to be transferred out of Guantánamo before 
January ends, part of an initiative to transfer as many as possible during 
Obama’s final year in office.

Yet human rights groups who advocate closing Guantánamo have long held that 
Obama’s plans are inadequate, not just in scheduling but in ambition. Obama 
anticipates holding some rump “forever prisoners” that the PRB does not clear 
elsewhere, and seeks congressional blessing to do so in the continental United 
States. Campaigners consider that exporting Guantánamo rather than genuinely 
closing it, because the plan accepts indefinite detention without trial, the 
practice that made Guantánamo internationally infamous in the first place.

The ten men sent to Oman <https://www.theguardian.com/world/oman> on Thursday 
were Ghazy, Samir Naji al-Hasan Muqbil, Adham Mohamed Ali Awad, Mukhtar Yahya 
Naji al-Warafi, Abu Bakr Ibn Muhammad al-Ahdal, Muhammad Salih Husayn 
al-Shaykh, Muhammad Said Salim Bin Salman, Said Muhammad Salih Hatim, Umar Said 
Salim al-Dini, and Fahmi Abdallah Ahmad Ubadi al-Tulaqi.

All 10 were cleared for transfer in 2010 by an interagency review, but a 
years-long ban on transferring detainees to Yemen and other bureaucratic 
intransigence – much of it coming from the Pentagon – kept them detained for 
six more years.
 