
Elmore Leonard: Using adverbs is a mortal sin

1 Never open a book with weather. If it's only to create atmosphere, and not a 
charac­ter's reaction to the weather, you don't want to go on too long. The 
reader is apt to leaf ahead look­ing for people. There are exceptions. If you 
happen to be Barry Lopez, who has more ways than an Eskimo to describe ice and 
snow in his bookArctic Dreams, you can do all the weather reporting you want. 

2 Avoid prologues: they can be ­annoying, especially a prologue ­following an 
introduction that comes after a foreword. But these are ordinarily found in 
non-fiction. A prologue in a novel is backstory, and you can drop it in 
anywhere you want. There is a prologue in John Steinbeck'sSweet Thursday, but 
it's OK because a character in the book makes the point of what my rules are 
all about. He says: "I like a lot of talk in a book and I don't like to have 
nobody tell me what the guy that's talking looks like. I want to figure 
out what he looks like from the way he talks."

3 Never use a verb other than "said" to carry dialogue. The line of dialogue 
belongs to the character; the verb is the writer sticking his nose in. But 
"said" is far less intrusive than "grumbled", "gasped", "cautioned", "lied". I 
once noticed Mary McCarthy ending a line of dialogue with "she asseverated" and 
had to stop reading and go to the dictionary.

4 Never use an adverb to modify the verb "said" ... he admonished gravely. To 
use an adverb this way (or almost any way) is a mortal sin. The writer is now 
exposing himself in earnest, using a word that distracts and can interrupt the 
rhythm of the exchange. I have a character in one of my books tell how she used 
to write historical romances "full of rape and adverbs".

5 Keep your exclamation points ­under control. You are allowed no more than 
two or three per 100,000 words of prose. If you have the knack of playing with 
exclaimers the way Tom Wolfe does, you can throw them in by the handful.

6 Never use the words "suddenly" or "all hell broke loose". This rule doesn't 
require an explanation. I have noticed that writers who use "suddenly" tend to 
exercise less control in the application of exclamation points.

7 Use regional dialect, patois, sparingly. Once you start spelling words in 
dialogue phonetically and loading the page with apos­trophes, you won't be able 
to stop. Notice the way Annie Proulx captures the flavour of Wyoming voices in 
her book of short storiesClose Range.

8 Avoid detailed descriptions of characters, which Steinbeck covered. In 
Ernest Hemingway's "Hills Like White Elephants", what do the "Ameri­can and the 
girl with him" look like? "She had taken off her hat and put it on the table." 
That's the only reference to a physical description in the story.

9 Don't go into great detail describing places and things, unless you're 
­Margaret Atwood and can paint scenes with language. You don't want 
descriptions that bring the action, the flow of the story, to a standstill.

10 Try to leave out the part that readers tend to skip. Think of what you skip 
reading a novel: thick paragraphs of prose you can see have too many words in 
them.

My most important rule is one that sums up the 10: if it sounds like writing, 
I rewrite it.

Elmore Leonard's 10 Rules of Writing is published next month by Weidenfeld & 
Nicolson.

Diana Athill

1 Read it aloud to yourself because that's the only way to be sure the rhythms 
of the sentences are OK (prose rhythms are too complex and subtle to be thought 
out – they can be got right only by ear).

2 Cut (perhaps that should be CUT): only by having no ­inessential words can 
every essential word be made to count.

3 You don't always have to go so far as to murder your darlings – those turns 
of phrase or images of which you felt extra proud when they appeared on the 
page – but go back and look at them with a very beady eye. Almost always it 
turns out that they'd be better dead. (Not every little twinge of satisfaction 
is suspect – it's the ones which amount to a sort of smug glee you must watch 
out for.)

Margaret Atwood

1 Take a pencil to write with on aeroplanes. Pens leak. But if the pencil 
breaks, you can't sharpen it on the plane, because you can't take knives with 
you. Therefore: take two pencils.

2 If both pencils break, you can do a rough sharpening job with a nail file of 
the metal or glass type.

3 Take something to write on. Paper is good. In a pinch, pieces of wood or 
your arm will do.

4 If you're using a computer, always safeguard new text with a ­memory stick.

5 Do back exercises. Pain is distracting.

6 Hold the reader's attention. (This is likely to work better if you can hold 
your own.) But you don't know who the reader is, so it's like shooting fish 
with a slingshot in the dark. What ­fascinates A will bore the pants off B.

7 You most likely need a thesaurus, a rudimentary grammar book, and a grip on 
reality. This latter means: there's no free lunch. Writing is work. It's also 
gambling. You don't get a pension plan. Other people can help you a bit, but 
­essentially you're on your own. ­Nobody is making you do this: you chose it, 
so don't whine.

8 You can never read your own book with the innocent anticipation that comes 
with that first delicious page of a new book, because you wrote the thing. 
You've been backstage. You've seen how the rabbits were smuggled into the hat. 
Therefore ask a reading friend or two to look at it before you give it to 
anyone in the publishing business. This friend should not be someone with whom 
you have a ­romantic relationship, unless you want to break up.

9 Don't sit down in the middle of the woods. If you're lost in the plot or 
blocked, retrace your steps to where you went wrong. Then take the other road. 
And/or change the person. Change the tense. Change the opening page.

10 Prayer might work. Or reading ­something else. Or a constant visual­isation 
of the holy grail that is the finished, published version of your resplendent 
book.

Roddy Doyle

1 Do not place a photograph of your ­favourite author on your desk, especially 
if the author is one of the famous ones who committed suicide.

2 Do be kind to yourself. Fill pages as quickly as possible; double space, or 
write on every second line. Regard every new page as a small triumph ­–

3 Until you get to Page 50. Then calm down, and start worrying about the 
quality. Do feel anxiety – it's the job.

4 Do give the work a name as quickly as possible. Own it, and see it. Dickens 
knewBleak House was going to be called Bleak House before he started writing 
it. The rest must have been easy.

5 Do restrict your browsing to a few websites a day. Don't go near the online 
bookies – unless it's research.

6 Do keep a thesaurus, but in the shed at the back of the garden or behind the 
fridge, somewhere that demands travel or effort. Chances are the words that 
come into your head will do fine, eg "horse", "ran", "said".

7 Do, occasionally, give in to temptation. Wash the kitchen floor, hang out 
the washing. It's research.

8 Do change your mind. Good ideas are often murdered by better ones. I was 
working on a novel about a band called the Partitions. Then I decided to call 
them the Commitments.

9 Do not search amazon.co.uk for the book you haven't written yet.

10 Do spend a few minutes a day working on the cover biog – "He divides his 
time between Kabul and Tierra del Fuego." But then get back to work.

Helen Dunmore

1 Finish the day's writing when you still want to continue.

2 Listen to what you have written. A dud rhythm in a passage of dialogue may 
show that you don't yet understand the characters well enough to write in their 
voices.

3 Read Keats's letters.

4 Reread, rewrite, reread, rewrite. If it still doesn't work, throw it away. 
It's a nice feeling, and you don't want to be cluttered with the corpses of 
poems and stories which have everything in them except the life they need.

5 Learn poems by heart.

6 Join professional organisations which advance the collective rights of 
authors.

7 A problem with a piece of writing often clarifies itself if you go for a 
long walk.

8 If you fear that taking care of your children and household will damage your 
writing, think of JG Ballard.

9 Don't worry about posterity – as Larkin (no sentimentalist) observed "What 
will survive of us is love".

Geoff Dyer

1 Never worry about the commercial possibilities of a project. That stuff is 
for agents and editors to fret over – or not. Conversation with my American 
publisher. Me: "I'm writing a book so boring, of such limited commercial 
appeal, that if you publish it, it will probably cost you your job." Publisher: 
"That's exactly what makes me want to stay in my job."

2 Don't write in public places. In the early 1990s I went to live in Paris. 
The usual writerly reasons: back then, if you were caught writing in a pub in 
England, you could get your head kicked in, whereas in Paris,dans les cafés . . 
. Since then I've developed an aversion to writing in public. I now think it 
should be done only in private, like any other lavatorial activity.

3 Don't be one of those writers who sentence themselves to a lifetime of 
sucking up to Nabokov.

4 If you use a computer, constantly refine and expand your autocorrect 
settings. The only reason I stay loyal to my piece-of-shit computer is that I 
have invested so much ingenuity into building one of the great auto­correct 
files in literary history. Perfectly formed and spelt words emerge from a few 
brief keystrokes: "Niet" becomes "Nietzsche", "phoy" becomes  ­"photography" 
and so on. ­Genius!

5 Keep a diary. The biggest regret of my writing life is that I have never 
kept a journal or a diary.

6 Have regrets. They are fuel. On the page they flare into desire.

7 Have more than one idea on the go at any one time. If it's a choice between 
writing a book and doing nothing I will always choose the latter. It's only if 
I have an idea for two books that I choose one rather than the other. I ­always 
have to feel that I'm bunking off fromsomething.

8 Beware of clichés. Not just the ­clichés that Martin Amis is at war with. 
There are clichés of response as well as expression. There are clichés of 
observation and of thought – even of conception. Many novels, even quite a few 
adequately written ones, are ­clichés ofform which conform to clichés of 
expectation.

9 Do it every day. Make a habit of putting your observations into words and 
gradually this will become instinct. This is the most important rule of all 
and, naturally, I don't follow it.

10 Never ride a bike with the brakes on. If something is proving too 
difficult, give up and do something else. Try to live without resort to 
per­severance. But writing is all about ­perseverance. You've got to stick at 
it. In my 30s I used to go to the gym even though I hated it. The purpose 
of ­going to the gym was to postpone the day when I would stop going. That's 
what writing is to me: a way of ­postponing the day when I won't do it any 
more, the day when I will sink into a depression so profound it will be 
indistinguishable from perfect bliss.

Anne Enright

1 The first 12 years are the worst.

2 The way to write a book is to actually write a book. A pen is useful, typing 
is also good. Keep putting words on the page.

3 Only bad writers think that their work is really good.

4 Description is hard. Remember that all description is an opinion about the 
world. Find a place to stand.

5 Write whatever way you like. Fiction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/fiction> is made of words on a page; reality 
is made of something else. It doesn't matter how "real" your story is, or how 
"made up": what matters is its necessity.

6 Try to be accurate about stuff.

7 Imagine that you are dying. If you had a terminal disease would you ­finish 
this book? Why not? The thing that annoys this 10-weeks-to-live self is the 
thing that is wrong with the book. So change it. Stop arguing with yourself. 
Change it. See? Easy. And no one had to die.

8 You can also do all that with whiskey.

9 Have fun.

10 Remember, if you sit at your desk for 15 or 20 years, every day, not 
­counting weekends, it changes you. It just does. It may not improve your 
temper, but it fixes something else. It makes you more free.

Richard Ford

1 Marry somebody you love and who thinks you being a writer's a good idea.

2 Don't have children.

3 Don't read your reviews.

4 Don't write reviews. (Your judgment's always tainted.)

5 Don't have arguments with your wife in the morning, or late at night.

6 Don't drink and write at the same time.

7 Don't write letters to the editor. (No one cares.)

8 Don't wish ill on your colleagues.

9 Try to think of others' good luck as encouragement to yourself.

10 Don't take any shit if you can ­possibly help it.

Jonathan Franzen

1 The reader is a friend, not an adversary, not a spectator.

2 Fiction that isn't an author's personal adventure into the frightening or 
the unknown isn't worth writing for anything but money.

3 Never use the word "then" as a ­conjunction – we have "and" for this 
purpose. Substituting "then" is the lazy or tone-deaf writer's non-solution to 
the problem of too many "ands" on the page.

4 Write in the third person unless a ­really distinctive first-person voice 
­offers itself irresistibly.

5 When information becomes free and universally accessible, voluminous 
research for a novel is devalued along with it.

6 The most purely autobiographical ­fiction requires pure invention. Nobody 
ever wrote a more auto­biographical story than "The Meta­morphosis".

7 You see more sitting still than chasing after.

8 It's doubtful that anyone with an internet connection at his workplace is 
writing good fiction.

9 Interesting verbs are seldom very interesting.

10 You have to love before you can be relentless.

Esther Freud

1 Cut out the metaphors and similes. In my first book I promised myself I 
wouldn't use any and I slipped up ­during a sunset in chapter 11. I still blush 
when I come across it.

2 A story needs rhythm. Read it aloud to yourself. If it doesn't spin a bit of 
magic, it's missing something.

3 Editing is everything. Cut until you can cut no more. What is left often 
springs into life.

4 Find your best time of the day for writing and write. Don't let anything 
else interfere. Afterwards it won't matter to you that the kitchen is a mess.

5 Don't wait for inspiration. Discipline is the key.

6 Trust your reader. Not everything needs to be explained. If you really know 
something, and breathe life into it, they'll know it too.

7 Never forget, even your own rules are there to be broken.

Neil Gaiman 

1 Write.

2 Put one word after another. Find the right word, put it down.

3 Finish what you're writing. Whatever you have to do to finish it, finish it.

4 Put it aside. Read it pretending you've never read it before. Show it to 
friends whose opinion you respect and who like the kind of thing that this is.

5 Remember: when people tell you something's wrong or doesn't work for them, 
they are almost always right. When they tell you exactly what they think is 
wrong and how to fix it, they are almost always wrong.

6 Fix it. Remember that, sooner or later, before it ever reaches perfection, 
you will have to let it go and move on and start to write the next thing. 
Perfection is like chasing the horizon. Keep moving.

7 Laugh at your own jokes.

8 The main rule of writing is that if you do it with enough assurance and 
confidence, you're allowed to do whatever you like. (That may be a rule for 
life as well as for writing. But it's definitely true for writing.) So write 
your story as it needs to be written. Write it ­honestly, and tell it as best 
you can. I'm not sure that there are any other rules. Not ones that matter.

David Hare

1 Write only when you have something to say.

2 Never take advice from anyone with no investment in the outcome.

3 Style is the art of getting yourself out of the way, not putting yourself in 
it.

4 If nobody will put your play on, put it on yourself.

5 Jokes are like hands and feet for a painter. They may not be what you want 
to end up doing but you have to master them in the meanwhile.

6 Theatre primarily belongs to the young.

7 No one has ever achieved consistency as a screenwriter.

8 Never go to a TV personality festival masquerading as a literary festival.

9 Never complain of being misunderstood. You can choose to be understood, or 
you can choose not to.

10 The two most depressing words in the English language are "literary 
fiction".

PD James

1 Increase your word power. Words are the raw material of our craft. The 
greater your vocabulary the more ­effective your writing. We who write in 
English are fortunate to have the richest and most versatile language in the 
world. Respect it.

2 Read widely and with discrimination. Bad writing is contagious.

3 Don't just plan to write – write. It is only by writing, not dreaming about 
it, that we develop our own style.

4 Write what you need to write, not what is currently popular or what you 
think will sell.

5 Open your mind to new experiences, particularly to the study of other 
­people. Nothing that happens to a writer – however happy, however tragic – is 
ever wasted.

AL Kennedy 

1 Have humility. Older/more ­experienced/more convincing writers may offer 
rules and varieties of advice. ­Consider what they say. However, don't 
automatically give them charge of your brain, or anything else – they might be 
bitter, twisted, burned-out, manipulative, or just not very like you.

2 Have more humility. Remember you don't know the limits of your own 
abilities. Successful or not, if you keep pushing beyond yourself, you will 
enrich your own life – and maybe even please a few strangers.

3 Defend others. You can, of course, steal stories and attributes from family 
and friends, fill in filecards after lovemaking and so forth. It might be 
better to celebrate those you love – and love itself – by writing in such a way 
that everyone keeps their privacy and dignity intact.

4 Defend your work. Organisations, institutions and individuals will often 
think they know best about your work – especially if they are paying you. When 
you genuinely believe their decisions would damage your work – walk away. Run 
away. The money doesn't matter that much.

5 Defend yourself. Find out what keeps you happy, motivated and creative.

6 Write. No amount of self-inflicted misery, altered states, black pullovers 
or being publicly obnoxious will ever add up to your being a writer. Writers 
write. On you go.

7 Read. As much as you can. As deeply and widely and nourishingly and 
­irritatingly as you can. And the good things will make you remember them, so 
you won't need to take notes.

8 Be without fear. This is impossible, but let the small fears drive your 
rewriting and set aside the large ones ­until they behave – then use them, 
maybe even write them. Too much fear and all you'll get is silence.

9 Remember you love writing. It wouldn't be worth it if you didn't. If the 
love fades, do what you need to and get it back.

10 Remember writing doesn't love you. It doesn't care. Nevertheless, it can 
behave with remarkable generosity. Speak well of it, encourage others, pass it 
on.

Read the second part of the article here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/feb/20/10-rules-for-writing-fiction-part-two>
 