
I’ve just landed back from Silicon Valley, having been on a trade mission with 
12 other incredible British female entrepreneurs. We met people like 
Eventbrite’s co-founder Julia Hartz, Julie Hanna (founder of Kiva and adviser 
to Obama), and (warning, even bigger name drop alert) Sheryl Sandberg. But 
there was one topic that ran through our conversations that I wasn’t expecting 
- failure.

Led by the Mayor’s International Business Programme and SVC2UK (run out of 
London & Partners) in partnership with the British Consulate General in San 
Francisco, we were whizzed around the Bay Area to meet senior executives at 
some of the largest companies in the Valley: companies like Apple, Uber, 
LinkedIn, Google and Facebook. All of whom are considered “successful” 
businesses. So why the focus on failure?

On the trip we had the opportunity to watch the trailer for a new documentary, 
made by one of my fellow missionaries Sarah Kerruish, calledGeneral Magic 
<http://www.generalmagicthemovie.com/>. It’s the story of the greatest dead 
company in Silicon Valley, a story of epic failure. Spun off from Apple in 
1990, the company listed on the American stock exchange in 1995 and the stock 
nearly doubled on the first day. That was the high point of the company’s 
history, which ended eight years later in bankruptcy.

General Magic is the company where Kerruish met her husband. Where Tony Fadell 
cut his teeth before he built the iPod, iPhone and Nest, and where so many 
people who went on to change the world sprung from, including Megan Smith, the 
current chief technology officer of America, Andy Rubin, the inventor of the 
Android phone and Pierre Omidyar who created eBay.

The company achieved technical breakthroughs that touch us all every day, 
including Magic Bus (the precursor to the USB stick), software modems 
(eliminating the need for modem chips), small touchscreens and touchscreen 
controller ASICs (which to you and me means designs that facilitate rich 
multimedia email, networked games, streaming television and early versions of 
e-commerce).

The trailer and indeed this trip reminded me how many of the world’s greatest 
visionaries once failed, and in a rather spectacular fashion. Culturally, it is 
nothing more than a rite of passage in the USA. It’s not a certain route to 
corporate death or permanent exclusion from the workforce but rather one 
possible outcome when you chase a big dream - as opposed to the typical UK 
perspective, where quite often, fear of failure paralyses people.

Dana Denis-Smith, founder of Obelisk, recalled giving up her job to set up the 
business that everyone thought “might fail”. Mothers, she thinks, feel an added 
pressure to bring emotional security to the family unit. Risk – and therefore 
the increased chance of failure – negatively affect the emotional equilibrium 
of a family, so mothers often give up too quickly on ideas and rather than 
pursuing riskier, compelling routes, take jobs they perceive to be more secure. 
Thankfully she didn’t.

So what do we all need to remember? What lessons should we all be embracing in 
order to fail well rather than completely?

Sarah McVittie of Dressipi, another missionary on SVC2UK, sees failure as a 
learning experience. “Any entrepreneur knows failure is something that can 
naturally happen when you try hard!” As entrepreneurs we make many mistakes but 
crucially, for those of us who experience success, we learn from those 
mistakes. We ask ourselves why we failed and try not to make the same mistakes 
twice. We can all learn from this school of thought.

No one knew what the success of General Magic would be. Or importantly, what 
its downfall would ignite. And the same goes for those 13 of us out there with 
big, audacious goals for our businesses – or you, in whatever role you 
currently hold – whether as an employee or employer, in a charity or business, 
student or pensioner, in an established company or with dreams of a start up.

Our trip, like the documentary, is a story that has relevance for any of us 
who dare to dream big and the life changing consequences when we fail, fail 
again, fail better and ultimately succeed. So let’s celebrate failure (and 
success) and let’s take risks, you never know what might come from them.
 