
Chalets Philippe - Chamonix, France

High on a secluded hill lies the most magical chalet hamlet in the Alps. This 
brainchild of ex-theatre impresario Philippe Courtines is a collection of 
renovated cowsheds, triple-storey haylofts and love-nest hideaways. The main 
chalet, Les Grandes Jorasses, sleeps eight plus two children and two infants, 
with smaller properties available in the garden.

It's a marvellous collection of old and new; state-of-the-art lighting and 
home cinema rub up against Savoyard antiques. The line between stage set and 
chalet has never been so blurred.

· Seven nights' chalet-board at Les Grandes Jorasses from £1,420pp, inc 
transfers from Geneva and daily chauffeur service (01344 849135,pollenbrooks.com
 <http://www.pollenbrooks.com>).

Chalet Merlo - Tarentaise, France

Get a taste of five-star chalet luxury for less. This new chalet is in the 
tiny French village ofLe Miroir, a 20-minute chauffered drive away from Val 
d'Isère, Tignes, and Les Arcs. Antique wooden beams and Ralph Lauren 
furnishings add style while the outdoor hot tub, home cinema and gym give a bit 
of substance. Just don't go for the nightlife.

· Seven nights' chalet-board from £834pp, inc unlimited champagne, 
seven-course gourmet meals and daily chauffeur service (0033 4 79 22 45 81,
chaletmerlo.eu <http://www.chaletmerlo.eu>).

Apartment R1/R2 - Avoriaz, France

New additions to the Rude Chalets <https://www.theguardian.com/travel/chalets> 
portfolio are these two four-bedroom self-catering apartments in Avoriaz. With 
balconies overlooking theRomain Gap, the high-tech, high-spec interior raises 
the bar in affordable apartment accommodation.

Bold colours, lots of pattern, wi-fi and flat-screen TV with PS2/DVD/CD. Local 
resort staff are on hand to help with transfers, ski school and equipment hire. 
Alternatively, borrow the free snowboards that come with the apartment.

· Seven nights' self-catering from £499 (0870 068 7030, rudechalets.com 
<http://www.rudechalets.com>).

Cappella - Colfosco, Italy

Art does not normally go hand in hand with skiing, but with real Dalís on the 
walls, it was voted the best art hotel in Europe by Condé Nast Johansens in 
2006. The hotel is in the heart of Colfosco, one of the best gateways into the 
famousSella Ronda ski circuit. The bathrooms are Italian stone, there is plenty 
of pine and the over-the-top decor is just the right side of chintzy.

· Seven nights' half-board from £620pp (0039 0471 836183, hotelcappella.com 
<http://www.hotelcappella.com>). 

Guglielmina Rifugio - Alagna/Gressoney, Italy

This mountain-top refuge sits at nearly 3,000m on the shoulder of the mountain 
between Alagna and Gressoney. A favourite spot for lunch and an après-ski 
drink, the real trick is to stay the night.

Watch the sun go down over the jagged Alpine peaks then enjoy a rustic 
three-course dinner; the ever-flowing grappa guarantees a party atmosphere. 
Next morning you have the mountains to yourselves and can drop down nearly 
2,000m before anyone else is about.

· €50pp pn half-board (0039 0163 91444, rifugioguglielmina.it 
<http://www.rifugioguglielmina.it>).

Arosea Life Balance Hotel - Val d'Ultimo, Italy

Far off the beaten track lies one of this season's more interesting openings. 
It is built on the side of the lake, and water is the main theme of the hotel. 
Mineral water is available on tap in the bedrooms and, along with the swimming 
pool water, is pumped directly from local sources using special technology that 
claims to retain the water's most beneficial properties.

A shuttle bus takes guests to the Schwemmalm resort where there are 18km of 
slopes. The hotel is also a great base for cross-country skiing, snow-shoeing 
and ski touring. Wind down with a traditional South Tyrolean spa treatment 
using apple blossom and pine needles.

· Seven-nights' half-board from £630pp (0039 0473 497 459, arosea.it 
<http://www.arosea.it>). 

Hotel Josl - Obergurgl, Austria

This bright, light and unapologetically modern hotel is less than 100m from 
the main lifts and close to the heart of the main village. The hotel was 
totally rebuilt in 2006 and the "sky sphere" spa moved to the top floor, where 
even the sauna has panoramic mountain views.

The outside of the hotel is a striking red, black and white and the rooms use 
bold primary colours like lime greens and blood reds for throws and walnut 
furniture. One of the highest, and jolliest, of all the Austrian resorts, the 
hotel itself sits around 1,900m so it's always a good snow-sure bet.

· Seven nights' half-board through Crystal Ski (0870 060 1370, crystalski.co.uk
 <http://www.crystalski.co.uk>; josl.at <http://www.josl.at>) from £595pp inc 
flights and transfers.

Hotel California - Champoluc, Italy

Though the hotel proprietors may not have fully comprehended the dark subtext 
of the Eagles' 1977 classic, the Hotel California is nevertheless an intriguing 
music-themed anomaly in this sleepy Italian resort - a great gateway into the 
vastMonterosa ski area. All the rooms are decorated and dedicated to American 
rock stars of a bygone era.

Think the Byrds, Bob Dylan, the Doors, Elvis Presley, the Grateful Dead, Janis 
Joplin and, er, John Denver. Though the decor is as old as the stars in places, 
every room has a dedicated sound system, and the artist your room is named 
after starts singing the moment you switch on the lights. Elvis has entered the 
building.

· Seven nights' half-board from £528pp inc flights and car hire through 
Momentum Ski (020-7371 9111,momentum.uk.com <http://www.momentum.uk.com>; 
hotelcalifornia.vda.it <http://www.hotelcalifornia.vda.it>).

Goldener Berg - Lech, Austria

This Oberlech stalwart may date back to medieval times - it grew out of a 
farmhouse that dates back to 1432 - but it's bang up-to-date in terms of design 
and service. A spa and freshwater spring have recently been added and the 
lounge area and half of the 45 rooms are being renovated for this season. Run 
by the well-seasoned Pfefferkorn family for the last 40 years, the restaurant 
has one Gault Millau toque (similar to the Michelin star system) and an 
excellent wine cellar.

· Seven nights' half-board from £1,273pp inc flights and transfer through Made 
to Measure Holidays (01243 533 333,mtmhols.co.uk <http://www.mtmhols.co.uk>; 
goldenerberg.at <http://www.goldenerberg.at>). 

Mavida Balance Hotel - Zell Am See, Austria

Recently renovated using local natural materials, the result is a shamelessly 
contemporary hotel that is more city-chic than resort-rustic. The opulent red 
and leather lounge is set around a central open fire and the rooms are 
greyed-off oak with flashes of colour and slate and stainless steel fittings. 
The spa even has a flotation tank.

· Seven nights' half-board from £870pp, inc flights and transfers through 
Kuoni (01306 747 008,kuoni.co.uk <http://www.kuoni.co.uk>; mavida.at 
<http://www.mavida.at>).

Haus Gmatchi - Zermatt, Switzerland

This doll's house-style chalet is in the very heart of the old town. Built 
from black timbers and raised on stilts, the building dates back to 1753 and 
over the centuries it has been a cow barn, hayloft and artist's studio. 
Sleeping six, it is one of the dinkiest chalets in the mountains.

On the cosy top floor, the living room and kitchen are divided by a wall of 
original wooden beams, and the flat-screen TV, bright red tiles and 
burnished-steel wood-burning stove give a distinctly contemporary flourish. 
Three double bedrooms share the downstairs levels.

· Seven nights' chalet-board from £729, inc flights and transfers through VIP 
Chalets (08701 123 119,vip-chalets.com <http://www.vip-chalets.com>).

Chesa Falcun - Klosters, Switzerland

So new to the Descent portfolio that it missed this year's brochure, the 
12-bedroom Falcun is set over four floors and has south-facing views across 
virgin snowfields to the Gotschna and Kublis peaks.

No expense has been spared, even the outdoor terraces are heated, and the 
bedrooms have double-height ceilings and private balconies.

If the in-house sauna, steam shower and massage service is not enough, you 
also have access to the rather exclusive Vereina Spa in the centre of the 
village. It can also be booked in tandem with next-door chalet Eugenia.

· Seven nights' chalet-board from £1,945pp (020-7384 3854, descent.co.uk 
<http://www.descent.co.uk>).

Hotel Mont Gelé - Verbier, Switzerland

Situated just above the Médran ski lift and four minutes' walk from the centre 
of town, this is the only hotel in Verbier to offer ski-in ski-out 
accommodation.

A three-star hotel, it is relatively good value (for Verbier at least) and the 
15 rooms come with iPod docking station, wi-fi access, DVD player and cable TV. 
Make sure you get a south-facing balcony to make the most of the views. 
Afternoon tea and early evening canapes included.

· Seven nights' B&B from £1,000pp (020-7385 8050, skiverbier.com 
<http://www.skiverbier.com>). 

Sport Hotel Hermitage - Soldeu, Andorra 

Andorra has managed to keep its prices relatively low while upping the 
quality. The Sport Hotel Hermitage may just be the most affordable five-star 
hotel in the mountains.

The five storeys of giant glass windows overlook the home slopes of Soldeu and 
the neutral colours and modern sculptures and furniture look both comfortable 
and contemporary.

The real selling point, however, is the spa. Set over five floors, its 
crowning glory is the network of hydro-massage pools.

· Seven nights' B&B from £625pp inc flights through Elegant Resorts (
elegantresorts.co.uk <http://www.elegantresorts.co.uk>, sporthotels.ad 
<http://www.sporthotels.ad>).

Kakslauttanen igloos - Finland 

Sleeping under the stars is one thing, but sleeping under the Northern lights 
on the edge of the Arctic Circle is quite another. Built from a special Thermo 
glass, the igloos keep you warm at outside temperatures of -30°C, so all you 
have to do is lie back and enjoy the light show.

You will feel the cold when you plunge through an ice-hole in the morning, a 
refreshing start compensated by a session in the smoke sauna.

· Seven nights' four-star half-board in nearby Saariselkä from £533pp, inc 
flights and transfers through Inghams (020-8780 4433,inghams.com 
<http://www.inghams.com>, kakslauttanen.fi <http://www.kakslauttanen.fi>). 
Transfer, dinner and one night's B&B in the glass igloo costs £134pp extra.

Sundance Lodge - Big White, Canada

Big White is one of the world's top spots for learning to ski powder. The 
slopes are not too steep but the snow keeps on falling. Until recently there 
was nowhere really outstanding to stay but Sundance has changed the picture.

Decked out with dark leather, stone walls and slate flooring, the look is 
comfy Canadian-luxe. The room comes with its own kitchen, there's plenty of 
clean lines and a few over-the-top splashes of pattern and colour.

It also has an in-house cinema, kids' play area, saltwater pool and outdoor 
winter waterslide.

· Seven nights' room-only from £1,294pp, inc flights and transfers with 
Frontier Travel (020-8776 8709,frontier-travel.co.uk 
<http://www.frontier-travel.co.uk>, sundancebigwhite.com 
<http://www.sundancebigwhite.com>).

Resort at Squaw Creek - Squaw Valley, California, US

More resort than hotel, Squaw Creek has private chairlift access into arguably 
California's best resort. A two-year refurbishment has just been completed, all 
of the rooms have been overhauled with a choice of deluxe king (vast king-sized 
bed) or deluxe queen (two queen-size beds), fireplace suites and penthouses.

All come with neutral colours and flat-screen televisions. The new spa is the 
finishing touch, with indoor and outdoor hot tubs, three swimming pools and a 
120ft water slide - which makes it just as popular with kids as their parents.

· Seven nights' room-only from £1,017pp, inc flights and transfers (0845 310 
3030,ski-i.com <http://www.ski-i.com>; squawcreek.com 
<http://www.squawcreek.com>).

 Mohr Life Resort - Zugspitze, Austria

This redevelopment at the foot of the Zugspitze - the iconic mountain on the 
border of Germany and Austria - is a distinctive blend of old and new. The 
200-year-old hotel has been comprehensively extended with a bold, modernist 
style. The 1,800-square-metre spa has a line of "birds nests" seats floating 
above the pool over the double-storey windows.

· Seven nights' half-board, six-day ski pass and massage from £525pp (0043 
5673 2362,mohr-life-resort.at <http://www.mohr-life-resort.at>).

Hotel Terra - Jackson Hole, Wyoming, US

New for this season and the first in a collection of eco-boutique hotels, the 
Hotel Terra is one of only five hotels in the US to conform to new LEED green 
certification. This means energy-efficient heating, lots of natural daylight 
and recycled materials.

Located slope-side in Teton village, it features rooftop spa and organic 
breakfast cafe, outdoor fire-pit dining and an Italian trattoria.

· Seven nights' room-only from £1,315pp inc flights and transfers (0845 277 
3333,skidream.com <http://www.skidream.com>; hotelterrajacksonhole.com 
<http://www.hotelterrajacksonhole.com>). 

Sunshine Inn - Banff, Canada

With the promise of fresh tracks every morning, this is one for powder hounds. 
The hotel sits up the mountain at the gondola mid-station and, with the 
exclusive opening of the Standish quad chairlift half an hour before the main 
lifts open, you can have first bite of the mountain before breakfast.

Banff's only ski-in ski-out accommodation, the 84 rooms were renovated last 
year. There is also a games room, massage area, gym and hot tub.

· Seven nights' room only is a bargain £195pp, 
skibanff.com/banff_ski_packages/sunshine_inn.php 
<http://www.skibanff.com/banff_ski_packages/sunshine_inn.php>, 001 87 754 22633.

Chalet-board means six nights' catered dinner and house wines and one night 
off for you to do your own thing.
 