
After he was made bishop of Durham in 1984, David Jenkins, who has died aged 
91, rapidly became a household name as a result of his many outspoken 
interventions in the religious and political controversies of the day. Though 
he was not, in fact, a particularly radical figure, theologically he was 
unpopular with conservatives on both sides of the Church of England, who 
suspected him – quite unfairly – of wanting to dilute the Christian faith in 
order to make it more readily acceptable.

Most people, however, found him extremely sympathetic. He came across as an 
engagingly warm and natural human being, bubbling over with enthusiasm for what 
he regarded as right and true, and so deeply convinced of the core truth of the 
Christian faith that he could afford to have a relaxed attitude to what he did 
not regard as essential elements of it – such as the virgin birth, or the empty 
tomb – as literally understood. It was refreshing to find an Anglican bishop 
accepting that there are many things in traditionalChristianity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/christianity> that are impossible for a 
modern westerner to believe in a literal sense, and saying so plainly.

The elder son of Lionel, a bank worker, and his wife, Dora (nee Page), Jenkins 
was brought up as a Methodist in Bromley, Kent, and educated at St Dunstan’s 
college, Catford. After three years’ military service in the Royal Artillery 
(in the course of which he reached the rank of captain), he read classics and 
theology at Queen’s College, Oxford, and trained for ordination at the Bishop’s 
Hostel, Lincoln. His only period in the parochial ministry, which was as a 
curate at Birmingham Cathedral, lasted barely a year, as in 1954 he was 
appointed to succeed his former tutor as fellow and chaplain of his old college.

Related: David Jenkins, former bishop of Durham, dies aged 91 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/04/david-jenkins-former-bishop-of-durham-dies-aged-91>

He was a popular tutor and an active fellow; he held several college offices, 
with varying degrees of success and, in 1966, at the relatively early age of 
41, he delivered the university’s Bampton lectures. Entitled The Glory of Man, 
they were extremely well received. The focus was on modern interests and 
anxieties, and particularly on contemporary concern with what he called 
“personalness”. He argued that man’s personal liveliness points to his – 
derived and as yet largely potential – divineness. Anthropology, he suggested, 
implies and involves theology.

It was hoped that Jenkins would follow up these lectures and develop the 
themes further, but, always keenly aware of the practical implications of 
religious faith, he was persuaded in 1969 to accept the directorship of the 
Humanum, an ambitious programme set up by the World Council of Churches in 
Geneva. Though the subtlety of his thought somewhat puzzled some of his 
colleagues, the work brought him new insights and many contacts worldwide; and 
it was a natural transition when he returned to the UK in 1973 to run the 
William Temple Foundation in Manchester.

This was the successor to William Temple College, which had been set up some 
years earlier to explore further the concerns of Temple, a former archbishop of 
York and Canterbury, with the relations between religion and social, economic 
and political issues. In 1979, Jenkins was prevailed upon to return to the 
professional academic world as professor of theology at Leeds, but though he 
wrote a number of popular books, he never published any follow-up to his 
Bampton lectures. The fact was that the spoken rather than the written word was 
his medium, and he drew large audiences to his talks and sermons, winning the 
hearts and minds of individuals and congregations.

It was between his appointment to Durham and his consecration that he 
electrified many church people by remarking in a BBC radio broadcast: “I 
wouldn’t put it past God to arrange a virgin birth if he wanted. But I don’t 
think he did.” He also referred to the resurrection being “far more than a 
conjuring trick with bones”, which was widely misquoted. This was far from 
being a gaffe; on the contrary it was an act of great courage, for it was part 
of a deliberate policy of bringing into the open the problems besetting 
religion in the late 20th century. “I want,” he said, “to get them talking 
about religion in the pubs.” He succeeded.

Yet any disquiet his words caused in the diocese was largely dispelled by his 
palpable devotion to essential Christian faith, including a quite traditional 
understanding of the incarnation, and by his caring pastoral approach. It was 
this concern that led him, for example, to take a close interest in local 
housing conditions. In the north-east of England, in the late 1980s, his 
heartfelt concern for social justice and his determined opposition to 
Thatcherism also won him considerable support.

Throughout his career he was a convinced ecumenist, and he strongly supported 
the work of the Student Christian Movement, serving as chairman of the SCM 
Press at a critical time (1987-92). It implies no criticism to say that he owed 
his influence largely to his personal qualities. He made no claim to be a 
profound or original thinker, and words tumbled from him so fast that his 
colleagues sometimes found it hard to be sure what he was saying, let alone to 
assess it fairly. On occasion his quick tongue could make him sound more 
outrageous than he meant to be, to his great distress. He was better at 
throwing off imaginative hints and opening up interesting vistas than at 
producing any coherent or closely knit system. Yet no one doubted his great 
intellectual courage and integrity, and his lack of pomposity and hypocrisy 
counted for a lot. People found him unassuming, humble and honest, as well as 
thoughtful. They were sympathetic to his excitement about searching for the 
truth in social and religious matters.

Both his work in Geneva and Manchester and his experience at Durham convinced 
him of the need for a theological perspective on political and economic issues, 
and in 2000 “the fire burned within him and he spake”: his book, Market Whys 
and Human Wherefores, analysed the implications of a market economy. If not 
strikingly original, it was persuasive, although it had little impact among 
professional economists.

He was for many years an enthusiastic lecturer for Swan Hellenic Cruises and 
after his retirement in 1994 he acted as assistant bishop in the diocese of 
Ripon until 2014. His memoir, The Calling of a Cuckoo, was published in 2003.

In 1949 he had married Mollie Peet, who provided a happy domestic background 
which made possible his hard-working life. His two sons and two daughters were 
also supportive, and in particular his daughter Rebecca served him faithfully 
and effectively as his personal assistant and public relations officer during 
his time at Durham.

Mollie died in 2008. He is survived by his children.

• David Jenkins, priest and theologian, born 26 January 1925; died 4 September 
2016

• Dennis Nineham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/31/the-rev-dennis-nineham-obituary> 
died in 2016
 