
Fish & Pips, Méribel

It was only as I arrived at the rustic-plush Chalet du Guide in Méribel that I 
realised that in my 30-odd ski trips, I'd never done the shared chalet thing. 
The group chalet takeover yes, but to the catered, per-room model, sharing 
mountain digs with perfect strangers, I was as green as a slope in a skier's 
nightmare.

Fast forward 24 hours and I'm one of two survivors at a table which has, since 
champagne and canapés at 7.30pm, witnessed an orgy of gourmet eating - rare 
Thai beef salad, salmon steamed in tom yum broth and griddled pineapple with 
homemade coconut ice cream - uninhibited imbibing and increasingly hilarious 
conversation as my brand new best friends and I get to know each other.

The delicious food and friendly banter have converted me to the idea of the 
shared chalet, so that by the time the nice young man from ski rentals company 
Freeride arrives the next morning with my snowboard and sets up my bindings in 
front of the fire, all thoughts of a Big Brother-style house have vanished from 
my mind.

"We wanted to offer the best elements of high-end chalet holidays - delicious 
food, highly professional staff, bespoke personal service and welcoming 
surroundings in a great location - while trimming some of the frills such as 
huge chalets with designer decor and hot and cold running champagne, to make 
the experience more affordable," says Philippa (Pips) Eyles of the chalet she 
runs with Holly (Fish) Fisher.

The pair met at the age of five on a joint family ski holiday. Ski buddies 
from that day on, these two 27-year-olds from Guildford and south London now 
have a more permanent presence in the mountains as Méribel-based gourmet chalet 
company Fish & Pips.

Their business plan was hatched during the first of two winter seasons that 
Eyles and Fisher worked for luxury chalet brand Scott Dunn in Méribel after 
finishing university in 2004. "We learned a hell of a lot," says Fisher. "Both 
what worked, and what we thought could be changed to create the kind of holiday 
we'd like."

They've certainly given Méribel's chalet scene a shake-up, creating an utterly 
relaxed but seriously polished product. Attention to detail is clear in 
everything from the immaculate white bed linen and fat duvets to the range of 
activities the staff will arrange (the choice includes in-room massage and 
dog-sledding) to the presentation of the food and the complimentary Fish & 
Pips-branded shuttle minibus.

The project had a tough start. When they were looking for rental properties to 
decorate and run themselves, both age and gender seemed barriers to their being 
taken seriously by landlords. But these early setbacks gave way to a 
last-minute triumph, when three chalets became available a month after they'd 
gone home for the summer and all but given up. Today, with six cosy, 
immaculately kept properties in "Méribel Village", a tranquil suburb 2km from 
the busy centre but with its own chairlift, and repeat business nearing 50%, it 
is clear they have hit on a winning formula.

"We'd like to set up in other resorts, too," says Eyles, "but we're in no 
hurry. At the heart of what we do is a highly personalised service."

Indeed. A few days before I visit Chalet du Guide, Eyles, who, like Fisher, is 
Cordon Bleu-trained, calls me to ask about my food preferences. "We think 
guests prefer light, contemporary, varied cooking rather than traditional 
chalet food. But if tartiflette every night is what you want, we're happy to 
provide that." Eyles also asks if I'd like any sandwich supplies bought in to 
help save on Méribel's vertiginous lunch prices.

I've been spoilt by having this as my first chalet experience, and am won over 
by the concept, even with the quirks of sharing with strangers. As I surrender 
to a blissful in-room massage, I hear a fellow guest gasping from down the 
corridor: "Nnnnnnggh! Ooooh!" I'm not sure but I think I recognise the voice of 
a fellow diner I chatted to the night before. Sure enough, as I open the door 
to let the masseur out, she sits on a bench in the hallway, her fiancé kneeling 
at her feet.

"Ooo-aaaAAAH!" And with one final tug, her ski boot at last is off. 

• +44 (0)1483 421 777, fishandpips.com <http://www.fishandpips.com>. A week's 
catered accommodation starts at £395pp per week, or £195pp per week in their 
one self-catering chalet. Individual rooms can be booked in Chalet du Guide, 
the other chalets must be rented complete. Flights with Swiss International Air 
Lines (0845 601 0956,swiss.com/uk <http://www.swiss.com/uk>) from Heathrow to 
Geneva from £80pp return, including free transportation of ski and snowboard 
equipment.
Rupert Mellor

Chalet Chocolat, Chamonix

"Today is going to be amazing," promises Helen Lavender, 33, the co-owner of 
Chalet Chocolat, which she runs as part of the RudeChalets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/chalets> chain with husband Chris, 37. 
She's researched the local off-piste guiding companies thoroughly and I believe 
her when she says Evolution 2 is the best. The Lavenders have already proved 
themselves to be utterly efficient, selecting staff who are reliable, 
hardworking yet fun, getting sponsorship from Burton so guests can ride the 
latest snowboards, running girls' camps and board test weekends, and by the 
simple fact that they've managed to expand their range of funky chalets each 
year - especially impressive, when so many other independent chalets are 
struggling.

The couple met while working a season in Méribel in 2000. Helen was living in 
a camper van, wielding the line, "Could I possibly come and use your shower?" 
to chat up blokes. Chris, who'd just packed in an IT job in London, said yes 
she could, sparking a romance that led to more seasons, interspersed with 
travelling, and an ambition to set up their own chalets.

They've differentiated their properties by being cool and snowboard focused, 
with bright interiors full of surf and skate and Burton stuff, art work, 
Xboxes, laptops, iPod docks and other youthful paraphernalia. But the guests 
aren't necessarily all young snowboarders; plenty of skiers and people in their 
40s/50s come too.

"We'll go to Italy - the snow will be better there," says Steph, the Evolution 
2 guide, as we set out. Platinum sunlight is beginning to arc over the rocky 
fingers of the Aiguille du Midi, illuminating why the Lavenders gave the chalet 
its name - it really is a chocolate-box house, all wood, fairy lights and 
flower boxes, fronted by trees pruned into spirals.

Italy was a good call. On the other side of the Mont Blanc tunnel, Courmayeur 
is bright, but with piles more snow than Chamonix. The car park is empty. Where 
is everyone? Don't they realise there's a metre and a half of fresh snow up 
there?

Even though the slopes are deserted, we decide to head straight off-piste into 
the backcountry. "Over this crest, you have to drop off the cliff then go 
straight through the gulley." This isn't exactly what I want to hear on my 
first run. Although it's the sort of powder day I've longed for on countless 
ski holidays ruined by lack of snow, I am suffering from a tequila-fuelled 
night on the tiles.

I'd spent the previous couple of days in Rude Chalets' other base in Morzine, 
for the Burton board test weekend. All the guests got to try Burton's latest 
boards, exchanging them between runs at a meeting point manned by Chris outside 
a mountain cafe in Avoriaz, to which Morzine links. It was a brilliant way to 
add extra value to a trip, and encouraged the various couples, lone guests and 
groups of lads to mix. As in all chalets, we ate communally, but we got on so 
well we also rode together, practised jumps, celebrated Helen's birthday, and 
on the last night, ended up dancing in the Opera club, in a cage, on a stage, 
until 4am.

But with this much snow, a local guide who knew every tree run and steep line 
as if it was his own back garden, even the hangover from hell couldn't put a 
dent in the day. As one of our group said when we retired to the warmth of the 
Jekyll bar at the end of the session, "that was one of those perfect days that 
either makes you want to go straight back out again or else retire from 
snowboarding forever".

• A week in Chalet Chocolat with Rude Chalets (08700 687 030, rudechalets.com 
<http://www.rudechalets.com>) costs from £329pp per week. A day's guiding with 
Evolution 2 (00 33 450 559 022,evolution2-chamonix.com 
<http://www.evolution2-chamonix.com>) costs €115pp. Transfer with Ski Lifts (
ski-lifts.com <http://www.ski-lifts.com>). Flights with Air France from London 
City to Geneva (0871 6633 777,airfrance.co.uk <http://www.airfrance.co.uk>), 
from £84pp.
Gemma Bowes

Ski Bliss, St Gervais

It's during a thick, pelting blizzard, when Jamie takes off his decent goggles 
and hands them to me, that I realise he must be the sweetest, most devoted 
chalet boy ever to stomp through the Alps in ski boots. Mine have fogged up and 
I've been struggling to snowboard without them, while Jamie skates ahead on his 
skis, tugging me along the flat run that is so stacked with powder my board 
won't budge. Now he is volunteering to ski blind so I can enjoy the run down to 
Megève with my eyes open.

A chef from Devon, 24-year-old Jamie Forrest opened the small, simple but 
stylish Ski Bliss apartment in this charming and ultra-traditional French 
resort in December. Still full of puppyish enthusiasm, he offers the sort of 
round-the-clock, personal service that you typically pay thousands for in a 
luxury chalet. That means he gets up early each morning to collect bread from 
the patisserie, digs the van out and drives you to the resort (the St Gervais 
lifts are 5-10 minutes away), takes you skiing, finds the best off-piste, 
flatters your skiing skills, brings his friends along for lunch (if you like), 
finds a fun après ski bar, plays darts and pool with you, drives you home or to 
the thermal baths at St Gervais to relax while he cooks an amazing dinner 
(whatever time you like, whatever you want to eat - his rosemary and thyme lamb 
and slow-roast pork were superb), then challenges you to a game on the Wii 
console, or sticks on a DVD.

If all that sounds a bit suffocating, he is just as happy to leave you be, or 
you can rent the apartment on a self-catering basis. But I was by myself, so I 
didn't mind being well looked after.

Jamie's desire to give this level of attention grew out of frustration at the 
big ski companies he worked for, and their strict rules about budget and menus.

"If people fancy champagne on their first night, I want to be able to buy it 
for them; I hate cooking the same thing every week, and I like hanging out with 
guests. The big operators don't encourage that, and don't reward it, so you 
don't bother, but I want to work hard to give a service I can be proud of." 
Mission accomplished, Jamie.

• A week at Ski Bliss (07800 724 530, ski-bliss.com <http://www.ski-bliss.com>
) costs from £400-600pp per week, including transfers. Flights to Geneva with 
Air France as above.
Gemma Bowes

Ski La Roche, La Plagne 

Ski La Roche's Danny Woodcock, 30, is breathing a sigh of relief. "We thought 
with the credit crunch, we might be in trouble, but since we opened it's been 
full every week."

Danny and his girlfriend Becky Magill, 37, who met while backpacking in 2000, 
spent three months scouring the French Alps in a camper van in the summer of 
2004, looking for the perfect property to start their business. "We knew what 
we wanted: an old, characterful barn with history that we could bring back to 
life."

Danny had done several seasons in the late 90s and had family in the building 
trade, so he had the skills to do a full Grand Designs-style job when they 
finally settled on the old schoolhouse in the centre of La Roche, one of the 10 
villages that make up the resort of La Plagne.

It's obvious a lot of love has gone into the project. The finish on this 
property, which sleeps 10 in doubles and a bunk room for four, is contemporary 
but cosy, with lots of pale wood, Jacuzzi baths and Wii consoles. The views 
across the valley are staggering. For somewhere so stylish it's nice to note 
that they also accept families - and provide high chairs, cots and monitors - 
which many designer chalets don't.

The next morning, we head up to ride La Plagne. Initially I'd been worried by 
the fact that La Roche is slightly out of town, but the sight of a brand-new 
six-man, high speed chair linking the hamlet to the slopes of Aime 2000, and 
from there the entire Paradiski area, assuages my fear.

We have a brilliant day, with Danny, now an expert in every route, taking me 
to straight to the steep slopes of La Bellecote. "La Plagne is such an 
underrated resort", he says as we sit on a chairlift recovering from a 
thigh-burning powder run. "On the right day, with the right snow, this area has 
some of the best terrain in France".

My early-season legs fail me well before the end of the day, so Danny leads us 
back down to La Roche and the bar of Chalet La Roche, the social hub of the 
village, for a remedial mid-afternoon vin chaud. "Not a bad office really, is 
it?" he smiles.

• From £390pp per week, based on 10 people sharing. Transfers included for 
groups of six or more. 0787 020 9566, 00 33 963 448700,skilaroche.com 
<http://www.skilaroche.com>. Flights to Geneva, as above. 
Chris Moran
 