
Working in New York one summer, Esther Greenwood is a young, intelligent women 
on the edge of greatness. Though the ambition she once had to achieve her 
dreams (the ones which won her the awards, the prizes, the grades) have faded 
into a distant memory and she’s barely drifting along.

With the pressure of marriage and the passé New York night life, what will 
become of Esther Greenwood?

The classic, semi-autobiographical (though, the more you learn about the novel 
and author, the more autobiographical it seems to become) novel by Sylvia Plath 
is 234 pages of pure brilliance. It gives us a meaningful insight into the 
thoughts of Plath and the complete isolation one can feel when in a city 
(though there are so many people, as they all seem to pass the person by 
completely). The book also shows an interesting, sadly relatable, idea of 
ambition; how the character started from nothing, had to work her whole life up 
until getting a scholarship to a college and finds herself in New York and then 
completely loses all of her drive, ambition and passion. She can’t write or 
properly read any more (things she once loved) and this is fed by how easy 
everything is for her; her grades meet all the requirements but don’t fill the 
emptiness that resonates within her.

The novel also takes on the role of women in society (the expectations of 
them, ideas of what society tells us women should prioritise, such as marriage 
and children - all things the Esther seems to come to resent as the novel 
continues), along with a young woman’s exploration of her sexuality. 
Materialism is also a subject Plath addresses (the people around her, the gifts 
she receives) through the interesting idea of how the character Esther was so 
easily able to give it all up: the clothes, the lifestyle, and the money.

The Bell Jar is not just a classic piece of fiction (though so out of the box 
for its time), but also a novel that will continue to resonate with people 
throughout time as it talks of problems and classic faults with human nature 
that will always persist. I give it 4.5 out of 5 for being able to so clearly 
represent not only women in society but the truth of mental illness.

 * Buy this book at the Guardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/bell-jar.html>
 