
More an Anglican intellectual than a theologian, Dennis Nineham, who has died 
aged 94, combined radical criticism of the New Testament gospels with lifelong 
loyalty to the established church. He served the Church of England on its Synod 
and its Doctrine Commission. He held professorships at London, Cambridge and 
Bristol and was warden of Keble College, Oxford.

He entered the public arena when his commentary on the Gospel of St Mark was 
published by Pelican in 1963 – the same year as Bishop John Robinson’sHonest to 
God <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-22480793>. “Our image of God must go” 
was the Observer’s headline for Robinson. Nineham argued for a similar 
dismissal and revision of the conventional image of Jesus. It could not, he 
argued in lucid detail, be based on the sort of history St Mark wrote. His 
Gospel, though ostensibly biographical, was “a spiritual messageaddressed to 
the church for which it was originally written”. The past of Jesus and St Mark 
was, as Nineham would often quote from LP Hartley, altogether “another 
country”. His work on St Mark, still much read, was to achieve an irrevocable 
shift in the understanding of the Gospels.

The rest of Nineham’s thinking and writing explored the implications of the 
commentary on the public and on the church, within which he was the object of 
grave suspicion. His ability to analyse complex issues and to make a case 
would, one of his friends observed, have made him an excellent high court 
judge. It was fundamental to his success at Keble. And it moved Allen Lane, the 
publisher of his commentary, to offer him a senior editorial position at 
Penguin. He refused.

The only child of Stanley, a clerk, and Bessie (nee Gaill), a schoolteacher in 
Southampton, and afflicted by polio, Nineham attended King Edward VI school in 
the city and admired the unsparing rigour of his classics teacher. He was 
introduced to New Testament criticism by the curate of his parish, Christopher 
Evans.

A scholar of Queen’s College, Oxford, with two firsts in classics, he went on 
to read theology under RH Lightfoot, a modest and retiring fellow of New 
College, Oxford, who had visited Germany in 1931 and found his intuitions of 
the Gospels – that, historically, they were the imaginative creations of their 
writers rather than the factual records desired by modern Christians – 
confirmed by the great German scholarsRudolf Bultmann 
<http://www.britannica.com/biography/Rudolf-Bultmann> and Martin Dibelius 
<http://www.britannica.com/biography/Martin-Dibelius>. Nineham was persuaded by 
Lightfoot and became a brilliant Oxford tutor in his turn.

He was ordained in 1944 and appointed chaplain of Queen’s. When he was 
appointed to a theology chair at King’s College London in 1954, he edited a 
collection of strikingly original and independent-minded essays in Lightfoot’s 
memory, Studies in the Gospels. Its contributors included practically all the 
leading New Testament scholars of the day, among them Austin Farrer who (unlike 
Nineham) kept his brilliant criticism of the Gospels apart from his professed 
orthodoxy.

Nineham’s professorial lectures were popular for the clarity he brought to 
complex texts and issues. Reflecting his virtues as an administrator, they had 
some of the character of an audit, the subject laid out in precise articulation 
with numbers, percentages, diagrams and so on. Meanwhile he toiled at St Mark, 
which he described in the introduction to his commentary as “not a photographic 
panorama of the whole of Christ’s life, based on the personal recollections of 
eye-witnesses, but a series of essentially independent stories, each one of 
which was preserved, and to some extent modified, in the context of the 
Church’s life and worship”.

Now well known, he was made regius professor of divinity at Cambridge. It 
looked like a good move. Liberally minded colleagues such as his old friend 
Geoffrey Lampe were there, andHarry Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2006/feb/20/guardianobituaries.obituaries> 
was recasting Christianity in a psychological mould. The radicalDon Cupitt 
<http://www.doncupitt.com/don-cupitt> was flexing his intellectual muscles.

But the New Testament seminar was firmly in the hands of the Rev CFD Moule 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/oct/24/guardianobituaries.religion>, a 
conservative scholar with great charm and an enthusiastic following. Moreover, 
Nineham’s old tutor in philosophy, the eccentricDonald MacKinnon 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-professor-donald-mackinnon-1427917.html>
, was propounding something he called “brute facticity” and denouncing 
enlightened liberalism and all its works. A dispute arose about the 
resurrection: spiritual or physical, fiction or fact?Mollie Butler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/feb/24/obituary-lady-butler>, wife 
of Rab, then master of Trinity College, loved to tell of Dennis at her 
breakfast table at that time. “And do you believe in the resurrection, 
Professor Nineham?” she asked. “Of course not,” came the prompt reply: “Would 
you please pass the mustard?”

After five years in Cambridge, Nineham returned to Oxford as warden of Keble 
College. Over the following decade he transformed the place. Supported by the 
younger fellows, he raised its educational standards, raised also funds to 
build a new quadrangle, secured the admission of women and undid for the future 
the requirement that the warden be an Anglican clergyman. His wife, Ruth, 
entertained and supported the wives and families of the fellowship. He attended 
chapel as faithfully as dinner in hall. His administrative tact and talents 
were in full play.

He brought out his thoughts about biblical interpretation in a substantial 
treatise, The Use and Abuse of the Bible (1976). It spelled out his main 
concerns: the otherness of the Bible’s cultural milieu compared with our own, 
the uncertainty of our knowledge of Jesus, the pastness of the past. Lucid and 
insistent as usual, it was enriched by his deep and wide reading of philosophy, 
literary criticism and social anthropology, of Lionel Trilling,Richard Southern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/feb/08/guardianobituaries.highereducation>
 and Ernst Troeltsch.

But his general views hardened. In 1977 his concluding contribution to the 
volume The Myth of God Incarnate (the very title infuriated the orthodox) 
warned his fellow contributors that their proposals to modernise Jesus – as 
“the man for others”, “the man for God”, the perfect moral example and so on – 
were precarious. To his exacting mind they seemed to have no idea of the 
extreme difficulty, even impossibility, of proving such claims historically.

He was aptly given an engraved portrait of Voltaire when he left Keble in 1979 
for his final post as professor of theology at Bristol. There he proved a 
sympathetic and effective head of department, enjoying the return from 
collegiate to university life.

He finally retired to Iffley, near Oxford, where he had one last shot at 
enforcing the pastness of the past withChristianity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/christianity> Medieval and Modern (1993), 
centred on the year 1000. He enjoyed the reading groups which he believed to be 
the model for the church of the future, replacing any kind of authority. He 
loved company and conversation. Samuel Johnson was his idol and Boswell’s Life 
was, you might say, his bible.

Dennis and Ruth, who died a month before him, had four children, whose careers 
in academic administration, scholarship, the law and political activism pleased 
him very much. He is survived by his daughter Biddy and his sons, Hugh and 
Christopher; his daughter Clare predeceased him. A son of the enlightenment to 
the last, Nineham left his brain to the project on cognitive function and 
ageing studies at the John Radcliffe hospital, Oxford.

• Dennis Eric Nineham, theologian, born 27 September 1921; died 9 May 2016
 