
I’m sorry to do this to you but this is yet another piece on “Just Not Sorry” 
because I just don’t quite get it, apologies. I know you’re busy, so I’ll keep 
it brief. Here is my problem: when did being polite become a bad thing?

In case you’ve missed it, Just Not Sorry is a Google Chrome extension that 
highlights keywords and phrases 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/09/is-new-email-tool-just-not-sorry-good-for-women-plug-in>
 in your emails that might undermine the point you’re trying to make. It was 
devised by Tami Reiss at Cyrus Innovation after a discussion at a networking 
event. The women present all admitted they had a tendency to use the words 
“just” and “sorry” when they didn’t really mean them. They worried that this 
made them look like a pushover in the office and stopped them gaining the 
respect they deserve.

Thanking people for their time isn’t a sign of weakness, it’s polite.

I like a woman who sees a problem and wants to fix it, so credit to Reiss for 
coming up with a practical, simple and efficient way for getting around this. 
Except that these good intentions have unintentionally led us further down the 
road to hell. In accepting that a woman’s vocal and written characteristics are 
holding her back, what we’re really saying is that it’s still a man’s world and 
to win in it, you have to act, sound and write like a man. How depressing.

As the editor of section called Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> in Leadership, I spend a lot 
of time thinking, talking and writing about how we get more women higher up the 
career ladder. Like Just Not Sorry, there are lots of brilliant ideas, apps, 
schemes, programmes and courses designed to do just that. There are very few 
ideas, apps, schemes, programmes and courses questioning whether the world 
we’re in is really as good as it could be. Or if, in fact, it couldn’t benefit 
from adopting some of those characteristics we’re so quick to deem “feminine”. 
I, for one, appreciate a bit of politeness in my emails.

I'm with Jennifer Lawrence, F-that to being 'adorable' at work
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2015/oct/15/jennifer-lawrence-adorable-women-held-back-workplace-paygap>
Over the years I have had men give me such sage advice as, “whenever someone 
at works asks how you are, remember to reply with, ‘so busy, so much going on’. 
Never say you’ve got it all under control.” Apparently being efficient, 
actually getting stuff done and having a calm approach to your work isn’t seen 
as dynamic enough.

Another favourite piece of wisdom is, “never thank someone for their time. 
Your time is just as important as theirs”. I value my time as much as the next 
person but I can say with no false modesty that, sometimes, it is less valuable 
than the people I meet with. And regardless, if you’re using your time wisely 
you should get something out of nearly every meeting you have, be grateful for 
that. Thanking people for their time isn’t a sign of weakness, it’s polite.

If being successful in a man’s world means emulating the worst traits of those 
men, then I’ll take middle of the road thanks. Rather than holding our hands up 
and apologising for our choice of words, let’s stand up for them. Let’s stand 
up for taking people’s feelings into consideration when we speak, for not 
seeing arrogance as a virtue, for thanking people for their contributions and 
for being sorry for putting our work onto other people. Let’s stop apologising 
for being women and instead demand that men behave differently.

For future reference, when I say any of the following, this is what I actually 
mean:

“Just ...”

Don’t worry, this email isn’t there to add to your ever-growing workload, it’s 
going to quickly inform you about something or ask for a small request. You can 
deal with this email in seconds, please do so.

“Sorry ...”

You’re busy, you’re important to me (regardless of where you are in the 
hierarchy) and I appreciate how much you do. I wish I didn’t have to add more 
to your workload. But I do.

“Would you mind ...”

You probably don’t have a choice in what I’m about to ask you to do but if 
there is a genuine objection then I’m giving you an out now. Make sure the 
excuse is a good one.

“Sorry to cut you off but ...”

I’m not sorry and I wouldn’t be doing it, if you’d just let me get a word in. 
Rather than pointing out what an obnoxious buffoon you’re being and 
embarrassing you in front of everyone, I’m trying to subtly point it out to 
you. Take the hint.


“I’m not an expert in this ...”

I’m not an expert in this but anyone can see your suggestion is ludicrous. 
Come up with a better one.
 