
There was certainly an autumnal breeze which seemed to stroke the pages of 
Terry Pratchett’s forty-first and final Discworld novel, much like the 
penultimate Long Earth story published earlier last summer. The Shepherd’s 
Crown whispered of things unsaid, of time running out, of not being able to 
leave things exactly the way one wanted. In many ways it is an imperfect, 
unfinished novel.

Ending forms part of the fabric of the story. It begins with the death of 
Granny Weatherwax, the Discworld’s most terrifying and powerful witch, a 
recurring character throughout the series, and one of my (and many Pratchett 
fans’) personal favourites. Granny Weatherwax’s conversation with Death, which 
is tender, funny and gentle, is one of the most poignant and thought-provoking, 
not to mention fitting, send-offs to such a beloved character I have ever read. 
You really get a sense of Pratchett’s own pathos as he bids her goodbye, but he 
is decidedly unsentimental and does not draw it out unnecessarily. Whether or 
not you agree with Terry Pratchett’s outspoken views on assisted suicide, it is 
hard to argue with his logic for living a good life right up until death and 
dying, as far possible, in your own terms.

Death – one of Pratchett’s most iconic characters, riding a skeletal horse 
called Binky, and speaking in CAPITAL LETTERS – has been uncharacteristically 
absent in recent Discworld novels; here, he moves centre stage again.

Granny Weatherwax’s death makes the barrier between Discworld and Fairyland 
dangerously permeable and a usurping King of the Elves – the preposterously 
named Peaseblossom – is determined to break through and make all residents - 
dwarves, humans, goblins (newly enfranchised and working on Discworld’s nascent 
railroads and ‘clacks’ towers) - their playthings.

All that stands between these crude, hedonistic parasites and domination is a 
witch-in-training, Tiffany Aching, Granny Weatherwax’s chosen successor; on her 
young shoulders rests the responsibility to unite the capricious witches and 
repel the otherworldly invaders.

Everything is set for an epic clash between good and evil. Yet this is no 
Middle Earth or Narnia; much of the rest of the novel is devoted to Tiffany’s 
backbreaking day-to-day work. In Pratchett’s world, witches perform the role of 
a comprehensive health service, free at the point of need (paid for through 
favours and kindness), fully integrated with social care like something out of 
Andy Burnham’s wildest dreams. They perform messy, practical, essential 
services – caring for the sick, ushering babies into the world and escorting 
people out with as much gentleness as possible, trimming the toenails of lonely 
old men. Tiffany is spread thin and pulled in disparate directions by her 
passion for her work; her sense of loyalty to her family; her tentative 
relationship with medical student Preston.

Besides, Terry Pratchett has little time for unadulterated evil in the style 
of Sauron or the White Witch, though his writing is incandescent with rage 
against stupidity and cruelty. Even an elf is shown capable of compassion and 
empathy; the spiteful and arrogant Mrs Earwig (who in a Roald Dahl story would 
be a tornado of unremitting spite) is courageous in the final battle.

Terry Pratchett tips his (famous) hat to almost every well-known strand of 
over 40 Discworld novels: the squabbling, magical academicals of Unseen 
University; the Ankh-Morpork City Watch; the tyrant of Ankh-Morpork of Lord 
Vetinari’s ongoing struggle with ‘The Times’ crossword… The Church of Om…

Is this actually a good novel? 

To some extent, it doesn’t really matter. For a Discworld aficionado, the 
book’s very existence is a kind of miracle, like an unexpected letter addressed 
just to you.

This book is full of apparently effortless, memorable and brilliant flourishes 
of language: Granny Weatherwax’s cottage is made “mainly of creaks”. Terry 
Pratchett’s love of words shines through, too: I counted three ‘susurrations’, 
each used in radically different contexts (one of Tiffany Aching’s favourite 
words, and now one of mine); there are also scientific names of prehistoric sea 
creatures and a panoply of wittily named characters. There are clever and 
unexpected allusions to everything from Alice in Wonderland to Schrodinger’s 
Cat to Margaret Thatcher speeches.

I loved the idea that elves cannot exist in “railway time” – because of the 
fairy-tale logic that Fair Folk hate iron, but also because the stories we tell 
ourselves are now about technology – the magic wand we build for ourselves.

However, some ideas feel like ingenious Pratchettesque inventions just waiting 
for a fulfilling story to latch onto – a counting, toilet-trained goat called 
Mephistopheles; trees which can see into the near future (surely the source of 
the wood into which yet-to- be murderers’ names are carved in the sci-fi 
thriller Minority Report?). Some plot threads are simply left dangling. Why 
does Granny Weatherwax’s cat, You, suddenly seem to be everywhere Tiffany goes, 
and once blazing with octarine (the colour of magic) fire? I kept expecting it 
to turn out that Granny Weatherwax had actually moved her soul into her feline 
familiar; the issue is simply dropped without comment. New character Peter, who 
becomes Tiffany’s apprentice – about time after a woman wanted to be a wizard 
in Discworld Book 4 – is too frustratingly nice; his saccharine flawlessness 
eventually grated with me.

More broadly, the battle with the elves felt too much like a return of 
Tiffany’s previous conflict in The Wee Free Men, itself an echo of Granny 
Weatherwax’s war in Lords and Ladies. Granny Weatherwax’s death seemed to 
balance the need for any major sacrifice later on, making the elven battle seem 
too easy.

Yes, I look forward to what I expect from a Terry Pratchett book, but whatever 
I read I want the author to punch me in the stomach without warning and upset 
me in unexpected ways (just not too much!). As J.K Rowling put it, “I didn’t 
want evil to be a cardboard cut-out and nobody gets hurt”.

Even the Nac Mac Feegle, Smurf-sized warriors whose fiery rhetoric, Glaswegian 
accent and love of battle with injustice and (elven) rulers whom they didn’t 
elect would make Nicola Sturgeon proud - and whom it would be fair to say Terry 
Pratchett has had fantastic fun with - weren’t really developed at all. Their 
humour was somewhat repetitive.

Some of the subversive and subtle satire of the earlier books had been taken 
out of the oven and was still raw in places: the wizards of Unseen University 
are too easy an impersonation of today’s scientists, overly reliant on 
bafflingly complex computer models and trying to bring every sphere of 
knowledge into their rigorous paradigm; the fondness of old men for sheds was 
pointed out but Pratchett had no wonderful theory to explain it (or if he did, 
I would have loved to know).

For all these flaws – how could this not be a flawed novel, an incomplete 
goodbye – by the poignant end of the novel I really couldn’t care less. All I 
felt was a profound sadness, that I’d never be whisked over the Ramtops riding 
shotgun on Nanny Ogg’s broomstick; listen to the torrid gurgle of the river 
Ankh as it oozes through a city where vampires wear black ribbons to prove 
their teetotal status; watch over Captain Sam Vimes’ shoulder as he solves 
another case, as though for the first time.

 * Buy this book at the Guardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/318140/s/the-shepherd-s-crown/> 