
A cold winter's evening, and Colette Stevenson, a 26-year-old charity worker 
from Kalamazoo, Michigan, is laying a table in a room above a pub in central 
London.

 Like thousands of expats during the holiday season, she prepares plates of 
chocolate chip cookies and other things that remind her of home, but this 
festive supper is a little different. It might not look like it, but Stevenson 
is preparing the ground for a new kind of political meeting.

 The gathering is in support of Howard Dean, the insurgent democratic 
candidate in the US elections. Stevenson's party calls themselves Generation 
Dean UK - a loose affiliation of "students and young professional supporters of 
Howard Dean and their friends". Although this kind of meeting is still a rarity 
in London, it is one of thousands of such groups taking the US political scene 
by storm. And they are all thanks to a web site,Meetup.com 
<http://www.Meetup.com>, which was originally planned to help bring together 
reading circles and foreign language groups.

Meetup.com is like an internet chat-room without the chat. Like a chat-room, 
it aggregates discussion topics, so there are sections dedicated to Harry 
Potter or learning Spanish. But the chat takes place in the real world, in the 
form of monthly events. And what makes Meetup different from, say, Friends 
Reunited, is the way it has been adopted by political interest groups, 
especially Dean's supporters.

 This time last year, Howard Dean was the nowhere man of the presidential 
campaign. The former governor of Vermont, the 49th largest state in the union, 
was the obscure, last-place candidate. With no real funding, he didn't have 
union support, had precious few people on the ground, and only 431 registered 
supporters. Even his own campaign team admit he wasn't registering a blip in 
the race for the White House. In short, Howard Dean had no chance.

 One year later, and Howard Dean is the Democratic front-runner. His chances 
of making the White House might have been harmed in the past week by the 
capture of Saddam Hussein, but the transformation in his support remains truly 
astounding.

 By early December, more than 530,000 Americans had registered as active 
supporters, and millions of dollars had flowed into the Dean coffers, 
independent of the Democratic party's own fundraising apparatus.

 He has close to 10 times the war chest of the other candidates for the 
Democratic nomination, yet is spending far less than his network-free opponents 
are being forced to. How has he managed it? Central to the transformation of 
Howard Dean is the power of the internet and how both his campaign team and 
supporters have embraced it.

 In dark, rainswept London, thousands of miles from the physical campaign 
trail, the Generation Dean party is just one example of this new networked 
power in politics.

 "The whole Dean thing is growing exponentially," explains Stevenson, as she 
arranges plates of turkey stuffing and thick wedges of key lime pie. "I think 
there is this feeling that Bush needs to be stopped at all costs and there were 
a lot of young Americans looking for an alternative," she says. "Meetup has 
provided a starting point for people to get involved in politics again, in a 
new way. It's important that these meetings are fun if they are going to engage 
with people and stop all this political apathy."

 US political pundits are calling the Meetup phenomenon "peer-to-peer 
politics". Chris Suellentrop, of Slate, has even likened the Dean campaign to 
Napster, describing it as a "force that enables the internet to upend an entire 
industry, threatens to transform the way it collects money, and opens the eyes 
of the average person to yet another way to use the net." Others have said that 
the internet is doing for Dean what television did for JFK in 1960.

 Myles Weissleder, vice president of Meetup.com, adds another spin. "The 
internet kick-started a political campaign. But many believe that it wasn't 
that the Dean campaign found the internet. It was the internet who found them," 
he says.

 The marriage between Dean and the net has pragmatic roots. William Finkel, a 
young New Yorker working for Meetup.com, was looking for a presidential 
campaign that would embrace his company. He approached Jerome Armstrong, a 
political blogger, after being rebuffed by John Edwards' campaign. Finkel 
contacted Armstrong because he had the most popular left-leaning political blog 
-MyDD.com <http://www.MyDD.com> - at the time, and Howard Dean had no official 
blog.

 Armstrong had the bright idea of holding a Howard Dean Meetup day. But 
although he had heard Howard Dean speak, he wasn't part of the campaign team. 
The thing that sparked Dean's transformation came from outside his campaign 
team. Armstrong and fellow-blogger Markos Zuniga started talking to Joe Trippi, 
Dean's campaign manager about fighting an internet campaign.

"There was a lot of bloggers out there in the middle of 2002 that were 
reaching out to different campaigns. But the only candidate that embraced them 
back then was Howard Dean," says Armstrong. The first Dean Meetups took place 
in February, but they were still far from the stuff of revolution. A mere five 
meetups took place, attracting a few hundred political enthusiasts. But in the 
following month, something extraordinary happened. The bloggers got hold of it. 
The word went around, and by March, all hell was about to break loose.

 The second Dean Meetup day, in March, saw 79 meetings taking place in 14 US 
cities. In New York City, 200 people were expected to turn up at the Essex 
Lounge, a trendy bar in the Lower East Side. More than 500 people turned up, 
with more locked outside. Since then, the Dean Meetups have continued to grow, 
breaking out of the major cities and engaging with a part of the US electorate 
that was thought to have given up on politics.

 As interest in Dean was mounting, Armstrong and Zuniga continued to promote 
the idea on their blogs. Another left-leaning political blogger - Mathew Gross 
- walked into the Dean headquarters and convinced Trippi to let him start an 
official blog.

 Some say the turning point was the winter meeting of the Democratic National 
Committee (DNC) in February, where Dean denounced the drive to war in Iraq and 
accused fellow Democrats of failing to stand up to the president. Dean had been 
receiving 50 emails per day before the speech, but suddenly the messages were 
flooding in.

 In one sense Dean had nothing to lose by embracing Meetup. But some have 
criticised the campaign for preaching to the converted. As JP Gowner pointed 
out in the Washington Post, the Dean campaign is failing to reach out to new 
constituencies such as African-Americans and voters in the deep South. Others 
think that Dean's campaign is so successful simply because Dean appeals to 
young people and the net appeals to them.

 The key question for Dean, however, is whether liberal politicians have the 
monopoly on internet activism. Dick Morris, Bill Clinton's adviser for 20 years 
and founder in 1993 ofVote.com <http://www.Vote.com>, points out that the 
Republican party is far closer to the demographic of the American internet user 
than Democrats have ever been.

 "Let's remember," he says, "that the internet is more male than female, more 
right-wing than left-wing, more upscale than downscale."

 "The Republican base is seething with activity, and you can't think of any 
community that is better connected, and better wired to itself, than the 
religious community. "The fact is that people who attend church regularly vote 
Republican by two to one, and those who don't, vote Democratic by two to one."

 So while Dean is reinventing popular politics in the US, he may not have much 
time left out there on his own. Whether the Republican Party can pull itself 
away from corporate fundraising and embrace individuals is an interesting 
question. Dean is certainly having no problems there. His supporters are giving 
consider able amounts of money, with only the prompting of a web site to 
inspire them to open their wallet.

 An example: within only a few minutes of Gore's endorsement, a 
click-here-to-donate link had appeared on the Dean site, asking readers to 
"Donate to thank Al". Four days later, more than $500,000 had rolled in from 
that button alone.

 Last weekend, a call for cash to show defiance against some negative 
television advertising had, in 24 hours, raised $200,000 from 2,500 donors, all 
via the internet. That negative advertising, incidentally, was funded by a 
political lobbyist firm working for another, unnamed, Democratic candidate. 
Dean's rise, and his transformation of politics-as-usual, is worrying many.

 Its not just about the money. The Dean weblog has been very effective in 
compelling people to help their campaign in other ways.

 Two months after asking, the Dean site has produced more than 100,000 
handwritten letters from supporters in other states to voters in the key Iowa 
and New Hampshire constituencies. Dean has to win in primaries in those states 
to get the nomination, and it's looking likely he will: from also-ran to 
presumptive winner, by the power of the web.

 This ability to raise both money and effort from genuine grassroots 
supporters instead of large corporate interests has changed American politics 
for ever. Even if he doesn't get the nomination, or if he does, but gets beaten 
by George W. Bush in November, Howard Dean will have achieved something. He, 
and his online supporters, will have changed politics forever.
 