 Rudyard Kipling, Ladybird Classics: The Jungle Book 
There is probably not a single child in the world without a preconceived idea 
of Rudyard Kipling's The Jungle Book. Show me one who doesn't know about 
Mowgli's adventures through the jungle with bumbling, kindly Baloo and cunning 
Bagheera, thanks to Disney's version of the book.

However, start reading the original and all preconceived notions might as well 
be thrown out the window. This is a dark and often unhappy tale which left me 
nervous and frightened and is more prone to cause a nightmare than a sweet 
dream.

Kipling tells the story of little Mowgli, a village boy who falls into the 
hands of a pack of wolves who raise him as their own in the Indian jungle. As 
he matures he starts to understand the 'Law of the Jungle' and the book follows 
his many adventures alongside the myriad creatures around him. Those include 
Baloo the bear and Bagheera the black panther, who become his tutors and 
protectors. As a child reader, one of the most disturbing parts of this 
relationship is the physical violence Baloo and Bagheera continuously seem to 
use against Mowgli as part of their teaching.

'Bagheera gave him half a dozen love taps (…) but for a seven-year-old boy 
[this] amounted to as severe a beating as you could wish to avoid.' I found it 
very difficult to like these two characters because of this abuse towards 
Mowgli and without sympathetic characters to relate to the book was hard to 
enjoy. I wanted Mowgli to escape from these two almost as much as I wanted him 
to escape the terrible monkeys. I don't think Kipling intended the reader to 
feel this way, but perhaps in his days, hitting a child was more common.

Kipling does manage to create an intense world that sucks you in with his 
descriptions of the jungle and the creatures that live there. I felt myself 
hearing the strange noises, feeling the ground slither with snakes and sweating 
in the heat of the penetrating environment of the jungle's overpowering force. 
When Mowgli swings from the vines in the gripped of the monkeys I thought it 
was a moment of release and wanted him to swing to freedom. But once again, the 
terror of the place gets the better of him and he is back down below suffering 
another beating for getting himself into trouble.

After reading this classic, I actually felt rather bewildered: it didn't 
contain a single character that I either understood or felt empathy towards. I 
should have felt some harmony with Mowgli as a young boy, but I didn't 
understand why he was not miserable in his situation. Why would he like and 
respect Baloo and Bagheera when they physically hurt him for no reason at all?

The books I enjoy give me a character I can understand and root for, but in my 
opinion The Jungle Book has failed here. Rather than a page-turner I found 
myself fearful to turn the pages of Kipling's book, as I knew I would be 
haunted by Mowgli's sad existence.

• Buy this book at the Guardian Bookshop 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/ladybird-classics-the-jungle-book.html>.

Want to tell the world about a book you've read? Join the site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
 and send us your review!
 