
Forty years ago this very morning, we woke blearily from a feverish jam-packed 
party all‑nighter which had jubilantly swirled around a whole floor of the 
swish Regency Hyatt hotel in Atlanta, Georgia.

In a way, 20th-century sport and celebrity culture were never the same again. 
It was the morning after the prodigal prodigyMuhammad Ali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/muhammad-ali> had contemptuously defeated 
the game white boxer Jerry Quarry in three rounds to mark his return to the 
ring after a ban of three and a half years for refusing conscription into the 
US army.

What a swellegant elegant party it was. While just about the whole world and 
his wife were there in spirit, of course, the elite of the American civil 
rights movement was in rapturous attendance in actual animate fact – Jesse 
Jackson, Julian Bond, Ralph Abernathy, Mrs Coretta King, Arthur Ashe, Sidney 
Poitier, Bill Cosby, Andrew and Whitney Young and such harmonious top-team 
collectives, each member flamboyantly dressed to the nines, as the Temptations 
and the Supremes.

Ali's biographer Thomas Hauser recalled all of three decades later that night 
of 26 October 1970 as "like something out of Gone with the Wind and probably 
the greatest collection of black power and black money ever assembled up to 
that time. They weren't boxing fans, they were idolaters." The New Yorker 
essayist George Plimpton also remembered that invasion of the Harlem peacocks 
in their enormous purple Cadillacs: "I'd never seen crowds as fancy, especially 
the men – felt hatbands and feathered capes, and the stilted shoes, the heels 
like polished ebony, and many smoking stuff in odd meerschaum pipes."

It was half a dozen years since Ali had been listed 1-Y in the Army Draft 
Board's intelligence test, a level considered unfit for service; but in 
February 1966 he was suddenly reclassified as 1-A and told to be ready to be 
posted to the Vietnam conflict. The boxer applied at once for exemption on 
conscientious grounds as a minister of religion (Islam): "I ain't got no 
quarrel with them Vietcong."

That single sentence reverberated around the world. But in much of the United 
States it was considered near treason. It took Ali's 43-month banishment from 
the ring – as the body bags continued to be flown home from Asia – for the 
popular sentiment to change, particularly among the young. Had the illiterate 
young boxer, after all, uttered a crucially salient sentence? Traitor was 
turning into a hero – and with nice irony it was Lester Maddox, the reactionary 
governor of Georgia, previously a club-swinging civil rights basher, now 
suddenly in need of some black votes, who broke ranks and allowed Ali's boxing 
comeback to be staged in Atlanta. Thus was set the scene for quite a party that 
October night.

Who most smartly twigged the resonance of the party invitation was probably 
the square-shouldered flat‑nosed puncher Quarry, a competent but inconsistent 
operator, and one who could usually be relied upon to succumb when it mattered 
most. Which, of course, he did on this auspicious occasion. But what if 
Quarry's eyebrow had not been expertly scalpelled open by one of Ali's short 
corkscrewed right‑handers at the beginning of the third? Might the desperately 
ring-rusty, out-of-puff Ali have soon been flattened by the journeyman? Defeat 
by Quarry would have writfinis and kaput on any miraculous resurrection; the 
legend would have died, the fabled Second Coming script would have been torn up 
there and then, and Muhammad Ali would have been just a footnote in history.

It was a quarter of a century until I was to see Ali again in Atlanta. 
Canonisation was total – but the saint who opened in 1996 the Atlanta Olympic 
Games was now a martyred, stumbling, dumb, half-tragic hero.

October remains a potently seminal month for Ali idolaters. The two most 
far-famed laurel-decked contests – 1974's so-called Rumble in the Jungle and, a 
year later, The Thrilla in Manila – both took place in October. And that 
ostentatious Atlanta happening 40 years ago yesterday was halfway house between 
29 October 1960, the day the loose-limbed, appealingly cocksure 18-year-old 
Olympic champion called Cassius Clay had won his first professional six-rounder 
in his Kentucky hometown, and all of 20 Octobers later at Las Vegas when a 
bewildered, broken-up and hurting Ali wretchedly ventured on a doleful attempt 
to regain his title against the apologetic new champion Larry Holmes. Not so 
much a contest, more an execution. Regicide, you might say.

Ali hardly landed even a token blow and after 10 excruciating rounds his 
devoted trainer, Angelo Dundee, mercifully announced: "That's it, no more, it's 
the end of the ballgame."
 