
Snowflakes were everywhere. On coffee mugs, T-shirts, key-rings. Huge posters 
of skiers covered in inconceivable amounts of snow adorned the walls. Salt Lake 
City airport’s arrivals hall left me in fear of being avalanched. “GREATEST 
SNOW ON EARTH!!” is the slogan yelled from every sign, souvenir and number 
plate I encountered. The state of Utah’s slogan is even a registered trademark, 
albeit one that is contested now and again.

Earlier this year, the Colorado ski resort of Steamboat sued Utah tourism 
officials for a campaign calling Salt Lake City “Ski City USA”, which it said 
infringed its “Ski Town, USA” trademark. Visit Salt Lake president Scott Beck 
admitted they were trying to lure skiers away from Colorado, which gets three 
times more skiers than Utah – 12.6 million skiers last season compared with 4.1 
million.

There’s bound to be more such bickering if Utah fulfils its latest dream: to 
create the biggest linked ski area in the US. Fifteen resorts are scattered 
around Salt Lake, and with just a few extra lifts, seven major ones could 
potentially be connected, creating a skiable area of 18,000 acres. This 
project, called One Wasatch, is still theoretical, and though officials from 
all seven resorts are keen to make it happen, there is opposition from 
environmentalists.
 Park City, Utah 
The first major step is already under way, however. Vail Resorts, which owns 
two of the state’s biggest and best ski areas – Park City (which it bought in 
September) and the Canyons – is to connect the two for the first time with a 
high-speed gondola next season.

I had long dreamed of visiting this city of religious devotion to both God 
(Mormon-style) and the outdoors, whose resorts are synonymous with ski films 
and untracked slopes. And even though the famous trademarked powder failed to 
materialise for most of my trip, with so many places to choose from, there was 
always something new to explore.

From Salt Lake City it’s a 40-minute drive to Deer Valley, Park City and the 
Canyons on an I-80 highway full of trucks with skis and snowboards thrown in 
the back.
 The Montage Deer Valley resort, Park City Photograph: Alamy 
I headed to posh Deer Valley <http://www.deervalley.com/> first, where huge 
groomers weaved in and out of expensive properties and small lift queues oozed 
politeness. It was as if a top-end British boarding school had transplanted 
itself into Utah and created a ski resort. I was never going to fit in; nor 
were any snowboarders: the resort is one of only three in the USA where 
snowboarding is banned.

This doesn’t seem likely to change any time soon because in September a judge 
ruled that snowboarders do not have a constitutional right to ride at Alta, 
another more extreme Utah resort where snowboarding is banned.

Peaceful, ordered and quiet, Deer Valley was a good first stop to get my ski 
legs back. By the end of day one I had remastered turning left.

Neighbouring Park City <http://www.parkcitymountain.com/site/index.html> is 
both a ski resort and a town, and boasts an impressive amount of immaculate 
pistes, plus fun parks. It used to be an old silver-mining town, and the mining 
carts were used to transport the first skiers up the mountain.
 Powder skiing at the Deer Valley resort. Photograph: Dan Campbell Photography 
I skied around the Jupiter, Thaynes and Motherlode lifts, which cover an area 
comprised entirely of double black diamond runs and where a sense of being 
somewhere wild and undeveloped remains. You can still see the old mine shafts 
and machinery.

In Jupiter bowl I found car-sized moguls. And a phrase that would torment me 
for the rest of the week was yelled by a passing skier: “This would be amazing 
on a powder day!” Sigh.

I headed into Park City town for solace and found it in a superb Moscow Mule 
served in a battered tin cup at theHigh West distillery 
<http://www.highwest.com/>. The arty Main Street was decked out in fairy lights 
and cowboy shops. Higgledy-piggledy bookstore Atticus rubbed shoulders with the
Java Cow Cafe, 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Java-Cow-Cafe-Bakery/121637753224> which boasts 
a Banksy mural crafted during the Sundance Film Festival in 2010. The town has 
a chirpy twinkle, rife with ghost stories about headless hookers and 
soup-stirring poltergeists.

The Canyons resort <http://www.canyonsresort.com/> is smart and well-kept too, 
with fun, easy pistes, avenues of silver birch and expert terrain of steep tree 
runs and bowls.

For the next part of the trip I travelled to the less obvious base of Ogden, 
40 miles from Salt Lake City, an old junction railroad town whose streets sit 
over a network of tunnels used for smuggling booze during prohibition. The main 
action is on the revitalised 25th Street, where you can catch an art house 
film, get a tattoo and grab a vegan meal while a saxophonist serenades your 
walk. Looming in the background is the near 3,000-metre peak of Ben Lomond, 
said to have inspired the Paramount Pictures logo thanks to William Wadsworth 
Hodkinson, one of the founders of the studio, who grew up in Ogden.
 Gate to the main square of the Solitude resort near Salt Lake City. 
Photograph: UIG via Getty Images 
From here, it’s a quick hop to the low-key resorts of Snowbasin 
<https://www.snowbasin.com/>, Solitude <http://www.skisolitude.com/> and Powder 
Mountain <http://www.powdermountain.com/>, of which only Solitude would be 
linked into the proposed mega-resort. I found powder at last in Snowbasin’s 
Middle Bowl Cirque, and at Powder Mountain, a “locals’’ hill, with a fun 
atmosphere in the Powder Keg saloon, where skiers chowed down on burgers and 
beers.

By 9am there was a snake of cars heading through Big Cottonwood Canyon and up 
to Solitude. Local superstition dictates that as you pass through Whispering 
Rock you hold your breath. Solitude, too, is like a moment stopped in time. 
It’s small and quiet, with some decently steep runs, and I hope if it does get 
connected to the other resorts it won’t lose its charming, peaceful vibe. Its 
Honeycomb Canyon area – so named because its sides are filled with mines – has 
no lifts in the canyon itself so you feel a sense of isolation despite the 
small dimensions of the resort. It’s still family-owned and after the slickness 
of Park City and Canyons, this homely feel was welcome.
 Utah claims to have the ‘greatest snow on earth’ - something a few other US 
states contest Photograph: Alamy 
The famously steep skiers’ resort of Alta 
<http://www.utah.com/ski/resorts/alta.htm>, plus funky Snowbird  
<http://www.snowbird.com/>and Brighton <http://www.brightonresort.com/>, were 
still to explore, but a storm blew in, creating a massive whiteout and I never 
got the chance. If the link-up happens I could have done them all in one day 
but that will have to wait. From what I tasted on my tongue, though, as I 
stopped outside Salt Lake City airport departures waiting for my snow-delayed 
flight, it was indeed some very, very good snow.

• Ski Safari <http://www.skisafari.com/index.aspx> (01273 224060, 
skisafari.com) offers holiday packages to five ski resorts in Utah. Stay seven 
nights at the four-starNewpark Resort & Hotel in Park City, 
<http://www.newparkresort.com/> room only from £1,215 per person, including 
flights and resort transfers. Ski Safari can tailor-make a Utah itinerary at 
the following resorts: Deer Valley, Canyons, Park City, Snowbird and Solitude

READERS’ TIPS – SKIING IN THE USA
 Nordic skiing at Mount Bachelor. Photograph: Alamy 
Winning tip: Mount Bachelor, Oregon


Underrated and little-known, Mount Bachelor is snow-sure with winding, 
tree-lined pistes and plenty of accessible backcountry. It’s just one of the 
spectacular volcanic peaks which dot the western US.A ride on the “Summit 
Express” to the 9,000ft peak offers views across to the Three Sisters trio of 
peaks and numerous marked and unmarked routes back down the mountain. 
Cross-country skiing and snowmobiling are also popular activities in the area.
youcantalan

Waitsfield and Warren, Vermont 

The twin Vermont ski villages of Waitsfield and Warren are a real joy, full of 
organic bakeries, artisan studios and friendly locals who frequent the range of 
après-ski bars and restaurants and make tourists feel welcome and valued.
nicolletta 

Las Vegas Sk, Nevada 

You probably don’t think of Vegas for skiing but there are some fun runs in 
the Spring mountains at an altitude around 2,800 metres, ranging from beginner 
to expert and the scenery is stunning. For après-ski, the Vegas strip is just 
down the road.skilasvegas.com <http://www.skilasvegas.com/winter/index.html>
catchytitled

Mad River Valley, Vermont


Mad River Valley has breathtaking views of snow topped peaks and bohemian 
village communities like Waitsfield where locals run cafes bars and independent 
theatres which are a refreshing change from the national chains. The Big 
Picture House in Waitsfield is an uplifting après-ski experience, showcasing 
local bands, cult movies, dance classes and locally sourced food. Listen, 
Lounge and Linger is their invitation!
bigpicturetheater.info <http://www.bigpicturetheater.info/>
foxthecox

The Mangy Moose, Wyoming


The Mangy Moose in Jackson Hole is a funky alternative to the rich cowboy ski 
bars in the area. A huge stuffed moose is visible from every part of the old 
style wooden bar and there’s is a great choice of local craft beers at $5 a 
glass in during happy hour. The food is cheap and hearty – huge, filling 
burgers from 11 bucks. The place really gets rocking when the free live music 
starts almost every night.
mangymoose.com <http://www.mangymoose.com>
gallarate

Après-ski in Utah

Après-ski options are improving in the once alcohol-disapproving state of 
Utah. In Park City, for an après-ski drink with a local vibe head toNo Name 
Saloon <http://www.nonamesaloon.net/> or to local brewery Wasatch 
<http://www.wasatchbeers.com/verify-age.aspx>, but for something different, and 
a petrolhead heaven, it has to beBilly Blancos <http://www.billyblancos.com/> 
for Tex Mex food beneath fully functioning cars and bikes.
callens17 

Jackson’s power bowls, Wyoming


Too much hype is written about the legend of Corbet’s Couloir that it 
overshadows Jackson Hole’s true attraction: the unbridled joy of finding your 
own way down Rendezvous Mountain through a series of waist deep, feather light 
powder bowls. Get the first tram up to get the first ride down, navigating your 
way down to the Hoback’s. Then do it again. And again. And again. Four hours 
later after floating over what seemed like an endless sea of powder, we stopped 
at The Mangy Moose (see above) for Yard Sale Burgers - the perfect tonic before 
going out to do it all over again in the afternoon. I’ve skied many places 
around the world but that day was unparalleled.
tommalcolm 

Mad River Glen, Vermont


This great little ski resort is a one-off, being owned by a co-operative since 
1947. The slopes aren’t pisted and it still has a single chair lift. Serious 
black bump runs, tree skiing and groovy music from the big-bearded lift 
operators’ boom boxes. It’s unlike anywhere else I’ve ever skied.
cg1960
 