



Get some clarity and distance

It could just be that you are exhausted and need some sleep, a different 
perspective or expert advice. Sleep allows our bodies to repair and our brains 
to process information, so it stands to reason that a lack of it can impair 
judgement and decision-making as well as have a negative impact on our moods 
and relationships. Sleep deprivation increases the amount of cortisol in our 
bodies too – this is often called the “stress hormone” and maintaining healthy 
levels is vital for mental functioning and cell regeneration.

Physically removing yourself from your routine can also give you time to 
reflect, as seeing problems from a distance (literally) can often allow you to 
see them more clearly. Specialist help can be hugely beneficial, as they are 
trained to quickly get to the root of issues ranging from the physical to 
mental. Sometimes simple changes such as sorting out your diet with practical 
nutritional advice can tip the balance as to how you feel and cope on an 
everyday level.

Studies have shown that meditation enhances cognitive abilities, boosts energy 
and promotes the ability to see things from others’ points of view. Learning 
how to switch off, maintain balance in your life and increase your emotional 
intelligence could mean the difference between wanting to run away from your 
job and understanding the changes you need to make to improve what you have.

Think about what really interests you and where your skills lie

You might need to re-train or refresh your skills before you can change the 
direction of your career. It’s also worth considering whether the things you 
love are actually the things you want to pursue as a career, day in, day out. 
Ask advice from people who do what you would love to do and find out their 
career paths . Most people love sharing their experiences, so ask them to give 
you the inside track as well as the upsides and downsides.

Make sure you have savings to tide you over

If you’ve taken the time to think and research and are sure that leaving is 
right for you, make sure you are fully prepared. Six months’ salary is 
generally considered a good amount to give you some wriggle room whilst you 
find a new role. This is also important as it stops you from panicking and 
taking the first thing that is offered: what’s the point of making a change if 
you then default back to your comfort zone? If you find it hard to save, then 
consider how you can make small changes every day, such as foregoing your 
morning coffee or wasting money on shop-bought lunches.

Ignore the naysayers 

Whenever you make a bold decision, the entire world will suddenly pop up to 
offer you “helpful” advice. Listen to your instincts and do what feels right 
for you because it’s your life, your career and ultimately you know best. Let 
“fortune favours the brave” be your mantra.

Be honest with colleagues about why you are seeking pastures new 

It’s really important not to bad-mouth your current company or burn your 
bridges. The world is a small place and they may come back into your life or 
prove useful in the future. Stay professional and polite and they’ll only be 
able to say good things about you if your name pops up in the future.
 