
A poll has found that 75% of Israeli Jews oppose the creation of a Palestinian 
state <http://jcpa.org/poll-israeli-jews-oppose-palestinian-state/> within the 
pre-1967 borders if it means withdrawing Israeli troops from the Jordan Valley.

The survey, conducted by a rightwing thinktank headed by a political ally of 
the Israeli prime minister, Binyamin Netanyahu, makes for stark reading, 
contradicting previous polls showing up to 60% of Israelis in favour of a 
two-state solution.

However, the poll confirms the argument that Israeli support for a Palestinian 
state is dramatically lower when they are presented with specific details 
rather than being asked to support the basic idea.

The Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, is making a concerted diplomatic 
push for a UN security council resolution seeking an end to the Israeli 
occupation of thePalestinian territories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/palestinian-territories> by November 2016.

Of the 60% of those polled who described themselves as rightwing, opposition 
to a Palestinian state within the pre-1967 lines rose to almost 92%, while 72% 
of those who identified as leftwing would support it.

That opposition rises further still if the issue of dividing Jerusalem is 
included, with 40% of leftwingers opposing the division of Jerusalem.

The poll was commissioned by a thinktank run by a former policy advisor to 
Netanyahu and initially published in the free newspaper owned by the Las Vegas 
casino owner Sheldon Adelson, one of the Israeli prime minister’s biggest 
backers.

Leftwing commentators suggested the polling was likely to be an accurate 
reflection of Israeli public opinion.

“The poll published in Israel Hayom is obviously meant to serve Netanyahu’s 
agenda,” said Mairav Zonszein,writing for the +972 website 
<http://972mag.com/most-israelis-oppose-palestinian-state-new-poll-shows/97833/>
. “And while it is dangerous to rely solely on a single poll to back up any 
claim, this specific poll – no matter how flawed or skewed – happens to be an 
accurate reflection of the Israeli government’s policies, much of its rhetoric, 
and the reality on the ground.”

Although historical polling has suggested solid Israeli support for a 
two-state solution, Zonszein argues that the latest poll more truly reflects 
both how Israelis vote for political parties – and those parties’ agendas – and 
how they talk about the peace process.

“Even though many polls over the years have shown and still show that a 
majority of Jewish Israelis support a two-state solution based more or less 
along the 1967 border with land swaps, such sentiment is reflected less and 
less in the way Israelis vote and talk. This new poll seems to provide a much 
more honest assessment of the reality on the ground and the reality in the 
halls of government,” she said.

The latest poll reflects what appears to be an ever-diminishing appetite for a 
two-state solution on both sides. Two sets of polls earlier this year – one of 
Palestinians for the right-leaning US thinktank Washington Institute for Near 
East Policy and a Pew Research poll in the spring – both identified growing 
pessimism that a peace deal could be done.
 