



How did you get where you are today?

A combination of three things: great mentors, hard work and luck. I’ve had the 
privilege of having great mentors. People who had been there and done that, and 
cared enough to impart their knowledge to me along the way. I worked hard from 
the start making sure no opportunities would pass me by, then, when luck 
struck, I was ready.

Who or what inspires you?

Cities and urban environments inspire me the most. Walking down the street, 
there are always unexpected urban moments – things happen that you couldn’t 
have imagined that morning when you woke up. These kinds of chance encounters 
are so wonderful.

The best part of my job is working with exceptional clients, consultants and 
colleagues

What does a typical day involve?

Currently, 10 Hudson Yards in New York City is nearly finished and 30 Hudson 
Yards is under construction. It’s a technically complex and extremely 
challenging project built over the West Side Railyards in Manhattan. This is 
the largest private development in the history of the United States. It will 
have an impact on the skyline of New York, which is thrilling and daunting.

Our offices at KPF are on Bryant Park, two subway stops away from Hudson 
Yards, so I’m frequently grabbing a hard hat and going on-site for meetings. 
Seeing the buildings rise from the rail yard makes each Hudson Yards meeting 
feel very purposeful.


I’m a mother of two, a high schooler and a middle schooler, so while I can 
plan for a productive day at the office, the forgotten lunch at school always 
has the potential to throw everything into disarray.

What would you say are the best and worst parts of your job? 

The best part of my job is working with exceptional clients, consultants and 
colleagues. Designing Hudson Yards with Bill Pedersen, KPF founder, is 
incredibly exciting. But high stress and pressure accompanies that excitement. 
The project, needless to say, comes with an immense responsibility to get it 
right.

I get to be surrounded by people that are passionate about making better urban 
environments for people to live, work and play. The worst part of the job is 
not having enough time in the day. This is a massive, complex project and I 
could work 24 hours a day and never feel finished. It’s a balancing act to be 
immersed and passionate about my professional life but leave it on the table 
when I walk in my front door.

What are the most common misunderstandings about your job?

There is a common misconception of the ‘the individual genius’ realising great 
buildings and cities. The starchitect. In actuality, it is the collaboration of 
many individuals and their unique points of view that make wonderful projects. 
No one person can do it alone.

How can we get more women into architecture? 

The recent passing of Zaha Hadid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/apr/03/zaha-hadid-observer-appreciation-rowan-moore>
 was a shocking tragedy for the architectural community, even if we only knew 
her through her inspiring lectures, buildings and projects.

She was a rare role model – female, visionary, with an uncompromised sense of 
self. The singular vision of an architect is celebrated but it is rare for 
young women to identify as they do with this singular genius.


For Muslims and women, Zaha Hadid was a shining torch
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/apr/02/for-muslims-and-women-zaha-hadid-shining-torch>
We need multiple narratives for the successful female architect. Similar to 
the partnerships that founded tech companies or scientists working together 
towards research goals, architecture is collaborative.

There are many initiatives against gender parity at architecture school. But 
the issue isn’t getting women in architecture, but rather getting them to stay. 
To achieve this, it’s important to have equal voices across the involved groups 
in design and construction including the clients, engineers and city planners.

How do you manage to strike a work/life balance?

I don’t believe I am doing a great job at achieving balance at all times. I 
feel, too often, that I am not doing enough at one or the other. I think it is 
possible to have one or the other but not both simultaneously and not all the 
time.

I am trying to be more focused and give my complete attention to where I am 
and it means not checking the phone constantly in the evening (for work) and 
not to stress about the after-school snack before the kids’ other activities 
while being available for emergencies. Having the support on both sides is 
really what makes the juggling act possible.

What is your ambition for the coming year?

I’d like to be part of the conversation that articulates the importance of 
building densely populated, mixed-use projects that incorporate public space. 
When done well, these projects only enhance cities and urban life. Hudson Yards 
is a good example of this and it is setting a precedent for cities worldwide.

I also have many personal goals involving fitness, many are left over from 
last year – but better late than never!

Marianne Kwok is a director at Kohn Pedersen Fox Associates 
<http://www.kpf.com/about/people/directors/marianne-kwok> and design team 
leader for the Hudson Yards project in Manhattan.

Talk to us on Twitter via @GdnWomenLeaders 
<https://twitter.com/GdnWomenLeaders> and sign up 
<https://register.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/> to become a member of 
the Women in Leadership network and receive our newsletter.
 