
Tiffany McDaniel starts all of her books as her readers do – with the title 
and the first sentence, nothing else. Her debut novel, The Summer That Melted 
Everything begins with a line as tantalising as the story itself: “The heat 
came with the devil.” Set in a blistering heatwave in 1984, the book is 
narrated by Fielding, the son of small-town lawyer Autopsy Bliss, who takes out 
a newspaper ad to invite Satan to Breathed, Ohio, just to see if he exists.

Instead of a cloaked reptilian figure, the devil seems to come in the form of 
a small, black boy: Sal. This odd child talks in parables, appears to watch 
humanity with sad weariness and somehow instigates tragic events wherever he 
goes. When the town begins to turn violently against him, the Bliss family must 
consider whether they are sheltering Lucifer himself, or merely harbouring a 
traumatised child.

McDaniel doesn’t really know herself: “Oh, Sal is a mystery even to me. He’s a 
contradiction, an old soul in a young body. I have my theories, but I don’t 
want to spoil it. There are some certainties about where he’s come from and who 
he is, so I think there is a point somewhere where those two identities merge.”

McDaniel, 31 and “born and raised in Ohio”, took the name for her fictional 
town from where her grandfather lived – Breathitt County, Kentucky – and 
plonked it on a version of the place she grew up in, at the foot of the 
Appalachians. A self-described tomboy who spent her childhood fishing and 
hiding in libraries, McDaniel had a classic child-of-the-90s cultural diet: RL 
Stine’s Goosebumps books and reruns of Hocus Pocus. Her fascination with the 
gothic frightened her parents. “As a child, I would draw dead people, 
skeletons,” she says. “I made bookmarks with ghosts, plane crashes on them. I 
did this stuff so much my dad got very concerned and asked me to draw happier 
stuff. I was so upset … that Fourth of July, I made a 6ft tall Uncle Sam out of 
cardboard, as a statement that I could do it but didn’t want to – and went 
right on back to drawing dead people.”

When I learned I could be a writer ​… the whole sky opened full of stars

When she was in the fifth grade she wrote a play about a murder that happens 
in a monster town, but it wasn’t until later that she realised she could write 
for a living. “I thought I had to have a hard job that I didn’t like and didn’t 
pay any money and made me tired and angry, like the jobs my parents had. When I 
was told I could, I thought ‘Oh my gosh, I can do this fora living?’ When I 
learned I could be a writer … The whole sky opened full of stars,” she says, 
smiling.

It was a long road for McDaniel – she wrote her first novel at 18, but was 25 
before she had an agent and only several years later did a manuscript start 
going out to publishers: “It was terrible, because editors would say, ‘Oh I 
loved it’ and after all this wonderful, long stuff they’d say ‘but I’m not 
going to take it’.” They seemed astounded that she hadn’t been through an MFA 
program. “I didn’t even know that was a conversation people were having!” she 
says. After accepting that the first book she wrote would not be the first 
published, she returned to her bedroom and wrote eight more novels in around 
two years, with The Summer That Melted Everything the favourite in that batch.

As McDaniel braced for more rejections, St Martins made an offer. Her family 
cried when they found out. “I was still frightened to believe too much in it. 
My mum was like ‘Aren’t you excited?’” She makes a face. “I’d been close 
before, so I didn’t feel safe until two years later when the book was on the 
shelf.”

Eight novels in a year may sound like a lot, but McDaniel talks about writing 
like one taking urgent instructions. She is strict in her ways: she has no 
outlines or plans, writes strictly chronologically and only starts when she has 
the title and the first line. It takes her a month, on average, to write a 
book. “They need to get out,” she says.

“One of the novels ended up taking eight days, which was even weird for me and 
I probably won’t do it again. I think that one had been sitting with me since 
the first novel … it was there saying, ‘Let me out!’” She is also remarkably 
proactive in marketing: she contacted more than 300 book bloggers to recruit a 
huge army of keen readers on Goodreads and social media, even personally making 
bookmarks for reviewers.

McDaniel’s book is very firmly set in the 80s: Fielding gets his first kiss 
while watching ET, his older brother Grand is haunted by the threat of Aids. 
Starting in 1984, a year before McDaniel was born, she says the era “felt like 
a decade-long summer – it was bright, big hair, big ambitions. So I took the 
heat of that decade and applied it to the heat in the story.” The novel is 
peppered with small references to her own upbringing – her family, like her 
characters, say “winda” instead of window, she says. But the religious fervour 
and the discrimination are products of keen observation from her childhood. The 
instances of racism and homophobia are at times pure venom, while some are 
benignly sanctimonious. “Like my momma used to say, when you play in thorns, 
you ain’t gonna get nothin’ but scratched,” one character mildly muses about 
Aids.

“I’ve been around people who are homophobic and I recognise the language they 
use, the attitudes they have,” she says. “But you can infuse these experiences 
in the characters, while keeping your personal feelings out of it.”

McDaniel’s fascination with matters esoteric and frightening is threaded 
through the novel, culminating in an act of horrific, public violence that 
feels both biblical and rooted in recent US history. Inevitably, in a novel 
about the devil, religion hangs over the book. But Sal is a strange kind of 
Satan: he mourns, laments disunity, is shocked by violence. Similarly, his 
persecutor Elohim – christened with the Hebrew name for God – is less than 
saintly, raising up religious fervour to torment and hunt what is ostensibly a 
child. McDaniel delights in this switcheroo: “I didn’t plan to make it as 
religious as it was, but it was so interesting to explore the good and bad 
sides, and the people who build up churches around themselves.”

Now Summer is safely out, McDaniel finds it “kind of weird” to read reviews, 
but she’s pleased by their positivity,as well as her shortlisting for the 2016 
Not the Booker prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/aug/15/the-not-the-booker-prize-2016-shortlist-revealed-time-to-get-reading>
. She worships Shirley Jackson and Flannery O’Connor; the comparisons of Summer 
with their books delight her, as do the To Kill a Mockingbird references. The 
similarities were entirely subconscious, she says: “Autopsy, Atticus – aw man, 
even the names are similar!” she groans. “It is so weird to be compared to such 
a wonderful book. Harper Lee is the best of the best.”


Her work isn’t done yet; she says her publisher recently scared her when 
pointing out how well a debut must do to warrant a second book. She’s not sure 
yet what that will be either – maybe one of the seven other novels, or 
something new. Her current favourite (she has the title and the first line) is 
set during the Holocaust, and follows two Jewish siblings who escape Nazi 
Germany for Breathed, where they set up a camp of judgment as they deal with 
survivor guilt. Whatever it is, she only has one goal: making it “worth it” for 
readers. “I grew up with not a lot of money so I remember what it was like to 
go to the bookstore and only be able to spend so much. When you got a bad book, 
it was kinda like, ‘Aw, man, I could have bought something better’. So I think 
about that – someone is investing in you, and I try and write the best book I 
can.”

 * The Summer That Melted Everything by Tiffany McDaniel is published by 
Scribe at £14.99 andis available from the Guardian Bookshop for £12.29 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/summer-that-melted-everything.html>.  