
Seven years ago Tina Brown, the woman responsible for turning around some of 
the world’s biggest magazine brands and the founder of the Daily Beast, moved 
from the written to the spoken word with the launch of theWomen in the World 
<http://nytlive.nytimes.com/womenintheworld/> summit. The annual three-day 
event brings together women who, as Brown puts it, “want to speak the truth to 
power” and previous speakers include Hillary Clinton, Angelina Jolie Pitt and 
Meryl Streep. We speak the morning before the conference and Brown is clearly 
excited about what’s taking place this year.

As well as Rula Ghani, the first lady of Afghanistan, and Megyn Kelly, the Fox 
News anchor who scared Donald Trump – two women Brown is particularly looking 
forward to hearing speak – the summit features documentary makers, activists 
and celebrities. They’re all linked by one common thread: they’re all women who 
have refused to back down in the face of blatant sexism.

Brown describes Kelly’s encounter with Trump as a “test case of misogyny on 
wheels”. The level of anti-women rhetoric is one of the key topics that she’s 
hoping the conference will debate. By bringing together women from all over the 
world she wants the audience to experience the different levels of sexism women 
face but also the strength of spirit that unites those who stand up to it.

Women in the World is an event powered by women who live behind the lines of 
the news, so we are looking for stories
Tina Brown 
Whether that’s the women “waging peace” in Africa, such as Bring Back Our 
Girls co-founder Obiageli Ezekwesili, or Zahra’ Langhi, founder of the Libyan 
Women’s Platform for Peace, through to Mindy Kaling talking about her 
experiences in Hollywood and Mary Beard discussing her experiences at the hands 
of the media. All these women, as Brown puts it, “have faced far bigger 
misogynists than Trump”.

To gather together a lineup as diverse and powerful as this you need a very 
well stuffed little black book, and Brown definitely has that. Her career began 
in the UK where she turned around the then failing Tatler magazine, before she 
moved to the US to the do the same for Vanity Fair and the New Yorker. She 
launched The Daily Beast, an online-only news platform, in 2008 and oversaw the 
merger with Newsweek in 2010. Her current company, Tina Brown Live Media, feeds 
into the current popularity of live events, although for Brown the leap from 
publishing to events was a natural one.

“I call this experiential publishing,” she says. “We programme it like we 
would a magazine. For us the critical thing is the rhythm and pace. We have no 
introduction, it’s not a conference. I think people are looking for that 
community experience, the sense that they’re sharing in something.

“The more people are addicted to their screens, the more they want to escape 
them, so we’re now growing a global community from India to London to New York. 
[There’s a need for diverse, curated content] because screens make us so 
insular. We can read but we self-select stuff that we want to read, what we 
want to hear about.

“It is an event that is powered by women who live behind the lines of the 
news,” she says, “so we are looking for stories. I’m looking at it as I would a 
magazine. For instance, we have a panel on women in Turkey and the free speech 
issue in Turkey is becoming a crisis so we have some great women coming from 
there who are refusing to be pushed down. It’s a new topic for America.”

Being able to understand what an audience wants is one of the things that made 
Brown such a successful editor. She knows that every audience wants good 
stories; but she also knows that how you present these is the thing that makes 
your publication (or event) unique.

On turning around the ailing but revered titles Vanity Fair and the New Yorker 
she says: “I love to be able to find the DNA of something that’s been obscured, 
and the excitement of a great title is thrilling. It’s good to deep-dive into 
something, go back to the first issue and see what this thing was before it 
became a sacred jewel. What got it off the ground?”

One topic that Brown thinks we’re not talking about enough is the opportunity 
that the current economic environment presents for women. For decades women 
have been trying to fight their way to the top of structures that were created 
by men, for men. However, the move to what she calls “the gig economy” presents 
an opportunity for women who want to work differently.

“Women have been trying to stuff themselves into these old dead structures. 
[We’re] very well attuned to the way the world is now, much more attuned than 
men who’ve been working in traditional structures are. I think we’re going to 
see more and more of women starting their own companies and getting ahead.”

She adds: “Starting something from scratch, you assemble your own team. When I 
started the Daily Beast it was a joy to have a bunch of kids with nothing to 
lose. It was a great group of Young Turks just saying ‘what the hell’. We 
launched and it took off like a bucking bronco. WithWomen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> in the World we saw something 
very early. Seven years ago I saw the rise of a global women’s movement, they 
were the new feminist icons as far as I was concerned and I wanted to put them 
on the stage. I’ve done the same thing with the launch of the American Justice 
Summit because I could see that criminal justice reform was the next big issue.”

So what advice would she offer these future women leaders?

“Don’t send the email right away, think about it till tomorrow. As someone 
whose life has been rendered chaotic by ‘reply all’, learning to wait has been 
a big lesson.”
 