
A group of former British ambassadors have joined a campaign calling for Tony 
Blair <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> to be removed from his 
role as Middle East envoy after his recent attempt to "absolve himself" of 
responsibility for the crisis in Iraq.

The letter, organised by the makers of George Galloway's film The Killing of 
Tony Blair <http://www.theblairdoc.com/>, says the 2003 invasion of Iraq was to 
blame for the rise of "fundamentalist terrorism in a land where none existed 
previously".

The signatories, led by Blair's former ambassador to Iran Sir Richard Dalton, 
describe the former prime minister's achievements as Middle East envoy as 
"negligible".

Other former diplomats to sign the letter are Oliver Miles, who was ambassador 
to Libya when diplomatic relations were severed in 1984 after the killing of 
WPC Yvonne Fletcher, and Christopher Long, ambassador to Egypt between 1992-95.

Other signatories include former London mayor Ken Livingstone, the human 
rights barrister Michael Mansfield QC, the former Liberal Democrat peer Lady 
Tonge – who resigned her party's whip in 2012 afterdeclaring that Israel would 
not last forever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/feb/29/lady-tonge-lib-dem-israel> – 
the former Tory prisons minister Crispin Blunt, George Galloway, the Green MP 
Caroline Lucas and the Daily Telegraph columnist Peter Oborne.

A spokesperson for Blair dismissed the letter on the grounds that it had been 
drawn up by an "alliance of hard-right and hard-left" whose members are 
"viscerally opposed" to the former prime minister.

The letter, written before Friday's seventh anniversary of Blair's appointment 
as the representative of the "quartet" on the Middle East, says the former 
prime minister's achievement as Middle East envoy are "negligible" and he is 
guilty of seeking to please the Israelis. The quartet consists of the UN, the 
EU, Russia and the US.

The letter says: "We, like many, are appalled by Iraq's descent into a 
sectarian conflict that threatens its very existence as a nation, as well as 
the security of its neighbours. We are also dismayed, however, at Tony Blair's 
recent attempts to absolve himself of any responsibility for the current crisis 
by isolating it from the legacy of theIraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> war.

"In reality, the invasion and occupation of Iraq had been a disaster long 
before the recent gains made by the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant 
(Isis). The sectarian conflict responsible for much of the war's reprehensible 
human cost was caused in part by the occupying forces' division of the 
country's political system along sectarian lines."

It added: "In order to justify the invasion, Tony Blair misled the British 
people by claiming that Saddam had links to al-Qaida. In the wake of recent 
events it is a cruel irony for the people of Iraq that perhaps the invasion's 
most enduring legacy has been the rise of fundamentalist terrorism in a land 
where none existed previously. We believe that Mr Blair, as a vociferous 
advocate of the invasion, must accept a degree of responsibility for its 
consequences."

The signatories say that Blair has failed to achieve any breakthrough as the 
quartet's representative, though they acknowledge his limited mandate that 
involves building the governance of the Palestinian Authority.

The letter says: "It is our view that, after seven years, Mr Blair's 
achievements as Envoy are negligible, even within his narrow mandate of 
promoting Palestinian economic development. Furthermore, the impression of 
activity created by his high-profile appointment has hindered genuine progress 
towards a lasting peace.

"Seven years on there are still over 500 checkpoints and roadblocks in the 
West Bank. The Gaza Strip, severely damaged by Israel's 2009 bombing, remains 
in a humanitarian crisis, with 80% of its population reliant on foreign aid for 
survival. Israel continues to build settlements that are illegal under 
international law. According to the Palestinian Authority's former Chief 
Negotiator, Nabil Shaath, Tony Blair has "achieved so very little because of 
his gross efforts to please the Israelis".

The letter is also critical of Blair's business interests. "Tony Blair's 
conduct in his private pursuits also calls into question his suitability for 
the role. Mr Blair has been widely criticised for a lack of transparency in the 
way he organises his business dealings and personal finances, and for blurring 
the lines between his public position as Envoy and his private roles at Tony 
Blair Associates and the investment bank JPMorgan Chase."

The letter is addressed to John Kerry, the US secretary of state; Sergei 
Lavrov, the Russian foreign minister; Ban Ki-moon, the UN secretary general; 
and Cathy Ashton, the EU's foreign policy chief.

The retired ambassador Oliver Miles, who noted in 2009 that two members of the 
Chilcot inquiry into the Iraq war "are Jewish" 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/commentators/oliver-miles-the-key-question-ndash-is-blair-a-war-criminal-1825374.html>
, said: "Tony Blair is the wrong man in the wrong job. The wrong man because he 
is identified with the war in Iraq; criticism has concentrated on his 
misreading of intelligence and his lies, but equally important was his failure 
to plan for the peace, with the result we see today. The wrong job because 
patching up the Palestine economy sounds good but avoids the real issue, the 
repression and misery of the occupation; that is what the quartet should 
tackle. Seven years on it's time to blow the whistle."

Crispin Blunt said: "It's time to end Tony Blair's personal calvary as quartet 
envoy following his disastrous statesmanship in office on the Middle East. His 
role as envoy was neutered politically almost as soon as it began, and is now a 
distraction from the increasingly desperate need for a comprehensive peace 
deal."

George Galloway said: "I have begun the process of parliamentary impeachment 
of Tony Blair. The House of Commons will vote on that later this year. His 
position is collapsing along with the state of Iraq he helped destroy. His 
tenure as Quartet envoy is now untenable"

A spokesperson for Blair said: "These are all people viscerally opposed to 
Tony Blair with absolutely no credibility in relation to him whatsoever. Their 
attack is neither surprising nor newsworthy. They include the alliance of hard 
right and hard left views which he has fought against all his political life. 
Of course he completely disagrees with them over the Middle East. He believes 
passionately in the two state solution but also believes that can only be 
achieved by a negotiation with Israel."

The spokeperson said of Blair's role as the Middle East envoy: "The truth, and 
anybody who knows anything about the situation in respect of Palestine knows 
this, is that transformational change is impossible unless it goes hand in hand 
with a political process. There was hope that this could progress with the 
recent US led talks which were underpinned by a hugely ambitious economic plan 
spearheaded by Mr Blair."

The spokesperson said of the criticisms of Blair's business interests: "Mr 
Blair has done no work for JP Morgan in the Middle East – he is the chair of 
their International Advisory Council – where he provides advice on global 
political issues."
 