
Escapism

Heli-skiing opens up inaccessible peaks but at a prohibitive cost. A slightly 
more affordable way to tackle unexplored mountains is on a ski and sail trip. 
On a new expedition to the Hornstrandir nature reserve in Iceland, a yacht 
sails to secret ski slopes each day, and guests eat and sleep on board, in a 
different spot each night. The trip is suitable for all abilities and no 
sailing experience is necessary.
• £1,432 for six days' skiing, accommodation, meals and guide, flights extra, 
departures March-May 2014, 020-7097 1734,anotherworldadventures.com 
<http://www.anotherworldadventures.com/adventures/ski-sail-arctic-iceland/>

What's new?


World Cup deal
Finding an affordable hotel in Brazil during the World Cup is looking about as 
likely as England lifting the trophy. Even tour operators are struggling. Real 
Holidays' solution has been to use campsites. It is offering week-long stays at 
three sites: Barra da Tijuca in Rio, which has pitches for up to 3,000 people, 
and two more in north-east Brazil, each with space for 500, in Salvador and 
Pipa, near Natal. As well as pools, big screens, bars and football pitches, the 
price for campers will include transfers to the matches, daily beach transfers, 
beer and caipirinhas and a barbecue meal every other day. Just don't expect to 
get much sleep!

A seven-day camping package costs £895pp, including a pre-assembled tent, 
sleeping bag and mattress, but not flights. It's not cheap for a week in a 
tent, but compared with what some hotels and hostels are charging, it's a 
bargain.

Accommodation
Castle House, a new four-bedroom holiday let within the 16th-century walls of 
Taunton Castle, has been restored for the first time in 300 years and will be 
available from 6 December. The Tudor hall is now a living room with woodburning 
stove, and original beams and floorboards abound.
• From £517 for three nights' self-catering for up to seven, including a food 
and wine hamper,vivat-trust.org 
<http://www.vivat-trust.org/properties.php?pid=122>

Win a holiday to India

Guardian Holiday Offers and Wild Frontiers are offering readers the chance to 
win a 10-day holiday for two to Rajasthan, India, worth £4,500. The trip 
includes visits to Delhi, the Taj Mahal (above), Jaipur and Udaipur. 
Accommodation is in three- and four-star hotels and heritage properties (such 
as the real Best Exotic Marigold Hotel), and flights and guides are included.
• theguardian.com/win-india-holiday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/competition/2013/oct/16/india-competition-rajasthan>

Glampwatch

All aboard! A Victorian railway coach stationed in St Germans, a pretty 
Cornish village, has been converted into rental property. The first-class 
compartment is now the master bedroom; the second-class section is an open-plan 
living room and kitchen. There's a bathroom in third, and a second bedroom with 
triple bunkbed in the guard's van.
• From £395 a week, sleeps five, oneoffplaces.co.uk 
<http://www.oneoffplaces.co.uk/Europe/England/Cornwall/Mevy---a-Victorian-Slip-Coach.aspx>

Cheap date

The Devonshire Fell, a restaurant with rooms in Burnsall, North Yorkshire, is 
offering "Wharfedale Wander" breaks from October to December. The offer 
includes a one-night stay, full Yorkshire breakfast, a pint and a ploughman's 
at the village pub, and free use of a nearby spa.
• From £60pp, 01756 718111, devonshirefell.co.uk 
<http://www.devonshirefell.co.uk/specials.html>

How much?!

Filthy-rich film buffs can spend three months ticking off their favourite film 
locations. The trip visits 20 locations in 10 countries; from Hugh Grant's 
Notting Hill bookshop to Amelie's Paris apartment, The Beach in Thailand and 
Tokyo's Lost in Translation hotel, including Jordan, Peru, China and Australia.
• £198,000 for two, including business-class flights, five-star hotels and 
guided tours,veryfirstto.com <http://veryfirstto.com/>

Travel trash

Do you often find yourself needing to make a primitive bow, lash wood together 
for shelter or hang your food out of reach of bears? If so, invest in Bear 
Grylls' survival bracelet, woven from 12ft of high-strength paracord. You'll be 
ready to fashion a splint at a moment's notice.
• £17.99, from beargryllsstore.com 
<http://www.beargryllsstore.com/uk/home/bear-grylls-survival-bracelet.html>

Trend alert! Back to Iran
 Ruins around the Apadana Palace in Persepolis. Photograph: Felip Trueba/Alamy 
Relations between Iran and the west are beginning to thaw. Barack Obama spoke 
to Iran's new president, Hassan Rouhani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/27/obama-phone-call-iranian-president-rouhani>
, on the phone last month, in the first direct contact between American and 
Iranian leaders since 1979. This week, talks between the Iranian government and 
a six-nation negotiating group started in Geneva.

Hugh Fraser of Corinthian Travel believes that where politicians lead, 
tourists will follow: "After 34 years, the west may be on the cusp of a new era 
in its relationship with Iran. Provided the talks succeed, and a resumption of 
normalised diplomatic and trade relations follows, we may see tourism returning 
to Iran as early as the autumn of next year."

It's a big proviso. The Foreign Office is still advising against all travel to 
parts of Iran, and all but essential travel to the remainder of the country. 
But Jonny Bealby, founder of Wild Frontiers, expects the warnings to be lifted 
soon. His company took 25 people on group tours to Iran this year, and advance 
bookings show at least twice as much demand for 2014. He says: "Iran is second 
to none in terms of historical sites, and the people are fantastically 
hospitable, liberal, fun and interested in the west."

BIndeed, before the Iranian revolution in 1979, the country was a major 
tourist destination for western tourists, with highlights including the ruins 
of Persepolis, the gardens of Shiraz, and the bridges, squares and monuments of 
Isfahan.

Early tours will be expensive: expect to pay around £2,800 for two weeks, plus 
flights (Turkish Airlines flies Heathrow-Tehran via Istanbul for about £450 
return). But, as happened in Burma, when a country opens up to tourists, travel 
companies are quick to meet the new demand – and prices can fall rapidly. By 
2015, Iran could be a new travel hotspot.
 