
I landed in Crimea in August, at high season, because I was writing a novel 
and I'd decided it needed to be set somewhere in Crimea. I needed a Soviet 
seaside resort town with a large, luxurious hotel. This was in 2011, when 
Crimea was still part of a country calledUkraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine>, which, though rife with 
corruption, still showed no sign of revolution or violent fracture. From the 
perspective of the present day, one might almost feel nostalgic for it.

Before I arrived, my knowledge of Crimea was based mostly on my parents' 
stories and on the Russian classics. When I thought of Crimea I thought of 
Chekhov, of the battlefields of the Crimean war and of the gilded playgrounds 
of tsars and commissars. I had only a hazy conception of what Crimea was like 
now. My Russian friends weren't much help. One, a close friend from childhood 
who now mingles with oligarchs in London and Moscow, said dismissively: "I 
don't know anybody who goes there." The middle class booked tours to Cyprus or 
the Dominican Republic, the wealthy sunbathed on yachts in Cap Ferrat.Crimea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/crimea> was now for the narod, the masses, 
people from the provinces who either couldn't imagine or couldn't afford 
anything better.

When my family lived in the USSR, Soviet citizens couldn't travel abroad and 
the choices were the Baltic coast – where I summered as a boy – or towns along 
the Black Sea, like Sochi, Gagra, Odessa and those of the Crimean peninsula. 
Yalta was arguably the most desirable of those destinations.

But the town I originally had in mind for my novel was Koktebel. It is a small 
beach town four hours by car south of Yalta. Koktebel has a bohemian 
reputation. It even boasts a nude beach. It is also renowned as the place where 
the Russian poet and painterMaximilian Voloshin 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maximilian_Voloshin> had his house, which he 
opened to artists and writers including Osip Mandelstam, Andrei Bely and Diego 
Rivera. The road leading to Koktebel passes villages reminiscent of the kind 
one encounters in parts of Greece or southern Italy.
 Cliff hanger: the Swallow's Nest Castle perched over the Black Sea at Yalta. 
Photograph: Alamy 
By the time I check into my hotel – a tidy but spare three-storey operation – 
I understand that I will not be able to set my novel here. Koktebel has no 
luxury hotels to speak of. But one advantage my hotel is that it is a few 
hundred metres from Maximilian Voloshin's house, now a museum. A bronze statue 
of Voloshin is planted on the promenade, between his house and the sea. The 
sculptor hasn't aggrandised him: he appears life-size, bearded, wearing a 
peasant tunic, part saint, part gnome. I take a mid-afternoon tour. The house 
is filled to capacity. The Russian vacationers, narod of all ages fresh from 
the beaches, encircle the guide, a young woman, primly dressed. She begins the 
tour by reciting some lines from a poem of Voloshin's,Dom Poeta (The Poet's 
House). Everyone listens courteously, respectfully. The Russian narod still 
know what they are meant to hold sacred – the Poets, the Church and the Wars.

I spend the afternoon in the blaze of sun and sensation that is Koktebel. The 
promenade, which stretches for kilometres, passes through a gauntlet of 
souvenir booths, food kiosks, bars, restaurants, games arcades, street 
performers and miscellaneous vendors – women peddling homemade cakes; young men 
at tables piled with salt fish; other men selling boat tours. Beyond them is 
the crowded beach. The farther east you go the more bohemian it becomes. 
Hotels, restaurants and vendors give way and nudists start to appear. Here and 
there you can spot a naked man, his equipment pendulous, making conversation or 
contemplating the sea.

Crimea, even more than the rest of the former Soviet Union, hasn't settled on 
a coherent idea of itself. When the Iron Curtain fell 20 years ago everyone 
grabbed haphazardly at the trinkets of the wider world. The Club Santa Fe, just 
west of Voloshin's house, serves sushi and pizza and throbs nightly with techno 
music. Fast-food stands advertise "Hot Dogs" (spelt out phonetically in 
Cyrillic) – which are sausages in pittas. Everywhere are signs for "Fresh" 
(also spelt out in Cyrillic), the umbrella term for any freshly squeezed juice 
– orange fresh, apple fresh, strawberry fresh.
 Postcard from the edge: boat tours in Koktebel. 
All these things are common, to be found all over the former Soviet Union. But 
other things are unique to Crimea. There are the citizens of Sevastopol, 
arguably the most Russian citizens of Crimea, their city steeped in martial and 
naval history. There is Bakhchisaray, the former seat of theCrimean Khanate 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crimean_Khanate>, and in its winding streets one 
feels the imprint of the Orient. In the hills above the palace are more 
curiosities: the Uspensky Cave Monastery, still functioning, carved into the 
face of a mountain. On the day I was there, bearded, black-clad monks harvested 
apricots.

And then there is Yalta, where Dmitri Gurov famously courted the lady with the 
little dog. They walked its promenade, its pier. Now a new generation of 
Russian bourgeoisie strolls here. There are cafés and boutiques to satisfy them 
and, what I needed for my novel, a handful of upscale hotels. The largest and 
most prominent is the Oreanda, just off the promenade, with the requisite 
Mercedeses and Bentleys parked out front.
 The white house: Livadia Palace. Photograph: Alamy 
But resurgent capitalism coexists with recalcitrant communism. In Lenin Square 
the mythical Bolshevik leader stands huge and bronze, looking past a McDonald's 
to the sea. People converge at his feet. Then too, there are the reminders that 
not everyone is prospering in Yalta. Once, I saw a string quartet consisting of 
four young women in cocktail dresses who had attracted a sizable audience; 
farther down I saw another quartet, like a harbinger of sad fate: four older 
women, drably dressed, playing to themselves.

Culturally and historically, Yalta has its attractions. Its main draw is the 
Livadia palace, former summer residence of Tsar Nicholas II. When the 
Bolsheviks seized the palace they looted it thoroughly before turning it into a 
sanatorium and, later, an insane asylum. A museum that attracts far fewer 
pilgrims than Livadia – and is the better for it – is the Chekhov museum. One 
can go there and see where the master worked and slept. One can listen to the 
matronly women who serve as guides speak of him with reverence.

At either end of the promenade stretch the beaches, the hipper Massandra to 
the south, the more prosaic beaches to the north. They are relatively narrow 
and composed not of sand but of large pebbles or small stones. Someone whose 
idea of a beach is a spacious expanse of soft sand, and who saw a Crimean beach 
in August, might wonder at its appeal: the thousands of steaming, rubicund 
bodies; the great hubbub; the proximity of many boats with their oily 
effluences.

But this is Crimea's appeal. Restful or relaxing it isn't, but it has its 
charms. It is an authentic expression of a culture that is dear to many 
Russians. And, in a sense, to understand what is happening inUkraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine> today is to understand the 
particular appeal of Crimea. The people who love it are precisely the people 
who distrust the pro-European government in Kiev and wish instead to join 
Putin's Russia. They prefer the familiar chaos of Crimea to some alien illusory 
paradise.

The Betrayers by David Bezmozgis is published by Viking on 28 August.
 