
A UN security council resolution being drafted by France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> and New Zealand plans to set an 
18-month deadline for completion of talks leading to the creation of a 
Palestinian state.

Details of the draft resolution – disclosed to the French newspaper Le Figaro 
<http://www.lefigaro.fr/> – emerged on Thursday amid warnings that if no 
agreement was reached in that timeframe, France would go ahead and unilaterally 
recognise a Palestinian state.

Pressure appears to be mounting on Israelis and Palestinians, not least from 
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, to return to the 
negotiating table after a damaging hiatus in the peace process of more than a 
year.

According to sources familiar with the resolution, however, it is unlikely to 
be tabled until after the end of negotiations between Tehran and world powers 
over a deal on Iran’s nuclear programme – due to be completed by 30 June – and 
probably not before September.

Details of the resolution emerged as the Israeli prime minister, Binyamin 
Netanyahu, met the Europoean Union foreign policy chief, Federica Mogherini. He 
restated his purported commitment to a two-state solution, having told voters 
earlier this year that no Palestinian state would be established on his watch.

Netanyahu had been warned by the visiting Norwegian foreign minister, Børge 
Brende, on Wednesday to expect a fresh wave of international pressure over 
making substantive progress towards a two-state solution once the Iran deadline 
ha dpassed.

While it was known that France had been working on a resolution since the 
failure of the last effort to pass a resolution on the issue, the leaking of 
its contents appears designed to put pressure on Netanyahu’s new rightwing 
government – in which opponents of a two-state solution hold prominent 
positions – to return to talks.

Netanyahu’s commitment to a two-state solution has been questioned, not least 
by US officials, who have refused to accept his assurances that hiscomments 
during Israel’s elections in March did not mean he had abandoned it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/19/binyamin-netanyahu-israel-palestine-two-state-solution>
.

In his meeting with Mogherini, Netanyahu used the opportunity “to reiterate 
Israel’s commitment to peace, and my commitment to peace”.

“We want a peace that would end the conflict once and for all,” he said. “My 
position has not changed: I don’t support a one-state solution – I don’t 
believe that’s a solution at all. I support the vision of two states for two 
peoples – a demilitarised Palestinian state that recognises the Jewish state.”

However, observers have remarked on Netanyahu’s appointment of Silvan Shalom 
to lead any negotiations with the Palestinians, a figure who in the past has 
been very public in his opposition to Palestinian statehood.

Netanyahu’s remarks were also quickly discounted by the chief Palestinian 
negotiator,Saeb Erekat <https://www.theguardian.com/world/saeb-erekat>, in a 
statement released by his office.

“It is not about Mr Netanyahu’s public relations skills claiming that he 
supports a two-state solution, but about his actions,” said Erekat. “The new 
Israeli cabinet has shown its commitment to consolidate an apartheid regime in 
occupied Palestine, as well as to continue its incitement campaign against 
Palestinians, sending the message that Palestinian lives, history and culture 
don’t matter.

“The international community has allowed Israel to stall the prospects of a 
just and lasting peace for too long and has a responsibility to face 
Netanyahu’s hypocrisy head on, and not at the expense of the Palestinian 
people. We call on the international community to do nothing more than demand
Israel <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> fulfill its obligations under 
international law.”

 