
The results of the visit to Prague of Sir Harry Twyford, Lord Mayor of London, 
and Sir Neill Malcolm, High Commissioner of the League of Nations for German
Refugees <https://www.theguardian.com/world/refugees>, who accompanied him as 
an unofficial adviser, were reported to members of the Lord Mayor’s Relief 
Committee at the Mansion House to-day.

The most urgent refugee problem is that of the Germans who have fled into 
Czecho-Slovakia from the newly occupied territory rather than risk the 
hostility of the Nazi regime. It is estimated that there are some 25,000 such 
refugees; most of them are Social Democrats, but there are some Jews. The 
Prague Government is anxious to be rid of them, fearing that they may form a 
new minority which will be a source of trouble between Berlin and Prague. These 
refugees are, therefore, faced with the alternatives of being forced back into 
territory whose Government they fear or of being without a resting-place of any 
kind.


APPEAL FOR TIME
Their position is desperate, and the agencies for refugee relief are doing 
their utmost to persuade the Czech Government to allow a little more time in 
which to help these people. I understand that during the visit of Sir Harry 
Twyford and Sir Neill Malcolm to Prague the need for this delay was urged with 
as much force as possible.

It was suggested that if the Government would allow an interval of only two 
months to elapse before the German refugees were compelled to leave Czech 
territory some means of helping to settle them elsewhere might be arranged. 
Apprehension about the effects that a new German minority might cause, however, 
dominates the Czech Government at the moment, and the only promise that could 
be secured was that no refugees who were likely to be marked men and liable to 
terrible ill-treatment if they returned to territory under German control would 
be forced to leave Czecho-Slovakia.


In these circumstances it is difficult to make further progress. The best hope 
lies in the efforts that may be made in Prague by the heads of the three main 
relief agencies – Dr. Alice Masaryk, who is concerned chiefly with Czech 
refugees; Herr Jaksch, who is responsible for a Social Democrat organisation; 
and Mme. Smolka, who directs a Jewish relief agency. These people are well 
aware of the misery that is being caused among German refugees, and they may be 
able to secure some alleviation.


LABOUR’S PROPOSAL
Another hope is placed in the British Foreign Office, which could, through the 
British Minister in Prague, urge the need for sympathetic treatment of these 
refugees. To-night a deputation from the National Council of Labour pressed 
this action on Mr. R. A. Butler, the Under Secretary for Foreign Affairs. At 
the same time they saw the Duke of Devonshire, Under Secretary for the 
Dominions, and asked him to consider the possibility of settling these refugees 
in the Dominions or elsewhere.

Although the German refugees constitute the most urgent problem they are only 
the beginning of the Czech Government’s difficulties. There are many more 
refugees from Sudeten territory who are Czechs and whom Prague could not refuse 
to accommodate. Prague is also faced with the prospect of receiving thousands 
more Czechs if the arrangements for option made in the Munich settlement are 
carried out.


Continue reading here 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/10/13/14Oct1938refugees.jpg>
 