 Israel's prime minister, Ehud Barak, and the Syrian foreign minister, Farouk 
Shara'a, began a second round of peace negotiations in the United States 
yesterday.
The talks, dramatically revived last month after a four-year break, are 
expected to move from generalities to tough and detailed bargaining on 
territorial withdrawal, water, security, the 'normalisation' of relations, and 
a timetable for implementation.

The talks were a 'huge historic opportunity' at which 'very, very hard 
decisions' would have to be made, said the US secretary of state, Madeleine 
Albright. The US was acting as a 'facilitator'; she would attend the 
negotiations every day and President Bill Clinton would come 'as often as 
necessary'.

The negotiations, at the secluded West Virginian resort of Shepherdstown, are 
expected to last a fortnight.

The Israelis appear to have lowered their hopes of a breakthrough - such as a 
'framework agreement' - in that time. But Israeli and Arab commentators mostly 
agree that the chances for a settlement between the Jewish state and its most 
tenacious Arab neighbour have never been higher.

On the eve of the talks, Syria made it clear that it would not budge from its 
key territorial demand: a complete Israeli withdrawal from the Golan Heights 
and south Lebanon.

By complete withdrawal Syria has always meant withdrawal to the ceasefire line 
of June 4 1967. That would bring the Israelis down from the strategic high 
ground above lake Tiberias, and restore Syrian access to its northern shore.

On his way to Washington, Israel's foreign minister, David Levy, said that 
Syria had 'hardened its position in the past few days'. Haim Ramon, a minister 
in Mr Barak's office, said: 'We will not withdraw to the June 4 1967 borders.'

But Mr Barak said peace with Syria had 'a very painful, very hard price', but 
it was 'necessary' to pay it. This line is generally taken to imply a readiness 
to withdraw from virtually the whole Golan. He insisted, however 'on complete 
normalisation with both Syria and Lebanon'.

If, as many observers believe, the negotiations are moving into their 
make-or-break stage, a potent convergence of personal and political factors 
accounts for that.

Mr Clinton badly needs a foreign policy triumph. Mr Barak is under heavy 
pressure of his own making, chiefly because of his highly-publicised pledge to 
end the occupation of south Lebanon by July. If, to keep the pledge, he has to 
pull out unilaterally without an agreement, what had been a hell-hole for his 
soldiers could turn into a strategic nightmare for him. The Hizbullah 
guerrillas might simply move up to the Lebanese frontier, posing a greater 
threat than before.

But the motives of Syria's president, Hafez al-Assad, appear the most 
compelling. He made the key contribution to the revival of the negotiations and 
has insisted that Mr Barak publicly endorse the commitment supposedly made by 
the late Yitzhak Rabin to withdraw to the June 4 1967 line. But Mr Barak would 
not do so.

Significant, too, is the high level at which talks were resumed. In the past, 
the Syrians had balked at increasing the seniority of the interlocutors.

If Mr Assad believes - as may well now be the case - that a peace treaty will 
strengthen rather than weaken his regime, he obviously wants to achieve one 
before he hands over to his expected heir, his inexperienced son Bashar. At 71, 
and in poor health, Mr Assad has little time left.

But it may have been south Lebanon that finally swayed him. A unilateral 
Israeli withdrawal from Lebanon would greatly reduce any Israeli incentive to 
quit the Golan. It could also - if Hizbullah is not restrained - lead to 
massive Israeli attacks on Lebanese 'infrastructure', and that could spark 
large-scale Israeli-Syrian hostilities which Syria could not possibly win.
 