 This week's opening round of substantive negotiations between Israel and Syria 
is a good moment to ask what sort of Middle East settlement the US and the main 
regional players are trying to achieve. On one level, the talks in 
Shepherdstown, West Virginia, are focused on an Israeli withdrawal from the 
Golan Heights, occupied since the 1967 war, in return for normalised relations, 
security guarantees and agreement on shared resources like water. These issues 
are in turn linked to the promised Israeli pullback from south Lebanon and a 
hoped-for end to Hizbullah's nasty little war. By further extension, an 
Israeli-Syrian peace may help accelerate a final Israeli agreement with Yasser 
Arafat's Palestinians - all to be completed, if Bill Clinton has his ambitious 
way, before this November's US presidential elections.
On the face of it, this all seems welcome. But the talks, predictably, have 
quickly run into problems. In truth, the positions adopted by both sides in 
Shepherdstown are weighed down by old thinking, old fears and old prejudices 
which could yet wreck the process. For its part, Israel has asked Washington to 
supply, gratis, up to $17bn worth of military assistance on top of its $2bn 
annual stipend. Jerusalem's wish-list includes nuclear-capable Tomahawk cruise 
missiles, real-time satellite intelligence and funding for its own missile 
defence system. It is also reportedly seeking a US-run regional weapons 
inspection regime and guarantees of emergency aid and oil during times of 
crisis. To those who may say that this a wondrous strange way to prepare for 
peace, Israel's reply is that such enhanced capability is essential if the 
prime minister, Ehud Barak, is to overcome strong domestic political 
opposition, assuage fears that his country's security may be compromised, and 
win the referendum in which Israelis will be asked to ratify any deal with 
Damascus. But while seeking what Mr Barak has called the "peace of the brave",
Israel <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> is in fact bent, as ever, on 
maintaining, indeed bolstering, its qualitative edge in terms of regional 
military power and thus its de facto political and economic Middle East 
dominance.

Syria, a chronically repressed country held in thrall by its reclusive 
president, Hafez Assad, also has a post-Golan agenda, some of which has become 
apparent at Shepherdstown, and some of which is merely suspected. Its adamant 
insistence on a full Israeli withdrawal to the exact June 4 1967 border may or 
may not prove to be a show-stopper; Israel has so far firmly rejected it. But 
it could also presage, in the view of some Israeli commentators, destabilising 
Syrian attempts to revise its other international boundaries, such as that with 
Jordan, which it has disputed since its creation in 1923. Syria, a Cold War 
client of the Soviet Union and still officially deemed a sponsor of terrorism 
by the US is, unabashed, also looking for substantial US and international 
economic and security aid as the price of making peace with Israel. The 
confrontational behaviour at the talks of its foreign minister, Farouk 
al-Shara, has meanwhile reminded Israelis that, in Syria's current view at 
least, normalised relations will not mean embassies and shopping trips in each 
other's capitals, let alone a sort of Damascus spring. Syria's citizens will 
not get the chance to vote on any agreement. While nobody can yet tell what 
Syria's heir apparent, Bashar Assad, may do, his father, while he remains at 
the helm, will have no truck with democracy or other western concepts of 
accountability, Golan deal or no. What is on offer from Damascus is at best a 
cold, barren peace; a peace rooted in the past, not the future. Like Israel, 
Syria seems to see Shepherdstown only as a way to advance increasingly stale, 
out-moded objectives based on old strategic models. Neither side fully accepts 
it for what it is: a long-overdue chance not just to end the era of 
Arab-Israeli conflict but to launch a new era of positive cooperation.

When the US appealed to both sides this week for "new ideas", the underlying 
problem was clear. The Middle East does not need yet more weapons. It does not 
need refurbished autocrats. Instead, its politicians and leaders must find the 
courage to change. What is needed now is a vision of a shared future, of a 
shared prosperity, of a shared confidence transcending the old fault lines of 
religious bigotry, racial prejudice, and half-remembered wars, and challenging 
their legacy of poverty, disenfranchisement, and fundamentalist extremism - the 
real, modern-day threats to peace. For this, crucially, the Middle East needs a 
leap of faith. This, so far, is lacking.
 