
Araf. Slow in Welsh. The word is inscribed on almost every corner of the road 
that winds up the Afan valley from Port Talbot to Glyncorrwg, a tiny town 
hanging on to a steep hillside deep in old coal mining country. Such caution 
could lead the unsuspecting visitor to think people in this part of south Wales 
are hung up on personal safety. This would be an error. Because Afan Forest 
Park is famous for its mountain bike trails - purpose-built singletrack - which 
compel you to plummet down the hillside. Seriously, would you move slowly on 
routes called Graveyard, Desolation or Dead Sheep Gulley?

No. Slow is how we moved later as we inched our way back up the driveway to 
Afan Lodge. A mere 10 minutes from Glyncorrwg in the village of Duffryn, the 
Lodge was opened three weeks ago by keen riders Louise and Richard Davis 
specifically for mountain bikers, and it makes a nice change from the bunkhouse 
or traditional B&B options usually on offer.
 Riding the Hidden Valley trail in Afan Forest Park 
Huge and spacious, it was originally a Miners' Institute housing a large dance 
hall, skittles alley and library. Today, it feels more like an Alpine ski 
chalet, its wooden floors capable of dealing with mud and grubby riders and its 
power hose more than adept at blowing chunks of dirt off derailleurs and 
chainrings. Probably even more importantly for the mountain bike community, or 
indeed anyone who enjoys an ale at the end of a day in the fresh air, it has a 
bar and restaurant on site, both of which look out on to The Wall, one of 
Afan's five trails. In fact, positioned as it is between both theGlyncorrwg and 
Afan mountain bike centres 
<http://www.glyncorrwgponds.com/mountain_biking%20the%20Glyncrrowg%20ponds.htm>
, the Lodge is in a great spot to let you hit The Wall within minutes. Which, I 
suspect, is a much more pleasant experience than the one endured by marathon 
runners.

We decided to tackle White's Level, graded as a red run – and if you're 
familiar with ski resorts, the coding of trail centres tends to be in the same 
vein with green as easy, blue as medium, red as difficult and black as severe. 
Taken at an easy pace, a red run isn't beyond the skills of a relatively 
competent off-roader. Having said that, the climb is not for the fainthearted 
or weak of lung and the large drop that appears at times on one side – the 
consequence of riding in a valley - can play havoc with the nerves. But after 
6km of rocky ascent, you get 10km of pretty much downhill riding beginning in a 
wide expanse under the spinning rotors of a huge wind farm at Windy Point 
before descending rapidly through forest and wood, bringing you back to the 
start at Glyncorrwg. The views alone are worth it.

A new addition to the upper part of Afan is W2, a route linking White's Level 
with The Wall and it's safe to say it's aimed at the more confident biker with 
some pretty demanding riding on the downhill.
 Afan Lodge 
After a hot bath, we relaxed by the Lodge's open fire and tucked into proper 
riding food - bangers and mash. Louise and Richard ran a bakery before opening 
the Lodge and pride themselves on using local produce in their restaurant; they 
still bake their own bread, two doorsteps of which covered in beans and eggs 
make for a sterling breakfast.

Louise and Richard are keen to share their knowledge of the area and point out 
the best bits – picking their brains is expected and Richard's dad Wynn, who 
still rides Afan, is nicknamed Tom-Tom for his orienteering skills. "We are all 
riders and we had in our heads a vision for this place," says Louise. "It was 
always going to be a lodge, not a B&B, not a hotel. Just somewhere mountain 
bikers could relax."

• Twin rooms at Afan Lodge start at £57.50 a night. Self-contained suites 
sleeping up to five people and equipped with a small kitchen are £125 a night. 
Afan Lodge, Afan Road, Duffryn Rhondda, Port Talbot.
afanlodge.com <http://www.afanlodge.com>, +44 (0)1639 852500
 