
As a pop-obsessed 1980s teenager, I never fancied winter sports much: all that 
hairstyle-compromising exertion, ghastly knitwear and sub-zero temperatures. 
Then came the video for Wham!’s fondue-fragranced festive classic Last 
Christmas, a soft-focus saga tracing George Michael’s doomed love – his 
blow-dry the size of a snow-laden chalet roof – for a C&A-clad ice-maiden among 
the snowflakes of the Swiss ski resort Saas-Fee.

That was 30 years ago this winter. To celebrate, the scenic Valais village has 
gift-wrapped a range of 1980s-themed events and holiday deals to make this 
season special (special). From 6-19 December and 10 to 23 January, the resort 
is offering packages in apartments and hotels at prices they say are rewound to 
1984: for example, seven nights B&B in a two-star hotel for £517 including 
lift-pass.

Another anniversary, marking 165 years since plucky local priest Father Johann 
Josef Imseng donned a pair of planks to become Switzerland’s first skier, is 
the pretext for similarly reduced prices between 10-23 January. Each Thursday 
between these [December] dates, a free guided torchlight hike will leave the 
tourist office at 6pm, headed for locations featured in the video – including 
the base station of the Felskinn cable car and Haus Schliechte, the chalet from 
the vid.

Truly dedicated pilgrims may wish to swing by the swishy Hotel Ferienart, 
which stabled the yuletide Young Guns during the shoot.

Guests taking advantage of the nostalgia packages will find the village at its 
winsome twinkliest, with a Christmas market on December weekends in the 
traditional wooden farm storehouses – look out for a George Michael lookalike 
there on December 12 and 13. Also, there is a plan for a Wham! tribute band to 
play during the “festivities”. Said to be a tiny, glitz-lite version of its 
near neighbour Zermatt, traditional, car-free Saas-Fee is in any case rich in 
reasons to visit. Although expert skiers would struggle to keep busy for more 
than a couple of days on its modest 100km of pistes, the runs are very 
beautiful. Overlooked by some 18 peaks over 4,000m and two spectacular 
glaciers, they are rarely crowded and exceptionally snow-sure, lying as they do 
between 1,800m and 3,500m, with runs on a glacier. The mileage-hungry may wish 
to note that the bus-linked next-door villages of Saas-Grund, Saas-Balen and 
Saas-Almagell can add another 45km to your ski pass, and that at one hour 45 
minutes away Zermatt is just doable as a day trip.

Saas-Fee boasts a bunch of world bests, with the highest underground funicular 
running up to the 3,500m Mittelallalin station, the loftiest revolving 
restaurant inThrees!xty <http://www.threesixty-saasfee.com/>, which on a clear 
day affords views as far as Milan, and theEispavilion 
<http://www.saas-fee.ch/en/page.cfm/aktivitaeten-saastal/entdecken-winter/ice-pavilion-allalin>
 – at 5,550m the largest ice grotto carved into a glacier. And it’s claiming 
another first this year with the newwellnessHostel4000 
<http://www.youthhostel.ch/en/hostels/saas-fee> (youthhostel.ch, doubles from 
£85 B&B, dorm beds from £29), a hybrid between the youth hostel movement’s 
bargain-basement ethos and a wellness centre with saunas, steam rooms, 
therapies and an indoor pool.

Perhaps Wham!’s Saas-Fee sojourn subconciously helped to trigger my own 
passion for snow sports years later. Certainly since then, I’ve rarely been on 
a chalet holiday with friends and not found an excuse to recreate Andrew 
Ridgeley’s swaggering presentation of a sparkler-topped cake at the dinner 
table, while George steals a glance at the stone-hearted beauty who stuffed his 
stocking with heartache.
• Check event details at saas-fee.ch <http://www.saas-fee.ch/de/Home>
 