
I had the birds and the bees conversation with my daughter when she was around 
four years old. I told her that sex is an act that two consenting adults choose 
to do and I stressed that nobody should touch her body in any way that makes 
her uncomfortable.

We have revisited this conversation over the years. I told her that her 
genitals are called a vagina, not fanny, nunnie, minnie or down there. I was 
sick and tired of the pervading belief that women and girls can’t describe our 
body parts directly.


Now nearly 10 years after that conversation (she’s just turned 14) teenage 
hormones are in full swing, with eye rolling and tuning me out while listening 
to Rihanna. But I love the fact we have frank open conversations about most 
things and I truly treasure the times we don’t agree. I love that she has her 
own views about the world.

With that in mind, I want to share some thoughts about my work that made me 
think of my daughter and the pressure girls around the world face in relation 
to their sexuality.


Feminism is breaking through the rigid patriarchy in Pakistan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/aug/08/culpability-qandeel-baloch-death-pakistan>
As part of my work with the Dahlia Project 
<http://www.manorgardenscentre.org/dahlia-support-fgm-survivors/>, a 
counselling service I founded for women and girls who have undergone female 
genital mutilation (FGM), I run sessions for refugee women where I talk about 
the cultures they grew up in.

The discussion always leads to sex, and a recurring theme is virginity. Many 
of the women are educated and considered liberal in their way of thinking. They 
say their daughters are equal to their sons. However, they also say they want 
their daughters to remain virgins to protect them from harm and so that future 
husbands will respect them.

What interests me about these conversations is that the women openly talked 
about being cheated on or beaten by their so-called respectful husbands. I 
nudged the women to reflect. “Did remaining a virgin work for you?” I asked. 
“Did it prevent the violence and betrayal he had caused you?” Many were baffled 
by my questions. By our second session some of the women were starting to 
realise that cultural patriarchy was alive and well in their homes, and they 
were complicit in committing the oppression they had endured against their own 
daughters.

Society high-fives men with multiple sexual partners

Sadly I only had two sessions with these women, and they left me questioning 
this universal obsession with virginity. I remember newspaper articles about 
Kate Middleton, being slut-shamed in newspaper articles for not being a virgin 
before marriage and rumour has it Diana had to prove her virginity before 
marrying Prince Charles. If a woman is sexually free or has multiple partners, 
society shames her and makes her feel bad about herself.

While dating I’ve been asked how many men I’ve slept with. This idea of being 
judged based on the history of my vagina is absolutely ludicrous and another 
form of control of women’s sexuality. My brother and all the men in my life are 
never asked such questions yet alone judged on them. Society high-fives men 
with multiple sexual partners.

I had my first sexual experience at the age of 18 with my then husband (I’m 
currently happily divorced). I didn’t make the choice to stay a virgin. I did 
so for two reasons. Firstly, I wasn’t the girl boys were lining up to date. I 
was a super nerd who didn’t wear makeup or pluck her eyebrows. So, no 
temptation or struggle for me. Secondly, my mother told me sex was great and 
nothing to be ashamed about. As a teenager I wasn’t keen to try something my 
mother enjoyed (remember that trick, parents).

Anti-FGM campaigner Leyla Hussein: the women who made me
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jun/29/leyla-hussein-the-women-who-made-me>
I remind my daughter that whenever the day comes that she wants to lose her 
virginity (why is it something you lose, like a precious possession?), it is no 
one’s business but hers. If anyone tries to judge her based on her genitals, I 
tell her to just walk away.

I tell her that our vaginas are very special and powerful, we bleed and give 
birth from them, and it’s her right as a woman to enjoy sex one day. It’s a 
beautiful and enjoyable act. Patriarchy tried to prevent me and over 200 
million FGM survivors from living as sexual beings, but through therapy and a 
loving supportive partner many of these women can and are enjoying sex. There 
is hope.

Dear world, women have sex and enjoy it, so get over the idea that virginity 
is something to protect.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter. Join the conversation with the 
hashtag#SheMatters <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23SheMatters&src=typd>.
 