
I’ve always been a fan of challenging myself, playing with fire and plunging 
head first into the deep end. And, more often than not, ending up in A&E with 
various degrees of physical damage and lacerations to my ego.

The one thing I’ve always wanted to do is standup comedy. 

Talk to anyone who’s done standup, and they will tell you that it’s the most 
terrifying thing you can do (I assume these people haven’t worked down a 200-ft 
mine, defused any bombs or had lunch with my mother.)

It’s especially difficult if you have no previous experience and have just 
booked yourself 25 solo one hour shows in one of the main venues of the biggest 
arts festival in the world, the Edinburgh fringe.

So that’s what I did. 

The two words uttered by almost everyone I told about my plans were “brave” 
and “mad”. This did little to raise my confidence levels. I chose to laugh my 
worries away (possibly the biggest laugh I got all summer), after all, what’s 
the worst that can happen, apart from extreme public humiliation and some form 
of emotional breakdown?

Both standup and the working world require confidence, the ability to deal 
with self doubt and the art of perfect timing

As the time neared, my brain seemed to alternate between peculiarly calm 
denial, sudden breathless, pop-eyed mania and a sort of panic-stricken whiteout.

But then something strange happened. Suddenly, I was behind the curtain. The 
lights dimmed, the music started, I heard the bubbling chatter of the audience 
coming in and I stopped chewing the microphone lead and weeping into my 
shoelaces.

I walked out there on to that stage, felt the applause like a triple espresso 
coursing through my blood, and I did it. Every day. For an hour. For the whole 
month.

I think I learned more from those 25 hours of terror than I’ve learned 
throughout my entire professional life.

I wasn’t expecting that there would be such a huge overlap between the skills 
one needs to perform standup comedy and those that we use in the workplace and 
in life, every day.

Both standup and the working world require confidence, the ability to deal 
with moments of self doubt and fear, the art of perfect timing, as well as a 
knack for observing and responding to an audience.

These are the life lessons that I learned from my nerve-wracking month of 
comedy.

Slow Down

In standup, an hour is a very long time. It’s not sixty minutes. When it’s 
going badly, an hour lasts for at least a week. When it’s going well … I’ll get 
back to you on that one when it’s happened to me.

When it comes to doing a talk or presentation at work, the first 10 minutes 
are usually fine. Then there’s a very awkward 47 minutes of filler. The best 
way to make this go well, is to talk slowly.

I’m a speed-gabbler. Once I’d learned to talk at half the speed, I realised 
I’d immediately halved my work. This was a turning point.

Don’t judge yourself by your audience’s reaction

If they’re not laughing it doesn’t necessarily mean they don’t think it’s 
funny, it just means they’re not laughers. I suppose it might mean that they 
think you’re rubbish, but the best advice here is to NEVER ASK. Just go home, 
have a hot bath, and high-five yourself in the mirror.

Similarly, if the audience you’re talking to don’t look excited about what 
you’re saying, it might just be because they don’t show emotion much. Plough 
on. You’re doing great. Even if you’re rubbish, you still have to plough on. 
Either way, just pretend they’re loving it, and you’re Live at the Apollo, 
totally acing it. It feels better.

Women and humour: just what are we so scared of?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2014/aug/05/humour-jokes-boardroom-office>
Silence is golden

As a broadcaster I’m trained to keep talking. There are no pauses and 
definitely no silence. But in standup, or any form of public speaking, pauses 
are crucial. Everything happens in the pauses. This is when your audience has a 
think about what you just said, gets the joke, understands the point and is 
made to wait for what comes next. Embrace the pauses. Hold them, tease with 
them, and just wait. When you’re good and ready, you can move on.

Fake it

Confident people are really just people who are good at appearing more 
confident than anyone else. It doesn’t mean they are. I’ve stood on stage 
almost fainting with fear and delivered a talk that people thought was calm, 
polished and totally in control. From where I was standing it was shaky, 
scrappy and a total mess. If you look confident, people think you are 
confident. They put some kind of trust in you, believe that you know what 
you’re doing and listen to what you have to say.

Filler techniques

All comedians and public speakers have their own fillers. Some take a sip of 
water, while others fiddle nonchalantly with the microphone lead. In reality 
they’re not thirsty and the mic doesn’t need moving – they’re just desperately 
trying to remember what they were about to say next.

The eyebrows have it

Successful performance, whether it’s a comedy show or a board-level 
presentation, is all about delivery. You can have the best speech in the world, 
but it can be totally ruined by a poor delivery. I’ve been to standup shows 
where 80% of the humour came from the comedians facial expressions and 
delivery. The material itself was average, but the show was great. For some 
reason, eyebrows seem to be key. Mine got a big workout in Edinburgh.

Have killer first and last lines

What happens in between is dictated by the first lines and remembered by the 
last. It’s the same in a three minute broadcast interview or a 10 hour talk. 
Your lines must be well prepared, concise, and delivered confidently. Thank 
you. And good night.
 