
I attended several events to celebrate International Women’s Month 
<https://www.internationalwomensday.com/> on 8 March and there was an 
uncomfortable, frequent occurrence that made me wince every time it happened.

If there were any men in the room it was deemed necessary by the women running 
the event to thank them for being there. Worse still were the men who, given 
the stage in front of a room of mostly women, felt the need to congratulate 
themselves for being there. It’s time we dispensed with the back-patting and 
got the conversation going instead.

Inviting men into our space is a good thing, because they can see how we 
communicate when we are in the majority. But it is only a good thing if they 
listen, and if we stop saying thank you.

Perhaps our over-gratefulness for any sort of male attendance stems from the 
fact that it isstill only 50 years or so since women were allowed any kind of 
equal status in the workplace. Is it then so surprising that men are still 
learning how to adapt to a female perspective when they are outnumbered by 
women? In my experience,the natural masculine inclination is to lead, and talk 
at the women. Whereas what we actually want them to do is listen to what we 
have to say, and take it on board.

Management styles vary regardless of gender and it has been proven that a 
happy and productive workplace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/stop-blaming-women-tackle-diversity-workplace>
 is one that has genderdiversity. But I am not convinced that men always listen 
to what women have to say and while we are busy being profusely grateful for 
their presence, we are playing to stereotypes and forgetting why we all need to 
be in the room together. Working with standup comics has given me a unique 
perspective on how differently men and women communicate. Broadly speaking 
women tell stories and men tell jokes. Women gossip and pass on information 
amongst their social groups, men banter and boast about their achievements.

Just as society requires women to adapt their conversational styles when 
dealing with men, so we also need to encourage men to understand how women 
communicate. Just because we say things differently, doesn’t mean what we’re 
saying is valueless.

We need men to attend women’s events, but we need to stop thanking them for 
coming and instead help them realise that they need to be there. As more and 
more women reach the top in the workplace, men are going to have to learn how 
to adapt their style for women rather than just vice versa. That will only 
happen when we stop being so grateful for their presence and instead remind 
them of the benefit that they get from these events too.

Society has still got an obsession with minoritising female achievements and 
until we stop thanking men for letting us have our voice, nothing will really 
change.

Lynne Parker is founder and chief executive of Funny Women 
<http://www.funnywomen.com>.

Talk to us on Twitter via @GdnWomenLeaders 
<https://twitter.com/GdnWomenLeaders> and sign up 
<https://register.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/> to become a member of 
the Women in Leadership network and receive our newsletter.
 