
Progress on inclusivity and equality within organisations remains 
frustratingly slow. I believe a significant part of the problem is that we 
insist on framing it purely as a gender issue. Instead, I have recently started 
urging leaders to get behind the business case for a more inclusive working 
environment for everyone.

The challenge is that focusing solely on women is actually the antithesis of 
inclusivity. Inclusivity is not about cherry-picking one group for success; it 
is about removing the barriers to success that exist for everybody.

In my experience, making the case on the grounds of gender stops a significant 
proportion of the workplace engaging with what you are setting out to achieve. 
Board-level men would nod politely at me, agree with what I was saying and then 
leave the meeting changing absolutely nothing about their behaviour. Who can 
blame them? Many might have believed there was a net cost involved with making 
the workplace more enticing for women.

With more junior men, there was a different problem: they often just couldn’t 
wrap their heads around the fact that this issue exists. After all, many of 
Generation Z are still surrounded by women doing better than them in academia 
and the early stages of their careers.

There’s also the irritating phenomenon of people internalising the stereotypes 
of their own identities. When we continually talk about women stalling in their 
careers, are we actually exacerbating the problem?

I started to realise that what is good for women is actually good for 
everyone. The younger generation is increasingly demanding flexible working 
arrangements, so a work culture that champions flexibility will make the 
business future fit - for everybody.

When we continually talk about women stalling in their careers, are we 
actually exacerbating the problem?

It isn’t just working mums who want (or need) to spend time at home with their 
families. Working fathers do too and arguably have more difficulties asking for 
the time off or flexibility that enables them to do so, as it is less 
culturally established. It isn’t just women who sometimes have difficulty 
asking for what they need or shouting about their successes – this is a 
challenge for introverted characters of both genders.

These are people issues, not women’s issues. We need to frame these workplace 
cultural shifts as a means of ensuring everyone feels valued and included. 
Crucially, we also need to anchor this in the business case, which starts with 
how we attract and retain the best talent. Greater diversity, of all kinds, is 
going to help businesses to understand their audiences more fully. And greater 
diversity within teams is going to lead to a greater range of opinions and 
perspectives when it comes to solving today’s increasingly complex business 
challenges.

Trying to shame people into changing behaviours, or focusing purely on the 
moral case for change, is not the way forward. Instead, business leaders need 
to start with the “why” and clearly articulate the business case for greater 
diversity within their organisations, along with an expectation that this is 
put into action by everyone in the organisation.

How to make the case for more inclusivity

 * Ensure leaders articulate the business case for inclusivity in the context 
of your company’s objectives. 
 * Hold team sessions in which employees work through the business case for 
their own teams by themselves. Using a coaching, rather than a telling, 
approach should lead to more sustainable change. 
 * Share case studies that demonstrate where diverse and inclusive teams have 
led to business success. 
 * Avoid shaming or belittling as a tool to create behavioural change. We all 
make mistakes – focus on the behaviour not the person. 
The paradox here is that it is often only HR, diversity teams or people 
particularly passionate about the cause that prioritise this agenda, yet the 
cultural shift can only happen when everybody changes their behaviour. In my 
experience, talking about the inclusivity of everyone in the context of the 
business case does just that.
 