
In business, the idea of a culture is all too often dismissed by those at the 
top as soft, unquantifiable and a waste of valuable time. To our collective 
shame, it is still considered the preserve of the HR department and rarely 
makes its way onto the agenda of the people in leadership.

Throughout my career, as an advertising strategist and now as chief executive 
of a creative agency, I have always had a fascination with people, be that 
consumers, clients or my employees. So as a leader, it is fundamental for me to 
pay attention to the culture in which those people live and work.

But this goes beyond personal interest. Culture is by far the biggest 
sustainable advantage we have in business today. Why? Because it is the hardest 
thing to replicate. Competitors can imitate product and match price overnight, 
but culture takes energy, commitment and years to build.

The process works both ways. If a strong culture can act as a protective 
shield for a business when times are tough, a weak or incoherent culture can 
just as easily lead to rot from the inside.

Take the current crisis at Volkswagen. The resignation of CEO Martin Winterkorn
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/23/volkswagen-ceo-martin-winterkorn-quits-over-diesel-emissions-scandal>
 is a good first step but the problem is not down to him alone – the rot always 
goes deeper. The company needs to return to its core values, the reason it came 
into being in the first place – “the people’s car”. Once upon a time the 
manufacturer believed that ordinary people deserved excellence. They need to 
make their own people internally believe in that again.

Stories like this should be a warning to business – no crisis can be played 
out behind closed doors and in an era where so many big businesses have 
suffered a breakdown in trust from the general public, it’s time for leaders to 
turn their attention to the inside.

Culture is not about offering yoga lessons and interest-free loans for 
travel​-​cards.

Why we are open

Agencies, like all service businesses, are just buildings full of people who 
are more or less good at what they do than their competitors. We know that our 
business will live and die by how motivated, inspired and committed our people 
are. So we made a conscious choice to make them our biggest priority; to change 
the way we work and this meant creating an “open” culture.

To us, open is a philosophy of collective creativity and collective 
responsibility. We wanted to destroy the hierarchy that was strangling talent 
and creativity, so we removed offices, got rid of fixed processes and did away 
with sign-off procedures.

The result? In five years we have tripled in size, swept up at awards 
ceremonies and, frankly, surprised the whole industry by coming out of the 
shadows and into the limelight with some of the most exciting and effective 
creative work in the world.

How openness makes us more diverse

One benefit of building our open culture is that we have developed a truly 
diverse team. In the advertising industry,which still struggles with the issue 
of gender inequality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/womens-blog/2014/dec/11/gender-diversity-agencies-women-advertising>
, this is vital.

Lack of gender diversity in agencies is an organisational failure
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/womens-blog/2014/dec/11/gender-diversity-agencies-women-advertising>
Creativity is the lifeblood of our work. By building an autonomous team with 
an open culture, we allow people to set their own agenda and have been able to 
attract new and diverse pools of talent.

We have had to work hard – really hard – to create a culture that is 
attractive to those who break the mould, women included. Today our executive 
team is made up of three women and five men and we buck the industry trend by 
having more females in senior management than men. It is not about tokenism or 
quotas, it’s about creating a culture that is attractive and accessible to a 
diverse range of the best talent.

Building a culture that will last 

Culture is the most fundamental way a business approaches its work. It is not 
about offering yoga lessons and interest-free loans for travelcards. It is both 
hard and soft: the attitude to the way you do work and the structures and 
processes that surround it, and in the current environment, it should be 
considered a priority for leadership. Here are three lessons for leaders to 
keep in mind.

 * Do you what you say you’re going to do 
Be sincere and deliver against your promises. This builds trust and 
consistency within teams.

 * Move culture to the top 
People place culture way too far down their agenda and it’s far too common for 
business leaders to face only outwards. Finding time to focus your attention on 
the inside is more important.

 * Never stop believing, refresh it every day and keep evolving 
It takes time – years – to build a solid culture but it is quick to destroy 
and ultimately gets stale. People change, so constantly evolving and 
reiterating your culture is the only way to keep it alive.

Of course these are just words and as they say, talk is cheap. Good people are 
not. They don’t need to be showered in cash, they need time, commitment and 
something to believe in. That means a strong culture. That means investment. 
But take it from me, I’m looking at my company accounts and I can tell you that 
culture really does pay back.

 