
The Red Lion and The Globe, Chulmleigh

These sibling coaching inns under the same ownership have both undergone a 
recent refurb. They have a similar look – bold vintage colours, rustic wooden 
tables, slate floors – and both deliver stylish, contemporary rooms, real ales 
and well-priced gastro-pub menus. You can mix and match: Stay in one, eat in 
the other. The Globe, perhaps, is the better looking (sitting on a cobbled 
church square, it's the stuff of picture postcards) with a flamboyant, 
oak-panelled restaurant which used to be a public reading room. Round the 
corner at the Red Lion, the bedrooms are a tad larger and dressed in bright 
Indian cottons; the bar downstairs serves excellent stone-baked pizzas (from 
£5.50). Chulmleigh, incidentally, is an old wool town surrounded by woodland 
and Culm grassland.
• The Red Lion, 01769 581007, theredlionchulmleigh.co.uk 
<http://www.theredlionchulmleigh.co.uk/site/>. The Globe, 01769 580252, 
theglobeinnchulmleigh.co.uk <http://www.theglobeinnchulmleigh.co.uk/>. Rooms 
£65-£85 per night

The Old Forge, Bishops Tawton
 The Old Forge, Bishops Tawton 
This is a proper B&B, just like they used to be – without the candlewick 
bedspreads and the fierce landlady. You get an optional evening meal, spotless 
rooms (two of them share a bathroom, one has an en suite with double-ended 
roll-top tub) and no television, other than a communal telly in the lounge 
(hosts Julie Philipps and Ross Warmington retreat to a barn conversion out the 
back leaving the house to the guests). For breakfast, you get fresh eggs from 
Julie's own hens. Dinner might include Devon lamb steaks or venison pie and 
home-grown vegetables. You can bring your own wine. Don't be put off by the 
location – the day-time traffic which streams past the door on the A377, 
dwindles to almost nothing at night.
• 01271 324020, theoldforgenorthdevon.com 
<http://www.theoldforgenorthdevon.com/>. Doubles £65 shared bathroom or £75 en 
suite, B&B. Two-course dinner £14.50 per head

Home House, Croyde
 Home House, Croyde, Devon 
In the centre of Croyde – a short walk from the beach – Nigel and Deborah 
Taylor's homely thatched cottage is the essence of chocolate-box Devon; a 
proper little charmer with its low beams, inglenooks and white-washed walls. 
Inside, they've given it a fresh, country-modern look – flagstones, Farrow and 
Ball and classic Habitat. The rooms are small but light and airy, done up with 
brass beds and simple antique furniture. You can breakfast on free-range eggs 
or home-baked banana muffins at a refectory table by a log burner, or sit 
outside in the patio garden. The Taylors are well geared up for surfers and 
offer an alfresco shower and storage for bikes, surfboards and wetsuits. They 
like kids, too.
• 01271 891259, homehousecroyde.co.uk <http://www.homehousecroyde.co.uk/>. 
Doubles from £75 B&B, or £70 for two-night stays

Norbury House, Ilfracombe
 Norbury House, Ilfracombe 
Uphill from the harbour, Ilfracombe's Torrs Park area is the posh part of 
town; all grand Victorian villas and so-called gentlemen's residences, harking 
back to grander days. Lately, it's become a little enclave of boutique B&Bs, 
most of them run by down-from-London professionals doing the classic lifestyle 
change. Norbury House, is the boho option; there's a touch of Brighton about 
the retro-metro decor, the vintage cocktail bar in the lounge, the white piano 
in the conservatory. There are some slightly dodgy carpets en route to the 
bedrooms, but the rooms themselves are an interesting mix of jolly colours, pop 
posters, Victorian fireplaces and king-size beds. Some have good sea views (the 
harbour is a 20-minute walk). For eating out, owners Adam and Paula Bess 
recommendLa Gendarmerie 
<http://www.tripadvisor.co.uk/ShowUserReviews-g191252-d1437852-r128267954-La_Gendarmerie-Ilfracombe_Devon_England.html>
, which has just earned Ilfracombe its first place in the Michelin Guide.
• 01271 863888, norburyhouse.co.uk <http://www.norburyhouse.co.uk/>. Doubles 
£90-£115, family rooms £125-£150

The Hamptons, Ilfracombe
 The Hampton’s, Ilfracombe 
Another Torrs Park number, this one is the classy designer option. Co-owner 
Janine Powell has a background in interior design. She still leaves husband 
Paul – ex Lloyds of London – holding the fort while she nips off to design the 
inside of a new Hilton. And she clearly threw everything she had at her own B&B 
rooms. With names like Chantilly, Kashmir and Jasmine, they veer from colonial 
cool to "French Boudoir Chic", all done up with faux fur throws, plush 
upholstery, feature wallpapers and soothing coastal colours. The lounge and 
dining rooms are pretty swish, too. Just watch your clutch on the drive's 
killer hill.
• 01271 864246, thehamptonshotel.com <http://www.thehamptonshotel.com/>. 
Doubles start at £ 69 B&B

Highcliffe House, Lynton
 Highcliffe House, Devon 
The hill leading up to Mike and Karen Orchard's Lynton B&B is so steep, even 
cars can struggle, but the views alone are a good enough reason to make the 
effort. From most of the bedrooms you can look down on the cliff-top town, 
across the wooded Lyn valleys to Exmoor's rocky Atlantic coastline and over 
Lymouth Bay to south Wales. In keeping with the late Victorian house, the 
romantic rooms are straight out of Period Living: a bit of Laura Ashley or 
William Morris, repro Jacobean or rococo, carved beds, French-polished 
wardrobes, high ceilings and heavy drapes. Myrtleberry and Summerhouse have 
mini wrought-iron balconies. Breakfast in the conservatory includes homemade 
bread and marmalade and another eye-full of that fabulous view.
• 01598 752235, highcliffehouse.co.uk <http://www.highcliffehouse.co.uk/>. 
Doubles from £110 per night B&B, reductions for longer stays

Travellers Rest Old Church, Umberleigh
 Travellers Rest Old Church, Umberleigh 
The word quirky is often overused when describing a guesthouse, but here it's 
hard to think of another term – though eccentric will do just as well. A 
converted Victorian church, tucked away in a middle-of-nowhere hamlet between 
Barnstaple and South Molton, its unashamedly ecclesiastical, right down to the 
owners' name: Sue and Derek Pope. To original gothic arches, carved rood 
screens, panelling and ornate plasterwork, they have added recycled pews, 
candelabras, a rich medieval colour scheme of reds, greens and cobalts and 
rather a lot of teddies. The Blue and Red rooms' shared bathroom is features a 
vintage bath and fittings. The West Suite has a carved four-poster, a "hidden" 
bathroom (the loo is housed in a closet, and you lift a lid from the tub) and a 
private conservatory with views over peaceful farmland. The decanter of sherry 
in each room is a nice touch.
• 01769 540831, travellersrestoldchurchdevon.co.uk 
<http://www.travellersrestoldchurchdevon.co.uk/>. Doubles from £88 B&B

Red Lion, Clovelly
 Red Lion, Clovelly 
This 18th-century seaside inn sits under a tower of rock, overlooking 
Clovelly's salty little harbour, its pebble beach and the waters of Bideford 
Bay. The rooms are neat and nautical, with wall-mounted oars, maritime prints 
and Lloyd Loom chairs. Next door, in the Sail Loft – a recent conversion – they 
tend to be larger, slightly posher, and done up in soft blues and greys. It's 
quite pricey, but the tariff includes free entry to Clovelly (normally £6.50 a 
head) and a parking place right on the beach. When the crowds leave at the end 
of the day, you can still wander like a local, puffing your way up and down the 
cliff-hung cobbled streets of this car-free village, gawping at its quaint 
cottages and dizzy views. The restaurant is not the Red Lion's strongest point 
but the pub downstairs does decent bar meals, or you can walk up to the New Inn 
(clovelly.co.uk <http://www.clovelly.co.uk/new_inn_intro.php>). 
• 01237 431237, clovelly.co.uk/red_lion_intro.php 
<http://www.clovelly.co.uk/red_lion_intro.php>. Doubles from £67 per person per 
night B&B

Raymont House, Hatherleigh, near Okehampton
 Raymont House, Hatherleigh, near Okehampton 
There are two doubles and a single room in this Grade II listed Georgian 
townhouse but you won't be sitting down to breakfast with a group of strangers. 
Jan and Alan Toogood have a policy of booking only one group of guests at a 
time. So if you check in as a single couple, you get the glamorous bathroom 
(there is only one) all to yourself. The rooms are simply furnished but 
super-comfortable. The breakfasts are hearty and mostly organic (fresh fruit, 
bacon butties on home-baked bread). And you are right in the middle of 
time-warped Hatherleigh, among the sheep-washed farmland of deepest north 
Devon. There are two decent pubs (the Tally Ho! 
<http://www.tallyhohatherleigh.co.uk/> and the George Hotel) within walking 
distance.
• 01837 810850, raymonthouse.co.uk <http://www.raymonthouse.co.uk/>. Single 
from £45, doubles from £85 B&B (£75 for two nights or more)

Victoria House, Mortehoe, Woolacombe
 Victoria House, Devon 
Set on the road that winds up from surfy Woolacombe to cliff-top Mortehoe, 
this place has seriously good views. All three rooms look down on the 
ship-wrecking rocks of Grunta beach and across the Atlantic towards Lundy 
Island. The one to go for is the Beach House – not so much a room as a 
self-contained chalet with its own sea-gazing deck and sun-lounger for two. 
Some of the decor looks a little tired, but the rooms are light and spacious, 
the breakfasts are good (Dorset cereals, Cornish smoked salmon with scrambled 
eggs, pancakes with maple syrup) and the location is superb – across the road, 
the South West Coast Path winds up through the National Trust's Morte Estate to 
lonely Bull Point lighthouse. Mortehoe has two decent pubs (the Chichester Arms 
and theSmuggler's Rest <http://www.thesmugglersrest.co.uk/>). Great sunsets. 
• 01271 871302, victoriahousebandb.co.uk 
<http://www.victoriahousebandb.co.uk/Welcome.html>. Doubles from £110 B&B

Know a great place to stay in the area? Add your recommendation in the 
comments below
 