
Into the jungle 

The first rule of a trip to the rainforest is to book a tour from a certified 
tour operator. A good guide will know where to spot birds such as parrots, 
macaws and aquatic birds, as well as tamarins, squirrel monkeys, and perhaps a 
troop of howler monkeys. Try to include a night hike to spot nocturnal 
creatures such as tree frogs, giant crickets and potoo birds. On a budget trip, 
you'll sleep in a hammock in local style dwellings, and eat simple meals such 
as beans or fish, rice and manioc. Bear in mind: conditions will be hot and 
damp, you will encounter disagreeable creatures such as stinging ants, 
mosquitoes (take malarial precautions) and black flies that seem to want their 
pound of flesh. But that aside, it will be a trip to remember.
• Manaus Jungle Hostel, +55 92 4101 9081, manausjungletours.com 
<http://www.manausjungletours.com>, £60 for a two-day, one-night tour including 
transfers from the city

Jungle cruises
 Amazon cruise, Brazil 
Literally hundreds of boats, from budget to luxury, offer a range of cruise 
options for passengers. Smaller, tourist-standard boats can navigate narrow 
tributaries of the Rio Negro and Amazon River to take you deep into the forest. 
These quieter tributaries are home to abundant aquatic life such as river 
dolphins, giant otters, piranha and catfish. Among the trees, you'll spot 
sloths and primates such as tamarins and squirrel monkeys, as well as birds 
such as herons, kingfishers, parrots, macaws, oropendolas, kiskadees and anis. 
Green verdant lushness descends to the river's edge while the crowns of giant 
ceiba and ficus trees tower above the canopy. As time and budget allow, your 
cruise might include jungle walks, piranha fishing, boat rides to giant water 
lilies and visits to caboclo villages.
• Prices start around £595 for three days and two nights, +55 92 3656 1246, 
amazonclipper.com.br <http://www.amazonclipper.com.br/>

Opera in the Amazon
 Photograph: Alex Robinson/Getty Images/AWL Images RM 
Built at the height of the rubber boom, in the late 19th century, when Manaus 
was a byword for luxury, the Manaus Opera House (Teatro Amazonas) gives you an 
inkling of that glorious past. Once slated for demolition, the newly restored 
gold-domed edifice is on a par with any of its European counterparts. With the 
wealth of the time, and high ambitions of the rubber barons, no expense was 
spared in its construction. Marble from Italy, ironwork from Glasgow and 198 
chandeliers of Murano glass make the theatre a must-see. For the World Cup, the 
theatre is offering several new performances including recitals, rock concerts 
and art exhibitions.
• Praça São Sebastião, within walking distance of the city centre, +55 92 3622 
1880. Open every day except Sun, 9am-5pm. Admission $6 (£3.60). Guided tours 
available from £6,cultura.am.gov.br <http://cultura.am.gov.br/>

Rubber plantation museum
 Photograph: viajeaqui.abril.com.br 
The splendour of Manaus's past was built on the backs of slaves – local 
Indians who were indentured to work on the rubber estates. Perhaps the best way 
to acknowledge that reality is with a visit to the Museu do Seringal Vila 
Paraíso. Restored from an original rubber plantation, the museum displays the 
conditions endured by rubber tappers. Exhibits include a replica of the store 
that was run by the plantation owner. Here, the workers bought goods such as 
manioc flour, salt and fish with their meagre pay. You learn about the 
back-breaking work from practical demonstrations, including tapping a rubber 
tree for its latex. Another demonstration shows how raw latex was heated over a 
fire to coagulate the sap into the huge rubber balls that were processed to 
manufacture familiar products such as tyres and condoms.
• Igarape Sao Joao, Taruma. A 20-minute boat ride (R$7(£1.90)) from Marina 
Daví near theHotel Tropical <http://www.tropicalmanaus.com.br/default-en.html>. 
Admission is £1.30. Open daily 8am-4pm (except Mon)

Meeting of waters
 Photograph: Alex Robinson/Getty Images/AWL Images RM 
Manaus sits at the confluence of two of the world's greatest rivers. The Rio 
Negro – with waters the colour of black coffee – flows south into the main 
stream of the Amazon (or Solimões), which is like coffee with cream. At the 
Meeting of Waters (Encontro das Águas), the two rivers merge in swirls of 
curlicues, spirals and whirlpools. The waters don't blend completely for 
another 6km downstream. The phenomenon is caused by differences in the speed of 
the currents and water properties. Freshwater dolphins are sometimes seen in 
the vicinity.
• Most Manaus tour operators offer a short trip, lasting half a day, +55 92 
2123 4777,amazonexplorers.com.br <http://www.amazonexplorers.com.br>. From 
£69pp, prices include transport, lunch and a guide

INPA science centre
 INPA Science Cantre, Manaus Photograph: facebook.com/bosque.daciencia/photos 
If your budget or schedule can't accommodate a jungle tour, you can get the 
next best thing at the Brazilian National Institute for Amazonian Research 
(INPA) centre in Manaus. A short taxi ride from Manaus city centre, the grounds 
cover 13 hectares, including a botanical garden and park with labelled trees 
and plants, such as ceiba (kapok) trees, ficus and various medicinal shrubs and 
vines. Glass-walled tanks house manatees, otters, turtles, caiman, and a 
variety of fish such as armoured catfish. Other aquatic creatures on show 
include the electric eel and freshwater rays. Macaws flutter among the 
vegetation while sakis, tamarins and squirrel monkeys caper through the 
treetops. You might spot other wildlife, such as sloths and agoutis (a type of 
large rodent) roaming free. An elevated walkway allows visitors access to the 
lower canopy, home to small reptiles, frogs and epiphytes such as orchids and 
bromeliads. The Casa da Ciência offers a scientific background to Amazon 
ecology, including the threats facing the rainforest such as illegal lumber, 
mining, dams and urban sprawl. Most signage includes English translations.
• Avenida André Araújo, +55 92 3643 3192, bosque.inpa.gov.br 
<http://bosque.inpa.gov.br>. Admission is £1.30, free for children under 10 and 
seniors. Open Tue-Fri 9am-5pm; Sat- Sun and holidays 9am-4pm

Land of Waterfalls
 Photograph: Alex Robinson/JAI/Corbis 
If you want R&R away from the dust and heat of the city, you can't go wrong 
with a couple of days exploring the waterfalls near the small town of 
Presidente Figueiredo, the "Land of Waterfalls" (Terra de Cachoeiras). Two main 
waterfalls beckon the visitor: around 16km from Presidente Figueiredo, the 
Urubui River flows over Sanctuary Waterfalls. The surrounding vegetation and 
moss-covered rocks lend a fairytale atmosphere. At Iracema Waterfalls, enjoy a 
relaxing swim in the pools below the cascading water. The area also has several 
caves, notably the Maroaga cave, with a 30m-high entrance, which home to bats 
and lizards, as well as cave insects.
• Day trips from £100, +55 92 8831-1011, amazonecoadventures.com 
<http://www.amazonecoadventures.com>. Alternatively, take a two-hour bus ride 
to Presidente Figueiredo (£5.40) and stay at Pousada Aldeia MariMari which 
offers camping or hammock space for £6.70, or a room for £27, +55 92 9409 2923,
pousadaaldeiamarimari.com <http://pousadaaldeiamarimari.com>

Anavilhanas archipelago
 Photograph: Kevin Schafer/Corbis 
Like a giant Harry Potter maze on acid, the Anavilhanas Archipelago comprises 
about 400 islands among the labyrinthine twists and turns of the dark Negro 
River. About three hours' boat or bus ride northwest of Manaus, the best way to 
see the area is overnight at one of several lodges, or on a live-aboard 
riverboat. The black waters of the Negro are less mosquito-infested than other 
areas, while you can expect to see abundant birdlife, including parrots, 
hummingbirds and owls. Birders will be keen to look for area specialities such 
as the white-winged potoo, pompadour cotinga and a variety of antbirds. 
Wildlife fans will enjoy encounters with caiman and pink dolphins and, if you 
are lucky, manatees.
• Take a bus to Novo Airão (£9.40) leaving from Rodoviária bus station. Stay 
at Pousada Bela Vista, from £48 per night for a double room with views of the 
river. Here you can book a jungle tour with a local guide, +55 92 3365 1023,
pousada-belavista.com <http://pousada-belavista.com>

Bird's eye view
 Ceiba tree climbing, Manaus. 
On a day-trip from Manaus, you can revisit your childhood by climbing 30m up a 
giant ceiba tree to explore the mysterious rainforest canopy up close. Here 
you'll see epiphytic plants unable to grow in the darker layers below, such as 
orchids, bromeliads and peperomias. Experienced guides "show you the ropes" as 
you sedately ascend into a strange world. Your low-key, minimal impact mode of 
travel is less disturbing to wildlife, increasing the chance of encounters with 
rarely seen creatures. At 30m, the mid-canopy zone is where the jungle action 
is, and you are likely to see woodpeckers, morpho butterflies and howler or 
capuchin monkeys.
• Day trip close to Manaus from £99, and you can combine a tree-climbing trip 
with a jungle survival course., +55 92 9245 3669,tropicaltreeclimbing.com 
<http://tropicaltreeclimbing.com>

Life's a beach
 Photograph: Rolf Richardson/Alamy 
The Ponte Negra area has sands to rival any ocean beach, and this is where 
Manaus locals come to socialise, listen to live music and watch the boi bumba 
folk dancing. Beach vendors sell take-away snacks, such astacacá (manioc juice 
soup with shrimp),pamonha (mashed boiled corn wrapped in corn leaves, or 
tapiocas (manioc flour tortillas stuffed with nuts). For dessert, try an 
ice-cream made of fruit such ascupuaçú, açai or camu-camu, or rala-rala 
(flavoured shaved ice) as you watch the sun go down. Along the promenade, 
street musicians compete for attention, blaring passers-by with the local forró 
music. The water is a bit muddy and not ideal for swimming, but it's fun to 
paddle in for a while, and piranhas are nowhere to be found. The beach is best 
when the river level is low, usually from July to December.
• 14 km west of the city centre, a taxi ride is around £13. Among the best 
known nightclubs is Porão do Alemão (Estrada da Ponta Negra 1986, +55 92 3239 
2976,poraodoalemao.com.br <http://www.poraodoalemao.com.br>)

• Roger Harris is the author of The Amazon and Amazon Highlights, published by 
Bradt Travel Guide
 