
Club Up

Tucked away from the leery crowds prowling around nearby Leidseplein, this 
clandestine club can be spotted only by the long queues outside its discreet 
and narrow two-storey building. An intimate space with a great sound system, 
the club is also associated with the exclusive artists' societyDe Kring 
<http://www.kring.nl/>, which is based on the floor below. It all sounds very 
secretive, but the vibe inside is remarkably laid-back and friendly. On certain 
nights, such as the eclectic Kiss Escort parties, De Kring opens its doors to 
the public and the venue effectively becomes a two-in-one club, where DJs are 
spread across the two floors and play a mixture of underground hip-hop, deep 
house and soul.
• Korte Leidsedwarsstraat 26-1, clubup.nl <http://www.clubup.nl>

Trouw
 Photograph: Juha van 't 
Zelfde/http://www.flickr.com/photos/8759761@N06/3493272789/ 
Who said the printing press was dead? It's alive in this part of town, but not 
as you might know it. Located in the former printing plant of the Dutch 
newspaper Trouw, this renovated industrial space has been transformed into one 
of the city's best clubbing venues. Stark concrete walls, industrial lighting 
rigs and defunct machinery only enhance the atmosphere created by pulsing 
minimal electro, while the shreds and remains of old newspapers – scattered all 
around the venue – make for interesting eye candy in between dancing. More 
recently, Trouw has become home to the legendary Amsterdam club night Rauw, 
with the likes of Erol Alkan, Larry Tee and Crookers all making appearances in 
the past few months.
• Wibautstraat 131, trouwamsterdam.nl/en <http://www.trouwamsterdam.nl/en>

Studio 80
 Studio 80 
This is a breeding ground for upcoming electro talent, and the main hangout of 
bespectacled hipsters, arty types and gay fashionistas in Amsterdam. Despite 
being stowed between a couple of largely uninteresting bars on the touristy 
Rembrandtplein, Studio 80's dimly lit interior, innovative DJs and charismatic 
clientele make it one of the hippest clubs in the city. Minimal techno is 
primarily the music of choice, with camp clubbers often donning fluorescent 
eye-make up and glittery garments as they take to the podiums scattered around 
the dancefloor. Expect an open-minded atmosphere, some serious techno heads , 
kohl-eyed divas and a good dose of androgyny.
• Rembrandtplein 17, studio-80.nl <http://www.studio-80.nl>

OT301
 Photograph: Rawfare/http://www.flickr.com/photos/rawfare/4718446162/ 
OT301 may now be recognised as an official cultural centre, but it's still 
easy to recognise the anarchic roots of this former squatted film school. 
Entering the club involves being escorted by a rather boorish doorman down a 
graffiti-laden corridor and into a large, slightly derelict-looking building. 
Once inside, the ferocity of the sound system soon takes hold of the crowd as 
they lap up cheap bottled beer and enjoy the freedom to smoke anywhere in the 
building (often much to the annoyance of non-smokers). Despite its "official" 
status, OT301 remains a decidedly underground club night, where the music 
usually veers towards dubstep, old-school acid house and drum'n'bass.
• Overtoom 301, ot301.nl <http://www.ot301.nl>

Bitterzoet
 Bitterzoet 
In a city saturated with electro clubs and fist-pounding techno heads, 
Bitterzoet offers a respite for those who prefer to embrace the urban, jazzy 
and soulful side of clubbing. The cosy, crimson-lit bar area has a casual but 
effortlessly sexy vibe, and the dance floor soon fills up with hip-grinding 
soul cats on selected club nights. The weekly Struttin' party (Fridays) is the 
longest-running funk and soul night in the city, with DJs Alviz, Bart Fader and 
Taco Fett spinning on a strictly vinyl-only policy. According to Alviz, it's 
"simply about having a good time: dancing, drinking, flirting and enjoying 
quality soul 45s".
• Spuistraat 2, bitterzoet.com <http://www.bitterzoet.com>

Supperclub
 Supperclub 
After more than 20 years, this internationally renowned club continues to 
successfully combine wining, dining and dancing in a stylish and sophisticated 
atmosphere. While Supperclub has always prided itself on being an ambassador 
for freedom, art and expression, it unwillingly developed a reputation as being 
exclusively for "beautiful people", and became overrun with rich tourists who 
had little sense of rhythm or fun. However, in recent months a few more gritty 
parties, hosted by some of Amsterdam's brightest young DJs, are re-establishing 
the club as a purveyor of cutting-edge music. The Sunday night Slave parties 
draw a particularly young, arty crowd and are held in the bright white 
restaurant, where guests enjoy mingling before moving the tables aside for an 
evening of unrelenting dancing.
• Jonge Roelensteeg 21, supperclub.com <http://www.supperclub.com>

Sugar Factory
 Photograph: Femke Van Veen 
Self-described as a "cutting-edge multi-disciplinary night theatre", Sugar 
Factory has found its niche as a platform where performance meets clubbing. New 
Media events are often paired with techno acts and live performance artists 
usually feature alongside DJs on club nights. Formerly a theatre, it has a 
large stage peering over the main dancefloor, where scantily clad performers 
often encourage the crowd to cut a rug of their own. Wicked Jazz Sounds hosts 
weekly parties where DJs, live musicians, singers and actors do improv live, 
while the Electronation night offers some of Amsterdam's finest electro talent, 
with the likes of Max Cooper and Mason holding regular slots. Sweet it most 
certainly is.
• Lijnbaansgracht 238, sugarfactory.nl <http://www.sugarfactory.nl>

Pacific Parc
 Pacific Parc 
Nestled among a crop of new cafes, bars and creative enterprises in the 
Westergasfabriek (a former gasworks turned city park and cultural hub) this 
spacious club feels a bit like a classic American diner that's been hired out 
for an art school reunion. The crowd here is made up of mature arty types 
reliving their hedonistic youth, ogling one another and quite often playing air 
guitar on the tables. On paper, it sounds like a bit of a nightmare, but the 
anything-goes atmosphere and hormone-fueled flirtations between the clientele 
make this a thoroughly entertaining night out. The music is a fun mix of 
northern soul, surf rock and 1970s disco; basically every genre that has a 
tendency to make people electric slide their way to the bar. The lack of 
entrance charge is an added bonus.
• Polonceaukade 23, pacificparc.nl <http://www.pacificparc.nl>

Canvas
 Canvas 
In a city that's not exactly renowned for tall buildings, it's rare that you 
have to go up seven floors to reach a club venue. Luckily, there's a lift for 
those who've had a tipple too many for the winding stairs that lead up to this 
hip and creative hangout. Located in the former home of the Dutch newspaper de 
Volkskrant, Canvas is an all-in-one cocktail bar, club and art gallery that's 
perched high enough to give you a panoramic view of the city. Local artists 
regularly exhibit new work while DJs usually play a blend of underground 
hip-hop, reggae and dancehall. Though the small space fills up fast at 
weekends, there's a generous smoking terrace outside where you can either gaze 
up at the stars or get dizzy by looking down.
• Wibautstraat 150, canvasopde7e.com <http://www.canvasopde7e.com>

Jimmy Woo
 Jimmy Woo 
A swanky joint with a decidedly cosmopolitan feel, Jimmy Woo attracts swarms 
of glamorous young socialites clad in decadent clothing and wearing shiny 
jewellery. Skinny supermodels pout nonchalantly in dimly lit corners, Dutch 
celebrities mingle with visiting VIPs and bottles of Moët are casually passed 
around like communal hip flasks. While it all might sound a tad superficial, 
the music – an eclectic mix of hip-hop, Baltimore club and house – makes up for 
the occasional discomfort caused by the troupes of self-loving young pretty 
things.
• Korte Leidsedwarsstraat 18, jimmywoo.com <http://www.jimmywoo.com>

• Arun Sood writes for Amsterdam Magazine <http://amsterdam-magazine.com/>
 