
The Staghunters Inn, Brendon, near Lynton
 Staghunters Inn, near Lynton, Devon 
Readers of a sensitive disposition may not be suited to the pubs of Exmoor. In 
general, they are steeped in hunting culture, the walls bedecked with stag and 
fox heads – not to mention mysterious bits of equipment designed for the 
dispatching of large, furry wild animals. To this day, following theDevon and 
Somerset Staghounds <http://www.devonandsomersetstaghounds.net/> – whether on 
horseback, quadbike or just a clapped out 4x4 – remains the principal means of 
entertainment in this desolate location. The Staghunters Inn, tucked away in 
the Doone Valley (setting of Lorna Doone), defines the type – good beer, good 
food and good dead animals on the walls.
•  01598 741222, staghunters.com <http://www.staghunters.com/Home.html>

Hartland Quay Hotel, near Bideford
 Hartland Quay Hotel, near Bideford, Devon 
Humbly I propose that the treacherous and – in large parts – inaccessible 
north-west Devon coastline is the UK's most beautiful. And this pub-hotel is 
one of the few relatively easy places to experience it. Hartland is a desolate, 
wind-swept place but the surf, granite cliffs and rock-pooling are 
unparalleled. The pub itself is good, but the bill of fare is really not the 
point – although you might hope to have something frothy and fine from the
Hartland Forge Brewery <http://www.forgebrewery.co.uk/> while there. This area 
is splendidly isolated and – unlike the beaches to the east (Saunton, Croyde 
and the like) – almost devoid of any organised tourist attraction other than 
the occasional red flash of a stonechat bouncing around in the gorse, or the 
primal thrill of watching your child net a bucket full of prawns.
• 01237 441218, hartlandquayhotel.co.uk <http://www.hartlandquayhotel.co.uk/>

The Thatch, Croyde
 The Thatch, Croyde, Devon 
The polar opposite to The Quay at Hartland, the Thatch is the hub of Croyde – 
North Devon's surfing mecca. London prices, and food that verges on the 
lacklustre, but who cares? This is the place to be – and heaven help you if 
you're 18 and you're anywhere else at peak season. Beach parties, "masked 
balls" and live bands complete the package. This is an unabashed party pub – 
don't go for a quiet pint in the summer months.
• 14 Hobbs Hill, 01271 890349, thethatchcroyde.com 
<http://thethatchcroyde.com/>, mains £9.95-£12.95

The Poltimore Arms, Yarde Down, Brayford
 Poltimore Arms, Brayford, Devon 
When I first moved to Exmoor, I spent a lot of time looking for this pub: 
driving down winding, high-hedged lanes, happening upon mysteriously named 
crossroads, placating thirsty passengers. It is very, very hard to find. 
Perhaps satnav has now nixed what was this pub's USP. Not that it's not a great 
pub – it certainly is that – but there is something magical in the looking for 
it. Once there, you are greeted by the clatter of a generator – for the Polty 
is too remote to have mains electricity. Ales, hearty food and real fire are a 
given. A recent visit occasioned excellent pints of Betty Stogs, brewed by 
Skinner's of Truro, and a foaming glass of Litehouse, from the Forge Brewery. 
Ring ahead to make sure they are open (hours are somewhat eccentric) and – of 
course – for directions. Recommended for Sunday lunch (£7.95).
• 01598 710381, poltimorearms.co.uk <http://poltimorearms.co.uk/>, mains 
£9.95-£16.95

The London Inn, Molland
 London Inn, Molland, Devon 
A genuine Exmoor village local. Virtually every building in this quiet, 
disparate collection of late medieval buildings is owned by the Molland Estate, 
which has a policy of not letting to weekenders. This means that there is a 
genuine sense of community here missing from so many pubs, not to mention two 
real fires and fiendish local ales including Exmoor Beast – an animalistic 6.6% 
dark porter. This last goes well with chef-landlord Stuart Mallen's famous 
Rasputin fish soup (£10.95), made with cod and ling sourced locally from the 
north Devon coast. Do NOT miss the 15th-century church, which escaped the 
modernising tendencies of the Victorians and has original "horsebox" pews, as 
well as any number of memorials including one bearing this inscription: "To the 
memory and to record the disastrous deaths of Thomas and Sarah Pincombe and 
their family of six, all of whom perished by shipwreck together with 187 of 
their fellow passengers. The calamitous event happened on the Manacle Rocks 
near the St Keverne coast of Cornwall on the night of the 3rd May 1855, within 
six hours after the lamented victims had left the harbour of Plymouth, as 
emigrants on their voyage to Quebec."
• 01769 550269, londoninnmolland.co.uk <http://londoninnmolland.co.uk/>, mains 
£6.95-£10.95

The Duke of York, Iddesleigh
 Duke of York, Iddesleigh, Devon Photograph: Steve Mann 
Steeped in and seeping bookishness, the Duke is best known as the pub where – 
no doubt over several pints – Michael Morpurgo dreamed up the story forWar Horse
 <http://www.michaelmorpurgo.com/books/war-horse/>. But before that, when poet 
Sean Rafferty was in charge, it was also Ted Hughes' local. Now a Camra-listed 
real ale specialist set in an impossibly picturesque thatched hamlet, you will 
be hard pushed to find any cause for grumbling other than one's natural 
inclination to do so. The menu is extensive but in reality the legendary steak 
and kidney pudding is the only option – best accompanied by what should be a 
supremely hoppy, copper-coloured pint of Tawny Owl from the Cotleigh Brewery.
• 01837 810253, dukeofyorkdevon.co.uk <http://dukeofyorkdevon.co.uk/>, four 
courses £26

The Grampus, Lee Bay, Ilfracombe
 The Grampus, Lee Bay, Ilfracombe. 
The Grampus in Lee Bay, on the north coast, is soon to be the local of Damien 
Hirst and partner Maia Norman, who are buying a property in the village 
(perhaps that's why the sheep in the area have a permanently anxious look). The 
wine list is provided by the owner of the wonderful Rhône vineyard St Cosme. 
Bill, one half of the couple who own the place, is a noted musician, meaning 
that Friday nights have a tendency to evolve into fairly unrestrained hoe-downs.
• 01271 862906, thegrampus-inn.co.uk <http://thegrampus-inn.co.uk/>

The Rock Inn, Georgeham
 The Rock Inn, Georgeham, Devon Photograph: Kev Nicholson 
It has more of the feel of a home counties gastropub, so you might wonder how 
the Rock Inn found itself in the tiny north Devon village of Georgeham 
(pronounce it George-ham if you want to fit in with the locals) – like a 
Londoner who came for a weekend break and never left. This 17th-century pub is 
none the worse for that, however, with great burgers (£8.95), a famous fish pie 
(£11.95) and five very local cask ales to enjoy in the fireside bars in winter 
or the sunny conservatory on brighter days.
• 01271 890322, therockgeorgeham.co.uk <http://www.therockgeorgeham.co.uk/>

The Royal Oak, Withypool
 Royal Oak, Withypool, Exmoor 
Just across the county border in Somerset is a germane spot to end an Exmoor 
walk as ever-present barman Jake pulls a fine pint of Exmoor Ale, brewed in 
nearby Wiveliscombe. Genuinely excellent food, including my favourite 
Anglo-Italian dish of lasagne and chips. The Barle Valley really is 
heart-stoppingly beautiful – if a tad wet. So the roaring fire and warm 
flagstones of the bar are always a sight for sore eyes. If you're accompanied 
by children, you could walk down to the village shop and tea room for an ice 
lolly.
• 01643 831 506, royaloakwithypool.co.uk <http://www.royaloakwithypool.co.uk/>
, mains £9.95-£14.95

The Bridge Inn, Dulverton
 Bridge Inn, Dulverton, Somerset 
Also just across the Devon/Somerset border, and on the banks of the Barle, 
sits the charming Bridge Inn. London types dreaming of Marylebone'sMEATLiquor 
<http://www.meatliquor.com/> will want to chomp through the Bridge Burger 
(£8.95), with a generous patty prepared up the hill at Gerald David's butchery, 
famed for his aged Devon Ruby beef. Unusually for the area, several Belgian 
brewers are represented in the fridge, including Duvel and Chimay. Opposite the 
pub entrance isFarthings <http://www.exmoor-farm-shop.co.uk/>, the best farm 
shop on Exmoor, with terrific meat and vegetables grown on the owner's farm.
• 20 Bridge St, 01398 324130, thebridgeinndulverton.com 
<http://www.thebridgeinndulverton.com/>, mains £8.95-£15

• Charlie McVeigh is the owner of the Draft House pubs 
<http://www.drafthouse.co.uk/>. A new branch has recently opened on Lordship 
Lane, East Dulwich, London

Know a great pub in the area? Add your recommendation in the comments below
 