
La Oliva

La Oliva's concept is about pintxos y vinos – Basque-style tapas and wine. The 
pintxos – most of which involve a bread base plus topping – are lined up on the 
bar so diners can take a look, give their selection to the staff, and wait for 
their chosen titbits to arrive. The wine list is extensive, and offers some 
excellent Spanish varieties. For hungrier diners, there is a regular menu of 
starters and mains involving some excellent ingredients typical of northern 
Spain, including the delicious, if expensive,pata negra ham. Try the skewer of 
seared tuna with meltingly fresh foie gras and a sweet, umami-heavy reduction 
of Pedro Ximénez sherry.
• Egelantiersstraat 122-4, +31 20 320 4316, laoliva.nl <http://www.laoliva.nl>
, mains €20-€25. Open Mon-Wed 5pm-10pm, Thurs-Sat noon-11pm, Sun noon-10pm

Beddington's
 Beddington's 
Beddington's is named after British chef and owner Jean Beddington, who opened 
her first restaurant in Amsterdam in 1983. A combination of her Derbyshire 
roots, Asian influences from living in Japan, and modern Dutch twists, make her 
food some of the most stylish and experimental in Amsterdam. Think seared tuna 
steak with a zingy horseradish, wasabi and soy concoction, served with mellow 
sweet potato mash. The restaurant itself is serene, despite the full view into 
the working kitchen, and it is tucked down a leafy side road away from tourist 
hubbub. Like most top quality restaurants, it attracts more business types than 
gastronomes, but Beddington and her team are never complacent when it comes to 
creativity.
• Utrechtsedwarsstraat 141, +31 20 620 7393, beddington.nl 
<http://www.beddington.nl/>, three courses €48, four courses €55. Open Tues-Sat 
from 7pm, last orders 9.30pm

De Kas
 De Kas 
De Kas, meaning greenhouse in Dutch, is housed in an enormous glasshouse: one 
half for eating, the other for growing the fruit and vegetables that end up on 
your plate. If your food wasn't produced here, it will come from the 
surrounding garden or a nearby farm. You might be served edible begonia flowers 
or the leaves of the "oyster plant" that tastes (bizarrely) of its namesake. 
While its reputation means that De Kas has a more commercial feel than it used 
to, the food is undeniably excellent. Organic, healthy and with the emphasis 
firmly on fresh produce, it serves modern European flavours with flair.
• Kamerlingh Onneslaan 3, +31 20 462 4562, restaurantdekas.nl 
<http://www.restaurantdekas.nl/>, two-course lunch €37.50, three-course dinner 
€49.50. Open Mon-Fri noon-2pm, 6.30pm-10pm, Sat 6.30pm-10pm

Restaurant Greetje
 Photograph: Max Flatow 
While Dutch cuisine might not have the greatest reputation, Greetje takes 
old-fashioned classics and makes them into something the country can – and 
should – be proud of. Bread is served with meat-flecked goose fat instead of 
butter, and potatoes are the carbohydrate of choice – generally mashed with 
seasonal vegetables to make a typically Dutchstamppot. The only element of this 
establishment that isn't Dutch is the service. Far from the indifference you'll 
encounter elsewhere, the waiting staff here are friendly, attentive and 
knowledgeable about their menu.
• Peperstraat 23-25, +31 20 779 7450, restaurantgreetje.nl 
<http://www.restaurantgreetje.nl/>, mains around €25. Open Tues-Fri, Sun 
6pm-10pm, Sat 6pm-11pm

Vis aan de Schelde
 Vis aan de Schelde Photograph: WestEnd61 / Rex Features 
Off the beaten track, this fish restaurant is something of an Amsterdam 
institution, despite its location by an out-of-town roundabout, next to theRAI 
convention centre <http://www.rai.nl/en/Pages/default.aspx>. Seafood lovers 
will thrill at the fresh oysters, crayfish, turbot and monkfish. Recent dishes 
include milky haddock and scallops served with crispy-fried pata negra ham, 
black "venus" rice made with squid ink and a sea-tasting, foamy sauce. The 
atmosphere is a little more old-fashioned and formal than Amsterdam's usually 
relaxed restaurant scene, making it the kind of place to take your parents. 
There's an extensive wine list, with a bias towards bottles that will go with 
the fantastic fish. Worth going the extra mile for.
• Scheldeplein 4, +31 20 675 1583, visaandeschelde.nl 
<http://www.visaandeschelde.nl/>, mains €29-€62, three courses from €38. Open 
Mon-Fri noon-2.30pm, 5.30pm-11pm, Sat, Sun 5.30pm-11pm

Razmataz
 Razmataz 
The menu at Razmataz leans towards French and Mediterranean dishes, and 
there's always a good selection of specials on the blackboard. In winter, 
you're looking at hearty lamb shanks, fillets of beef and magret de canard; in 
summer, expect Dutch asparagus with new potatoes, young peas in salads, and 
fragrant strawberries in sweet "soup". Service is friendly, if a little slow, 
and the crowd is young and diverse – just like the Westerpark area the 
restaurant is in. Razmataz is one of only a few restaurants open for breakfast, 
lunch and dinner, not to mention morning coffee and after-dinner drinks. Its 
terrace also ensures it gets a healthy after-work crowd on sunny evenings.
• Hugo de Grootplein 7, 9-11, +31 20 486 8408, razmataz.nl 
<http://www.razmataz.nl/>, mains around €20. Open Mon-Thurs 8.30am-1am, Fri 
8.30am-3am, Sat 9am-3am, Sun 9am-1am

District V
 District V 
District V comes into its own on a warm summer's evening, when its terrace 
fills the entire south-east corner of a leafy square in the south of De Pijp. 
It offers a simple three-course menu for under €30, with just a few choices for 
each course: meat, fish or vegetarian. The food is generous and tasty, with a 
leaning towards French bistro fare. Recent dishes include a whole poached 
artichoke with a buttery dressing, classic steak tartare, and spicy gazpacho 
with seafood. The menu changes fortnightly, making it the kind of place you 
want to return to again and again. It's also close to De Pijp's hip bar scene – 
after-dinner drinks are all too easy from here.
• Van der Helstplein 17, +31 20 770 0884, district5.nl 
<http://www.district5.nl/>, mains around €19, three courses €29.50. Open Mon, 
Wed-Sun 6pm-10.30pm

New King
 New King 
The queue regularly runs out the door of this Mandarin Chinese institution. 
Despite the venue's size, diners regularly wait 45 minutes for a table. But 
portions are generous, and you're bound to order more than you can eat, so 
building up an appetite is advised. Service can be brusque, and the wine list 
won't excite, but the food is worth the wait. New King's speciality is roasted 
duck: its skin is so crisp you could cut your finger on it, and it's served 
with broth with hints of aniseed. The dim sum are highly recommended, although 
some involve a half-hour wait. Also try the aubergine stuffed with peppery 
minced pork (but beware of the chilli kick).
• Zeedijk 115-117, +31 20 625 2180, newking.nl <http://www.newking.nl>, mains 
around €16. Open daily 11am-10.30pm

Take Thai
 Take Thai Photograph: Alamy 
Not a hint of bejewelled elephants or sequined cushions at this elegant, 
minimalist Thai eatery. The decor is all white orchids and serene neutral 
tones, while the staff are as elegant as the tableware. The menu includes Thai 
classics such as fishcakes fragrant with kaffir lime leaves, presented with 
concise attention to detail. A house speciality is the lamb massaman: the meat 
has been simmered in a rich, spicy, addictive sauce until it falls apart. 
Prices are as friendly as the service, despite the restaurant's prime 
Utrechtsestraat location. Just a stone's throw from the gaudy, fluorescent-lit 
tourist traps of the Rembrandtplein, Take Thai is a haven of sophistication and 
calm.
• Utrechtsestraat 87, +31 20 622 0577, takethai.com <http://www.takethai.com/>
, mains around €20. Open Mon, Tues 6pm-10pm, Wed-Sun noon-3pm, 6pm-10pm

Blauw
 Photograph: Sjaak Ramakers 
Blauw is on the up-and-coming Amstelveenseweg, and the design – split level 
with low-slung lighting and mood decor – gives it the edge over its more 
traditional Indonesian competitors. But its trendy interior and cool crowd 
don't detract from the fact that the food is exquisite. Order therijsttafel 
(literally: rice table) and prepare for an enormous selection of marinated 
meats, fragrant curries and crunchy salads. Skewers of juicy chicken and beef 
come with sweet-yet-savoury sauces of satay and molasses, while vegetable-based 
salads – both raw and cooked – are tossed with sweet, chilli, vinegary 
dressings and plenty of coriander and peanuts. Prepare to be rolled out the 
door afterwards.
• Amstelveenseweg 158-160, +31 20 675 5000, restaurantblauw.nl 
<http://www.restaurantblauw.nl/>, mains around €25. Open Mon-Thurs 6pm-10.30pm, 
Fri 6pm-11pm, Sat 5pm-11pm, Sun 5pm-10.30pm

• Vicky Hampton is the Amsterdam Foodie <http://www.amsterdamfoodie.nl/>
 