
Albert Cuyp Markt

Despite being named after an old Dutch painter, the only thing Dutch about the 
Albert Cuyp market is that it encapsulates Amsterdam's reputation as a 
harmonious melting pot of different cultures. Expect to find a selection of 
Turkish, Moroccan, Surinamese and Indonesian goods on offer, the highlight 
being that one can indulge in a culinary tour of these countries in a short 
leisurely stroll along the market street. The reasonably priced Surinameseroti 
kip rolls – spicy chicken wrapped in a soft flat bread – are a must-have. While 
the emphasis is primarily on food, there are also stalls dedicated to clothing, 
textiles, flowers, books and junk at bargain prices.
• Albert Cuypstraat, +31 20 678 1678, albertcuypmarkt.nl 
<http://www.albertcuypmarkt.nl/ac_english.html>. Open Mon-Sat 9am-5pm

Concerto
 Photograph: Gisela Clarke/ classicrockforums.com 
<http://www.classicrockforums.com> 
Since it opened as a small independent record store in 1955, Concerto has 
grown from one storefront to five, and has built a reputation as being one of 
the best – and cheapest – places to buy a diverse array of music. Spread across 
five narrow buildings, the shop feels like a musical labyrinth as the classical 
section winds its way into narrow corridors of world, jazz and dance, with an 
extensive secondhand vinyl section. Unlike other specialist record stores that 
can feel cooler than thou, Concerto stocks the perfect combination of 
commercial releases and rarities, making it just as easy to pick up Madonna's 
greatest hits as an obscure compilation of Bollywood B-sides.
• Utrechtsestraat 52-60, +31 20 624 5467, concertomania.nl 
<http://www.concertomania.nl>. Open Mon-Wed, Fri-Sat, 10am-6pm, Thurs, 
10am-9pm, Sun, noon-6pm

De Looier Arts & Antiques
 Photograph: Sarah Moore 
It's easy to walk past the inconspicuous entrance of De Looier and dismiss it 
as a downright dingy-looking shop filled with unwanted old tat. As you step 
inside, however, it becomes clear why this is the largest and most popular 
indoor antiques market in the Netherlands. Asian furniture nestles against 
religious art, vintage jewellery is laid out alongside silverware and old 
wooden toys sit eerily alongside war memorabilia from decades past. Whether 
you're hunting for something specific like antique grandfather clock from the 
19th century or merely rummaging, there will undoubtedly be something 
eye-catching.
• Elandsgracht 109, +31 20 624 9038, looier.nl <http://www.looier.nl>. Open 
Mon-Thurs, Sat, Sun 11am-5pm

Oudemanhuispoort Book Market
 Photograph: Alamy 
It's not uncommon to find beard-stroking scholarly types browsing through the 
Sartre section of this secondhand book market in a quaint little stone passage 
between two grand 18th-century university buildings. While there is an 
abundance of academic titles on offer, there's also a variety of fiction, 
non-fiction and art prints, with the emphasis on quality rather than quantity – 
you won't find any trashy paperbacks here. The distinguished sellers seem to 
take great pride in what they do, often looking slightly distressed when 
parting with their beloved works of literature at such low prices.
• Oudemanhuispoort. Open Mon-Fri 11am-4pm

Recycled Bicycles
 Recycled Bicycles Photograph: 
recycledbicycles.org/http://www.recycledbicycles.org 
Let's face it, the only way to experience shopping like a local is by weaving 
through the narrow streets on two wheels, shopping bags flailing in the wind. 
In a bid to curb the selling of stolen bikes to tourists, the team at Recycled 
Bicycles rescue, renovate and sell old, broken bikes at a bargain price. The 
passionate team, led by BMX enthusiast Vitor, make it their mission to provide 
newcomers to the city with sturdy, affordable and guilt-free bikes. They are 
also occasionally willing to rent out bikes for select periods of time, 
offering rates that are by far the best value in the city. Just ask nicely.
• Spuistraat 84a, +31 65 468 1429, recycledbicycles.org 
<http://www.recycledbicycles.org>. Open Mon, Sat 2pm-6pm, Tues-Fri 9.30am-6pm

Wini Vintage
 Wini Vintage 
Though there's a wide selection of vintage stores scattered throughout the 
city, Wini offers the highest-quality garments at the lowest prices. Unlike 
some other vintage shops, the clothes don't smell like they were last washed by 
your great-grandmother in the 1930s, and are perfectly pressed and dry cleaned. 
Unused vintage fabrics are also sold by the metre at reasonable prices, 
providing budding designers and tailors with cheap and unique materials. While 
the shop specialises in vintage women's dresses, there's also an abundance of 
men's suits, retro kids' clothing, jewellery and, rather amusingly, 
rainbow-coloured ski wear from the 1960s.
• Haarlemmerstraat 29, +31 20 427 9393, winivintage.nl 
<http://www.winivintage.nl>. Open Mon-Wed, Fri, Sat 10.30am-6pm, Thurs 
10.30am-6.30pm, Sun noon-6pm

Noordermarkt
 Photograph: David Gee/Alamy 
Situated in the quaint and cobbled Jordaan district, this open-air market will 
suit both foodies and lovers of vintage. Organic farmers from all over the 
Netherlands set up their stalls every Saturday to sell fresh organic produce 
for a fraction of the prices charged at "organic" supermarkets. Do your fruit 
and veg shopping with the locals or take a stroll and sample the typical Dutch 
treats such as freshly bakedstroopwafels or salted raw herring. On Mondays, the 
market transforms into an antique-hunter's dream. Stalls are piled with vintage 
clothes from the last century, alongside antique books, coins and beautifully 
designed furniture.
• Noordermarkt, boerenmarktamsterdam.nl <http://www.boerenmarktamsterdam.nl>. 
Open Mon 9am-2pm, Sat 9am-4pm

Waterlooplein Markt
 Photograph: Alamy 
As the best-known and most central flea market in Amsterdam, Waterlooplein has 
clad generations of tourists in flares, Hawaiian shirts and occasionally 
amusing T-shirts bearing slogans about being "high on life". These days, 
there's the added attraction of a selection of new clothes stands, where 
upcoming designers sell their creations before trying to make the big time. 
Given the high volume of tourists that visit the area, pushy sellers are keener 
to make a sale than in other markets, which results in some argumentative 
bargaining. Still, stand your ground and there's a high chance you will come 
away with a gem or two, if not an amusing T-shirt.
• Waterlooplein, +31 20 552 4074, waterloopleinmarkt.nl 
<http://www.waterloopleinmarkt.nl>. Open Mon-Sat 9am-5pm

I Love Vintage
 Photograph: Sarah Moore 
Initially conceived as an online store five years ago, Ilovevintage.nl 
<http://www.Ilovevintage.nl> was so successful that owner Faranak Mirjalili 
decided innovatively to merge clicks with bricks and opened this shop. You can 
shop from the store's sample selection of cheap vintage dresses, shoes, bags 
and accessories, or head to a touchscreen monitor to browse the entire 
collection by style, size, and colour. As in a shoe shop, customers tell the 
assistants what they want, and out it comes from the stock rooms. You can also 
plan in advance and come with online item numbers ready to quickly try on your 
digital finds.
• Prinsengracht 201, +31 20 330 1950, ilovevintage.nl 
<http://www.ilovevintage.nl>. Open Mon-Sat 9.30am-6pm

IJ Hallen
 IJ Hallen 
With more than 1,500 stands and 3,000 free parking spaces, the monthly IJ 
Hallen in the north of Amsterdam is the largest flea market in northern 
Holland. Shopping here involves a bit of an aquatic adventure – take the free 
ferry across the scenic IJ river and follow the hordes of bargain hunters. 
There is a €4 admission charge, but it's worth it if you have the patience to 
browse for most of the day. Anything and everything secondhand can be found 
here; battered old guitars are propped against antique chairs, art prints are 
scattered among military gear. In summer, the market moves outside, allowing 
for even more stalls and street vendors.
• TT Neveritaweg 15, +31 22 958 1598, ijhallen.nl <http://www.ijhallen.nl>, 
entry €4. Check website for dates

• Arun Sood writes for Amsterdam Magazine <http://amsterdam-magazine.com/>
 