
PGC Hajenius – the art deco tobacco shop
 PGC Hajenius – the art deco tobacco shop 
Pantaleon Gerhard Coenraad Hajenius started his first cigar and tobacco shop 
in 1826 when he was only 19 years old, and gradually became the official 
supplier to several European courts. The shop, as it is now, was created in 
1915, and boasts a superb art deco interior. The trimmings reflect the firm's 
erstwhile prosperity – note the Italian marble on the walls and counters, and 
the beautiful Delft tobacco jars lined up on the shelves. No paint was used to 
decorate the interior, of course – no foreign smell was allowed to interfere 
with the thick wafts of cigar smoke.
• Rokin 96, +31 20 623 7494, hajenius.com <http://www.hajenius.com>. Open Mon 
noon-6pm, Tues-Sat 9.30am-6pm, Sun noon-5pm

The yawner gable stone
 The yawner gable stone 
Amsterdam is like an open-air museum, and in the streets you can enjoy the 
gable stones, carvings used in the 17th century to help walkers find their way. 
The yawner is a local favourite – his mouth wide not to yawn but to swallow a 
pill, he used to indicate a pharmacy. At the time, most local medicines were 
made from spices and plants brought back from overseas, so the yawner was often 
depicted as a Moor. Legend has it that a Moorish man would assist the 
pharmacist on market days, promoting the medicine by swallowing pills in front 
of those assembled, before acting out a sudden recovery from whatever his 
ailment was that week.
• Herenstraat 7

The chapel of the parrot
 Photograph: c.s. on Panoromio 
<http://www.panoramio.com/user/964150?with_photo_id=12496925> 
The Kalverstraat is one of the busiest pedestrian shopping streets in Europe, 
which might explain why the message at the entrance of the chapel sounds like a 
marketing slogan :"Een kwartier voor God" (15 minutes for God). In 1578, the 
Netherlands became protestant, and while Catholics were tolerated, they had to 
pray in private places. A lot of hidden churches were built in houses and 
nicknamed as animals or objects, as saints were not allowed – hence thePapegaai
, the parrot. Walk past the narrow entrance to discover a wide and beautiful 
church.
• Kalverstraat 58, +31 20 623 1889, nicolaas-parochie.nl 
<http://www.nicolaas-parochie.nl>

The proverbs of the Oude Kerk
 The proverbs of the Oude Kerk 
Built in the middle ages as the church of St Nicholas, the Oude Kerk (Old 
Church) now sits rather incongruously in the middle of the red light district. 
While many visitors pop in, most of them miss the rare carved stalls in the 
choir – each illustrating a different proverb. One illustration tells of the 
damaging effects of alcohol, while another depicts "money has no value in the 
face of death". On the opposite side, proverbs like "money doesn't come out of 
my behind" and "who wants to open his mouth like an oven must open wide" 
reminds us not to lose ourselves in vain efforts.
• Oudekerksplein 23, +31 20 625 8284, oudekerk.nl <http://www.oudekerk.nl> 

Zon's Hofje
 Zon’s Hofje 
In Amsterdam, you can access a number of amazing hidden gardens just by 
pushing a door. This is the case of Zon's Hofje, which takes its name from the 
hidden Mennonite church which was located here in 1650. Amsterdam'shofjes were 
traditionally built for widows who could not afford to live by themselves, and 
comprised a group of small houses organised around a public garden square. 
Above the entrance, under the clock, look out for a beautiful gable stone 
inscribed: "Love built us this lodging, hope remains our permanent impulse to 
see the sun on our souls …" This quiet and charming place has been used by 
students to live and study since 1960.
• Prinsengracht 159. Open Mon-Fri 10am-5pm, enjoy with respect 

Lairesse Apotheek
 Lairesse Apotheek 
If your visit to Amsterdam is inspired by the city's design heritage, this 
remarkable pharmacy designed byConcrete <http://concreteamsterdam.nl/main.html> 
is a must. As soon as you enter, you will notice the glass cases representing 
the Mendeleïev periodic tables of the elements and, beyond that, the curved 
wall of green Plexiglas drawers used to store the medicines and the images of 
ginkgo leaves on the floor. The concept, they claim, is to offer medical 
knowledge while encouraging wellbeing and serenity, best symbolised by the 
floor-to-ceiling tree trunk built into the counter.
• De Lairessestraat 40, +31 20 662 1022, delairesseapotheek.nl 
<http://www.delairesseapotheek.nl>. Open Mon-Fri 8.30am-6pm, Sat 10am-5pm

The Movies
 The Movies 
If you're a fan of art deco, a screening at the Movies art house cinema is 
highly recommended. Created in 1912, this cinema is the oldest still in use in 
Amsterdam, aptly located on one of the oldest dykes in the city, the 
Haarlemmerdijk. While the street is now extremely trendy, lined with designer 
stores and high-end restaurants, the Movies has been preserved. Arrive early 
for a pre-show drink or dinner at the in-house restaurant and to bask in the 
interior – geometric wall lamps painting the room in a warm yellow hue, haughty 
mahogany furniture and old film posters. A truly special atmosphere.
• Haarlemmerdijk 161, +31 20 638 6016, themovies.nl <http://www.themovies.nl> 

The statue of the little woodcutter
 The statue of the little woodcutter 
We love this little man sawing the branch he is sitting on. You can pass by 
this place a hundred times without spotting this adorable statue in the tree, 
despite being located in a very touristy place, directly opposite the bridge 
from the Leidseplein. This anonymous piece of art, in bronze and no taller than 
about 50 centimetres, has been here since 1989. Legend says that is was created 
by Queen Beatrix herself ...
• Leidsebosje, Stadhouderskade 12 

Sculptures under the Vondelpark viaduct
 Sculptures under the Vondelpark viaduct 
The objective of the Amsterdam School 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amsterdam_School> artists was to put art in the 
centre of every citizen's life, regardless of their social background. These 
two sculptures under the viaduct in the Vondelpark, are a good example of this 
style and its principle: everything in the public space can be made beautiful 
and enjoyable for everyone. Thousands of Amsterdamers walk past them every day, 
but few stop to look. Depicting a young boy on one side of the passage and a 
young girl on the other, they were carved in stone by Hildo Krop in 1947 and 
renovated in 2010.
• Under Van Baerlestraat 1 

The tree in a house 
 The tree in a house 
The newly built residential areas in Amsterdam's former eastern docklands are 
well worth a visit, if only to pay homage to the famous "tree in a house". The 
owners of the houses on Scheepstimmermanstraat were given carte blanche to have 
their own homes designed, so the street became a veritable portfolio of modern 
Dutch architecture. The undisputed highlight, however, is to be found at number 
120, where architect Koen van Velsen constructed an entire house around a 
10-metre acacia tree, stretching from the ground floor up to the glass roof.
• Scheepstimmermanstraat 120, koenvanvelsen.com 
<http://www.koenvanvelsen.com/residence.html>

• Delphine Robiot and Marjolijn van Eys are the authors of Jonglez's Secret 
Amsterdam guide 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Secret-Amsterdam-Jonglez-Guides-Delphine/dp/2915807361>
 