
The Somerville, Torquay 

This ritzy Torquay guesthouse won't be to everyone's taste: think gilding, 
gold damasks and red carpets, tassels, travertine marble and decadent 
blackamoor statues. But never mind the bling, this is South West Tourism's B&B 
of the Year (for 2011); hospitable owners Adam and Grant run the place like 
clockwork; and the rooms – though generally on the cosy side – are wall to wall 
luxury (pocket-sprung king-beds, snazzy bathrooms, digital radios, robes, 
sweets and handmade chocolates). In two of the suites you can watch your plasma 
TV from a designer bath. In the hall, there's a help-yourself bar stocked with 
fresh milk and home-baked cookies. Breakfast is a treat of local goodies. 
Torquay harbour is a stroll downhill.
• 515 Babbacombe Road, 01803 294755, somervillehotel.co.uk 
<http://www.somervillehotel.co.uk>. High season singles £65 B&B, doubles from 
£85

Pebbles, Budleigh Salterton
 Pebbles, Budleigh Salterton Photograph: unknown 
This is right on the seafront in sleepy Budleigh. The garden gate opens on to 
the footpath (take a right for the red cliffs of the Jurassic Coast). Three 
rooms overlook the pebble beach with its lobster pots and upturned fishing 
boats (two of them have a sea-view conservatory; the third, a child-friendly 
twin, shares a bathroom); all share a fresh and vaguely New England look 
(patchwork quilts, striped cottons, lighthouse motifs). You sleep on goose-down 
mattress toppers, lulled by the sound of waves on shingle, and wake up to the 
smell of home-baked bread. Lots of nice touches here, including homemade cake, 
pretty china and, a first in my book, hot pebbles to keep the toast warm.
• Fore Street, 01395 442417, bedandbreakfastbythebeach.com 
<http://www.bedandbreakfastbythebeach.com>. Doubles from £99 B&B

Hedgehog Corner, Axminster 
 Hedgehog Corner, Axminster 
As the name suggests, it borders on the twee (doily tablecloths, stripped 
pine, the odd teddy) but the rooms are immaculate, affordable and – as chatty 
owner Joy Raymond, will no doubt tell you – this is the closest guesthouse to
River Cottage HQ <http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/river-cottage> (Hugh 
Fearnley Whittingstall's gaff is 1½ miles away). Like her famous neighbour, Joy 
majors on local produce: oak-smoked Lyme Bay kippers, homemade bread and 
muesli, Clipper teas, Moore's biscuits (the latter from Dorset, which is so 
close you can walk there). She's keen on green tourism, too, and offers 5% 
discount if you arrive by public transport (you can get a bus from nearby 
Axminster station).
• 01297 32036, hedgehogcorner.co.uk <http://www.hedgehogcorner.co.uk>. Doubles 
from £75 B&B

Kerswell Farmhouse, Totnes
 Kerswell Farmhouse, Devon 
The views from this Devon longhouse are spectacular: a patchwork of undulating 
South Hams farmland, the purple peaks of Dartmoor and hardly another building 
in sight. The rooms are a masterclass in rustic modernism – oak joinery, 
whitewash and antiques meet remote-controlled blinds and the kind of bathrooms 
you'd expect in a luxury hotel (kitted out with digital rain-head showers and 
White Company toiletries). Mead, upstairs, has the best view; Bonberry, in a 
converted outhouse, has its own little garden. Owner Nichola Hawkins can rustle 
up what she calls a "light supper" (spinach and watercress soup, poached salmon 
and new potatoes and her own clotted cream ice-cream). Husband Graham is the 
wine man (his list features wines from Devon's Sharpham Vineyard). For days 
out, Totnes, Dartmouth and Dittisham are an easy drive away.
• Cornworthy, 01803 732013, kerswellfarmhouse.co.uk 
<http://www.kerswellfarmhouse.co.uk>. Singles from £50 B&B, doubles from £90. 
Suppers at £20 a head, or £30 for a "proper dinner"

Just B, Dartmouth
 Just B, Dartmouth 
In pricey Dartmouth (where it costs £4.50 just to cross the river on the Dart 
Ferry), Lorna Churchill's bed-without-breakfast venture provides a handy budget 
option. She started a few years ago with two rooms in a Foss Street townhouse 
she could barely afford to buy; now she offers nine rooms across three 
properties – all self-contained, close to shops, bars and cafes, nicely 
furnished (in an Ikea sort of way) and well equipped (shared irons, boards and 
hairdryers hang in the stairwells). Four of them are studios with basic mini 
kitchenettes. And some, like jolly, nautical Room 8 at Zion Place, have an 
extra bed. Great for families or groups of friends.
• 01803 834311, justbdartmouth.com <http://www.justbdartmouth.com>. Doubles 
from £60 room-only, studios from £80 (minimum two-night stay at the weekends). 
Last-minute offers from around £99 per room for two nights

Keynedon Mill, Kingsbridge
 Keynedon Mill, Kingsbridge 
Stuart and Jeni Jebb opened this "boutique retreat" earlier this year, making 
a home for themselves in the converted mill, and creating four lovely guest 
rooms in the old miller's cottage next door. The decor balances simple 
rustic-French style with creaking oak, sloping floors and lumpy whitewashed 
cobb. They have added swish bathrooms, king-size beds, candelabras and a 
wood-burner in a cosy communal snug. They are close to the beach at Slapton, 
four miles from pretty Kingsbridge, or you can just hang out in the meadows of 
the mill's own five acres. In the evening, Jeni can whip up a two- or 
three-course dinner. Game casserole, perhaps, followed by Devon apple cake and 
clotted cream.
• Sherford, 01548 531485, keynedonmill.co.uk <http://www.keynedonmill.co.uk>. 
Singles from £50 B&B, doubles from £85. Dinner from £15 per head

The Lamb Inn, Crediton
 The Lamb Inn, Crediton 
This is one of those old-fashioned village locals that city folk dream of – 
low beams, dark wood and real ale, with a whiff of woodsmoke, history and home 
cooking. So you might be somewhat surprised by the rooms. Done up in a light, 
uncluttered contemporary style, they feature solar-powered underfloor heating, 
power showers and luxe beds. One of them, in the pub's converted coach house, 
has a freestanding bath in the bedroom. A downside is the lack of parking (what 
a popular village this is); a big plus is the Lamb's award-winning food, made 
to order with quality ingredients at reasonable prices (main courses from 
£8.90). The pub, by the way, has its own cinema.
• Sandford, 01363 773676, lambinnsandford.co.uk 
<http://www.lambinnsandford.co.uk>. Doubles from £65 to £120 B&B 

Magdalen Chapter, Exeter 
 Magdalene Chapter Hotel, Devon Photograph: Jason Ingram 
This place was once the West England Eye Hospital. Then it was the retro Hotel 
Barcelona. By the time it re-opens in June it will re-emerge as the second 
Chapter Hotel (the first is the sassy Montpellier in Cheltenham). Thanks to 
nifty architecture and a big budget, the place is a clever integration of 
high-spec contemporary design and ornate Victoriana. All 59 rooms follow a 
style code – lots of aubergine, dark oak, feature wallpapers and white hospital 
tiles – but all are different. One is in a former operating theatre, and there 
are some glass-cube penthouses in the roof. It's not cheap (and at the lower 
end of the tariff, the rooms are small) but every room comes with an i-Pad 2 
and a complimentary mini bar, plus you get to enjoy the artwork in the glassy 
lounge, the indoor-outdoor pool, and the British-inspired food (the menu is 
guided by BBC chef, Simon Hopkinson).
• Magdalen Street, 01392 281000, themagdalenchapter.com 
<http://www.themagdalenchapter.com>. Doubles from £135 per night room-only or 
£150 B&B

Agaric Restaurant with Rooms, Ashburton
 Agaric Restaurant with Rooms, Ashburton 
Those who whiz past Ashburton on the Devon Expressway are missing out. This 
traditional mid-Devon town is a little gem: big on antique shops, Georgian 
townhouses, fresh Dartmoor air and the excellent Agaric Restaurant. The 
Agaric's rooms are in the Grade II listed Tudor House, four doors down. 
Designer-artist Sophie Colley is responsible for the imaginative decor, the 
luscious colours – plums and pewters, aubergines and olives – the velvety 
fabrics and the revamped junk-shop furniture. Husband Nick (Agaric's chef) 
makes the breads, brioches and jams for breakfast. You don't have to eat at the 
restaurant to stay here – but why wouldn't you?
• 30 North Street, 01364 654478, agaricrestaurant.co.uk 
<http://www.agaricrestaurant.co.uk>. Single £50, doubles from £110 B&B

Horn of Plenty, Tamar Valley
 Horn of Plenty, Tamar Valley Photograph: Picasa 
Built for a copper mining company in the 1860s, this is a relaxed, 
put-your-feet-up sort of place with an old-fashioned country house vibe. A big 
draw is the location: in the beautiful Tamar Valley, you can walk over the 
Cornish border via a little packhorse bridge across the river – four miles from 
foodie Tavistock and right in the thick of the West Devon Mining Landscape (a 
World Heritage Site). From 10 rooms, choose a chintzy classic in the main 
house, or a more contemporary number in the garden annexe. All have Vi-sprung 
beds and dreamy views of the valley across the hotel's own walled garden. Some 
have mini balconies. The restaurant (two AA rosettes) is rather good, too.
• Gulworthy, near Tavistock, 01822 832528, thehornofplenty.co.uk 
<http://www.thehornofplenty.co.uk>. Doubles from £95 B&B (£125 in high season)

Know a great place to stay in the area? Add your recommendation in the 
comments below
 