
Café Belgique
 Cafe Belgique Photograph: Sarah Moore 
One of the smallest bars in Amsterdam, Belgique still finds space for eight 
Belgian draught beers and more than 30 bottled varieties. Situated among tacky 
tourist traps in an alleyway just off Dam Square, Belgique has been able to 
preserve a sense of charm and credibility, partly through its reputation as one 
of the main hangouts for street artists and DJs in Amsterdam. While the beer 
selection consists of heady Belgian offerings, the interior is Dutch 17th 
century meets graffiti art. Old stone walls and oak panels have been spray 
painted bythe London Police <http://www.thelondonpolice.com/NewTLP/News.html>. 
Despite the smoking ban, the staff turn a blind eye if you light up.
• Gravenstraat 2, +31 20 625 1974, cafe-belgique.nl 
<http://www.cafe-belgique.nl>. Open Sun-Thurs 2pm-1am, Fri, Sat 2pm-3am

Pollux
 Pollux Photograph: Sarah Moore 
A late-night dive bar with two of the most charismatic publicans you'll ever 
meet. The ever-smiling Frits single-handedly runs the bar while his wife Tanja 
sits on the same bar stool day and night, chain-smoking, smiling at customers 
and ordering neat vodkas. Eerily, the couple have wax statues of themselves 
doing exactly the same thing, resulting in a few highly inebriated customers 
attempting to get their change back from inanimate sculptures. The neon-lit 50s 
style jukebox is packed with classic rock and soul, making for some interesting 
moves on the stripper's pole – a remnant from the bar's former life as a go-go 
bar. Revellers have been known to stay well into the early morning – it depends 
what mood Frits is in and whether Tanja has drained the vodka supplies.
• Prins Hendrikkade 121, +31 20 624 9521, cafepollux.com 
<http://cafepollux.com>. Open Tues-Thurs, Sun noon-3am, Fri, Sat noon-4am, food 
served noon-8pm

Brouwerij 't IJ
 Brouwerij Photograph: Sarah Moore 
Better known as the "windmill brewery", Brouwerij 't IJ brews beer in the 
thatched windmill that towers over the terrace. There's a magical quality to 
sampling the local brew under such a magnificent structure, a feeling enhanced 
by the cheap prices (most €2.30) and the choice of five high-percentage beers. 
Don't be deceived by the small glasses, the windmill blades won't be the only 
thing spinning after you've sampled two or three Columbus ales, the strongest 
of the five offerings. The locals have even coined a term for the state of 
newcomers who end up stumbling, or sometimes crawling, away from the 
establishment – spinmilled.
• Funenkade 7, +31 20 622 8325, brouwerijhetij.nl 
<http://www.brouwerijhetij.nl>. Open daily 3pm-8pm

't Smalle
 ’t Smalle Photograph: Sarah Moore 
Time stands still within this building, which was originally built as a Hoppe 
distillery in 1780. Old oak casks remain stacked above the bar area, and 
vintage brass furnishings, gleaming chandeliers, dripping candles and the smack 
of fermented alcohol make it feel like a Dutch traders' haunt from yesteryear. 
While they may not be from the 18th century, bearded Dutch locals still 
frequent the bar to gossip about the latest happenings in the neighbourhood. 
The building is also located on one of the prettiest canals in Amsterdam, 
meaning there tends to be a bit of a scrap for the waterside seats come summer. 
It's best to get there early, or soak up the atmosphere inside.
• Egelantiersgracht 12, +31 20 623 9617, t-smalle.nl <http://www.t-smalle.nl>. 
Open Sun-Thurs 10am-1am, Fri, Sat 10am-2am

Whiskycafé L&B
 Whiskycafé L&B Photograph: Sarah Moore 
With around 1,400 different types of whisky and bourbon – sourced from 
Scotland, America, Canada, Japan and even India – the hardest thing about 
visiting Whiskycafé L&B is picking the right tipple. Luckily, the bar staff are 
enthusiastic whisky purists, who often provide samples and guide you through 
the extensive menu that's split into different regions of Scotland, and the 
rest of the world. The atmosphere is relaxed and genteel; there are usually a 
few solitary types sipping 40-year-old malts while reading – or at least 
pretending to read – a literary classic. But generally it is a very social 
place – the shared penchant for good whisky usually gets people talking long 
into the night.
• Korte Leidsedwarsstraat 82-84, +31 20 625 2387, whiskyproeverijen.nl 
<http://www.whiskyproeverijen.nl/index-gb.htm>. Open Sun-Thurs 8pm-3am, Fri, 
Sat 8pm-4am

Café Brecht
 Cafe Brecht Photograph: Sarah Moore 
This Berlin-style living room cafe attracts students and literary types who 
discuss the merits of Brechtian drama while flicking through the plays that are 
scattered around. Inspired by Berlin's alternative bar scene, Sandra Houtman 
and her son decided to offer up their own piece of east German charm in the 
heart of Amsterdam. Berliner Pilsner, fritz-kola and a variety of German beers 
are on tap, and a selection of bratwurst is available. The atmosphere is casual 
and stylish; vintage furniture, and knitting needles, wool and threads on hand 
for crafty types. There's a literary open mic session on the last Sunday of 
each month, but you might want to brush up on your German.
• Weteringschans 157, +31 20 627 2211, cafebrecht.nl <http://www.cafebrecht.nl>
. Open Sun-Thurs noon-1am, Fri, Sat noon-3am

Vesper Bar
 Vesper Bar Photograph: Sarah Moore 
In a quiet corner just off bustling Haarlemmerstraat, this elegant cocktail 
bar feels like stepping into a happy hour scene from Mad Men. Expats and locals 
from the nearby advertising agencies enjoy their post-work tipple while 
discussing strategies and bashing away on smartphones. The decor is kitsch and 
sophisticated, with James Bond memorabilia sandwiched between fine liqueurs and 
pop art prints. On Saturday and Sunday afternoons, the bar offers "high tea 
cocktails"; a quirky alcoholic twist on traditional high tea. Cakes from 
neighbouring bakeries are served with teapots of cocktails. In a city not 
renowned for good cocktail bars, Vesper has raised the standards.
• Vinkenstraat 57, +31 20 846 4458, vesperbar.nl <http://www.vesperbar.nl>. 
Open Tues-Thurs 8pm-1am, Fri, Sat 8pm-3am

Chet's Jazz Café
 Chet’s Jazz Café Photograph: Sarah Moore 
Filled with elegant men and women sipping fine wines while chatting to the 
sounds of acoustic jazz and effortlessly snapping their fingers in time, Chet's 
Bar feels like stepping back into 1930s Chicago. Co-owner Diego Rattenni always 
states that he wants his customers to "soak up the jazz and savour the wine". 
The bar used to feature large-scale jazz bands four nights a week, but they 
received noise complaints from neighbours and have since had to stick to solo 
musicians and duos on Fridays and Saturdays. The understated music still 
provides the perfect backdrop for an evening of wine and conversation.
• Hazenstraat 19, +31 61 986 3190, chetsjazzcafe.com 
<http://www.chetsjazzcafe.com>. Open Tues-Thurs, Sun 7pm-1am, Fri, Sat 7pm-3am

Café Sound Garden
 Soundgarden Photograph: Sarah Moore 
Not much has changed in Sound Garden since it opened in the early 90s. Kurt 
Cobain lookalikes converse shyly in corners of the room, old rockers play pool 
or pinball, and a few suits – who probably had mohicans and listened to Bad 
Brains back in the day – sit on the sunny terrace which overlooks a nearby 
canal. While grunge bars can sometimes feel cliquey and even a tad pretentious, 
Sound Garden is surprisingly friendly, and you'll inevitably find yourself in 
conversation with muso strangers at some point – probably talking about the 
best places to find Mudhoney B-sides or Jesus and Mary Chain T-Shirts.
• Marnixstraat 164-166, +31 20 620 2853, cafesoundgarden.nl 
<http://www.cafesoundgarden.nl>. Open Mon-Thurs 1pm-1am, Fri 1pm-3am, Sat 
3pm-3am, Sun 3pm-1am

Okura Hotel
 Okura Hotel Photograph: Sarah Moore 
Amsterdam is saturated with cosy bars and casual beer cafés, but it can be 
hard to find more upmarket drinking establishments. Located in the south of the 
city, the Okura Hotel offers high-end drinks at high-end prices. While visiting 
might hurt your wallet, the service – and sense of sophistication – is 
unparalleled. Immaculately dressed white-gloved waiters offer you table 
service, and cocktails are mixed to your personal preference. On the 23rd 
floor, the upscale bar also offers a panoramic view of Amsterdam that can 
rarely be seen from the traditional, smaller Dutch buildings. Japanese 
businessmen, wealthy tourists and Dutch locals all frequent the establishment, 
making for an interestingly diverse crowd.
• Ferdinand Bolstraat 333, +31 20 678 7111, okura.nl <http://www.okura.nl>. 
Open daily 6pm-1am

• Arun Sood writes for Amsterdam Magazine <http://amsterdam-magazine.com/>
 