
1. Jungle Bay, Dominica 

Opened in 2005 and set in 55 acres of rainforest, Jungle Bay (
junglebaydominica.com <http://www.junglebaydominica.com>) was built on strong 
eco-principles - from preserving trees and wildlife to using local labour and 
materials - but it doesn't stint on visual impact. The 35 large stilted, 
luxurious rooms are all built from wood and have outdoor solar-powered showers 
to go with the spruced-up Swiss Family Robinson feel. Dominica isn't about 
great beaches (what sand there is is black and volcanic) but the hiking and 
other healthy activities on offer, including kayaking, mountain-biking and 
whalewatching, more than make up for it.

Getting there: Q Holidays (0870 720 1127; qholidays.co.uk 
<http://www.qholidays.co.uk>) can arrange stays at Jungle Bay from £110pp a 
night, including meals, hiking trips, yoga lessons and a half-hour spa 
treatment. Return flights from Gatwick to Antigua start at £583.50 with British 
Airways (ba.com <http://www.ba.com>). Onward return flights from Antigua to 
Dominica start at £68 (liat.com <http://www.liat.com>). 

2. Jade Mountain, St Lucia
 This is not the sort of hotel that gets planned in a corporate boardroom. 
Perched on top of a hill, it has 24 open-sided rooms, all with views of St 
Lucia's iconic Piton mountains and their own infinity swimming pool - which 
allows you to stargaze, swim and commune with hummingbirds, all without leaving 
the privacy of your room. Opened last year, Jade Mountain (
jademountainstlucia.com <http://www.jademountainstlucia.com>) is the newest 
hotel from Nick Troubetzkoy, who also owns Anse Chastenet, an early pioneer in 
quirky Caribbean hotels. This place may be expensive, but it's also endearingly 
undeferential - and Anse Chastenet's bars and restaurants are just a stroll 
away.
Getting there: ITC Classics (01244 355527; itcclassics.co.uk 
<http://www.itcclassics.co.uk>) offers seven nights at Jade Mountain from 
£3,027pp including flights, transfers and B&B accommodation.

3. Tiamo Lodge, Bahamas


On the outlying Bahamian island of South Andros, this hotel is entirely 
solar-powered. Designed both to be low-impact and provide local employment, 
Tiamo (tiamoresorts.com <http://www.tiamoresorts.com>) is very popular with 
honeymooners and serious anglers (who come for the bone fishing). Wraparound 
porches compensate for the lack of air-conditioning.

Getting there: Windows on the Wild (020 8742 1556; windowsonthewild.com 
<http://www.windowsonthewild.com>) has a seven night trip, with six nights' 
full board at Tiamo, including use of kayaks, guided snorkelling (with 
equipment) and hikes, and one night in Nassau, from £1,975pp, including flights 
via Miami with American Airlines and the internal flights.

4. Plantation Beach Villas, Tobago

This collection of six three-bedroom villas was designed by Swede Arne 
Hasselqvist, who was also responsible for many houses on the ritzier island of 
Mustique. Here, amid the gingerbread-style houses, verandas and gardens, the 
atmosphere is deliberately low-key. There's a small bar and restaurant, but all 
the villas have kitchens. The staff (each villa has an attendant) are flexible 
enough to take you shopping, cook dinner and babysit (or leave you alone), 
making this an almost perfect destination for families with small children. All 
the villas share a pool, while uncrowded Stonehaven beach can be reached 
through a small gate. The front desk can book scuba diving and boat trips (
plantationbeachvillas.com <http://www.plantationbeachvillas.com>). 

Getting there: Real Holidays (020 7359 3938; realholidays.co.uk 
<http://www.realholidays.co.uk>) has seven nights at Plantation Beach Villas 
from £1,016pp, based on a family of four, including accommodation and flights.

5. Cocobay, Antigua

All-inclusive hotels are usually the preserve of big hotel chains, but Cocobay 
bucks the trend (cocobayresort.com <http://www.cocobayresort.com>). Most of the 
53 rooms are in simple but sweet tin-roofed cottages. They don't have 
televisions or phones but all the other facilities are in place. There's a 
swimming pool, a bar and two restaurants. The hotel aims to source both food 
and staff locally and it's within walking distance of three beaches. However, 
it's not an option for families with small children: the minimum age for guests 
is 14 (except at Christmas). The owners of Cocobay opened Hermitage Bay on 
Antigua's west coast last year, which works on the same principles - with a 
higher level of luxury, and a commensurately higher price. As one recently 
returned guest put it, 'it's the sort of place that gives all-inclusives a good 
name'.

Getting there: Caribtours (020 7751 0660; caribtours.co.uk 
<http://www.caribtours.co.uk>) has seven nights at Cocobay, including flights, 
transfers and all-inclusive accommodation, for £1,061pp.

6. Ku, Anguilla 

Anguilla is known for its extraordinarily expensive hotels, but two years ago, 
Cap Juluca - one of the most exclusive - opened the 27-room Ku (ku-anguilla.com 
<http://www.ku-anguilla.com>) where the minimalist decor (white walls, white 
floor, white furnishings) is well suited to the island's white sand beaches and 
general air of seclusion. But, like a diffusion range from a top fashion 
designer, Ku ticks the desirability boxes while remaining within the reach of 
ordinary mortals, so instead of Cap Juluca's privacy-minded luxury, Ku is 
located on a more public beach - with a good choice of local restaurants within 
walking distance. For pricey Anguilla, it's a bargain.

Getting there: Tropic Breeze (01548 831550; tropicbreeze.co.uk 
<http://www.tropicbreeze.co.uk>) has seven nights at Ku on a room-only basis 
for selected dates between 1 April and 19 December, including flights with BA 
from Gatwick to Antigua and onward to Anguilla with Liat, from £999pp.

7. Beau Rive, Dominica 
 More proof that Dominica has picked up the low-key tourism torch and is 
running with it, Beau Rive (beaurive.com <http://www.beaurive.com>), owned by 
former musician Mark Steele since 2004, has just eight guest rooms, with 
balconies, within a plantation house, plus a swimming pool. A spice garden 
adjoins the hotel's restaurant, which serves whatever is fresh and available. 
John Faithfull of Trips Worldwide says: 'Visitors are made to feel like Mark's 
house guests, and we get great feedback from clients.'
Getting there: Trips Worldwide (0117 311 4418; tripsworldwide.com 
<http://www.tripsworldwide.com>) offers holidays from £1,149pp (based on two 
sharing), including flights to Antigua and on to Dominica with Liat, transfers 
and seven nights in a double room with breakfast.

8. Ginger Lily, St Lucia

The Ginger Lily (gingerlilyhotel.com <http://www.gingerlilyhotel.com>) may be 
a simple 11-room hotel but it is perfectly placed for the bars of Rodney Bay 
and party-minded Reduit beach. Just one block back from the beach, with its own 
pool, restaurant and bar, it has large rooms, all with balconies, and all of 
them surrounding a mellow pool area; and the rates are a bargain. It is plugged 
into the local community, which makes organising activities, including scuba 
diving and jet-skiing, a doddle.

Getting there: Caribbean Unpackaged (020 8446 8122; caribbean-unpackaged.com 
<http://www.caribbean-unpackaged.com>) has superior rooms at Ginger Lily from 
£81 a night, not including flights. Virgin Atlantic (virgin-atlantic.com 
<http://www.virgin-atlantic.com>) flies direct to St Lucia three times a week 
from Gatwick and once a week from Manchester, return fares from £595.

9. Petit Bacaye, Grenada 
 In this collection of five palm-thatched houses, things are kept deliberately 
simple - there's no air-conditioning, no television and no swimming pool. 
However, the beach lies a few steps away, the hotel provides mosquito repellent 
and there are hammocks at every turn. You'll probably need a hire car to make 
the most of Grenada, but there's a bakery and a mini-market within a short 
walk, while a swim takes you to a nearby island which is a nature reserve for 
egrets. Even though all the houses have kitchens, Petit Bacaye (petitbacaye.com 
<http://www.petitbacaye.com>) takes the Caribbean fantasy thing seriously - 
there are regular beach barbecues, and fishermen deliver their catch to the 
restaurant daily straight from the boat. It's owned by Peter Pilbrow and Julia 
Montgomery, who own the acclaimed Onion Store hotel in Romsey, Hampshire.
Getting there: Just Grenada (01373 814214; justgrenada.co.uk 
<http://www.justgrenada.co.uk>) charges £695pp for a week in a one-bedroom 
cottage sleeping two, including flights from Gatwick, accommodation and 
transfers.

10.Hostal Del Tejadillo, Cuba 

This is the sort of hotel that you'd hope Havana would be overrun with. Unlike 
most of the city's unlovely Soviet-inspired hotels, the Tejadillo is a colonial 
palace, located on an atmospherically run-down street, near Plaza de la 
Catedral and five minutes' walk from the Malecon waterfront. Yes, it's a bit 
musty and disorganised, and the facilities are a bit basic, but all 32 of the 
high-ceilinged bedrooms open on to a central courtyard with fountain, and all 
have a balcony or a patio. And there's a bar.

Getting there: Journey Latin America (020 8747 8315; journeylatinamerica.co.uk 
<http://www.journeylatinamerica.co.uk>) has three nights at the Hostal del 
Tejadillo, including flights on Virgin Atlantic, from £630pp.

11.Maca Bana, Grenada 

Maca Bana (macabana.com <http://www.macabana.com>) is a small collection of 
seven villas on a hillside which share an infinity swimming pool. Decorated by 
the artist owner Rebecca Thompson, the villas are very well equipped - with 
proper kitchens, outdoor hot tubs and staggering views. Painting and cookery 
classes can be arranged, although the improbably beautiful Magazine beach is 
likely to be the greatest temptation. In general, only children over 12 are 
welcomed, owing to the steep climb from beach back to the hotel, but the hotel 
is flexible and can advise families on which are the less precipitous villas. 
Thompson and her husband also own Aquarium on Magazine beach, considered to be 
one of Grenada's best restaurants.

Getting there: Caribtours (020 7751 0660; caribtours.co.uk 
<http://www.caribtours.co.uk>) has seven nights at Maca Bana, including 
flights, transfers and room-only accommodation, for £1,445pp.

12. Lodge At Chaa Creek, Belize 

Even before Francis Ford Coppola opened his eco-lodges in Belize, Chaa Creek (
chaacreek.com <http://www.chaacreek.com>) was taking the greener approach to 
tourism. With some road-building help from the British army, this organic farm 
opened its first rooms in 1981. It is run by an Anglo-American couple, Mick and 
Lucy Fleming. Lying beside the Macal River in 330 acres of rainforest, it has 
just 21 stone and palm-thatched cottages, and a restaurant that serves locally 
sourced food. The eco-principles are still strong - there's no air-conditioning 
anywhere on the resort, nor is there a swimming pool - instead, guests can take 
a dip in the river, and the hotel runs particularly good tours into the local 
area to visit Mayan ruins.

Getting there: Journey Latin America (020 8747 8315; journeylatinamerica.co.uk 
<http://www.journeylatinamerica.co.uk>) has three nights at Chaa Creek for 
£1,444pp full board, including British Airways flights (0870 850 9850;ba.com 
<http://www.ba.com>). 

13. Gate House, Saba 

You can walk from Saba's tiny airport to the Gate House (sabagatehouse.com 
<http://www.sabagatehouse.com>). In fact you can walk pretty much anywhere on 
Saba; this Dutch Caribbean island is just five miles long and has only one 
road. Saba doesn't do vast golden-sand beaches but the hiking is as good as the 
snorkelling and the views across to St Barts come as a bonus. Owned by a French 
couple, the Gate House also has a notably good restaurant (with an excellent 
wine cellar) for an island with just 1,500 residents. There are seven guest 
rooms, which share a swimming pool but families might prefer the hotel's 
four-bedroom villa, which has its own private pool.

Getting there: Doubles start at $125 a night including breakfast. Get there by 
flying to St Maarten via Amsterdam with KLM (klm.com <http://www.klm.com>) and 
then to Saba with Winair (flywinair.com <http://www.flywinair.com>). 
Alternatively you can fly to Antigua with BA and connect to St Maarten with 
Winair.

14. Little Arches, Barbados

A far cry from Barbados's torpid (and aptly named) Platinum coast, which is 
awash with stultifyingly luxurious hotels, the 10-room Little Arches (
little-arches.com <http://www.little-arches.com>) is a short walk from the 
determinedly normal village of Ostins in the south of the island. All the 
beaches in Barbados are technically public, but Enterprise beach, just across 
the road from Little Arches, is genuinely so. Used by both locals and tourists, 
it has a handy stall selling drinks and snacks and a palpable sense of 
relaxation. Back at the hotel, there's a small rooftop pool - several of the 
rooms lead out on to it. Bicycles are also provided for guests (this part of 
Barbados is pleasingly flat) and the hotel has its own yacht for excursions. It 
also has a good restaurant, La Luna, which is run by one of the hotel's 
co-owners, Mark DeGruchy.

Getting there: Caribbean Expressions (020 7433 2610; expressionsholidays.co.uk 
<http://www.expressionsholidays.co.uk>) has seven nights at Little Arches from 
£1,117pp, including flights, transfers and B&B accommodation.

15. Jake's, Jamaica 
 Jamaica has some wonderful hotels, including the Rockhouse (where the Rolling 
Stones cavorted in the 1970s) and Mockingbird Hill, an eco-lodge which runs an 
adult literacy programme for its employees. However, Jake's (islandoutpost.com 
<http://www.islandoutpost.com>) on Treasure Beach continues to stand out from 
the crowd. Part of the Island Outpost empire founded by Chris Blackwell of 
Island Records fame, but owned by theatrical designer Sally Henzell and her son 
Jason, this 26-room hotel continues to feel fantastically connected to the 
local environment. Guests are encouraged to visit local cafes and restaurants. 
While groovy, endearingly louche Jake's has traditionally spurned modern 
conveniences such as air-conditioning and televisions, the hotel's newly opened 
Treasure Beach House is a four-bedroom villa which comes with satellite TV, 
plunge pool and air-conditioning.
Getting there: Trips Worldwide (0117 311 4418; tripsworldwide.com 
<http://www.tripsworldwide.com>) has seven nights' room only at Jake's from 
£1,239pp including flights and transfers.
 