
Ask someone to give you their list of "paradise" destinations and Albania is 
probably one of the least likely places to crop up. But as I drop my bags, kick 
off my flip-flops and dive into a turquoise sea, the "P" word is the only way 
to describe what I'm seeing.

Bobbing about on my back, I strain my eyes right and left in a bid to spot 
another human being, but all I can see is smooth white sand stretching away in 
both directions for about three miles. Mountains rise up just behind the beach, 
huddling together to increase my privacy. And as if that's not utopian enough, 
I've even got my own "private" beach bar, where resident mixologist Bledi 
rustles up mojitos for £3 a pop.

In Albania, this counts as expensive. No wonder increasing numbers of 
backpackers are making their way over here. According to student travel 
specialist STA Travel, there has been a huge rise in demand for trips to the 
country, which was once regarded as Europe's poor relation.

"We have noticed a massive increase in the number of gap-year travellers and 
backpackers wanting to try Albania," says STA's Ian Swain.

When I went backpacking, in the late 90s, it was all about Thailand, with its 
talcum-powder sand, beach huts and low-key bars. But getting there required an 
endurance test of 15 hours in economy class, not to mention a sizable dent in 
the student loan. My trip to Drymades Beach involved only a three-hour flight. 
All right, I then had to spend a few more hours on the bus that weaves its way 
along the rocky mountain roads that lead south from Tirana, the capital city. 
But that just meant I had the opportunity to hop off en route and explore some 
of the country's coastal nooks and crannies.

The Albanian Riviera stretches nearly 300 miles from Vlore down to Butrint, 
forming one of the last stretches of unspoilt shoreline in Europe. Around 
almost every corner there's a strip of empty sand that has managed to escape 
invasion by the package holiday hordes.

Heading out of Tirana for the coast, one of the first places I stopped at was 
Orikumi, home to the ruins of an ancient village dating back to 600BC. In other 
countries it would all be roped off, with overpriced tickets and T-shirts on 
sale. Here, however, I could wander at will around the remains, crunching along 
a path strewn with bits of old Roman pottery. I felt like a pasty-faced Indiana 
Jones stumbling across a lost city. While a large proportion of Orikum (as the 
village was originally called) is buried under the nearby estuary, the 
amphitheatre, market stalls and sacrificial altar are still largely intact.

From here, my route continued up into the Cika Mountains, where the smell of 
pine trees and hot earth wafted in through the open windows of the bus, 
fuelling my desire to find a beach and cool off as soon as possible. I didn't 
have to wait much longer.

After winding up through the Llogara Pass, at 1,100m (3,609ft), the road began 
to weave its way down to the coast and I got my first glimpse of what the 
backpackers are getting so excited about. The edge of Albania stretched out 
into the distance, bordered the whole way along by a ribbon of white sand. The 
only symptoms of human "civilisation" were the domes of the machine gun bunkers 
scattered every few hundred metres along the shore - leftovers from the 
country's paranoid dictator Enver Hoxha, who died in 1985.

Reaching the coast, we turned off the tiny "main" road and headed down to 
Palassa Beach, bouncing down a track that would break the average rental car. I 
wasn't about to complain about having my teeth shaken loose over the potholes, 
though; the lack of tarmac is the main reason why the region has yet to be 
gripped by the tentacles of mass tourism.

The reward for those prepared to put in the effort is a three-mile stretch of 
beach to call your own. The only sound here is the hypnotic rattle of pebbles 
being raked over the shoreline. In 48BC, Julius Caesar landed here from Rome, 
on his way to battle Pompey at Pharsalus in northern Greece; I've a hunch it 
hasn't changed much since. As with most of the beaches I came across, there's 
nothing (and no one) stopping you from simply plonking a tent up and spending a 
few nights here.

Do that, though, and you're in danger of missing out on Bledi's freshly made 
mojitos. Drymades is the next beach along, and it's here that pebbles are 
replaced by smooth sand and a mellow soundtrack of Cafe del Mar-style tunes.

After emerging from my spontaneous dip I finally bump into another visitor. 
Edward is an Albanian artist looking for inspiration. "I love it here," he 
tells me, as we wait for Bledi to mix mojito number three. "You should see it 
first thing in the morning, when the sun comes up. It'll blow your mind."

It wasn't just the beach bar lifestyle that brought back memories of 
backpacking in Thailand; the accommodation was similar, too. Tucked away in the 
woods behind the beach are a bunch of wooden, one-bedroom huts, with kitchens 
and shower rooms. They are basic but comfortable - especially when you're 
spending most of your time catching rays on the beach.

If you do find yourself craving some civilisation (ancient or modern), you'll 
find it just a couple of hours' drive away, in Saranda. When the sun goes down, 
you can see the lights of Corfu twinkling across the water like tiny glow-worms 
in the distance.

A few days after dragging myself away from Drymades, I sit sipping the froth 
off a cappuccino while fishermen putter about in the little harbour, their 
boats chock-full of freshly caught fish. I could happily spend the day here, 
watching the world go by, but this is merely a pause on the way to Butrint.

The ruins of this city form an architectural index of ancient history, with 
Greek, Roman and Venetian remains all contained on one tiny island. Located 
half-an-hour's drive south of Saranda, on the edge of a beautiful blue lagoon, 
it was a thriving port for more than a thousand years and is now a Unesco world 
heritage site.

Starting at sea level I amble along avenues of shady trees, working my way up 
through time until I reach the island's highest point. The route takes me past 
an ancient Roman bathhouse and Christian baptistry, before leading me up steps 
worn smooth by centuries of shuffling feet to the magnificent Venetian castle. 
In the 15th century this would have provided an important early peek at hostile 
visitors; now it's ideal for spotting sea eagles circling over the 
electric-blue water.

Albania is not all old ruins and rudimentary beach huts, though. Making my way 
back north towards Tirana, I spend the final few nights at a boutique hotel, 
Rapo's, in the village of Himara.

This is the first glimpse I get of Albania's potential future - one with 
Wi-Fi, swanky dark wood sunbeds and poolside waiter service. While it's all 
very nice, I can't resist sneaking off down a nearby track to find yet another 
deserted beach. Developers must be itching to get their hands on this place 
but, for now, the backpackers have it to themselves.

Essentials

British Airways (0844 493 0787; ba.com <http://www.britishairways.com>) flies 
from Gatwick to Tirana from £200, including taxes. Huts at Drymades Beach sleep 
two people and cost from €25 (00 355 69 229 3463; emaileddy_pp@hotmail.com 
<mailto:eddy_pp@hotmail.com>). Doubles at the Rapo's Resort Hotel in Himara (00 
355 39 322856;raposresorthotel.com <http://raposresorthotel.com>) cost from 
€65, including breakfast. For more information about visiting Albania see
albaniantourism.com <http://www.albaniantourism.com>.

Five new backpacker must-sees

We asked three experts where this year's hot spots would be.

Syria

"This maligned Middle-Eastern renegade is perfect for backpackers," says Dan 
Linstead, editor of Wanderlust magazine. "There are friendly people, historic 
sights - from Krak des Chevaliers to Palmyra - a tantalising desert interior 
and two wildly atmospheric cities (Damascus and Aleppo) in which to haggle for 
carpets and smoke hubble-bubbles."

Zambia, Botswana, Namibia 

"Backpacker destinations tend to go in cycles," says Lonely Planet writer 
David Else. "The political troubles in Kenya and Zimbabwe put travellers off 
the established Kenya-to-South Africa overland route. But then a few years 
pass, and they begin to work out new routes. Now they are going to Zambia, then 
Botswana or Namibia, on the way to South Africa."

Malaysia

"With a price war on flights to Malaysia (between Air Asia X and Malaysian 
Airlines), Kuala Lumpur looks set to rival Bangkok as the backpacker hub of 
south-east Asia this summer," says Linstead. "Malaysia's islands, including 
Langkawi and Tioman, are less crowded than Koh Samui and Phuket, and Kuala 
Lumpur offers access to the Borneo rainforest."

Cambodia, Vietnam and Laos

"From the Thorn Tree message board section of our website, we get a good feel 
for where backpackers are heading, and they seem to be branching out from 
Thailand into Cambodia, Vietnam and Laos," says Else. "They offer a 
superficially similar culture to Thailand's, but a much less developed 
backpacker trail."

Colombia and Bolivia

"As well as Vietnam, and Africa, South America is also a 'must-see' 
destination this summer," says Anna Walkinshaw at STA Travel. "Hot spots 
include Rurrenabaque, a base for wildlife and jungle tours in the Amazon basin 
in northern Bolivia, and the Parque de Tayrona in Colombia, a breathtaking 
national park on the Caribbean coast, where you can rent a hammock under the 
stars."
 