A group of protesters stormed an awards ceremony this year. What were they 
dressed as, and what were they protesting?  Steaks, protesting the live cattle 
exports industry in Australia  Sausages, protesting the male domination of the 
Australian film industryChanting "End the sausage party!," about 15 women 
dressed as sausages lay down on the red carpet at the Aacta awards before 
security guards dragged them away.  Milk bottles, protesting the nanny state 
and Sydney’s lockout laws  Schmackos, protesting greyhound racing in Australia 
Which Australian artist won the most Arias in 2016?  Flume He won five Arias in 
total.  Courtney Barnett  Keith Urban  Sia After delivering a deeply odd 
apology to the Australian government for smuggling two dogs into the country, 
Johnny Depp appeared on Jimmy Kimmel Live and described Barnaby Joyce as:  A 
red-faced potato man  An overgrown baby  Inbred with a tomato Depp said: 'He 
looks somehow inbred with a tomato. It’s not a criticism, I’m just saying, I 
was a little worried … he might explode.'  One child standing on another’s 
shoulders while wearing a big coat The day radio and screen star Andy Lee's 
children's book came out, the publisher’s website crashed owing to public 
demand. What was the title of the book?  The Smell of Other People  We Found a 
Hat  What About a Book About Nothing  Do Not Open This Book Which of the 
following screen stars did NOT appear in a stage production in Australia this 
year?  Delta Goodrem  Richard Roxburgh  Shaun Micallef  Yael Stone Alex Dyson 
and Matt Okine quit their hosting spots on Triple J breakfast in December. What 
was their catchphrase?  Slap on the cans  It’s gonna be a scorcha  What a 
bloody legend  Pack 'er up, boys In March John Cleese announced he was 
considering pursuing legal action against an Australian theatre company. Why?  
The company's flagship show was a cabaret-style event hosted by an impersonator 
called “John Cheese”, and he had been caught on a Vine making racist comments  
The company had been running ads in industry magazines passing off Fawlty 
Towers quotes as its own  The company had been running Fawlty Towers-inspired 
dinner-and-show events called “Faulty Towers”Interactive Theatre International 
has staged its Faulty Towers dining experience in major capital cities around 
the world since 1997. The company says it did seek permission.  He watched one 
of their productions and thought it was terrible Leah Purcell’s The Drover’s 
Wife was a radical reimagining of a classic Australian short story. Which 
acclaimed Australian author wrote the original?  Banjo Paterson  Norman Lindsay 
 Tim Winton  Henry Lawson Australian hip-hop artist Drapht won best urban album 
at the Arias for his record Seven Mirrors, which followed a four-year hiatus. 
During that time, what was Drapht doing?  Producing records for other people  
Building seven literal mirrors, and writing a song about each  Opening and 
operating an organic wholefoods restaurantSolomon's Cafe, in Highgate, Perth, 
closed in March 2016.  Pursuing a career as a screen actor in a new, acclaimed 
Australian television series At the Melbourne comedy festival, two comedians 
got married at a public ceremony in support of marriage equality. What are 
their names?  Zoë Coombs Marr and Hannah Gadsby  Zoë Coombs Marr and Rhys 
NicholsonHannah Gadsby officiated, True Australian Patriots – a trio that 
parody the Australian far-right –showed up in protest, and Wil Anderson 
appeared from the side of stage to have his arms signed.  Rhys Nicholson and 
Tom Ballard  Tom Ballard and Wil Anderson Unusual for having no submission 
process, the Windham-Campbell prize for writers awards US$150,000 to nine very 
surprised authors each year – and this year Helen Garner was among them. How 
did she find out?  She found the email in her junk mail and thought it was a 
hoaxOnly after checking with her publisher and contacting the university was 
she able to confirm that she had won. 'I nearly keeled over,' Garner said.  She 
forgot to attend the ceremony and heard her name called on the radio  Richard 
Flanagan sent her a text  She read about it in the paper What is the most 
correct definition of the phrase "parallel importation restriction" (PIR)?  
PIRs allow Australian booksellers that want to bulk order buy from overseas 
publishers. As a result, Australian publishers are forced to make that book 
available in Australia quickly through other booksellers.  PIRs make overseas 
booksellers that want to bulk order Australian books buy from the publisher 
that holds Australian rights to that book, and not from one overseas. In return 
for this, the Australian publisher has to make that book available in Australia 
quickly.  PIRs make Australian booksellers that want to bulk order buy from the 
publisher that holds Australian rights to that book, and not from one overseas. 
In return for this, the Australian publisher has to make that book available in 
Australia quickly.  Literally no one knows what this phrase means. Adriano 
Zumbo, whose cooking show, Zumbo’s Just Desserts, gave Australia toothache this 
year, is most famous for a particular dessert to which he has given his name. 
What is it?  The Zumbomisu, like tiramisu but with a Zumbo twist (extra booze)  
The Zumbaron, a macaron flavoured with things that should never be found in 
sweetsZumbarons come in such flavours as Thai green curry, laksa, grilled 
cheese toastie and pork bun.  The Zumbanana split, the most decadent banana 
split you’ve ever eaten  The Zumboroquembouche, a croquembouche covered in 
miniature Zumbo heads made out of sugar In November, under the ABC’s new 
managing director Michelle Guthrie, all but one of Radio National’s music shows 
were cut. What remains?  The Inside Sleeve  The Live Set  The Rhythm Divine  
The Music Show The Avalanches finally released their second album after a 
15-year wait. What was the name of its first single?  Frankie Sinatra  Bette 
Davis Pies  Tony Di Blasi  Marilyn Maroon In Tim Minchin's song Come Home 
(Cardinal Pell), urging Pell to return to Australia to face Australia’s royal 
commission into institutional responses to child sexual abuse, Minchin calls 
Pell which of the following names?  Pompous buffoon  Goddamn coward  Georgie-Poo
 All of the above Which painting won the Archibald prize this year?  Louise 
Hearman’s portrait of Barry Humphries  Mark Etherington’s portrait of Ken Done  
Nick Stathopoulos’s portrait of Deng Adut  Natasha Bieniek’s portrait of Wendy 
Whiteley AB Original – Briggs and Trials' new hip-hop act – made headlines with 
the release of their debut single, featuring Dan Sultan. What was the key 
message of that song?  Indigenous incarceration rates are a national crisis  
The Triple J Hottest 100 should be moved from 26 January  Australia Day should 
be moved from 26 JanuaryTrials explained that the single, titled January 26, 
draws attention to the 'absolute absurdity of celebrating the day that our 
ancestors were slaughtered'.  A treaty for Indigenous Australia is long overdue 
Mad Max: Fury Road swept the technical awards at this year's Oscars, breaking 
Australia's previous record of three wins for The Piano. Which of the following 
was not won?  Best costume design  Best visual effects This award was won by Ex 
Machina – but Mad Max also won best film editing, best production design and 
best makeup and hair styling, bringing its tally to six.  Best sound editing  
Best sound mixing Two former contestants on The Bachelor Australia, Megan Marx 
and Tiffany Scanlon, sparked speculation that they were in a lesbian 
relationship by posting a racy photo of themselves on Instagram. What were they 
doing in the photo?  Skinny dipping together at the beach  Taking part in a 
photo shoot for a men's magazine  Lying naked in a bed of rose petals, American 
Beauty-style  Eating a bowl of spaghetti together topless  You got…  Challenge 
your friends Submit answers  