
There are those who question the subtlety of Didier Drogba's touch and the 
accuracy of his finishing, but the tenacity of the Ivory Coast striker is not 
in doubt. Called upon twice in a marathon penalty shoot-out, he twice 
converted; while Cameroon'sSamuel Eto'o 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/samuel-etoo> - whom he will meet again in 
the Champions League in a little over a fortnight - could only send his second 
kick spiralling into the Cairo sky. So, 12-11 victors after a scarcely credible 
shoot-out, it was Ivory Coast who progressed to face Nigeria in the semi-final 
of the African Nations Cup on Tuesday.

Yesterday was the day of penalties in Egypt. Although it was to pale by 
comparison with what was to follow, the first quarter-final, between Nigeria - 
for whom Jay-Jay Okocha was again absent with a groin injury - and Tunisia in 
Port Said had seemed an exhausting affair. Obinna Nsofor had givenNigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nigeria-football-team> an early lead, 
but, after Clayton, Tunisia's Brazilian defender, had failed from the spot, 
Karim Haggui levelled just after half-time. When Tunisia went two up in the 
shoot-out, the defending champions looked to be heading into the last four. Two 
saves from Vincent Enyeama levelled the balance, though, and after Kanu had 
tucked in Nigeria's eighth penalty, it fell to the veteran Rahdi Bouazizi to 
suffer the ignominy of missing the decisive kick.

That, though, was nothing on what was to follow. At least there was the 90 
minutes of normal time in the Military Stadium in which to catch the breath. 
The last quarter-final had been billed as the clash of the two strikers, and 
they added to that sense with a gladiatorial hug before kickoff, but neither 
was greatly involved in a game that was soon bogged down among a wealth of 
burly central midfielders. With extra-time, though, the match came alive. Ivory 
Coast took the lead after Arsenal's Emmanuel Eboue thundered a 30-yard drive 
against the bar, from where it rebounded to Bokari Kone on the edge of the box. 
He gathered and calmly steered a shot through a cluster of players and into a 
bottom corner. Two minutes later Geremi hit the bar, and two minutes after 
that, Cameroon were level, Albert Meyong Ze rolling home after Daniel Ngom Kone 
had taken down Jean Makoun's lofted pass.

In the shootout, Eto'o, with a little stutter, sent Jean-Jacques Tizie the 
wrong way with the first kick, but Drogba immediately levelled, initiating what 
was probably the most perfect sequence of penalties ever seen in an 
international. It was by an 11-10 margin that Ivory Coast won this tournament 
in Senegal in 1992, and once again their stamina was unimpeachable. Every 
player on both sides, including the two goalkeepers, scored - Geremi's effort 
was so powerful that it tore the net from its pegging; Alioum Saidou was 
permitted a second attempt after Jean-Jacques had saved his first effort, the 
goalkeeper having apparently strayed from his line. And so it fell, once again, 
to the two great icons of their teams. With the 41st penalty kick of an 
extraordinary day, Eto'o cracked and sent his kick high over the crossbar; with 
the 42nd, Drogba, calm amid the chaos, sent his nation into the semi-finals.
 