
A vocal campaign to save BBC 6 Music from closure  
<http://www.facebook.com/group.php?gid=278123313911>was rewarded today when the 
BBC Trust said the digital music station will stay open.

The trust said it was opposed to a proposal put forward in March by the 
director general, Mark Thompson, as part of a wide-ranging strategy review.

However, the BBC Trust said it would accept a formal management proposal for 
the closure of 6 Music's digital sister station, BBCAsian Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/asian-network>, provided that it included 
alternative plans for meeting the needs of this ethnic minority audience "in 
different ways".

It said 6 Music <https://www.theguardian.com/media/6music> was encouraging the 
take-up of digital radio among listeners, describing it as a "highly 
distinctive" service that represents "value for money" and is "well liked" by 
its audience.

The BBC Trust <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-trust> said there had 
been "significant public support for the service" and that 78% of nearly 50,000 
online responses to a consultation on the BBC's future focused on 6 Music. The 
trust also received more than 25,000 emails and nearly 250 letters about the 
station, "the great majority" of which opposed the closure plan.

It said BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> managers should be 
increasing 6 Music's average audience of around 600,000 weekly listeners rather 
than shutting the station down.

The trust also said 6 Music does not represent a threat to commercial 
competitors. "Throughout the period of our consultation we have received no 
evidence from the commercial radio sector to suggest that 6 Music represents 
any kind of threat either now or in the future, so long as it remains true to 
its distinctive remit."

BBC executives should consider the future of 6 Music as part of a wider 
examination of how best to improve the performance of its network of digital 
radio stations.

"The trust concludes that, as things stand, the case has not been made for the 
closure of 6 Music," the trust ruled. "The executive should draw up an 
overarching strategy for digital radio. If the director general wanted to 
propose a different shape for the BBC's music radio stations as part of a new 
strategy, the trust would consider it. The trust would consider a formal 
proposal for the closure of the Asian Network, although this must include a 
proposition for meeting the needs of the station's audience in different ways."

Ruling on the other elements of Thompson's strategic review of the BBC's 
activities, the trust said it endorsed the proposal to cut the corporation's 
online budget by 25%, contingent on being able to "understand and approve the 
editorial changes involved".

"The BBC should sharpen online's focus so that it is truly distinctive and has 
clearer editorial vision and control," the trust added.

Thompson's plan to close Blast!, a cross-media service aimed encouraging the 
creative skills of teenagers, was supported by the trust. The BBC's governing 
body said it would leave the decision on the future of BBC Switch, the 
cross-media brand providing content for younger viewers, to management.

On Thompson's proposals for the BBC's TV networks, the trust said it saw no 
need "for radical changes to the current portfolio". "But the BBC needs to 
identify future tipping points where reassessment of the structure will become 
necessary, such as full digital switchover in 2012 and 50% of viewing on a 
non-linear basis. The BBC has more to do to ensure programmes are truly high 
quality and distinctive."

Sir Michael Lyons, the BBC Trust chairman, said: "The director general 
presented us with a thoughtful set of proposals earlier this year in support of 
a clear future vision for the BBC – a vision the trust supports because it is 
rooted in the BBC's enduring mission to inform, educate and entertain audiences 
with programmes and services of high quality, originality and value.

"In order to deliver that vision we have concluded that the BBC must 
accelerate changes to its behaviour, leading to a clearer definition of the 
boundaries within which it operates as it makes the transition to the digital 
future.

"The end result will be a BBC that focuses on its two main obligations to the 
public – to provide distinctive public service content and to use their money 
wisely."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 