
Angus Deayton's sacking from Have I Got News for You helped the BBC1 satirical 
news quiz to nearly 7 million viewers, its biggest audience of the year.

An average of 6.6 million people watched Friday night's episode, up 600,000 on 
the previous week and nearly a million higher than two weeks ago, before the 
latest scandal erupted around the troubled presenter.

The total audience will be nearer 7 million when people who recorded the show 
are taken into account.

Paul Merton temporarily stepped in to the presenter's chair following 
Deayton's sacking last Tuesday with comedian Russ Noble parachuted in as team 
captain to rival Ian Hislop.

The publicity surrounding Deayton's sacking combined with press stories on 
Friday reporting Merton and Hislop's attack on the former team captain will 
have prompted many to tune in for the voyeuristic experience.

But Deayton's sacking did not prove popular with everyone. More than 150 
people have complained to the BBC about the decision to sack him following 
further revelations about his private life.

And more than 70% of the 6,000 viewers who voted in a Teletext poll said he 
should not have been sacked.

Friday's audience accounted for nearly three in 10 viewers watching TV at 
9.30pm. The quiz narrowly beat ITV's big film, Bruce Willis action movie Die 
Hard With a Vengeance, which had 6.4 million viewers at that time.

Have I Got News for You also had more than twice the audience of Channel 4's 
much-hyped celebrity reality show, The Osbournes, which was watched by 2.9 
million, or one in eight viewers.

The heavy metal star narrowly beat the latest in BBC2's Great Britons series, 
which drew 2.8 million viewers.

BBC bosses are planning to use a different presenter each week until the end 
of the current series, when a permanent host is expected to be appointed.

The Weakest Link presenter, Anne Robinson, will host the show this week.

Stephen Fry topped a MediaGuardian.co.uk text message poll as the favourite to 
replace Deayton on the show on a full-time basis.

Clive Anderson and The Kumars at No 42 star Sanjeev Bhaskar have also emerged 
as candidates for the post.

Merton quipped on Friday's show: "I'd like to thank Angus for all his efforts 
in entertaining vast numbers of the general public over the years. How he found 
the energy to do this show as well I'll never know."

In a statement last week, the BBC said stories about Deayton's private life 
had made his position as host of the show "untenable".

It added: "It is felt by all concerned that continuing stories in the media 
about Angus's private life have made him the subject of headlines rather than a 
commentator on them."

Team captain Ian Hislop said yesterday in his column in the Sunday Telegraph: 
"No one expected him to be the Archbishop of Canterbury, but it is not really 
possible to present a satirical programme if you are seen to be sleazier than 
the people you are making jokes about."
 