
Insurers could be forced to pay out more than $1bn (£700m) to cover 
liabilities resulting from the crash yesterday in New York of American Airlines 
flight 587.

The disaster is a further blow to the insurance industry which is already 
coping with the estimated £50bn cost of the September 11 attacks.

Lloyd's of London confirmed it was one of several insurers of the plane, but 
said it was unable to put a figure on expected losses until the exact cause of 
the crash was known.

"We are not the lead underwriter, though we have an involvement," a spokesman 
said.

American Airlines has insurance cover for the cost of the plane, estimated at 
around $80m, and $1.5bn for other li abilities, but the eventual payout is 
unlikely to reach this figure.

Lloyd's exposure will be limited to just $50m (£34m) if the crash turns out to 
be the result of terrorism. After the September 11 atrocities, aviation 
insurers withdrew terrorism cover, prompting a crisis among airlines until 
governments agreed to underwrite the risk. The agreement means that governments 
around the world are responsible for covering airlines' risks of up to about 
$1.5bn in the event of a terror attack.

The lead insurer for American Airlines is Global Aerospace, an agency jointly 
owned by Britain's Royal & SunAlliance and CGNU. The agency spreads the risk 
across its members, which include Munich Re, Zurich, Chubb and Tokio Marine.

A CGNU spokesman said the company's direct exposure is limited, adding that 
its exposure to the September 11 atrocity, which included two American Airlines 
planes, was no more than $35m.

Shares in insurance companies took a battering in afternoon trading following 
the crash. Royal & Sun Alliance fell 4.3%, down 16.5 to 370.5p, while CGNU 
slipped 10p to 857.5p. In New York, Chubb fell 4% while Swiss Re was down 3.5%.

Analysts described the falls as excessive. "The loss in market capitalisation 
already exceeds any potential losses from claims," said analyst Karlos van 
Endert at BNP-Paribas in London.

Insurers globally already face an estimated £45bn-£50bn in claims stemming 
from the September 11 attacks.
 