
The talents which made Tony Howard an exceptional journalist – a clear mind, 
the power of lucid expression and an ability to recall a dozen facts on the 
most recherche subjects – enabled him to write or broadcast, with authority, 
about almost anything except sport. At theListener, where I worked for him for 
two years, he wrote, cogently and entertainingly, about whatever was the 
broadcasting topic of the week and, more recently on arts programmes, he 
expressed informed, if sometimes controversial, views on plays, films and 
exhibitions. But his real interest was politics, particularly the business of 
politics.

Howard was fascinated by the drama of unfolding and unexpected events – the 
way in which the Profumo affair had, by sounding the death knell of deference, 
altered the political landscape and, more recently, the effect of the expenses 
scandal on the relationship between Parliament and the public. Both sensational 
revelations appealed to the iconoclast who lurked inside a man whose origins 
and habits made him appear a natural member of the establishment.

Howard was a paradox – a convinced social democrat who so revered the rules of 
polite conduct that he reproved me for using a mobile telephone in a 
restaurant. For years, he attended a gathering of soi-disant socialist 
intellectuals who aimed, over supper, to change the world. He thought of the 
evenings as amusement – enjoyable, pointless and a fruitful source of the 
dismissive jokes which he made, with relish, to his more politically engaged 
friends.

Tony Howard was a genuine radical. His belief in a world free of prejudice was 
born at Westminster school where he witnessed and abhorred the bullying of 
Jewish boys. As a national service subaltern at Suez, his objection to the 
conspiracy that sought to justify the invasion was so strong that he kept and – 
despite the threat of court martial – published a diary which exposed the 
fiasco which ended in humiliating retreat.

His position on the political spectrum, like his Labour party membership, 
endured to the end. He attempted, without success, to persuade me to vote for 
Diane Abbott in the election of the party's national executive and was an 
enthusiastic admirer of Ken Livingstone. Yet he moved effortlessly, if slightly 
cynically, among sections of society with diametrically opposed views.

He remained Michael Heseltine's friend, and admirer, for more than 50 years – 
partly because he was, by nature, socially ecumenical and partly because his 
friendships, once made, were indestructible. In effect, he wrote Heseltine's 
autobiography. Because we talked to each other about work he often described 
the progress he was making – or failing to make. A frequent complaint was that 
the book was too long. "I keep taking pages out and Michael keeps putting them 
back." The discussions always ended with Howard's firm reminder: "It's 
Michael's book, not mine. I'm just the subeditor." Loyalty was one of Howard's 
conspicuous virtues.

Work on Heseltine's autobiography provided an opportunity to see inside the 
mind of a senior, successful and highly ambitious minister. Howard was not a 
politician manque. Had he wanted a career in Parliament, he would have pursued 
with more determination his two opportunities to make progress towards 
Westminster. He examined the way in which politicians work in the way that 
anthropologists study the behaviour of primitive tribes.

His best books were biographies of RHS Crossman and RA Butler – opposing 
parties, differing personalities but similar commitment to the art of the 
possible. And his most erudite reviews were of works about politics and 
politicians. He took a benevolent interest in several other human species, 
particularly obscure bishops. But his speciality was politicians.

His admiration was selective and he believed, wrongly in my opinion, that the 
quality of MPs had severely deteriorated. Not for him the "professionals" who 
worked away all day on charts and diagrams. The House of Commons was, in his 
opinion, a place for oratory, not statistics. After last year's debate on 
parliamentary allowances, he telephoned me to express delighted surprise that 
John Selwyn Gummer had made what he called "a proper speech". Howard had few 
illusions but remained a romantic who believed that courage and convictions 
were the politician's essential ingredients.

My generation still thinks of Tony Howard as an elegant writer, incisive 
polemicist, hugely successful editor of two national magazines and deputy 
editor of this newspaper. But during the last 10 years of his life he became 
best known as the all-purpose political pundit who appeared on innumerable 
radio and television programmes to discuss either affairs of the day or some 
historical event which was somehow in the news.

His success in that role was not just the result of his inexhaustible 
knowledge. He always spoke like a man who believed what he said as well as one 
who knew what he was talking about. Tony Howard exuded the slightly remote 
integrity which prevented him from rising right to the top of his profession. 
Perhaps he was right to observe, rather than practise, politics.
 