
Having made my decision to transition, the first place I went was the Clare 
Project <http://www.clareproject.org.uk/>. The convenor handed me pages on the 
NHS pathway <http://www.pfc.org.uk/files/BHCPCT.pdf>, the numerous oestrogens 
<http://www.gendertrust.org.uk/n2/docs/gt_is10.pdf> available, hair removal 
<http://www.gendertrust.org.uk/n2/docs/gt_is12.pdf> and surgery 
<http://www.gendertrust.org.uk/n2/docs/gt_is07.pdf>, and told me that the first 
step was to ask my GP for a psychiatric referral.

My doctor warned of a three- to four-month waiting list. Fine, I thought, I'll 
have time to manage things with friends and family. Days later, the letter 
arrived: my assessment would be in two weeks. This is it, I decided. I would 
live as a woman - except at work, as my temporary contract expired in two 
weeks. Why make all that effort for the sake of a fortnight?

I emailed everyone I saw socially - I wanted them to find out from me. I 
covered every issue I thought they might have, before apprehensively pressing 
'send'. Then I went into town to buy essentials for my new life. I picked an 
outfit, trying to assert that I was presenting as female without over-dressing. 
I settled on a black-and-white T-shirt, a knee-length skirt, black tights and 
flat shoes, and set out.

The more 'everyday' my action, the more unfamiliar and frightening it seemed. 
Stepping outside was terrifying - this was nothing likeglamming up for 
genderqueer nights <http://www.pinknews.co.uk/news/articles/2005-8537.html/>. 
The stakes felt sky-high: I'd denied myself the 'off' switch I'd had whenever 
presenting as female meant difficulties. I knew, though, that I was doing the 
right thing.

I had to replace the cheap bra inserts I'd bought on eBay, so my first stop 
was transgender-specific:a shop in Hove <http://www.fantasygirl.co.uk/> that 
caters for anyone on the male-to-female spectrum. I spent £110 on more durable 
breast forms, baulking at the expense but knowing that they'd last until I got 
on hormones. (I've promised these, signed, to a friend once I no longer need 
them. Ifthey appear on eBay, I'll be very annoyed.)

Hungry, I nervously dashed into the Co-op. Would transphobia complicate the 
simple act of buying fruit? No: I bought a banana without judgement from 
cashier or customers, and confidently got the bus home. My initial fear - that 
I'd struggle to walk around town without constant hassle - didn't materialise.

Friends replied to my email: all supportive, many praising my 'bravery'. I 
didn't feel I was being brave: I'd done what was necessary to stay sane. Some, 
particularly my male friends, expressed concerns - they liked me as a man, and 
worried that I was going to 'disappear'. From my transgender perspective, I'd 
underestimated the tribal nature of gender. I was surprised to find that some 
female friends felt I was 'joining' them, whilst some males felt I was 
'leaving' them.

Soon, their anxieties dissipated. The immediate changes were superficial; 
fundamentally, I was the same person. But out for a friend's birthday on the 
second night of my 'real-life experience', I became worryingly aware of how 
strangers might respond. Two men stared at me, then one got up and asked: "Are 
you a bird or a bloke?"

What to do? Demand a third option? Say "woman" in my untrained male voice, or 
some camp-sounding high-pitched tone? "Bloke" seemed the safest, yet least 
comfortable, option. "I thought so," he said. "Nice tits!" He squeezed the 
contents of my bra and left. I sat down, simultaneously violated and relieved.

Two days later, I returned to the Clare Project. I felt less secure: shops had 
refused to serve me, several old friends hadn't returned my email, and I was 
worrying about my family. Their counsellor told me to give my friends time, to 
expect some discrimination, and to bide my time with my parents.

"What if the psychiatrist rules me unfit to transition?" I asked. "He won't," 
said the counsellor. "There's a raft of psychiatrists to go through - this 
referral just checks for any obvious mental health problems. Explain everything 
calmly and you'll be fine."

I went home, slightly reassured. The next day, I returned to work - as male. I 
knew that theGender Recognition Act <http://www.gires.org.uk/GRA.php> prevented 
employers from sacking transitioning staff, but as a temp I could soon be out 
of work, and nothing stops employers passing over transsexuals.

I told my manager, who was helping me find another job within the 
organisation. She told me to consult human resources. The HR manager and I 
decided that if I got another job, I would email everyone I knew explaining my 
transition not just between departments, but also between genders. For now, 
though, I contemplated unemployment - and starting another job in an unknown 
situation. I'd rather stay where I was: I knew it was a welcoming environment, 
and there was another trans woman on my floor who seemed perfectly happy.

My psychiatric assessment was the next day. I nervously entered Hove 
Polyclinic and filled out apreliminary questionnaire 
<http://www.cardiacrehablothian.scot.nhs.uk/docs/HAD Scale - Reference V1.pdf>, 
measuring my depression and anxiety. To my relief, my scores were low - I'd 
heard rumours that the people at the Charing Cross Gender Identity Clinic don't 
like to hear of other psychological difficulties besides gender dysphoria.

The psychiatrist asked the questions I expected - about my childhood, my 
family and friends, my work, my involvement with the transgender community, my 
mental health, my substance use and my sexuality. My fears of rejection were 
unfounded: he scheduled a second appointment, telling me that he would 
recommend me for full reassignment.

To celebrate, I went shopping with a friend. I treated myself to a makeover, 
before getting started on a new wardrobe. Once we were done, I discarded the 
(awful) coat and bag I'd bought years ago, symbolising my shift from 
'cross-dresser' to 'trans woman'. Already, I'd stopped feeling that I was 
living 'as a woman' - I was simplyliving.

I returned to work the next day, and arranged a new temporary role. I told my 
new boss that I was transitioning: no issue, she said. I thought how fortunate 
I was - I must have had one of the easiest beginnings to transition ever. One 
trans friend told me that she lost everything, including her job and her 
relatives. It was tragic. I thanked goodness that I had been able to live and 
work in a relatively accommodating time and place.

There was just one group left to tell: my family.

• Juliet Jacques's column will appear fortnightly. You are invited to post 
comments and questions for Juliet below, and are very welcome to share your own 
experiences.
 