
Ayahuasca, as it has come to be known internationally, is a plant medicine 
that has been used in the Amazon for centuries for healing and spiritual 
purposes. Renowned for the often extraordinary visions it induces - not to 
mention the deep vomiting - it is made from an Amazonian vine known to western 
science as Banisteriopsis caapi and usually at least one other plant.

Over the last 25 years or so ayahuasca has gone global 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/jun/07/peru-ayahuasca-drink-boom-amazon-spirituality-healing>
, with many 1000s of people travelling to Peru and other South American 
countries to drink it, and expert healers - curanderos, shamans, ayahuasqueros, 
maestros - travelling abroad to hold ceremonies. Many drink ayahuasca because 
they’re looking for healing, some are just curious, some mistake it for a 
recreational “drug.”


One of ayahuasca’s pioneer scientific researchers is Dennis McKenna, a US 
ethnopharmacologist and younger brother of the legendary ethnobotanist and 
author Terence. Some years ago, in an article titled “Ayahuasca and Human 
Destiny” published in the Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, McKenna emphasised the 
contribution ayahuasca can make to physical and spiritual healing - “if it is 
ever afforded its rightful place in medical practice” - and addressing 
potential environmental catastrophe.


“[Ayahuasca is] the conduit to a body of profoundly ancient genetic and 
evolutionary wisdom that has long abided in the cosmologies of the indigenous 
peoples of the Amazon who have guarded and protected this knowledge for 
millennia, who learned long ago that the human role is not to be the master of 
nature, but its stewards,” McKenna wrote. “Our destiny, if we are to survive, 
is to nurture nature and to learn from it how to nurture ourselves and our 
fellow beings. This is the lesson that we can learn from ayahuasca, if only we 
pay attention.”


Below are edited excerpts from an interview between McKenna, in the US, and 
the Guardian, in Iquitos, a city in Peru’s Amazon which the scientist calls the 
“epicentre” of the “global ayahuasca movement”:


DM: What can [ayahuasca] do for the environmental movement? I think a lot of 
people, especially if they come to South America, come away with a really 
renewed appreciation for our connection to and the importance of nature. I 
think that ayahuasca is a catalytic influence in changing global environmental 
consciousness, which is something that’s got to happen if we’re going to get 
out of the mess we’re in. The main challenge we have as a species is - getting 
on the soap-box for a minute - we have forgotten our connection to nature. 
We’ve come to the conclusion that we own nature, it exists for us to exploit, 
and we’re busy doing that. We’re destroying it in the process. We’re 
destabilising all of these global mechanisms that keep the biosphere habitable 
by life. I think ayahuasca is waking up a lot of people and reminding them 
that, “No, that’s not the way it is. You monkeys are not running the show. The 
plants are running the show, by sustaining life on earth, if nothing else.” 
There needs to be a global shift of consciousness. People need to understand 
this before they can really begin to change, and so in that sense I think 
ayahuasca is an ambassador from the community of species. The message is 
basically, “Wake up, you monkeys! You’re wrecking the place!” It’s very 
important and interesting that so many people come away with this strong 
message that they’ve really been moved and touched by something that they feel 
is an intelligent entity - an intelligent representative of the natural world.

 Sina Ramirez Rios, a Shipibo curandero singing to ayahuasca before a ceremony 
near Pucallpa in Peru’s Amazon. Photograph: Emilie Lescale 
DH: Why is that? Why does it make clear to people our connection to nature? 
How does it do that? Because it teaches us that the plants and trees are alive, 
in a sense, and are intelligent and sentient?


DM: I don’t think there is a scientific answer. It’s more like a philosophical 
answer, or a spiritual answer. This is the challenge of our time: we have 
separated ourselves from nature and we really need to re-understand that 
relationship, and as part of the community of species, which we are - we may 
deny it, we may forget it, but we are part of the community of species. And I 
think that the community of species is concerned about this problematic primate 
that they have let loose on the planet. As a species, we are simultaneously the 
most dangerous thing that has appeared in the course of evolutionary time and 
we’re also the mostpromising. Indigenous people have this perspective that 
[ayahuasca and other plants] are teachers. They exist to give us guidance and 
wisdom - and I believe that, actually. [Indigenous people] have been the 
stewards of the plants, the stewards of this knowledge, but I think that now 
things are getting desperate on a global scale in terms of the environmental 
catastrophes that are looming. I think there’s a sense in the community of 
species we’ve got to step up the game and these are their tools to contact 
human beings and basically say, “Pay attention because you need to 
re-understand your relationship to nature”, and once that’s understood then you 
have to start making changes. I think one of the challenges of our species - 
one of our problems - is that we’re very, very clever. We can do amazing things 
with our big brains and our opposable thumbs and our ability to use and create 
technology. No doubt that we’re clever. The problem is we’re not wise - and 
that’s the whole thing. I think the message from ayahuasca and all these other 
teacher plants is, “Wise up.” Literally: “Get wise.” So that we can use the 
technologies we’ve invented in a way that supports and sustains life, rather 
than threatens life. That’s really the message. It’s a profound message, but 
it’s a simple one.

 The Banisteriopsis caapi vine, the key ingredient to ayahuasca, known by 
numerous different names throughout the Amazon. Photograph: Emilie Lescale 
DH: Do you feel Peru <https://www.theguardian.com/world/peru> is the centre of 
what you call the “global ayahuasca movement”, or is it more Brazil?


DM: I think it’s Peru. In terms of its interfacing with the West, or Western 
culture, in Brazil, where you find it is through churches [like the Uniao do 
Vegetal], which have adopted ayahuasca as their sacrament. I don’t think 
there’s a big ayahuasca tourism industry in Brazil. It may be happening, but 
Iquitos is definitely the epicentre. People have been coming there regularly 
since about 1995 and it has grown a lot.


DH: Do you think more clinical studies [on ayahuasca] need to be done? That 
that would be positive for ayahuasca in general?


DM: I don’t need clinical studies to convince me ayahuasca is good medicine, 
that it’s helping people, but you can publish them [and it’s] a good way to 
convince skeptical colleagues in biomedicine, rather than just some guy raving 
about how great it is. . . This also grades over into some ethical issues. 
There are multiple ones. This is something that exists in the context of 
traditional medicine. It has already, in a certain way, been co-opted by the 
West through the ayahuasca tourism phenomenon and so on. Is it ethical to try 
and take a medicine like this and stuff it into a biomedical research 
structure? Is that the right way to approach it? I’m not saying that it is and 
I’m not saying that it isn’t. I just think that we have to be clear that there 
are aspects here of taking something out of its traditional context. Can it be 
used that effectively in biomedicine, or do you need the ceremonial ambience? 
It goes back to these hoary principles of setting. Which are very important. 
Does it have to be traditional? I don’t think so, but you could say, “Well, why 
not?” Because this is a Peruvian patrimony. Peru has declared ayahuasca a 
national patrimony, and you could say, “Well, if you’re going to develop 
therapeutic protocols and programs around ayahuasca, why not do them in Peru?” 
You’re not taking it away from anybody. You’re actually creating opportunities 
for Peruvian doctors, scientists and curanderos to work together to develop 
therapies that can help people - essentially taking a page out of the idea of 
medical tourism. Tourists are going to come to take ayahuasca for 
psycho-spiritual reasons. Why can’t they come and take it for medical reasons? 
That’s just an idea.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fandes-to-the-amazon%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fayahuasca-changing-global-environmental-consciousness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba04a5de70c04378a4545f073a039f03ed45f41c%2F206_135_2588_1553%2F2588.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Ayahuasca%20is%20changing%20global%20environmental%20consciousness'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fandes-to-the-amazon%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fayahuasca-changing-global-environmental-consciousness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Ayahuasca%20is%20changing%20global%20environmental%20consciousness%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fandes-to-the-amazon%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fayahuasca-changing-global-environmental-consciousness%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba04a5de70c04378a4545f073a039f03ed45f41c%2F206_135_2588_1553%2F2588.jpg>
 Miguel Ochavano Uquia, a Shipibo maestro working with ayahuasca at the Temple 
of the Way of Light near Iquitos in Peru’s Amazon. Photograph: Temple of the 
Way of Light 
DH: “Medical tourism.” Have you heard that term used by anyone else [regarding 
ayahuasca]?


DM: Medical tourism is kind of a buzz word now, especially in the States 
because of the crazy cost structure of so many medical procedures. . . 
Ayahuasca therapy is not something you can get [here], at least, not legally, 
so if you want to access it you can go to South America. In that sense it’s 
medical tourism. . . I think the ayahuasca tourism thing is definitely a 
two-edged sword. It’s having a lot of negative impacts on indigenous 
communities, but at the same time it’s benefitting a lot of people and, in some 
ways, keeping the tradition alive. But it’s alsochanging that tradition, as 
people start to cater to Western tastes and needs. So what needs to develop, I 
think, is some kind of a fusion of traditional and medical practices that takes 
the best from both and creates some kind of new paradigm. I hope that’s where 
it goes.


DH: What you said there about negative impacts on indigenous communities. . . 
What kind of impacts?


DM: There are multiple ones, but a lot is related to economics: the foreign 
tourists come to a place like Iquitos with their pockets full of money and 
their values and their interests and it can completely skew the economic 
situation. . . [But] it can also be good. Economic influx in communities can be 
a good thing if it’s properly done. Another aspect is that most of the centres 
[offering ayahuasca] around Iquitos aren’t owned by Peruvians. They’re owned by 
foreigners. That’s fine. They’re the ones that have the resources to set these 
things up, but then there’s a temptation to not treat their people well, not 
compensate them well, and then there’s the issue that you get in any kind of 
cult-like situation where you have a very powerful medicine, you have people 
coming in to have these experiences, often they’re put in a vulnerable 
situation because the whole point of the exercise is to go to a place where you 
can open up and examine your deepest, darkest fears and secrets and so on. If 
you happen to be with a curandero who doesn’t necessarily have your best 
interests in mind - there are plenty of those - you can be mistreated. As you 
know, sexual abuse of foreign tourists in ayahuasca centres is not uncommon. 
Ayahuasca, like anything else, is a technology. It’s a tool. It really doesn’t 
have any inherent moral qualities. It can be used in really positive ways and 
really negative ways because the ethics of it originate in the people who use 
it and how they use it and what they use it for.

 Ayahuasca being prepared near Pucallpa in Peru’s Amazon. Photograph: Emilie 
Lescale 
DH: Just to pull back a second. If asked, “Are plants intelligent”, would your 
answer to that be, “Well, obviously, ayahuasca is a good example”?


DM: Yes, ayahuasca is intelligent. Yes, plants are intelligent. Not in the way 
that we are, but in some ways they’re much smarter than we are. It depends on 
how you want to define intelligence, right? If intelligence doesn’t require 
nervous systems, it it doesn’t require brains. . . if intelligence is when 
something reacts to their environment in a way that optimises its adaptation. 
Under that rubric plants are definitely intelligent - but not like we are. They 
don’t have brains and they work on different time-scales. This is part of a 
co-evolution we’re seeing. Co-evolution works on vast time-scales and ayahuasca 
has only been known to the West for less than 150 years. That’s a tiny slice of 
historical time. . . I think we’re only beginning to learn how to use 
ayahuasca, how we use it as a tool to wake up other people because, if you 
haven’t noticed, there’s a great deal of willful ignorance, at least, in the 
States, particularly with regard to environmental issues. Our politicians - at 
least, the Republican side of the equation - are proud of the fact they don’t 
know anything about climate science and they deny that it is even important. 
This is the attitude that needs to be changed. Stupidity is not going to solve 
our problems and yet they’re behaving as though it will. . . Are you familiar 
with the author Michael Pollan?


DH: Yes. Food Rules [the title of a book by Pollan]. 


DM: He wrote a wonderful article in The New Yorker. The Intelligent Plant 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2013/12/23/the-intelligent-plant>. I think 
it really well summarises some of the issues right now that science is looking 
at, in terms of plant intelligence. I mean, a few years ago, you bring that up, 
you’d just be laughed at. Now, not so much. There’s really compelling evidence 
that plants are capable of planning, remembering, dealing with other plants and 
other things. . . Something else we’re learning about intelligence: you don’t 
have to have a brain. Brains are over-rated, you know. What you have to have is 
neural networks - very extensive networks of connections. If you look at 
eco-systems, if you look at forests, if you look at things on the macro-scale, 
these are tremendous, enormous neural networks. You can think of them from that 
perspective, like the connections between the roots of plants and the fungi in 
the soil. These are mycelial networks that can sometimes cover many miles. The 
biggest organisms in the world are actually mushrooms, believe it or not. Not 
psychedelic ones, as far as we know, but they’re mushrooms that grow in the 
forests in Oregon, places like this. They’re a cubic mile in extent. They’re 
80,000 years old. Because the mushroom part is just the reproductive body. 
What’s really going on is the mycelial networks in the soil: the hyphae of the 
fungi is closely associated with the roots of plants, so it’s a very, very 
close symbiotic association. This is the intelligence of plants. This is the 
real thing. This is not just a romantic notion. This actually is real. It’s 
sometimes called the Gaia Hypothesis, originated by James Lovelock, a 
geophysicist and geochemist. . . His basic idea is that the entire biosphere is 
regulated, working together in such a way to keep it within these fairly narrow 
parameters that will support life.


DH: One more thing on plant intelligence. . . There was a book recently 
published,Brilliant Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/radical-conservation/2015/aug/04/plants-intelligent-sentient-book-brilliant-green-internet>
, written by an Italian, Stefano Mancuso.


DM: He’s one of the leading researchers on this right now.


DH: I read the book by Mancuso, which really got me thinking. One of the 
things he doesn’t address is the idea that plants teach humans, that there is
that kind of relationship. 


DM: It’s a bit of a leap for him, but it is definitely where this is trending.


DH: Are you continuing with your scientific research into ayahuasca at the 
moment?


DM: Well, not so much, but I’m interested in moving in to the therapeutic area 
and I would like to do some structured chemical, clinical studies. But I want 
to do them in Peru. And I organize retreats in the Sacred Valley [in the Cusco 
region] at Willka T’ika.


DH: Can I just finish with one more question, Dennis? You say in “Human 
Destiny” [the article published in the Journal of Psychoactive Drugs] “You 
monkeys only think you’re running things.” And that’s quoted, as if someone 
else said it. Is that what your brother Terence said, or is that what you said 
at some point?


DM: It’s what the ayahuasca said.


DH: To who?


DM: Me. 


DH: Ok. And what does it mean? Is the play on “You monkeys only think you’re 
running things?” or am I reading too much into it?


DM: When I took ayahuasca with the Uniao do Vegetal for the first time, in Sao 
Paulo in 1991, I had a very impactful ayahuasca experience in which I was shown 
photosynthesis at the molecular level. Being a plant biochemist I sort of 
understand these processes. It was extremely inspiring to me at the time. The 
take-home lesson was, “You monkeys only think you’re running the show.” It’s in 
my book [The Brotherhood of the Screaming Abyss].

 