
Two days before the low-key release of an unassuming little movie called The 
Dark Knight <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-dark-knight>, and it's all 
happening at London's Dorchester hotel. Or rather it was - this is where Batman 
himself, Christian Bale, allegedly assaulted his mother and sister on Sunday, 
leading to the man in black being quizzed by the boys in blue when he was 
supposed to have been interviewed instead by journalists. (Some would say he 
took the pleasanter option.)

No one knows yet what prompted Bale to allegedly lash out - perhaps his family 
members made the mistake of asking him how much weight he lost for The 
Machinist, or what it was like to act alongside the lateHeath Ledger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/heathledger>, two questions which he must by 
now be hearing in his sleep.

With banks of paparazzi assembled outside the hotel, publicists tearing 
pell-mell along the corridors and reporters going stir crazy waiting in the 
hospitality room for some word on Bale's manoeuvres (I swear I saw one 
journalist piling the complimentary Bounty bars into her clutch-purse in a 
moment of hysteria), sanctuaries of calm are hard to come by. But the suite in 
which the actorAaron Eckhart <https://www.theguardian.com/film/aaron-eckhart> 
has been installed, to discuss his role as Gotham City's district attorney 
Harvey Dent in The Dark Knight, fits that description. Eckhart suddenly finds 
himself the flag-bearer for the UK release of this record-breaking blockbuster 
($158m and counting), now that one of the movie's two stars is helping police 
with their enquiries, and the other one is reachable only by ouija board.

The 40-year-old actor, who has the blond locks of a Californian surfer and the 
jaw of Roger Ramjet, is a tranquil presence who rakes over the characters he 
has played - most of them dislikeable, some downright reprehensible - with an 
air of amusement.

Harvey Dent is different. It could be said that the entire moral journey of 
The Dark Knight is borne by this one man. He starts out as an idealistic DA who 
measures his success by the amount of mobsters who want his head on a platter. 
And while Ledger's snivelling, lip-smacking Joker can't help but eclipse the 
other characters, and the entire film, it is Eckhart's Harvey Dent, not Bale's 
Bruce Wayne/Batman, who provides the picture's humane centre - and not only 
because Eckhart looks like someone it might be fun to shoot pool with, whereas 
Bale resembles a sleek new gadget you'd find cover-mounted on a men's magazine.

The key to Eckhart's portrayal of Dent lies in the highly visible struggles he 
has with his conscience when he is driven to abandon the law. Even as he 
emerges from an explosion with half his flesh torn off, and wanders into a bar 
with one eyeball bulging from its socket and a network of exposed facial nerves 
like piano strings, he remains wrenchingly human. His character might acquire a 
comic-book moniker ("Harvey Two-Face") but Eckhart plays it straight, keeps it 
real.

"Harvey's such a rich, fascinating character," he says. "He's got this love 
for Gotham, the same way Batman has, only he protects the city legitimately, 
within the confines of the law, whereas Batman works in the shadows. It was fun 
for me to play the kind of white knight. And then when he turns into Harvey 
Two-Face, you understand where these extreme feelings come from. You can see 
very clearly where all the characters start out. With Bruce Wayne, it goes back 
toBatman <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/batman> Begins. With the Joker, 
even though he's really at the same place throughout the movie, you can see 
these glimmers of humanity; he's been scarred, and it's affected him deeply. I 
think these are the things that give the film its depth."

The Dark Knight also displays an unusual degree of moral investigation, which 
peaks when the formerly honourable Dent presides over the beating of one of the 
Joker's henchmen. "It's so pertinent!" enthuses Eckhart. "Chris [Nolan, the 
director and co-writer] says there wasn't a political agenda to the film, but 
everything in it touches on these contemporary issues. There's someone 
terrorising your city - how do you get information out of them? What lengths 
will you go to? Will you kill someone? When I read the script, I was thinking: 
Jeez, this is right up our alley. As an audience member, you find yourself 
asking some very deep moral questions."

Eckhart, who is only just starting to pop up in gossip columns since the 
tabloids got wind of his rumoured closeness with Jennifer Aniston, is well 
known by now for choosing roles that attempt to put the viewer on the spot. "I 
have to say, that stuff attracts me," he says of the various cads, bounders and 
bastards he has played. "I like my characters to stay out in front, to have the 
slash-and-burn mentality. They plough through things, they don't look behind 
them, they don't see the wreckage. I feel that plays to my strengths."

The most reliable source for such parts has been his friend Neil Labute. He 
gave the actor one of his first film roles as the despicable Chad, whose 
sustained humiliation and emotional torture of a hearing-impaired co-worker 
drove Labute's 1997 debut In The Company Of Men. "I don't tend to play crude or 
violent men," he notes. "I wouldn't be attracted to playing drug addicts or 
wife-beaters. I like white-collar psychological crime, and Neil writes that 
stuff very well. There's a deliciousness as an actor in being able to go all 
the way, to not feel guilt or remorse."

The pair teamed up again on Your Friends and Neighbours (1998), Nurse Betty 
(2000) and Possession (2002), but I don't think Eckhart's best work has been 
with Labute, or among the self-conscious conundrums of the dreadful Thank You 
For Smoking (2006) (or, for that matter, playing chefs-in-love with Catherine 
Zeta-Jones in No Reservations). He's subtler and far more surprising in The 
Dark Knight, or as the benevolent biker in Erin Brockovich (2000), where he 
found interesting nuances in a part that was essentially Mr Nice Guy.

Eckhart and Labute met at Brigham Young University. "We were both going 
nowhere, struggling to get jobs, and that really bonded us. That and the fact 
that we thought we were talented and no one else did. There's nothing like 
rejection to bring two people together - 'The whole world's wrong and we're 
right,' that kind of thing. In fact, we're still like that. He emailed me last 
night. Our whole thing lately is, 'Let's do it again. Let's do something even 
more out there, let's go shock 'em once more.' And we will."

In the mean time, Eckhart is doing it on his own. His next film is Towelhead, 
the directorial debut of Alan Ball, who scripted American Beauty and created 
the HBO series Six Feet Under. Eckhart plays a married man who falls in love 
with his next-door neighbour. It could be the basis of a farce or a romcom if 
that neighbour were not a 13-year-old Iranian-American girl.

I go to tell him it sounds like his most unsavoury character yet, but he 
interrupts me - "It sounds like my demise?" he laughs, trying to pre-empt what 
I was going to say. "There's no doubt he's the least appealing person I've ever 
played. He's seemingly upstanding, disenchanted with life, and meets this girl 
who reinvigorates him. And he falls in love with her. You have to find the 
heart in it, otherwise you're just playing an animal. That's what Alan said - 
'This guy loves this girl.' That's why it's worth doing. I don't play bad guys. 
I play human beings. That's where the drama is."
 