
César Martinelli published the original Catalan edition of Conversaciones con 
Gaudí in 1951. As a young student, and later as a novice architect, the young 
Martinelli had a series of encounters with Gaudí in which the maestro revealed 
his philosophy of art, architecture, life and religion. Martinelli transcribed 
the conversations from memory as soon as he returned to his rooms, and while 
the exact words may not be Gaudí's they recall his voice with extraordinary 
power. 


January 23 1915 
 The Greeks, whose temples were of Pantelic marble - a marble as crystalline 
as sugar, transparent and of a sublime beauty - had nevertheless no hesitation 
in painting over it. Because colour is life, and we should not scorn this means 
of instilling life in our works.

Colour is life, and the clearest manifestation of death is lack of colour. 
Carved stone roses are not true roses because the greatest part of the beauty 
of roses is in their colour, which the carved ones do not have.

The inhabitants of countries bathed by the Mediterranean feel beauty more 
intensely than those of the north. The Nordic peoples do not have the plastic 
vision of life, which we understand so easily. We have a responsibility to 
transmit this in our works, in whose form our mode of being should be revealed.

Some people believe Barcelona is a rich city because the facades of its 
buildings have more richness than those of the north. That is true; but not 
because we have more wealth, but because of our spirit, which makes us strive 
to enhance and extend that richness. The women of Barcelona wear more expensive 
clothes than those of the north. But this does not prove great wealth either. 
We have a good climate, light and sun which encourages us to walk outside, so 
our women have more reason to adorn themselves to pass time in the street. Our 
genius makes us seem richer than those in the north, and encourages them to pay 
inflated prices for works by Mediterranean artists.

We of the Mediterranean have a better perception of form, and of all that can 
be appreciated with the visual sense. Doctors, and surgeons in particular, 
place great emphasis on the sense of touch, but it is not so important. Touch 
is limited, it is an analytical sense. Vision, on the other hand, is synthetic; 
the whole is greater than the parts. Life can only be appreciated through sight.

February 3 1915 
 Commerce has always been the protector of the arts. Greece - whose artistic 
taste is the most refined that has ever existed - was very much a trading 
nation. Italy, and its former republics of Venice and Genoa, a nation of 
sailors who navigated all the oceans and concentrated the commerce of the known 
world, was the cradle of sublime artists and built beautiful monuments, which 
are the object of universal admiration.

Aside from artistic worth, such monuments have a true capital value for the 
nations that possess them, a value revealed in the revenues brought by the 
tourists who visit. Commercially important cultures can, at the same time, also 
be centres of intense artistic vitality.

February 7 1915 
 The gothic is an industrial art, which is why it repeats elements 
irrespective of proportion. And it attempts to hide false structural forms by 
placing ornament wherever it distracts attention. The praises that have been 
dedicated to gothic art are literary in nature, often seeing it as an 
embodiment of Romanticism (in the novelistic sense). A gothic building acquires 
its most perfect expression in a ruined state, covered in ivy and seen by 
moonlight - that is to say when hardly anything can be seen clearly.

February 21 1915 
 Do not seek art and beauty in the north. Light in the north and the tropics 
does not fall at 45 degrees - the angle at which objects are most perfectly 
illuminated. Lack of light, or excessive light from directly overhead, makes 
objects in these places appear deformed; rather than the object, we see a 
phantom of the object. The Mediterranean peoples are accustomed to seeing 
images, not phantoms; we are more imaginative than fantastical and therefore 
better suited to the plastic arts.

September 29 1918 
 I have never been a supporter of centralised lighting. If a space must be 
illuminated by a single light source then the centre is the correct place for 
it. But we can now produce luminescence of extreme power, and we should temper 
it somewhat. Central lighting can no longer be justified. In contrast, light 
sources on walls or against pillars meet surfaces in which they can be 
reflected and offer opportunities to hide spotlights which adds a greater 
richness and variety to the room.

Of all trades, electricians are the most ignorant. They perform tasks as a 
simple job with no aesthetic sense. For them there is no architecture, no 
harmony. They take no account of mouldings or exquisite details. They would 
illuminate everything equally. They prefer the light source to be visible even 
though it flattens a space rather than illuminates it. Beauty does not belong 
to any particular style. Every artist has tried to make his work not just good, 
but better than anyone else has achieved before. So we, in our work, can find 
beauty in the elements that belong to any style from any age.

Biography

1852: Born on June 25 in Reus, Spain. 


1863-68: Attends secondary school at the Colegio de los Padres Escolapios. 


1869: Moves to Barcelona for pre-university studies. 


1873-77: Studies architecture at the Escola Provincial d'Arquitectura in 
Barcelona.


1878-79: Awarded first public contract to design street lamps in Barcelona. 


1878: Designs windows for a glove manufacturer; through this, Eusebi Güell, 
who later becomes his patron, is acquainted with his work. Designs a workers 
cooperative settlement in Mataro; the project is displayed at the World 
Exhibition in Barcelona.


1882: Works closely with Joan Martorell's agency. 


1883: Appointed architect of the Sagrada Familia. 


1884-87: Builds the entrance and stables for the Güell estate. 


1886-89: Builds a town palace for Güell in Barcelona. 


1892: Designs the Franciscan mission at Tangier. 


1898-1900: Builds the Casa Calvet in Barcelona, and the city awards him a 
prize for best building of the year in 1900.


1900-1914: Constructs Park Güell. 


1906: Moves into a house in Park Güell. 


1906-1910: Casa Milà, Gaudí's largest apartment complex, is constructed. 


1914-26: Dedicates himself solely to the construction of the Sagrada Familia. 


1926: On June 7 he is run over by a tram outside the Sagrada Familia; he is 
taken to a pauper's hospital because of his ragged appearance and dies three 
days later.
 