
The government’s own advisers on A-level reform have warned that scrapping the 
AS-level could “seriously damage” the uptake of mathematics.

AS-level exams, taken in year 12 and worth half an A-level, are to be 
abolished under the government’s overhaul of qualifications. The move, the most 
controversial in former education secretaryMichael Gove’s curriculum reforms, 
has been opposed by headteachers, teachers, academics, leading universities and 
subject specialists. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/jan/23/michael-gove-a-level-reforms>

Now a body set up by the government to advise on the content of the new 
A-levels <https://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels> has stepped outside 
its remit to attack the policy, which will see the AS-level uncoupled from the 
A-level and turned into a standalone qualification. One member said the effect 
on further maths, in particular, could be “absolutely devastating”.

In a letter to the education secretary Nicky Morgan, the A-level Content 
Advisory Board <http://alcab.org.uk/> (Alcab), which is made up of academics 
representing leading universities, said the return to the traditional A-level, 
with examinations only taken at the end of a two-year course, could threaten 
the recovery in numbers which this year has seen maths overtake English as the 
most popular A-level for the first time.

Professor Richard Craster, who is chair of the board’s maths panel and 
professor of applied maths at Imperial College London, warned in the letter 
that a decrease in the uptake of A-level maths, particularly further maths, 
would mean that disadvantaged students had less chance of getting into the 
“very best universities”.

His comments are a major embarrassment to the government, which set up the 
board in 2013to guide its exam watchdog, Ofqual, on what the new curriculum 
should look like 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/may/01/gcse-alevels-easier-says-ofqual>
. The structure of the exams was outside the board’s remit, but such was the 
strength of feeling among the panel that its “serious concerns” about the loss 
of the AS-level were put in a letter to Gove which said “serious damage” would 
be done to “the uptake across maths A-level” unless time was given for a 
“staged approach with piloting”.

The letter continued: “Although we recognise that the government plans to move 
to linearity in all A-level subjects, this is a serious concern for the maths 
community. It could well be that maths is not best served by a strictly linear 
syllabus.”

The board also criticised plans for the standalone AS in further maths to be 
worth just 40% of an A-level in university entry requirement points, describing 
it as “yet another serious concern”.

It raised fears that proposed changes to the maths GCSE could also add to the 
“downward pressure on student uptake of A-level, particularly from the state 
sector”.

Maths A-level has seen a major resurgence under the two-part A-level 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/aug/14/a-level-maths-overtakes-english-students-harder-subjects>
, which will be scrapped from 2017. Numbers of students going on to study the 
subject beyond GCSE have risen from 52,788 in 2004, just after the introduction 
of the AS-level, to 88,816 this year. The numbers taking A-level further maths 
has risen by 152% over the same period. Teachers, academics and exam boards 
attribute much of the rise to the “stepping stone” effect of the AS-level.

Professor Alice Rogers, a member of Alcab’s maths panel and a professor in 
theoretical physics at King’s College London, said that scrapping the AS would 
deter girls from taking maths. “Uptake is a big concern,” she said. “The AS 
allows students to dip their toe in the water rather than plunging straight 
into A-level.

“I think the risk will, in particular, bear down heavily on girls’ choices and 
there is already a concern about the proportion of girls who take A-level 
maths. Girls are less inclined to take risks and often have more choice at 
A-level because they have a bigger spread of good GCSEs.”

Another panel member, who wanted to remain anonymous, warned of the 
“absolutely devastating” impact on further maths. “Many pupils do not know 
exactly what they want to do. Being able to test it out by doing an AS that has 
value is enormously important,” he said.

Tristram Hunt, the shadow education secretary, who has pledged to save the 
current AS-level, said: “The Tories are turning the clock back on social 
mobility. David Cameron’s regressive policy to end the current AS-level 
qualification will close the window of opportunity for many young people 
wanting to go to university.

“We need more young people pursuing the study of mathematics, but this policy 
is going to make that less likely. This is damaging both the life chances of 
young people and our future economic competitiveness as a nation.”

A DfE spokesperson said: “Returning exams to a linear structure means students 
will no longer have to endure the exam treadmill of constant testing and can 
develop a deeper understanding of the subject. Richard Craster has said the 
proposed maths and further maths A-levels will ‘educate and engage students 
with the high level material necessary for entering university courses’. The 
Alcab subject panel has not provided any evidence that moving to a linear 
structure will impact on take up.

“As part of our plan for education, we have trebled funding for the Further 
Maths Support Programme to £5m a year for three years, set up the ‘Core Maths’ 
qualification to offer around 200,000 teenagers a third option for studying 
maths post-16 and established a network of 32 Maths Hubs to look at new ways of 
raising post-GCSE participation in maths.”

 * This article was amended on 13 October 2014 to include a quote from a DfE 
spokesperson.
 