
The Budweiser brewer Anheuser-Busch has been accused of encouraging a "locker 
room" and "frat party" corporate atmosphere in a sex discrimination lawsuit 
filed by a former senior executive who was responsible for tailoring the 
company's public image.

Francine Katz, a former chief communications officer at Anheuser, has alleged 
that the beer company maintained gender disparities in pay, excluded women from 
"informal social networks" and reassigned responsibilities from female 
executives to use as rewards for male colleagues.

A 20-year veteran at the company, Katz quit Anheuser at the end of last year 
after a$46bn (£28bn) takeover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/jun/11/useconomy.usa> by Belgium's 
InBev. She says she realised, from documents circulated during the deal, that 
her base salary and bonus were far below those of male colleagues.

The lawsuit, which was rejected as "unjustified" by Anheuser, is a potential 
embarrassment to the Anheuser-Busch InBev conglomerate which makes drinks 
ranging from Stella Artois to Bass and Bud Light. During her tenure Katz was 
the firm's public voice, overseeing corporate social responsibility and the 
recruitment of minorities. Katz was one of Anheuser's most senior female 
executives – her lawsuit says that in 2002, she became the first woman to serve 
on the company's strategy committee, a body comprising the firm's top 15-20 
executives setting corporate direction. At that time, she was given a pay and 
bonus package of $500,000 but she says her male predecessor had received 
$1.25m. She said this disparity continued.

In a press statement yesterday, Katz said she tried to discuss her 
compensation with superiors, including former chairmanAugust Busch III 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/August_Busch_III>, on several occasions, but her 
requests were "ignored or met with hostility and misinformation".

She said she only realised the extent of the alleged gap in pay when Anheuser 
was taken over: "It wasn't until the company was being sold to InBev last year 
that I learned the truth."

Anheuser's takeover by InBev sparked dismay and controversy in St Louis, the 
midwestern home city of Budweiser. Critics argued that a US icon was being sold 
into overseas hands and there were short-lived attempts by Budweiser 
enthusiasts to organise a boycott and to protest against the deal.

Anheuser said in a statement that the company believed Katz was compensated 
fairly and treated "in compliance with all relevant laws and internal 
standards".

It continued: "Our company firmly believes in treating all employees fairly 
and values the differences of all employees, specifically prohibiting any form 
of discrimination based on a person's gender, race, religion, sexual 
orientation, national origin, disability or other prohibited factor."
 