
While the separation of church and state is enshrined in the Australian 
constitution, the presence of religion has never been far beneath the surface 
of our political system.

The Australian Labor party is in many ways a creature of the Catholic church, 
emerging as it did from the devout Irish working classes of the 1850s; the 
internal split that fractured the party through the 1950s and 1960s driven by a 
determination to fight the godless communist insurgency.

On the other side, a conservative party built on the Protestant work ethic and 
increasingly influenced by a God-fearing fundamentalist flank inspired by the 
Pentecostal fervour that created the religious right in the United States.

Unions, clubs, churches. Joining something might be the best act of resistance 
| Peter Lewis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/23/unions-clubs-churches-joining-something-might-be-the-best-act-of-resistance>
On issues as diverse as marriage equality and IVF, euthanasia and the 
treatment of refugees, articles of faith have been both an anchor point and an 
organising tool for contentious political debates.

But as we have pointed out recently, with traditional membership of churches 
on the decline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/23/unions-clubs-churches-joining-something-might-be-the-best-act-of-resistance>
 the impact of organised religion on the body politics is waning.

This week’s Essential Report attacks the faith issue from an alternate angle 
by asking people: what happens to us when we die? After all, the post-life 
condition is a fundamental marker of faith or its absence.
Where do you believe you go after you die? 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/tools/tables/embed/index.html?spreadsheet=1u5KrbrPma0tGiKxKyWDU5ZYN5SPk041MXTFlFcyoDsk>
What we find is a strong atheist contingent who see nothing at the end of 
their mortal coil. A further 25% in the agnostic camp are unable to commit.


This leaves the largest cohort – 43% – heading to a range of spiritual 
destinations such as an afterlife (27%), coming back for another crack (9%) and 
shuffling off somewhere else (7%).

As is our habit, we couldn’t help ourselves checking on voter profile – where 
the most striking finding is the consistency of belief across political 
affiliation. While Greens are significantly more likely to see no future 
destination, major party voters match each other tightly on their beliefs.

Turning our attention to specific issues and the spiritual crosstabs yields a 
little extra data.
Climate change is 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/tools/tables/embed/index.html?spreadsheet=1MbJEKfbQN3TzxRSFJwb6JpDOQ5CzlKsi5UlrNZPKEkY>
If you are agnostic about where you are headed you are less likely to blame 
climate change on human activity. Unsurprisingly perhaps, you are also more 
likely to answer don’t know.


In contrast, if you have a definite view of your future post-expiration, you 
are more likely to also have a definite view on our changing climate.

On a more immediately relevant issue to the hereafter the insights are less 
intuitive.
Euthanasia should 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/tools/tables/embed/index.html?spreadsheet=1KRTHHgQCWglOcx_9cyT0ByoktWNyJ4ScagQhMPIB50I>
While agnostics again are overrepresented in the “don’t know” camp, it is the 
strong overrepresentation of atheists among supporters of voluntary euthanasia 
that bears scrutiny.


On one level these people are free from the religious dogma that reifies the 
sanctity of life. On the other, they are more likely to embrace a fast-track to 
the ultimate destination, even though they don’t expect much of a view.

So is there a point to this exercise other than to prove that this time of 
year I have too much time on my hands?

Like any research, look hard enough and it gives you a few things to chew on.

First, despite the deviations, on issues that really go to the core of who we 
are, the differences in political worldview of the spiritual and atheist only 
exist at the margins.

On its surface this suggests we have succeeded in our federation’s founders 
aspiration of separating church and state; our political identities are not 
rooted to our spiritual personas.

I would contend that this represents a change from the politics of the 20th 
century, where church commitment was stronger, as were debates about the 
fundamentals of our political system while the battle between capitalism and 
communism played out.

Yes there has been a particular focus on modern political debates about the 
impact of Islam on politics since 9/11, but this is engaged with as an issue of 
national security, not as one of faith.

But if the fading away of a spiritual frame to our politics has been partly 
caused by the decline of the traditional religious institutions, it has also 
been fuelled by the silence of our political participants.

With rare exceptions, Australian politicians do not link their own sense of 
spirituality to the issues they advocate for or oppose: instead they tend to 
oscillate between dead managerialism of technocratic jargon and the overwrought 
hyperbole of populism.

Rare is the contribution that grounds politics and policy into the more 
fundamental aspects of our human condition.

Trust in public institutions keeps declining. This week the disdain went a 
step further | Peter Lewis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/02/trust-in-public-institutions-keeps-declining-this-week-the-disdain-went-a-step-further>
I find this particularly missing in our discussions about the existential 
threat of climate change. We give lip service to the need to leave the planet 
to our children, but we shy from a deeper engagement with our own raison d’être.

Likewise with debates around health and aging; we fall into the 
problem-solution, budget-burden, don’t-touch-Medicare mode without giving voice 
to the inevitability of death.

This is not a call for the privileging of certain spiritual views above others 
or, God forbid, trying to convert atheists or agnostics (or vice versa). It is 
simply an observation that much that dulls the passion in our discourse starts 
with our tendency to shy from the existential.

Something about our political culture means our leaders don’t feel compelled 
to intone “God Bless Australia” when addressing the masses, and that’s a good 
thing.

But it would be refreshing to hear our leaders grappling with these deeper 
issues, if only to assist us build a stronger bridge between our own inner 
worlds and the one we share.
 