
When Cath injected herself with heroin, unaware it had been contaminated by 
anthrax, her wrist immediately began to swell and turn red. The pain was 
shocking. But she felt only anger and irritation.

"I wanted my usual buzz," she said. "I'd been a heroin addict for 23 years. I 
knew I'd spiked my vein properly. I couldn't understand why the gear wasn't 
working."

So she injected herself a second time. This time her entire arm swelled up. 
The red turned to purple. It spread up towards her elbow and down towards her 
fingers. The pain intensified but the drug high still didn't come.

It was 2010 and Cath had infected herself with anthrax at the height of the 
largest single common-source outbreak of human anthrax in Britain in more than 
50 years. The deaths spread across Europe: 126 cases were eventually 
identified, including 119 in the UK. At least 14 people died.

This week health experts said a second drug user had died of anthrax in 
Blackpool <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/blackpool>, weeks after the first 
such death in the town.

During the 2010 outbreak, everyone in Cath's community knew of the risks. Her 
needle-exchange clinic had posters warning that heroin contaminated with 
anthrax could kill and listing the symptoms. News of deaths and amputations 
caused by the disease spread across the drug users' grapevine. But Cath 
couldn't care less. "My eyes slid over those posters," she says. "I didn't 
think of my body as something I needed to keep alive – it was a just a piece of 
skin with veins that I could put drugs into."

That day, as she watched her arm turn from purple to black, she just felt 
annoyed that her elusive hit hadn't materialised. She injected herself a third 
time. Finally, the opiate kicked in.

When she woke, hours later, sweat was pouring off her and the pain in her arm 
was excruciating. "It still didn't occur to me that the heroin had been 
contaminated," she said. "I just thought it was another abscess."

Cath was so used to abscesses that she barely bothered going to hospital to 
have them treated, not caring that doctors had considered amputating her 
infected arms and feet on a number of occasions.

After three days, however, she was unable to stand the pain any longer. 
Diagnosed with anthrax, she was immediately put on an intravenous, antibiotic 
drip – the only vein to be found was in her neck. She was told an amputation 
was the most likely option but that death was a possibility.

"I couldn't compute that I had anthrax," she said. "It was the stuff of 
terrorism and war to me. But it didn't make me think I should stop taking 
heroin. All I was worried about was that if they amputated my right arm, I'd 
have to learn how to inject with my left."

Cath was lucky. The antibiotics killed the infection and on the fourth day, 
she was given 28 pills to take every day for two weeks and sent home. The first 
thing she did was to call her dealer.

Last week, for the first time since the 2010 outbreak, the European Centre for 
Disease Prevention and Control, and the European Monitoring Centre forDrugs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/drugs> and Drug Addiction admitted Europe 
was again in the grip of an anthrax outbreak, probably linked to contaminated 
heroin.

There have been 10 cases identified across Europe since early June. The 
official advice from theHealth <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> 
Protection Agency (HPA) is that more cases are to be expected.

"It's likely that further cases among people who inject heroin will be 
identified as part of the ongoing outbreak in EU countries," said Dr Fortune 
Ncube, an expert in blood-borne viruses with the HPA. "The Department of Health 
has alerted the NHS of the possibility of people who inject drugs presenting to 
emergency departments and walk-in clinics with symptoms suggestive of anthrax."

How the anthrax found its way into the heroin this time has puzzled police and 
health experts. In 2010, the contamination in the UK was eventually traced to a 
single batch infected with anthrax spores from an infected goat or contaminated 
hide somewhere in transit between Afghanistan or Pakistan and Scotland, 
probably in Turkey.

There are other causes. Heroin can be naturally contaminated after harvesting 
from soil where an animal had died from anthrax. It can also can be 
contaminated if infected bone meal is used during the cutting process.

Whatever the source, experts are highly critical of the advice that has been 
given to users in the past fortnight.

Often, when there is a health scare among drug users, the advice government 
hands down through treatment agencies is to use drugs in safer ways. With HIV, 
for example, users were encouraged to use needle exchanges. This time, however, 
the advice is simple: stop using heroin and seek help from local treatment 
centres, which can provide support including substitute medication.

That, according to some experts, is impracticable. They say that in an 
environment where it can take users six months to get access to heroin 
substitutes such as methadone or Subutex, asking users to stop using is futile.

The National Treatment Agency for Substance Misuse disputes this timescale. It 
says the average waiting time to get treatment in England is five days – the 
lowest it has ever been – and even quicker in an emergency.

"The HPA campaign assumes users know what they're doing," said Mark Styles, a 
director for the DetoxPlus and Pierpoint addiction treatment centres in St 
Annes-on-Sea, near Blackpool. "That's one hell of a presumption."

Styles has come across half a dozen cases of anthrax in his 16 years of 
working with heroin users. "They're not remotely interested in the risk of 
contracting anthrax," he said. "To tell someone with a drug addiction that they 
need to stop taking the drug, is like telling me I can't drink water."

Scott March agrees. An addict for 16 years, he eventually detoxed last year. 
March knows of at least four people who have died from anthrax linked to 
contaminated heroin. "It was scary to be using drugs, knowing it could have 
anthrax in, but the urge to use is so powerful, that there's no fear strong 
enough to stop you," he said. "Even if you knew your needle was full of 
contaminated heroin, the fear wouldn't be strong enough. You can't see past the 
denial."

In the unlikely event that users were engaged enough to care about infection, 
added Styles, they would probably not spot its onset. "The symptoms of anthrax 
are minor compared to the horrendous physical effects of taking heroin. Users 
are suffering so much anyway that they're simply not going to notice any 
difference," he said.

Cath was aware she could infect herself with anthrax a second time after 
leaving hospital. "The contaminated drugs were still going around," she said. 
"But my urge to use again was stronger than my will to live."

Nine months after her anthrax infection, however, she decided to detox. "I 
didn't give up immediately after having anthrax but it did make something click 
very subtly inside me," she said.

Cath has now been clean for two years, including more than a year of 
treatment. She has trained as an aromatherapist and masseuse. "If I can give 
up, then anyone can – with determination and good treatment," she said.

"I had anthrax, been an addict for 23 years and had got to the point where I 
was effectively not human: I was rotting, I lived like a rabid, stray dog. But 
now I love life now and my family are proud of me. When she looks at me, my mum 
doesn't have anguish in her eyes any more."
 