
Adam Peaty’s lifeguard, Deborah Hood-Leverett, leans over the reception 
counter of his local swimming pool and proudly shows off her iPhone: her 
background is a beaming selfie with the Olympic champion taken just a week 
before he flew to Rio. “I said: ‘I better get a photo now because you won’t 
want to know me when you’ve got a gold medal’,” she says.


A swimming teacher at Repton school in Derbyshire <http://www.repton.org.uk/>, 
Hood-Leverett watched with a tear in her eye as the 21-year-old local lad won 
Olympic gold in the early hours of Monday morning – smashing a world record in 
the process. “To sit up in that high chair and watch him swim, I find it quite 
a privilege,” she adds. “When he comes back I’ll want a better photo.”


Peaty started training at the independent boarding school, near his hometown 
of Uttoxeter on the outskirts ofDerby <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/derby>, 
five years ago when his coach Mel Marshall spotted his extraordinary talent and 
wanted to train him alongside her day job as a swimming teacher.


Now he pulls up several times a week in his red Mercedes at 5am for a two-hour 
training session, usually followed by a gruelling gym workout and often a 
mid-evening swim. Staff here once saw him collapse on to Marshall after 
completing an exhausting weights session, such is his ferocious work ethic.


“He’s our hero. You just wait for the water to rub off on you,” says a regular 
swimmer at Peaty’s world champion-making pool.


In the school’s sprawling sports centre, a signed shirt and swimming cap 
decorate the reception wall. Ian Pollock, the school’s director of sport, asked 
Peaty for the memento after he won Commonwealth gold at the Glasgow games two 
years ago.

“He was in the pool and I shouted down to Mel to ask him for a hat for the 
wall,” Pollock recalls. “Adam literally took that hat off his head in the 
middle of a training session. He joked that it’s a world champion hat so it’s 
probably a fast one. That’s the sort of bloke he is.”


As Peaty’s grandmother Mavis became an internet sensation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/08/rio-2016-adam-peatys-grandmother-olympicnan-celebrates-win-on-twitter>
 as she cheered him on from her Uttoxeter living room,an army of 200 fans, 
family and fellow club swimmers 
<https://twitter.com/Cityofderbysc/status/762476519381872642> descended on 
Repton school to watch the action at 3am, passing round homemade cakes and soft 
drinks. “I tried for alcohol and they told me off,” says Richard Pilcher, one 
of Peaty’s coaches at the City of Derby club.


In British swimming circles, the 21-year-old has been a star in the making 
since he started making waves in 2012. But it wasn’t always that way. His 
parents have told how his fear of water led to tears at bath time and a loud 
refusal to get into the pool as he climbed up his mother Caroline’s arms.


It was, Pilcher says, a twist of fate that brought Peaty to Marshall’s 
attention: “Mel was looking at this other swimmer, a 14-year-old lad, at Dove 
Valley swimming club – but he wouldn’t go [training with Mel] unless he could 
take a friend to Derby. And that friend wasAdam Peaty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-peaty>.”


And despite his world-beating breaststroke, Peaty’s front crawl wasn’t 
actually very good for a 14-year-old, Pilcher says: “Mel tells me she put him 
in one of the lower lanes with younger girls when he first arrived.”


Steve Layton, the City of Derby swimming club secretary, has known Peaty since 
2009. He has “self-belief like you wouldn’t believe,” Layton says, and a “very 
calming demeanour” that inspires not only his teammates but also the younger 
teenagers with whom he shares a pool.


The club has several future stars on its books, including teenagers Ellie 
Baldwin, Sarah Vasey, Harriet Cooper and 14-year-old Greg Butler, who is 
currently the country’s top breaststroker in his age group and whom Pilcher 
said “could be the next Adam Peaty”.


But there are uncertain times ahead for swimming in Derby. Three pools in the 
east Midlands cityhave closed in the last year 
<http://www.uttoxeteradvertiser.co.uk/future-swimming-derby-adam-peaty-trained-risk/story-28679344-detail/story.html>
 due to cuts in council funding, meaning the club has had to train outside the 
city – some nine and 10-year-olds training 40 minutes away in Loughborough late 
on Friday evenings.


“For an Olympic year we’ve been very strained. It’s been very difficult,” says 
Pilcher. “We’re starting to form good grassroots at the club and we don’t want 
that to be tarnished.”


For Peaty, his sights are now set on Friday’s 4x100m medley relay and 
potentially another gold medal for Team GB. There will be a major party in 
Uttoxeter when their local hero returns from Rio – and it won’t just be at his 
nan’s house.

 