
Ancient “hobbit-like” humans who lived on an island in Indonesia thousands of 
years ago died out far sooner than thought, and modern humans could have been 
to blame.

First reported in 2004, and officially named Homo floresiensis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/aug/16/flores-hobbit-human-downs-syndrome-claim-homo-floresiensis>
, the fossilised remains of the hobbit-like hominins were unearthed in the 
Liang Bua cave on the Indonesian island of Flores. Just over a metre tall, the 
long-lost species had elongated feet and a brain the size of a grapefruit.


The original studies of the remains and the deposits around them suggested the 
creatures could have lived as recently as 12,000 years ago. But new research 
now overturns that idea, proposing instead that our long-footed cousins 
disappeared at least 50,000 years ago - and hints that humans might have played 
a role in their demise.


Biting off more than it can chew: human ancestor struggled to eat hard foods
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/08/biting-off-more-than-it-can-chew-human-ancestor-struggled-to-eat-hard-foods>
“The new understanding of the dates make a lot more coherent sense in terms of 
the evidence of what we know about modern human dispersal,” says Matthew 
Tocheri, an author of the study from Lakehead University, Ontario. Over the 
past 100,000 years, extinction events followed modern humans wherever they 
went, he said. “It is not always the case the humans are the sole factor,” he 
added. “But they are often in the right place at the right time to at least be 
a part of the reason.”


The idea that Homo floresiensis was alive and kicking until 12,000 years ago 
arose from theteam’s previous work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2004/oct/28/evolution.science>. Carbon 
dating of charcoal remains in the cave suggested a range of dates between 
19,000 and 12,000 years ago, while other evidence from the site pushed the 
dates further back - a tooth from a dwarf elephant-like creature,Stegodon 
florensis insularis 
<http://palaeo.gly.bris.ac.uk/macro/islandrule/Indonesia.html>, found with the 
remains was dated to around 74,000 years ago. When all the evidence was 
analysed, scientists concluded thatHomo floresiensis disappeared between 95,000 
and 12,000 years ago.

Since modern humans arrived in Australia around 50,000 years ago, the dating 
suggested thatHomo floresiensis could have been rubbing its hairy shoulders 
with our ancestors for up to 40,000 years.

But the new research paints a rather different picture.


Writing in the journal Nature, the international team of scientists have 
revealed <http://nature.com/articles/doi:10.1038/nature17179>that new 
excavations and analysis at Liang Bua date theHomo floresiensis remains to 
between 100,000 and 60,000 years ago, meaning that the species disappeared much 
earlier than previously thought.

The revelation came as the team delved deeper into the nature of the sediments 
forming the cave floor at Liang Bua. They discovered that the layers in which 
the fossils were found had been eroded to the north of the cave, producing a 
slope where younger material built up.


“They were unknowingly excavating a mixture of much older and much younger 
sediment,” said Professor Chris Stringer, head of human origins at the Natural 
History Museum in London.


As a result, the charcoal samples previously used to date the fossils were in 
fact deposited long after the diminutive creatures died. By analysing uneroded 
layers of the cave floor whereHomo floresiensis was found, together with the 
remains themselves, the scientists discovered that the remains are far older 
than previously thought. Other evidence supported their conclusions. In the 
same deposits in whichHomo floresiensis was found, the team recovered thousands 
of stone tools, said Tocheri, which have been dated to between 190,000 and 
50,000 years old.

This face tells us why we must rethink our views on our ancestors
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/sep/13/homo-naledi-new-light-orogins-of-species>
While the new results overturn the notion that modern humans and Homo 
floresiensis might have lived side-by-side for around 40,000 years, the study 
raises an intriguing possibility. “If modern humans had reached Australia by 
50,000 years ago, they didn’t jump over the islands - they would have been in 
south-east Asia a little bit earlier than that,” says Tocheri. That, he says, 
raises the question of whether the arrival of modern humans had something to do 
with the demise of their hobbit-like relations. “The timing of that, with 
modern humans potentially at least moving through the area, is quite 
suspicious,” he said.

Stringer agrees. “That population, we think, has lasted there potentially for 
more than a million years. So what changes? What changes is modern humans 
coming to the area, we believe, about 50,000 years ago,” he said. “It is 
probably economic competition - they are not necessarily conducting warfare or 
hunting floresiensis,” Stringer added. “But even hunting the same animals, 
eating the same plant resources, wanting to live in the best environments, that 
will remove the resources that the floresiensis needed.”


Whether or not modern humans turn out to be the guilty culprits of the 
hobbits’ demise, Tocheri believes the remains are a poignant reminder of our 
place in the world. “Even if they went extinct on their own they are an 
important reminder of how much diversity, morphologically, behaviourally and 
genetically, our human family has lost in the past several hundred thousand 
years,” he said. “We are the only ones remaining.”

 