
We are still in the car on the way up from the station, when Antonio Carluccio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/antonio-carluccio> embarks on his 
List of Things That Make Me Really Cross. Item one: the busybodies who stop 
people picking wild mushrooms in the New Forest. 'In the entire world mushrooms 
are allowed to be picked,' he says in his thick, Italian accent, unmitigated by 
his 30 years in Britain. 'But here they say it ruin the environment. If it was 
true then France and Italy would be out of mushrooms because everybody there 
pick them.' I wonder out loud if the author of A Passion for Mushrooms - the 
man known to his grandchildren as Grandpa Cep - is to blame for the rampant way 
in which we harvest mushrooms in Britain. 'Not true,' he says. 'I always say do 
it ecologically. I put a code of conduct in my book.' He tells me, proudly, 
that it includes instructions to take toilet paper on mushrooming trips. 'In 
case, you know, the people they have a need.' I am stumped for an appropriate 
response.

Happily, we have soon arrived at the thatched weekend cottage in the Hampshire 
hills where his wife Priscilla, is waiting for us. It is a beautiful place with 
gnarled beams and bare plaster walls and an open fire that makes everything 
smell of wood smoke, including me. The ceilings are low and they counsel me, 
sweetly, to mind my head. 'It's alright for us,' says Priscilla, looking fondly 
at her husband. 'We're little dumpty people.' It's a fair description. Now in 
their late sixties, they have a comforting roundness: Antonio with his white 
lambswool curls which, famously, he cuts himself and his pleasing boulder of a 
head and those eyes that disappear to a crinkle when he smiles; Priscilla, 
dressed in something baggy and black, with a tousle of a grey bob. But looks 
should not deceive. There is steel beneath this softness. They both have lots 
of things they like to be exceptionally pissed off about.

Not that they have good cause to be cross with the world. Late last year they 
floated their two-dozen-strong chain of Carluccio's Caffés on the Alternative 
Investment Market. The Caffés - clean, modern spaces with delicatessens at the 
front selling branded Carluccio's goods like pasta and sauces, restaurants at 
the back with a menu of solid Italian classics - did well on the market, which 
wasn't surprising. They already serve over 60,000 people a week and have 
trebled their turnover since 2002. They owned 20 per cent of the business and 
it is estimated the two of them earned around £10 million from the deal. After 
years in direct day-to-day management, they are now just consultants, although 
Antonio will always be there at each new opening, of which there are going to 
be plenty. The management team has talked about as many as 100 Carluccio's 
Caffés across the country. They are open from early until late and this year, 
OFM readers have given them the award for best breakfast. Antonio looks very 
pleased but a little bemused. 'Breakfast is the good thing in Britain. It is 
the thing done very well.'

As against everything else, which, one quickly comes to understand, we do very 
badly indeed. For years Antonio has been banging on about this: that we do not 
respect food enough here, that we do not take enough care over it, that, quite 
frankly, we have no taste. I wonder whether the success of the Caffés suggests 
that his lectures have finally been successful; that the job is done. 'Not 
yet,' he says. 'I have more things to do. My intention is not to educate. It is 
to enthuse people about the taste of Italian food.' I ask him what is missing 
in Britain. 'What is missing is the historical teaching of mother to daughter.' 
In Britain, he says, family has disintegrated, and inside the family is the 
best place to learn about food.

I have always been a little suspicious of this romantic notion of the 
loveliness of family. A lot of the time, it seems to me, extended family can be 
a living hell. And surely Antonio and Priscilla must know this too? After all 
they've had loads of them. Antonio had been married twice by the time he met 
Priscilla in the early 1980s. Priscilla, who is Terence Conran's sister, has 
three, now grown-up, children by a previous marriage.

Antonio shrugs. 'In the family you learn both toughness and sweetness,' he 
says. 'In my family you have rows, yes. But producing good food is an act of 
love as well as necessity.'

This gets us on to the wonders of Italy, a place Antonio left when he was 
still in his twenties. He was born in the south but grew up in Piedmont in the 
north, son of a station master and one of seven children. After he left home in 
his early twenties he worked his way through Austria and Germany as a wine 
merchant before landing in Britain in the 1970s. Though he has travelled there 
for his books and television shows, and for the business, he has displayed 
absolutely no desire to go back to living in Italy. Still he holds it up as a 
model of all that is good in food. 'The Italian poor people, they still try to 
get the best food they can. They have the know-how.' He says that in Italy even 
the 'poor people' will want to have 'a sniff of a truffle'.

The problem, Antonio says, is that the British never saw food as a pleasure. 
And that's because of the supermarkets. 'Here the quality of food is dictated 
by the supermarkets and the buyers at the supermarkets, they don't know about 
food.' He tells me that in French supermarkets everything is much better. Again 
I'm not convinced this is true. Anybody who has walked around a mega-branch of 
Carrefour will find the familiar mix of processed drek, and bagged-up salads. 
'But in French supermarkets they have seasonal food as well,' he says. 
Naturally, because Antonio is bloody cross about most things, he doesn't think 
the farmers' markets movement is up to much either. 'Too much of that stuff, it 
come from far away.'

Via farmers' markets we have stumbled onto interesting territory: the aching 
middle-classness of foodies in Britain. It's a culture which for all their 
virtues - and they are many - the Caffés seem to play to. They are found on 
affluent high streets in Esher and St Albans, Windsor and Oxford. Just as 
Terence Conran's Habitat was, visiting one is as much a statement of lifestyle 
as the things you might buy there. This is no coincidence. For years, until 
1989, Priscilla was chief buyer for her brother's stores. Famously, on an early 
buying trip to India, they independently chose the same carpet out of a stock 
of thousands, and Terence declared that his sister was blessed with exactly his 
taste. And his business acumen. As we talk, the division of labour in the 
Carluccio household becomes clear. Antonio's job is to be Antonio: to enthuse 
about food and scold us, and talk about his enthusiasm for foraging for wild 
foods and whittling hazel sticks. Priscilla's job is to market Antonio. He is 
her brand.

The Caffés were her idea. In 1981, the year they married, Terence Conran asked 
his brother-in-law if he would like to take over the running of a restaurant he 
owned in Neal Street in London's Covent Garden. Although Antonio had no 
professional chef training, he was a gifted amateur cook who had already won a 
newspaper cookery competition. Eventually they bought the restaurant outright 
and in 1991 opened a delicatessen next door. They began working on a range of 
branded goods which, until recently, were available in shops across Britain. 
(Now they are sold only in the Caffés.) In 1999, building on the success of 
Antonio's books and TV series, Priscilla decided that the shop could be used as 
model for a new kind of café. Or Caffé. After a huge effort to raise finance, 
the first opened that year just off London's Oxford Street.

Given that she wants the food culture in the whole of Britain to improve, does 
the middle-classness of the business bother her? 'It's not meant to be a 
middle-class thing. It's meant to be for everybody.' There are even some 
branches, she says, where builders eat.

There is, says Antonio, jumping in, a problem with eating out in Britain. 
'Here it is about going out. Food is second.' On this Priscilla agrees with her 
husband. 'I think the whole thing about being seen in the right place is a 
bore.' I suggest that her brother's restaurants are too much like that, and she 
looks affronted. 'Terence wouldn't agree with that.' Perhaps not, but it's hard 
not to think of, say, Quaglino's with its big sweeping staircase, designed for 
making an entrance, without seeing it in those terms. Still, it's unfair to 
question the sister on the brother's business.

In any case Antonio has moved on. He likes a historical perspective and, to 
his mind, the great Elizabeth David should take some of the blame for the 
problems with food in Britain. He mentions that he cooked for her once, while 
she was in hospital, and that he found her very difficult. 'She is 
co-responsible because she presented all that stuff from abroad. She didn't 
make enough of food from Britain.' Given that Antonio is most famous for his 
wild-mushroom risottos rather than his Lancashire hotpots, this seems a little 
unfair. I wonder whether living here for so long hasn't driven him mad. 'Yes, 
completely,' he says. 'Especially you go to the Italian restaurants and they do 
it so badly.'

Yet another of Antonio's gripes: that it's the Italian food which is awful 
here, as well as the British food, despite the efforts he has made to improve 
it. He wants me to know how much good he has done for Italian food in the UK. 
He tells me that it was because of the baking they did at Neal Street that we 
have focaccia in Britain, and mentions that in 1999 he was awarded the 
Commendatore OMRI, Italy's equivalent of a knighthood, for services to Italian 
food abroad. The Caffés have also been invited to join a prestigious society of 
quality Italian brands. He says that it's not only Italian restaurants in 
Britain that do terrible things. It's restaurants in Italy, too. 'Now I've 
written a book about Italy I discovered we have many recipes that mustn't be 
forgotten,' he says. 'Too many chefs in Italy already forget.' He mentions 
being served an oyster with chocolate in Italy once and looks genuinely 
distressed at the memory.

He believes the good things should not be mucked about with. To prove it, for 
lunch, he serves a starter of hand-cut tagliolini made at Neal Street, served 
just with butter, parmesan and lemon. It's delicious. After that, a dish of 
mutton he came up with to mark Prince Charles's marriage to Camilla, except it 
wasn't something that was actually served. 'I sent him the recipe. He sent me a 
very nice letter back.' It's a light stew of sweet mutton chops with soft pears 
and French beans, though Antonio isn't happy with the beans because he thinks 
Priscilla didn't cook them properly. 'Of course,' she says wearily, 'it has to 
be my fault.' After that, a fine quince tart.

As we talk over lunch, it becomes clear that Antonio genuinely doesn't feel he 
has been recognised for the work he has done. When I mention having interviewed 
Jamie Oliver for a public event recently and that he needed a bodyguard, 
Antonio wants me to know that, on a trip to Australia, he, too needed 
bodyguards. 'They love me there, because I bring to them the classic way of 
cooking Italian.' He tells me not once, but twice, that he has written to the 
BBC about a new TV series he wants to do but that they have rejected the idea. 
'I want to do something more educational but they seem to have got rid of all 
the foreign chefs.'

We have come to the end of lunch and I still want to know if he thinks food in 
Britain really is still as bad as it always was. It seems absurd to me to 
suggest that nothing has changed since the 1970s. Antonio concedes that things 
are better. 'Maybe 65 per cent of the time it has improved.' From the other 
side of the table Priscilla scoffs. 'I don't think so. You only have to look at 
the shelves in the supermarkets to realise that most of what is being sold is 
not very good for you.' I comment on this constant banter between them. Antonio 
rolls his eyes. 'I have contra all the time from her.' Priscilla shrugs. 'I 
think that's healthy.' Antonio leans towards me. 'Probably if you talked to an 
Italian not married to an Englishwoman you would have a more pleasing 
interview.' Wearily Priscilla shakes her head and starts clearing the table.OFM
 