
 “A few years ago, I couldn’t even go out of the house by myself,” says Daniel 
Mynott. That was before he started getting involved in sport. “Now, I go all 
over London and the country. I have so many friends I’ve lost count. I even 
have my own car.”

Mynott has autism. A few years ago, when he was 15, the Change Foundation 
<http://www.thechangefoundation.org.uk/> turned up at his school and encouraged 
him to try taking part in sport. “I hated sport,” he says. “I was lazy as hell, 
but they saw my potential, they saw I was good with people. Gradually, I fell 
in love with it.”


Mynott’s people skills led him into coaching, and he now works for the Change 
Foundation as a development officer. He coaches “cricket, football, dodgeball, 
you name it,” although his passion is cricket.


“Cricket is all about communication; if you don’t talk, it doesn’t work,” he 
says. Finding communication and social interaction difficult is a typical 
characteristic of autism, and most traditional therapies focus on the 
importance of developing social skills. However, with sport, it happens 
naturally.


“It changes you without you knowing it,” says Mynott. “Because all the focus 
is on the game.”


There can be a tendency to encourage people with autism into individual 
activities such as running and swimming, where the need to communicate is less 
important. There have been successful autistic athletes in these sports, such 
as the 2012 Paralympics gold-medal-winning swimmerJessica-Jane Applegate 
<http://www.jessicajaneapplegate.com/>.


Those who prefer individual sports will still gain social benefits through 
their relationships with the coaches or other participants, but Mynott 
recommends team sports. “I wouldn’t have had all these benefits if I’d done an 
individual sport,” he says.


Amy Webster, coordinator of the Active for Autism 
<http://www.autism.org.uk/active> programme at the National Autistic Society 
<http://www.autism.org.uk/>, agrees. “There’s a massive misconception that 
people with autism can’t do team sports,” she says. “They can.”


Webster coaches a mixed disability football team and travels the country 
training sports coaches in how to deal with autism.


“The beauty, but also the struggle, of autism is that each person is 
different. So, as a coach, you have to adapt. What works for one person might 
not work for another.”


Some typical barriers may include difficulty with body language, the colour of 
the clothes, even the whistle. If a player has a problem with a coach’s 
whistle, for example, she says the coach could try visual aids, such as red or 
green cones.


Mynott says the key to being a successful coach to someone with autism is 
building trust. “Everything else flows from that,” he says. It was his 
relationship with his coach that led him to discover his love of sport.

 He says his coaching ethos is to start slowly, focusing on an activity or a 
practice routine for as long as it takes until the person is ready to join in 
with a group.

Improved social skills is not the only thing to be gained from taking part in 
sport. Research in the US found that children with autism were more likely to 
be overweight than other children. This was often linked to the increased 
barriers stopping them from being active.


Overcoming these barriers can have far-reaching benefits. As well as the 
physical and mental gains from returning to a healthy weight, research has 
shown that taking part in sport can decrease the frequency of negative, 
self-stimulating behaviours common among people with autism, such as body 
rocking or head nodding. Additionally, exercise can discourage aggressive and 
self-injurious behaviour and improve one’s attention span.


Carol Povey, director at the National Autistic Society’s Centre of Autism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/autism>, says getting involved in sport 
can have a huge impact on the self-esteem of someone with autism. “This is 
really important,” she says. “One mother told me that playing football helped 
her son immensely, because when he was playing with the team no one thought 
about his autism – he was just another team member.”


But what if you’re no good at sport? Isn’t there a risk – one that would also 
apply to people without autism – that it can lead to frustration and hurt your 
self-esteem even more?


Webster says she trains coaches to be aware of this and suggests changing the 
targets to make them more realistic. “Winning and losing can be a big 
struggle,” she says. “Make the goal simply to make a good pass or to join in 
with the group.”


Povey says it is important not to make blanket assumptions when it comes to 
autism; as with everyone else, some people will love sport and some will hate 
it. “But when it works,” she says, “it works really well.”

 