
'They said they were going to give us ostrich eggs,' Esther Mbarga, aged 49, 
recalls. "'They're huge,' they said. 'Come and we'll give them to you.'" Aged 
ten or eleven, she and her friends had never seen an ostrich egg. They were 
really excited. They were taken deep into the bush and waited expectantly. 
Then, one at a time, they were led off to have their genitalia mutilated. 
Esther was pinned to the ground by four women and cut by a fifth. She limped 
away bleeding and crying. It was hard to walk and urination was incredibly 
painful for days afterwards. For some reason, the women weren't happy with the 
excision. On further checking they decided that there was more to cut. They cut 
more the following day and yet more a week later.

Esther lives in Burkina Faso where female genital mutilation is not legal but 
is still carried out covertly. Female genital mutilation comprises 'all 
procedures involving partial or total removal of the external female genitalia 
or other injury to the female genital organs for non-medical reasons'. Not only 
may the clitoris be partially or wholly removed, but also one or both of the 
labia. Sometimes the vaginal orifice is narrowed by cutting and repositioning 
the labia. The World Health Organisation estimates that 91.5 million girls over 
the age of 9 in Africa have been mutilated in one of these ways. According to 
the most recent U.N. statistics, 72.5% of women in Burkina Faso aged between 15 
and 49 have undergone genital mutilation. In the majority of cases this 
procedure is arranged and carried out by the older women in a community.

As well as violating a woman's human rights and causing short term pain and 
trauma, a mutilated woman may suffer chronic pain and urinary infections for 
the rest of her life. Her sexual enjoyment is inevitably diminished, she may be 
unable to give birth normally and her child is more likely to die during or 
immediately after birth.

Some say that the practice began when men, going to war, wanted to ensure the 
fidelity of their wives. The reason given today is that it prevents women from 
being promiscuous. That was why Esther and her friends were cut: 'our parents 
believed that if a girl was not cut she would love boys a lot and be unfaithful 
to her husband.'

Certainly, sex is far less enjoyable for a woman who has been mutilated. It 
may even be very painful. Oumoul Koulsoum Bouda, aged 24, remembers, 'My cousin 
was married for two years. They couldn't make love. Each time it hurt her and 
she cried.' It seems paradoxical, when this practice is carried out for the 
sake of the husband, that men often cite the fact that a wife either doesn't 
want to have sex or isn't good at it as a reason for divorce.

In 2008 the World Health Organisation produced an interagency statement 
reaffirming a commitment to eliminate female genital mutilation within a 
generation. In Burkina Faso, the government has made a commitment to eradicate 
the practice through educational efforts. Joining the fight are numerous NGOs, 
such as RECIF, PromoFemmes and The Association of Women Jurists. However, 
governmental or institutional awareness that FGM is unacceptable is not enough 
– the men and women of Burkina Faso need to feel the same way. Attitudes to 
women must change.

As it stands now, the 'ideal' Burkinabe woman is submissive to her husband. 
'Before you go to your husband's house, there's a little ceremony,' says 
Oumoul. 'The old women give you advice: don't disobey your husband… even if he 
does something you don't like, keep quiet about it.' After marriage, a woman's 
family may be unsupportive if she tries to stand up for herself. 'If a woman 
goes to her family with a legitimate grievance, they're likely to tell her to 
calm down and go home.'

A woman who does not conform to society's ideal is a source of shame to her 
family. Oumoul's grandmother wanted her granddaughter to be mutilated because 
she said it would be a source of shame to her if she wasn't. 'She said her 
friends would mock her.'

Isabelle Zongo works for Marie Stopes International in Burkina Faso. 'Shame 
plays a very powerful factor in promulgating social conventions,' she says. 
'Even if a wife wants to leave her husband - be it for domestic violence, 
insistence on mutilating daughters or other reasons - there is really nothing 
she can do. She cannot leave and go to her family for support as she will bring 
shame on her family for acting outside social conventions. Because of the 
weight that shame carries, many women withstand domestic violence and are 
unable to seek any kind of help for fear of bringing shame on their family.'

The future isn't entirely bleak, however. Among educated men and women, at 
least, attitudes are changing. Mothers are beginning to refuse to have their 
daughters mutilated - Oumoul's mother was one of them. Oumoul herself believes 
that women must start to stand up for themselves and should never become 
dependent on a man. When asked which women she admires she replies, 'Ellen 
Johnson-Surleaf and Angela Merkel.'

As for Esther, she believes that the answer lies in Christianity. A woman, she 
says, should only be submissive to God and a husband should love his wife like 
Christ loved his church. She is adamant that she will not have her own daughter 
mutilated. 'Enough is enough,' she says. 'If it wasn't good, God wouldn't have 
made it. If God made it, why should man remove it?

This longlisted article was published on 23 July 2009. It was written for the 
Guardian's International Development Journalism Competition between 1 April and 
22 June 2009.
 