
It was Guus Hiddink who had best summed up the pressure on the Parisians. “A 
big club has to win aChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague>,” he had offered on the 
eve of this tie, his soundbite lost amid a rather rambling assessment of the 
contest ahead, even if his words still struck a chord with the locals. It is on 
occasions such as this, a collision with one of the recently established elite, 
when Paris Saint-Germain’s progress is properly gauged and when credence is 
given to their bid to become one of European football’s powerhouses. At times 
this felt as if it could descend into a night of frustration. Instead, it ended 
as one of jubilation.

This was not the thrashing the French had hoped to impose on a side 12th in 
the Premier League, a marker laid down as they progress further in the 
competition, but Laurent Blanc’s team still have a lead with which to travel to 
London for next month’s return. They will consider the reality that Chelsea 
must retrieve a deficit as cause for optimism, confident they will be able to 
wound on the counter where Lucas Moura and Ángel Dí María will be ever eager to 
spring upfield at pace. Perhaps the fact this was never the walkover some had 
envisaged may actually work in their favour. PSG were dominant but they were 
also exposed at times. Their advantage is only slender. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/16/paris-saint-germain-chelsea-champions-league-match-report>
 Reminders they will not sleepwalk into another quarter-final may be timely.

Edinson Cavani’s low shot gives PSG winning edge over Chelsea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/16/paris-saint-germain-chelsea-champions-league-match-report>
Yet there was also evidence that a team who sweep all before them virtually 
every week in Ligue 1 can raise their standards further when confronted by 
Europe’s established elite. At home, PSG find life utterly uncompetitive to the 
tune of 35 unbeaten league matches and a fourth successive title sure to be 
secured before March is out. Their goal difference is already 51, the gap to 
second place extending to 24 points. The monopoly of domestic silverware is 
taken for granted in a championship chase warped by Qatari money but, aside 
from building a brand, the owners’ target has always been a first European Cup. 
Victories like this reinforce the belief that heightened level of ambition is 
far from folly.

The manner in which Blanc’s team tore into Chelsea reflected an underlying 
expectation to progress that has never really carried this club before. Two 
years ago they were squeezed out byChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> on away goals, succumbing 
naively in the second leg in London. Retreat 12 months and they were already 
more streetwise, returning the compliment with a blend of resilience and 
brilliance at Stamford Bridge but progress still felt like a watershed. This 
time around they had hoped to stampede their opponents, PSG’s intent 
demonstrated by Lucas’ dispossession of Cesc Fàbregas within 40 seconds.

It is the class of their attacking ranks that marks them out. Lucas was a live 
wire, all swerving skill and searing pace from flank to centre, and the 
Brazilian would eventually eke out the free-kick from whichZlatan Ibrahimovic 
opened the scoring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/feb/16/paris-saint-germain-v-chelsea-champions-league-live>
. The Swede is their talisman, a player of proper presence, even if that 
deflected reward was only his eighth goal in 37 Champions League knockout ties. 
He will travel to London with a point to prove given that last year’s sending 
off in that arena, with hispost-match complaints 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/12/zlatan-ibrahimovic-chelsea-babies-red-card>
 about “crying” home players, still smarts.

In midfield there is snarl and energy with Blaise Matuidi and Marco Verratti, 
the 23-year-old Italian now secured to terms until 2020, a busy combination 
buzzing around Thiago Motta’s steadying influence. Then there is Di María. The 
recruitment of the Argentinean, despite that rather incongruous season feeling 
unloved at Manchester United, was a key step in the Qatari strategy: a player 
whose willingness to come to Paris with his best years still potentially ahead 
of him changed a mindset. “With Di María’s arrival we moved from ‘PSG can’t win 
the Champions League’ to ‘With him PSG can win it’,” Blanc said.

The 28-year-old, true to recent resurgent form, was more recognisable as the 
creator-in-chief voted man of the match as Real Madrid secured La Decima in 
2014, his feet a blur as he eked out space and spread panic. There had been one 
exquisite pass slid for Lucas to collect beyond Gary Cahill and bear down on 
goal. When he drifted infield, the overworked Thibaut Courtois was forced to 
tip over swerving shots from distance. It would be Di María’s assist for 
Edinson Cavani that edged his side back in front. Di María will be as potent a 
threat in the return as he seeks to remind English football of his capabilities.

Yet, for all that Courtois’ heroics kept Chelsea afloat, there were also 
reminders this competition can drive to distraction those who consider 
themselves contenders. If PSG were the more imposing team, Chelsea retained the 
capability to knock them from their perch. Kevin Trapp had already saved 
astoundingly from Diego Costa by the time Mikel John Obi forced Chelsea level. 
There were flashes of indecision across a backline not used to being tested 
and, where Oscar could not capitalise, those mouthwatering attacking talents at 
Real Madrid, Bayern Munich or Barcelona might have made hay.

“Our target had been not to concede, and we failed in that much,” Blanc said. 
Therein lay the warning. Regardless, PSG will still travel with confidence. 
That is all they know these days.
 