
Alesha Dixon <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alesha-dixon> is visibly 
excited. "I'm buzzing," she says, seated on a sofa in a vast white room in a 
London hotel. "I feel really fulfilled." The cause is not the forthcoming 
release of her second solo album, The Alesha Show, although she is "really 
pleased", not just with the music it contains (mostly produced by Xenomania, 
the secretive hit-making team behind Girls Aloud), but with the fact that it's 
actually going to be released at all. This alone makes it a marked improvement 
on her 2006 debut Fired Up, which her record label pulled before it even 
reached the shops, after a couple of preceding singles flopped.

Nor is her excitement caused by the recent triumph of Strictly Come Dancing, 
the reality show she won last Christmas, at the National Television Awards, 
although she went along to help collect the gong and witness its effect on 
Simon Cowell, who wore Strictly's victory over X Factor and Britain's Got 
Talent with his trademark charm and good grace. "His face was a picture. Oh my 
God. It was better than actually winning."

These, however, seem to be mere trifles compared to the fact that Dixon has 
spent the morning in the company of DJ Nick Ferrari. It's difficult to imagine 
anyone being this thrilled at meeting the rightwing shock jock and wannabe Tory 
candidate for London mayor (his big ideas included marching prison inmates 
across town in shackles), but she lobbied hard to appear on his LBC breakfast 
show. Perhaps understandably, her record company expressed some puzzlement as 
to how bandying words with Ferrari was supposed to help relaunch a pop career.

"It's the only programme I've ever asked my radio plugger to get me on," she 
gushes. In fairness, Dixon always gushes. Her words flood out, punctuated by a 
deafening and impressively filthy laugh, yet they're undercut by a certain 
steeliness. "It was great," she goes on. "You do so many interviews about 
trivial things, but with this, I got to talk about Jonathan Ross and Russell 
Brand. I got to talk about multiculturalism. I got to talk about politics."

Getting to talk about politics turns out to be rather a hobby-horse with 
Dixon, which she admits comes as a surprise even to those closest to her: "My 
manager said, 'When you started talking about Question Time, I nearly choked on 
my cornflakes.'" She gives another deafening laugh. After Strictly, she says, 
she was offered a lot of presenting work, "programmes about footballers' wives 
and things like that", but she turned them down.

If someone had offered her a show "dealing with social issues and current 
affairs, but for a younger audience", it might have been different. She is 
perhaps the only Strictly Come Dancing contestant to have parlayed her mastery 
of the cha-cha-cha into appearances on BBC1's late night politics show This 
Week. "I was sitting there feeling slightly out of my depth, but I'm putting 
myself in these environments that scare me. I took part in a women's seminar 
with Gordon Brown's wife recently, talking about women in the media. And I'm 
going to Downing Street next week. I'm going to have breakfast with Sarah 
Brown. I'm just dying to get my little foot into Downing Street."

Her comeback appears to be going rather well. "It's different every day," she 
says, "keeps you on your toes." It might reasonably be suggested that, at 30, 
Dixon's career has already contained enough surprises to keep her on her toes 
for life. She was born in Welwyn Garden City to an English mother and a 
Jamaican father, the latter unimpressed by her abandoning plans to become a PE 
teacher in favour of singing. "I'll never forget that conversation. He said, 
'Well, I understand that you love singing, but you have to look at the market, 
and there aren't many successful British black artists.' I remember saying to 
him, 'I can't make my decisions in life based on other people's successes and 
failures.' I thank my dad, because he gave me the drive to say, 'You know what? 
I'm going to prove we can sell.'"

Mis-Teeq, the girl group she joined, did indeed go on to sell: two platinum 
albums and seven top 10 singles in three years, tours in Australia and Asia. 
The only time Dixon had been abroad before was "on a ferry with my family to 
France when I was five". The band offered a clever amalgam of pop, R&B and the 
then-voguish sound of UK garage. Dixon was the band's rapper, although she says 
some of her lyrics make her cringe now. "'We're young fresh wise turned 
celebrities, muh-nuh-muh-nuh move your b-b-bodies -' rubbish lyric, but it was 
sort of the thing that gave Mis-Teeq our edge."

They succeeded in making garage family-friendly and were linked to the genre's 
other big success story, So Solid Crew, because Dixon was engaged to their 
rapper Michael Harvey. But while So Solid seemed incapable of disassociating 
themselves from the violence that surrounded the garage scene, Mis-Teeq were 
asked to appear at Buckingham Palace. By 2004, there was even talk of them 
breaking America. They had a hit there with a single called Scandalous, but 
while they were promoting it, their record label in England went bankrupt - 
largely, it was reported, because it had pumped vast sums into Victoria 
Beckham's solo career, although the million-pound deal for a Pop Idol runner-up 
called Rosie Ribbons probably didn't help much.

In any case, Dixon was tiring of being in a band, and the others wanted to go 
out on a high, so Mis-Teeq broke up, rather abruptly - but, Dixon insists, 
amicably. Two big things happened in 2005: Dixon launched a solo career and 
married Harvey, at which point things started to go wrong. Neither of her solo 
singles set the charts alight; her record label declined to release the album 
and dropped her. Two weeks later, the Sun revealed that Harvey was having an 
affair with Javine Hylton, a Popstars runner-up; the couple now have a baby.

"The irony is," says Dixon, "I embarked on them both at the same time, then 
lost them both in the same month. I'm sitting here smiling today, though. At 
the time, you can't help thinking, 'What have I done?' Because I tried to be a 
professional, I tried to treat people respectfully, I was a good wife, so what 
have I done? I believe you reap what you sow, so in my gut, I can't help 
feeling like something was trying to be flushed out of my life. I worked hard, 
I put my heart and soul into it, I've got a good mental attitude and my life 
was, like, pulled out from underneath me. I didn't know where to step. I was 
just lost. Within two weeks it felt like the world had collapsed on my head."

Separated from Harvey, she sold her wedding dress on eBay: it was supposed to 
be a spirit-lifting defiant gesture, but the winning bid turned out to be a 
hoaxer. "Christmas that year was quite a dark time," she says. "Then Brian 
Higgins of Xenomania called me up out of the blue and said he wanted to write 
with me, even though there was no record company there. And then Strictly 
happened. From the moment I met [dance partner] Matthew Cutler and we went into 
training, I was just converted. Every day I was just smiling and having fun. I 
laughed a lot for four months." This must have been tough on Cutler's eardrums.

There's a sense her well-publicised problems did Dixon no harm as a Strictly 
Come Dancing contestant. The camera loved her; her enthusiasm for the whole 
thing was impossibly infectious, and she ended the show a fantastically 
accomplished dancer. But, as she carefully notes: "It's not just about the 
dance skills - a lot of it is about how the public warm to your personality." 
And the British public loves a triumph over adversity, which chimed perfectly 
with the show's romantic, fairytale aspect. As Dixon accepted the trophy, Bruce 
Forsyth rather unexpectedly yelled: "You're the British Beyoncé!" A bidding war 
between record labels (including, Dixon was amused to note, the one that had 
recently dropped her) indicated that other people thought so, too, although 
transforming reality show fame into a rejuvenated pop career is a tough call, 
as Peter André or Busted's Matt Willis will tell you.

Still, if The Alesha Show fails, it won't be for want of trying. As well as 
Xenomania, it employs the services of Duffy's co-writer and producer Steve 
Brooker and American R&B hitmakers the Underdogs. The result might well unite 
the Saturday teatime audience with her old Mis-Teeq fans. The first single, The 
Boy Does Nothing, is not only maddeningly catchy, it comes complete with lyrics 
about having two left feet and taking a sip of dancing juice. She's planning 
live shows that incorporate her ballroom skills.

Her current schedule - which in addition to power breakfasts at Number 10 and 
surprise appearances on shock jock phone-in shows, includes a Strictly Come 
Dancing Christmas special - has meant she's had to cancel a visit to see her 
father in Thailand, but she isn't complaining: "If it doesn't work, I want to 
be completely accountable. Nothing scares me any more. I've proved to myself 
that I can get out of bad situations, that I can go through bad times and come 
out the other end better. I feel I had to take a low, because in Mis-Teeq, 
although it was hard work, we never had any major obstacles. I'm stronger, I 
can deal with it, I'm fearless again. There's nothing you could throw at me 
that I couldn't get through. It's all happened."

She lets rip with one of her deafening laughs. "It's all happened," she grins, 
"in a most bizarre way".

The Alesha Show is released on November 24.
 