
Why has no one in the history of this beautiful and damnably maddening 
language come up with a better and more expressive word than "culture" to refer 
to the good stuff?

The Oxford English Dictionary defines "culture" thus: "A particular form or 
type of intellectual development. Also, the civilization, customs, artistic 
achievements, etc., of a people, esp. at a certain stage of its development or 
history." Rightfully this definition is placed well below the primary and more 
respectable: "The action or practice of cultivating the soil; tillage." Even if 
we turn from a Latin derivative to Greek – an intellectual if desperate act in 
itself – we end up back whence we fled, with "eidos": "The distinctive 
expression of the cognitive or intellectual character of a culture or social 
group."

I refuse to buy any book that has the word "culture" in its title, subtitle, 
or jacket copy. It is a word that reeks of the classroom and stultifying 
academia. It is a dead, boring word, and neither denotes nor connotes anything 
good. And yet I am about to use it. But only once. I promise.

American culture is a five-car wreck on a highway. The United States is a 
young country. To look on it with optimistic eyes, it is a brattish child of a 
country. To look on it with a colder eye, it may be seen as an infant mortality 
waiting to happen.

When I refer to that five-car wreck, I refer to its music, for its music and 
its literature of the last century and a half are all that it has given to the 
world in terms of that thing whose repellent name shall go unspoken.

Rock'n'roll and the rest of it, and all that led up to it – balladry brought 
across the sea by early settlers and re-made in the strangeness of a new land, 
the subdued plangent songs of the enslaved in that strange new land, the urban 
song-mongers of Tin Pan Alley, small-town and big-city buskers, the nova 
express from black rag-tag post-bellum marching bands, and the accelerating 
theft and flow of all this between black and white, rural and metropolitan, 
field and stage – it has been a glorious wreck.

I tried to pry apart the wreckage and delve what lay in, behind, and beyond it 
in a book calledWhere Dead Voices Gather, and I probably added to the wreck:

"And, of course, that is what all of this is – all of this: the one song, ever 
changing, ever reincarnated, that speaks somehow from and to and for that which 
is ineffable within us and without us, that is both prayer and deliverance, 
folly and wisdom, that inspires us to dance or smile or simply to go on, 
senselessly, incomprehensibly, beatifically, in the face of mortality and the 
truth that our lives are more ill-writ, ill-rhymed, and fleeting than any song, 
except perhaps those songs – that song, endlessly reincarnated – born of that 
truth, be it the moon and June of that truth, or the wordless blue moan, or the 
rotgut or the elegant poetry of it. That nameless black-hulled ship of Ulysses, 
that long black train, that Terraplane, that mystery train, that Rocket '88, 
that Buick 6 – same journey, same miracle, same end and endlessness."

Those whose portraits appear here represent all that I'm talking about. Their 
stories, while often enthralling, do not need to be told. You can read them in 
these pictures, each an evocation, each a celebration and a summoning.

There are a few here whom I don't like. I'm not talking about the portraits; 
I'm talking about those, and the music of those, they portray. Everyone will 
probably have a few about whom they feel the same. But what would any party or 
barroom gathering be if there were not a few presences we didn't like? 
Unimaginable.

Together the music these characters represent is the lament, wail, and bang of 
that magnificent wreck that has spoken more resonantly, meaningfully, and 
truthfully to the world than any American statesman since Thomas Jefferson 
(whose "distinctive expression of the cognitive or intellectual character" of 
himself and his country had far more in common with Jerry Lee Lewis's or Little 
Richard's than most recognise).

This gallery is wondrous. I would not be so foolish as to say that you can 
hear the music by gazing at these portraits; but I will say that I am right now 
about to dig out Little Richard's Get Rich Quick, and then, after that, the 
Contours doing Smokey Robinson's First I Look at the Purse; then maybe Wanda 
Jackson's Fujiyama Mama, followed by Dave Brubeck's Take Five or perhaps 
Ornette Coleman's Empty Foxhole.

So, if you want what's good for you – an escape from that thing so fatally 
coupled to that word I promised not to use again – just get in the car, like 
the man says, and don't buckle that cheap, plastic safety belt of intellectual 
achievement and civilization. Those things will kill you. Just go. OMM

Nick Tosches is the biographer of Jerry Lee Lewis, Dean Martin and Sonny 
Liston, and has written extensively on American music.
 