
South Australia’s premier, Jay Weatherill, has hit back at criticism from 
prominent businessmen of the federal government’s decisionto build 
French-designed submarines in Adelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/26/france-to-build-australias-new-submarine-fleet-as-50bn-contract-awarded>
.

A group of businessman, including Dick Smith and John Singleton, took out a 
full-page advertisement in the Australian on Tuesday describing the decision as 
“astonishing” and potentially a “fiasco”. They suggested buying off-the-shelf 
nuclear subs would have been a better option.

But Weatherill called the group “sad old men” and said their ad “looked like 
it was scribbled on the back of a serviette after a long lunch”.

Build Australia's submarines in Adelaide, says former commission of audit chair
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/15/build-australias-submarines-in-adelaide-says-former-commission-of-audit-chair>
In their advertisement the businessmen argued that retrofitting what is 
essentially a French nuclear submarine with a diesel engine was a “very 
complicated option”, which had never been done before. The design phase would 
take so long that the decision to make the submarine in Adelaide would be 
“meaningless”, because the workforce would have “dissipated” by the time it 
came to be built.

The businessmen said such a conventionally powered sub would come into service 
at a time when the rest of the world would be operating nuclear-powered fleets. 
That would be like putting a propeller plane up against a modern jet, the 
advertisement said.
“We will be condemning our sailors to their graves,” it said.

It also questioned the economics of the decision, saying it would be cheaper 
to subsidise car industry jobs and buy submarines from overseas.


The other businessmen who put their name to the ad were Gary Johnston, the 
owner of Jaycar Electronics, Boyd Munro and John Tait. They insisted they were 
not affiliated with any political party nor represented any military contractor.
 