
Former Channel 4 chief executive Andy Duncan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andyduncan> has said the BBC should be set 
targets to ensure it meets its commitments to create partnerships with rival 
broadcasters.

Speaking at the Oxford Media Convention, Duncan, one of the architects of a 
plan to set up a joint venture between the BBC andChannel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4>, which has still not come to 
fruition, said: "There should be more pressure on the BBC. A proper framework 
should be put in place ... A bit like the indie quota system.

"The corporation is obliged to commission a certain number of shows from 
independent production companies. BBC managers must answer to theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Trust if that target is not met."

His comments about the BBC will be interprated as a broadside against BBC 
management, who have so far failed to reach a partnership deal with Channel 4.

Duncan insisted he was "philosophical" about the lack of an agreement and 
emphasised that his successor may yet agree one, but added that many of the 
BBC's partnership proposals have "come to nothing".

In Duncan's first speech since he stepped down as chief executive, he berated 
politicians, policymakers and industry executives, accusing them of failing to 
rise to the challenges posed by the digital age.

Speaking to MediaGuardian.co.uk after his speech, Duncan said: "The problem is 
the government policy cycle is quite slow, the civil service policy cycle is 
quite slow and the broadcasting policy cycle is quite slow"

He said it was "out of kilter" with the pace of change on the ground. "We've 
got to find a quicker way of making decisions".

Duncan said that some of the goals set out in Lord Carter's Digital Britain 
report, including universal broadband access, could be "a really big part of 
solving some of the economic and social problems we have got".

He continued: "None of the main political parties get this point," before 
pointing out: "In the Netherlands, I you want to get your unemployment benefit 
you have to go online". He said the internet could be: "A fantastic way of 
delivering public services."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 