
Last week the UK Home Office published the findings of its investigations into 
allegations of animal suffering, made after undercover infiltrations at two 
animal research facilities.

You will not find coverage of any of the conclusions in the national news 
media. Instead any search for media coverage will unearth the original 
infiltration stories under headlines such as: “Horrific video shows distress of 
puppies and kittens waiting to be dissected at animal testing lab 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2571532/Video-shows-distress-puppies-kittens-waiting-dissected-animal-testing-laboratory.html>
”; “Graphic content: horrifying video shows puppies and kittens tested at UK 
laboratory 
<http://www.express.co.uk/news/uk/462546/Horrifying-BUAV-video-investigation-shows-puppies-kittens-ripped-apart-in-UK-animal-lab>
”; and “Rats beheaded with scissors and kept in ‘pitiful state 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/student/news/rats-beheaded-with-scissors-and-mice-kept-in-a-pitiful-state-imperial-college-london-vows-to-overhaul-treatment-of-animals-in-labs-after-video-emerges-showing-appalling-suffering-8996140.html>
’.”

These “shocking exposés”, brought to the newspapers by the animal rights group 
BUAV, include distressing images, links to videos that are difficult to watch, 
and quote allegedly secretly recorded researchers saying terrible things about 
the animals in their care.

The newspapers seem in no doubt that the allegations they are carrying add up 
to “appalling suffering on a very large scale”, and appear to be proud of their 
role in bringing the abuses to light: “The Sunday Express today publishes 
details of an undercover investigation … that shines a light on the secret 
world of vivisection laboratories.”

You may well see these articles as reassuring evidence that we still have 
public interest journalism in the UK. These animal rights supporters have done 
exactly what investigative journalists used to do in a time when newspapers had 
enough money to shine a light on the darker corners of our institutions and 
uncover hidden abuses. And you would be right, but for one thing: we now know 
that the stories were largely untrue.

Since you will not find this information in the mainstream print media let me 
tell you what the Home Office found.

The infiltrations investigated by the Home Office took place at Imperial 
College London and the pharmaceutical company Merke, Sharpe and Dohme. Out of 
180 allegations made by BUAV about Imperial, the Home office upheld just five 
and declared the other 175 “unsubstantiated”.

The five ‘non-compliance’ issues it found were classed as “minor” – one in 
category A and four in category B (with category D being at the most severe end 
of the suffering scale). Category B means that while there may have been “some 
animal welfare implications“, it “[did] not involve significant, avoidable or 
unnecessary pain, suffering, distress or lasting harm”, and there was “no 
evidence of intent to subvert the controls of ASPA [theAnimals (Scientific 
Procedures) Act 1986 <http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1986/14/contents>]”. 

While the Home Office repeated points it had made previously, which had been 
conceded by Imperial, about the poor culture of care and failings in 
management, the report concluded that “overall the … allegations of cruelty at 
the establishment have not been substantiated.” It was a far cry from the 
“abuse” reported by the Sunday Times, and as one commentator said, the BUAV 
allegations carried by the media“were 97% wrong and 3% right” 
<http://speakingofresearch.com/2014/10/03/buav-spies-lies-and-inspection-reports/>
.

In the case of Merke, Sharpe and Dohme, the Home Office upheld none of the 
BUAV claims. None. “Our findings confirm that the site is well managed with 
staff at all levels committed to the provision of appropriate standards of 
welfare and care, within the constraints of the scientific requirements of the 
research.” Again a very long way from the media headlines of “horrific 
distress” and animals that “can be heard screaming in terror as they are 
restrained by researchers”.

Let me emphasise here that there is no excuse for any lapses in animal welfare 
and that I fully support the right of activists and the media to uncover and 
expose abuses of animals in research facilities. However, the huge discrepancy 
between the allegations reported prominently in national newspapers and the 
truth should worry anyone who cares about the accurate reporting of science in 
the media, and should raise questions about the way these undercover exposés 
are covered.

For the uninitiated, let me just tell you how these stories typically come 
about. A person sympathetic to animal rights groups whose aim is to abolish all 
animal research secures a job in an animal research facility, usually as a 
junior animal technician, and stays there undercover for around 6-8 months. 
Despite the fact that universities and companies have robust mechanisms in 
place for whistleblowing, none of the infiltrators have reported the animal 
cruelty they claim to have witnessed to staff or the Home Office, preferring 
instead to secretly film the alleged suffering for months before bringing it 
directly to their Sunday newspaper of choice.

For the infiltrated institution this is how it goes. They know nothing about 
the infiltration until the Thursday night or Friday morning before publication 
when a journalist calls to tell them that extremely serious allegations will be 
made about them on Sunday. They are given just a few hours to look at the 
allegations and respond. In some cases they are not even shown the full dossier 
of claims made against them. Requests to the newspaper for more time are 
generally turned down and because the institution is unable to mount any kind 
of proper investigation in the short timeframe, the allegations appear almost 
completely unchallenged.

This kind of one-sided reporting may have been more understandable when 
scientists stayed quiet on the issue, but this is no longer the case. Earlier 
this year, 81 organisations signed aConcordat on Openness in Animal Research 
<http://www.understandinganimalresearch.org.uk/policy/concordat-on-openness-on-animal-research>
, committing them to embrace media and public interest in their use of animals 
in research, and open up their facilities to more journalists. So when animal 
rights activists in Leicester recently told local newspapers that a new 
facility in the university would be used to inflict suffering on monkeys and 
dogs, the university threw its doors open to journalists who after unfettered 
access reported that this particular facility housed only rodents.

The media should continue to shine a light on this aspect of science and 
should avail itself of the new climate of openness to go into animal research 
facilities and report all they see.

Why does any of this matter? Because animal research is a vital and necessary 
part of medical science. While scientists are making great strides towards 
replacing, refining and reducing the use of animals, many key questions in 
medical science can still only be addressed by studies on animals – studies 
that offer hope to millions who suffer from serious conditions such as cystic 
fibrosis, Alzheimer’s disease, stroke, spinal cord damage and so on. The new 
treatments for Ebola that we have all seen in the news require studies in 
monkeys before they are used in humans.

All but one winner of the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine over the past 
40 years has used animals in their research, including yesterday’s UK-based 
winnerProfessor John O’Keefe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/oct/06/nobel-prize-physiology-medicine-brain-navigation>
.

The British public have every right to know the truth about animal research 
and should know about the failings as well as the benefits. Robust and open 
debate in the media about the ethics and practice of animal experiments is 
crucial. But if the public reject the use of animals in research after reading 
inaccurate, sensational and misleading reports, the press is failing its 
readers badly.

Every media studies student will know that “Man bites dog” is a better story 
than “Man doesn’t bite dog”. But editors should be very concerned if the “Man 
bites dog” story they splashed on their front pages turns out not to be true. 
Last week’s reports may not have made for a sexy headline but they should cause 
editors to pause for thought the next time BUAV comes knocking with its 
cleverly edited video footage. This subject is too important for poor 
journalism.
 