
Diabetes <https://www.theguardian.com/society/diabetes> patients could be 
spared the burden of constantly monitoring blood sugar levels after scientists 
have developed a “smart” form of insulin.

The new compound, which was shown to be effective in mice, automatically 
activates when blood sugar levels soar, and remains in circulation for up to 24 
hours. In the future, patients could inject the insulin once a day, or even 
less frequently, overcoming the need for constant self-monitoring and insulin 
top-ups after meals.

Danny Chou, a chemical biologist who led the research at the University of 
Utah, said: “Diabetic patients still need to guess to some extent how much 
insulin they need. With this you would just inject it and it wouldn’t matter if 
you overshot because its activity would stop when glucose levels get too low.”

About 400,000 people in Britain have type 1 diabetes, including 30,000 
children. The condition, which normally begins in childhood, is an autoimmune 
disease in which the body kills off all its pancreatic beta cells. The cells 
produce insulin, which regulates blood sugar, and without beta cells, the 
body’s sugar levels fluctuate wildly, meaning that patients need to monitor 
glucose and typically inject insulin several times each day.

Taking too much insulin can drive blood sugar levels too low, leading to 
hypoglycaemia– such episodes are responsible for around 10% of deaths in type 1 
diabetes.


Taking too little insulin means blood sugar levels are consistently too high, 
which can lead to serious complications in the long term, such as blindness and 
nerve damage. “In theory, with this there would be none of these glucose 
problems,” said Dr Chou.

The smart insulin, known as Ins-PBA-F, is engineered to bind to a blood 
protein, called albumin, as soon as it is injected. This means it is 
essentially stored in a reservoir. The insulin is then released when blood 
sugar levels reach a certain threshold, meaning it can act to lower the 
circulating glucose.

In the study, published on Monday in the Proceedings of the National Academies 
of Science <http://www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1424684112>, diabetic mice 
given a single daily injection of the modified insulin had glucose levels that 
were as stable as those seen in healthy mice. The team hope to test the 
treatment in patients within two to five years.

Karen Addington, chief executive of the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation 
<https://www.jdrf.org.uk/> in the UK, said: “For many people living with type 1 
diabetes, achieving good blood glucose control is a daily battle. A smart 
insulin would eliminate hypos – which are what many with type 1 diabetes hate 
most. It would enable people with type 1 diabetes to achieve near perfect 
glucose control, all from a single injection per day or even per week. That’s 
really exciting.”


Dr Richard Elliott, of Diabetes UK <http://www.diabetes.org.uk/>, said the 
approach had the potential to make it easier for people with diabetes to manage 
their condition, but cautioned that the progress towards clinical versions of 
the treatment could be slow. “Years of further research and clinical trials 
will be needed to find out if a similar drug could be used safely and 
effectively by people with diabetes,” he said.
 