
It is Monday morning and Christine, a teacher in Ghana's rural Central Region, 
is taking the register. Seven girls are absent. Absenteeism is not uncommon in 
this area, particularly on Mondays which is market day, but at Christine's 
school there is a disproportionate absence rate for girls. The lack of private, 
hygienic toilet facilities makes it almost impossible for them, many of whom 
walk several miles to school, to attend while they are menstruating.

The school is just metres from the Atlantic Ocean, yet there is no piped fresh 
water in this area. The school toilet has no water supply. The door has fallen 
off its hinges and leans precariously against the wall. The floor is thick with 
faeces, urine and sodden newspaper while the air is thick with stench. A small 
fan turns lazily and ineffectually. Flies swoop.

Over 24 million girls of primary school age in Sub-Saharan Africa do not 
attend school. Their access to basic education is denied for a range of factors 
but the link between school sanitation and attendance is poorly acknowledged. A 
recent UNICEF report estimates that one in ten school-girls in Sub-Saharan 
Africa skip school during menstruation. The same report found that enrolment 
rates for girls in Guinea rose by 17% after the government invested in school 
sanitation projects. Despite this, the drive for increased enrolment from the 
majority of Ministries of Education and international development agencies 
focuses on the provision of teachers. While many countries have introduced 
"girl-friendly" education policies, toilets are often overlooked.

Assuming girls menstruate for five days a month, those who attend schools with 
unsuitable toilet facilities could miss a quarter of their education when they 
reach puberty. They are more likely to fall behind, become demotivated and lose 
interest in their studies.

While girls suffer disproportionately, a lack of water and poor sanitation in 
schools can seriously affect the health of all pupils. According to the World 
Health Organisation diarrhoea kills four children every minute in Sub-Saharan 
Africa. Diarrhoeal diseases spread quickly among children who are unable to 
wash their hands after using the toilet and before eating. Teachers are not 
immune to these infections either. Sickness caused by poor sanitation is a key 
factor in the high rates of teacher absenteeism in rural schools.

A lack of water and inadequate toilet facilities add to the list of reasons 
why teachers don't want to teach in rural areas. Christine dreams of 
transferring to a school in the nearby town of Cape Coast where she believes 
the teaching environment will be healthier.

"When you have a situation where the children smell, it's bad. They are 
wearing their uniforms all week because there is no water. Then they visit the 
lavatory and dirty themselves. You can't even get in the classroom to teach, 
the whole classroom is smelling bad".

"Teachers in urban areas, they really enjoy it because children are neat and 
they can wash their hands throughout the day. So for the teacher, the 
environment is good. Pupils will get sick less often and attend school more 
regularly so it is easier to teach".

Five thousand kilometres south of Ghana, Mandisa, the head teacher of a South 
African school can relate to Christine's situation.

"When I arrived at this school the toilets were unusable, they were full of 
maggots. The children feared them and there was no water. They were so 
unhealthy that they were making children sick and no one wanted to use them, 
especially the girls".

Realising that the toilets were a key factor contributing to the high levels 
of absenteeism Mandisa made them a priority in her school-improvement 
programme. She lobbied local businesses for donations and organised concerts to 
raise funds. She built a new toilet block with a tank to collect rain water and 
set up a fund for toilet paper and soap. Local women clean the toilets in 
exchange for a discount in their children's school fees. Absenteeism at 
Mandisa's school has decreased, the pupils' health has improved and the toilets 
are bright and clean.

In many Sub-Saharan African countries over 90% of education budgets are used 
to pay teachers' salaries. Schools are increasingly expected to raise money 
from the local community to improve school infrastructure. While many 
communities place a high value on their children's learning environment, this 
system favours schools in more affluent urban areas. Schools like Christine's 
in Ghana lose out because the local community cannot afford to contribute.

Earlier this year the Women Farmers Advancement Network (WOFAN) in Nigeria 
marked National Women's Day by constructing toilets in 40 schools. The Personal 
Hygiene andSanitation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/sanitation> Education project 
(PHASE) coordinated by AMREF and GlaxoSmithKline has supported 247 schools in 
rural Kenya to provide latrines and water tanks, as well as hygiene-related 
educational materials. For many schools, NGOs bridge the critical gap between 
community and government investment.

In 2003 Clare Short wrote an article for this newspaper highlighting global 
inequalities in access to water. She claimed: "The answer is not more charity 
or NGO projects. Water and sanitation are not a matter for charity, they are 
essential for human health and development". Her argument is compelling but so 
are reports from AMREF that the percentage of children washing their hands at 
school rose from 15.4% to 58.5% as a result of the PHASE project.

Education, particularly the education of girls is acknowledged as being the 
most powerful tool for helping individuals, families and communities to escape 
poverty, yet the awkward truth is that attending school is compromising the 
health of millions of children in Sub-Saharan Africa, and millions of girls are 
prevented from attending school due to poor toilet facilities.

In South Africa Mandisa has lined the school play-ground with the old toilet 
bowls and filled them with flowers. As well as providing an interesting talking 
point for visitors they are a poignant reminder of how the community has 
invested in their children's health and education. Meanwhile, in Ghana, 
Christine tries to ignore the empty seats in her classroom and begins to teach.

This longlisted article was published on 23 July 2009. It was written for the 
Guardian's International Development Journalism Competition between 1 April and 
22 June 2009.
 