
Michael Boyd's early days as the artistic director of the Royal Shakespeare 
Company <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/rsc> were haunted by a pronouncement 
he made a few weeks before being appointed: that he was "in favour of a bit of 
Semtex being tactically exploded at the RSC". He's spent the five years since 
calmly reinvigorating the company: staging Shakespeare's complete works, 
finding new venues, creating a thriving ensemble, forging links with today's 
playwrights. But now he's finally pulled out that bit of Semtex - in the form 
of Anthony Neilson.

With his boyish features, soft voice and slouchy uniform of scuffed black 
jeans and faded suit jacket, Neilson doesn't look especially volatile. The 
playwright-director looks more like a PhD student fazed by the idea of leaving 
university. And yet, it's fair to say that none of the 11 RSC actors he is 
working with have encountered anyone like him.

Neilson's usual practice is to collaborate with people he has worked with 
previously, creating a show pretty much from scratch in four or five weeks. As 
he'd never met his RSC cast before, he was given a luxurious 19 weeks of 
rehearsal time with them. As of two days ago, he had only just finished writing 
all the scenes for the play, God in Ruins, and many of those still needed 
rewriting. God in Ruins has its first performance next Thursday.

Neilson admits that his way of working "is fairly selfish. It's about 
channelling pressure - the more pressure, the better. It fires me up, otherwise 
I'm very prone to prevaricate. Anything I do has got to have some feeling 
behind it, and that feeling should be quite intense."

It's crucial that his actors aren't afraid of the intensity - or of radical 
last-minute changes. That's why he prefers to work with the same actors 
repeatedly. "People think that's a cosy thing, but it's not necessarily. 
Friends can be much more abrasive than anyone else."

The RSC actors - all men - knew little of this when rehearsals started in 
early July. Nor were they especially familiar with Neilson's work. But they had 
their appetites whetted on a group outing to London's Royal Court in April to 
see his play The Wonderful World of Dissocia, about a woman with mental 
illness. "I don't want to blow his trumpet," says Ryan Gage, one of the younger 
members of the cast, "but it was stunning: filmic and unashamedly theatrical; 
camp but also dark and uncompromising. I thought, that's what theatre should 
be."

Although he hadn't written the script before going into rehearsals, Neilson 
had been mulling over his ideas for Dissocia for some years. That wasn't the 
case with God in Ruins. "A lot of what I do is like cutting a suit to fit an 
actor," Neilson says. So before he could write a word, he needed to get to know 
his cast. Cue the usual rehearsal-room routine of lengthy discussions and 
improvisation exercises, plus what Neilson, with a certain amount of 
understatement, calls "a certain amount of drinking". Quickly, however, even 
those actors with a lot of experience in devised theatre (in which a play is 
constructed from improvised scenes) realised that Neilson's approach was 
different. One of the actors, Sean Kearns, has been acting for 24 years in a 
mixture of classical, new and devised work. "We would improvise stuff," Kearns 
says, "and at the end you would discover that Anthony's not actually interested 
in any of the dialogue we'd come up with, or any of the scenarios, but in the 
dynamics within the group. We'd try and get underneath him, but you would 
second-guess what he wanted, and in actual fact that was the furthest thing. It 
was quite frustrating. You'd wonder, 'What's our deal in this creative 
process?'"

The actors found themselves waiting for Neilson to come up with material. And 
waiting. And waiting. "Nothing seemed to happen for a long time," says Brian 
Doherty. "That can be very unsatisfying because you finish working and you've 
no idea what's been achieved." Gage adds: "Some days, Anthony would turn up and 
say, I haven't got anything I want to show you, there's nothing new to explore. 
As a creative person who needs material to be able to do something, that was 
really frustrating."

Neilson was committed to presenting a work in progress performance as part of 
an RSC season in Newcastle in August, so he began shaping scenes for that. That 
brought compensations: "He has a great ability to capture the rhythms of 
people's speech, and certain idiosyncrasies that you recognise very quickly," 
says Doherty. But it also brought challenges. "Anthony won't settle on an idea 
for the sake of settling on an idea," says Joel Trill. "That's been something 
we've had to get to grips with: you can't get attached to a character, because 
it might be gone the next day."

Gage discovered this to his literal cost. "Something I did eagerly, like a 
good little young actor, was go out and buy £140 worth of DVDs to research an 
avenue we were exploring, only to discover a couple of days later that he'd 
decided it was shite. I thought, I've learned something right there. You can't 
get too precious about it."

Neilson recognises that this can be hard for the actors. "They think it's 
because they've been doing something wrong, but it's not. It's just that I'm 
looking ahead." He emphasises the importance of his cast as a source of 
inspiration. For instance, God in Ruins revolves around an alcoholic character 
who as of Friday last week had yet to be given a name. Neilson says the 
character emerged from an improvisation in which "Brian did this brilliant 
drunk acting. I've always wanted to do something in which a character was out 
of it for the duration, and fortuitously Brian does drunk acting better than 
anyone I've seen."

The cast, in turn, have found ways of disconcerting Neilson. "You can begin to 
know them as people," he says, "but then their acting persona isn't necessarily 
the same as that." As Kearns explains: "Once you hand an actor a piece of 
script, they start to look for a character and what makes that person tick. 
It's been tricky for Anthony because he wanted us to say things as ourselves, 
and we were getting in the way of that."

The very practicalities of the commission have proved problematic. There's the 
size of the cast: "It's 11 people, and I want them all to have something decent 
to do, which isn't always true with Shakespeare." There's the imposed 90-minute 
running time: "To do justice to 11 major characters in that time is tricky."

But the biggest challenge has been that, as a fluke of RSC scheduling, the 
actors are all men. "That's been very difficult because I've had to realise a 
lot of things about myself. A lot of the emotional core in my work has been to 
do with the women who are in it, and to an extent the emotional core in me is 
linked to that. I found that, while I like men individually, I'm not a great 
admirer of the male sex overall."

He dismisses early stabs at the play as "fairly charmless" - and if anything 
has endeared Neilson to his cast, it's this readiness to criticise himself. At 
a rehearsal on Friday last week, he brought in 18 new pages of script, only to 
denounce a large chunk of it with the words: "Right, well, that's fucking 
horseshit." As another of the more experienced actors, Jude Akuwudike, says: 
"He can't be dishonest: whatever he comes out with, it has to mean something, 
and have some vim. I really respect him for that."

What the actors think means a lot to Neilson. He constantly asks their opinion 
on new scenes, explains his motives, invites discussion on the form of the 
play. He spent weeks toying with the idea of creating a series of disconnected 
vignettes whose narrative would be absorbed "by osmosis"; the relentless 
questioning this received from the cast contributed to him abandoning the idea. 
The actors are Neilson's first audience: if they're confused, chances are the 
audience will be, too. This too became frustrating. As Doherty said in October: 
"I don't want to hear myself talk about anything any more. And it takes a lot 
to get a bunch of actors to not want to speak."

Neilson, too, has come to the conclusion that 19 weeks is a long time to spend 
on a single play. Two months ago, he still felt that there was merit in having 
the time and space to sift and reject ideas. But last week, he confessed that 
doing this over such a protracted period had resulted in "tenser situations 
than I would normally encounter. People think that with devised work, the 
longer the better. But that hasn't proven to be the case for me."

Still, he says, grinning, the proof will be in the production. "If people come 
and tell the actors it's great, a slow amnesia will come over them, where 
they'll remember all the good bits and humorous moments, and this will become 
one of their most enjoyable experiences. But if it's slagged off and the 
audiences are abysmal, they'll remember the bad bits and tell everyone I'm an 
overrated prick".

· God in Ruins opens at the Soho Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre>, London W1, on November 29. Box 
office: 0870 429 6883.
 