
Lassus. Bach. Bruckner. Stravinsky. In our historically aware times, such 
musicians tend to get locked away in separate boxes, where each requires 
specialist interpreters and audiences who are looking for different kinds of 
musical experience. It would certainly seem that these composers are poles 
apart, and not just in terms of their musical styles.

Lassus was employed as a servant of the church and aristocracy, composing at a 
time when music was understood as a mathematical science wedded to a religious 
function. Stravinsky, by contrast, operated in a highly cosmopolitan society in 
which composers were lionised, ranked among the leading intellectual voices of 
their time and music. Bruckner, again by contrast, was composing at a time when 
music was considered the greatest of the arts, and when a whole tranche of 
Austro-German society was arguing passionately about the direction music should 
take. But Bruckner travelled little, unlike both Lassus and Stravinsky, and was 
shy, devout, socially gauche and spiritually intense. More than the passing of 
centuries separates these composers. And yet they were unified by one thing: 
the search in music for a realm in which the mind is free to confront the 
mystery of its creation.

As a so-called baroque specialist who chooses to work with period instruments, 
I am one of those who helped create, if not the boxes themselves, then the 
attitude that says, "this is the way we must perform this or that music". 
Period musicianship is about bringing the music of all periods to life, not 
putting it in the right place on the shelf.

People still express surprise when they hear that I am performing Bruckner, or 
Mahler and Stravinsky. As one of the second generation of what is still called 
the "early music" movement (even though what is now called early music was 
written far earlier than anything that requires a conductor), I should perhaps 
not be surprised by this. In those days, we had to be evangelical, dogmatic 
even, to get our message across, so I can understand it if people put us 
performers in boxes that it seems we made ourselves. It is also true that when 
I perform Bruckner - either the symphonies, with the Orchestre des 
Champs-Elysées, or the choral music with the Collegium Vocale - I like to carry 
over into this 19th-century repertoire the same principles I put to work in the 
music of the German and French baroque.

But what I am searching for is not "authenticity" in the way this term is 
usually understood. We cannot hear Bach's cantatas as the congregation in 
Leipzig heard them because we are very different people, just as we cannot hear 
Bruckner's music as he heard it. But what we can hear, or can help to 
communicate as performers, is an authenticity in the sense of allowing the 
music to be true to itself.

The music of Bruckner has long had a special meaning for me. During my 
childhood in Ghent, Bernard Haitink's Concertgebouw orchestra would come to the 
cathedral to play two Bruckner symphonies each year. Long before I ever thought 
of a career in music, I would sit motionless, awestruck by the way this music 
could fill the entire building, making it shine with sound. And although when I 
perform Bruckner, I may be using different instruments and interpreting the 
music in a different way, this is still the effect I am looking for: to fill 
people's minds and bodies with what are, in a sense, cathedrals in sound, 
constructed with great abstract blocks of sound and fraught emotion that carry 
the spirit beyond emotion to something like real freedom. There is no 
compromise with Bruckner. This is not music for channel-hoppers, or those in 
search of instant rewards. To deliver his music, you have to be a strong 
performer - whether you're a conductor like Celibidache or Karajan, or someone 
with a completely different musical background - like myself. And you also have 
to be a strong listener.

Part of Bruckner's intensity came from his being deeply religious. His 
Catholicism was the ritualised, obedient religiosity of ordinary people: he 
said the Ave Maria 16 times each day and never seems to have questioned church 
teaching. Besides the Bible, his library contained just a few books - Robinson 
Crusoe seems to have been a particular favourite - and there is no evidence 
that he read or thought widely about history, literature or art.

In some ways, his most devoutly religious work is the second Mass, in E minor. 
He composed it for the consecration of the votive chapel in the new cathedral 
at Linz. The church is neo-gothic, part of a wider Austro-Germanic nationalist 
revival, and Bruckner composed his music for choir and wind ensemble in a 
manner very different from his other masses, but strongly reminiscent of Lassus 
and Palestrina. But you don't need to be religious to appreciate the mass, 
which contains some of Bruckner's gentlest and most easily approachable music, 
particularly in the Kyrie and the exceptionally delicate Benedictus. The work 
comes to its fruition in the intense, chromatic polyphony of the Agnus Dei, and 
even though you can tell how personal this prayer was to Bruckner, even for 
anti-clerical sceptics like myself, this movement seems to offer something 
along the lines of real, lasting peace.

In performing this music - and particularly the long tradition of what I call 
spiritual polyphony, which runs from Palestrina and Lassus, through Bach, to 
Bruckner, Stravinsky and beyond - in letting the music be true to itself, we 
may also perhaps become truer to ourselves. This, at least, is the kind of 
authenticity I'm looking for.

· Collegium Vocale Gent and Philippe Herreweghe perform Bruckner's Mass in E 
minor at the Usher Hall, Edinburgh, on Tuesday. Philippe Herreweghe was talking 
to Guy Dammann.
 