
It took Andy Murray four hours to beat Roger Federer for the first time in a 
grand slam match, and, looking unusually dispirited afterwards, he admitted he 
would need a decent rest to recover from the fractious finish to his semi-final 
if he is to take theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> title away from Novak 
Djokovic on Sunday.

Murray is bidding to become the first player since Lew Hoad in 1956 to win a 
second slam title immediately after his first, which he secured against 
Djokovic on that memorable night four months ago in New York. But he had little 
time for history after surviving a brutal physical and mental examination by 
Federer on Friday night.

An ugly confrontation towards the end of their see-sawing five-setter clearly 
ruined the Scot's mood, even on Burns Night. Neither player, though, would 
break the sport's protocol of niceness later, and Murray deflected questions 
about the angry exchange of words and glances when he failed to serve out the 
match at 6-5 in the fourth set.

Just before he had passed Federer with a perfect forehand, and the Swiss 
mouthed something inaudible (understood to be "Fucking stop" with the BBC moved 
to apologise for the language during their broadcast), then Murray made an ugly 
face at him.

The Swiss upped his level considerably, broke, held and won the tie-break to 
force a fifth set. The mood for the remainder of the match was uglier than in 
any of their previous 19 encounters. Murray won 6-4, 6-7 (5), 6-3, 6-7 (2), 
6-2, a fair reflection of the rhythm of the struggle.

"It was a long, long match," Murray said. "It's a very late finish. I'm tired. 
I don't want to be wasting any energy, because I'll need all of it if I want to 
win against Novak on Sunday.

"Stuff like that happens daily in tennis matches," he added, refusing to 
confirm what Federer had said to him. "It was very, very mild in comparison to 
what happens in other sports. It's not relevant what he said. It doesn't really 
matter. It didn't rattle me, but he definitely raised his level."

Federer said: "We just looked at each other one time. That's OK, I think, in a 
[four-hour] match. We were just checking each other out for a bit. That wasn't 
a big deal for me. I hope not for him."

The suggestion that he might be slipping from the upper echelons, alongside 
Murray, Djokovic and the absent Rafael Nadal, was batted away neatly. "Nothing 
has changed. I've played these guys, what, 60 times, the three guys around me 
in the rankings. So we know each other really well. We play each other very 
close very often. We keep on trading wins and losses."

Murray's coach, Ivan Lendl, said: "Playing Roger is never easy and he stepped 
it up when he had to. Andy was fortunately able to produce when he had to as 
well. What pleased me most? Winning the last point.

"He did well to come back in the fifth set after twice leading but that is 
what he trained for. He trained for it physically and he trained for it 
mentally. He tried to focus on every point in practice, then it is easier in 
the matches that way. That is what you have got to do."

Federer spoke earlier in the tournament about the refreshing sense of fair 
play on court and respect in the locker room that characterises the sport, but 
there was a definite edge to this match. Both seemed to thrive on it. Asked if 
he would like tennis to be more confrontational, Murray, a big boxing fan, 
smiled and said: "No. I know you guys would.Tennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> is doing just fine the way it is."

And it is. The standard here has been phenomenally high again and Djokovic 
drew universal praise for his blistering performance in putting David Ferrer 
away in three sets in the first semi-final on Thursday night. He has the 
benefit of an extra day's rest but Murray, for whom fitness and recovery have 
become an exact science, said he was confident he would be ready for the 
challenge.

"You never know how you're going to feel the next day," he admitted. "I'm sure 
I'll be tired in the morning, and stiff and sore, so I need to make sure I 
sleep as long as possible, do all of the recovery stuff. I'll hit very little 
beforehand, just try my best to be in the best possible condition for Sunday.

"Realistically, I'm probably not going to feel perfect because of how the 
match went tonight, but it's not to say I can't recover well enough to play my 
best tennis."
 