
Thousands of pupils taking AS-level exams this summer received lower grades 
because examiners were told to toughen their marking, the head of a coalition 
of private schools has claimed.

Andrew Grant, chairman of the Headmasters' and Headmistresses' Conference 
(HMC), called for an urgent explanation of evidence that "suggests strongly" 
that it had been made harder to achieve As, Bs and Cs. He will address the 
issue at the HMC's annual conference tomorrow.

Grant pointed to data comparing the results of "legacy" AS exams taken in June 
2008 with new-style ones taken in 2009. For some exam boards, "the number of 
subjects showing a decline in the proportion of pupils gaining particularly the 
highest grades appears to me to be beyond the bounds of statistical 
probability", he said. Grant said he had seen statements from examiners 
claiming they were told to tighten their marking. One said he was unhappy about 
the pressure, feeling it was unfair on pupils.

A senior source working with the exam boards admitted to the Observer that 
there had been a shift in attitude but denied that it had been ordered by 
Ofqual, the exams regulator. "Examiners are fed up with the yearly accusations 
of dumbing down and are taking a tougher approach," he said, claiming the aim 
was to stabilise, rather than lower, the percentages achieving top grades.

Grant, headteacher of St Albans school in Hertfordshire, began investigating 
the issue after an outcry about the results of a drama and theatre studies 
AS-level set by the exam board Edexcel. "At St Albans, we had 18 AS drama 
students and not one got an A grade," he said. "We have never had fewer than 
30% of our drama students getting an A and this is the strongest drama cohort 
we have had. Three of them were in the top 10 in the country at GCSE with the 
same board."

A number of other headteachers were similarly disappointed, Grant found. He 
said it was "deeply disturbing" for teachers and pupils and would hit 
university applications. "I imagine students all over the country have changed 
their plans on where to apply and what to apply for."

Richard Russell, headteacher at the independent Colfe's school in south-east 
London, called some of this year's results a "car crash". "We had one A in 
economics and no As or Bs in business studies," he said. "In August 2008, the 
same teachers got 100% A and B grades with an intellectually comparable cohort. 
But in other, smaller entry subjects, the results were higher than we expected."

Others warned against jumping to conclusions. Professor Alan Smithers, from 
the University of Buckingham, said the cohort sitting the new paper this summer 
were largely doing it for the first time, while the 2008 group included many 
students who were taking resits, which usually boosts results. The results of 
those resitting the old-style papers in June 2009 were far higher.

But Grant said: "One sees a striking and widespread decline between June 2001 
[when a new-style syllabus was also introduced] and June 2009, which one would 
not anticipate given the record of relentlessly rising results in the 
intervening years. When you put all these things together, there is a strong 
aroma of rat."

The exam boards and regulator denied any interference. Kathleen Tattersall, 
chair of Ofqual, said the pattern seen by Grant did not exist when resits were 
included. "Ofqual worked closely with the awarding bodies this year and there 
were no significant changes in the attainment levels in this summer's AS 
levels," she said. "There has been no recalibration of the standard this year."

One insider pointed to lower levels of coursework in the new exams and argued 
that this could be responsible.
 