 US investigators are increasingly certain that flight 587 was brought down 
because turbulence from the wake of a Japanese Airlines jumbo sheared the tail 
from the American Airlines Airbus A-300.
Although the Japanese 747's path was to the west and about 800ft (240 metres) 
higher than flight 587, an analysis of radar data and wind patterns has shown 
that the jet would have crossed the wake of the preceding plane, even though it 
was four miles ahead.

Those records, together with sound of the plane rattling on the cockpit voice 
recorder, the two pilots' report of wake turbulence, data from the flight data 
recorder indicating that the tail fin came off first and the engines continued 
to run, has led the investigators to believe that they have found the initial 
cause of the crash.

"We haven't found any other evidence of any impact with any foreign object. It 
appears to be some sort of aerodynamic effect, the national transportation 
safety board spokesman George Black said.

But the investigators are unable to explain what combination of events could 
have produced enough force to tear the tail fin and rudder off the plane and 
rip both engines away before the fuselage plummeted into the Rockaway area of 
Queen's, killing at least 265 people.

If wake turbulence was the cause, it would not be the first time. In September 
1997 a USAir Boeing 737 crashed near Pittsburgh after it encountered the wake 
vortices of a preceding jet. The wake turbulence plus anomalies in the rudder 
were blamed.

The investigators are also analysing the A-300's maintenance records. The 
airline has ordered safety checks on its Airbus fleet.

Although the investigators have said that the A-300's tail fin shows no signs 
of corrosion, they are analysing materials used in its construction.

Since the early 1980s the European Airbus consortium has been far more willing 
than Boeing to use carbon fibre-reinforced plastic for parts critical to the 
plane's cohesion. The type which crashed, the A-300-600R, uses the material in 
its tail fin, rudder, engine casings, landing gear bay doors, nose and flaps.

Company officials are already positioning themselves to argue that the 
stresses created by wake turbulence, combined with action taken by the flight 
crew, may have exceeded the load that the tail fin is designed to withstand.

Part of the investigation centres on possible damage to the plane in 1994, 
when it encountered severe turbulence en route from Barbados to Puerto Rico. A 
report said the plane suffered unspecified "minor damage", was repaired, and 
returned to service.

The plane's maintenance records show that one of the six fittings that hold 
the fin to the fuselage had to be repaired by Airbus before it was delivered in 
1988. It was made thicker and reinforced with rivets. The US safety board has 
said that its records did not require additional inspections.

· Negotiators for the Senate and the House of Representatives reached a 
tentative deal yesterday on a law to make American air travel more secure, 
fulfilling a promise to get an aviation security bill to the president before 
Thanksgiving next week.

The last main sticking point was the status of airport baggage screeners. The 
bill passed by the Senate created a federal workforce of 28,000 screeners, a 
move opposed by the House.
 