
My job interview with Anthony Howard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/anthony-howard> at the New Statesman in 1977 
did not go as expected. I was summoned to his office prepared for interrogation 
on my literary and editorial skills, not to mention my political tendencies. 
The job as number two on the arts and books pages was the one I most wanted in 
Fleet Street and would have done or said almost anything to get. I certainly 
planned to suppress the fact that I had voted Liberal in the previous election.

But instead of being grilled, I found an editor in a resigned, almost 
melancholic mood. "Well," he said, "it appears that you're coming to work for 
us." Then, before I could reply or thank him, Tony suddenly cheered up. "Of 
course," he chortled, "I can't pay you very much." He mentioned a figure. I 
would have worked for half. I subsequently learned that later in the day, 
Martin Amis and Christopher Hitchens had gone in to see Tony and asked how much 
he had agreed to pay me. On hearing the modest figure, they looked at one 
another and – entirely prearranged – shook their heads and said: "Oh, you could 
have got him for much less", thus ruining Tony's day.

There was a lot of fun and teasing at Tony's New Statesman. He was then in his 
early forties, about 15 years older than most of his staff. His mode was brisk, 
at times brusque, but he displayed a benign, rather house-masterly indulgence 
towards us. He had a particular way with cliche – not the obvious ones, but 
Tonyisms, which we learned to cherish. "Tick tick goes the clock," was his way 
of telling us to get on with the job, often followed by: "Mustn't let the grass 
grow under our feet." The wireless would be referred to as "the puff-puff 
radio", while a contributor's availability would be greeted with: "Barkis is 
willing, Barkis is willing." The hurrying manner also concealed a shyness; in 
editorial conferences, he would often make only brief eye-contact, preferring 
to address the ceiling while laying down a smokescreen with his cigar.

In those days, the New Statesman was at its old home of Great Turnstile; still 
a time of hot metal, Wednesday-morning visits to the printers at Southend, of 
luncheon vouchers and ping-pong in the office's basement. The front and back 
halves were largely separate institutions – "Like a pantomime horse," Tony 
would say. The three literary editors he appointed were John Gross, Claire 
Tomalin and Martin Amis. Tony read everything but interfered little, though he 
liked to ask of our pages: "Any filth?" – his manner poised between anxiety and 
hopefulness. He would despair all his journalistic life over the younger 
generation's misunderstanding of clerical and aristocratic titles (when it was 
"Reverend" as opposed to "the Reverend" Simkins). We in response were delighted 
to discover in the paper's archives a letter from the young Howard, then in his 
first job onReynold's News, humbly proposing himself to the editor of the 
Statesman as a possible reviewer of religious books.

If the Statesman's circulation was declining, the paper was still way ahead of 
theSpectator; big political and literary names happily wrote for small fees. 
Unlike some editors, Tony was famously mean with the company's money and 
generous with his own. A former publicist who helped promote one of his books 
told me that he was the only writer who ever took her out to lunch to thank her 
for her work.

Some obituarial remarks have suggested that Tony's career was less than 
fulfilled; that with more luck (or cunning or manic egotism) he would have 
edited a national daily or Sunday. I'm not sure he would have been happier. A 
weekly magazine (after theStatesman he went on edit to the Listener) seemed to 
suit him. And when he and I met up again professionally at theObserver – he as 
deputy editor, I as TV critic – he often seemed, despite outward cheer, a 
little dispirited. Perhaps it was just a matter of being second-in-command 
rather than first. But editing a daily or Sunday would have given him less time 
for writing books and might have slowed his development into the nationally 
admired commentator – or "great panjandrum", as he would probably have said of 
someone else – that he became. In this final manifestation, Tony developed a 
wonderfully characteristic way of starting a sentence: "It was, if I am not 
mistaken, Rab Butler at the Tory party conference in 1953, who said that...", 
well aware that there was no one in the radio or TV studio with the knowledge 
or authority to contradict him. But then he was always correct in his 
compendious rememberings.

In these later years, he remained proud of what he called "his boys" (yes, we 
were mainly "boys" – it took him a few more years to get better at appointing 
"girls"), and liked to wind them up about one another. "Of course, none of you 
has done as well as Harris," he would say, squinting to see if the remark had 
gone home (but then we knew he would doubtless prepare a different barb for 
Robert Harris).

When Tony resigned rather abruptly from the New Statesman, his "boys" gave him 
a dinner at the Gay Hussar. At one point, he was asked what had become the 
traditional Great Turnstile question, ritually posed to the politicians and the 
powerful who came to lunch there. "What is it about yourself that you would 
least like to be publicly known?" When faced with this question himself, Tony 
thought for a moment and replied: "That I'm sentimental."

He didn't elaborate and we moved on. But he was right. Under the briskness and 
brusquerie, he was a softie and our respect for him was matched by our 
fondness. He was also forgiving, and though I never confessed that I had once 
voted Liberal, I'm sure he would have pardoned even that.
 