
Though his dark gaze is unwavering and his conversation fizzes with ideas, 
Adam Foulds <https://www.theguardian.com/books/adam-foulds> is tired. He's just 
back from a writers' retreat in Italy, his first proper break in more than half 
a decade. The past few years have been something of a whirlwind: from 
"poetry-smitten student" to prize-winning novelist and poet, accepting awards 
in a rented suit.

In 2008 he won the Sunday Times Young Writer of the Year awards for his first 
novel, The Truth About These Strange Times, a darkly comedic romp about a 
Scottish no-hoper who develops an unlikely friendship with a 10-year-old boy. 
Earlier this year he was awarded the Costa poetry prize for The Broken Word, an 
intense, disquieting verse history of the Mau Mau uprising from the perspective 
of an English adolescent. (According to Matthew Parris, chair of the judges, 
the overall winner, Sebastian Barry, was "jolly nearly pipped to the post" by 
Foulds.) His latest novel,The Quickening Maze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/the-quickening-maze>, is an equally dazzling 
historical reconstruction, telling the story of two poets, John Clare and 
Alfred Tennyson, who briefly crossed paths at a lunatic asylum in Epping Forest.

For such a young writer (he is 34), it's an impressive body of work, not least 
because of its bold stylistic range. Foulds is not afraid to approach difficult 
subject matter, from the atrocities of civil war to madness in Victorian 
England. Nor is he limited by the confines of autobiography. Though critics 
have sometimes been bewildered by his scope, he remains beguiled by the 
possibilities that come from stepping outside the self. "I admire that kind of 
wide-ranging imagination that is able to immerse itself in different contexts 
and produce elegant, convincing, impassioned fictions. I find it a very 
exciting way of encountering the world, going from experience to experience and 
encountering them as deeply as I can."

He was always "world-hungry", but the young Adam did not at first want to 
write. He grew up in Woodford Green, on the cusp of Epping Forest, where city 
and country collided. His mother was a qualitative market researcher and his 
father was a chartered accountant who later "trained as a rabbi instead of 
retiring". As a boy, his fascination was with nature (his years of 
bird-watching in the forest inform The Quickening Maze's bewitching sense of 
place). He planned to study zoology, and it was not until a teacher set him to 
write a poem as a teenager that he found his metier.

That one "very bad" attempt ignited something in him: he wrote unstoppably, 
later honing his technical skills at Oxford through workshops with the poet 
Craig Raine. He did not turn to prose until he was well into the creative 
writing MA at the University of East Anglia (he was in the same year as Clare 
Allen, author of Poppy Shakespeare, and short-story writer Clare Wigfall).

To say Foulds takes writing seriously is an understatement. He is burningly 
intense about his chosen career, and one feels he has staked everything on it. 
As he puts it: "Writing has warped me. I have not fitted myself for anything 
else." In the beginning, he took jobs in warehouses, shops and offices, "menial 
work with very little responsibility that allowed me to keep all my mental 
space for writing". The three books were produced in a five-year period of 
continuous, dogged work, a feat that he feels "took its toll".

What drives him? The books, varied though they are, circle around ideas of 
freedom and entrapment, returning again and again to the problem of how to 
build a life within the often crushing limits of circumstance. Foulds 
frequently describes his work in violent terms. "These books wouldn't be 
arising if what I was struggling to articulate was not occluded in some way. 
The books exist because I'm wrestling with something, a way of processing my 
experience of the world and coming to understand it." Though his technical 
control creates surfaces of great elegance and cohesion, the power of his 
writing derives from the sense that, further down, a war for meaning is being 
waged.

In The Quickening Maze, poetry is likewise presented as dangerous. At the 
novel's centre stands John Clare, now one of our most highly regarded nature 
poets. Clare was a farm labourer who produced a vast body of work before 
slipping away into insanity. As one character memorably puts it: "England sang 
through him, its eternal, living nature." But "the violent machine of poetry" 
is as much curse as boon, and Clare's gift of the gab quickens until he is 
speaking in unintelligible tongues. His brief success has become a matter of 
bitterness: "You write your heart wide open... and in the end the crowd will 
tread on that heart as they rush to a new amusement."

Foulds's own experience of writing is not nearly so agonising. "It's not 
necessarily entirely healthy, but I actually find not writing a very difficult 
state." There are also compensations to the daily business of putting words to 
the world. "The way I write stylistically provides a lot of local excitements. 
Finding those accuracies that are equivalent to the experience is very 
compelling." It also makes his work intensely pleasurable to read, studded as 
it is with electrically acute images and phrases.

The novel he is working on now returns to the preoccupations of The Broken 
Word - war, violence, complicity - "but in a more amplified way". The phrase 
catches the difference between his poetry and prose: both are concerned with 
narrative, but poetry allows the story "to be as intensely delivered as 
possible", while prose permits ideas to be more thoroughly worked through.

His own life, too, seems to be broadening out. After five years without 
holidays, writing in every spare scrap of time, he is beginning to find more 
sustainable working patterns. "You need to get out of the flat and experience 
things and encounter people." Endearingly, this includes voluntary work 
visiting old people, with whom I hope he engages in energetic conversations 
about England's poetic heritage.

It's not something one can imagine Martin Amis doing, and it's entirely in 
keeping with the sense of integrity that Foulds so powerfully radiates. 
Respecting one's elders is clearly important to him. He describes The 
Quickening Maze as "an act of filial piety. I wanted to get in contact with the 
deep sources in English literature and make a relationship with them for 
myself." It's a touchingly modest venture, but it also betrays confidence: a 
son's respect for a tradition he is well on the way to inheriting.

• The Quickening Maze is published by Jonathan Cape, £12.99.

• See Adam Foulds in conversation with the Guardian's Sarah Crown about his 
work, and hear him read from The Quickening Mazehere 
<http://www.tinyurl.com/cvp38g>.
 