
In his time Antonio Carluccio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/antonio-carluccio> has catered for 
Prince Charles, Mick Jagger, Nicole Kidman. Not to mention the tens of 
thousands who pop into their local Carluccio's every week for a plate of 
spaghetti vongole and a bottle of crisp white wine. But there were a couple of 
meals last year which I don't suppose he ever imagined he'd cook. One evening 
he served up black pasta with seafood - "A bit funereal, maybe," he recalls. 
And on another memorable occasion a huge puffball fungi. "I cut it into slices 
and fried it and grilled it." Sitting down to dinner, on both occasions, were 
his fellow patients - or "nutters", as he calls them, partly, I suspect, out of 
affection, partly to somehow distance himself from them - at the Priory, the 
famous clinic where Antonio also happened to have checked himself in.

This was last September, following an accident with a knife in his Fulham 
flat. He's always denied that it was any attempt at self-harm. However, what he 
does say when we meet is that he was feeling depressed. "Down, very down," he 
says, in his instantly recognisable Italian accent. "I was thinking: 'What am I 
doing here?' I wanted to get away from the press, away from everything."

His 28-year-long marriage to Priscilla, Sir Terence Conran's sister and the 
business brains behind the couple, was about to combust. He was no longer 
involved in his eponymous chain of restaurants-cum-delicatessens and his 
original restaurant in Covent Garden, the one where he'd trained up an unknown 
Jamie Oliver, had been closed down to make way for leggings and sweatshirts (as 
a branch of American Apparel).

It is eight months since his stint in the Priory. We meet up at a branch of 
Carluccio's in southwest London. In 2005 he and Priscilla floated the company 
on the stock exchange and sold their stake for a reported £10m. Since then the 
restaurants have become ubiquitous on well-to-do high streets, a sort of 
McDonald's for the middle classes in the way that Pizza Express used to be. It 
must have been strange. No one likes to think that they're dispensable, and I 
imagine it was surreal to see the delis piled high with pasta swirls and olive 
oil, in that distinctive royal-blue packaging that bore his name, knowing that 
he was no longer in charge. Even more galling to hear complaints from some 
quarters that the food had gone downhill.

However, earlier this year the management invited him back on board as a 
consultant for two days a month, so I find him sitting at the back of the 
restaurant, ordering bowls of ice cream and cups of coffee, filling in a Sudoku 
puzzle in the newspaper.

Yesterday he was in Manchester teaching the chefs how to make spinach balls. 
("Very simple, but they were horrible. You have to know the spirit in which the 
dishes were created.") He has, he tells me, 16 projects on the go. "Sixteen!" 
he says, luxuriating in the very word as though to say: "Look! I'm fine!" And 
it's true - on the whole he seems much like his old self. There is a cookbook, 
Simple Cooking, to be published later this year, and his new website and a 
couple of ideas that are being pitched with television channels. He's just back 
from Delhi, where he was training Indian chefs ahead of the launch of an 
Italian restaurant; tomorrow he will leave home at daybreak to catch a flight 
to Italy for a caper festival.

He calls the waitress over. Carluccio wants the chef to rustle up a recipe he 
invented last night, when he could not sleep. "Take some capers, not too salty, 
some walnuts, some olive oil. A little bit of chilli," he explains. "Whiz it up 
in the blender, serve with some crostini. A sort of caper pesto." Five minutes 
later the poor chef returns with something inedible - more like mustard than 
pesto. "Too much chilli!" says Carluccio. I wonder what the staff must think 
whenever he pops by, however avuncular he likes to appear.

To his credit, Carluccio has never been known for the mood swings that have 
made other well-known chefs famous. He might be capable of holding a grudge - 
he's only recently forgiven his former right-hand man Gennaro Contaldo after a 
bust-up in the late 1990s, which resulted in three key members of staff leaving 
the company - but he's very disapproving about anything approaching a hissy fit 
in one of his kitchens. In a strange way there's always been something 
impenetrable about him, something to do with his Italian accent, as strong as 
ever despite the fact that he hasn't lived in Italy since he was 23, something 
to do with the fact that he's always appeared resolutely upbeat, never 
seemingly happier than when hunting for his beloved fungi or pounding a chicken 
breast with a mallet or whittling a hazel stick or telling a joke (he has 
hundreds written down in a notebook). Even his size - he's as round as a brandy 
glass - has always seemed to deflect introspection.

When I suggest that not many men of his age - he's 72 - would talk publicly 
about having therapy, he says: "I can think of many people walking down the 
road who would benefit from it. Everyone should have therapy." I'm not 
convinced it's something he'd have said a year ago.

Clearly something was seriously amiss in September when he called his personal 
assistant in a panic after he'd cut himself with a knife. What had happened? "I 
was at home on my own. I was trying to cut a big piece of bread." He mimes 
slicing a loaf. "I'd had a lot of whisky ..." Weirdly, the first person he 
called was his personal assistant. When she saw the amount of blood he was 
losing she called an ambulance. He was kept in hospital with a suspected 
perforated lung for three days.

Throughout his life, he tells me, he has suffered, off and on, from 
depression. Albeit briefly, he'd been treated for it before. "You are tired, 
you cannot function in your head, everything becomes heavy." What made it so 
bad this time? "All the accumulation of projects. It became too much. It was a 
combination of things. Losing the restaurant. Not being in charge of my own 
name. OK. Some people said: 'Well, you got your money for it.' But the money 
did not replace it. Most of the personnel didn't even know I was no longer the 
owner. Many of the customers didn't know either. That made it harder."

It must have been strange, I say, to go from feeding 60,000 people a week to 
none. "One hundred thousand," he corrects although this is a number I've never 
heard bandied about before.

Since he and Priscilla launched Carluccio's Caffès, as they called them, in 
1999, his round crinkled face, bushy eyebrows and curly white hair that he 
insists on cutting himself had been the public image of the company. The 
recipes supposedly learned at his mother's knee (his trademark phrase: MOF MOF 
"Minimum of fuss, maximum of flavour") were the perfect counterpoint to 
Priscilla's eye for clean, uncluttered styling. It's easy to forget that when 
they opened their first delicatessen in 1991 next to their Covent Garden 
restaurant most people still thought focaccia was a type of deadly tropical 
disease. The couple was instrumental in expanding our notions of Italian 
cuisine beyond claggy lasagne and deep-pan pizza. However, when they sold their 
20% share in the chain and their involvement eventually ended, he felt somehow 
diminished. "I was seen as the person who could sell. When you sell your name 
as a brand, the name is gone," he says. "It is a deep psychological thing to 
understand. You sell a little bit of yourself for money. At the time I didn't 
understand that. I lost my own identity."

At the Priory he had one-to-one therapy with psychiatrists and shared his 
story with the other patients, many of whom put his own worries into 
perspective. "I was very thankful that I could be there," he says. "I was 
trying to come to myself again. I had a sanctuary. I could be alone without any 
entourage. Perhaps for the first time in my life. I could talk to someone who 
listened, who understood." He realised, he says, that financial gain was not 
his principle motivation. "Business never was my strength. I always said to 
myself: if you do something well, that is reward enough. I wasn't interested in 
making money. That was always a secondary thing. I was the man of creation, of 
menus or recipes, the public relations. Everyone else did the business." 
Perhaps, like anyone who had a hobby which turns into a career, the fun went 
out of it somewhere along the way.

It used to be said that to understand Carluccio you had to understand his 
wife. He was a wine importer when they met. She was the one who spotted his 
talent in the kitchen, who encouraged him to enter a cooking competition in the 
Sunday Times (he came second to a woman from Wiltshire who no one ever heard 
from again). It was through Priscilla that he was introduced to her brother 
Terence, with whom he'd stage cooking contests whenever they went on holiday. 
She was the powerhouse behind the scenes who had always driven the Carluccio 
brand. Maybe it's no coincidence that when their working relationship changed, 
their personal relationship suffered.

Carluccio says he can not comment on why their marriage failed. In one 
newspaper report his adultery is cited. All he will say is that the divorce was 
"amicable". Are they still friends? "At the moment we are not speaking," he 
says.

One of his 16 projects is his autobiography, which he's thinking of calling 
The Station Master's Son. In the past he's always painted his childhood as 
something quaintly bucolic. His family was poor but his mother made sure there 
was delicious food to eat; when times were tough he would go foraging for wild 
rocket and mushrooms in the countryside around Piedmont with his father. One of 
his earliest memories is of watching his father on the station platform. As 
soon as the last train of the day had pulled out, it was Carluccio's job to run 
and tell his mother that it was time to put the pasta on to boil.

Every day he records some memories and hands the tapes to his ghostwriter. I 
imagine the biography might end up being rather good - probably much improved 
by the regular therapy sessions that mean he's more inclined to recall the 
darker side to his childhood. "I am investigating myself," he says. 
"Fragmentary things. It is very, very useful." There was a series of events - 
"the list of horrors" - which he thinks precipitated his depressive side. He 
describes them like film stills (his friend the late film director Anthony 
Minghella always told him his life would make a good script: "Somewhere between 
Cinema Paradiso and The Railway Children.")

He was a little boy during the second world war. "I remember going to the 
vineyard to get grapes when I heard machine guns. I saw a shed with a man 
hanging by one foot. It was horrible - there was only half of him - the other 
half was on the ground. The Germans had cut him in two with a machine gun. I 
still see that image in my mind." He brings one of his huge, paw-like hands up 
to his forehead. "You know, life can be shocking. Most things you forget. But 
some of them remain impressed on you, and they accumulate."

There was more to come. When he was 18 a friend in the village, the doctor's 
son, killed himself. "His father wanted him to become a doctor, but he wanted 
to be a poet." Then when he returned home following a year in the navy, another 
friend was killed in a motoring accident. "His head squashed by a lorry."

But it was the death of his brother Enrico when Carluccio was 23 that was the 
turning point in his life. Enrico was the youngest of the seven Carluccio 
children. Antonio was working at Olivetti, the typewriter manufacturer, when he 
heard the news. "The director came to see me. 'Something terrible has 
happened.' My blood stopped. You imagine everybody else but the smallest. Your 
father, your mother. When they told me it was my little brother, I had to be 
taken home - I couldn't cope."

His father met him at the mortuary. "Another picture I can not forget. My 
little brother stretched, contorted, lying on the marble. He was 13." Enrico 
had drowned in a local lake. "We were always told never to go in the water 
after eating because of cramps, but that was exactly what he did. He went down 
in four or five feet of water, but his friends were too shocked to do 
anything." His mother never recovered. When the local Jehovah's Witnesses told 
her they'd help her see her son again she renounced Catholicism and converted. 
Carluccio shakes his head.

He moved to Vienna a year after Enrico died. "I'd always wanted to go abroad, 
and it seemed like the only way to get away from the misery." Carluccio may 
have made a fortune espousing Italian cuisine ever since, but he never lived in 
Italy again.

It's after six o'clock and Carluccio's is beginning to get busy. Children are 
running around squealing. The mixture of Priscilla's Formica tabletops and 
Antonio's familiar pasta dishes have in recent times made the chain the 
fallback option for any middle-class parents too exhausted to make dinner. I 
sense that it's a development that Carluccio, who has never had children, isn't 
overly happy about.

"I love children," he says, as a small girl skids around the table "... with 
garlic and rosemary."

I imagine he can be infuriating. He has one of those minds that flits from one 
thing to another, like a bee hunting for pollen. He checked into the Priory 
complaining of exhaustion, but he seems incapable of taking it easy. And, boy, 
he can be curmudgeonly. There's the BBC. "I am very disappointed in Mark 
Thompson. He was enthusiastic about me doing a series on mushrooms. And then he 
wrote to me saying the nation is not ready yet. How can he have singularly 
decided that the entire nation is not interested in mushrooms?"

He dislikes almost of all his fellow chefs. "I do not think very much of them. 
I like Raymond Blanc. Although I take him with a big pinch of salt. Marco 
Pierre White. He is a very good chef. Liking is another thing." He hates most 
other restaurants (for someone who's supposed to be an ambassador for Italian 
cuisine he rarely recommends any other Italian restaurants apart from his own). 
And don't get him started on restaurant critics.

On the other hand, part of me wants to give him a hug. There was a point, with 
the 13 cookbooks and the TV series and the caffès and the honorary OBE, when 
the son of the station master must have thought he was invincible. For the past 
20 years he has seen his name become a highly successful brand. Now he's 
contractually forbidden to use it for any future restaurant venture. He's a 
natural restaurateur without a restaurant. For all his ebullience he's plainly 
a sensitive sort of chap who has seen his life collapse around him, like a pot 
of wilted spinach. It can't be easy to be on his own, without the marriage or 
the business. When he left the Priory he spent the night at his personal 
assistant's house because he had nowhere else to go. Now he's living alone in a 
rented house while once he and Priscilla used to share a London flat and an 
idyllic country cottage in Hampshire, complete with exposed beams and a 
beautiful garden. He's looking for somewhere to buy with a patch of ground to 
grow some vegetables - "But you suddenly become aware of your limitations. Do 
you have enough time to pay the mortgage off? Time is no longer in front of 
you."

Clearly the idea of giving up work is anathema to him. I wonder if he'll marry 
again. "Three times married, three times divorced. I don't think so," he says. 
"I have 10, maybe 15, years ahead of me. I would like them to be pleasant ones. 
I travel a lot, I have lots of friends. They like me. I do it for me now. To be 
content and to be happy. To feel free."

antonio-carluccio.com <http://www.antonio-carluccio.com>
 