 Even as the plane roared 100 feet over her head, Gail Allen refused to believe 
what was happening. Three days earlier, she had been at a memorial service for 
her son, Richie, a fireman killed at the World Trade Centre on September 11.
She watched the plane drop out of the sky onto the houses of her neighbours on 
130th Street, razing at least four of them to the ground. Flames shot into the 
air and the quiet beachside neighbourhood of Belle Harbour filled with black 
sooty smoke.

Two blocks away from the impact site is St Francis de Sales church, where 
memorials have been held for Richie Allen and more than a dozen other 
firefighters killed in the twin towers. It is a working class, mostly 
Irish-American district, home of firefighters, cops and ambulancemen.

"It's a neighbourhood that has been hit hard. To be hit again is hard to 
believe," Mrs Allen said. "I can't believe I have more to get through."

She had been putting the rubbish out when the American Airlines plane flew 
over, the sound of its labouring engines making the whole block vibrate. "I 
looked up and saw something fall off the plane. Then it just fell out of the 
sky. It looked like a ball of flame," she said.

Within seconds, all the firemen on the block were out of the door climbing 
into their jackets and helmets, running towards the crash site. But they had no 
hoses. All they could do was help some of the injured and look on as the bodies 
of the passengers burned.

One retired firefighter, Bill Mundy, was a resident of what is being called 
Ground Zero and was first to arrive on the scene. By a twist, he was also among 
those deployed to the other Ground Zero in New York - that which still 
smoulders in the mass grave of downtown Manhattan.

"I was down at the World Trade Centre also," he said, "and when you come down 
here now and talk to the same fellas - you can see the looks in their faces - 
how much longer can we endure?"

Tom Ray picked up one of his old fire helmets and ran two blocks to the scene. 

"There were bodies scattered around. Some were still strapped into their 
seats. They were telling us, don't touch the bodies, the FBI want them as they 
are, so you had a body here and a body there and you're trying to dig down 
between them, to see if there is anyone who was in one of the houses in 
between," said Mr Ray.

He had been one of the relief firemen sent in to the World Trade Centre two 
months earlier. "It's unbelievable," he said. "Just as we thought we might 
finally be getting back to some kind of normalcy, this happens."

Jennifer Tone looked out of her window and saw the plane coming down. "It was 
intact - the wings were there, the tail was there, just a big, silver plane in 
a blue sky coming down at us. I just said to my son and my mother, 'We've got 
to get out of here, there's a plane coming at us'."

Seconds after the crash she heard cars "popping" in the intense heat like 
shots from a machine gun. "All I could hear was, pop, pop, pop, popping; the 
people were running away from their cars just trying to get the hell out of 
there."

Charlie Kinzie, who cycled eight blocks to the scene, said: "You could see the 
outline of the bodies still sitting in the seats with their belts on. There 
were four houses totally destroyed, and another half dozen pretty badly 
damaged."

Jerry Conicelli, a retired policeman thought at first that Concorde was coming 
over, the plane was so loud. But Concorde is normally at 8.14 in the morning. 
He looked up and saw the plane fly low over the rooftops.

"It sounded like it was reversing its engines, and it was real loud. It looked 
like the engines just fell off it and it came straight down," he said.

An elderly lady, Selma Frank, who lives near the beach, said: "I was still 
lying in bed and heard a deep clunk like the house was rocking. I opened the 
door and saw flames coming towards me and I ran out towards the boulevard in my 
night clothes as fast as I could, there was ambulances screaming everywhere. I 
feel like I'm not on an even keel in my own home anymore."

Several eyewitnesses said they saw the plane's engine fall separately from the 
main fuselage. It landed a distance from the main wreckage in the forecourt of 
a Texaco garage, a hole blasted in its side.

Mary Healy, a secretary taking her Veterans Day bank holiday off, said: "I 
heard like a crack in the sky just as I was letting out my cat and I looked up 
and saw a plane like we always see in this area, but a piece from it fell to 
the ground like it had fired something like a missile against us. Then, it just 
glided, quite gracefully actually, to the ground and the bomb went off."

Mike Shapiro, a local cab driver, was stuck at a red light when the airliner 
flew over. "I could see the letters, AA, on the tail and I saw something, maybe 
an en gine fall off it and sort of curve away from it, and then, boom, it came 
down," he said.

He ran over to the scene to try to help. "I saw one guy, a young man, walking 
away with his arm on fire. He was beating away on his sleeve."

The flight was destined for the Dominican Republic, where huge numbers of 
people now resident in the Bronx, Brooklyn and Queens, once lived.

Within an hour of the crash, some 20 people had arrived at the scene knowing 
that their relatives were almost certainly beneath the charred, flaming 
wreckage, having seen them off at the terminal only minutes ago.

They came in vain hope, inconsolable, weeping and screaming their grief. One 
woman had to be carried away by police officers from the edge of the blazing 
wreck into which she was almost about to wander in an apparent trance.

Another man called Luis was stunned into silence, having just seen off his 
wife, Mercedes, returning to visit her parents. "Please sir, I cannot talk to 
you now because my wife was on the plane," he said, "God bless you, God bless 
her."

A special family centre was set up at the nearby Ramada airport hotel, to 
which counsellors were dispatched and the victims' families taken to special 
rooms to be treated for shock and certain bereavement. The vast majority were 
Dominican and, according to a doctor, spoke only Spanish, leading to initial 
language problems.

By lunchtime 200 people had arrived at the Ramada, representing some 30 
families. As they arrived, clutching at each other, some cried, others had 
expressions like stone. One woman, making her way through the lobby, collapsed 
and was lifted to her feet before being ushered inside. Staff at the hotel knew 
the routine well, having done the same for relatives of the TWA 800 crash 
victims in 1996.

The raw nerves of New York immediately presumed a terrorist attack, although 
police officers advised that the little evidence gathered thus far indicated a 
terrible accident, and a cruel twist of fate.

The same thought, of course, gripped Belle Harbour too. Maybe it was some 
bizarre and terrible vendetta against the families of the firemen who had died 
on September 11.

"It's the way they've got us to feel. That's how we think now, as if the 
terrorists are coming closer and closer to our homes," said Michael Palmiero.

"A lot of people came to live around here to feel safe," said James Gallagher. 
"I guess from places like Russia or wherever in South America and eastern 
Europe. And the fact is that these days no one can feel safe and no one does 
feel safe because basically we aren't safe."

"We had bonded as a community after September 11," said Mordechi Stohlberg, 
who had lost a second cousin in the World Trade Centre attacks. "We were 
beginning to recover and came closer. People who didn't mix with each other but 
became friends and thought things were going to get better now look what fate 
has done to us - hundreds more human beings burning to death in another plane 
right on our block."

By afternoon yesterday, the junction between 34th Street and Rockaway Beach 
Boulevard was like a war zone jammed with fire engines, police vans and TV 
wagons, lights flashing, sirens wailing and rescue workers massing among the 
gawping residents, sightseers and a few refugees.

The neighbourhood around 129th Street and Rockaway Boulevard - a busy shopping 
area - was turned into a furnace, with blazing debris scattered across several 
blocks of suburban housing.

Burning shards of the aircraft littered the streets and back lawns. One 
charred part of wreckage was propped against a smouldering car, another against 
a garden fence. An engine came down in the back garden of a two-storey house on 
129th Street, knocking over a boat that had been parked on a trailer outside 
and blackening the back of the house. A wing tip landed in another garden.

"We're going to find whoever we can still find if there's anyone still left 
alive," said fire ladder chief Tony Abruzzese. "But if I've learned anything in 
this town over the last few weeks in New York, it's not looking good."

The fumes had singed Carlton Myers' tracksuit as he made his getaway. "What 
the hell have we done that first they want to come attacking our city and then 
some plane comes out of the sky? All I want to know is, can I get on with my 
life without planes crashing into me, please?"

According to firefighters, the number of dead from Belle Harbour is likely to 
be mercifully limited. Most people of working age were out at work, and the 
plane fell into a confined area. Victims were mainly elderly neighbours who 
spent their days at home.

"It's a terrible thing to say at a time like this," said mayor Rudy Giuliani, 
the hero of September 11, who was quick on the scene and held an impromptu 
sidewalk press conference wearing an Office of Emergency Management baseball 
cap. "Things could have been much worse." It seemed that 12 houses were 
devastated beneath the blazing fuselage in the immediate crash.

"It could have been a lot, lot worse," Mr Myers said, with the authority of 
someone who has recently seen far worse. His eight-year-old son, Thomas, was 
playing with a balloon. He wanted to know how many people had died this time.

As time went on, the sense that the people of New York had been monstrously 
picked upon yet again started to abate. It seemed more likely that it could 
have all have been a terrible coincidence - a freak accident at the very spot 
where so many had suffered from manmade terror.

As the smoke died down, the people of Belle Harbour stood and watched the 
flashing lights of the fire engines in mute disbelief. This thin strip of land 
with its wide beaches and salt winds had been their refuge from the catastrophe 
a few miles away in Manhattan. The firemen went to work there and many did not 
come back, but this was supposed to be home, where they were safe.
 