
Every year, my son spends half the summer in Ukraine with my parents. He has a 
ritual: as soon as he wakes up, sun glaring and white-hot at 8am, he runs into 
the garden, straight to the cucumber plant. My mum taught him how to twist them 
at the stem gently, so as not to pull on the whole plant, and how to embrace 
the sharp ends of the prickles on his soft palms: a quick polish and the spikes 
come off, leaving it safe for nibbling with abandon.

We only use one word for cucumber in Ukraine – ogirky – which refers to them 
in all their forms – fresh or pickled, and whatever variety. British cucumbers 
(those rather watery15cm-long behemoths!) are different to the smaller, spiky 
kind I grew up with. As a student shopping at the Warwick University branch of 
Tesco, I made do, and lLuckily, now I can get more compact and flavoursome 
varieties in London, although I don’t think they’ll ever make up for the 
gherkins we enjoy in Ukraine.

Ukraine gets very hot in summer and the gherkins we get are rather dry – in a 
good way. They are dense, extremely fragrant and sweet. Picked while still 
warm, they are an absolute flavour bomb. Come early autumn, when the sun calms 
down a little and the cucumbers are not watered as much, they become even more 
intense. This is the time to start pickling. Not with vinegar, but by letting 
lacto bacteria do its job.

Back in the day, when aircon wasn’t in anyone’s wildest dreams, Ukrainians 
built small kitchens close to where veg was grown, tiny brick houses where all 
the windows and doors could stay open to let some welcome air in to the mini 
preserving factories that they would become. One of the first things to pickle 
would be cucumbers.

Olia Hercules’ recipe for courgette caviar | Recipes from Ukraine
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/31/ukrainian-courgette-caviar-recipe-olia-hercules>
My mum and I love long-fermented gherkins – salty, strong beasts, almost olive 
green, the ones that make you wince, but still reach for another. (I call them 
“nuclear” gherkins.) My dad, however, loves a gentle one- or two-day ferment.
Malosolni ogirky (literally “little-salted gherkins” – those that are quickly 
pickled) are incredibly easy and a good introduction to fermentation. All you 
need is some good water (no chlorine as it kills bacteria) and organic produce 
(pesticides again get in the way of the process), salt, some flavourings and a 
maximum of two summer days. My Russian-Kazakh friend Mari, when in a rush, also 
uses carbonated water – extra CO2 is believed to be a catalyst for the process.

If your kitchen is hot, the malosolni will be ready within 24 hours. And then 
... oh my. Slightly fizzy, delicately sour, retaining freshness but with enough 
funk to be served with rye bread and lardo, taming the heat of a freshly downed 
ice-cold vodka shot. This is a classic I’m giving you here. But I have also 
gone further than that. Add some halved chilli and garlic slices to the 
ferment. When ready, finely dice the gherkin and his friends. Then, alongside a 
small spoonful of the fizzy brine, pour it over an oyster. Because the ferment 
is so young, it won’t kill the delicate oyster flavour. Basically, use as 
normal gherkins but with a fresher, funkier edge. And when the gherkins are 
gone, do not dump the brine. Use it as a vodka pickleback or drink it in the 
morning on a hangover. I grew up watching my dad do this, always bewildered … 
he hates the nuclear but he drinks that strong brine!

Quick-fermented cucumbers

Makes 1 x 3 litre jar
1kg fresh organic cucumbers 
<https://www.ocado.com/webshop/product/Natoora-Ridge-Cucumber/69875011?from=search&tags&param=cucumbers&parentContainer=SEARCHcucumbers_SHELFVIEW>
, the smallest ones you can find
20g sea salt flakes
1 litre mineral water
1 red chilli, whole but bruised with the blade of a knife
10 garlic cloves
1 tsp raw honey
2 sprigs of leaf celery
10 peppercorns (pink are good too!)
1-2 dill umbrellas or some bruised dill stalks
Horseradish leaves, if available
Blackcurrant leaves, if available

1 Sterilise your jar and a muslin cloth.

2 Prepare the cucumbers by cutting them into the sizes and shapes you like. 
You can also leave them whole.

3 To make the brine, dissolve the salt in the water. You may need to help 
things along by heating it slightly. (If you do this, add the herbs and spices 
too to infuse.) Leave the brine to cool down to room temperature.

4 Now, pack the cucumbers, chilli, garlic, honey, celery, peppercorns, dill 
and leaves into the jar and cover with brine. If the cucumbers bob up at the 
top, cover them with the sterilised muslin and weigh it down with something. 
Sometimes I just wedge a couple of celery sticks across the neck of the jar to 
keep them under the brine.

5 Leave in a warm place in your kitchen for at least 24 hours. Check the next 
day – if you see bubbles on the surface you are in luck. Take one pickled 
cucumber piece out with a sterilised fork to check. It should be pleasantly 
sour. If they don’t taste too different, give them another day. If the weather 
is cool, you may need three days.

6 When you are happy with the result and you don’t want them to become 
stronger, pop them into the fridge to slow down the fermentation process. If 
you like some funk in your life, leave them for another few days.

Note: You shouldn’t have any problems in terms of infections. But if you see 
any blue growth, just take it off with a spoon carefully. Things are bad if you 
get slime in your brine, but this should not happen in such a short period of 
time. Just make sure you sterilise the jar properly.

 * Olia Hercules is a chef, food writer and regular contributor to Cook. She 
is author of Mamushka: Recipes from Ukraine and Beyond (Octopus). Rachel Roddy 
is away.  