
Budva, Montenegro <https://www.theguardian.com/travel/montenegro>

It's all about sun, sand and James Bond in the Montenegrin resort town of 
Petrovac, which was used as a filming location forCasino Royale. Situated 
within the district of Budva, Petrovac is dotted with spas, such as Monte Casa 
Spa and Wellness which offers a range of pamper packages and even has a Turkish 
hammam. If you want to try island life, rent a fishing boat from the harbour. 
And if you want to dance the night away, take a taxi up to Top Hill, the 
open-air club where Montenegrins go to party.
Monte Casa Spa and Wellness, Obala BB, Petrovac, 85300, (+382 33 426 900; 
montecasa.com <http://www.montecasa.com/>)

Tito's Cave, Drvar, Bosnia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/bosniaherzegovina>

After the Nazis invaded Yugoslavia in the Second World War, the town of Drvar 
became the headquarters of the partisans' resistance movement. Controversial 
dictator Tito set up his headquarters-cum-hideout just outside the town, and 
from this cave withstood German air raids with the help of Allied forces. At 
the end of the uphill path to the cave's entrance, you're rewarded with a great 
view across Drvar – and the cave itself is a popular spot for leaving ageocache 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/teacher-blog/2013/apr/04/geocaching-geography-history-teaching-landscapes>
. Drvar's local rakiya, a plum brandy popular throughout the Balkans, can 
be enjoyed once you get back down.
Tito's Cave, 1km north of Drvar

Church of St Blaise, Vodnjan, Croatia  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/croatia>

Where can you see a particle of Jesus's cross or the undecayed tongue of 
St Mary of Egypt? St Blaise in the Istrian village of Vodnjan is your best bet. 
It is home to the desiccated remains of six saints and 380 other relics, all 
enclosed in glass cabinets. Why the bodies of the saints have remained intact 
is a mystery – legend has it that they have special powers – but the church's 
exquisite baroque façade is arguably just as magical.
Church of St Blaise, Trg Sveti Blaz, Vodnjan (+385 52 511 420). Open daily 
July-September 9am-7pm. Admission 35 kn

Buzet, Croatia

The architecture in medieval Buzet, in the Istrian peninsula, is a reminder of 
the days the Venetian empire ruled this town, and there are some super views 
overlooking the Mirna River, but most folk come for the truffles. Visit in 
September and you'll be able to join in Subotina Po Starinski, a traditional 
fair celebrating the Virgin Mary's birthday at which the truffle takes centre 
stage – the locals cook up the world's biggest truffle omelette and wash it 
down with biska, mistletoe-flavoured brandy.
Buy and sample truffles at Zigante Tartufi 
<http://zigantetartufi.com/index.php/en/trgovina-buzet>, Trg Fontana, 52420 
Buzet (+385 52 663 340). Open daily 9am-8pm

Njegusi Village, Montenegro 

Njeguši, a mountain village in southern Montenegro, lays claims to the heart 
of Montenegrin cuisine. It's known for its prsut (air-dried ham), lepinja (flat 
bread) and njeguski sir (cheese) which can be bought sliced in a jar of olive 
oil, making it the kind of cheese you can keep in your car. For an authentic 
meal, try the Nevjesta Jadrana restaurant.
Nevjesta Jadrana, Zanjev Do, 81250 Njeguši (+382 67 486 211). Open daily from 
9am

Stari Bar, Montenegro 

Stari Bar, also known as the Old Town of Bar, is an open-air museum whose 
ruins date back to the Middle Ages. The remaining masonry stands against the 
dramatic backdrop of the Rumija mountains, with a reconstructed church and 
clock tower offering a haunting reminder of a time when this town was the most 
important in Montenegro. In late November the place returns to life thanks to 
Maslinijada, a festival dedicated to olives, which the locals celebrate with 
costume and dances.
Stari Bar is a short cab ride away from the New Town of Bar. 2€ entrance fee

Vrulja Cove, Croatia 
 Private beach: Vrulja Cove. Photograph: Alamy 
Want a beach all to yourself? Head to Brela, on the island of Vrulja. Its 
white pebble beach, fringed with figs and olives, stretches for six kilometres 
– and the coastline is full of coves that make it perfect for privacy. Vrulja 
Cove, the area's most beautiful spot, is a gem that is quite literally, hidden 
– it's actually far easier to get to it by boat than by land. Full disclosure 
(ahem): Vrulja Cove is also a haven for toplessness, and sometimes 
bottomlessness. But it's well worth getting over your inhibitions for the sake 
of the beautiful turquoise waters.
Brela is 45km from the city of Split; day tours available with Split Adventure,
splitadventure.com <http://splitadventure.com/> 

Syri Kalter, Albania <https://www.theguardian.com/travel/albania> 

Syri Kalter means Blue Eye in Albanian, and when you reach this amazing water 
spring you'll see why. A geological phenomenon, the 50m-deep spring is a deep 
blue at its centre, with a lighter blue ring surrounding it, resembling a pupil 
and its iris. Throw a stone into its centre, and it will pop back up after a 
little while. It's a bit cold for swimming (an average of 10C in the water), 
but you can always hire a pedalo for a closer look. And the Demi restaurant 
nearby offers a delicious al fresco seafood lunch overlooking the sea.
Demi Restaurant, Rruga Butrinti, Saranda (+355 85 224 636)

Rozafa Castle, Shkodra, Albania 

If you like horror stories, you'll love Rozafa Castle. Legend has it that the 
three brothers who built this castle were told to sacrifice one of their wives, 
and the chosen wife was bricked into an alcove, which still remains. It sits on 
the edge of Lake Shkoder, the largest lake in the Balkans, and the city of 
Shkodra is worth a visit for its Malazeze cuisine alone: flavoursome dishes 
from the mountain regions, consisting of grilled meat and fish.
Rozafa Castle, Rruga Kalasë, Shkodra 4000. 3km south of the city centre. Open 
8am-10pm. Admission 200 lek

Topola, Serbia 

Right at the heart of Serbia, in Sumadija region, sits the town of Topola. The 
19th-century revolutionary Karadjordje, who led an uprising against the Ottoman 
empire and is credited with founding modern Serbia, had his summer residence 
here – it's now a museum that will help you understand a lot of the background 
to modern Balkan history. Karadjordje's tomb is found in St George's Church, 
along with the magnificent mausoleum of the Serbian royal family (he may have 
been a revolutionary, but he still founded his own royal line). Sumadija is 
known for its fine wine, and every October the village of Vinca holds 
a grape-picking ceremony known as Oplenacka Berba – a good time to come and 
sample the previous year's vintage.
St George's Church, Kraljice Marije 4, Topola 34310 (+381 34 811 280; 
oplenac.rs <http://www.oplenac.rs/wpeng/#sthash.LTCpXAE4.dpbs>) 
 