
The Brazilian Joaquim Maria Machado de Assis 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joaquim_Maria_Machado_de_Assis> is, to 
English-language readers, perhaps the most obscure of world literature's great 
short-story writers. Producing work between 1869 and 1908, Machado wrote nine 
novels and more than 200 hundred stories, more than 60 of the latter appearing 
after 1880. This date marks the point at which Machado metamorphosed from a 
writer of romantic trifles into a master of psychological realism, seemingly 
overnight. The Brazilian poet and critic Augusto Meyer compared the shift to 
the one between Herman Melville's earlier works and Moby-Dick.

The evolutionary leap is unquestionable, although the precise reasons for it 
are unclear. Indeed, many uncertainties surround the biography of Machado, who 
was an intensely private person. Perhaps it's no surprise that such a man 
should create a body of work that prizes the puzzle above the certainty. Meyer 
called ambiguity Machado's most prominent theme and the translators Jake 
Schmitt and Lorie Ishimatsu agree, seeing it as being "in part the result of 
his subjective, relativistic world view, in which truth and reality, which are 
never absolutes, can only be approximated; no character relationships are 
stable, no issues are clear-cut, and the nature of everything is tenuous." 
Machado writes with pleasurable clarity – he worked as a journalist for a time 
– but the straightforwardness of his stories is a camouflage for less obvious, 
more troubling cargo.

The theatre for nearly all these dramas of uncertainty is the Rio de Janeiro 
of the Second Empire <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Empire_of_Brazil> 
(1840-1890), which sprawls from his pages as a humid, busy city full of 
intrigue, gossip and prejudice. Remarkably for a man who became a distinguished 
civil servant and founded the Brazilian Academy of Letters, Machado was the 
mixed race grandson of slaves (slavery persisted in Brazil until the 1880s), 
and received little more than an elementary education. Growing up poor on the 
outskirts of Rio gave him an outsider's eye on the bourgeois Carioca society he 
later joined. His work tirelessly satirises their human inadequacy, by turns 
savagely or with an ironic compassion. That someone of his background should 
become Brazil's greatest writer is, as one critic has noted, as if Tolstoy, 
rather than inheritingYasnaya Polyana 
<http://www.ibiblio.org/sergei/Exs/YasnayaPoliana/yp1.html>, had been born a 
serf.

Machado's most recent English translator, John Gledson 
<http://www.machadodeassismagazine.bn.br/editions-text-the-cane.php>, says the 
difficulty of translating him is capturing the right balance of distance, 
understanding and sympathy. Trapdoors to the unexpected open constantly in his 
work, from the sadism of "The Hidden Cause", or the bleak violence of "Father 
versus Mother", to the subtle play of what Michael Wood terms his "quiet, 
complicated humour". Reading him prompts thoughts of so many different writers 
that he can only be unique. Poe's chilling shadow falls across "The Hidden 
Cause" and "The Fortune-Teller". "The Alienist" glitters with Swiftian satire. 
Machado's shrewd, even devious work with the point of view of his narrators 
positions him alongside Henry James. Numerous stories anticipate the moral 
ambiguity of Chekhov's mature work, in particular "A Singular Occurrence". 
Machado's literary mapping of Rio reaches back to the St Petersburg of Gogol 
and Dostoevsky, and anticipates the Dublin of Joyce. Finally, some of his more 
obviously strange works (nearly all of it is strange to some degree, which is 
part of its brilliance) evoke Borges and Kafka. Given all this, it's little 
wonder that writer and critic Kevin Jackson would feel confident enough to 
claim that Machado "invented literary modernity, sui generis".

As wide-ranging as Machado may be in style, however, there are certain themes 
he continually returns to. Read enough of Machado's stories in succession and 
you will soon conclude that the most dominant among these is an obsession with 
time and its destructive passing. Almost all his stories take pains to 
establish themselves in the recent or more distant past. "She died in 1859", 
begins "The Cynosure of All Eyes"; in "Eternal!" the narrator tells us that 
"the whole incident took place 27 years ago". "I've never been able to 
understand the conversation I had with a lady, many years ago, when I was 17, 
and she was 30", begins "Midnight Mass". The story is an exquisite rendering of 
a failed attempt to recapture time, in this case an unconsummated sexual 
encounter. In "Mariana", a man is transported into the past while sitting 
before a portrait of his eponymous ex-lover. In "Dona Paula" an old woman 
becomes almost vampiric in the way she relives an old affair via her niece, who 
is engaged in a flirtation with the son of Dona Paula's ex-lover. But when her 
niece is absent, the older woman cannot recapture her own memories in a way 
that satisfies her:
 But everything … was described with the cold and faded ink of an old 
chronicle, an empty skeleton of history that lacked a living soul. Everything 
occurred in her head. Dona Paula tried synchronising her heart and her head to 
see if she could feel something beyond a mere mental reproduction of her past, 
but despite all efforts to evoke the old feelings, none returned. Time had 
swallowed them. 
What she is seeking can only be delivered, as Proust would define in Swann's 
Way 30 years later, by the action of involuntary memory. Her failure is shared 
by large numbers of Machado's characters, who are continually trying to find 
routes back into the past. In this way the telling and experiencing of stories 
– and by extension literature – becomes not a way of interpreting the world, 
but the world entire. At its most pessimistic, as at the conclusion of "Dona 
Paula", all pleasure lies in a past that proves impossible to meaningfully 
access.

This conception of a hollow, unreal present tied to a genuine but obliterated 
past finds a binary in Machado's interest in the duality of the self, and the 
exploration of characters whose outer and inner personae differ radically. In 
"The Diplomat" this idea is expressed through the description of a man's 
unexpressed passion for a friend's daughter. In "A Famous Man" a hugely 
successful composer of polkas is wracked by his inability to compose 'serious' 
music. But it is in an earlier treatment of this theme, 1882's "The Mirror", 
that Machado captures the phenomenon most memorably. Alone in a desolate 
plantation house, Jacobina, a sub-lieutenant in the National Guard, finds his 
reflection growing dimmer and less distinct. The only way to bring it back into 
focus, and thus cling to reality, is to spend a period several hours each day 
standing before the mirror in his uniform. Jacobina steps out of this strange, 
haunting story to take his place alongsideChekhov's Dmitri Gurov 
<http://www.eldritchpress.org/ac/jr/197.htm> and Joyce's Gabriel Conroy 
<http://www.online-literature.com/james_joyce/958/>, men whose fatally divided 
selves leave them trapped in a limbo between their public and private personae. 
Just as the characters belong together, so do their creators; writing about 
Machado in 2002 Michael Wood complained, "Everyone who reads him thinks he is a 
master, but who reads him, and who has heard of him?" Not nearly so many as he 
deserves.

Quotations from the stories are translated by John Gledson, Jack Schmitt and 
Lorie Ishimatsu

Next: Angela Carter
 