
"I cannot think of any other author", said Harold Bloom of Edgar Allan Poe, 
"who writes so abominably, and yet is so clearly destined to go on being 
canonical." But for each writer who has disparaged him, from Henry James to 
Yeats, Lawrence to Auden, there is an array of works that bear his influence: 
stories and novels not only by horror specialists like HP Lovecraft and Stephen 
King, or by writers of detective fiction such asArthur Conan Doyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/arthurconandoyle>, but by Dostoevsky, 
Baudelaire, Edith Wharton, Thomas Mann, TS Eliot, Joyce, Faulkner, Borges, 
Eudora Welty, Nabokov and Bolaño. Like the obsessions that so often lead to the 
annihilation of Poe's narrators, his influence cannot be escaped.

When Poe began writing stories in earnest in the early 1830s, the gothic 
genre, by far the most popular in the periodicals of the day, was, in artistic 
terms, distinctly hackneyed. Responding to sniffy charges of "Germanism", in 
the preface to his first collection,Tales of the Grotesque and Arabesque 
<http://www.peterharrington.co.uk/rare-books/american-literature-literature-history/tales-of-the-grotesque-and-arabesque/>
 (1840), Poe averred that "terror is not of Germany, but of the soul", and one 
of the primary reasons for the longevity of his stories lies with their ability 
to present stock scenarios (live burial, the doppelgänger, possession) in ways 
that tap into far more profound wells of horror than most gothic authors – or 
horror writers generally – locate. These atmospheres transcend his sometimes 
turgid prose, and the finales described as 
<http://www.newyorker.com/arts/critics/atlarge/2009/04/27/090427crat_atlarge_lepore>
 the "campy, floozy 'Boo!' business at the end", by offering destabilising 
visions of madness, obsessive love, cruelty and endemic menace.

Ever since Marie Bonaparte's pioneering study from a Freudian perspective, 
published in 1934 (which, wrote Richard Wilbur, "though absurd in all the 
expected ways … comes up with many constants of imagery and narrative 
pattern"), Poe's works have often been considered proto-psychological. As 
Benjamin F Fisher notes, this way of reading them "finds excellent symbols in 
the spiralling staircases and downward spirals into ocean depths or mouldering 
sub-cellars of ruinous mansions and abbeys" they abound in. Similarly, while 
individual stories might take place in London (The Man of the Crowd), off the 
coast of Norway (Descent Into the Maelström), or a "chain of wild and dreary 
hills that lie westward and southward of Charlottesville" (A Tale of the Ragged 
Mountains, the only story Poe set in his native Virginia), the vagueness of 
many of the settings reinforces the sense that it is really internal, psychic 
landscapes they are describing.

This idea is underlined by Poe's repeated presentation of buildings as 
metaphors for the human mind. In The Fall of the House of Usher (1839), his 
most controlled, concentrated story, he describes a rotting mansion with a 
crack running through it. Likewise the incestuous Usher twins, Roderick and 
Madeline, are two halves of a divided self that, once separated, disintegrates. 
InWilliam Wilson <http://www.eapoe.org/works/tales/wilwilf.htm> (1839), Poe's 
superb take on the doppelgänger myth, theboarding school where the narrator and 
his uncanny double 
<http://www.hackney.gov.uk/ep-edgar-allan-poe.htm#.UuuqRHd_vns> Wilson first 
encounter one another has "no end to its windings – to its incomprehensible 
subdivisions". Just as the two boys seem to represent the competing natures of 
a single psyche, so within the school building it is "difficult, at any given 
time, to say with certainty upon which of its two storeys one happened to be". 
Hidden away like an unpleasant notion, Wilson rooms in one of the "many little 
nooks or recesses" that entail "the odds and ends of the structure". The gap 
here between Poe's fiction and later theories of repression, or the narrator's 
"wild, confused and thronging memories of a time when memory herself was yet 
unborn" and the Freudian unconscious, is irresistibly narrow.

Poe's genius in William Wilson is to tell the story not of a good protagonist 
bedevilled by an evil twin, but of a corrupt man tormented by a vision of his 
better self. How like our own internal lives, haunted by the better decisions 
and kinder acts of our ideal selves. As Poe's biographer Kenneth Silverman 
points out, doubling is a recurring feature of Poe's work, from the Usher twins 
and William Wilson to the sleuth C Auguste Dupin and his arch enemy in The 
Purloined Letter, Minister D–. The occluded name invites the possibility – 
never distant in Poe – that Dupin's adversary is in fact an alternate version 
of himself.

Poe's three Dupin stories, The Murders in the Rue Morgue, The Mystery of Marie 
Rogêt and The Purloined Letter, created the template for detective fiction that 
Arthur Conan Doyle and Agatha Christie would use for their most famous 
creations, Conan Doyle saying of Poe's detective stories that "each is a root 
from which a whole literature has developed". Dupin is a man, in Peter Thoms's 
phrase, with the "ability to read the mysterious space of the city". He is a 
decipherer of symbols, and it is this ability that Borges – who cites Poe 
throughout his work – transplants into Erik Lönnrot, a detective who considers 
himself "a pure thinker, an Auguste Dupin", whose murder investigation revolves 
around the secret name of the Hebrew god.

Lönrott's quest turns out to be a dead end, the case an elaborate trap. Unlike 
the Dupin of The Purloined Letter, he cannot outwit his criminal counterpart.
Jacques Lacan made much of the fact <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HiQB6jL2u4A>
 that in Poe's story every character is driven to act by a letter (or 
"signifier") whose contents are unknown, and the blankness of the purloined 
letter is just one of many significant absences to be found in Poe's work. Why, 
in The Murders in the Rue Morgue, were the two victims rearranging the contents 
of an iron chest at three in the morning? In The Cask of Amontillado, what is 
the insult for which Montresor enacts his hideous revenge on Fortunato? What is 
the incomprehensible horror the narrator neglects to describe in The Pit and 
the Pendulum? These, like the uncertainty of setting discussed earlier, almost 
goad readers to supply their own meaning. "Poe believed", writes Louise J 
Kaplan, "that truly imaginative literature locates its deepest meaning in an 
undercurrent. The surfaces of his tales are always deceptions", requiring 
effort to "detect the embedded secrets". There is also another possibility: 
that these absences bid the reader to supply their own meaning, to interact 
with and map their own guilt, urges and frustrations onto the stories.

Two of Poe's most famous stories, The Tell-Tale Heart and The Black Cat (both 
1843), revolve around the same absence: the motive for the murders they 
describe. "I was never kinder to the old man than during the whole week before 
I killed him", the narrator of The Tell-Tale Heart tells us, while death in The 
Black Cat arrives suddenly and unexpectedly, apparently as much a surprise to 
the murderous narrator as to us ("I withdrew my arm from her grasp and buried 
the axe in her brain"). Both stories are monologues, both describe maniacal 
states, and both contain passages of unusually blunt prose, as striking as a 
folk tale's: "The night waned; I worked hastily, but in silence. First of all I 
dismembered the corpse. I cut off the head and the arms and the legs".

The echoes of these distinctive, reliably unreliable voices, which foreshadow 
the stream-of-consciousness technique, can be heard, as shouts or whispers, in 
works by authors such as Charlotte Perkins Gilman, Nabokov, Thomas Bernhard and 
Roberto Bolaño. In his Advice on the Art of Writing Short Stories, Bolaño 
writes: "The honest truth is that with Edgar Allan Poe, we would all have more 
than enough good material to read", and hisBy Night in Chile 
<http://www.threepennyreview.com/samples/lesser_sp07.html> can be considered a 
homage. The book is a novel-length monologue by a right-wing priest, Father 
Urrutia Lacroix, who is also the pseudonymous literary critic H Ibacache. It is 
a supposed confession, the rant of a man haunted by his former self, and over 
the course of the book Urrutia proves as slippery as Poe's earlier creations, 
while his narrative contains the distinctly gothic vision of a husband 
torturing political prisoners in the basement while his wife entertains guests 
upstairs. Like Poe's central works, Bolaño's novel enacts the battle of the 
divided self, placing us on a steep pathway descending from surface 
respectability into darker drives and longings.

Next: Clarice Lispector
 