
Frank O'Connor, born Michael O'Donovan 
<http://frankoconnor.ucc.ie/foc_and_mod.php?teanga=> in Cork in 1903, strikes 
me as one of those unfortunate authors who's far from forgotten, but is so 
familiar a part of the Irish literary furniture that he's rarely much noticed. 
Often these days it's not his stories that are quoted, but passages fromThe 
Lonely Voice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/literary-criticism/9780971865990/the-lonely-voice-a-study-of-the-short-story>
 (1963), his book-length study of the short story. It's unsurprising that this 
book should prove so hardy: O'Connor was compelling when voicing an opinion. 
What Richard Ellmann calls the "assumptive tone" of his criticism can inspire, 
thrill and infuriate, but will never bore. "He was like a man who takes a 
machine gun to a shooting gallery," wrote Sean O'Faolain. "Everybody falls flat 
on his face, the proprietor at once takes to the hills, and when it is all 
over, and you cautiously peep up, you find that he has wrecked the place but 
got three perfect bull's-eyes."

If his criticism could be scattershot, his stories are the acme of patient 
craft. Speaking to a student journalist at University College Dublin in the 
early 1960s, O'Connor described a writing process that incorporated both 
extremes of his character: "I hate to write a story over a period of even two 
days because then I lose the mood. I write my stories as though they were 
lyrics … I like to get the essence, the spirit of a story down in about four 
hours – in any old rigmarole (I've got to catch it like a poem). And then I 
polish it endlessly. In my latest book there are stories I have rewritten 50 
times."

This labour-intensive process gave his stories what he called, referring to 
Chekhov's work, their "bony structure", meaning an absolute solidity of 
construction. Yet their surface is all conversational ease, a story arriving 
from the next barstool along. O'Connor tellingly preferred to call his audience 
"listeners" rather than "readers", and believed passionately that the story 
should ring "with the tone of a man's voice, speaking". This effortless flow 
(achieved only after much effort) misleads some readers, as Benedict Kiely 
noted, into believing that O'Connor is "all surface and no depth". But in fact 
many of his best stories, including "The Uprooted", "In the Train", "Michael's 
Wife" and "The Mad Lomasneys", gain their great power from the way in which 
they combine the intimacy and familiarity of the oral tradition with a 
Chekhovian objectivity.

The balance between these two approaches shifts from story to story, but was 
present throughout O'Connor's career. It's there in one of his earliest and 
most famous stories,"Guests of the Nation" 
<http://www.gs.cidsnet.de/englisch-online/Grundkurs3/levko.htm#text2>, the 
title story of his 1931 debut collection. O'Connor had done "odd jobs" for the 
IRA during the revolutionary period, and fought on the Republican side in the 
Civil War, and 10 of the stories in his first collection were war stories. The 
obvious parallel here isIsaac Babel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/feb/10/brief-survey-short-story-isaac-babel>
, who just a few years before had turned his experiences as a Soviet soldier on 
the Polish front into Red Cavalry (1925), and indeed O'Connor said that "the 
man who has influenced me most, I suppose, is really Isaac Babel". Yet their 
military stories are quite different, O'Connor sharing none of the heated 
relish Babel took in recounting violence. Instead, at the end of "Guests of the 
Nation" the narrator, having become friends with and then taken part in 
executing two British soldiers, stands looking out over "the little patch of 
black bog with the two Englishmen stiffening into it" and is gripped by the 
certainty that his youth, and whatever revolutionary fervour he had previously 
held, have both been destroyed. However many times it's read, the story's stark 
energy does not dissipate.

Where Babel and O'Connor are closer is the skill and emotion they bring to 
their child narrators, as well as a shared regard for Maupassant (both writers 
named stories for him). O'Connor's finest stories, though, aren't his portraits 
of childhood, or those that focus on what Julian Barnes terms his "bristly, 
fierce, manipulative" gallery of priests. They are the ones that most 
powerfully capture what he thought characterised the short story above all 
else: "an intense awareness of human loneliness". Supreme among these is "The 
Uprooted" (from his best collection, 1944'sCrab Apple Jelly 
<http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/1981/oct/08/oconnors-crab-apple-jelly/?pagination=false>
), which follows two brothers on a trip home for the Easter weekend. Quiet Ned, 
a schoolteacher, has been "failed" by Dublin: "He no longer knew why he had 
come to the city, but it was not for the sake of the bed-sitting room in 
Rathmines, the oblong of dusty garden outside the window, the trams clanging up 
and down, the shelf full of second-hand books, or the occasional visit to the 
pictures." Meanwhile the ordination of his more assertive brother, Tom, "seemed 
to have shut him off from the rest of the family, and now it was as though he 
were trying to surmount it by his boisterous manner and affected bonhomie. He 
was like a man shouting to his comrades across a great distance." Both men are 
living lives they find intolerable, their frustration only succeeding in 
sealing them deeper within their loneliness. The story, the most lyrical that 
O'Connor ever wrote, is also one of his most pessimistic. "We made our choice a 
long time ago," Ned says in response to Tom's suggestion that he marry a local 
girl. "We can't go back on it now."

"A good short story must be news," O'Connor said, and his vast body of work 
contains much that has, through emotional honesty and quality of observation, 
stayed news. Yeats said O'Connor was "doing for Ireland what Chekhov did for 
Russia", and whether describing gunmen in the bogs, the inhabitants of lonely 
farmhouses, or poor Rita Lomasney living wild while all the time becoming 
ensnared by bourgeois Catholic convention, his best stories attain a distinct 
psychological and emotional richness. There isa fine short story prize given in 
his name each year in Cork <https://www.theguardian.com/books/frankoconnoraward>
, but the greater monument remains his stories.

Next up: John Cheever
 