
Katherine Anne Porter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/katherine-anne-porter> lived a 
long life but published sparingly. Her bibliography is patchy despite its 
slightness – 27 stories and one novel – and yet a handful of her stories rank 
among the best in American literature, fired by a voice and quality of 
insightfulness that no other writer shares. Her style, a particularly lucid 
strain of modernism, was formed from channels cut by Henry James, Willa Cather 
and James Joyce, and made its own pronounced impression on her fellow 
southerners Eudora Welty, Flannery O'Connor and Carson McCullers. But there is 
something set deep within her writing that bears no marks of influence, and is 
not found elsewhere. This unique quality is surely the reason why she can make 
a serious claim for greatness from a relatively modest platform.

Porter grew up poor, scion of a once grand Louisianan family shunted by 
circumstance to rural south Texas. LikeJohn Cheever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/john-cheever>, she devoted 
considerable energies to convincing people ofher august lineage. 
<http://www.loa.org/images/pdf/Porter_Portrait_Old_South.pdf> This makes her 
sequence of "autobiographical" stories (which feature Porter's fictional 
alter-ego, Miranda) even more remarkable an achievement, because they are not 
drawn from life as they appear to be. When she was 30, after a brief, 
radicalising spell in New York, Porter travelled to Mexico to witness and to an 
extent participate in the cultural revolution underÁlvaro Obregón 
<http://www.pbs.org/itvs/storm-that-swept-mexico/the-revolution/faces-revolution/alvaro-obregon/>
. Her first stories, written in the early 1920s, take Mexico as their setting.

"Flowering Judas" (1930) took longer to emerge, and is the most extraordinary 
of Porter's Mexican stories. It blends religious faith, political belief and 
eroticism in a narrative that feels at once concrete and hallucinatory. Laura, 
a young, idealistic American, is committed to socialism, but still "slips now 
and again into some crumbling little church" to pray. The labour leader 
Braggioni, whose body "swells with ominous ripeness", tries each night to 
seduce her. Disillusioned, Laura sees Braggioni as a betrayal of the 
revolutionary ideal, and at the same time realises that her idealism is 
romantic nonsense. Yet she still runs Braggioni's errands, smuggling pills into 
prison for a fellow revolutionist who uses them to kill himself. In the story's 
final sequence Laura dreams that the suicide returns to punish her act of 
betrayal, each strand of the story combining in a charged and horrific vision.

Betrayal, which as Charles Baxter has observed "gives off a very particular 
hum" in Porter's work, defines another of her masterpieces, "Noon Wine" (1937). 
The story describes a failing Texas dairy farm and the hiring of a stranger, 
the taciturn Swede Mr Helton, whose industry turns around the fortunes of the 
Thompson family. A decade later another stranger arrives at the farm gate, the 
bounty hunter Homer T Hatch, who is intent on running Mr Helton to ground for a 
crime he committed in North Dakota 10 years before. Mr Thompson, however, 
doesn't want to let him go. The confrontation between Thompson and Hatch is one 
of the great scenes of American literature: menace throbs beneath a veneer of 
civility, and the mood shifts queasily between humour, pettiness and grave 
threat. When Thompson kills Hatch he is cleared by a jury, but cannot shake his 
sense of guilt. Like the unfortunate peasant inGuy de Maupassant's "A Piece of 
String" <http://www.eastoftheweb.com/short-stories/UBooks/PiecStri.shtml>, he 
spends days travelling the countryside explaining what happened to his 
neighbours but failing to convince them, or himself, of his innocence. His 
great act of betrayal is to involve his wife in this process, a decision that 
demeans her and leads to his suicide. An explanation for the extraordinary 
power of "Noon Wine", which has often and understandably been described as a 
modernist Greek tragedy, is given by Porter in a 1956 essay: it is "a story of 
the most painful moral and emotional confusions", she writes, "in which 
everyone concerned, yes, in his own crooked way, even Mr Hatch, is trying to do 
right".

Thompson's suicide is described with a haunting simplicity: "Taking off his 
right shoe and sock, he set the butt of the shotgun along the ground with the 
twin barrels pointed towards his head. It was very awkward. He thought about 
this a little, leaning his head against the gun mouth". The passage exemplifies 
the command Porter shows when writing about death. She nearly died after 
contracting Spanish flu in Denver in 1918, and in her fictionalised account, 
the 1939 story "Pale Horse, Pale Rider", death appears to Miranda in a fever 
dream as a stranger who "leaned far towards her and regarded her without 
meaning". In the surging stream of consciousness narrative "The Jilting of 
Granny Weatherall" Porter goes further still, to the threshold of death and 
beyond:
 Her heart sank down and down, there was no bottom to death, she couldn't come 
to the end of it. The blue light from [the] lampshade drew into a tiny point in 
the centre of her brain, it flickered and winked like an eye, quietly it 
fluttered and dwindled. Granny lay curled down within herself, amazed and 
watchful, staring at the point of light that was herself; her body was now only 
a deeper mass of shadow in an endless darkness and this darkness would curl 
around the light and swallow it up. 
The passage prompts – and earns – comparison to Tolstoy, who, more than any 
other writer, keeps returning to the moment of death in his fiction (think of 
that "black sack into which an invisible, invincible force" is thrusting Ivan 
in "The Death of Ivan Ilyich").

As Granny Weatherall lies dying her mind roves the past, which in Porter's 
work is an involute and inescapable territory. All of her characters find 
themselves tightly enmeshed in personal and collective memory, an active force 
that limits and often determines their actions. To escape this hold, it seems, 
requires escaping life itself; in "Pale Horse, Pale Rider" it is only when 
Miranda is on the brink of succumbing to her illness that she discovers "There 
were no longer any multiple planes of living, no tough filaments of memory and 
hope pulling taut backwards and forwards holding her upright between them". 
Porter's most complete exploration of this theme is "Old Mortality" (1937), a 
long, tripartite story exploring the myths families construct around 
themselves, and the tension younger family members experience as they try to 
break free of them. At the story's end Miranda rejects the oppression of 
tradition, but the final line – arriving like a blow – describes "her 
hopefulness, her ignorance", and implies that her supposed escape is only the 
next wave of myth making in process. As this suggests, Porter is a fatalist, 
which explains why her endings so often feel absolutely necessary. "The reader 
expects," the novelist Penelope Gilliatt once noted, "some counter-twist on the 
last pages, but no such trick. The end is a true end, and the truth of its 
acceleration comes when you read any of her finest stories a second time."

Which is not to say Porter's stories are programmatic. They are too intensely 
realised for that. They possess, in Robert Penn Warren's memorable description, 
"rich surface detail scattered with apparently casual profuseness", but beneath 
it rests "the close structure which makes such detail meaningful". Porter 
denied the deliberate presence of symbolism in her work – "I never consciously 
took or adopted a symbol in my life", shetold an interviewer in 1963 
<http://www.theparisreview.org/interviews/4569/the-art-of-fiction-no-29-katherine-anne-porter>
 – but intention, whether or not she was speaking truthfully, is beside the 
point here. Great stories generate their own meanings, and take on new life in 
the mind of each reader. Porter's stories are of the past, but they remain 
active and alive.

Next: Dambudzo Marechera
 