
Flannery O'Connor's stories plough a straight and often gory furrow from 
individual pride to disaster. Writing the way she did "because (not though) I 
am a Catholic", she described A Good Man is Hard to Find, the first of her two 
story collections, as "nine stories about original sin, with my compliments". 
This religious flavour, coupled with the great economy of her prose, and a 
tendency to focus on two characters inextricably and antagonistically tied to 
one another, might have made parables of her stories. But the unruly life she 
invests them with, not to mention her deliciously skewed sense of humour, stops 
them attaining the clearly defined edges of the purely instructional. "As with 
the work of any profound artist,"Robert Towers 
<http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/1979/may/03/flannery-oconnors-gifts/?pagination=false>
 notes, "an element of the mysterious – of the unspoken, the unacknowledged – 
hangs like a shining mist over all that has been consciously intended and 
consciously achieved."

The English professor Walter Sullivan 
<http://articles.latimes.com/2006/aug/19/local/me-passings19.1> once compiled a 
bloody catalogue. Of the 19 stories published in O'Connor's short lifetime (she 
died from a kidney infection in 1964 at the age of 39, having been diagnosed 
with lupus in 1950), nine end in one or multiple violent deaths, three in 
physical assault, one in arson, and two in theft. O'Connor's tongue was in her 
cheek when she said, "I can't write about anything subtle", but she knew a good 
joke has its roots in the truth. Her stories are baldly dramatic, and the 
Georgia she creates on the page – as individual a landscape as any in fiction – 
is summoned with few, very bold strokes. The sun is "a huge red ball … drenched 
in blood", a "furious white blister", a "white hole like an opening for the 
wind to escape through in a sky a little darker than itself". The "fat yellow 
moon" is seen in the branches of a fig tree "as if it were going to roost there 
with the chickens". O'Connor so loads her brush with pathetic fallacy that her 
landscape is alive, the scene nearly always hemmed in by lines of watching 
trees or woods that gape "like a dark open mouth".

The figures she plants in this landscape –farmhands, conmen, embittered 
intellectuals, bigots, Bible salesmen and killers – are equally vivid, and the 
situations they encounter yet more so. Speaking of the disjunction between her 
Catholic convictions and what she saw as her largely godless readership, 
O'Connor wrote that "[w]hen you can assume that your audience holds the same 
beliefs you do, you can relax a little and use more normal means of talking to 
it; when you have to assume that it does not, then you have to make your vision 
apparent by shock – to the hard of hearing you shout, and for the almost-blind 
you draw large and startling figures." The most famous example of this 
approach, O'Connor's quintessential story, is "A Good Man is Hard to Find" 
(1953), in which a family encounter the gang of an escaped convict, The Misfit, 
in the Georgia backwoods. As O'Connor has it, the story's meaning resides in a 
moment of grace enacted when the grandmother, up until the conclusion of the 
story solely foolish and self-serving, touches The Misfit's shoulder and tells 
him,
 'Why you're one of my babies. You're one of my own children!' She reached out 
and touched him on the shoulder. The Misfit sprang back as if a snake had 
bitten him and shot her three times through the chest. 
It's an indelible moment, yet despite O'Connor's own explanation it is 
interpretable in many different ways. O'Connor's ability to create characters 
and situations that resonate as powerfully as they do results in meanings that, 
as she herself acknowledged, ramify beyond authorial intention. A parable only 
possesses its surface meaning and actual meaning, but O'Connor's most 
accomplished stories can seem to point in all sorts of directions at once. 
Elizabeth Bishop succinctly captured this paradoxical trait when she pointed 
out that "[y]ou'd have to call 'A Good Man is Hard tßo Find' a 'funny' story 
even though six people are killed in it".

But if the potential meanings of O'Connor's stories are numerous and plastic, 
their internal logic is singular and concrete. O'Connor is so sedulous an 
observer ofChekhov's gun rule <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chekhov%27s_gun> 
that if a family discusses a newspaper story about a killer on the loose, there 
is no doubt that he'll massacre them; if a bull is roaming the fields, its horn 
will soon be buried in someone's gut ("Greenleaf"); if a grandfather has bred 
his own obstinacy into a beloved granddaughter, he will beat her to death when 
she is obstinate towards him ("A View of the Woods"). The inexorability of 
O'Connor's plots can, as in these cases, invest her stories with the awful 
power of Greek tragedy, and indeed before giving readings of "A Good Man is 
Hard to Find" she'd say that, "like the Greeks you should know what is going to 
happen in this story so that any element of suspense in it will be transferred 
from its surface to its interior". If someone's first experience of O'Connor 
was "The Displaced Person" (1954), at the denouement of which three people 
passively watch a tractor roll down a slope and crush a fourth, the event would 
be unexpected and shocking. But the story is arguably more powerful when a 
familiarity with O'Connor's work makes this ending an awaited inevitability. 
The tangible menace that her stories exude isn't about "what", but "when".

When her control is less certain, as in "A Stroke of Good Fortune" (1949) or 
"A Late Encounter with the Enemy" (1953), such an approach can seem a gimmick, 
calamity arriving like the punchline to a poor joke. Failures like this explain 
why some critics consider O'Connor's art brilliant but narrow and predictable. 
But such instances are in the minority, and the late stories "Revelation" 
(1964) and "Parker's Back" (1965), suggest her talent was only deepening as her 
life ended. It's tempting to wonder what she might have done with more time, 
not least to see how the "Christ-haunted" South of her fiction would have been 
altered by the Civil Rights Act, passed a month before she died. Her position 
on race was ambivalent, but I tend to agree with Hilton Als that she was "not 
romantic enough to take Faulkner's Disney view of blacks – as the fulcrum of 
integrity and compassion. She didn't use them as vessels of sympathy or scorn; 
she simply – and complexly – drew from life". That same collision of the simple 
and the complex is what lies at the heart of her best work, a tight compact of 
the bold, the startling, and the mysterious.

Next: Frank O'Connor
 