
During his lifetime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2006/mar/31/guardianobituaries.books> John 
McGahern was frequently called Ireland's Chekhov. It's a description that 
carries the flavour of journalistic laziness, but there is something common to 
their ability to largely efface themselves from their prose, and their skill at 
drawing meaning from the lives of everyday rural people: teachers, farmers, 
labourers and policemen. McGahern clearly learned a great deal from Chekhov, 
and he even included a tribute of sorts in his story The Beginning of an Idea, 
where a character struggles with a fictionalised biography of the Russian. But 
he preferred deflecting the comparison when it arose: "I think there is nothing 
that Chekhov wrote that isn't wonderful", he told an interviewer in 1991. 
"Chekhov is one of the few writers that didn't write enough. You can't pay a 
writer much more of a compliment than that."

It could be said McGahern didn't write enough: six novels and three 
short-story collections in a career of 44 years. He always took his time, 
scrapping much more than he kept, sometimes writingmore than 20 full versions 
of a single story <http://thedublinreview.com/how-mcgahern-did-it/>. But then 
you could say, the more you explore his work, that most of it is a rewriting, a 
revising of a small stock of theme, incident and location. The setting is 
sometimes Dublin, occasionally London, but usually Co Leitrim where the soil is 
poor, "in places no more than an inch deep". The period is most often the 
1950s, and even in stories set later the Troubles do not intrude. He delves 
into the tensions between Catholic Irish and representatives of the Protestant 
Ascendancy <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HenqDQehg0g>, but always at a 
personal level.

On the page McGahern is a realist, and some consider him conservative, but 
taken collectively the stories have an experimental edge, or at least a strange 
one. Consider the way he reuses certain characters, most notably an emotionally 
abusive farmer and his second wife, Rose, who appear prominently in the stories 
Wheels, Sierra Leone and Gold Watch, and are mentioned in several others. In 
each of these stories the narrator visits from Dublin and clashes with the 
father. Yet Rose, the farmer and the returning son are not intended to be the 
same characters from story to story. Rather they are archetypes of some kind, 
and through its repetition the struggle enacted in each story comes to seem 
like some eternal battle from myth.

The father is there from the beginning, incarnated as a Garda sergeant in 
McGahern's first novel, The Barracks (1963). At the time Anthony Burgess said 
the book "has caught so well the peculiar hopelessness of contemporary 
Ireland", and it is true that a strand of hopelessness runs throughout 
McGahern's work. As Nicholas Wroe notes,"the horrors are always there in 
McGahern" <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/jan/05/fiction.books>, even 
if they are of a quiet, despairing sort, as when a hungover and jilted man 
looks on a Dublin street:
 There were five steps up to each house. The stone was granite. Many of the 
iron railings were painted blue. Across the street was a dishevelled lilac 
bush. They'd taught us to notice such things when young. They said it was the 
world. 
Or when a teacher (McGahern's occupation before his second novel, The Dark, 
was banned, and he was driven from Ireland) stares out of the classroom window, 
willing three o'clock:
 Outside, the three stone walls of the playground run down to the lake, the 
centre wall broken by the concrete lavatory, above it the rapid sparkle of 
pinpoint flashes of sunlight on the wings of the blackdust swarm of flies; and 
on the windowsill in a jam jar a fistful of primroses some child has gathered 
from the May banks. In the stream of sunlight across the blackboard the 
chalkdust floats, millions of white grains, breathed in and out all day, found 
at night in the turnups of trousers, all the aridity of this empty trade. 
Or when a priest remembers his mother's descent into senility 
<http://www.newyorker.com/online/2009/11/16/091116on_audio_li>:
 … and then the day came when he had to admit that she no longer knew who he 
was, had become like a dog kennelled out too long. 
This is brutal material in its way, and McGahern's dark energies are nowhere 
more forcefully expressed than in the extraordinary Hearts of Oak, Bellies of 
Brass (1970). Collecting his pay after another punishing day of shovelling on a 
London building site, the narrator reflects:
 I love to count out in money the hours of my one and precious life. I sell 
the hours and I get money. The money allows me to sell more hours. If I saved 
money I could buy the hours of some similar bastard and live like a royal 
incubus, which would suit me much better than the way I am now, though 
apparently even as I am now suits me well enough, since I do not want to die. 
The men labour, drink, and "go round to Marge and Kathleen", prostitutes who 
live "in the condemned row, moving from empty house to empty house ahead of the 
demolition. Limp rubbers floated in the gutters Monday mornings while they 
slept in the daylight." It is a cycle seemingly without meaning or end, one of 
many that confirms the wheel as the central image of McGahern's work: the 
identification of life as a recurrent pattern. In Parachutes it reappears as a 
depressive's vision:
 It was as if we were looking down a long institutional corridor; the child in 
the feeding chair could be seen already, the next child, and the next … the 
lawnmowers in summer, the thickening waists. It hardly seemed necessary to live 
it. 
In the story Sierra Leone, one of several McGahern stories about unsuccessful 
love affairs, the narrator notes with weary acceptance, "the old wheel turned 
and turned anew, wearing my life away; but if it wasn't this wheel it would be 
another." But in Oldfashioned, one of his most ambitious and remarkable 
stories, some air is let in, if only temporarily: "The wheel of the summer 
turned pleasantly. The seeds pushed above ground, were thinned. The roses and 
the other flowers bloomed. The soft fruit ripened and Mrs Sinclair started to 
make jams in the big brass pot." And in the late story The Country Funeral, the 
repetitious cycles of country life, in particular the wake and burying of the 
dead, are seen not as markers of the claustrophobic narrowing of life, but acts 
that deepen the connections between people.

From McGahern's earliest books there is an extraordinary grace and power to 
his descriptive writing, particularly of landscape. (Dublin does not receive 
the same careful attention, and remains – perhaps intentionally – 
insubstantial.) His descriptive abilities grew as he continued to labour at his 
style, culminating in the descriptions of Gloria Bog in The Country Funeral, 
located in the heart of the territory where so many of his stories take place. 
He describes the bog with great beauty and plainness of language, first at dusk:
 Without any warning, suddenly, they were out of the screen of small trees 
into the open bog. A low red sun west of Killeelan was spilling over the sedge 
and dark heather. Long shadows stretched out from the small birches scattered 
all over the bog.

And then at night:
 It was a clear moonlit night without a murmur of wind, and the acres of pale 
sedge were all lit up, giving back much of the light it was receiving, so that 
the places that were covered with heather melted into a soft blackness and the 
scattered shadows of the small birches were soft and dark on the cold sedge. 
If you have not read McGahern before these passages may seem unremarkable. I 
suspect their effect, and that of his prose generally, depends in part on 
repetition, its wheeling returns to the same places, the same people, the same 
situations, and that its impact grows with each repetition just as a ritual 
accretes meaning the more it is performed. Beneath these descriptions of Gloria 
Bog lies the sediment of his many other evocations of Leitrim, a landscape he 
recreated with the persistence of Paul Cézanne painting Mont Sainte-Victoire. 
"My only concern", as McGahern once said, "is that I get the sentence right and 
describe my world clearly and deeply."

Next: Italo Calvino
 