
"Like overhearing a scream", is how Doris Lessing described reading the 
Zimbabwean authorDambudzo Marechera 
<http://www.vqronline.org/articles/2006/winter/habila-on-dambudzo-marechera/>'s 
1978 bookThe House of Hunger <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m3fbB8e6HHY>. 
Comprising a novella and a series of satellite stories, it marked the arrival 
of an extreme and unusual talent that was cut short by death from Aids-related 
illness in 1987.As China Miéville has noted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/audio/2010/aug/04/books-that-made-me-china-mieville>
, Marechera demands "sustained effort from the reader, so that the work is 
almost interactive – reading it is an active process of collaboration with the 
writer – and the metaphors are simultaneously so unclichéd and so apt that he 
reinvigorates the language".

Marechera described his writing as a form of "literary shock treatment", and 
the majority of his works are written in a sometimes difficult 
stream–of–consciousness style that owes a significant debt to European 
modernism. He has been called the "African Joyce", but the description is 
somewhat glib. After all, if you compare anyone with Joyce you had better 
specify which Joyce you mean. With its deliberately confused timelines, 
disorienting shifts between external event and internal process, and 
predilection for the grotesque, much of Marechera's writing lies somewhere 
between the night-town episode of Ulysses and JG Ballard's Atrocity Exhibition.

Written in English, his second language (his first was Shona), Marechera's 
prose exudes tension. He considered English a form of combat, a process of 
"discarding grammar, throwing syntax out, subverting images from within, 
beating the drum and cymbals of rhythm, developing torture chambers of irony 
and sarcasm, gas ovens of limitless black resonance".

Marechera grew up in troubled times. In 1965 Ian Smith's government issued the 
Unilateral Declaration of Independence (UDI), beginning a 15-year struggle that 
would end with Rhodesia becoming independent Zimbabwe in 1980. Throughout this 
perioda civil war split the country 
<http://www.historytoday.com/paul-moorcraft/rhodesias-war-independence> into 
competing factions attempting to create white, black, democratic, Marxist and 
authoritarian states. In Marechera's work this state of affairs is represented 
by student spies working for the government, terrorist cells, violently 
suppressed street protests, and a general atmosphere of instability and threat.

Marechera's characters are typically outsiders. He was separated from the 
inhabitants of his township by education (he won a scholarship to the first 
Rhodesian public school to admit black pupils), separated from his homeland by 
exile, from his fellows at Oxford by racism, and finally,on his return to 
Zimbabwe after independence <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m3fbB8e6HHY>, from 
those who had fought while he lived in London. As he writes in Black Sunlight, 
"Steve Biko died while I was blind drunk in London. Soweto burned while I was 
sunk in deep thought about an editor's rejection slip." Oxford, Black Oxford, 
meanwhile, is a scabrous assault on the way Marechera (who was a wild and 
ill-disciplined, albeit brilliant student) was belittled by both the university 
tutors and his fellow students. The story begins and ends with bitterly ironic 
visions of beauty and hope, but the despair at its centre suggests that these 
intermittent moments of joy are remnants of an optimism that is being ground 
away by adverse reality.

The gap between the chaotic world of Marechera's fiction and his own life is 
small, although the manner in which he writes is far from typical 
autobiographical fiction. Rather, the works become struggles between what one 
critic describes as "competing identities". Often the narrator undergoes 
extraordinary transformations, like those found in the Polish authorBruno Schulz
 <http://brunoschulz.eu/en/>'s stories, although with the accent more on dread 
than wonder. At the end of Protista, the narrator, who appears to have crossed 
from life into death, encounters a man from his village who drowned some time 
before:

Yesterday I met Barbara's father in the valley. 
'I'll get you in the end, you rascal!' he screamed. 
But I bit the silver button and turned myself into a crocodile and laughed my 
great sharp teeth at him.
He instantly turned himself into mist, and I could only bite chunks of air. 

This folkloric element, effective as it can be, is untypical in Marechera; 
more often a character's reality is called into doubt in a way closer to the 
modernist crisis of the self. The effect is disquieting, and can, as in The 
House of Hunger, be little short of horrifying:

A doorway yawned blankly into me: it led to a smaller room: numb, dark and 
also utterly empty. I could not bring myself to touch the walls to prove that 
they were really there… For some reason I began to wonder if I was really in 
there; perhaps I was a mere creation of the rooms themselves. Another doorway 
brooded just ahead of me.

Nightmare visions and chaotic boundaries between fantasy and reality also 
characterise The Slow Sound of His Feet. In this short, devastating 
masterpiece, the narrator, an artist, struggles to come to terms with the 
consecutive violent deaths of his father and mother. Memory and reality are 
skilfully handled, with five successive mentions of waking up or opening and 
closing eyes blurring the line between dream and reality. The narrator tries 
and fails "to paint the feeling of the silent but desperate voices inside me".

Of the many potent motifs in Marechera's work, the most definitive one is this 
inability to find one's voice. When the narrator's mother is shot dead in The 
Slow Sound of His Feet, his sister's hand, "coming up to touch my face, flew to 
her opening mouth and I could feel her straining her vocal muscles to scream 
through my mouth"; when the children bury their mother the sun is "screaming 
soundlessly"; in Protista, the narrator, attacked by the ghost of a drowned 
boy, cries out, "but I could not hear my own voice", while The Transformation 
of Harry ends with "something shrill" tearing into the narrator's ears:

Startled, I looked up. Philip and Ada were also staring. 
The maddening high-pitched needles were coming from Harry.
But he was not making any sound. 

The heart of Marechera's work, as these examples suggest, is a bleak 
territory. "Life", as he puts it in The House of Hunger, is like "a series of 
hunger-scoured hovels stretching endlessly towards the horizon". African 
critics attacked him for this attitude, Juliet Okonkwo writing in 1981 that his 
"excessive interest in sex activity, his tireless attempt to rake up filth, is 
alien to Africa – a continent of hope and realisable dreams". Marechera's 
position? "If you are a writer for a specific nation or a specific race, then 
fuck you."

Marechera is a challenging writer. Even supporters like John Wyllie, a reader 
for the publisher Heinemann who thought Marechera "a sort of African Dylan 
Thomas only much more intelligent than Thomas ever was", despaired after trying 
to recommend changes to one particular work: "I have worked through Black 
Sunlight three times and now feel that I need to go away into the nice quiet 
Irish countryside and have a nervous breakdown". But what some see as wilful or 
naive complication is, for Marechera, an honest accounting of his reality. It 
can be confounding, sometimes tedious, but also exhilarating, and often reads 
like no other writer you know. As Marechera's alter ego in The Black Insider 
states, "To write as though only one kind of reality subsists in the world is 
to act out a mentally retarded mime, for a mentally deficient audience". This 
uncompromising stance is a cogent challenge to conventional narrative styles, a 
declaration that the most convincing versions of reality might not be smooth or 
fluent, but chaotic and fractured.

Next: Edgar Allan Poe
 