
In a lecture delivered in New York in the spring of 1983, Italo Calvino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/italocalvino> remarked that "most of the 
books I have written and those I intend to write originate from the thought 
that it will be impossible for me to write a book of that kind: when I have 
convinced myself that such a book is completely beyond my capacities of 
temperament or skill, I sit down and start writing it".

Like much of Calvino's work, the statement is at once ironic and quite 
serious, and is justified entirely by his extraordinary bibliography. Between 
the late 1940s and his relatively early death 
<http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/1985/nov/21/on-italo-calvino/> in 
1985, aged 61, he produced as varied and individual a body of work as any 
writer in the modern era: neorealist stories of the second world war and 
postwar period (the young Calvino served as a partisan, and was a Communist 
party member until shortly after the Soviet invasion of Hungary in 1956), 
fables, political allegories, historical novels, stories inspired by scientific 
theories, thought experiments, narratives generated using tarot cards and 
computer processes, and, at either end of the 1970s, two novels –Invisible 
Cities <http://www.jeanettewinterson.com/journalism/invisible-cities/> and If 
on a Winter's Night a Traveller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/may/22/fiction.italocalvino> – that 
exemplify his method of using fantasy to address reality. In structural terms 
these books also codify his passion for beginnings and mistrust of endings, 
positions that perhaps explain why he habitually moved from one obsession to 
another, looking for the next impossible thing to write. As the narrator of his 
1959 novel The Nonexistent Knight mourns, revealing the pessimism that 
counterbalances the exuberance of his work,
 "One starts off writing with a certain zest, but a time comes when the pen 
merely grates in dusty ink, and not a drop of life flows, and life is all 
outside, outside the window, outside oneself, and it seems that never more can 
one escape into a page one is writing, open out another world, leap the gap." 
In the late 1940s Calvino wrote a number of Hemingwayesque stories that drew 
on his own wartime experience. Already, however, a fairytale quality imbued 
some of them, for example Animal Wood, and this is the direction in which his 
work tended throughout the 1950s; the neorealist novel of Italian society that 
readers anticipated did not appear. As he later explained: "Instead of making 
myself write the book I ought to write, the novel that was expected of me, I 
conjured up the book I myself would have liked to read, the sort by an unknown 
writer, from another age and another country, discovered in an attic."

That book, the historical fantasy The Cloven Viscount (1951), was followed by 
two of similar style, The Baron in the Trees and The Nonexistent Knight. In the 
same period Calvino worked on his anthology Italian Folktales (1956), a 
conscious attempt to produce a Grimm-like survey of stories from the Italian 
peninsula. This project cemented his regard for "the force of reality which 
bursts forth into fantasy" a term that could be applied to the majority of his 
subsequent work. With occasional exceptions, such as the fine 1963 story The 
Watcher, about the 1953 national election, Calvino abandoned realism.

From the 1960s onwards Calvino's work often took the form of a game played 
between himself and the reader, or himself and a concept. In stories such ast 
zero <http://quarterlyconversation.com/t-zero-by-italo-calvino-review> and The 
Night Driver 
<http://www.mixcloud.com/GuardianRadio/jeanette-winterson-reads-the-night-driver-by-italo-calvino/listeners/>
 (1967) he goes astonishingly far, stripping out character and plot yet 
retaining narrative momentum. These stories aligned Calvino with the OULIPO 
group, the Paris-based circle including Raymond Queneau and Georges Perec, 
which sought to graft the rigour and constraints of mathematics onto the 
freedoms and ambiguities of literature. Not everyone was a willing passenger on 
these particular journeys, however. Gore Vidal, who in a famous 1974 essay in 
the New York Review of Books effectively launched Calvino in the 
English-speaking world, grumbled that t zero "could have been written (and 
rather better) by Borges" and that The Chase reminded him of Robbe-Grillet. 
"This", he clarified, "is not a compliment".

Those stories appear in a second collection of Cosmicomics, the story sequence 
that represents one of Calvino's greatest achievements. Written mostly between 
1964 and 1968, although he made additions to the collection as late as the 
1980s, they are indebted, according to their author, "particularly to Leopardi, 
the Popeye comics, Samuel Beckett, Giordano Bruno, Lewis Carroll, the paintings 
of Matta and in some cases the works of Landolfi, Immanuel Kant, Borges, and
Grandville's engravings 
<http://www.tracemayer.com/index.cfm?ThisPage=show_by_category&inventory_category=Grandville%20Engravings>
". Mostly narrated by a protean being with the unpronounceable name Qfwfq (I'm 
happy to go along withRobert Coover's "Kwoofk" 
<http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/books/2013/06/fiction-podcast-robert-coover-reads-italo-calvino.html>
), each story uses scientific statements as launch pads for imaginative tours 
de force, exploring the domestic, the romantic and the existential via 
astronomy, geology and evolutionary biology. Qfwfq has been around since the 
big bang, and we follow him across the wastes of deep space, through stands of 
proto-conifers, into fecund tide pools and beneath the earth's crust. As the 
translator Martin McLaughlin notes, Calvino's constant aim was "to raise the 
target which literature sets itself: he challenges literature to describe the 
indescribable, from macrocosm to microcosm, from the Big Bang to the division 
of cells". The language he uses to achieve this is striking, delivering 
concrete descriptions of, for example, cosmological theory, as with this 
imagining of the now dismissed steady-state theory of the universe's origins:
 "Space is curved everywhere, but in some places it's more curved than in 
others: like pockets or bottlenecks or niches, where the void is crumpled up. 
These niches are where, every two hundred and fifty million years, there is a 
slight tinkling sound and a shiny hydrogen atom is formed like a pearl between 
the valves of an oyster." 
More than any other writer I know, to begin a new Calvino story is like 
embarking on a voyage to unknown lands; there is a joy to the sense of 
expectation he inspires. Yet at the same time, his work is tempered with an 
atmosphere of melancholy and increasing pessimism. Images of the end of the 
world recur with obsessive regularity, and even terror is present in a 
significant minority of his works. The most remarkable example of this is The 
Argentine Ant (1953), which describes a man, woman and baby who move to a new 
village filled with hope – the promise of a new beginning, that core Calvino 
theme – only to find that their house, indeed the entire locality, is infested 
with ants. The story really is, as Gore Vidal stated, "as minatory and strange 
as anything by Kafka", and the way it builds its air of threat and mystery with 
plain, undemonstrative language recalls Calvino's own description of Kafka 
"using a language so transparent that it reaches a hallucinatory level".

"My author is Kafka", Calvino once told an interviewer when asked about his 
influences, and his presence is discernible throughout Calvino's work, from The 
Argentine Ant to the 1984 story Implosion. Here Calvino links two of 
literature's most introspective characters, the doomed prince Hamlet (the story 
begins: "To explode or to implode – said Qfwfq – that is the question") and the 
mole-like creature from Kafka's death-haunted story The Burrow, in a beautiful 
but deeply melancholic rumination on black holes and the death of the universe, 
and an apprehension that obliteration lies at the heart of each individual 
consciousness:
 "Don't distract yourselves fantasizing over the reckless behaviour of 
hypothetical quasi-stellar objects at the uncertain boundaries of the universe: 
it is here that you must turn your attention, to the centre of our galaxy, 
where all our calculations and instruments indicate the presence of a body of 
enormous mass that nevertheless remains invisible. Webs of radiation and gas, 
caught there perhaps since the time of the last implosions, show that there in 
the middle lies one of these so-called holes, spent as an old volcano. All that 
surrounds it, the wheel of planetary systems and constellations and the 
branches of the Milky Way, everything in our galaxy rests on the hub of this 
implosion sunk away into itself." 
The last line of this final Cosmicomic – "I go on digging my hole, in my 
mole's burrow" – forges a link with The Burrow, a story that Kafka was yet to 
finish at the time of his death, or so it appears: the final page of the 
manuscript is completely filled, with no terminating punctuation mark. How 
fitting that in one of his last stories Calvino, whose work is a catalogue of 
new beginnings (the "collection of fragments that is my oeuvre", he called it), 
should gesture to the last story of another author that does not end, only 
stops. Calvino's own life, too, didn't draw to a close but broke off abruptly 
with a cerebral haemorrhage, the next impossible book, finally, remaining 
unwritten.

• Translations from the work here are by William Weaver, Archibald Colquhoun 
and Tim Parks.

Next: Barry Hannah
 