
At the turn of the millennium, the Uruguayan daily El País asked writers and 
critics to vote for the greatest Latin American novel. The winner, by a clear 
margin, was Juan Rulfo's Pedro Páramo, the book Jorge Luis Borges called one of 
the best works of Hispanic literature, or indeed of any literature. If the 
paper had asked its voters to choose the greatest Latin American short story 
collection, Rulfo's The Plain in Flames would probably have come second only to 
Borges. Remarkably, these two books, published in 1953 and 1955, constitute 
two-thirds of Rulfo's entire bibliography, despite the fact that he lived until 
1986. "In my life there are many silences," Susan Sontag quotes him as saying. 
"In my writing, too."

The silences yawn in Rulfo's writing. Its rhythms seem to slow time, and 
reality's edges fray into a strange gulf. In a story such as They Have Given Us 
the Land, where a group of peasants trudge across an arid plain, four pages 
seem to become a vast expanse. It is a negative space, lacking "the shadow of a 
tree, not even the seed of a tree, not even a root of anything". We are in the 
central-western Mexican state of Jalisco, Rulfo's birthplace and the territory 
in which all his startling, bleak fictions unfold. He was born in 1917, and his 
father and uncle were both killed in the fallout from the Cristero war, in 
which priests and Catholics tried to overthrow the officially atheist 
government that formed following theMexican revolution 
<http://www.historytoday.com/alan-knight/mexican-revolution> (1910-1920). Rulfo 
wrote of his childhood – part of which he spent in an orphanage – that he often 
saw corpses hanging from posts, and that he spent all his time reading, 
"because you couldn't go out for fear of getting shot". His work, 
unsurprisingly, is focused on poverty and violence.

As well as always being situated in Jalisco, all Rulfo's short fiction – 
written in the 1940s and 1950s – is set in the tumultuous post-revolutionary 
period of his childhood. It was a time when the countryside emptied as the 
peasants made their way to the cities, their migration the result of 
lawlessness, failed land reform and government corruption. In Comadre Hill, the 
narrator's neighbours "would disappear among the oaks, never to be seen again". 
"From the ranches", Rulfo writes in Paso del Norte, "the people were coming 
down to the villages; the people from the villages left for the cities. In the 
cities the people got lost; they dissolved into the people." If it is sometimes 
easy to forget or ignore this context, it is partly because Rulfo forgoes any 
details beyond the immediate confines of the story. Additionally, the haunted 
quality of settings like the forsaken town of Luvina, which originate in his 
childhood experience of rural depopulation, situate them in an eerie border 
zone between life and death, reality and surrealism, that feels less like a 
specific era than a psychological or spiritual state of being.

As a result of this, many of Rulfo's stories possess an elemental, universal 
quality. In You Don't Hear Dogs Barking, a father carries his wounded son on 
his shoulders and repeatedly asks him if he can see the village they're looking 
for. It is night, and the father can't see where he's going. Samuel Beckett 
might have devised this scenario, with its blend of absurdity, morality and 
indeterminate horror. As is true of all Rulfo's best work, the story is pared 
back to the point of starkness, and invested with a crackling energy. In Tell 
Them Not to Kill Me!, a bold and brilliant cousin to Isaac Babel's Red Cavalry 
stories, the impact of this energy is immediate and forceful. In Talpa, by 
contrast, where a dying man's wife and the brother who is cuckolding him make a 
long, arduous pilgrimage, the effect is more gradual, as a malignant remorse 
wells in the unfaithful man like the "yellow water" that spills from his 
brother's sores:
 I had never felt life to be slower and more violent than when we were walking 
among such an accumulation of people; as if we were a swarm of worms all balled 
together under the sun, wriggling through the cloud of dust that imprisoned all 
of us on the same road and had us all corralled. Our eyes followed the dust; 
they stuck to the dust cloud as if they were bumping into something they 
couldn't get through. And the sky always grey, like a heavy grey spot crushing 
us from above.

In stories such as It's Because We're So Poor 
<http://www.bu.edu/agni/fiction/print/2010/71-rulfo.html> and the political 
satire The Day of the Collapse, Rulfo displays his talent for dramatic 
monologue, a technique he appears to have learned from William Faulkner (who 
also set his work in a single territory thatblended realism and the 
phantasmagorical <http://www.lib.umich.edu/william-faulkner/sroots/maps.html>). 
Rulfo brought this technique to a state of extremity in his novel Pedro Páramo 
(1955), the forerunner of which is perhaps his greatest story, Luvina. In 
Luvina, an educated and exhausted old man sits in a cantina, warning a young 
traveller about the town he is heading towards. LikeIvan Turgenev's Bezhin Lea 
<http://slavic.rutgers.edu/Fall_2007/Readings/Turgenev_Bezhin.pdf>, or Franz 
Kafka's A Country Doctor, Luvina begins with a transition from the everyday 
world to a stranger plane, as the harsh landscape lying beyond the cantina is 
described:
 The earth is steep. It slashes everywhere into deep ravines, so far down that 
they disappear, that's how far down they go. People in Luvina say dreams rise 
out of those ravines; but the only thing I ever saw rise up from there was the 
wind, whirling, as if it had been imprisoned down below in reed pipes. A wind 
that doesn't even let bittersweet grow: those sad little plants can barely 
live, holding on for all they're worth to the side of the cliffs in these 
hills, as if they were smeared onto the earth.

A mule driver brings the man and his family to Luvina, then rides off, "as if 
he were fleeing from a place of the devil". Though the town appears deserted, 
there are people there, but only old men and "abandoned women" who spy on the 
newcomers. The dead, we are told, can be seen, "passing by like shadows, 
hugging the walls of the houses, almost dragged along by the wind". Is the town 
cursed? Is it purgatory? Is the teller of the story, as he gets more drunk, 
speaking metaphorically or telling tall tales when he says that the dead walk 
the streets, or that the children born there instantaneously become men and 
"disappear"? The story presents a series of puzzles and potential 
interpretations, while Rulfo, typically, gives the reader no clues beyond the 
man's speech and two short, tight-lipped paragraphs of third-person narration.

Luvina is the last stop before Rulfo crosses, definitively, from this world to 
the next. Pedro Páramo is, as a friend aptly described it, "a journey into 
death but not out of it". If Rulfo's short stories are bare structures that we 
must scour for meaning, reading Pedro Páramo is like hunting for a key in a 
building that is collapsing around you. You can read Rulfo's slight but dense 
body of work in a couple of days, but that represents only a first step into 
territories that are yet to be definitively mapped. Their exploration is one of 
the more remarkable journeys in literature.

Translations from the work are by Ilan Stavans with Harold Augenbraum.

Next: Edgar Allan Poe
 