
"Too bitter," Jean Rhys said of her work in 1945. "And besides, who wants 
short stories?" No one did then, at least not hers. Rhys published her first 
collection in 1927, and her first novel the following year. In the 1930s came 
three increasingly dark and accomplished novels, but the better she got, the 
less she was read. She published nothing for 20 years, until stories began 
appearing in the London Magazine in the early 1960s. In 1966,her final novel, 
Wide Sargasso Sea <http://www.bl.uk/eblj/1988articles/pdf/article12.pdf>, 
brought her acclaim and a degree of financial security at the age of 76. 
Another two short-story collections appeared before her death in 1979. They 
include some of the best British short stories of the last century.

The Left Bank, Rhys's debut collection, which Ford Madox Ford helped bring to 
publication <http://www.granta.com/New-Writing/After-the-affair>, comprises a 
series of modernist fragments in which hard-up bohemians get mournfully smashed 
in Paris: "But there she was stony-broke and with a hand that was rapidly 
losing its cunning, seeking oblivion in a cheap Montparnasse café." Much of it 
resembles the most insubstantial parts of Maupassant. The best thing in it by 
far is the long closing story, Vienne, which describes a relationship 
disintegrating as a couple move through a corrupt and crumbling Europe.

As with the vast majority of Rhys's stories, Vienne was heavily 
autobiographical. The extent to which Rhys drew on her own life means her 
stories and novels contain many repeating elements: a childhood on the 
Caribbean island of Dominica, English public school and stage school, 
chorus-line work, hard times in Paris, Bloomsbury bedsits, exploitation, 
alcoholism, depression, and the loneliness of the perennial outsider. Her 
protagonists appear on a spectrum between distress and desolation, with little 
hope of escape. "How few people", we are told of one, "understood what a 
tightrope she walked or what would happen if she slipped. The abyss. Despair. 
All those things."

"All those things"; Rhys's style, casual at a glance but devastatingly exact 
when considered closely, developed rapidly throughout the 1930s (despite not 
appearing until the 1960s and 70s, most of her best short stories were written 
in the late 30s and early 40s). She can execute an array of powerful effects, 
from the stunning, cadenza-like torrent of loosely associated words and phrases 
that ends Tigers Are Better-Looking, or the eerie gothic of Pioneers, Oh, 
Pioneers, to Selina's stylised Martiniquaise patios in Let Them Call It Jazz. 
And, whichever mode she is operating in, her prose remains, as Al Alvarez 
judged, contemporary in the way a poem by Donne is contemporary: you hear her 
voice speaking directly to you; her reality is your reality. It is a prose 
close to poetry not in the lush sense usually implied by the term "poetic 
prose", but because it is condensed, elliptical, emotionally precise.

Given her dismal subject matter, if Rhys's prose weren't so extraordinary it 
would be difficult to read her. Rhys's emotional precision focuses chiefly on 
the dissection of loneliness. Her women encounter men who function, VS Naipaul 
notes, as "arbitrary providers of dinners, rooms, clothes", but this isn't a 
world of courtship and marriage. This is a world of transient relationships 
based on sex, not love. "No homes are entered," Naipaul continues, "the 
metropolis is reduced to a few cafés, boarding houses, and hotels."

The subject of Till September Petronella, one of Rhys's best stories, embodies 
this marginalised position. Petronella Gray is an ex-chorus line girl scraping 
a living as an artist's model. Accepting an offer to escape her drab bedsit and 
stay with an admirer at his cottage in the Cotswolds, she is treated by his 
other guests first with snobbish disdain, then outright hostility. Leaving, she 
encounters a farmer who tries to set her up as a lover he can call on when he 
visits London. "A bit of loving," he tells her, "[a]ll women like that. They 
like it dressed up and sometimes – and sometimes not … they like pretty dresses 
and bottles of scent, and bracelets with blue stones in them." Back in the 
city, Petronella picks up a man called Melville at a taxi rank. They go for 
dinner, have sex, and when he drops her home she mocks the memory of the farmer 
by telling Melville to bring her "a gold bracelet with blue stones in it".

Before he goes, Petronella tells Melville about a stage manager who pulled her 
out of the chorus and gave her a line. But on her cue she froze, and in that 
terrible moment looked into the face of a man in the front row. "'Help me, tell 
me what I have forgotten'", she remembers thinking:

But though he had looked, as it seemed, straight into my eyes, and though I 
was sure he knew exactly what I was thinking, he had not helped me. He had only 
smiled. He had left me in that moment that seemed like years standing there …

This is surely one of the moments Michael Wood 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michael_Wood_%28academic%29> was thinking of when 
he wrote, "Jean Rhys's women go under because they are imprisoned in their 
isolation and no one has the generosity to visit them there." Throughout Rhys's 
works, this sometimes uncaring, sometimes hostile response emanates not only 
from people, but also from nature and the physical world. London's streets are 
"a grey nightmare in the sun"; a mirror is "malevolent with age"; a dripping 
tap plays "a gay and horrible tune"; an early spring day is "heartless" and 
"acid, like an unripe gooseberry"; in more than one story, trees are 
"tormented" by the wind; the sky has "no colour", or it is a white glare, or it 
is, when Rhys is at her most direct, "the colour of no hope".

It is not surprising that this harsh environment should provoke so much 
psychic distress. The Sound of the River, I Spy a Stranger, Outside the Machine 
and The Lotus are just a few of the more memorable of Rhys's stories that 
address mental illness. Petronella Gray confides that when she gets anxious the 
thought comes to her "suddenly, like a revelation, that I could kill myself any 
time I liked and so end it. After that I put a better face on things". And 
although it might sound unlikely, Petronella is upbeat for a Rhys heroine. But 
then she is still young, and hasn't yet incurred the critical –and in Rhys's 
universe unavoidable <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UN_6xJJNphY>– amount of 
damage that will break her will. Selina strikes a note of defiance at the end 
of Let Them Call It Jazz, but here, too, the feeling arises that over time she 
might become just like another Martiniquaise in Rhys's fiction: the pitiful one 
we witness offering herself up to a stranger in Rhys's 1939 novel, Good 
Morning, Midnight, "'crying because she was at the end of everything'".

For Rhys's characters, the journey through life is less an arc than a steep 
slide, and lying at the bottom of it is Miss Verney. The subject of Rhys's late 
and great story Sleep It Off Lady,Miss Verney lives in drunken, genteel poverty 
<http://www.exeterexpressandecho.co.uk/Villagers-reject-dull-spot-jibe/story-11826347-detail/story.html>
 in a small country cottage. There is a galvanised iron shed in her garden, 
"astonishingly large, the end almost dark". She wants it removed, but as a 
builder explains the size of the job she suddenly realises that the shed, and 
the objects around it, will all outlast her:

Long after she was dead and her cottage had vanished it would survive. The tin 
bucket and the rusty lawnmower, the pieces of rag fluttering in the wind. All 
would last for ever.

The menacing shed, and the rats she believes infest it, obsess her. Her 
neighbour, friendly in the past, becomes mocking. Miss Verney's unease grows. 
Then, just as Rhys allows us to think things might improve, the old woman falls 
while taking out the rubbish. She lies propped against the dustbin on the cold 
shed floor, waiting for a rat to detach itself from the shadows. People pass by 
on the lane without hearing her cries. A little girl sees her, but thinks she 
has been drinking – "'Everybody knows that you shut yourself up to get drunk'" 
– and skips away. So there Miss Verney lies, as a "numb weak feeling slowly 
took possession of her. Stronger than cold. Stronger than fear. It was a great 
unwillingness to do anything more at all". Her savagely bleak situation is an 
appropriate terminus for Jean Rhys's fiction.

Next: Isak Dinesen
 