
In The Anatomy Lesson, a book-length essay published in 1978, the Yugoslavian 
writer Danilo Kiš divided the short story into two eras: "pre-Borges and 
post-Borges." Bearing this out, the last two of the three short story 
collections Kiš published during his lifetime, A Tomb for Boris Davidovich 
(1976) and The Encyclopedia of the Dead (1983), represent a remarkable 
contribution to those fictions, existing somewhere between imagination and the 
concrete reality of the document.Just as Borges's stories thrive in the narrow 
strip dividing fact from fantasy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2010/jul/22/short-story-jorge-luis-borges>
, so does Kiš's work find an abnormal power in attempting to capture reality by 
doctoring the documentary truth.

That method might seem paradoxical, but all it means is that Kiš stands among 
those writers whose perception of reality, as Branko Gorjup has noted, differs 
from "those realists whose narrative technique hinges exclusively upon the use 
of mimesis". In this regard he's no different toJames Joyce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2011/mar/09/short-story-james-joyce>
,Bruno Schulz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2010/dec/03/brief-survey-short-story-bruno-schulz>
 orKafka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2009/jan/06/kafka-short-story>, 
who all bear significant influence on his work. If Kiš's project is in places 
more problematic than theirs, it's because of the explicitly historical 
subjects he tackles, such as the Holocaust and Stalin's purges. "The reader 
likes to know", he wrote, "whether 'it all happened' just as you describe it, 
whether you made any changes in the actual course of events; rare is the reader 
… who knows that 'it all' has never happened … anywhere but in the work itself, 
be it autobiography or biography, novel or story. The memoir is the last genre 
to give the illusion of objectivity."

A Tomb for Boris Davidovich (translated by Duška Mikić-Mitchell), a story 
cycle describing the grisly ends of a series of forgotten (in fact, invented) 
Jewish Comintern revolutionaries, is where he mashes together fiction and fact 
in the most provocative way. The stories are constructed like unusually artful 
passages from history books, or excerpts from biographical dictionaries, the 
text busy with footnotes and qualifiers: "some sources attest"; "despite the 
meagre data covering his earliest years"; "testimony about him is 
contradictory". We huddle alongside Kiš, peering into the murky depths of each 
story, trying to make out details. So convincingly is this done that we need to 
be reminded, as Matt F Oja writes, that Kiš "is in fact unconstrained by 
considerations of literal truth: he has at his fingertips all of the places, 
dates, and facts down to the minutest details, because he is free to invent 
them as he likes. But instead he chooses to invent the very limits which the 
historian faces: insufficient written sources, contradictory eyewitness 
accounts, multiple possible interpretations of a single event."

In muddling the real and the fictional in this way, Kiš is not playing games 
for play's sake. A half-Jewish ethnic Serb born in 1935 in Subotica, then in 
the Kingdom of Yugoslavia, his father and many members of his extended family 
were murdered in Auschwitz. He believed, as he told an interviewer in 1985, 
that "literature must correct History: History is general, literature concrete; 
History is manifold, literature individual. What is the meaning of 'six million 
dead' if you don't see an individual face or body – if you don't hear an 
individual story?" Before portraying the homicidal illogic of Stalinism, he 
addressed the Holocaust in an outstanding trilogy comprising the short story 
cycle Early Sorrows (1969) and the novels Garden, Ashes (1965) and Hourglass 
(1972), which followed the enchanted procedures of Bruno Schulz's 
"mythicisation of reality". "Schulz is my god", Kiš once told Updike.

Kiš was no monotheist, however. The channelling of a wide variety of writers 
is one of the defining features of his work. In his recent essay, Transmission 
and the Individual Remix, Tom McCarthy discusses this kind of "receiving which 
is replay, repetition", and Kiš himself asserted that "of all influences 
operating in the history of literature the most important is that of work on 
work". In other words, as Aleksandr Hemon points out, "Kiš does not borrow from 
other writers, he communicates with them". Two of his major themes – the 
struggle with history and the preservation of memory (for him not nearly the 
same thing) – find their closest echo, appropriately, in the greatest of such 
communicators, James Joyce. For Stephen Dedalus in Ulysses, "history is a 
nightmare from which I am trying to escape", and Kiš shares his belief that art 
is the only legitimate way of making sense of it. Also in Ulysses, at Dignam's 
funeral, Leopold Bloom stares at the graves and wonders gloomily how we can 
ever hope to remember the innumerable dead for longer than "fifteen years, 
say". If A Tomb for Boris Davidovich is a cenotaph – literally an empty grave – 
for the hidden victims of Stalin's purges, The Encyclopedia of the Dead 
(translated by Michael Henry Heim) is the same project continued along more 
blatantly metaphysical lines. Responding to Bloom's anxiety, the title story 
describes a Borgesian wing of the Swedish Royal Library that houses a book 
containing the biography of every ordinary life lived since 1789.

Theory lies close to the surface in Kiš's writing, but that writing, as Joseph 
Brodsky notes, "is essentially a poetic type of operation". Despite the veneer 
of objectivity his later stories required, the reader is never far from a 
detail that generates a disproportionate amount of descriptive light. In Simon 
Magus, the contingency of the early Christian church flows from an image of the 
apostles preaching in villages, "perched on wobbly barrels". In The Magic Card 
Dealing, as a murderer steals past a hospital porter – "a former Cossack who 
was so full of vodka that he rocked slightly while sleeping in an upright 
position, as though in a saddle" – the violence of the Stalinist era links arms 
with that of the red cavalry during the Soviet-Polish war, and so on back 
through time.

Kiš is one of the great European writers of the post-war period, but his 
reputation in English-speaking countries is not what it should be. His work was 
just beginning to become better known in the west when he died of lung cancer 
in Paris in 1989, aged 54, but the posthumous elevation of a Roberto Bolaño has 
not been his. Like the Chilean, whose work also manipulates biography and 
history, Kiš contends that fiction can access a level of truth unavailable to 
the historical record. Kiš often quoted Dostoevsky's judgment that "nothing is 
more fantastic than reality itself", and wrote in his essay, Advice to a Young 
Writer (1984), "Do not believe in statistics, figures, or public statements: 
reality is what the naked eye cannot see". Two years earlier, in the story 
Jurij Golec, he put it even better: "nothing is ever stable apart from the 
grand illusion of creation; no energy is ever lost there; every written word is 
like Genesis."

Next: Flannery O'Connor
 