
William Trevor <http://literature.britishcouncil.org/william-trevor> was born 
in County Cork in 1928 and has lived in England since the 1950s. He gave up 
sculpture when he turned 30, became a copywriter, and wrote his first two 
novels and several stories largely on company time. These stories, composed "on 
a battered Remington typewriter in an office corridor in London" and set in 
England, were "driven by curiosity about the unfamiliar".

Unfamiliarity spurs Trevor's imagination; artists, for example, are almost 
entirely absent from his work. Consistency throughout his long career is often 
cited, but while his prose never strays far from a precise naturalism, distinct 
shifts are nevertheless discernible across his work. The Pinteresque cast to 
the dialogue in some of his earlier outings is absent from later stories. Since 
the mid-1970s, Irish settings have become more common – he explained in 1983 
that he had been away long enough to develop the artistic distance he required 
– and over the subsequent decade, politics, particularly relating to the 
Troubles, gained prominence. The younger writer, despite displaying the 
compassion for his characters that has persisted throughout his career, was 
undoubtedly more willing to place the helpless in cruel situations where their 
timidity is ruthlessly exploited. Of these, the more oppressive examples 
include "The Penthouse Apartment" (1967), "Broken Homes" (1975), and "Being 
Stolen From" (1981), in which a woman is manipulated into returning an adopted 
child to its birth mother.

This suffocating story ends with the projection of a miserable, loveless 
future that's repeated in the title story of the collection in which it appears,
The Ballroom of Romance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/unclassified/9780140039375/the-ballroom-of-romance>
 (1972). One of Trevor's most brilliant stories, it describes the diminished 
prospects of Bridie, the 36-year-old daughter of a disabled mountain farmer. On 
Saturday nights she cycles to the Ballroom of Romance, a bleak, isolated hall 
where local men and women mingle with varying degrees of desperation. Bridie 
convinces herself that she loves Dano Ryan, an affable road mender. But when 
their desultory conversation reveals he will marry his widowed landlady she 
determines she will no longer visit the ballroom and, in the closing lines, 
reconciles herself to a union with middle-aged bachelor Bowser Egan, with whom 
she has sometimes dallied in the dark fields:
 She rode through the night as on Saturday nights for years she had ridden and 
never would ride again because she'd reached a certain age. She would wait now 
and in time Bowser Egan would seek her out because his mother would have died. 
Her father would probably have died also by then. She would marry Bowser Egan 
because it would be lonesome being by herself in the farmhouse. 
"The Ballroom of Romance" speaks of the same "paralysis 
<http://jasmin-morehard.blogspot.co.uk/2008/04/about-joyces-paralysis.html>" 
that Joyce identified in Dubliners; that is, a moral failure resulting in the 
inability to live meaningfully. The two writers share methods as well as 
themes: the critic Dean Flower notes that "both are masters of the subjective 
third-person and the ironic nuances of indirect discourse 
<http://www.jstor.org/discover/10.2307/3852202?uid=3738032&uid=2129&uid=2&uid=70&uid=4&sid=47698780400607>
". Like Joyce (and to a lesser extent, Chekhov), Trevor contrives to bury his 
own voice within that of his characters, so that comments which first appear to 
be authorial are shown to emanate from them: "objective-sounding information," 
as Flower writes, "is really subjective … You never quite hear Trevor's voice." 
Read "The Ballroom of Romance" for the first time and you might think the final 
lines belong to an omniscient narrator. Read it again, and you realise the 
inflection is Bridie's: the words not a judgment passed down, but a realisation 
arrived at; an epiphany. The skill with which Trevor applies this technique is 
perhaps his greatest achievement as a writer; the irony is that he does it so 
well it's virtually invisible. "I think all writing is experimental,"he told 
the Paris Review in 1989 
<http://www.theparisreview.org/interviews/2442/the-art-of-fiction-no-108-william-trevor>
. "The very obvious sort of experimental writing is not really more 
experimental than that of a conventional writer like myself. I experiment all 
the time but the experiments are hidden."

Trevor's stories require careful reading for this reason, and because what is 
presented on the story's surface often conceals the truth. The tension between 
these positions is a key concern of Trevor's. Affairs, those most commonplace 
causes for deception, litter his work, and in the late 1970s and 1980s he 
became particularly interested in the subjectivity of history. "The News from 
Ireland" (1986), his story of the potato famine, is glutted with lies and 
deceptions, from a road to nowhere – an insulting labour project ill-suited to 
weak, hungry men – to the governess Miss Heddoe's self-deceiving assertion that 
"I do not know these things", denying unpalatable truths she had earlier begun 
to apprehend. Whereas other political works such as "Attracta" (1978) and 
"Beyond the Pale" (1981) show how the weight of history impinges on individual 
psychology, in "The News from Ireland" Trevor shows characters making personal 
choices that will reverberate throughout the following 150 years.

Trevor has said that "big house" stories appeal because their milieu is one of 
doom. Perhaps that's why, given the dying away of the Church of Ireland (Trevor 
is a Protestant) and the Catholic church's more recent loss of authority, 
priests have come to feature more heavily in his later work. A conversation 
between a Protestant and Catholic priest is the subject of his most recent 
great story, "Of the Cloth 
<http://www.newyorker.com/archive/1998/03/09/1998_03_09_076_TNY_LIBRY_000015098>
" (2000), which, although completely grounded in concrete reality, hovers at 
fable's borders in a way similar to John Cheever's "The Swimmer 
<http://shortstoryclassics.50megs.com/cheeverswimmer.html>". It is a reminder 
that if Trevor's range of subjects has narrowed it has done so, as he described 
recently, in the manner of painters who "paint the same subject many times … in 
search of another angle, another viewpoint …" In 1989, he made another 
comparison with painting when he was asked to define the short story:
 I think it is the art of the glimpse. If the novel is like an intricate 
Renaissance painting, the short story is an impressionist painting. It should 
be an explosion of truth. Its strength lies in what it leaves out just as much 
as what it puts in, if not more. It is concerned with the total exclusion of 
meaninglessness. Life, on the other hand, is meaningless most of the time. The 
novel imitates life, where the short story is bony, and cannot wander. It is 
essential art. 
Next: JD Salinger
 