
“I calculated once,” Vladimir Nabokov told an audience at Cornell University 
in the spring of 1958, “that the acknowledged best in the way of Russian 
fiction and poetry which had been produced since the beginning of the last 
century runs to about 23,000 pages of ordinary print.” Readers with a basic 
grounding in Russian literature will be able to reel off many of the writers in 
Nabokov’s notional anthology: Pushkin, Lermontov, Gogol, Dostoevsky, Turgenev, 
Tolstoy and Chekhov. But there was no place for Nikolai Leskov, of whom, the 
occasional beautiful image aside, Nabokov didn’t think much.

Those who disagree have made numerous attempts, over the last hundred years, 
to install Leskov in the Russian literary pantheon. The pantheon itself 
approved: Dostoevsky published him, Chekhov acknowledged a debt to his work, 
and Tolstoy admired it. Yet he has fallen, repeatedly, into obscurity. Last 
year saw the launch of another offensive in the long war over his reputation: 
Richard Pevear and Larissa Volokhonsky, thecurrent powerhouse of 
Russian-to-English translation 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2005/11/07/the-translation-wars>, published 
a collection of his stories named for one of his great masterpieces, The 
Enchanted Wanderer. But despite the latest round of articles and reviews, there 
is no reason to believe this revival will be any more lasting than those before.

Why? What is it about Leskov that refuses to settle into consensus? Various 
reasons have been advanced, the most credible one being, as Robert Chandler 
maintains, “we English have always expected our Russian writers to be 
unambiguously serious. We want to be shown a character’s spiritual development; 
we want to be given truths to live by. But what Leskov gives us is something 
else: story matters more than character, and all we get by way of metaphysical 
insight is a sense that life’s horrors and beauties are so intermingled as to 
be beyond all understanding”. As Richard Pevear notes, Leskov’s first 
significant champion was the formalist critic Boris Eikhenbaum, who wrote in 
the 1920s that Leskov equalled Dostoevsky, Turgenev and Tolstoy “not by 
resembling them, but by being totally unlike them”. A few years later, in his 
study of Russian literature, DS Mirsky captured the quality of this difference 
when he wrote, “If Turgenev’s or Chekhov’s world may be compared to a landscape 
by Corot, Leskov’s isa picture by Breughel the Elder 
<http://www.the-athenaeum.org/art/full.php?ID=37994>, full of gay and bright 
colours and grotesque forms”. His stories offer few of the pleasures we find in 
the great Russians, but so do theirs lack many that we find in his.

Leskov writes about peasants, household domestics and their employers; about 
soldiers and officers and priests, pilgrims, monks and merchants’ daughters; 
about schoolboys, czars, Tatars and gypsies. “No one,” VS Pritchett maintained, 
“catches so truthfully the diversity of national character in his time.” Unlike 
almost every other famous Russian writer of the period, Leskov was not a member 
of the landed gentry; he said he came to know the Russian people by living 
among them, not through “conversations with Petersburg cabbies”. His settings 
range from his central southern home town of Orel (Turgenev’s home, too) to the 
Eurasian Steppe, the lakes of the north, Ukrainian Kiev, the metropolitan 
centres of Moscow and St Petersburg. As a young man, working for a firm that 
managed several large estates, he travelled all over Russia gaining knowledge 
that he would fully exploit in his fiction. At the outset of his story The 
Pearl Necklace, he reflects on the way travel generates writing material, 
“there’s simply no getting away from impressions. And they sit thick in you, 
like yesterday’s kasha stewing – well, naturally, it came out thick in the 
writing as well.”

Leskov’s stories are often close to folktales, moving at the sort of speeds 
that can be achieved when psychological analysis is jettisoned (which isn’t to 
say his stories lack an often acute understanding of psychology). In his
masterful essay The Storyteller 
<http://ada.evergreen.edu/~arunc/texts/frankfurt/storyteller.pdf>, Walter 
Benjamin draws a distinction between storyteller and novelist, asserting, “it 
is half the art of storytelling to keep a story from explanation as one 
reproduces it”. Leskov, Benjamin writes, “is a master at this”. Indeed, so 
consummately did Leskov disguise himself as the traditional storyteller that 
many readers believed his work to be a mere updating of much older folk 
material. Leskov played with this idea, prefacing one of his most successful 
stories of this type, Lefty, with the note, “I have transcribed this legend”. 
In fact the story was almost entirely his own invention, but his metafictional 
flourish was so widely accepted that he subsequently wrote a letter asserting 
himself as the story’s author, and not, as one reviewer put it, merely its 
“stenographer”.

In Lefty, as in many of Leskov’s stories, events succeed one another at a 
breathless pace. It seems the story might end, only for another flourish to 
extend the action (the great digressor Laurence Sterne was one of his favourite 
authors). Nowhere is this indefatigable quality more prominent than inThe 
Enchanted Wanderer <http://www.mhpbooks.com/pdfs/Leskov.pdf>, the story of Ivan 
Flyagin, who as a boy is responsible for the death of a monk, receives a 
visitation from the monk’s ghost, and is cursed to die “many times”. So begins 
a lifelong odyssey across Russia, packed with a lifetime of incident: Ivan 
cares for pigeons and cuts off a cat’s tail, turns nursemaid, gets embroiled in 
a flogging contest, is held hostage by Tatars for many years, becomes a father, 
becomes an alcoholic, falls in love with a gypsy, performs a mercy killing, 
finds himself down and out in St Petersburg, kills a cow and goes to war.

In an essay arguing that Leskov’s obscurity was unjust (plus ça change), 
Irving Howe noted that The Enchanted Wanderer “no doubt has its distinctive 
national significance, but to a non-Russian the story asks to be read as 
an evocation, both cheering and saddening, of the necessary absurdity of human 
effort”. In his misfortune and toiling, his ricocheting from one event and 
emotional state to another, Ivan’s journey through Russia can be seen as 
representative of our journey through life: ragged, exhausting, wondrous and 
sad; an eternal pursuit of an elusive goal.

Following Gogol’s lead, Leskov often wrote in the “skaz” form 
<http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/547338/skaz>, where the text 
recreates a storyteller’s nonstandard, dialect speech. This is a difficult 
effect to translate, and according to some commentators Pevear and 
Volokhonsky’s attempts (puns of mixed quality) fail to capture the originals’ 
ingenuity. Earlier translations by David Magarshack and David McDuff don’t even 
attempt to recreate them. But skaz was just one technique among many, and one 
of the great pleasures of Leskov’s work is its diversity: A Little Mistake 
could be from the pages of Grimm; the short, terse chapters of The Man on Watch 
generate a thriller’s momentum; A Robbery is a superb comedy of provincial 
life. Just as you settle into a certain style, he surprises you again.

His most famous story, for example, The Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk, is like 
nothing else he wrote. It is told with a dispassion that makes its realist 
account of a sequence of coldblooded murders all the more shocking. It is the 
type of story, Irving Howe remarked, “a writer may, if he is lucky and has some 
genius, bring off once or twice in his career, a piece that radiates enormous 
narrative authority by sacrificing almost everything else”. There is certainly 
nothing else like it in Leskov’s work, and, according to David McDuff, nothing 
like it “elsewhere in 19th-century Russian literature, not even in Dostoyevsky”.

How different this Leskov of the 1860s is to the writer who, between 1886 and 
1891, devoted himself entirely to didactic, religiously-themed stories. By this 
time he had become a Tolstoyan, and in stories such as Pamphalon the 
Entertainer his descriptions of ancient Byzantium – “At both its upper and 
lower levels, the entire state was filled with vice” – are clearly swipes at 
modern Russia. But, ever protean, his output changed tone again before his 
death in 1895. A story he wrote the year he died, A Winter’s Day, is a 
merciless evisceration of Russian society that reads more like the script of a 
play than a prose work, so pared back is the writing. It begins in a 
deceptively light register, which sours into bitterness as the story 
progresses. Through a series of conversations we discern several mysteries and 
scandals, but Leskov never brings them fully into the light. The impression is 
an eerie one of a family, a town, a society, riddled with corruption and a 
terrible coldness of heart. David McDuff calls it “one of the bleakest works in 
Russian literature”, which, national cliches aside, really is saying something. 
Leskov may have written to a friend that “the real strength of my talent lies 
in the positive types. Show me such an abundance of positive Russian types in 
another writer,” but both this late work and his first published story, the 
extraordinary, despondent Musk-Ox, are intensely pessimistic.

Yet the thrilling range of Leskov’s body of work keeps slipping away. In a 
1978 review of Hugh McLean’s biography, the translator Richard Freeborn wrote: 
“Our ignorance of Leskov can never again be advanced as a reason for ignoring 
him.” But McLean’s book is long out of print, and when Pevear and Volokhonsky 
published their new translations it represented yet another rediscovery of this 
serially rediscovered writer. Will he persist this time? Or will he, like one 
of his open-hearted wanderers, disappear for another decade or two, only to 
return again from the wilderness to enthral another generation with his 
uncommon stories?

• Translations from the work are by David McDuff, and Richard Pevear and 
Larissa Volokhonsky.

Next: Robert Aickman
 