
"You wait ages for an atheist bus and then 800 come along at once," said 
Ariane Sherine <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/arianesherine> at the 
culmination of her campaign to put anti-faith slogans on the sides of UK buses. 
Throughout, she has been the antithesis of the shrill, dogmatic and shouty 
atheist that is so beloved of religious caricaturists. She is charming, smiley 
and wonderfully unintimidating and her campaign has captured the imagination of 
thousands of people.

Last summer, she was irritated by an advert on a bus from a religious 
organisation that expressed a profoundly threatening message (essentially, 
think what we think or "you spend all eternity in torment in hell"). She 
wondered if there was a classier and more thoughtful way of putting the 
opposing point of view.

The result – thanks to £135,000 <http://www.justgiving.com/atheistbus> raised 
mainly through small donations – is a national fleet of 800 buses with the 
words "There's probably no God, now stop worrying and enjoy your life" on the 
side, plus a series of adverts on the London Underground. The phrase is a 
genius of understatement. They are the weary words of so many of us who have 
had to listen tight-lipped to endless wild-eyed preachers presuming to tell us 
we were born sinful and are destined for eternal damnation. Those silent 
millions have suddenly found a voice.

With the low December sun glistening off the gold of the Albert memorial in 
the background, the atheist bus campaign's press launch felt at times more like 
a Church of England coffee morning. There were warm greetings, hugs between old 
friends and purposeful-looking people marching back and forth with clipboards 
looking stressed about whether the catering would be adequate. The cast was a 
mini-Who's Who of British atheists: evolutionary biologist Professor Richard 
Dawkins; the philosopher AC Grayling; president of the British Humanist 
Association Polly Toynbee; comedian Robin Ince. Even Stephen Fry sent a 
goodwill message from New Zealand (not enough cash yet for a live video link 
up).

Ince, who hosted the event, pointed out that the buses were not technically 
atheist, but agnostic. "That is the scientific viewpoint because we can't 
ultimately prove that there is no God. But I'm taking the risk," he said.

Dawkins is another man who is taking the risk. "I would have chosen a slightly 
stronger slogan," he confided, "but I wouldn't have wanted to say there's 
definitely no God just as I wouldn't want to say there's definitely no Father 
Christmas."

All in all, Sherine's campaign has been a magnificent and surprising 
achievement. The original fundraising target of £5500 was reached in just 3 
hours – and at its peak, the campaign's Just Giving website was clocking up £17 
per minute. The site has continued to attract new donors on every single day 
since its launch.

For my money, it is Sherine's amusing and charming slogan that has prompted so 
many people to part with her hard-earned cash. Pledging support was a way for 
non-believers to make a statement about what they didn't believe – and in the 
process, to make some other people smile and perhaps think a bit on their way 
to work. Atheists are by definition free-thinkers who don't follow the crowd. 
The atheist bus gave us a way of speaking with a single voice – and it feels 
great. As Sherine put it, "I don't feel alone anymore."
 