
Akland Street in Melbourne is lined with cake shops, whose windows are loaded 
with rum cigars, chocolate tunnels, cherry strudels and florentines. Oversized 
blue and pink meringues prick the eyes with their artificial intensity. The end 
of the street is the end of the line. A three-carriage tram, ornate in muted 
burgundy stands at the terminus, loaded with passengers. They sit at starchy 
linen. Mid-flambé, a chef stands looking out at us. Wow! A tram restaurant! It 
moves! My band-mates and I are excited. Then we discover that you have to book 
a month in advance. Excitement fades, grapes sour. I recall the revolving 
restaurant where I last ate in Atlanta. The view was awfully spectacular, but 
the food was spectacularly awful. The prawns tasted of fleshy water. I convince 
myself that riding around Melbourne as if we were on the Orient Express 
wouldn't be so great after all.

We are in the suburb of St Kilda, where we are recording. Alongside the suburb 
of Fitzroy, it is the hip area of Melbourne. Overlooking the terminus is the 
bar and restaurant Bigmouth, a windowed wedge of Deco on the corner. The walls 
are painted shades of Australian coffee - flat white and short black. Candle 
flames flicker in orange bevelled glasses. Until the 30s, the Oakrood Tea House 
stood on the site, where you could take tea in the trees on platforms built 
between the branches of an oak. Like much of the city, the menu has a strong 
Greek presence. Saganaki cheese sizzles off the skillet, dribbled with lemon. 
Like most places I've eaten at in Australia, Bigmouth is neither particularly 
formal nor expensive, but the ingredients are quality and prepared with 
imagination. Cubes of pork belly are poached in olive oil, complemented by 
sweet apple crisps and contrasted against the pungency of a crumbling blue 
cheese. The tortellini is hand-made and stuffed with chicken and pistachios - 
subtle flavours and textures, served without ceremony.

I wander back to the studio satisfied, but know that as I put my head on my 
pillow tonight, I'll be thinking of how great it would have been to ride around 
Melbourne on a tram, the crockery tinkling as I tucked into my tea.

· The writer is the lead singer with Franz Ferdinand
 