
"You know it's unnatural for 20,000 tons of aluminum to fly, right?" Could the 
American who asked that question sense my foreboding and perhaps see the slight 
regret in my eyes as I flew across the Atlantic to begin a four-month student 
exchange trip?

What was I doing, leaving my friends and family behind and heading to 
Baltimore, Maryland? Having only flown a couple of times before and never for 
longer than that required to reach Mediterranean holiday destinations, this was 
perhaps the hardest part of the trip.

Once I'd touched down at the airport, a mere 10 miles from the University of 
Maryland, my home for the next four months, I was thrown into an 
air-conditioned world of strange, yet familiar, accents and new products, like 
freshly cooked pretzels and Krispy Kreme doughnuts. The culture shock was 
extreme in the first week: Coca Cola tasted different, everything had way too 
much sugar in it and people asked banal questions while you spoke, like "oh 
really?"

Arriving on campus was an almost surreal experience. The first student I saw 
from the safety of a car was stabbing the air with a wooden samurai sword. Much 
to my relief, I later found out he was known by some of my housemates and quite 
harmless.

The residential part of the campus was broken up into communities, clustered 
villages almost, and I shared an apartment with three other lads, who all lived 
about 20 minutes drive from their parents' houses. The apartment was decent, 
though my room quite often got referred to as The Cell in emails sent home.

An icebreaker on the first night revealed that many students, of varying ages, 
living within the small community were in a similar situation to me, knowing no 
one. However, in a room full of Americans, the Englishman stands out. Everyone 
introduced themselves, gave their degree and what year they were in. When my 
turn came the room perked up, like meerkats at the first sighting of an eagle 
on the horizon. This would happen almost every time I was introduced to new 
people.

Making friends was fairly easy, as people were curious about the UK and about 
other people's perceptions of America. Classes were fun. The structure was less 
formal than in Britain, but this was reflected in the grades when I got back 
home. All the grades achieved in the US were knocked down one place at my 
English university. The range of topics that could be studied was a lot broader 
in the US, though, which made up for the drop in grades. I tried to make full 
use of this and took courses I would not be capable studying in the UK. There 
are not many, not in Leicester anyway, who can claim they studied Hunter 
Thompson and Tom Wolfe as part of their media degree.

At the end of my first week, a road trip was offered to Ocean City, some three 
hours drive away, which was very welcome. It was interesting to see an 
Americanised version of Blackpool. The same attractions were there, just 
slightly better.

While I was at Maryland, I visited Washington frequently as it was only a 
cheap train ride away and a free shuttle bus service from the campus would make 
stops at the train station. I was also escorted to New York - always take 
people who know the subway. As a person doing media andAmerican studies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/americanstudies>, both the cultural and 
social aspect of travelling and visiting new places was very enlightening. Some 
unplanned extra time I had at the end of the semester was filled with a 
four-day trip to Las Vegas - 24 hour America, the Dream distilled into a desert 
valley. The perfect end to a four-month visit.

How much did it cost?  The flight was £400. It cost approximately £1,600 for 
the four months accommodation, and an extra £700 for the meal card needed to 
buy food on campus. The MARC train to Washington was about £5 for a return fare.


Was it worth it? It was a fantastic time; I made loads of new friends and 
learnt a lot about a culture I had been studying for a long time. There's no 
finer way to learn about a different society than to actually live in it.


Any tips? Befriend people with cars. It sounds mercenary, but cars are 
necessary, not just a luxury. If you want to travel any great distance in the 
US, it is best to do a little research and hunt out the smaller flight 
operators. Southwest Airlines do deals on flights from the Washington DC area 
to various western locations, especially if you sign up to their email service. 
If you do fancy a trip to Vegas, try booking your hotel through
Tripreservations.com <http://www.tripreservations.com>
 