
A Dangerous Method (2012)
Director: David Cronenberg
Entertainment grade: B
History grade: C

Sigmund Freud <https://www.theguardian.com/books/sigmundfreud> and Carl Jung 
were pioneers of psychoanalysis. In the 1970s and 1980s, papers discovered in 
Geneva revealed the extent to which Jung was involved with a patient, Sabina 
Spielrein, who herself became a noteworthy psychoanalyst.

Mental health
 Michael Fassbender and Keira Knightley in A Dangerous Method. Photograph: 
Sony Pics/Everett/Rex Features 
Carl Jung <https://www.theguardian.com/books/carl-jung> (Michael Fassbender) 
is working at a clinic in Switzerland when a young Russian woman, Sabina 
Spielrein (Keira Knightley) is brought in, screaming and writhing hysterically. 
Spielrein's problems are swiftly traced to sexual fixations on being beaten by 
her father and on defecation. Gross, but true. It's also true that, when she 
calmed down a bit, she turned out to have a brilliant analytical mind. 
Meanwhile, Jung meets his idol, Sigmund Freud (Viggo Mortensen). The two hit it 
off, and discuss Spielrein's case. What Jung doesn't tell Freud is that he's 
having an affair with her. There's no doubt now about this once controversial 
historical claim: "you have vigorously taken my unconscious into your hands 
with your saucy letters", Jung wrote to Spielrein on 20 June 1908. Private 
meetings between the two were arranged in this and many similar notes, making 
it plausible that an unconscious wasn't the only thing vigorously taken in hand.

Sex
 ‘Unprofessional relationship’: Keira Knightley and Michael Fassbender. 
John Kerr, on whose biography of Freud, Jung and Spielrein this film is based, 
has noted of Jung's practice that "by investigating fantasies, and making the 
patients take them seriously and sexually, analysis raised the complexes to 
delusional intensity before dissolving them". It's perhaps on this basis that 
the film asserts Spielrein wanted Jung to beat her. It's certainly not on the 
basis of fact. While the investigation of fantasy probably was part of Jung and 
Spielrein's affair, by that time her fantasies took the form of obsession with 
theWagnerian hero Siegfried <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sigurd>. But the film 
wants to show you Keira Knightley's nipples popping out of a corset while 
Michael Fassbender whacks her bottom with a belt strap. There is no evidence 
that the two indulged in spanking or whipping. The letters between Spielrein 
and Jung say no such thing, and nor does her very intense diary. Still, they're 
dead and can't complain, and perhaps the producers hoped a few more of you 
might go and see their psychoanalysis movie if they bunged in some kinky stuff. 
To be fair, it's much more restrained than you might expect from director David 
Cronenberg. It's still made up, though.

Relationships
 Keira Knightley as Sabina Spielrein in David Cronenberg's A Dangerous Method. 
Jung tries to dump Spielrein. A Dangerous Method promptly turns her into the 
psychotic Alex from Fatal Attraction, dead set on either getting the hapless 
Jung back or ruining him. At least she stops short of boiling his bunny. Maybe 
because he doesn't have a bunny. The film shows correctly that Jung lied to 
Freud, portraying Spielrein as a fantasist when really he did have a long 
affair with her. But it doesn't get close to the reality that both he and Freud 
belittled her as a colleague throughout her career, while simultaneously 
incorporating ideas of hers such as the "death-instinct" into their own work. 
It's true that Spielrein had trouble accepting the breakup, butJung's real 
letters 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/culturenews/8718211/Jung-Love-Sabina-Spielrein-a-forgotten-pioneer-of-psychoanalysis.html>
 to her make him sound like such a git that it's impossible to take his side. 
Unless, apparently, you're this film.

Character
 Michael Fassbender and Viggo Mortensen in A Dangerous Method (2011) by David 
Cronenberg. Photograph: Allstar/Lionsgate/Sportsphoto Ltd 
Appropriately enough, A Dangerous Method 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-dangerous-method> develops a sort of 
personality disorder (the subject of Spielrein's study). The scenes with Freud 
and Jung are clever, unexpectedly funny and thoroughly enjoyable. The portrayal 
of their paternalistic and troubled relationship is spot on, both historically 
and cinematically. The scenes with Spielrein fall flat. Partly, this is because 
Mortensen and Fassbender play their parts brilliantly, with commendable 
subtlety and easy wit. While this isn't Knightley's worst performance, as an 
actor she is not in their class. But it's also the fault of a screenplay which 
allows Freud and Jung substance while fobbing Spielrein off with an archetype. 
Not even a Jungian archetype. Just a Hollywood one.

Verdict

A Dangerous Method is great on the guys, but maybe David Cronenberg needs to 
work on his underdevelopedanima <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anima_and_animus>.
 