
This is the first in an episode-by-episode review of Desperate Romantics. 
Watch last night's episode on iPlayerhere 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/b00lvyr1/Desperate_Romantics_Episode_1/>. 

"In the mid-19th century, a group of young men challenged the art 
establishment of the day. The pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood were inspired by the 
real world, yet took imaginative licence in their art. This story, based on 
their lives and loves, follows in that inventive spirit."

Flash, bang, wallop: what a disclaimer. Here, scrawled in Auntie's finest 
Heritage Whimsy font across an authentically aged canvas backdrop, was the 
perfect preamble to Peter "Occupation" Bowker'smischievous period romp 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2009/jul/21/desperate-romantics-bbc-drama>; 
a rollicking gambol through a fictionalised Victorian London with a narrative 
as contemptuous of historical reverence as its rambunctious subjects were.

Disclaimer duly delivered, the episode 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2009/jul/22/desperate-romantics-coast> 
opened with a shot of a strapping dandy sprinting along a busy thoroughfare, 
coat tails aflutter. This was one Fred Walters (Sam Crane), a fictional 
interloper whose enthusiastic narration provides the perfect frame through 
which to view the pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood's monocle-popping antics.

Visibly, gaspingly, in awe of the brotherhood, Walters seals his friendship by 
assisting them in the pursuit of both a) a communal, redheaded lady muse with 
which to defrost the thus-far unimpressed art establishment, and b) the 
patronage of pre-eminent art critic John Ruskin (Tom Hollander),a prissy 
proto-Sewell fond of purple aphorisms <http://www.briansewell.co.uk/home.html> 
("beauty deprived of its proper foils and adjuncts will cease to be enjoyed as 
beauty" etc), and terrified of sex.

So who are these bowler-toppling bounders?

There is Dante Gabriel Rossetti (Aidan Turner), hirsute carouser, swaggering 
braggart ("I'm half Italian, half mad!"), compulsive stroker of wenches' 
breastbones and, as the brotherhood's unofficial frontman, the painter most 
likely to fall to his knees at the end of a successful exhibition and bellow 
"THANKYOUWEMBLEY" to the bow tie-spinning consternation of "The Man".

There is William Holman Hunt (Rafe Spall), a tense, upset sort given to 
explosive topless punching-bag sessions ("BOWBOWBOWBOW!"), his nipples 
oscillating with some manner of (thus far unspecified) religious/sexual guilt. 
And there is John Millais (Samuel Barnett), a prodigiously gifted sort whose 
enormous talent and extreme youth attracts the scorn of his fellow 'hoods ("You 
are no sexual threat whatsoever!" guffaws Rossetti, eyebrows waggling 
wolfishly).

Though united by their desire to place a whoopee cushion beneath the 
establishment's complacent buttocks, the PRB's association is underpinned by an 
intense mutual competitiveness.

In one of last night's pivotal scenes, for example, Hunt received unexpected 
fellatio from a prostitute before nutting Rossetti while going "HWNYAAAAH". But 
it's their obsession with hot muse/"hat shop stunner" Lizzie Siddal (Amy 
Manson) that most threatens to upset their apple cart; her fragile, fluttering 
beauty as big a danger to their association as any number of one-star reviews.

Other notable features?

There was a knees-up/breeches-down jingle that accompanied the brotherhood's 
more lively moments, alerting us to imminent fisticuffs and/or naked fumbleage. 
There were numerous shots of the brotherhood striding abreast, a vaguely 
irksome motif that also revealed Rossetti's hat to be by some margin the 
largest (an intentional nod to his formidable sexual prowess? Possibly).

So. Were you gripped by the combination of alpha-fop revelry and artistic 
seditiousness? Or did all the high-waisted posturing and brazen historical 
liberty-taking ruffle your blouse? Prithee, your reflections below if you will.
 