
Turn to the Guardian's university clearing pages and there are many vacancies 
for a subject that was once hugely popular. Until recently,American studies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/americanstudies> departments sprang up 
everywhere. But no longer.

Now 28 universities still have American studies places unfilled, and they 
include many at well-regarded institutions - Essex, Keele, Kent and Swansea 
among them. Due to lack of demand, five universities have closed American 
studies departments while others have cut staff. Keele, traditionally the 
top-ranking American studies department, with a maximum, grade five ranking for 
research for the past few years, has had to fire half its staff. Professor Ian 
Bell at Keele says: "Students don't want to be branded by doing American 
studies. They still want to do American modules as part of English or history 
but, after Bush, they shy away from being labelled as pro-American - not after 
the obscenity of Iraq."

It's only a straw in the wind: student choices are notoriously fickle. But it 
fits the picture of a groundswell of anti-American feeling. Where in the world 
could you walk down the street and not collect overwhelmingly negative vox pops 
on Bush's America and its global impact? Last year's BBC/ICM poll, taken in a 
string of countries across the continents, found only Israel in support of Bush 
- with Canada, Australia and Korea least unfavourable, but still with a 
majority against.

That is not necessarily the same as anti-Americanism. The Bushites in their 
daily, foul-mouthed email assaults on Guardian writers try to portray current 
anti-American sentiment as racist, akin to anti-semitic. They try to pretend 
"old" Europe is just effetely snobbish about the Ugly Americans. They dismiss 
anti-Bush disgust in developing countries as envy and as ignorant support for 
terror.

But opinion polls make it clear that people are well able to separate their 
feelings about Americans from the politicians and policies now occupying the 
White House: 81% of the British say, "I like the Americans as people", 
according to Mori, but only 19% admire American society. They overwhelmingly 
reject the proposition "We would be better off if we were more like the 
Americans in many respects" - the view of the right and of younger Tories 
infatuated with US neo-conservatism.

How much wider the Atlantic has grown under Bush. A Mori poll for the German 
Marshall Fund examined European attitudes towards America. It found massive 
condemnation of US Middle East policy (among the British just as strongly) and 
equally strong opprobrium for US policies on global warming and nuclear 
proliferation. Most Europeans - the British too - want the European Union to 
become a superpower to match the US, with a strong leadership in world affairs. 
(Americans said they wanted to be the only superpower.) Yet there was also 
surprisingly strong support among two-thirds of Europeans for strengthening 
Nato - even in France.

However, President Bush's election pledge this week to withdraw 70,000 troops 
from Germany and Korea may bring an abrupt end to Europe's old doublethink on 
Nato. If the troops go, it may force Europe to confront the hypocrisy of 
detesting America while relying on it to provide the defence European nations 
refuse to pay for. The Bushite emailers are justified in sneering, "We pulled 
your sorry asses out of two world wars" (the printable version), and it's just 
as well Fox News hasn't covered celebrations in Paris this week that pretend 
France liberated itself, with never a mention of Europe's American saviours.

If a Bush victory brings a major withdrawal from Europe, it should prod the EU 
into coordinating its defence capability, without having to beg the US for a 
transport plane to mount every tiny border peacekeeping operation in Macedonia. 
If the EU starts to put its still considerable defence spending to better 
collective use, Bush won't like it: his ministers protested when Blair and 
Chirac began the task.

If Bush wins it may galvanise Europe into a stronger sense of what it must do 
in response. Forget Blair's phantom "bridge" across the Atlantic, and start 
building across the Channel. (Sadly there has been no growth in university 
applications to read European studies or languages.)

The world waits on the US elections with particular trepidation this time. The 
fall of the Berlin wall was a great opportunity missed for America the victor 
to become the global force for good it thinks it is. The fall of the twin 
towers was a chance to reclaim that lost global respect, but in every action 
Bush has swelled the ranks of those who cheered in the streets when it happened.

ICM's poll reveals a world that thinks America arrogant, less cultured, a 
worse place to live than their own countries and a threat to world peace. Is 
that hatred now irreversibly hardwired?

A Kerry win might still do much to heal the rift, just by showing America 
publicly renouncing Bush and all his works. Peering into Kerry's muddy campaign 
messages, it is unclear whether the man can be far-sighted, brave and decisive. 
On Nato troops, for example, he first said he would consider withdrawing them, 
then said it was a mistake, then that it should be done but more slowly.

The insane necessities of a presidential campaign make it impossible to know 
what manner of president will emerge at the end, but if Kerry does indeed make 
it his mission to repair America's global standing, he will have a brief window 
of global goodwill in which to try his best.

The underlying picture of attitudes towards America suggests a miasma of 
confusion and deep emotion: the idea of America is woven deep into the 
universal imagination. When prompted, the world can also admit to seeing the US 
as that beacon of liberty and opportunity that Americans dream themselves to be.

Hardly a child born can avoid drinking in the great American myth from those 
Disney realms where the simple, humble and virtuous win through every time 
against the rich, corrupt and greedy. How is that self-image squared with the 
monster the world perceives? The old Hollywood morality tales from Shane and 
It's a Wonderful Life still spin out into Spiderman or I, Robot, celebrating 
the little guy who beats the monster corporation. Homespun American goodness 
warring with the cruelties of raw capitalism is the dominant Hollywood theme, 
yet little of this culture enters the US political bloodstream.

Between the American ideal and the American reality falls the longest shadow. 
Discuss. It's well worth more study. If John Kerry wins and sets about 
repairing the damage Bush has done, it may get American studies flourishing 
again - and stem the global tide of anti-Americanism.

p.toynbee@theguardian.com <mailto:p.toynbee@theguardian.com>
 