
Q I will be leaving the UK for Australia in early November for at least one 
year to work and travel. Initially, I want to transfer just a few thousand 
pounds, but if I decide to settle I will need to transfer a larger sum. What is 
the best way to do this?


CT

A Your question is one of many I have received about transferring money into 
another currency, which probably reflects the fact that many more people are 
travelling or moving abroad these days. Fortunately the increased demand, 
combined with the growth of the internet, has brought new opportunities for 
getting a good deal than existed in the past when the banks had a complete 
stranglehold.

There is now a team of players who are specialists in foreign currency trading 
and easily accessible to individuals. Just tap "foreign currency brokers UK" 
into your search engine and you will find a long list of firms competing for 
your business. Several also advertise their services in the print media, 
including in-flight and travel magazines. You can also use the internet to 
obtain details of the banks that provide accounts operating in the currency you 
are interested in.

Specialist currency houses are basically brokers in the foreign exchange 
markets, but many of them have developed back-up services to assist companies 
and individuals who also want to buy property overseas and set up foreign bank 
accounts. In some instances they have special deals with banks to reduce or 
waive transfer charges.

The exchange rates quoted daily in the newspapers, and by services like 
Teletext, are based on the "inter-bank" rate, the rate used by banks when 
dealing large amounts among themselves. Private individuals normally have to 
deal at the "tourist" rate which is more expensive, with a wider spread between 
what you pay for the currency (the buying price) and what you receive for the 
currency (the selling price). Local banks also add charges and commission to 
currency transactions. In addition there are usually further charges for 
transferring funds to overseas banks, even if they belong to the same bank 
group. Sometimes these are imposed by both the outgoing bank and the receiving 
bank.

Because they deal in large amounts of currencies for their clients, specialist 
currency houses are able to offer individuals "commercial" exchange rates. 
These are normally fairly close to the "inter-bank" rates, but with a built-in 
margin for the broker.You can shop around on the internet to compare the 
different rates available. Many brokers provide a free calculator service to 
help you identify precisely what you will get at their rates.

Currency houses have traditionally focused on dealing in large amounts and 
many still have a minimum of between £5,000 or £10,000. However, some will deal 
in lower amounts, down to £1,000, especially if there are larger transactions 
to come in the future, as in your case. It is a highly competitive business and 
the currency houses are prepared to negotiate both on exchange rates and 
transfer costs.

A word of caution: as with most things in the financial world, cheapest is not 
always best. Low exchange rates may be balanced by higher transfer charges, and 
you should also check the financial status of the company and security measures 
used to protect your money from going astray. Foreign currency trading is not 
regulated by the Financial Services Authority (FSA) as it is not a "listed 
activity" but currency houses are checked by HM Revenue & Customs to ensure 
they comply strictly with money laundering regulations.

The first step, before dealing, is to register with your chosen company and 
provide proof of your identity and residence, in the same way as required when 
opening a UK bank account. Once you have registered you will be given direct 
access to a trader in the dealing room, who will provide information about the 
trend in the rates for the currency you are interested in. It is then up to you 
to decide whether to deal or not. Foreign currency price movements can be 
highly volatile and even the experts can get it wrong. Not long ago it was 
widely forecast that the US dollar would slump to below $2 per £1, now there 
are predictions that it could rise to $1.50.

At present prospects for the Australian dollar look strong, reflecting the 
boom in the commodity markets which is boosting the Australian economy. 
Conversely the outlook for sterling is poor with predictions of a slowdown in 
the economy. But what is difficult to judge is how much of the good and bad 
news has already been discounted by the exchange price movements.

If you do decide that the Australian dollar will continue to gain in value 
against sterling, you could "fix" the current exchange rate to apply to 
"forward" transactions that need not be completed for up to two years. This 
will give you a definite figure for how many Australian dollars you will 
receive for your £100,000 at some future date. But this is a definite 
commitment, requiring a deposit, and you could lose out in a big way if the 
Australian dollar falls in value before you decide whether or not to buy a 
property.

If you decide not to use a specialist currency house at this stage, it is 
worth shopping around domestically. The Post Office, for example, has no 
charges for buying and selling currencies. It makes its money by widening the 
spread between the buying and selling prices at the tourist rate. Travel agents 
and high-street currency exchange outlets also often boast about making no 
charges, but their spread can be exorbitant.

I did a spot check recently when seeking to change some US dollars into 
sterling. The Post Office quoted a rate of $1.94 to £1. My bank offered a 
similar rate, but with the addition of charges and commission, and a 
high-street currency exchange shop, operated by a travel agent, quoted over 
$2.1 for £1. Eventually I went to a specialist currency house and obtained a 
rate of $1.82. Quite a difference.
 