
A delight to read Alan Rusbridger’s farewell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/may/29/farewell-readers-alan-rusbridger-on-leaving-the-guardian>
 (30 May), which reminded me why I identify myself so strongly as a member of 
the Guardian family. Rusbridger shows that the independence of the Scott Trust 
leads to the refusal to give up on investigations when others quail, and a 
style of editorship that shares decisions, and power, with others. I had not 
realised that the paper was born after the Peterloo massacre and have since 
found out that an earlier paper, the Manchester Observer, shut down because of 
libel cases rushed through the courts to stop its publication, recommended 
readers to follow the story in the new Manchester Guardian. What a pedigree. I, 
with so many others, wishKatharine Viner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/22/katharine-viner-new-editor-guardian>
 well as she develops a paper that keeps us thinking and hoping in hard times.
Roger Clough
Emeritus professor, Lancaster University 

No newspaper can be perfect, but for me the Guardian gets pretty damn close
Tony Claydon 
• Alan, thank you beyond words for your wonderful article and for what you, 
your editorial board and the Scott Trust have done for journalism – and for me, 
too. I got both my two main jobs through Guardian adverts. I starting taking 
the Guardian nearly 70 years ago in 1948, when I graduated from Manchester 
University in engineering. I have hardly missed a day since, not even when I 
first moved to Reading in 1958 and the paper came a day late. May you continue 
in your next role for many years.
Peter Grantham
Reading

• No newspaper can be perfect, but for me the Guardian gets pretty damn close. 
And of all the paper’s stories over the past 50 years, Alan Rusbridger’sKeep it 
in the ground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/series/keep-it-in-the-ground> campaign 
is the most urgent and important of all. Climate change is a multifaceted 
challenge with roots deeply embedded in our society and economy, and is worthy 
of a long-term commitment by the Guardian. 

Here’s my challenge to Katharine Viner: stick with climate change as a major 
theme in your columns and let your tenacious investigative journalists loose on 
the subject. Dedicate your newspaper to a ceaseless exposure of all those 
organisations and institutions that endanger the future of life on this 
precious planet. And explore what we can do about it. It seems odd that 
individuals and groups around the world are more passionately concerned about 
climate change than many governments. Although nearly 200 nations have signed 
up to the UN climate negotiations, they seem unable or unwilling to legislate 
for fossil fuel companies to keep it in the ground.

This situation resonates at the local level, where environmental groups faced, 
for example, with coal mining proposals, find themselves up against big 
businesses with huge financial resources, political influence and, shamefully, 
government support. We need your help. One step would be for the Guardian to 
publish a weekly climate rights section, along the lines of your Consumer 
champions column, where concerned individuals and campaigners can seek advice 
in their attempts to prevent fossil fuel businesses in their area from causing 
further damage to our atmosphere.
Tony Claydon
Felton, Northumberland

Rusbridger has shown exceptional skills and imagination in maintaining the 
balance between material and moral existence
Richard Stainton 
• As Katharine Viner returns from the US to take the reins, may I suggest she 
reverses one of Mr Rusbridger’s few bad decisions: killing off the wonderful
Guardian diary <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/series/diary> – a 
execution all the more surprising as Rusbridger cut his Guardian teeth on the 
diary (I recall sending him tip-offs in the distant mists of time). The diary 
replacement, the so-calledNotebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/series/notebook> is a failure, 
eminently miss-able, unlike the old diary’s early morning fix of intrigue and 
vituperation. I have worked with many great Guardian diarists: Steven Cook, 
Andrew Moncur, Maev Kennedy, Simon Bowers, Jon Henley, Marina Hyde andthe 
peerless Hugh Muir <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/hughmuir>. So, please, 
Katharine: bring back the beloved diary.
Dr David Lowry
Stoneleigh, Surrey

• Alan Rusbridger <https://www.theguardian.com/media/alanrusbridger> has shown 
exceptional skills and imagination in maintaining the balance between “material 
and moral existence – profit and power”, which, as CP Scott wrote 94 years ago, 
is essential if a newspaper is to be great. And during an era in which so many 
of his peers in the media and politics have lost or muddied it. But this is not 
a Big Yellow Taxi moment – we did know what we’d got before he was gone. Best 
wishes to Katharine Viner as the first woman editor to take up this precious 
legacy.
Richard Stainton 
Whitstable, Kent

• I almost had tears in my eyes when reading Alan Rusbridger’s farewell to his 
readers – I think he is brilliant (and sexy with it). No danger, I am 87.
EL Trussell
Sudbury, Suffolk

• Glimpsed a shiny black and silver sticker above “Farewell, readers” on the 
front page and thought for a split second it was a souvenir fragment from the 
smashed hard drives.
Sandy Adirondack
London

• Just – thank you. Best wishes.
Bella D’Arcy Reed
Maldon, Essex
 