
'Food is important here in Alentejo," says Gertrudes Alfacinha. "But only good 
food!" My host is one of the city of Évora's official guides, a passionate 
diminutive historian who likes to take guests to lunch at one of the many small 
restaurants tucked down thetravessas of this labyrinthine city. Our table is 
strewn with saucers of olives, cheese, tiny squid, black pork and garlic 
butter. This, a meal in itself, comes standard with the table.

"Anything you touch you pay for," Gertrudes warns, but we pretty much touch it 
all as we discuss the Alentejo's capital, a Unesco world heritage site. History 
and food are what Évora has in abundance. Plus wonderful wine – and shops 
selling cork products.

The Alentejo (literally "land beyond the Tagus") is a warm, dry, mostly gentle 
region north of the Algarve that has been ignored by all but a few. A long 
history of turbulence means many of its towns are on hilltops – not just Évora 
but the medieval village of Monsaraz on the Spanish border, the baroque 
Montemor-o-Novo above the main E90 from Lisbon, and the pantiled city of Beja 
in the south.
 The Alentejo is known as Portugal's gastronomic soul … Fialho restaurant, 
Évora 
This big fertile region, a third of the country by area, is known as 
Portugal's gastronomic soul. The food is neither peasant nor sophisticated, but 
rich with ingredients such as sheep's cheese, black pork, salt cod, wild 
mushrooms and asparagus. Towns have their own specialities, such as peppery 
olive oils or egg-yolk based desserts. It's this rich individuality that makes 
Alentejo special – and the fact that it produces almost half of Portugal's wine.

Now the region is being touted as the new Tuscany, or the affordable Tuscany. 
Certainly it's just as food-orientated, and entry-level wines are better value 
than in Chiantishire. Architecturally, the Alentejo also has an abundance of 
Roman remains: Évora has city walls, a huge aqueduct and a temple dedicated to 
Augustus.

After the Romans, the Visigoths and then the Moors ruled the Alentejo. Its 
rich soil helped make it famous, and when the Jesuits arrived in the 16th 
century, they boosted the viticulture and transformed cities like Évora with 
their florid architecture. So why has this beautiful, fecund, food-orientated 
region been neglected by the Brits? Maybe it's because we think of Portugal in 
terms of Lisbon and the Algarve. The Alentejo, as the land that lies between 
those two popular tourist attractions, is too easy to overlook, despite its 
size.

Beyond Évora – where I'm finishing my meal with an egg-and-almond dessert 
calledtoucinho rançoso dos santos (rancid lard of the saints!) – the region has 
much to offer the food lover, as well as culture, countryside and cork. Time to 
work off those calories.

Where to eat
 L'And Vineyards resort 
L'And Vineyards Resort, Montemor-o-Novo 
Open to non-residents Wednesday-Sunday, this oenophile's dream resort, 30km 
west of Évora, offers wine pairings with each dish. In his modern 
Michelin-starred white and glass restaurant, chef Miguel Laffan ambitiously 
seeks to "reinterpret" Portuguese cuisine with dishes such as roasted 
tenderloin of traditional Alentejo black pork with cauliflower gratin, 
asparagus, peas and blood sausage.
• +351 266 242 400, l-andvineyards.com <http://l-andvineyards.com/pt/>, three 
courses from €55

Taverna Os Templários, Monsaraz 

Be sure to eat outside at this small, family-run restaurant 20km from the 
Spanish border, which has a terrace looking across to the massive Alqueva 
reservoir. Order the local black pig with a bottle of Reguengos red, or the
bacalhau com espinafres(salt cod with spinach). 
• Rua Direita 22, +351 266 557 166, three courses from €20 

Restaurante Maçã, Lavre 
This plain but award-winning village restaurant in the Alvalade mountains is 
proud of its Alentejo cuisine and does a goodensopado de borrego (lamb stew) 
and fish soup. The small bar also serves apetiscos (snack) menu if you arrive 
early.
• +351 265 847 100, maca-restaurante.pt <http://www.maca-restaurante.pt>, 
three courses from €30

Fialho, Évora 
Back in 1948, Manuel Fialho began serving local snacks. Today his busy, 
strip-lit restaurant is credited with having saved a number of traditional 
dishes such asfavada real de caça, a bean stew served to royal guests after 
hunting trips, andsopa de beldroegas (purslane soup). Walls are covered with 
deer antlers and Manuel's awards.
• +351 266 703 079 , restaurantefialho.com <http://restaurantefialho.com/>, 
three courses from €25

Where to drink 
 Herdade dos Grous, Beja. Photograph: Philipp Schwarz 
Convento Cartuxa, Évora 
Cartuxa Wines occupies an old Jesuit winery farm outside Évora's city walls. 
It's a tranquil whitewashed place where you can wander past vast barrels 
containing wines from little-known grapes like aragones, castelao and 
trincadeira. Drink at the bar or takeaway for only €5 a bottle.
• Estrada de Arrailos, +351 266 732 788

Herdade dos Grous, Beja 
This modern wine bar sits on a country estate in the south of the Alentejo, 
with its own vineyards and cork forests. Herdade dos Grous's Reserva red won 
the Oenologist Union of Alentejo's top award for 2006. Visitors can also learn 
about horse breeding, olive plantations and organic farming.
• +351 284 96 00 00, herdade-dos-grous.com 
<http://www.herdadedosgrous.com/inicio.html>, tastings from €5

Carmim Enoforum, Reguengos de Monsaraz 
Carmim is the largest wine producer in the Alentejo. At its modern 
headquarters 15,000 bottles are produced every hour. Visitors can take a tour 
and also visit the olive press.
• +351 266 508 200, enoforumwines.com <http://www.enoforumwines.com/>, visit 
with blind tasting of two wines €10

Where to stay 

Casa Pinto, Monsaraz 
This six-room guesthouse has rooms named after Portuguese colonies – Mombasa, 
Goa, Macao – and feels like someone's slightly eccentric home. The Spanish 
owners have created a gorgeous roof terrace with views of the Alentejo 
countryside.
• +351 226 557076, casapinto.es <http://casapinto.es/>, rooms from €60 B&B 
 Convento dos Loios, pousada de Évora 
Convento dos Loios, pousada de Évora 
The word pousada just means inn, but Pousadas de Portugal is a group of hotels 
in converted historic buildings, on the lines of Spain's paradors. This former 
monastery is a warren of lofty white and ochre cloisters right in the centre of 
Évora. Each room is a former monk's cell – even the presidential suite with its 
baroque ceilings and cut-glass chandeliers.
• +351 266 730 070, pousadas.pt 
<http://www.pousadas.pt/historic-hotels-portugal/en/pousadas/alentejo-hotels/pousada-de-evora/convento-dos-loios/pages/home.aspx>
, rooms from €136

Convento do Espinheiro 
King Alonso V stayed in the guesthouse of this convent several times in the 
late 15th century. Now a five-star hotel, the Convento has a luxurious, regal 
feel, with cosy rooms and altars everywhere you turn. There's also a swimming 
pool surrounded by olive groves.
• +351-266 788 200, conventodoes-pinheiro.com 
<http://www.conventodoespinheiro.com/>, rooms from €170

Where the locals go 
 Herdade do Vau 
Olga Miguel, Évora tour guide 
I love the boleimas (apple and cinnamon pastries) from Ma-Jó (on Rua Dom 
Augusto Eduardo Nunes in Portalegre), close to the Spanish border, or from any 
bakery up the road in Castelo de Vide until lunchtime.

Michele Marques, chef at Mercearia Gadanha, Estremoz 
I love leaving my restaurant (merceariagadanha.pt <http://merceariagadanha.pt>)
with the view of the castle of Estremoz and Évoramonte on the horizon. I also 
love the drive to the hill town of Marvão, north of Portalegre – the road, 
especially in spring, is wonderful.

Rita Martins, Terrius group of sustainable farmers (terrius.pt 
<http://terrius.pt/>) 
The Serra de São Mamede mountains have a microclimate that's great for 
producing high-quality chestnuts, apples, peppers and mushrooms. The region has 
several festivals, but the most important is in November, to celebrate the 
chestnut harvest.

Fernando Melo, wine critic, Beja 
I would strongly recommend Herdade do Vau <http://herdadedovau.com/> (+351 226 
199 800, herdadedovau.com, doubles from €80) near Beja, both for the exquisite 
set of grape varieties planted there and to stay – it's a good base to explore 
all of the southern Alentejo.

Sunvil (020-8758 4722, sunvil.co.uk 
<http://www.sunvil.co.uk/discovery/portugal>) offers seven-night culinary 
breaks in the Alentejo from £581pp including flights, B&B accommodation and car 
hire

• This article was amended on 12 May 2014. An earlier version stated that 
Pousadas de Portugal is state-run. The hotels are now run by the Pestana group.
 