
Some car manufacturers clearly didn't get the memo. With America's "big three" 
motor companies on life support, it was supposed to be a glitz-free, austere 
Detroit motor show this year in preparation for the possibility of mourning.

General Motors and Chrysler are cutting staff salaries and slashing every cost 
to the bone as they struggle to survive on emergency loans as effective wards 
of the US state. GM can't even afford to run the escalators at its headquarters 
during evening hours while Ford has scaled back office cleaning from nightly to 
weekly, according to the New York Times.

So was it appropriate for Mercedes to serve up lobster risotto, merlot and 
crème brûlée as it launched its new E-class sedan at Detroit's swankiest new 
hotel – the Westin Book Cadillac?

Several swanky sports carmakers – including Porsche and Ferrari – discreetly 
pulled out of this year's show. But Lamborghini flew the flag with a decidedly 
unreconstructed exhibition stand featuring twig-thin models smiling seductively 
alongside rich boys' toys masquerading as modes of transport.

Then there was Britain's Bentley, which for some reason decided that Detroit 
would be a good place to launch a £146,100 deluxe convertible featuring massage 
chairs and a lockable ski cabinet in the boot.

Bentley's sales and marketing director, Stuart McCullough, helpfully showed me 
that the grain on the hand-made wood panelling matched perfectly on both front 
doors of the Continental GTC Speed. He was engagingly combative when I asked 
him whether he expected to sell many of the 200mph cars in down-at-heel 
Detroit. "That's a silly question," said McCullough. "At a Detroit show, you're 
aiming to put cars on sale for the rest of the world."

He pointed out that he'd done interviews with Chinese, Russian and Middle 
Eastern television from the show. Fair enough, I suppose. After all, Bentley 
provides a livelihood for 4,000 British workers.

Over on the Aston Martin stand, salesman Ron Pond was cheerfully chatty. He 
said the celebrity chef Wolfgang Puck, who owns an Aston Martin DB9, had popped 
round earlier for a look at the firm's latest range. When members of the public 
arrive to gawp at Aston Martin's stand, Pond has a polished technique for 
deciding who should be allowed beyond a plexiglass barrier to be treated as a 
serious buyer.

"I say to them 'Well, sir, what kind of sports car do you currently enjoy?" 
Pond explains. "If they say a Mazda MX5, they're not going to spend the money 
for an Aston Martin."

With a dozen or so manufacturers absent from the show this year, China's top 
carmakers – Brilliance and BYD – were elevated from their previous spot in the 
basement of Detroit's Cobo convention centre to take stands alongside America's 
loss-making elite.

That meant there was a big gap to fill downstairs. So the organisers came up 
with a test track allowing visitors to try electric cars through an elaborate 
impromptu landscape of tropical trees, shrubs and waterfalls.

After signing several forms and being rather pedantically breathalysed, your 
correspondent went for a spin in a Mitsubishi iMiEV – a nifty little plug-in 
car set to go on sale in Japan this year.

I can report that the engine was disconcertingly silent but that the car was 
comfortable and smooth to handle. At least, that's as far as I could tell – I 
wasn't allowed to go above 15mph.

The company may be teetering on the brink of financial oblivion but Chrysler 
has come up with some unusual ideas for dashboard gizmos. Chrysler displayed a 
"concept car" boasting something called "vehicle networking" which allows you 
to link up with your driving buddies.

A map on the dashboard will show the location of "buddy" vehicles and will 
direct you to them. You can share instant messages, share directions and music 
and the car will even guide you to them.

Then there's a "teen setting" which, in a slightly Big Brother way, allows 
parents to keep track of young drivers by limiting their speed and their 
distance from home – and even by alerting mum and dad when their movement 
becomes erratic.

A year ago, Chrysler launched a new Dodge Ram truck at the motor show by 
herding a bunch of bulls through downtown Detroit. Chrysler's vice-chairman, 
Jim Press, apologised for the lack of cattle this year: "We had the cows all 
signed up but they were called to Washington to talk to the cow czar."

For good measure, he added: "It's a bear market, anyway."

Finally, the least convincing bit of spin at this year's motor show came from 
Ford's chairman, Bill Ford.

"In spite of the many challenges we face, I can honestly say I've never been 
more excited about our prospects for the future," said the great-grandson of 
Henry Ford.

Has anybody told Bill that Ford has lost $24bn since 2005 – and that US car 
sales are expected to plunge to a 27-year low this year?
 