
In the last two years, the phrase "10 billion" has come to stand for a 
supposed demographic crisis. In 2011, the UN projected that there will be 10 
billion people living on the planet in 2100, and this has been perceived as 
unsustainable. In Britain,Stephen Emmott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2012/jul/15/overpopulation-root-planet-problems-emmott>
 has come to be most closely associated with the figure because of the play he 
performed, or rather the vivid lecture he gave, at the Royal Court theatre, in 
London, last year. The Guardian'sMichael Billington called it "one of the most 
disturbing evenings" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/jul/19/ten-billion-review-royal-court> 
he had ever spent in a theatre: "Emmott uses an array of statistics to 
reinforce his argument that the current global population of seven billion will 
grow to 10 billion, maybe more, by the end of the century … We are facing a 
crisis with ecosystems being destroyed, the atmosphere polluted, temperatures 
rising and a billion people facing water shortage." (Emmott's book 
<http://www.penguin.co.uk/nf/Book/BookDisplay/0,,9780141976327,00.html> 
expanding on the lecture is due next month.)

I regard the figure of 10 billion differently: it isn't simply an indication 
of crisis or, in Emmott's words "an unprecedented planetary emergency". It is 
even one of hope – because what it means is that the world's population is 
increasing more slowly than it used to.

Because of this slowdown, 10 billion is the most we can expect to ever be: 
there are not too many of us and there will not be too many of us. But there 
is another vital issue: what matters is planning for a world in which we are 
squeezing ever more tightly into cities and where – for a few generations – 
more will be old than are young.

What 10 billion actually represents is a slowdown in population growth rates 
to peak at that number. The slowdown began shortly after 1971. Quite why it 
began then no one knows. That year, worldwide, population grew by 2.1% in a 
single year, more than it ever had before and more than it ever would again.

One reason we are unsure why the slowdown began when it did is that hardly 
anyone was looking back then. It is only in the light of four decades of near 
continuous fertility decline that it has become clear when the turning point 
was. And the causes? We don't really know. In Europe and North America the 
postwar baby boom tailed off. In China the one-child policy had not yet 
started, so it wasn't that. Across much of the planet far better access to 
contraception was spreading, but quite why 1971 was the year that growth 
reached its peak we may never pin down. The population has carried on growing 
since then, but less each year than the year before – and the increase has been 
more the result of better health and fewer deaths than of more births.

Back in 1968, all the talk was of the population bomb. In 1970, Ansley Coale, 
a demographer at Princeton, predicted that, at the then current rates of 
growth, the number of people in just over a dozen centuries' time would be too 
many to even fit on the surface of the Earth. That is what compound growth of 
2.1% a year results in if it continues unabated. No wonder there was no sense 
of the beginning of a slowdown: the experts were still saying that the end was 
nigh.

But people began to have fewer children in the 1970s. The power that women had 
to limit births increased. The need to have more offspring to secure an old age 
free of poverty diminished. A human population explosion that had been under 
way for 120 years came to an end. Again, I am referring not to the growth in 
the number of people but the growth of the rate of increase.Population 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/population> levels will continue to rise for 
many decades. But the acceleration ended more than 40 years ago. And we should 
not be panicking about 10 billion.

But why did the population explosion begin when it did, just after 1851? It 
might have been due to the disruption of most of the world's traditional 
societies, all with their own population control traditions. No one back then 
could have known because no one was counting all the people. The theory I 
prefer is that following a few "favourable seasons", the rise in a species 
number can be astonishing. "We have better evidence on this subject than mere 
theoretical calculations," Charles Darwin wrote, "namely, the numerous recorded 
cases of the astonishingly rapid increase of various animals in a state 
of nature, when circumstances have been favourable to them during two or three 
following seasons. Still more striking is the evidence from our domestic 
animals of many kinds." He was writing just as those favourable seasons were 
beginning for humans worldwide.

I am far from advocating waste and profligacy or cheerleading for an unbridled 
capitalism. Until now, the growth in population and the growth in capitalism 
have gone hand in hand. Markets made more than was needed because more 
consumers were arriving each year. It is not hard to make a profit when there 
are more people clamouring to buy your products, clothes, food, gadgets, 
haircuts and university degrees. For decades it was thought to have been 
geographical expansion that made continual growth economically possible. Then, 
when the entire world was embraced within global markets, it was thought to be 
the increased speed at which goods were traded that kept capitalism working, 
time triumphing over space. The simple reality of there being more consumers 
born every year than those who were dying has been largely ignored. But that is 
about to end – there will soon be fewer young consumers.

Do not be frightened that our population is forecast to rise to 10 billion – 
it may not, and even if it does there is more than enough to go round. It is 
only the richest billion who are consuming too much and, just as most of us do 
not emulate the most affluent of a century ago, there is no need to believe 
people in a century's time will have the playthings the rich have today.

That the world's population will settle at or around 10 billion is good news. 
(The change that we should really prepare for is the population decline that 
will occur after 10 billion is reached.) One of the best possible outcomes of 
the slowdown might be that the way in which we now produce and consume too much 
will become impossible without ever-growing numbers of young people to make 
up the market. Your great grandchild could be living in better, calmer, less 
polluting and less profit-obsessed times than you.
 