
Funny old genre, the Beatlemania-era pop group movie. Didn’t last long. Only 
produced one truly memorable movie – the evergreen and now 50-year-oldA Hard 
Day’s Night <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/36251/hard.day.s.night> – 
and was gone in about as much time as it took the United States to absorb the 
impact of the British Invasion and start to produce incomparably great 
post-Beatles pop music of its own.

As usual, the Beatles <https://www.theguardian.com/music/thebeatles> set the 
terms (and, as usual, promptly outgrew them). Or rather, Dick Lester did, by 
understanding them exactly, and filming their crazy everyday lives at the 
height of British Beatlemania as a sardonically funny, lightly surreal 
faux-documentary with priceless musical inserts. The main point was: the pop 
group plays the pop group. Sounds easy, right? Wrong: anybody could imitate it, 
but nobody could replicate it. Not even Lester, as the more bloated and 
sluggishly madcap Help! proved 18 months later.

And not John Boorman, in his early apprenticeship as a director, who took a 
similar approach with his Dave Clark Five movie Catch Us If You Can. The Five 
weren’t the Fab Four (despite that Daily Express headline “Tottenham Sound Has 
Crushed The Beatles!”), not musically and definitely not charisma-wise, but you 
can still watch the movie for some great songs, cute period cars, and for the 
band members’ clothes and shoes, which are too-too haute-mod 1965, and just to 
die for. In retrospect, I’m glad Boorman got it all out of his system early on; 
his next film, his first masterpiece, was Point Blank.

A Hard Day’s Night lit up the London outposts of the Hollywood Studios, who at 
the time were spending money like water in Britain. So it’s surprising that so 
few pop-group movies ended up being made, because to hear tell, almost every 
band got an offer. Even Gerry And The Pacemakers got to star in Ferry Cross The 
Mersey, which soon vanished completely for decades. And Herman’s Hermits – 
truly the most execrable cultural waste byproduct of the entire Invasion, who 
yet became huge family-friendly moptops in the USA – first played themselves in 
a Connie Francis MGM movie, then starred in Mrs Brown, You’ve Got a Lovely 
Daughter, and every time it plays on TCM, I reach for my Ted Turner voodoo doll 
and pins. Its absolute polar opposite, the Monkees’Head 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/apr/28/monkees-head-jack-nicholson-interview>
 – cynical and surreal – may be the best pop group movie after A Hard Day’s 
Night, but it was also the genre’s death-knell.

Apart from the Beatles, the really great bands avoided movies: the Kinks, the 
Who, the Animals, the Hollies, the Zombies. The Stones’ movie offers only 
resulted, years later, in Performance, the second-greatest British movie ever 
made (so there!). Be thankful for that, because if the Stones had ever made 
their own Ferry Cross The Mersey, I fear we’d think very poorly of them today.

• This article was amended on 2 July 2014 because an earlier version said the 
Small Faces did not make a movie. The Small Faces appeared in the 1965 film 
Dateline Diamonds.
 