
There are just a few things missing to complete the scene. Savage dogs, 
rusting engines from white vans plundered for parts, seagulls squabbling over 
landfill, scuffed barges laden with gravel and a backdrop peppered with 
indifferent high-rise housing. Add a slight scent of sewage and the 27-tonne Le 
Roi des Belges (King of the Belgians) might be berthed on some wind scythed 
stretch of the Thames Estuary far east of Tower Bridge.

The illusion, conjured on a grey and blustery January morning is not so very 
whimsical. Le Roi des Belges just happens to be moored on top of the brutalist 
Queen Elizabeth Hall between the Royal Festival Hall and the National Theatre. 
This, though, is no weather beaten Thames trader; it is, rather, an artwork – 
houseboat, too, which the public can stay in. It was designed by architect 
David Kohn and artistFiona Banner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/fiona-banner>, with Artangel for 
Living Architecture, an organisation set up by the philosopher Alain de Botton 
to build innovative holiday homes around the shores of Britain.

The shock, having ridden a slow and brutally utilitarian lift up through a 
jagged concrete interstice between the Queen Elizabeth Hall and the Hayward 
Gallery, is to find the houseboat anchored to the vast concrete roof of the 
1960s concert hall, a terrain as bleak, and as compelling, as any found 
downriver from Tower Bridge.

Artist and architect say they were inspired by Joseph Conrad's novel, Heart of 
Darkness, set on the Thames and the River Congo, and by Conrad's tales of how 
he steamed up the Congo in a boat of the same name in 1889. But, where Conrad 
experienced the all but unspeakable horror of the atrocities committed in the 
Congo Free State by King Leopold II, what you see spread out before you as you 
board the artworld Roi des Belges, also known asA Room for London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/a-room-for-london>, is the most 
compelling, and gloriously wide-angled, panorama of central London, framed by 
the Palace of Westminster on the port side and St Paul's to starboard.

"The idea is that where once ships sailed out from imperial London to the rest 
of the world, today the world has come willingly to London," explained de 
Botton. "The boat is here to provoke, stimulate and adjust how people feel about
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>."

Two people can stay here for a single night during the course of this year. 
Snuggled into their cabin – complete with neat galley, dining a pair of room, 
bunks that can be slid together, a shower with a view of the dome of St Paul's 
and a library. Those stowing their jib aboard this happily unexpected 
houseboat, are offered shelves stacked with books on London, peerless views and 
the strangest sense of being marooned alone in the heart, not of darkness, but 
of a neon, fluorescent and sodium-lit city and with the sound of Thames water 
lapping the South Bank shore overlain with the noise of night buses and 
emergency service sirens.

A Room for London is a year-long arts venue. A programme of visiting writers 
includes Swedish author and cultural historian Sven Lindqvist and novelist 
Jeanette Winterson. Among the musicians staying on board will be Andrew Bird, 
the Chicago multi-instrumentalist, German composer Heiner Goebbels and Laurie 
Anderson. Video and installation artist, Jeremy Deller, and Talking Heads' 
David Byrne will also be part of the crew. Somewhere between July and December 
you might want to book yourself on board, too, before, Le Roi des Belges is 
lifted off the roof of the Queen Elizabeth Hall and packed off to her next port 
of cultural call.

Le Roi des Belges is the sixth of the adventurous new rental houses 
commissioned by Living Architecture. These include the Balancing Barn on the 
Suffolk coast between Aldeburgh and Walberswick by Dutch architects, MVRDV, the 
Shingle House on the extreme south-easterly point of England at Dungeness, by 
the Glaswegian team NORDArchitecture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture>, and the Dune House on 
the fringe of Thorpeness,Suffolk, by Norway's Jarmund/Vigsnaes architects. All 
are moored by the sea, yet none is as literal in form as the shipshape Roi des 
Belges.

• This article was amended on 17 January 2012. The original referred to 
atrocities committed in the Congo Free State by King Alphonso II. This has been 
corrected.
 