
If, like Henry, the hero of her novel, a younger Audrey Niffenegger could have 
seen into her own future, she would never have believed it. Not so long ago, 
she was an unknown artist and teacher living in a one-bedroom apartment in 
Chicago, struggling to pay the bills. She still lives in Chicago (as she has 
done all her life), although now in a house, which she shares with her two cats 
and a menagerie of stuffed animals (she's into taxidermy). And she still 
teaches at the Chicago Centre for Book and Paper Arts. But now she is an 
internationally bestselling novelist. Her novel The Time Traveler's Wife - a 
whimsical love story about a man with the unfortunate habit of popping up naked 
at odd moments in his past - has just been voted, by readers responding to a 
poll by the publishers Random House, one of 15 "future classics", alongside old 
favourites such as To Kill a Mockingbird and Catch-22. "It's kind of crazy," 
Niffenegger admits. "I think it depends which novels people have read most 
recently." And an awful lot of people have readThe Time Traveler's Wife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/the-time-travelers-wife> recently.

With appropriately back-to-front timing, Niffenegger is in London to promote a 
book begun many years earlier. Where the novel took her four and a half years 
and sold well over 2m copies, The Three Incestuous Sisters, a painstakingly 
produced and extremely grown-up picture book, took 14 years to make 10 copies - 
all entirely by hand, even including the paper - which sold for $10,000 each. 
Now, after 20 years, it has been reproduced as close to the original as 
possible by Jonathan Cape for a slightly more affordable £16.99. "It seems like 
a miracle. I had spent all this time mailing little packages to publishers and 
getting these weird rejection letters, which basically said: 'This is 
brilliant. We're not going to publish it.'"

It would not have been possible without The Time Traveler's Wife, the 
extraordinary success of which is due in no small part - in this country at 
least - to a Richard and Judy book club recommendation, which sparked sales of 
almost 45,000 copies in one week. Jonathan Franzen notoriously snubbed Oprah's 
book club lest it should taint his literary reputation: does it bother 
Niffenegger if her novel is considered more popular than literary? "Well, he's 
a boy, and boys are different . . . I wrote it as a literary novel and my 
publisher published it as literary fiction. The fact that it sold a lot of 
copies I don't think necessarily changes that. But it's perfectly OK with me if 
people want to say it's popular fiction. I don't think that's an insult."

Part sci-fi (sort of Priestley and Wells, but with lots more sex) and part 
smart chick-lit, The Time Traveler's Wife revels in the romantic cliche that if 
you wait long enough Mr Right will eventually show up - although probably not 
at the right time. It could also be read as a comment on the chronic 
unreliability of men, here one minute gone the next. "My father had the kind of 
the job where he was often travelling, so my mother was stuck with us all the 
time. I wouldn't say she came unglued, but you could tell that she was really 
not enjoying herself. That was what I was thinking about when I tried to 
imagine what it would be like to be in Clare's situation."

But, apart from Henry's erratic time-keeping, it is in many ways the portrait 
of an infuriatingly perfect marriage. "I've never been married, and I've never 
even lived with anybody, so I don't know about this first hand. I talked to all 
my married friends and the women all said that what they really wanted was to 
have side- by-side houses, where they could visit each other." So she invented 
a marriage in which there would always be an element of unpredictability and 
absence, a side-by-sideness in time rather than place.

Despite the insistence on the slipperiness of destiny, there is never any 
uncertainty about the lovers' future. According to Guardian critic Natasha 
Walter, this quasi-religious sense of predestination accounts for the novel's 
phenomenal popularity. Walter sees The Time Traveler's Wife, along with Alice 
Sebold's The Lovely Bones (another Richard and Judy runaway bestseller, about a 
murdered girl in Heaven) and the hit film The Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless 
Mind, as part of a broader trend in American culture of rejecting harsh realism 
in favour of reassuring narratives that offer "a benign kind of magic".

"No way!" Niffenegger exclaims. "[The novel] never says there's an afterlife, 
it never says this is destiny. If anything, I'm postulating a kind of 
randomness and meaninglessness. There is nothing in the book that I intended to 
be read as affirming some kind of religion. My own view is fairly dark."

Anyone who doubts this might take a look at The Three Incestuous Sisters. With 
its grim echoes of Goya and Edward Gorey (although Aubrey Beardsley was her 
main inspiration), these shadowy aquatints are a world away from Disney. Eerily 
enigmatic with the faintest whiff of eroticism, the pictures depict a sinister 
story of jealousy and desire. "People who know me well were surprised to read 
The Time Traveler's Wife because there is that level of optimism and romance 
that they didn't think I had in me."

With her bright-red hair ("It's not my real colour you know," she says) and 
dressed entirely in black, she resembles a more robust version of one of her 
pale, floaty sisters. She began the book when she was 22 and ended it when she 
was 36. "It's interesting to work on something for such a long time because it 
becomes a sort of autobiography - when I look at the pictures I remember 
wherever I happened to be." But it's not, she insists, autobiographical, 
despite the dedication to her two sisters. "My sisters are a little bemused by 
the whole project. But they are very happy that they finally got copies after 
all these years. We get along really well. We don't go around throwing 
ourselves out of lighthouses or trying to steal each other's boyfriends."

The idea came to her as a dream. Really. "It was a tableau of three women with 
very long hair, sitting in chairs side by side. I knew their names - Clothilde, 
Ophile and Bettine - and I knew they were the Three Incestuous Sisters and that 
was it. People expect there to be a whole lot more sex in it. But the incest is 
metaphorical - they are too involved with each other and interfere with each 
other's lives in very horrible ways."

Girls having their hair pulled out by birds, suicide, dismembered babies and 
foetuses like furballs under the bed, it's a fair guess that Niffenegger wasn't 
feeling very jolly at the time. "I was horribly depressed in my teens and 20s. 
Somewhere around 33 or 34 I seemed to have grown out of it. I just got somewhat 
more cheerful and stopped bursting into tears all the time." It was not long 
after this that she began working on The Time Traveler's Wife.

Soon after the novel came out, the film rights were optioned by Mr and Mrs 
Pitt Productions (yes, those Pitts); post-Aniston/Pitt split, Brad is still 
going to play Henry, but is still looking for his Clare. It's easy to see why 
the novel appealed to them. "If there's a cinematic quality to it," she says, 
"it's because when I write I think in terms of what things look like, I'm sort 
of making a little movie in my head."

It was not only Niffenegger's career that was transformed following The Time 
Traveler's Wife. A few days after she had finished the manuscript, she met 
photographer Christopher Schneberger. "I waited for you, and now you're here," 
she writes triumphantly in the novel's acknowledgments. A happy ending there, 
too, then? Awkward pause: "I hate to say it, but we have broken up." Oh dear. 
"We're still friends, we are very fond of each other, we're not even mad at 
each other," she says. "Having somewhat publicly declared, 'Hurrah! I've found 
true love', it's rather embarrassing to have to say, 'Well, it didn't work 
out.' I keep dating artists, because they are most of the people I know, but 
I'm starting to wonder if I shouldn't hook up with a banker. I've got cats ..."

Her next novel is set in Highgate cemetery, so she has been spending more time 
in London. She has a whopping case of Successful First Novel Syndrome to 
overcome. "God yes, wouldn't it be nice if this [The Sisters] could be 
considered my second novel, and we could just get on with it. I'm not 
interested in repeating myself, but I think a lot of people would simply like 
more of what they like."

And if, like Henry, she could revisit a time in her past, when would she 
choose? "Just after the novel came out, the fall or winter of 2003, I remember 
thinking this is the most perfect moment in my life. Everything is perfect 
right now! It's not as if I'm unhappy at the moment, because things are just 
going too well, but if I could go back just a little bit, I would. Maybe just 
for a while, and then I'd come back and get on with my life".

·  The Three Incestuous Sisters by Audrey Niffenegger is published by Jonathan 
Cape at £16.99. To order a copy for £15.99 with free UK p&p, call the Guardian 
Book Service on 0870 836 0875, or go toGuardian.co.uk/bookshop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/bookshop>
 