
Guardian writers’ predicted position: 9th
Last season’s position: 8th

The great Australian mining boom rolls on, and so continues football’s fraught 
relationship with the beneficiaries of its prosperity. Clive Palmer has come 
and gone in a whirlwind few years on the Gold Coast, while Nathan Tinkler has 
recently added Newcastle Jets to the firesale. Only two remain: the Bakrie 
Group at Brisbane Roar, and Tony Sage atPerth Glory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/perthglory>.

Sage is indeed a colourful character. In 2011 he threw a wonderful dummy spit 
and threatenedto walk away 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/news/perth-glory-owner-tony-sage-sorry-for-quit-threat-and-re-affirms-commitment-to-club/story-e6frg6n6-1226229371065>
 from the club after huge financial losses, only to reaffirm his commitment a 
week later. He then abused the referees and hired a crack team to do a 
“forensic look at all the blogs” to find troublemakers “destabilising the 
club”. Perhaps spurred on by the giddy realisation that people in high places 
do actually read their internet musings, the keyboard warriors took their 
concerns to print, and amidst the turmoil last season, sent an angryletter 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/sport/football/protest-group-rattles-glory-box-fans-letter-calls-on-owner-to-act-or-sell-club/story-fn63e0vj-1226848459555>
 to the club instructing Sage to sell the club or “forfeit the Perth Glory FC 
franchise licence back to Football Federation Australia”. Welcome to the 
A-League: where crazy club executives are rivalled only by the batshit crazy 
fans who bite the hand that feeds them.

Yet the frustration of the supporters can be understood in the context of 
Perth Glory’s unrelenting mediocrity. The controversial sacking of Alistair 
Edwards midway through last season was a harbinger for farcical scenes out 
west, and Perth Glory remained in the headlines for all the wrong reasons. As 
the team won just four of their remaining 14 games under new coach Kenny Lowe, 
the crowds stayed away, and those who did turn up unfurled passive aggressive 
banners at the stadium. The whole affair ended on an unconvincing note as Lowe 
admitted it was a “brave” move to re-sign him for two more seasons.

A long-standing gripe amongst Perth Glory fans has been the neglect of young 
Western Australian talent. They’re a proud bunch out west, and they want to see 
their boys stick it to those layabout snobs on the Eastern Seaboard. In this 
context, Edwards was a popular choice of coach among the fans. He preached the 
gospel of youth, and as a former Glory player and local city councillor, he 
pushed some parochial buttons. But the barely-concealed battle between him and 
former captain Jacob Burns saw the latter emerge with a decent gig in the club 
football department, while Edwards has returned to coaching development and 
television punditry in Asia. Perhaps both of them are better off.

Lowe’s claim to fame is his time spent developing youth players at the 
National Training Centre at Football West, however his recruitment in the 
off-season has owed less to a youth policy and more to recycling existing 
A-League talent. Youssouf Hersi, a crowd favourite with the Western Sydney 
Wanderers, will add spark and creativity to the Glory attack, while local boys 
Dino Djulbic and Richard Garcia return home after some time away. Ex-Newcastle 
Jets captain Ruben Zadkovich, the man whose talent and self-belief regularly 
clash – with hilarious consequences – will likely replace Burns as the mongrel 
midfielder. Meanwhile, Diogo Ferreira arrives from Brisbane Roar. Apparently 
Diogo was a Perth Glory fan as a kid, which the Glory social media teamwasted 
no time in exploiting 
<https://twitter.com/PerthGloryFC/status/509153500022857728>. Then again, 
everyone supported Perth Glory in the old days, mainly because they were the 
only club in the NSL not run like a local sandwich shop.

Mitch Nichols is also a handy pick-up on loan from Cerezo Osaka, while Danny 
Vukovic has returned to the club after a short spell in Japan. The most 
intriguing signing, however, is Andy Keogh, who arrives in Perth after a 
journeyman career in England. Keogh will replace Shane Smeltz, who has been the 
club’s top goalscorer over the past three seasons. With Smeltz now at Sydney 
FC, a lot of responsibility rests on Keogh, and in pre-season at least, he has 
delivered with a goal on debut against Malaga, as well as several goals in the 
FFA Cup.

With William Gallas now a distant memory, Perth will begin the season without 
a marquee player. There has been talk of signing a star striker to bolster 
their attacking stocks, although Lowe has made it clear that he wants a blue 
collar culture at the club. Lowe says he wants players “who’ve got no ego, who 
are quite prepared to roll their sleeves up and work.” 4-4-effing-2, lads!
 