
Guardian writers’ prediction: 4th


Last season’s position: 2nd


Benjamin Franklin once said there were only two certainties in life, death and 
taxes. Had he lived to watch the Wanderers grace Parramatta Stadium, he might 
have added a third – write these guys off and you’re an idiot.


In just two years, the league’s “oldest newest” club has blazed a trail of 
achievement that even the most starry eyed optimists would have imagined 
impossible. Premiers in their debut season, back to back grand finalists, and 
now a remarkable berth in the final of the Asian Champions League, with a shot 
at a $1.7m prize and the honour of becoming the first Australian club to win 
the region’s top club competition.

It’s one thing to impress amid the level-playing field of the A-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league>, another thing entirely given 
the inequality in wealth and playing personnel on offer in the top leagues in 
Asia. Not since 2005 has a Japanese or Korean club failed to qualify for the 
final; West Sydney beat four – including last year’s grand-finalists FC Seoul – 
en route to the final. Marcello Lippi may have won a World Cup, the Champions 
League and five Serie A titles, but even he couldn’t engineer a way past Tony 
Popovic’s men.

Off the pitch, in two years the Wanderers have forged the most devoted and 
passionate fanbase in the league. Sure, the supporters spend half the game 
singing about themselves instead of their team, but there’s no disputing the 
RBB have raised the bar for active support. With almost 16,000 members – at 
full subscription given stadium limitations – West Sydney havesurpassed the 
Parramatta Eels, GWS Giants, Bulldogs, Tigers and Panthers 
<http://www.smh.com.au/sport/soccer/aleagues-wanderers-top-the-list-for-membership-sales-in-western-sydney-20140901-10b2tb.html>
. Welcome to Australian football’s heartland, the Ukraine of the Soviet Union’s 
food production, if you will.

And yet...

The build-up to Season 10 has seen vast improvements across the league, not 
just in playing staff, but also in coaching. The “big clubs” Sydney FC and 
Melbourne Victory appear set to wake from their slumber after a period of 
underachievement, and the influx of money and talent into Melbourne City (née 
Heart) sees last year’s wooden spooners now led by Spain’s all-time leading 
goalscorer, David Villa. Cogitate on that for a moment.

In this context, Western Sydney’s off-season recruitment appears, well, weak. 
Gone are talismanic figures Shinji Ono and Youssouf Hersi, Socceroo Aaron Mooy, 
and cross-machine Jerome Polenz. The combination of Hersi and Polenz in 
particular was a critical aspect ofWanderers’ play last season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/nov/05/western-sydney-wanderers-discover-alternatives-to-youssouf-hersi>
, but in these four, Western Sydney have lost four of their five top assist 
generators from the previous campaign.

To fill this void, in come some relatively unknown figures – Vitor Saba, Romeo 
Castelen, and Seyi Adeleke. A guy who sounds like an SBS journalist, a former 
Dutch international who was injured for almost five years, and a lad stranded 
in Nigeria due to Ebola (he didn’t have the condition personally).

Used only sparingly during the last rounds of the Asian Champions League, much 
will be expected of Saba if he is to fill the hole left by Ono. More than just 
a key playmaker in the Wanderers system, Ono brought experience and confidence 
to a young squad; a calmness on the ball, and the wisdom to dictate tempo and 
control possession when his side most needed.

Tony Popovic will need Castelen injury-free and at the top of his game to 
match his compatriot Hersi’s seven goals and 13 assists across two seasons. 
Castelen hails from the same town as Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink, and fans will be 
hoping the new Wanderer is morethis Hamburg 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cy0AAhJlwCk> than this Hamburg 
<http://www1.skysports.com/football/news/11881/5640794/>; there’s no question 
as to the pedigree, it’s just whether he can stay on the pitch.

In pre-season it become apparent that key rivals have evolved tactically. 
Kevin Muscat has abandoned Ange Postecoglou’s‘Jekyll and Hyde’ 4-2-2-2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/nov/11/melbourne-victory-sydney-fc-tactical-analysis>
 (where the 2s apparently stood for ATTACK ATTACK ATTACK) with the vastly 
experience duo of Milligan and Valeri to provide an at times porous (and 
comedic) defence with greater cover. Josep Gombau now plays a 3-4-3, but with a 
full pre-season under his belt, expect his Maliks and Boogaards to have a much 
clearer conception of their defensive responsibilities. Likewise, with Graham 
Arnold at the helm don’t expect 2014-2015 Sydney FC to be shipping four or five 
goals every time the Roar show up.

In contrast, the Wanderers’ tactical consistency has been a hallmark of their 
first two seasons. Now Western Sydney have proved their premiership was no 
fluke, expect many to have their targets set on the team. And look to see if 
rival managers have now had sufficient time to work out Tony Popovic’s system 
and approach.

And yet...

Irrespective of all the ifs and buts – if Tomi Juric left, if Matthew 
Spiranovic got snapped up, if Popovic himself was poached by a bigger club – a 
simple fact still remains: this present squad – without Adeleke, Castelen and 
Juric (against FC Seoul in the second leg) – just qualified for the ACL final.

While opposition scouts may not have been quaking in their boots at a 
frontline of Brendon Santalab, Mark Bridge, and Labinot Haliti, the Wanderers 
under Popovic have always been much more than just the sum of their parts, and 
no side in the A-League has the same collective mentality, endeavour and 
resilience. The 2012 Coach of the Year has a history of making silk purses out 
of sows’ ears; or have we forgotten Dino “Croatian Brian Deane” Kresinger so 
quickly?

You’ll get no rollovers from this Wanderers side and their consistency across 
the season should still see them safely ensconced in the six. With so many 
sides expected to vastly improve though, it will make for a congested top-end 
of the table – season three will be when Popovic really proves his mettle as a 
manager to see if the Wanderers can adapt and evolve in step with a rapidly 
improving league.
 