
One day in 1981, 16-year-old Alan Warner was in Oban with a friend when they 
noticed something in an art shop window. "My friend said: 'There's that new 
book by that guy in Glasgow.' It had beautiful rococo art work on the cover." 
The book was a hardback copy ofAladsair Gray's novel Lanark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/science-fiction/9780857861788/lanark>
, just published by Edinburgh-based Canongate press. "I remember saying to my 
friend: 'You mean there's someone in Scotland writing books today?' I genuinely 
thought writing in Scotland had died out like the gas lamp."

Warner concedes that this deluded impression was in part prompted by living in 
a Highland tourist town and seeing Walter Scotts and Robert Louis Stevensons 
bound and forbidding in souvenir shops – "an antiquarian feel that had been 
projected on to Scottish literature." But it wasn't much better in Glasgow. He 
recalls going to a three-storey bookshop there the same year. "The Scottish 
literature section consisted of Muriel Spark, John Buchan, Stevenson and Scott. 
Apart from Spark you'd have nothing published since the 60s. Nothing. 
Everything was over with."

Worse, literature had been colonised by the posh English. "Every Penguin 
classic you looked at was 'He studied at Oxford or Cambridge.' That's why I was 
fascinated by literature – because it was otherworldly. It wasn't something 
made in and of my community."

It's inconceivable that any sentient Scot could feel today as Warner did in 
1981. Scottish literature has flourished so much in the three decades since 
that disbelieving Oban moment, thanks to Gray, James Kelman, Irvine Welsh, AL 
Kennedy, Andrew O'Hagan, Iain Banks, Ali Smith, Kathleen Jamie, and others too 
numerous to mention, that the firm of Scott, Stevenson and Spark no longer has 
a stranglehold on the national literary imagination.

The most notable omission from that list of Scottish literary revivifiers is 
Warner himself, who, as the author of seven novels from hisbravura 1995 debut 
Morvern Callar  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780099586111/morvern-callar>
to the sophisticated ambition of his latestThe Deadman's Pedal, published this 
month, has been feted as one of Scotland's finest writers. The critics hail 
you, I tell him, as the true artist of the Scottish novel. "Oh I cringe when 
you say that. It's just I can't walk around – I should but I can't – thinking 
'I am an artist.'" Warner's a big man, but shrinks over his Red Bull and ice as 
he sits at a table framed by the window of the bar of Edinburgh's Rutland Hotel.

Behind him it rains unstoppingly for the next three and a half hours, 
reinforcing the melancholy Caledonian mood Warner established when we met, as 
he pointed out closed-down shops on Princes Street. Scotland's premier 
boulevard is hushed: there's no traffic thanks to the building of a tramway and 
few pedestrians because of the rain. There is, though, a tank parked on the 
street, to woo army recruits. Outside, Edinburgh's unpeopled and militarised; 
inside, Warner eventually moves from Red Bull to Guinness.

"I've always had to pinch myself," he says, de-hunching himself finally. "Even 
today I still feel like a reader who happens to write. I know it's not really 
the truth, I know it's taken over my life, the writing, become a compulsion. 
And more than a compulsion – a curse."

Long before he became an accursed artist, Warner was bookless in Argyll. "My 
family didn't really read books. Nor did I." That changed when, aged, 15, he 
went into John Menzies and came out with three novels –Camus's The Outsider 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780241950050/the-outsider>
, Gide'sThe Immoralist and Charles Webb's The Graduate  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780141190242/the-graduate>
– partly because the covers suggested the books would be about sex.

"I thought books were James Bond and Agatha Christie and then suddenly I read 
The Immoralist and later Alan Paton's Cry, the Beloved Country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/classics/9780099766810/cry-the-beloved-country>
 and half way through them you're devastated by what's going on. It completely 
changed my world. I never knew literature could move you, change the way you 
looked at the world."

Seduced by literature, he became a Highland autodidact, trawling in almost 
continuous literary rapture through Penguin classics from a charity shop. 
"Twenty five of them in a row – no sensible connection between them. 
Dostoevsky, Gide,The Lives of the Saints, Henry James. It was a completely pure 
experience for about a year of my life. Those books twisted me around something 
remarkable."

Only later did Scottish writing catch up with Warner's reading. The book that 
revolutionised his sensibility and induced him to write fiction wasJames 
Kelman's 1984 novelThe Busconductor Hines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781846970399/busconductor-hines>
. "I remember that the effect it had on me – apart from great joy – was 'That's 
all you have to do. You sort of, eh, have a job and you write about the job and 
the guy has thoughts.' So out came the pen." He still starts his books in 
longhand.

By this time, Warner was studying for a humanities degree in London, but had 
already worked for British Rail on the Oban-Glasgow line. "I was writing bad 
poems at the time. And I thought 'I can do this.' But I reached page 35 and the 
guy hadn't left his bedroom to go to work." Warner had a grand vision for this 
putative literary debut. "I wanted to write something big and mythical in the 
landscape of the west coast of Scotland."

The book was also to have a political undercurrent, since it would be set on 
the railways in the fearful interregnum between the Beeching axe and BR's 
privatisation. "The Thatcherite political idea was that the railways are a 
unionised system that has the country by the balls, and so freight was put in 
the hands of privatised road hauliers."

His aim was also to make that political story personal. The hero's dad would 
run a road haulage company, thriving as his son's railway industry collapsed. 
Politics would be thus infused with oedipal struggle, albeit with this twist: 
the dad was in the ascendant, at least economically. Warner was strip mining 
his biography: his dad was a Yorkshire-born wartime sergeant-major turned 
entrepreneur, who made his fortune by delivering coal to homes on the Isle of 
Mull and later, with his Mull-born wife, ran hotels in Oban.

But Warner couldn't make that book work, so set it aside for nearly a quarter 
of a century. Instead, he wroteMorvern Callar from 1991 to 1993 without anyone 
knowing what he was up to. At the time he was working on the railways. "I 
didn't tell anyone. Imagine if you'd failed. You'd be teased in the pub for the 
next 10 years. You don't go down to the pub and say: 'I've reached page 65 – 
it's going splendidly!' In that male culture on the railways, there was that 
sort of Hemingway concept that there's something effeminate about writing – 
bullshit of course."

What was he writing behind closed doors, this self-styled "lonely bedroom 
grafter"? A novel that broke the unwritten rule: don't have a corpse in scene 
one. It starts with Morvern discovering her boyfriend dead on the kitchen 
floor. "He'd cut His throat with the knife," she reports. "He'd near chopped 
off His hand with the meat cleaver. He couldn't object so I lit a Silk Cut. A 
sort of wave of something was going across me. There was fright but I'd 
day-dreamed how I'd be." The critic Jenny Turner compared it to The Great Gatsby
 <http://www.lrb.co.uk/v17/n21/jenny-turner/fairy-lights>: "The same effortless 
surface, with an immaculate craft going on beneath." Morvern's affectless 
hipster anomie also seduced: the book sold more than 60,000 copies.

After Morvern Callar was published in 1995 and won the Somerset Maugham award 
<http://www.societyofauthors.org/somerset-maugham>, Warner became a poster boy 
for the Scottish literary renaissance. "There was this media construct of 
Irvine and me as part of a movement called the Scottish Beats," he recalls. 
Guinness has never been sipped more crossly. "I was never influenced by the 
Beats. I was a more formalist writer, more interested in classical structure."

Who devised the Beats tag? "It might have been the New York Times. This 
glamorous girl came over to interview us and tried to gather us in the pub. We 
said: 'We'll gather in the pub if there's a bar bill.' So they made the scene 
by having a bar bill." He laughs. "The article went: 'As night falls, the Beats 
of Scotland gather in a shady pub to discuss their poems ...'"

Thanks to the nihilism, drugs and dance music mix-tapes in Morvern Callar, 
Warner also got written up as a member of the chemical generation of novelists. 
He didn't like that tag either. "I've said before you can write a very good 
story or novel about going to night clubs but you can't base a whole literary 
movement around it."

Warner left Edinburgh for Dublin in 1997, following his wife who was going to 
study there. "It was getting a bit hectic and hectic for me means the Scotsman 
ringing up and saying: 'Can you give us 2,000 words on olive oil by next 
Wednesday?' I realised by that point I'd wandered into alien territory."

In Dublin, he withdrew comfortably. "I am a bit of closet case. I don't know 
how other writers do it otherwise. I find it so time consuming." In Edinburgh 
he'd written a sequel toMorvern Callar called These Demented Lands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780099577911/these-demented-lands>
. In Dublin, he ventriloquised not one woman, but a gang of horny, 
hard-drinking schoolgirls from Our Lady of Perpetual Succour in The Port (as in
Morvern Callar, Warner's fictional simulacrum of Oban) who go on a trip to 
Edinburgh for a singing competition. In The Sopranos  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780099268741/the-sopranos>
and its 2010 sequelThe Stars in the Bright Sky, Warner – as Thomas Jones wrote 
in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780224071284/the-stars-in-the-bright-sky>
– turned "an indulgent eye on many of the pet hates of the Daily Mail – binge 
drinking, promiscuity, teen pregnancy, abortion, single mothers, obesity, 
drug-taking, and young women generally misbehaving".

Surprisingly, The Sopranos has not been adapted into a film, even though Rob 
Roy director Michael Caton-Jones <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0001994/bio> has 
been slated to direct. Part of the problem, says Warner, is that Caton-Jones 
thinks the girls should be cast from unknown first-year drama students, while 
the studios demand stars. This is a shame, particularly since the only other 
adaptation of a Warner novel was such a triumph. Lynne Ramsay's 2002 film 
Morvern Callar <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/92809/morvern.callar>, 
starring Samantha Morton, was, he says "a French art movie set up in the 
Highlands. I dreamed of that movie when I was 17."

While in Dublin, Warner also wrote The Worms Can Carry Me to Heaven (2006) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780099268758/the-worms-can-carry-me-to-heaven>
, which took its title from his mother's deathbed words. He asked her about her 
funeral plans. She answered: "The worms can carry me to heaven." An ambitious, 
almost Proustian remembrance of a terminally ill man's life, written with great 
bravura by Warner in the narrative voice of a native Spanish speaker writing in 
artificial English, it is his only novel so far to be set outside his homeland.

Warner returned to Edinburgh with his wife in 2009, and there disinterred the 
old Highland railways manuscript. What finally unlocked that novel for him was 
abandoning first-person narration. "It had been in first person because I 
wanted to get that immediacy of being on the railway, the dignity and absurdity 
of labour. But the first person couldn't carry the weight." It was hard for him 
to surrender the narrative method since it was what he took from James Kelman: 
"It was Kelman who threw down the moral and ideological challenge to the 
third-person voice and the values it takes on, the way it smuggles in political 
positions too."

So abandoning Kelmanian narration, especially for a book that drew on Warner's 
own life, was a difficult step. "The third person voice comes in for a lot of 
knocking but it can be so subtle. If you're careful with it you can suggest so 
much of a character without recourse to the Dear Reader voice."

The result is The Deadman's Pedal, a genre-bending novel about a 16-year-old 
Highlander working for British Railways in the early 1970s. It's part
bildungsroman with raunchy interludes, part class analysis, part political 
meditation, part reverie about his native landscape's grandeur and, if Warner 
has his way, the first of a trilogy. Those who want to mistake it as 
autobiography have Warner's blessing. "What you're trying to do as a writer is 
create the illusion that it is an autobiography. But you're playing a double 
trick – it looks like autobiography but it's not. You're trying to achieve that 
authenticity, that verisimilitude."

In any case, the dates are all wrong for it to be autobiographical. "I was 
playing with my Action Men in 1973 when Simon's out chasing girls." The book 
starts with a wake for a dead train driver and throughout there is a sense of 
an overstaffed industry on its last legs. Into this doomed milieu comes young 
Simon. "You're in an old folks' home on wheels in this joint, son," a veteran 
warns him.

"There's a sense of time running out and I like that dramatically," Warner 
says. "It's a double nostalgia because you've got people like Penalty" – a 
venerable character apt to romanticise his steam-train adventures through the 
book – "who are bemoaning the loss of the steam engine, people like me 
bemoaning the loss of the diesels." But Warner is also lamenting the end of the 
seemingly indefensible – the overstaffed railways of yore. "You had a baggy 
workforce. There was this patch after mid-60s dieselisation when all firemen 
were retained. So they all had other jobs, fishing and stuff. They had it 
sussed." He estimates that on the Oban-Glasgow line there were 69 employees in 
1973; now, he reckons there are 12.

And yet in our era of pay cuts and job insecurity, how delightful to read 
about this doomed bunch of chippy, Highland slackers: "There was a residual 
dignity about them: they believed in workers' rights, in workers of the world 
unite. Now they're on individual contracts." Warner says the arc of the 
storyline will end two books later with the railway closed down, the tracks 
lifted. "Simon finds himself a middle-aged guy walking this empty trackway." 
Already he's plotting book two.

In The Deadman's Pedal Warner dares to have scenes that run on too long, like 
a diesel breaking beyond the buffers. Why? "Books that have tight elegance 
often fall dead for me. If you look at James Cain or Raymond Chandler, they're 
perfect and formed in relation to plot. They're ideologically short. I like 
books to feel slightly out of control, inelegant, with long detours. Of course 
it's a construct but you create avérité feel."

There is also Gothic extravagance. There are sunken villages, glass-topped 
graves, coffins tumbling from graveyard to loch, and a plutocrat's big house 
with a posh girl with whom Simon becomes besotted, abandoning his first love 
from the council estate. Like Warner, Simon is a social butterfly, a 
middle-class boy who works in a working-class profession and yet hobnobs with 
Highland toffs. Were you like that? "Simon's much more balanced than I was at 
that age. He's not so tetchy and dissatisfied."

When I first meet Warner, sheltering in a hotel doorway, the 47-year-old looks 
– in sensible overcoat and matching haircut – a pillar of the Scottish literary 
establishment, no longer the ostensible literary tyro of the chemical 
generation. He cuts a professorial figure – appropriate since for the past year 
Warner has been writer in residence at Edinburgh University. Aren't such 
courses for wimps? "I used to think so. But I'm really encouraged that 15 
students can get into a workshop and openly talk about their work. That's their 
strength and my weakness – I would have dropped dead to reveal my novel half 
way through to a bunch of strangers."

But there are limitations to what Warner can give his students. "You can share 
your work in a supportive environment. You can pick up information and if that 
helps, that helps. But you can't write through community," says the one-time 
lonely bedroom grafter. "Ultimately writing is a solitary art form."
 