
In 1969 Anselm Kiefer <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/anselm-kiefer>
, then a 24-year-old art student in Karlsruhe, travelled round various 
locations in France, Switzerland and Italy where he was photographed giving the 
"sieg heil" (Hitlergruß) salute outside prominent buildings. His exhibiting of 
a selection of the images, under the titleOccupations (Bezetzung), for his 
degree show provoked anxious incomprehension among his tutors and, later, anger 
among the public and critics. The taboo-breaking work has now entered the 
art-historical canon and Kiefer has been credited with an early "naming" of the 
evil that so many of his countrymen had chosen to forget, but more than 40 
years after it was produced,Occupations remains one of the most polarising 
artworks to have emerged from postwar Germany.

Late last year in New York, an exhibition 
<http://www.gagosian.com/exhibitions/2010-11-06_anselm-kiefer/> of Kiefer's 
work featured some of the 1969 images alongside more typical later work such as 
huge glass cases displaying tableaux made up of cotton dresses, palms, bushes, 
an aeroplane fuselage and burned books, as well as large paintings of the 
German landscape made with ash, lead, snakeskin and other organic materials. 
"When I moved to my new studio in Paris a few years ago I had the space and 
opportunity to look at old work, often for the first time since it was made," 
he explains. "I found all these negatives from 1969 that I'd never even 
developed. So I developed some of them and put them in a big container for the 
New York show. It seemed a long time ago when I made them, but even after all 
these years some people did not like them at all."

The show attracted a small demonstration 
<http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/newsdesk/2010/12/gagosian-jerusalem-protest.html>
, but Kiefer says he is "used to hard reactions. When I first thought of the 
work I didn't know anyone else who was doing anything similar, but I had always 
thought that I had been born an artist and so what I did was art. I was very 
confident. If I hadn't been I wouldn't have been able to do any of this. Even 
by the time of the Venice biennale in 1980, when I was supposedly established, 
not a single critic was for me. Everyone was against my work. Of course, they 
later turned in my favour, but I needed a high degree of confidence to 
continue."

Kiefer's willingness to engage with the German myths and preoccupations that 
had been contaminated by association with Nazism earned him a certain notoriety 
throughout the 1970s and 80s. He worked in the darkly symbolic forests, echoed 
Caspar David Friedrich's romantic landscapes and cited Wagner via photography, 
painting and sculpture. He incorporated the alchemical materials of fire and 
melted metals and became increasingly absorbed by the Jewish myths and beliefs 
that the Nazis had attempted to eradicate. Over time he began to co-opt his 
long-standing interest in poetry and myths from many different cultures, not so 
much in search of a solution to the questions of why we are here and what we 
are doing, but more to explore human philosophical endeavour in the face of the 
uncaring natural processes of entropy and decay.

It is a dauntingly formidable prospectus that, for some, can slip into 
portentousness. One critic of the New York show summed up her antipathy by 
explaining that she "found the fact that MoMA had to reinforce its walls for 
the 1988-89 exhibition to support the weight of huge, often lead-covered 
canvases more significant than the paintings themselves". But the historian 
Simon Schama admires Kiefer precisely for his heft, commending his "heavy-load 
maximalism" at a time when "impish minimalism was king of the contemporary art 
world". Kiefer, Schama says, "is incapable of making trivia". Marina Warner 
maintains that his "apocalyptic vision has been central to the dilemma about 
what to remember and how to remember it, to the tensions around oblivion and 
commemoration . . . The alchemical art builds a historical and literary 
polyphony, certainly, but at a deeper level it also relates to ritual, to 
ritual's yearning to redraft events, to turn death into a celebration."

Kiefer was in London last week to install his new show at the White Cube 
<http://www.whitecube.com/exhibitions/ak%202011/> gallery. Despite the almost 
theatrically high seriousness of his work, the now 66-year-old artist cuts a 
rather cheery figure as he greets staff and checks lighting levels at the 
gallery, accompanied by his wife and two young children. The exhibition is 
named after a play by the 19th-century Austrian writer Franz Grillparzer,Des 
Meeres und der Liebe Wellen (The Waves of Sea and Love), about the Greek 
priestess Hero and her lover, Leander, who drowned while swimming the 
Hellespont to be with her. The show comprises large photographs of seascapes, 
some of which have been subject to various processes, including electrolysis, 
to ensure that their surface, when exposed to the air, changes appearance over 
time. Variously superimposed upon the images are obstetric implements, 
Euclidian drawings, a lead model of a U-boat and the presence of Kiefer himself.

"It is a show about impossibilities," he explains. "Putting a Euclidian 
diagram on a seascape is about the impossibility of capturing the sea. The sea 
is always fluid. The geometrical figure gives the impression of fixing it at a 
certain moment. It's the same as us imposing constellations on the sky which, 
of course, are completely crazy and nothing to do with the stars. It is just 
for us to feel more comfortable. To construct an illusion for ourselves that we 
have brought order to chaos. We haven't. I might have been born into a very 
literal sense of chaos, but in fact that state is true of all of us."

Kiefer was born in a small Black Forest village in March 1945, just a few 
months before the end of the war. He was brought up near the Rhine, not far 
from both the Swiss and, more importantly, the French borders. "Because of the 
history and geography I was driven to French culture. And the Rhine would flood 
every spring so the border never seem fixed, although I couldn't cross it. 
France lay behind this moveable frontier and was quite enigmatic because I 
couldn't go there but it was there. In effect it was the promised land, but not 
because of the physical state of Germany. I actually liked the ruins from the 
war as a child. I used to build little houses out of the rubble."

His family were Catholic and Kiefer was an altar boy who can still recite the 
Latin mass. He says his parents were quite conventional in their faith, "but I 
was interested in transcendence from a very early age. I was interested in what 
was over there, what was behind life. So when I had my first communion I was 
very disappointed. I had expected something amazing and surprising and 
spiritual. Instead all I got was a bicycle. That wasn't what I was after at 
all."

He was making "quite big pictures for a very small child" from as far back as 
he can remember, but although his facility for art was always acknowledged, 
Kiefer chose to study law at university, claiming that he must have "had some 
sort of complex in that I thought I was already an artistic genius and so 
didn't need art school. And while I never wanted to be a lawyer, I was 
interested in the language of law. A law textbook is amazing in how little it 
has to do with life. In that sense I suppose it is a little like art." While at 
law school he continued to make art, but eventually realised he needed to meet 
with other artists, and so transferred to art school. "Before then I hadn't 
really kept any of my work; this felt like a real start." It coincided with him 
also first properly comprehending recent German history.

"I got hold of this record which was made by the Americans to educate Germans 
about their own history. It included speeches from Hitler and Göring and 
Goebbels, and I was both shocked and fascinated by the sense of will they 
projected. It had all only happened just a couple of decades earlier, but in 
school it was taught as if it was about Alexander the Great. It was a dry piece 
of ancient history. And although my father had been an officer during the war, 
the war was not really talked about at home. My father was not a Nazi, but of 
course he was infiltrated by the ideology. So my family, like many others, 
stuck to this illusion about the Wehrmacht not being Nazis, just being 
soldiers. But of course we know today a lot of them were involved in the 
extermination of Jews and others."

At Düsseldorf art school Kiefer met Joseph Beuys. "I was never in his class 
but I showed him my work several times. I was working in the forest and would 
roll up these huge paintings, put them on the roof of my Beetle and drive to 
show him. He was the first one to say clearly that myOccupations photographs 
were art. My other tutors just wrung their hands: 'Is it morally right? Is this 
allowed?' Beuys looked at them and said straight away it was a good action, and 
for him, action was art."

Throughout the 1970s Kiefer devoted himself to Germanic myths. He explored the 
forests where early German tribes had defeated Roman legions and which were an 
"infinite vessel of mystery, of fairytales, of childhood memories". He absorbed 
the romantic sturm und drang of Caspar David Friedrich's landscapes and 
skyscapes, and delved deep into Wagner's music and his place in German culture. 
"My mother once made me listen toLohengrin on the radio from Bayreuth and it 
made a big impression. I was attracted to the idea of the holy grail as 
something far away and enigmatic and a sort of destination where you 
desperately want to get to, but you know you will never arrive. That sense of 
longing came to me very early in my life. And art is longing. You never arrive, 
but you keep going in the hope that you will."

Kiefer says he was on the left as German politics became increasingly violent 
throughout the 1970s, "but I was always critical. My brother was in the 
Communist party and was invited to spend time in China and was absolutely 
seduced. He is much more intelligent than me, but he came back saying 'there 
are no more flies because it is so clean'. When the Baader-Meinhof actually 
started murdering people I thought it was just like the Nazis again. They felt 
they could be judges just as Hitler did. Indirectly all this must have affected 
my art, but not directly. That said, the Tate once bought a triptych of mine 
that I had painted on very cheap wallpaper. Later they found the phrase "there 
is torture in German prisons" written on the back of the picture and asked me 
what it meant. It actually had nothing to do with the art, but it obviously 
showed I cared about what was going on. But I've never made art for the daily 
political situation."

After German reunification Kiefer moved to Barjac in the south of France, 
where over time his studio complex became a work of art in itself as he 
steadily constructed a series of towers, tunnels and buildings. In 2008 he 
relocated to Paris and a vast studio space that had once been the depository 
for the La Samaritaine department store. France has treated him well. He has 
been commissioned to create site-specific installations at the Grand Palais, 
became the first living artist since Braque to create a permanent installation 
at the Louvre and directed and designed the sets for a new opera,Am Anfang (In 
the Beginning) that marked the 20th anniversary of the Opéra Bastille. In 
January Kiefer was appointed to the chair of creativity in art at the Collège 
de France. "I first came to France aged 17 in a truck and was, quite by 
accident, dropped off at the Louvre. I always think in circles, so I do like it 
that I now have a painting there."

France also provides him a vantage point from which to observe Germany. He 
says the war is now over, "but I wish it was more over. I wish that Europe was 
more united. Helmut Kohl was criticised for a lot of things quite rightly, but 
concerning Europe he was very good. Germany needs a strong Europe, because you 
still cannot completely trust Germany." He says the fact that it is a 
comparatively young nation has had an impact. "It doesn't have the positive 
national myths of other countries. The French have their revolution, the 
English the Empire, being the first democracy and Magna Carta, the Americans 
have their war of independence. Germans just have defeats in wars, so they are 
always feeling a little bit inferior, and then they over compensate. Being tied 
closer into Europe would help that."

Although his move to France coincided with an intensified investigation of 
myth and religion in his work, Kiefer is no longer a practising Catholic, but 
acknowledges that "even people who seem not to be spiritual still long for 
something; I'm sure this is the reason we have art and poetry. I think without 
spirituality we cannot live, and in this respect the best religion is Hinduism, 
which teaches that each religion can contain some little truth. Art is an 
attempt to get to the very centre of truth. It never can, but it can get quite 
close. It is the dogmatism of the church, the idea that words can express a 
single truth over hundreds of years, that is complete nonsense. The world 
changes. Language changes, everything changes. Paintings certainly change."

Kiefer's relationship with the processes of time goes beyond mere acceptance. 
He leaves sculptures and paintings outdoors exposed to the elements. He has 
subjected his work to acid, flamethrowers and axe attacks. At the White Cube 
show the colours are already changing. The huge photographs will remain stable 
while they are sealed under glass, but as soon as they are exposed to the air 
they will become dynamic. This sense of the provisional and contingent, and the 
resistance to the idea of a "finished" work, raises philosophical questions as 
to the curation of his, and by extension of all, art. Talks are underway to 
establish a joint German-French foundation to look after the Barjac complex, 
with the specific intention of allowing nature to slowly reclaim the site. 
Curating his art has become less a matter of conserving it than accompanying it 
through history.

"It is a fascinating area, and at the heart of what I do. I like it that the 
White Cube photographs will change, and hope to find a collector who will be 
brave enough to take them out of the glass. But art should be full of 
intriguing questions such as this. Art really is something very difficult. It 
is difficult to make, and it is sometimes difficult for the viewer to 
understand. It is difficult to work out what is art and what is not art. All 
this can be hard work. Sometimes in recent years I've felt that the parameters 
have changed. It seems too often a luxury product, a weekend hobby. The only 
question asked is 'what's the price?' When I was studying the stakes seemed 
higher. Art was challenging, like Kant or Hegel or Derrida. It was something 
really worth thinking about. A part of it should always include having to 
scratch your head."
 