
It is a sweltering afternoon in Kisangani, a city in the Democratic Republic 
of Congo (DRC). A 15-year-old boy named Kefalla has walked from the 
countryside, and listens to the monotonous roar of the Congo river, and smells 
something strong and musky, and watches as a crocodile surfaces above the 
swirling mass of mud-laden water. He has come not for food, medicine or water 
but for internet access.

Kefalla is one of 230,400 internet users in the DRC according to the 
International telecommunications union (ITU). But the country has a population 
larger than the UK, which means the percentage of people using the internet is 
the second lowest in Africa at 0.3% compared to 65.8% in the UK.

The internet café in Kisangani, a run-down, multi-storey, dirty-white building 
with three satellites on its roof, is special then. It was one of eight centres 
in the country funded by ADEN, a five-year project with a budget of €6million 
launched in 2003 by the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and one of 58 
centres across 11 sub-Saharan countries.

ADEN's aim was to connect commercially unsuitable areas to the internet. The 
centres selected were "in line with sustainable development principles and 
based on new information and communications technologies". They also addressed 
two traditional humanitarian issues such as agriculture, education or health. 
But to ensure the sustainability of individual projects the French would not 
subsidise by more than 50%, and proof of co-financing with local civil society 
was necessary before any subsidies, which generally paid for computer 
equipment, internet connections and generators, were handed out.

Christophe Lacroix, at the ADEN centre in Kinshasa, said the centre organised 
a deal with their local internet supplier (ISP), which meant they paid $500 
(£305) a month for their satellite internet connection of 256 kbps, but would 
only pay $400 (£250) a month when funding stopped.

Jason Sali, at the ADEN centre in Akassa, Nigeria, had a different experience. 
In "the first year we paid one or two months in advance. There were problems 
because the ISP would often switch the service off without due notice. However, 
during the year, we were able to negotiate and reduce the monthly amount by 
threatening to change service provider".

"In the second year ADEN wanted to pay the ISP directly. Therefore a 12 month 
contract was agreed, and the ISP even added an extra-month free. However, after 
the money was paid, the service deteriorated. Our ISP had to visit each of his 
500 or more clients to install new equipment and change their settings when he 
changed his wholesale provider. As our centre was the most remote, and had paid 
in advance, we were the last to be serviced".

"We could not threaten to change providers because we had already paid in 
advance. But we threatened with legal action. He claimed the problem was with 
the wholesale provider not him. Anyway, going to court in Nigeria is an 
expensive operation - I think he knew that this was an empty threat".

"Eventually, the technicians went to Akassa to change the receiving equipment 
and reorientate the dish. But they did not know how to reconfigure the network 
using our software, which was provided by Mandriva, a French company, as part 
of the project. Unfortunately, neither the centre manager or the administrator 
had been trained to do this. We called someone from Obafemi Awolowo University, 
but he refused to go to Akassa. Eventually, we carried the server to Port 
Harcourt - a journey of two hours by boat and three hours by road and took the 
server to an engineer who was able to help".

Bah Abdoul, at the ADEN centre in Labé, Guinea, said their 512kbps satellite 
connection would often cut out when it was cloudy, and because Guinea was in 
rain season for six months a year this was more than problematic. They pay €600 
(£509) a month.

Satellite technology is the only way to connect to the internet in 
rural-Africa, but offers poor and unreliable performance, and is prohibitively 
expensive. The DRC has 10,600 land-line telephones in the entire country, and 
1500 broadband subscribers. Despite this one in 50 uses a mobile phone, and the 
number of internet users has risen by 89,800 in two years.

Kefalla walks home from the internet café in Kisangani; European investment 
has rescued the city from being overrun by an impenetrable forest. Even in the 
DRC there are outposts of progress.

This longlisted article was published on 23 July 2009. It was written for the 
Guardian's International Development Journalism Competition between 1 April and 
22 June 2009.
 