
If you were a mischievous fairly with eternal life and the power to enthral 
people, it'd make great sense to live here, bewitching passing walkers to take 
off all their clothes. The spell of the Fairy Pools is that they look as if 
they must be warm – with the kind of vivid blue water associated with the 
Maldives – but, having come straight down from the Black Cuillins they're 
anything but. A local swimmer warns us they're on the usual Scottish 
temperature range: cold, bastard cold or freezing.

The pools are, however, delightful, and few are immune to their charms. We 
visit them in late autumn, when the Isle of Skye is springy with marsh grass 
and ablaze with bracken. We approach from the bottom of a wide, smooth glacial 
basin, the glen marking out a single deep groove like a linocut.

Suspense builds as we pass a series of crystal clear, aqua blue pools, each 
seemingly more appealing than the last. Under a cliff the grey rock has been 
carved into a perfect oval bath tub with a view of the waterfalls. Beyond that 
a grassy island gives access to a high, natural infinity pool, bounded by the 
natural stone wall.

But our prize today is the two pools higher up the glen. They are separated by 
a rock buttress and underwater arch so the first is choppy from current and 
waterfall while the second is preternaturally still. The water is so clear that 
every pebble and contour can be seen in its depths. Around it are rocks for 
jumps and dives, and flat rocks on which to sunbathe.

We climb down to the pools and undress in the warmth of the late afternoon 
sun. There's a grass-lined cubby hole in the cliff just right for clothes. 
White lichen covers a few spritely trees that stand sparse and leafless, and 
the crags sprout ferns and thin heather.

Perhaps it is fairy mischief that makes us abandon our wetsuits and jump into 
water that is face-smackingly, lung-contractingly cold (6 degrees Celsius). We 
clamber back out to catch our breath. The river is at the perfect height for us 
to haul ourselves out on to the rock buttress and dive in again and again, and 
then swim under the arch. This is river swimming at its most magical.

Getting there

For Fairy Pools, park in Glenbrittle. There is a clear path up to the pools 
which may need walking boots – there are streams, stepping stones and boggy 
bits to cross. A swimming hat and goggles are strongly recommended. There are 
circular walks that include the Fairy Pools which take you into Cuillins.

Moderate swim. Requires some clambering in and out.

• This is an edited extract from Wild Swim by Kate Rew and Dominick Tyler
 