
Certain people just survive in terms of their importance. Andy Warhol 
represents the era of the 60s and 70s because of the iconography of his images 
and because of his links to rock and roll and celebrity in New York. That won’t 
go away. He did create what are essentially very simple images. You might think 
‘Oh I could do that’, but you didn’t and you weren’t there. That’s what is 
central to the importance ofAndy Warhol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/andywarhol> – that he will always 
represent that time and that place.


Andy Warhol may be in heaven but his art has a hellish darkness
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2016/jan/29/warhol-may-be-in-heaven-but-his-art-has-a-hellish-darkness>
It felt special because we wouldn’t normally get to see these works. Curated 
exhibitions of works in the public domain would normally have some kind of 
angle or theme that would link the pieces like a particular period of an 
artist’s career. What’s different about this exhibition is that a collector’s 
personal preferences are represented.

Warhol thought that film was becoming the ultimate art form. He did a number 
of films, which, as with a lot of his work, were ahead of their time. His 
approach to filmmaking was artistic and almost DIY. In his Screen Tests series, 
he seemed to enjoy playing mind games with people as he would leave the camera 
rolling and just leave the room. I would have liked to spend more time watching 
them to really let them seep in.

He would deliberately use quite poor quality photographs at the start of the 
process particularly in his serialisations such as The American Man (Portrait 
Of Watson Powell). Each image is slightly different because of the screen 
printing process and you see this when they are all lined up.

Repetition of images is part of parcel of the Warhol approach, so the Halls 
have had to get little subsets of those larger pieces. There were 32 in the 
original works to represent Powell’s 32 years of service to the company he 
worked for. The Halls have eight in their collection so it’s enough to show the 
effect. You get a feel for it but not the overall thing so it leaves you 
wanting more.

I wonder how he would feel about his pieces being scattered all over the world.
 His ambition was for them to be displayed together. It was interesting to 
learn that he was thinking on that scale.

I like that this exhibition was in Oxford. To not have to go into London to 
see these kinds of exhibitions is quite nice, I must admit, for people like me 
in the provinces.

As told to Nicola Slawson

To find out about upcoming Guardian Live and Guardian Local events 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/events>, sign up to become a Guardian member
 <https://membership.theguardian.com/>



 