
Even when they are hiding behind a net with a scraggy beard and barnacles on 
show, mussels are beautiful, their inky blue-black shells clamped around a 
plump, mysterious world. As a child, on holiday in France, my face steaming 
above my own bowlful, I remember being shocked and fascinated by their colour 
and appearance, like mysterious alien organs.


I think being taught to use one hinged mussel shell to pick out the flesh from 
another helped me overcome my suspicions, and I was an adventurous child who 
liked salt and would try most things – fussiness came later. Thirty years on, 
my son pokes, pinches and eats mussels in much the same way I did, showing 
almost, but not quite, as much enthusiasm as he does with red pizza and cocoa 
pops.

Mussels inhale and filter the ocean at a rate of around 40 litres (9 gallons) 
a day. Nourishment and pollution are one and the same thing to them – so you 
need to know your ocean, or lake. My fishmonger in Testaccio market gets his 
mussels from Lago di Paola, on the coast between Rome and Naples.


They are safe, good, cheap and best of all – like good guests arriving at your 
door – they bring lots of liquor. This one is a briny elixir of the sea 
released when the mussels are exposed to heat. It is the key to this recipe, a 
dish that makes my mouth water just thinking of it. Pastacon patate e cozze – 
pasta with potatoes and mussels – is a dish typical of Ischia, a small, 
volcanic island in the gulf of Naples.

I find tugging mussel beards an extremely satisfying job – and they do need a 
tug, at which the mussel clenches back shut. Once they are thoroughly cleaned 
the mussels need steaming open, then lifting from their liquor and setting 
aside. You then use the intensely flavoured liquid – lip-smacking stuff – to 
finish cooking the par-boiled pasta and potatoes.


Much of the liquor is absorbed by the pasta and potatoes as they bubble. 
Liquor that isn’t absorbed is thickened by the starch from the collapsing 
potatoes, olive oil and your stirring, creating a silky, creamy sauce. This way 
of cooking pasta is similar to that of risotto – in fact, it is calledrisottare 
la pasta.

A quick recipe for Italian soft almond biscuits from Rachel Roddy | A kitchen 
in Rome
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/08/pasticcini-recipe-italian-almond-biscuits-cookies-rachel-roddy-kitchen-in-rome>
It is not a complicated method, but one that does require attention and a keen 
eye when the pasta is cooking. You are watching and waiting for the moment the 
liquor and starch unite into a sauce and thicken slightly, coating both the 
back of the spoon and the pasta. Depending on the amount of liquid, the 
starchiness of the potatoes and how the ingredients choose to behave on that 
particular day, you might need a little pasta cooking water. Practice is the 
way, but isn’t that almost always the case?

Various pasta shapes work here. My favourite by far – and a favourite pasta 
shape full stop – ispaccheri: a short, wide tube that is typical of Campania. 
In her encyclopaedic and brilliant book Pasta, Oretta Zanini de Vita suggests 
the origins ofpaccheri can be found in the onomatopoeic Neapolitan word paccarià
, which means “to slap” – named so because the original fresh pasta, put 
quickly in the mouth, supposedly slapped the face.


Whether you feel slapped or not, paccheri is a fullbodied and pleasing shape, 
especially when coated with a deeply flavoured sauce of land and sea, the tubes 
just the right size to catch the plump coral mussels and flecks of parsley.

Pasta with potato and mussels

The mussels can be steamed open in advance: just set the flesh aside and keep 
the liquor to one side, reheating it when you are ready.

Serves 4
1kg mussels
Olive oil
A garlic clove, peeled, crushed
A pinch of red chilli flakes
2 potatoes (about 400g)
450g pasta – paccheri/rigatoni/mezze maniche/pappadelle
Parsley, finely chopped

1 Wash, scrub and scrape the mussels until they are clean. In a large deep 
frying pan with a lid, warm 4 tbsp olive oil with the chilli and the garlic, 
which you have peeled and crushed with the back of a knife. Cook until fragrant.

2 Add the mussels, stir, cover the pan and cook – shaking the it occasionally 
– until the mussels have opened and released their liquor. Use a slotted spoon 
to lift the mussels from the pan, letting any liquor in the shells drip back. 
When the mussels are cool enough to handle, pull the flesh from the shells and 
set aside.

3 Peel the potatoes and cut into short batons. Bring a large pan of water to 
the boil, add salt, the potatoes and pasta, then cook for 5 minutes or until 
half cooked. Drain, reserving some water – the pasta will still be very firm.

4 Bring the mussel broth back to the boil, add the pasta and potatoes, cover 
and cook for the rest of the pasta cooking time, shaking the pan from time to 
time, until it is al dente. If you are worried about the amount of broth, add a 
little pasta cooking water. In the last minute of cooking time, add the mussels 
and a handful of chopped parsley, stir and serve.

 * Rachel Roddy is a food writer based in Rome, the author of Five Quarters: 
Recipes and Notes from a Kitchen in Rome 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/five-quarters.html> (Saltyard) and winner of 
the André Simon food book award  