
Food associations become set in childhood and can’t be shaken off. Deep purple 
curves and taut glowing beauty aside, I still think aubergines look like
Barbamama <http://www.barbapapa.com/barbamama-en/>. The stalk reminds me of a 
pixie hat, at first clinging tight, then, if too many days pass, curling up at 
the edges. Aubergines are a yin and yang vegetable, the dark skin slicing open 
to reveal pale flesh, which, sweetly spongy, tastes not so much of the earth 
and the sun as the tang of the sea.

Aubergines, although exotic, became quickly familiar in the kitchen when I was 
growing up, as my mum – withJane Grigson 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalogsearch/result/?q=Jane+Grigson&order=relevance&dir=desc>
 propped open (though the need for a recipe had long passed) – made enough 
ratatouille to drown us. Later, she would bake aubergines until the flesh fell 
away from the charred skin, which she would peel and transfer to a sieve to 
drain, where it resembled a grubby dishcloth. The fairy godmothers – olive oil, 
garlic and lemon – would transform the dishcloth into a silky puree called baba 
ganoush, which tasted as exotic as it sounded, especially with rounds of pitta 
bread that puffed hot steam. Occasionally she would forget she had started baba 
ganoush, and the next day two kitchen cremations would be pulled from the back 
of the Aga.

When I left home, I bought my own copy of Grigson’s vegetable book, and made 
my fair share of ratatouille and baba ganoush. I discovered that not only do 
aubergines look like dishcloths when baked, when fried they have the nature of 
a kitchen sponge, able to soak up whatever you provide.

Rachel Roddy’s recipe for an Italian pasta and bean feast | A kitchen in Rome
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/28/pasta-e-fagioli-recipe-feast-rachel-roddy-kitchen-in-rome>
Aubergines, known as melanzane in Italian, arrived in Sicily from the Middle 
East with the Arabs. They settled quickly, becoming as much a part of Sicilian 
summer as the sun and bread on a Sicilian table. We arrived in Sicily last 
week, in a complicated town called Gela. As always, Vincenzo settled in 
immediately, assuming the colour, dialect and habits of his childhood. I am 
enthusiastic, but take longer to settle, especially in our inherited kitchen – 
which was built for his grandmother, who was much smaller than me. The market, 
which is anarchic and dispersed all over the city, is also taking a bit of 
getting used to.

Aubergines are just coming into season. The ones familiar to me, dark with 
curves, known here asquelle lunghe (long ones) come in all sizes, from 
truncheons to three-inch teardrops. There are also Tunisian aubergines known
violetta,which are oval and come in shades from deep purple to pale lavender. 
Both varieties are excellent. I learned most of what I know about aubergines 
from two Sicilian women: Carmela, my mother-in-law and the daughter of a 
Sicilian farmer, and Fabrizia, the daughter of an aristocrat.


Both women know their aubergines and that the flesh needs heroes to transform 
it: heat, smoke, olive oil, salt, vinegar, garlic, spices, lemon. From Carmela, 
I learned to grill aubergine; searing heat transforming slices from sponge into 
velvet, which are then marinated with olive oil, garlic and oregano. In Sicily, 
the answer to the herb question is almost always: oregano. From Fabrizia, I 
learned to fry. “Why people have such a fear of frying I don’t know,” she said, 
standing over aubergine cubes jigging around a pan of extra virgin olive oil in 
preparation for caponata.

Speaking of which, you might have expected a discussion in Sicily about 
aubergine to start with caponata, but I am going to leave that until I’ve 
really settled in.

Today’s recipe is for involtini di melanzane, or aubergine rolls, although you 
could stop after the grilling and simply eat the velvet slices as they are. If 
you are happy to roll, I suggest a very Sicilian filling of breadcrumbs, red 
onion, tomatoes, raisins, pine nuts and herbs – a grand combination of tastes 
and textures, homely and exotic. Let them rest, so the bread can swell; the 
raisins too. The rolls can be eaten just so (my favourite), warmed under the 
grill, or baked in a simple tomato sauce.

I suggest a very Sicilian filling of breadcrumbs, red onion, tomatoes, 
raisins, pine nuts and herbs

Choose aubergines that are heavy, with skin that’s bright, firm, glowing and 
offering resistance: it should bounce back when you press it. I am on the fence 
about salting, a habit necessary with aubergine varieties that are bitter, 
which is rare these days. Sometimes I do, sometimes I don’t. For this recipe, I 
don’t. I do press them between kitchen towel, then brush them with seasoned 
olive oil before grilling, rolling, resting and settling down to lunch.

Aubergine rolls (involtini di melanzane) 

Serves 4
2 large aubergines
Extra virgin olive oil
Salt and black pepper, to taste
Dried oregano, to taste
50g raisins
50g pine nuts
A small red onion
100g ripe tomatoes, chopped
60g soft, white breadcrumbs
A sprig of parsley or basil, finely chopped

1 Trim the tops from the aubergines, then cut lengthways into 5mm-thick 
slices. Whisk together some extra virgin olive oil, salt, pepper and oregano, 
then brush this over the slices and set aside.

2 Make the filling. Soak the raisins in hot water for 10 minutes to plump 
them, then drain. Toast the pine nuts, if desired. Peel and dice the onion, 
then fry until soft in a little olive oil. Add the tomatoes, breadcrumbs, 
raisins, pine nuts, parsley or basil, a pinch of oregano, some salt and pepper 
and a little olive oil. It should be moist, but not wet, so adjust as necessary 
and taste for seasoning.

3 Get the grill pan hot, then cook the aubergine slices until golden on one 
side, then the other. Set aside until cool enough to handle. Pile a little 
filling at the bottom of each slice, then roll them up into little parcels. 
Leave to sit for a while so that the bread plumps up, then serve.

 * Rachel Roddy is a food blogger based in Rome and the author of Five 
Quarters: Recipes and Notes from a Kitchen in Rome 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/290678/s/five-quarters/>
 (Saltyard, 2015) and winner of the 2015 André Simon food book award  