
They are sisters. They are in a car. They are arguing vociferously. One of 
them threatens to leave. It looks as if it might turn ugly. The two girls are 
acting (their socks off, it has to be said) but for 17-year-old Ellie it's not 
all that far from the truth. Next week she will be in court to testify against 
her ex-boyfriend who attacked her. "Being here makes me forget all about all 
that," she says.

We are at Breeze Arts Foundation 
<http://www.breezeleeds.org/pg/242/Breeze_Arts_Foundation> in Leeds on a snowy 
Thursday morning, in an arts space nestled between theWest Yorkshire Playhouse 
<http://wyp.org.uk/>, Yorkshire Dance <http://www.yorkshiredance.com/> and the 
BBC. Eight young people between the ages of 16 and 20 are responding in a 
variety of dramatic ways to a scene their drama teacher Fiona has presented to 
them.

Breeze Arts Foundation, which has been running for five years, is a 
partnership betweenLeeds city council 
<http://www.leeds.gov.uk/Pages/Default.aspx>'s Breeze team (the city's young 
people's service) and West Yorkshire Playhouse. It is aimed at getting young 
people who are Neet (not in education, employment, or training) or in danger of 
becoming Neet back into education or work.

The course members attend for a 12-week block and are referred from schools or 
youth groups, or by keyworkers. While here they will all work towards anArts 
Award <http://www.artsaward.org.uk> – a qualification managed by Trinity 
College London in association with Arts Council England, but available across 
the whole of the UK – and an end-of-term performance.

Each member of the group today tells a different story. Some are here because 
they simply can't stay in school, some because they have a history of 
offending, some because they have family problems and some have low academic 
abilities. One girl is back from university and has mental health issues. What 
unites them is complete dedication to the task in hand.

The task is to respond to drama teacher Fiona's fictional scene about a girl 
who has found some pictures of her sister on a man's computer. The responses 
are varied and imaginative. One pair have the girlfriend confront the 
boyfriend, touching on issues of paedophilia. It seems no topic is off-limits, 
but arising issues and responses are discussed as adults. As Ellie says: "It's 
just a really relaxed atmosphere. Nobody gets told off or told they can't say 
something."

Sarah McGlinchey is the course keyworker. As well as devising the course 
structure she does one-on-one work with the students, helping with everything 
from housing to job applications, and working as an advocate. Programme content 
is delivered on a Wednesday and Thursday but the rest of the time McGlinchey 
focuses on one-to-one support and other aspects of keywork. She says: "Some of 
the young people have left school with no qualifications or been told they 
aren't going to achieve anything, but when they make their portfolios or see a 
certificate at the end of it, it's such an achievement. The Arts Award 
qualification is how a lot of them have got into college."

Each course is designed according to the group's skills or interests. For 
example, one term might focus heavily on songwriting, another term might be 
predominantly drama and dance.

"The young people have so many things going on in their personal lives," says 
McGlinchey, "that being able to express themselves through a painting or 
through a character is really great for them. Moreover, a lot of them are 
hands-on learners and struggle in a classroom environment. This really helps 
them develop their skills in a way they are comfortable with."

Some of the teens here will never go on to work in the performing arts. Some 
will have glittering careers. One former member has worked at the West 
Yorkshire Playhouse and Ellie has already worked on TV show Waterloo Road. 
Another student went on, via a local college, to university to study art 
therapy. Whatever happens, McGlinchey says: "Learning about performing arts and 
the arts industry builds their confidence and shows them what opportunities are 
out there."

Because of the flexible in-out approach, says Christine Mulcahy, Breeze area 
manager, the course works well for people at different ends of the learning 
difficulties spectrum. "The students have a range of issues themselves and 
because of this they are usually quite tolerant of young people with additional 
needs," she says. This is evident today as raucous applause greets each skit, 
regardless of how polished it is.

"The best thing about this job," says McGlinchey, "is seeing the young 
people's journeys and seeing them grow in confidence. They can lose themselves 
in the arts and be anyone they want to be. I feel so proud at the end of term 
when they perform and overcome a lot of their fears."

Why not join our community? Becoming a member of the Guardian social care 
network <https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network> means you get sent 
weekly email updates on policy and best practice in the sector, as well as 
exclusive offers. You can sign up – for free –online here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/>.
 