
Q I've just received a child trust fund voucher for £250, but I don't know 
what to do with it. The accompanying material is full of gobbledegook. At the 
same time it seems a bit unfair that my other, older children should be left 
out. Are there similar savings schemes for them?

A I'm not surprised you are confused - at first it can be difficult to 
comprehend. But the basics of the child trust fund (CTF) are quite 
straightforward. Every child born on or after September 1 2002 receives a 
voucher from the government for £250 - or £500 if their parents qualify for 
child tax credit. A second voucher will be sent out when the child reaches 
seven years of age. This money must be invested by a parent for them in an 
approved CTF account.

Further sums, up to a maximum of £1,200 a year, can be contributed to the 
account by relatives, friends or the child itself. Any returns are not subject 
to capital gains or income taxes. This tax-free status is counterbalanced by 
the fact that no money at all, including interest, can be withdrawn until the 
child's 18th birthday.

There are three basic kinds of accounts: stakeholder, non-stakeholder shares 
and non-stakeholder savings. A list of the approved account providers and 
distributors can be found online atwww.childtrustfund.gov.uk 
<http://www.childtrustfund.gov.uk>. These providers can offer any of the three 
different kinds of CTF.

The CTF stakeholder scheme, which is the government-preferred option, has 
special features. It must offer investment in shares, at least initially, and 
must also include a "lifestyling" option. This means when the child reaches 13, 
the investment mix of the fund must be gradually changed to less risky 
investments to try and preserve the accumulated value until the maturity date 
on the child's 18th birthday.

Another condition is that the management charge must not exceed 1.5% a year, 
although there is scope for the fund to charge administrative costs. The 
government raised the maximum charge from the original figure of 1% in an 
attempt to persuade providers to offer stakeholder accounts.

Because of the small amounts involved compared with other investments, most 
CTF accounts are simple tracker funds - tracking the FTSE l00 index for example 
- for the first 13 years. Ironically, however, these CFT accounts are likely to 
be more expensive than normal tracker funds, which tend to have annual 
management fees of between 0.3 to 1%. Providers of CFT accounts justify 
charging the permitted maximum of 1.5 % on the grounds that there is more 
administrative paperwork, including the lifestyling option.

If the voucher is not invested within 12 months after being sent out, the 
government will automatically put it into a stakeholder account, from one of a 
panel of providers. It was revealed recently that although over 1.7m vouchers 
have so far been sent out, fewer than half have actually been used to open 
accounts. As a result the government has been forced to send out reminder 
notices.

So far, the vast majority of parents who have used the vouchers have plumped 
for the easy option of putting them into the approved non-stakeholder accounts 
offered mainly by banks and building societies, often with the lure of 
competitive interest rates and other sweeteners like free toys to attract 
customers.

Many parents don't understand or trust stock markets and are uncertain about 
the merits of the non-stakeholder CTF share accounts. They simply want to keep 
the money safe and earn a bit of interest over the years. This is 
understandable, given the volatile performance of the stock markets in recent 
years. Nevertheless there is a general consensus amongst advisers, as well as 
the government, that shares offer the potential for the best return over an 
18-year period. Shares may be volatile, with falls as well as increases in 
value, but there is a considerable amount of evidence to show that historically 
they do provide better returns than cash or bonds over the longer term. There 
is a big choice of share-based accounts, including some ethical funds.

There is, and always has been, a pretty wide choice of investments for older 
children not eligible for the government handout. Although children are not 
allowed personally to buy shares until they are 18 years old, investments in 
unit and investment trusts can be designated into a child's name until the 
transfer ownership at the age of 18. A bare trust is another way of avoiding 
tax liabilities and controlling the time when the child receives the money. But 
it is bit complicated and doesn't achieve a lot more.

There is no income tax liability on investments held by a child provided 
income doesn't exceed £100 a year (when the parent becomes liable to pay tax). 
There are a host of special deposit accounts for children, National Savings 
child bonds, and the so-called "baby" bonds offered by friendly societies with 
tax advantages.

Personally, I favour investment trust saving schemes, which have very low 
charges and accept small monthly contributions. Investment trusts are risky 
because their performance is linked to the stock market and the fund manager 
can borrow money to invest (known as gearing). However, if you are willing to 
take a risk there is wide choice of different trusts that have the potential to 
provide good rewards.

A big problem with the CFT accounts is their inflexibility, with the 
restriction on the amount that can be invested and inability to withdraw any 
money for some 18 years. The government's contribution doesn't really amount to 
much. It is really only intended to stimulate the idea of saving for the 
future. If it is successful in achieving that basic objective, and parents are 
persuaded to invest in shares, then there could be some valuable nest eggs for 
the future generation of children when they reach 18 - just the time when money 
is often needed most.
 