
Like the bucketfuls of empty ones I collected when I was younger, shells in 
the sink make me happy. Particularly clams. Happy because they are beautiful – 
some monochrome, others a faded tortoiseshell, like fluted stones just lapped 
by the sea. Happy, too, because clams in the sink means a favourite that nudges 
out all the other favourites:spaghetti alle vongole.

I do remember my first time, at a trattoria under my old flat, an old-school 
place that was jaded except for a few dishes that were homely and wholly 
enjoyable. I hadn’t been in Rome that long, but long enough to be chanting the 
quartet of Roman stalwarts:carbonara, gricia, amatriciana, cacio e pepe – 
sturdy dishes I was eating on slightly blinkered heavy rotation. This new dish 
was like someone changing the music – a plate of spaghetti with what tasted 
like the elixir of the sea, with sweet, plump clam morsels. Pure joy.

You know the mantra about the best Italian cooking being a few excellent 
ingredients cooked with respect – which usually means doing as little as 
possible – so they come together into something delicious? Spaghetti alle 
vongole is this. It is also transportive: spaghetti alle vongole takes you to 
the sea, whether you like or not, from a trattoria in Testaccio, or a flat in 
Shepherd’s Bush.

Then there is the taste of the sea by the sea, which is where we go at the 
slightest sign of celebration. Payday – sea; birthday – sea; won €50 on a 
scratchcard – sea. It takes about 25 minutes to drive from Rome to Fregene; 35 
if you are in a Fiat Panda that is nearing retirement. The beach and sea are 
fine, but the spaghetti alle vongole at a substantial beach shack called La 
Baia is excellent. And there are fried anchovies and cold wine and we have sand 
between our toes and are going to paddle in the sea later, then pass out under 
an umbrella.

Rachel Roddy’s recipe for baked stuffed tomatoes with potatoes | A kitchen in 
Rome
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/02/pomodori-al-riso-baked-stuffed-tomatoes-with-potatoes-rachel-roddy-a-kitchen-in-rome>
I like making spaghetti alle vongole as much as I like eating it. What happens 
is wonderful: given enough heat, the clams open – with a sort of unzipping 
noise, if you put your ear near the pan – and release their liquor with abandon 
and reveal a plump secret world, a tender bivalve, briny and sweet. You know 
how fresh fish doesn’t so much smell of fish as of the sea – saline, tangy, 
ever-so-slightly sulphurous, like a cold breath? The liquor of clams seems the 
very essence of this smell; such a distillation of the sea that you want to 
smack your lips at its umami hum. You mix this precious stuff with more oil and 
garlic and possibly some starchy pasta cooking water and it becomes a sauce for 
spaghetti or linguine, a tangle in which the clams get caught for the second 
time.

There is a school of thought that says you don’t need to bother with two 
stages – that the clams can be steamed open then the spaghetti added, making it 
the most perfect one-pot meal. I am fine, though, with the small palaver of two 
stages. It means that you can lift the clams out as they pop open so they don’t 
overcook; that any sand that didn’t get eliminated in the first soak and seeped 
into the liquor can be strained away; and that you can reduce the liquor to the 
right, slightly syrupy, consistency. Two stages also means you can do half the 
work by removing flesh from some of the clams while leaving the rest inside for 
shell beauty.

The arrangement of utensils and ingredients is key: a glass of wine for the 
pan and another for the cook; a slotted spoon at hand to lift the clams out as 
soon as they open and a bowl to receive them; a sieve ready over a bowl to 
strain the clam liquor and a cup to reserve some pasta cooking water; parsley 
chopped. This sort of dish is all about repetition and conscious effort the 
first few times, noting best arrangements and amounts of liquor. It’s trial and 
error until making spaghetti alle vongole becomes part of what you do and you 
are happy as a clam at high tide.

Spaghetti alle vongole 

Serves 4 (or 2 greedy people)


1 kg clams (vongole veraci, carpet, Venus or palourde)
6 tbsp extra virgin olive oil
2 garlic cloves, peeled, crushed
A small glass of white wine or dry vermouth (about 125ml)
A pinch of red chilli flakes
500g spaghetti
A handful of flat-leaf parsley

1 Soak the clams in lightly salted cold water for at least an hour, then 
drain, straining off any sand and grit that has soaked from the clams.


2 In a large, deep frying pan, deep enough to accommodate the pasta later, 
warm 2 tbsp olive oil with one of the cloves of garlic, peeled and crushed for 
a milder flavour, sliced for a stronger one. Add the clams and the wine, shake 
then cover. After a minute shake again, then lift the lid and, using a slotted 
spoon, lift the clams into a bowl as they open. Discard any that don’t open.

3 Strain the clam broth through a very fine sieve and set aside. Remove the 
flesh from half of the clams. Leave the rest of the clams in their shell.

4 Meanwhile, cook the pasta in boiling salted water until al dente.

5 Put the frying pan back over a low heat, add 4 tbsp olive oil, the rest of 
the garlic and the chilli. Once the garlic is fragrant, add the clam broth and 
let it bubble until it is reduced by about half – it should be slightly 
thickened. If the pasta is not ready, pull the clam pan from the heat.

6 Drain the pasta, reserving a a cup of pasta cooking water. Put the clam pan 
back on the heat, add the clam flesh and the clams in shells. Cook for a few 
seconds, add the pasta and, if you feel it needs it, some of the pasta cooking 
water. Add some parsley, toss and then divide between plates.

 * Rachel Roddy is an author and food blogger based in Rome and the author of 
Five Quarters: Recipes and Notes from a Kitchen in Rome (Saltyard, 2015) and 
winner of the 2015 André Simon food book award
 