
Bang, there goes 100 points off the FTSE 100. Suddenly, the index is within 60 
points of 6,000, a level last seen in late-February, which was roughly when 
investors recovered from their new year fretfulness and decided the gloom, 
perhaps, had been overdone.


But memories of January’s wobble are fresh and here’s the US Federal Reserve 
with a reminder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/18/interest-rates-increase-federal-reserve-economy-brexit-china>
 of how the alarm came about in the first place. Interest rates could rise next 
month, according to the latest minutes. An increase is far from being a done 
deal – a one-third chance, according to the futures prices – but September had 
previously been seen as the moment.


In theory, June or September should make little difference. We’re only talking 
about a quarter-point rise, to follow an increase of the same size last 
December, so US rates will be low whatever happens. And the Fed will only move 
if it thinks the US economy is sufficiently strong.

Yet it would be wrong to dismiss an early US increase as a fuss about nothing. 
Relative calm was restored to markets in March when the dollar started to 
weaken. That eased the pressure on those overextended companies in emerging 
markets that have foolishly borrowed in dollars. China has been able to get a 
grip on the renminbi, which was a major source of worry in January. And oil – 
priced in dollars – has risen from $27 a barrel in January to $47 today, 
creating headroom for under-the-cosh producers like Russia. In short, a weaker 
dollar has made investors feel better about the world.

A US rate rise threatens to undo that work if it forces the dollar higher 
again. If the oil price slips, corporate bond markets – and banks – will again 
be fretting about defaults by overborrowed US shale producers. Any recurrence 
of turmoil in China would be taken particularly badly; some China-watchers 
argue Beijing is waiting for a good moment to devalue the renminbi properly in 
an attempt to restore competitiveness to an economy that continues to slow. If 
that were to happen, the currency wars of the past few years would look like 
minor skirmishes.

Meanwhile, the big-picture backdrop for the global economy looks as 
uninspiring as in January. Indeed, the International Monetary Fund says 
prospects have become slightly worse – at the start of the year it was 
expecting global growth of 3.4% this year but its latest forecasts say 3.2%, 
little better than the 3.1% of 2015.

It is possible, of course, that markets come to view a US rate rise in June as 
cheerful news – a sign that the world’s biggest economy is getting stronger. 
But that’s not the way to bet. The potential of a stronger dollar to cause 
havoc in the rest of the world remains an underlying obsession. Do not be 
surprised if markets stage a tantrum in the run-up to June’s vote: it’s the 
traditional way to scare the Fed into backing off.

Life’s no beach for Thomas Cook

There was no profits warning, just an admission this year’s outcome may only 
match last year’s. And the first-half performance, if anything, was slightly 
better than the City had feared. Yet Thomas Cook’s sharesfell 19% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/19/thomas-cook-shares-fall-terror-fears-turkey-tunisia-egypt>
.

The EgyptAir plane crash was one obvious explanation. But it also looks as if 
investors have underestimated the scale of the “market disruption,” asThomas 
Cook <https://www.theguardian.com/business/thomascookgroup> puts it, for 
holiday companies.

In Turkey, which used to be the firm’s second biggest market, capacity has 
been cut by a third, with most of the reductions ordered after the Istanbul 
bombings in January. Even so, in the middle of May, Thomas Cook faces the 
daunting prospect of finding 1 million customers to take a summer holiday in 
Turkey. Meanwhile, Egypt and Tunisia are off-limits and there is a scramble to 
find hotels in Spain, Bulgaria and Greece.

In the circumstances, chief executive Peter Fankhauser’s claim of “significant 
progress” in the six months to March was fair. Underlying losses (inevitable in 
the first half in a seasonal business) were reduced by a 10th. He hopes Thomas 
Cook, still burdened with too much debt, can return to paying dividends this 
year. Good luck with that, but you can’t blame investors for feeling they’ll 
believe it when they see it.

Walmart holds fire over poor Asda performance

One theory holds that Asda’s sales are so weak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/19/asda-sales-fall-for-seventh-quarter-in-a-row>
 that it’s only a matter of time before US parent Walmart orders its UK 
off-shoot to launch a price war to combat the discount menace of Aldi and Lidl.

Asda’s numbers are certainly poor – like-for-like sales have now fallen for 
seven quarters in a row. But the idea that Walmart is preparing to roll out the 
heavy guns doesn’t fit with the tone from the top. Asda was deemed worthy of 
only a single paragraph in the tour of the global empire. Walmart sounds merely 
bored byAsda <https://www.theguardian.com/business/asda>, rather than ready to 
fund a price war.
 