
There are two pensions revolutions going on – one you’ve all heard about, and 
one that is probably rather more important. The first is the “freedom from 
annuities” revolution launched by George Osborne and promoted by pensions 
minister Steve Webb, to be forever known as Lamborghini man after saying the 
reforms will let savers spend their money however they like.

The second, “auto enrolment”, involves millions of employees being channelled 
into workplace-based schemes, and is building up to the point where 8% of their 
pay goes into a retirement fund – although in the early years it is less than 
that.

Judged by its own limited ambition, auto enrolment is working. The number of 
employees choosing to opt out has been lower than expected, at a little less 
than 10%. A report out on Monday from Scottish Widows will show that it is 
already having an impact, with the proportion of low-income people facing 
penury in retirement falling significantly since auto enrolment began in 2012.

But auto enrolment is still in its infancy. The first employers required to 
enrol their staff – giant companies such as Capita and G4S – have big HR 
divisions. Now the “staging dates” are beginning to cover smaller employers – 
those with 60 staff from 1 October – and from June next year the micro 
employers – the hair salons, car repair yards, etc – will have to start paying 
in. Expect the opt-out number to rise, with some bosses nudging their employees 
out as much as they can. The harder-up ones won’t need much nudging; from 
October 2018, somebody earning £20,000 a year would see £96.24 going into their 
pension pot every month – but at the cost of £48.12 whipped out of their 
take-home pay.

The problem with auto enrolment, as so many pension experts know, is not how 
many people will opt out, but that the sums they are paying in are still far, 
far from adequate. A report from thePensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> Policy Institute this week found 
that if someone at the age of 22 has 8% of their pay going into a pension (the 
deal under auto enrolment is 4% from the employee, 3% from the employer and 1% 
from the government) and sticks at this level all the way to age 67, then the 
probability of them picking up an income that is two-thirds of their final pay 
packet is just 49%. Take a career break, or fail to start saving until age 40, 
and the chances of a decent income in retirement slide into oblivion.

The truth is that 8% of pay is simply not enough. But what’s the solution? For 
decades the pensions industry has banged on about the need for employees to pay 
in more to the new-style stock market-based “defined contribution” (DC) pension 
schemes that most of us now have to rely on. They seem to be less interested in 
banging the heads of employers to pay in more. In Australia, employers are 
forced to pay in 9%, compared with the lame 3% we’re telling companies to do 
here.

What’s more, the pensions industry seems to assume we are on a one-way street 
from final salary to DC. We could turn off that “highway to hell” and embrace 
“defined ambition” schemes instead, which give workers more clarity about what 
they’ll get at retirement rather than the spin of the stock market wheel.

But that’s not to say individuals shouldn’t try to do more. An interesting 
scheme is surfacing in the UK after years of success in the US. It’s calledSMarT
 
<http://www.inudgeyou.com/financial-nudge-the-classic-example-of-save-more-tomorrow/>
 – the Save More for Tomorrow programme – and the idea is that when someone 
lands a job, they commit to automatically increasing their percentage 
contribution into their pension at every future pay rise. In one US SMarT 
scheme, employees increased their contributions from 3.5% to 13.6% of salary 
over a four-and-a-half year period. But to really make it work, employers 
should have to do the same.
 