
Thousands of current account switchers face greater confusion and higher 
charges as banks scramble to make their account fees more transparent ahead of 
an Office of Fair Trading penalty charges ruling.

Instead of offering transparency the different methods that banks now use to 
charge for overdrafts are leaving consumers facing a harder task to compare 
like-for-like, consumer bodies warn.

Halifax has just unveiled a revamp that will see new standard current account 
customers shell out a daily fee of up to £2 for an ordinary agreed overdraft, 
and £5 a day for any unauthorised borrowing.

The bank's Reward account, to be offered from early February to all new 
customers paying in at least £1,000 a month, will effectively punish those who 
only dip into their overdrafts because the monthly cost of a £10 overdrawn 
balance will be the same as for £1,000.

The new fees will also be foisted upon all the bank's existing Moneyback 
current account customers.

"For anybody with a small monthly overdraft of £100, say, the cost of this 
from February will be as much as £20, a very expensive sum," warns Michelle 
Slade, spokeswoman for financial data analyst Moneyfacts.

On the plus side, those who stay in the black will now receive £5 every month 
in their account instead of interest.

Halifax, shortly to be swallowed up by Lloyds TSB, is the latest bank to 
abandon its existing interest and fees structure and impose what it calls a 
new, easier-to-understand set of sheet of charges. "The idea is to get rid of 
confusing interest rates and make it much more transparent," a spokesman said, 
stressing that the thrust will be on "simplicity". It is expected that all its 
current account customers will move to a daily overdraft charging fee in 2009.

Shake up

Halifax is the latest bank to shake up the way it charges customers to run 
their current accounts, and follows similar moves made over the past 12 months 
byBarclays <https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> and Alliance & 
Leicester.

A&L customers with authorised overdrafts have stopped paying monthly interest 
of up to 17% and now pay a daily 50p charge instead up to a maximum of £5 a 
month. Barclays has launched its Personal Reserve where, for a flat £22 fee, 
customers have a safety net embedded in their accounts giving them five days 
without extra charge if they bust their agreed overdraft limit.

Sophia Ostler has been in a bitter wrangle with Barclays bank for months. The 
24-year-old charity worker is disputing a series of charges and overdraft 
penalties unknowingly racked up over a number of years, and has come to the end 
of her tether.

"I was going nowhere and turned to the ombudsman, before Barclays offered me 
£200; it's not as much as all the charges but I decided to accept it. I am 
completely fed up and will definitely switch to a different bank as soon as I 
can in the future; the 'least worst' that I can find. My experience has really 
set me against banks."

Although each bank has denied its overhaul is linked to an ongoing OFT 
investigation into penalty charges on current accounts, many in the industry 
think otherwise. "All these moves are due to the drive for much more openness 
and transparency ahead of the OFT court case with banks over penalty bank 
charges, to show that such changes are now being made," says Andrew Hagger of 
price comparison website Moneynet.co.uk.

It is a bid to show willing and soften the impact if the OFT wins, agrees 
Slade. "It's a preventative move, with more banks moving towards this kind of 
account to simply get something in place to show regulators if they come down 
heavily on them," she says.

The high court case has set the OFT against banks over the size and legality 
of current account penalty charges of up to £38 for breaching an overdraft by 
as little as £1. Earlier in the year the first victory was given to consumers 
as judges ruled that current account fees were subject to rules of fairness. 
The banks have lodged an appeal against this decision and a ruling is expected 
early in January, although the full court case is expected to drag on for 
months.

There is concern that an eventual victory for consumers could prompt the banks 
to introduce charges for all daily banking transaction to claw back lost cash. 
However, attempts by Halifax and others to introduce different charging 
patterns are in danger of bamboozling customers, says Kevin Mountford, head of 
current accounts at Moneysupermarket.com.

"We've had Halifax's plans, which are different from Barclays that are 
different again from A&L," he says. "It's getting harder and harder to do a 
like-for-like comparison, which is what most consumers rely on to choose 
between one financial product and another."

With a straight comparison of the interest charges on overdrafts, consumers 
can rely on a simple compare-and-contrast test, he adds. "There's a danger that 
current accounts could carry on down this route and end up like the credit card 
market where there's just too much confusion," he says.

These growing layers of complexity are a key reason behind the still sluggish 
current account switching market.

An OFT study found that just 6% of customers had actually bothered to switch 
current accounts in the 12 months to July 2008. This was "one of the lowest 
rates in Europe", it said. Relatively few of the UK's 54 million current 
account holders actively monitored the relative competitiveness of their 
current accounts, it said. Worse, only one in 20 said they always on the 
lookout for a better deal and made an effort to keep up-to-date with changing 
offers.

Mountford suggests that fear of a chaotic administrative spell for your bank 
account, with direct debits disappearing into a black hole, lay behind the 
shockingly low numbers. "Switching bank accounts is sadly still a clunky 
process with worries of salary payments going missing."

Such fears continue to deprive consumers of major savings. The OFT study shows 
how a customer typically in credit without an arranged overdraft who regularly 
switches from an average current account to the best-performing rival will save 
£56 over a year, and a switch from the worst-performing account to the best 
would bring in £63. Even better, a switch for a heavily indebted customer 
without an arranged overdraft from the most expensive account to the cheapest 
would save £112 over the year.

Anyone who has stuck with the same provider for several years should run a 
keen eye over their account details, and be prepared to put in some hard 
research; if you're getting the risible 0.1% on any credit balance or being 
charged an overdraft rate in excess of 16%, it's probably worth looking at the 
possibility of an instant switch.

Do the maths

How the new Halifax Reward account with its daily fee could leave customers 
with an agreed overdraft limit feeling fleeced compared to its High Interest 
current account.

Thumbs down

• If you are on average £200 overdrawn for 10 days you will pay £5 per month 
(ie 10 x £1 minus £5 credit); you would have paid £1.07 interest charges at 
19.5% APR.

• If you are on average £500 overdrawn for 10 days you will pay £5 per month; 
you would have paid £2.67.

• If you are on average £1,000 overdrawn for 20 days you will pay £15 per 
month; you would have paid £10.68.

• If you are on average £200 overdrawn for 20 days you will pay £15 per month; 
you would have paid £2.13.

• If you are on average £500 overdrawn for 20 days you will pay a net £15 per 
month; you would have paid £5.34.

Thumbs up

• If you are on average £1,000 overdrawn for 10 days you will pay £5 per 
month; you would have paid £5.30.

Source: moneynet.co.uk <http://www.moneynet.co.uk>
 