 Every plane that crashes will bring, for the indefinite future, a surge of 
international panic. Did it fall or was it pushed? If New York, or anywhere in 
the US, is the scene, alarm will multiply by 10. Such is the legacy of the 
terrible crime that occurred two months ago.
At this moment, no one can be certain what happened on American Airlines 
flight 587 two minutes after it left JFK airport. The event would have been 
horrific in normal times, though we forget what normal times were like. And it 
may turn out to have been a case of simple mechanical failure. But after 
September 11, a crash plays in a different context. Since that fateful day, we 
have learned a lot about both the weakness and the strength of the system 
terrorism tried to destroy.

We learned that living is dangerous, and has not got less so. There are 
enemies all around, capable of doing what happened yesterday even if, in this 
case, they didn't. That is a corrosive fear to live with, beyond the limit of 
plausibility we knew before. We found there were people who will stop at 
nothing, and there seem to be plenty of them around. On the post-September 11 
learning curve, that is a sizeable discovery, a jolt to the psyche not just of 
Americans, who thought they were invulnerable, but to plenty of others who knew 
we weren't.

During these two months, we've also been forced into innocent realms of 
erudition. The world has changed in that way too. We've maybe read a few books 
about Islam, and learned about the geography of Afghanistan. We've heard about 
the Taliban, and can sometimes distinguish between the historic allegiances of 
the Pashtun and the Uzbeks. But the period has also seen the opening up of 
darker knowledge about our own societies: their fragility from within.

There is, it turns out, much hatred of America. We didn't really know how far 
this went, before. It's not always simple antagonism. The critique of the US's 
role in the world was sometimes thoughtful and profound as the weeks went by, 
and it generated an echo in parts of the US itself. There was revisionism that 
touched a worried popular instinct. But there's also been this venomous, 
righteous, unfeeling, contemptuous dislike, which gained in weight from the 
startling willingness of some people to express it even when 5,000 mostly 
American innocents had just been slaughtered in New York.

This blot has to go into the post-September reckoning, as does the casuistry 
often underlying the analyses of the US-led operation against terrorism. These 
have sometimes been honest and sincere. There's been a case to make against the 
endless bombing of Afghanistan even when, on Washington's say-so, few targets 
were left to bomb. All bombing kills some innocent people, which is a hideous 
thought. But quite a lot of the analysis has revealed simple and incorrigible 
anti-Americanism. Significant voices have been prepared to corrupt their 
assessments of the present situation with litanies of complaint against every 
foreign action the US has taken in the past 50 years.

Such special pleading against America knows few limits. Attacks on the 
Afghanistan campaign traverse smoothly from point to point without 
acknowledging implicit contradictions: saying first that the campaign was 
wrong, then that maybe it was in some small part justified, but was bound to 
fail, then that it was the wrong battle to be fighting when so many larger 
scars, of American making, defile the world.

These are some of the weaknesses we've discovered. Society is newly vulnerable 
to terrorist events it had never conceived of before, and to states of mind 
that turn away from confronting their implications honestly. But some strengths 
have also been revealed, which should steady the ship when more calamities 
strike.

For a start, those who criticised military action against the Taliban on the 
grounds that it could not be won seem to have been proved wrong. The advance 
towards Kabul has been slow in coming. The complications that will arise on 
getting there are, thanks to our crash-course in Afghan history, well 
understood. Osama bin Laden remains at large and may do so for months. No doubt 
the criticisms of America will glide on to different ground. But at least it 
looks likely that the Taliban will be expelled from power, and replaced by a 
less fundamentalist collection of tribal chiefs who are not committed to 
supporting global terrorism.

Second, the international system has been strengthened, especially the part of 
it stretching from the US to Europe. Britain is in the middle of this system, 
and Tony Blair's conduct of his role has come to seem more American than 
European. He sometimes looked more like President Bush's secretary of state 
than Britain's prime minister. His speeches haven't always given proper 
priority to his European identity. If Bush is a unilateralist, Blair hasn't 
seemed an altogether comfortable multi-lateralist, but more at home as 
America's special relation.

But it's a mistake to see Europe as a fading partner here. The significant 
thing about the European Union in this war is how closely its members have 
stayed together, despite provocations to do otherwise. Petty institutional 
disputes have been transcended by the will to take a common line against 
terrorism, from which, remarkably, there has been no deviation. The British do 
not easily understand how great a triumph this is for coalition governments of 
which we know nothing. As Chris Patten said, they do not have a single foreign 
policy, and never will. But the EU works towards a common foreign policy: one 
in pursuit of common goals within the framework of nation-states talking 
constantly to each other. That is realism both national and international.

The questions facing the international system remain very forbidding. Europe 
and the US are the simplest part of it, though even now Washington's permanent 
attachment to internationalism must be in doubt. The United Nations remains a 
pariah on the Hill. The Middle East peace process, which cannot happen without 
America's stringent, painful insistence, seems a higher commitment for Europe 
than for the US president. Several trigger points of conflict in central and 
southern Asia are cocked for war. And it is always possible that another 
suicide plane hijacker will find an inviting target that guarantees him a place 
in paradise.

It is not a comfortable time. We live on the edge of many alarms. What may be 
banal accidents now instantly raise our fears of systemic breakdown. This will 
go on for years. But the system has swung into its own defence, and is making 
some sense of the threats it faces. In one small, impoverished land, the haven 
of a terror that has few other places to hide, it looks as though superior 
force will win. That should be totally reassuring, whatever the next 
difficulties may be.

h.young@theguardian.com <mailto:h.young@theguardian.com>
 