
On death

I realise I don’t have a bucket list; I don’t feel I’ve been cheated of 
anything. I’d like to have gone to Timbuktu, and there are places I will be 
sorry not to see again. But actually, because of the nature of my life and the 
nature of what happened to me in my early life – my addiction – I know I have 
been very lucky.

On Britain remaining in the EU


We all know what ‘getting our country back’ means. It’s snorting a line of the 
most pernicious and debilitating Little English drug, nostalgia. The warm, 
crumbly, honey-coloured, collective “yesterday” with its fond belief that 
everything was better back then, that Britain (England, really) is a worse 
place now than it was at some foggy point in the past where we achieved peak 
Blighty.

On Doctor Who

I’m put off by how much gape-acting David Tennant does. The mouth is 
permanently gurning. It’s like watching someone who is half Time Lord, half 
haddock.

AA Gill dies weeks after revealing he had cancer in restaurant review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/10/aa-gill-dies-weeks-after-revealing-he-had-cancer-in-restaurant-review-sunday-times>
On Morrissey’s autobiography

What is surprising is that any publisher would want to publish the book, not 
because it is any worse than a lot of other pop memoirs, but because Morrissey 
is plainly the most ornery, cantankerous, entitled, whingeing, self-martyred 
human being who ever drew breath. And those are just his good qualities.

On PR

I have never acted on a press release or gone out to dinner with a PR. I think 
PR is a ridiculous job. They are the headlice of civilisation.

On American exceptionalism

America didn’t bypass or escape civilisation. It did something far more 
profound, far cleverer: it simply changed what civilisation could be.

On television

I don’t know how long a child will remain utterly static in front of the 
television, but my guess is that it could be well into their thirties.

On success

The interesting adults are always the school failures, the weird ones, the 
losers, the malcontents, this isn’t wishful thinking. It’s the rule.

On travel

You either get the point of Africa or you don’t. What draws me back year after 
year is that it’s like seeing the world with the lid off.

On Rolf Harris

Rolf Harris is a hard man to hate, but that doesn’t mean we shouldn’t try. 

On hacks

Freedom of speech is what all other human rights and freedoms balance on. That 
may sound like unspeakable arrogance when applied to restaurant reviews or 
gossip columns. But that’s not the point. Journalism isn’t an individual sport 
like books and plays; it’s a team effort. The power of the press is cumulative. 
It has a conscious human momentum. You can – and probably do – pick up bits of 
it and sneer or sigh or fling them with great force at the dog. But together 
they make up the most precious thing we own.
 