
The company that employed the Washington navy yard gunman, Aaron Alexis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/17/navy-yard-shooting-victims-identified>
 said on Tuesday that his latest background check revealed only a minor traffic 
violation.

The Experts, a defence contractor, said the check on Alexis was carried out 
three months ago. The company said that had it known of his two arrests for 
gun-related offences, it would not have employed him.

A Virginia gun store and range said it ran a background check on Alexis before 
selling him a gun and ammunition on Sunday. Sharpshooters Small Arms Range said 
he passed the check.

Alexis, 34, killed 12 people before being shot dead on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/blog/2013/sep/16/washington-dc-navy-yard-shooting-live>
. He was questioned in 2004 in Seattle, and by Texas police in 2010. No charges 
were brought in either case.

The US government ordered a series of security reviews on Tuesday, as 
investigators attempt to find a motive for the attack. The White House 
announced a review of security procedures for private contractors after it 
emerged that Alexis had security clearance for the base.

The Experts said it hired an unnamed service to perform two background checks 
on Alexis and twice confirmed his secret government clearance through the 
Department of Defense. The latest check was made in June 2013, the company 
said. The Experts said it had beensubcontracted by HP Enterprise services, part 
of Hewlett-Packard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/16/aaron-alexis-washington-navy-yard-shooting>
, to update and replace computers for the US navy and marine corps.

Thomas Hoshko, chief executive of The Experts, said he would not have hired 
Alexis, a computer technician, had he known about his past contact with police. 
He said theUS military <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-military> should 
have shared more information with the company about his history.

Alexis came to the attention of police in Seattle and Fort Worth over separate 
gun-related incidents. A Seattle police report said Alexis was arrested for 
"malicious mischief" after he shot out the tyres of a construction worker's car 
near his home in 2004, in what he said was an "anger-fuelled blackout" after he 
felt the worker "disrespected him".

In 2010, he was arrested while he was a Navy reservist in Fort Worth, after 
his downstairs neighbour complained he had shot a bullet through the ceiling of 
her apartment. The neighbourtold police 
<http://localtvwtvr.files.wordpress.com/2013/09/alexis_aaron_fwpd-public-information-report.pdf >
 Alexis had complained of noise and she was "terrified" of him. He was not 
charged after he told police the gun went off by accident when he was cleaning 
it.

In an emailed statement provided to the Guardian on Tuesday by FTI Consulting, 
The Experts said: "At this time, we can confirm that the suspect had been 
employed by The Experts for approximately six months over the last year, during 
which time we enlisted a service to perform two background checks and we 
confirmed twice through the Department of Defense his secret government 
clearance."

Alexis had worked for The Experts in Japan, from September 2012 to January 
2013. "The latest background check and security clearance confirmation were in 
late June of 2013 and revealed no issues other than one minor traffic 
violation," the statement said.

Thomas Hosko, chief executive of The Experts, told Reuters Alexis had "secret 
clearance" and a "CAC" – common access card – but said he was unclear when the 
contractor was due to start work. Hosko said he was unaware of any misconduct 
issues involving Alexis.

A defence official told the Guardian that Alexis had been vetted in 2007 as a 
navy reservist and in March 2008 was given clearance for access to secret 
material.

Under reciprocity rules he carried this clearance over when he became a 
contractor as there had been no significant break in his employment and no 
"unadjudicated derogatory information" had been received about him, the 
official said, adding that federal standards required employees at Alexis's 
level to be revetted only every 10 years.

An attorney for the Sharpshooters Small Arms Range, Michael Slocum, said 
Alexis rented a rifle, bought bullets and used the range on Sunday. He then 
bought a shotgun and 24 shells. Authorities say he had a shotgun with him when 
he entered a building at the navy yard on Monday. Slocum said the store ran a 
federal background check on Alexis and it was approved. Law enforcement 
officers visited the range on Monday, reviewing video and store records.

The navy said Alexis enlisted as a full-time reservist in May 2007. He was 
granted an honourable discharge in 2011 after a series of misconduct issues, a 
Navy official told Reuters. The Associated Press reported that the Veterans' 
Association had been involved in treating Alexis for a series of mental-health 
issues since August. The FBI said it was investigating his medical history.

In a news conference on Tuesday, the FBI said Alexis was acting alone and was 
armed only with a shotgun when he entered the navy yard on Monday. The head of 
the FBI's field office in Washington, Valerie Parlave, dismissed reports that 
the 34-year-old used an AR-15 semi-automatic rifle, the type of gun used in 
other recent mass shootings. She said Alexis "may have gained access to a 
handgun once inside the facility and after he began shooting".

Parlave said the shotgun was purchased legally and added that Alexis had 
"legitimate access" to the navy yard.

Washington's Metropolitan Police Department (MPD) said Alexis was believed to 
have shot other employees from the lobby of building 197, as well as the third 
and fourth floors. He engaged in several firefights with police before being 
shot dead by armed officers. The MPD chief, Cathy Lanier, said exchanges of 
gunshots between Alexis and police lasted between 30 minutes and an hour, 
before he was killed. Both Parlave and Lanier were speaking at a press 
conference in Washington, outside the field FBI field office.

Appealing for information from the public, Parlave described the FBI's 
investigation as "methodical and time-intensive", involving crime-scene mapping 
and assessment of bullet trajectories on the site, as well as interviews with 
people who knew Alexis in cities across the US. Alexis, a Buddhist convert, is 
known to have lived in New York, Seattle and Fort Worth in recent years.

Parlave would not comment on reports that the gunman was receiving treatment 
for mental-health issues. She said: "We continue to look into Mr Alexis' past, 
including his medical and criminal histories." She said that the search for a 
motive was still under way.
 