
It's Friday morning, the morning after the night before. The government has 
won its vote on tuition fees and there has been violence on the streets of 
London in clashes between students and the police. AndAaron Porter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/aaron-porter>, president of the National 
Union of Students, is obviously going to be gloomy … isn't he? Well, no, he is 
not. In fact he is upbeat; there is definite relief in his voice.

"We have shaken this coalition government in a way that they haven't been 
shaken by anyone yet," he says.

The result was much closer than expected, with 21 Liberal Democrat MPs 
rebelling over the proposals, along with six Tories. For Porter, that was a 
triumph in itself, and shows the NUS "won the intellectual side of the debate".

But he is upset about the pockets of violence that broke out. "Of course we 
condemn the violence, but we also condone students' right to peaceful protest," 
he says carefully.

Aaron Porter was expecting to have a tough time as NUS president. But when he 
took over from Wes Streeting in July, no one could have predicted just how 
tough it was going to be. With a newly elected government, a major review of 
higher education and government spending cuts to contend with, all in the space 
of a couple of months, his has arguably had the most challenging brief of any 
NUS president to date.

The last few weeks have been particularly bruising. Porter has been criticised 
by his members for condemning violence at student protests, for not supporting 
university occupations around the country and has been called "spineless" and 
"a class traitor". There have been numerous calls for his resignation and even 
a Facebook campaign calling for him to be sacked.

Does he feel hurt by the comments? "Some people say that student politics is 
much nastier than any other politics. People are less inclined to stay within 
boundaries. I keep that in the back of my mind. I won't pretend that it isn't 
upsetting sometimes, but I literally love the job," he says. "I love the issues 
I am dealing with, and it is a tough but exciting time to be NUS president."

This is typical Porter. With his squeaky-clean good looks and preppy style, 
the 25-year-old, who still lives at home with his parents, looks more like the 
son of a politician than a politician. But he does talk the talk. He is 
likeable and charming, but if he senses he has given too much away, revealed 
something of the real Aaron Porter, he is straight back "on message".

He winces at the mention of his Newsnight interview alongside University of 
London students union president Clare Solomon on the evening of the first fees 
demo, when students stormed the Conservative party headquarters at Millbank.

While Solomon held up under interrogation by Jeremy Paxman, Porter seemed 
rattled. And he took exception to a claim on the programme by the Liberal 
Democrats' deputy leader, Simon Hughes, that Porter had vowed to "hunt down" 
Liberal Democrats who had gone against their pre-election pledge to oppose an 
increase in tuition fees.

Porter says he was misquoted by Hughes, something that clearly still irritates 
him. "I said that we would chase down politicians. What I clearly meant was 
holding politicians to account. I think he put words into my mouth, and sought 
to use this to his own political ends. The NUS is not the kind of organisation 
that would ever incite violence, but we do think politicians should be held to 
account for political promises that they make."

If Porter looked bewildered that night, it was probably because he'd had the 
best and worst moments of his presidency within the space of a couple of hours. 
"I went from an absolute high of having addressed a 50,000-strong crowd of 
peaceful protestors to, minutes afterwards, being told by a member of staff 
that riot police had been called to Millbank. I had horrific images flying 
through my head, and I could potentially feel public support slipping away from 
us if it was handled badly. That is why I was as strong as I was in the 
condemnation, but I think it is also important to say that I understand why 
students are angry."

When he thinks about the fees pledge made by Liberal Democrats before the 
general election, which he says was "a stroke of campaign genius" from the NUS, 
the events of the past few months seem inconceivable. "I stayed up all night as 
the election results came in, and as I saw the increasing probability of a 
coalition government including the Liberal Democrats, my eyes lit up. At that 
stage, I couldn't see how it was possible they could do anything but vote 
against higher fees."

So one of the first big lows of his presidency came on the day after the 
Browne review, which recommended lifting the £3,290 cap on tuition fees, was 
published. "I had 14 meetings set up with Lib Dems and I watched one after the 
other break that promise," he says. "It was then it started to sink in that it 
was going to be a very tough few months for us."

As far as Porter is concerned, some Liberal Democrats have been "dazzled by 
the ministerial car and the big office". Nick Clegg is "more interested in 
maintaining his position as deputy prime minister" than social justice. Simon 
Hughes, whom, after the Newsnight debacle, he jokes could go on his list of 
"dislikes", is definitely off his Christmas card list.

But he has a soft spot for the universities minister, David Willetts, whom, he 
says he has "a lot of time for – for a Tory." What he admires about Willetts is 
that "he seems genuinely committed to getting more young people going to 
university, and I believe him". It is an issue he feels the Tory party is split 
over.

But it is not only politicians who should be held to account for the hike in 
tuition fees, says Porter, who read English at Leicester University and 
remembers when the decision was taken to raise fees from £1,000 a year, back in 
1998. "I think vice-chancellors need to take an incredible amount of blame for 
not making the case for why higher education should be protected a lot earlier 
than they did. Some vice-chancellors even lobbied for higher fees, not knowing 
that their teaching budgets were going to be slashed by 80%."

And he is not convinced that universities have the means to provide 
value-for-money when the cap on fees is lifted in 2012. "Students are already 
asking questions about the quality of contact with tutors, library resources … 
if there is a problem at £3,000, this will be exacerbated at £9,000."

Porter has his mum, a teacher from Trinidad, who timed dinner with the news 
every night, to thank for sparking his interest in politics. "She wasn't 
politically active, but we'd have these great debates around the dinner table 
about political issues." His mum and dad, a retired policeman, are incredibly 
proud of him, he says, but they do get upset about people criticising him, 
probably more than he does.

After a recent appearance by Porter on the BBC's Daily Politics, presenter 
Andrew Neil said: "I think I was listening to a future MP there." But Porter is 
not sure about a career in politics. "I've spent a lot of time with politicians 
this year, and, if anything, it has made me a lot more frustrated about the 
political system. There seem to be a lot of politicians who play fast and loose 
with their principles, and I am not sure I want to be in that environment." I 
can't help but suspect he is protesting a little too much, and that five years 
down the line, he'll be picking up his parliamentary pass.

Clearly he is someone who lives to work, rather than the other way round. He 
confesses that he always picks up the phone, even if it rings at 2am. More 
often than not it is a TV or radio researcher, and even if it means going on 
air five minutes later, it rarely phases him. He doesn't get much time off, but 
when he does, he follows Crystal Palace FC, likes going to the theatre and 
reading plays, "quite dark stuff like Alan Bleasdale, David Hare and Mark 
Ravenhill."

In the long term, he sees himself with a job in education, perhaps for a 
charity, or even starting his own thinktank.

His year as president of the NUS (he was vice-president for two) was always 
going to be dominated by the fees issue. Does he feel he has failed? 
"Absolutely not." In fact, he reveals that he intends to stand for president 
for a second term. For the NUS, he says, "This is not the end of the fight, but 
the beginning". Now the NUS is campaigning to get the Education Maintenance 
Allowance cut reversed, and over the government's "so-called progressive 
measures" such as the National Scholarship Fund, which would offer financial 
support for less well-off students, details of which are due early next year. 
And while the NUS may not have succeeded in stopping the vote, there are 
"significant victories" to celebrate.

"We have shaken this coalition government. I mean, the Lib Dems are in 
disarray. And that is no mean feat when the NUS is being run by a 25-year-old, 
and our members are all incredibly busy people, studying and working, sometimes 
in difficult circumstances. We may not see the full impact of this straight 
away, perhaps it will be the next general election when Lib Dems start to lose 
their seats, but we have definitely started to bring this government to its 
knees."

• This story was amended on 14 December 2010. We originally said that fees 
were raised from £1,000 in 1994, rather than 1998.
 