
The mother of Aaron Alexis <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/aaron-alexis>, 
the former navy reservist who killed 12 people in a shooting spree at the 
Washington navy yard, made an emotional statement on Wednesday, saying she was 
heartbroken for the families of the victims.

Speaking from her home in New York, two days after the incident, Cathleen 
Alexis said she was glad her son was "now in a place where he can no longer do 
harm to anyone".

More details emerged of Alexis's recent mental health problems. In early 
August, Alexis, 34, called police in Rhode Island, saying he thought people 
were following him and talking to him through the walls of his hotel room. 
Police informed the local navy authorities, but it appears no attempt was made 
to revoke his access to military installations.

Cathleen Alexis did not address her son's state of mind in her short statement 
on Wednesday. She told a CNN reporter: "Our son, Aaron Alexis, has murdered 
twelve people and wounded several others. His actions have had a profound and 
everlasting effect on the families of the victims.

"I don't know why he did what he did, and I'll never be able to ask him why. 
Aaron is now in a place where he can no longer do harm to anyone, and for that 
I am glad. To the families of the victims, I am so, so very sorry that this has 
happened. My heart is broken."

CNN did not broadcast video of the statement. On Tuesday, Cathleen, who lives 
in the Bedford-Stuyvesant neighbourhood of Brooklyn, New York, told police she 
was willing to talk to one reporter but did not want to be filmed or 
photographed.

In Washington, Barack Obama, voiced exasperation over the "ritual" of mass 
shootings in the US, which he said routinely shock the nation but then fail to 
convince Congress to initiate even rudimentary gun control laws.

Speaking to the Spanish-language network Telemundo, 
<http://www.bing.com/videos/watch/video/exclusive-president-obama-in-interview-with-telemundo/xoz3n43d?fg=ESUS_Telemundo_Network_NEW%20VIDEO%20HUB%20SEPT%202010>
 he said that it was up to legislators to take action to prevent a repeat of 
the navy yard shooting.

Obama said: "The fact that we do not have a firm enough background check 
system is something that makes us more vulnerable to these kinds of mass 
shooting.

"I do get concerned that this becomes a ritual that we go through every three, 
four months, where we have these horrific mass shootings. Everybody expresses 
understandable horror. We all embrace the families and obviously our thoughts 
and prayers are with those families right now – as they're absorbing this 
incredible loss.

"And yet we're not willing to take some basic actions that we know would make 
a difference."

Obama said he had "put in place every executive action" that he proposed after 
the mass shooting at Sandy Hook elementary school in Newtown last December, but 
restrictions on access to firearms needed to be implemented by Congress.

The Obama administration has announced three separate reviews 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/17/white-house-aaron-alexis-washington-navy-yard>
 prompted by the navy yard shootings, including one into the procedures 
governing security clearances for contractors such as Alexis.

A handful of lawmakers seized on the shootings at the navy yard, which is less 
than two miles away from Capitol Hill, to renew calls for gun reform. But the 
consensus in Washington is that any legislation is highly unlikely to pass the 
Senate or House of Representatives.

It has emerged that Alexis, 34, bought a shotgun and ammunition from a store 
in Virginia 48 hours before the killing spree, despite a history of violent 
outbursts and two firearm-related arrests.

In the latest incident, Alexis told police he got into an argument with 
someone as he was getting on a flight from Virginia to Rhode Island, where he 
was working as a naval contractor, and he said the person sent three people to 
follow and harass him.

On 7 August, about a month into a new job doing navy contract work, Alexis 
called police while he was staying at a hotel in Newport, Rhode Island. Two 
officers were dispatched, who reported that Alexis told them heard voices 
talking to him through a wall while at one hotel, so he changed hotels twice.

However, he said the voices followed him and he feared they might harm him. He 
also though that vibrations were being sent into his body by a microwave 
machine to deprive him of sleep.

Newport police lieutenant William Fitzgerald told the Associated Press that 
the Rhode Island naval station was alerted and sent a copy of the police report 
later the same day. A spokeswoman for the naval station did not comment.

Concern over the ease with which Alexis acquired a firearm and was able to 
retain his security clearance to work on navy installations has intensified 
over the past 48 hours. It previously emerged he had been arrested three times, 
on two occasions after incidents involving guns. In one, in Seattle in 2004, he 
shot the tyres of a construction worker's car.

In another, in Texas in 2010, he fired through the ceiling into the apartment 
of his upstairs neighbour's apartment a dispute over noise. Neither resulted in 
a prosecution.

The Veterans' Affairs department said in a statement reported by the Stars and 
Stripes 
<http://www.stripes.com/news/va-says-navy-yard-gunman-didn-t-seek-mental-health-treatment-1.242105>
 that Alexis, who was honourably discharged from the navy in 2011, had visited 
its doctors twice in August but only to complain of insomnia. It said: "On both 
occasions, Alexis was alert and oriented, and was asked by VA doctors if he was 
struggling with anxiety or depression, or had thoughts about harming himself or 
others, which he denied."

It went on to say that he had been given "a small amount of medication to help 
him sleep" after saying that changes in his work patterns had led to bouts of 
insomnia.
 