
It is already being described as the most famous shot in the history of New 
Zealand cricket. When Grant Elliott, once a South African but now very much a 
Kiwi, swung his bat and planted the penultimate delivery of a thrilling game 
high over wide long on and into the crowd, it sent the Black Caps into the 
World Cup final for the first time after six semi-final failures.

South Africa had been beaten by four wickets as New Zealand chased down what 
had seemed a very challenging total of 298, under the Duckworth-Lewis method, 
in a match reduced by rain to 43 overs a side. But if it was joy for the New 
Zealand team, the 40,000 fans packed into Eden Park, and the nation of four 
million, it was only despair forAB de Villiers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ab-de-villiers> and his team, who had hoped 
to throw off the tag of having never reached the final of a global competition. 
To come so close was, said an emotional De Villiers, painful.

New Zealand v South Africa: Cricket World Cup semi-final - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2015/mar/24/new-zealand-v-south-africa-cricket-world-cup-semi-final-in-pictures>
“It is a tough one being asked to describe my emotions,” he said, holding back 
the tears. “I felt we left it out on the field and I can’t ask any more. We had 
our chances, especially in the second half of the game, and we didn’t take 
them. Obviously it’s painful, so many people back home supporting us and we 
wanted to take the trophy home for them.

“I guess the sun will come again tomorrow. We had a lot of fun and I’m proud 
of the guys. We fought in every single game to the death. It is no consolation 
to have participated in one of the most memorable of games. It doesn’t make me 
feel better at all. It hurts quite a bit. I’m gutted.”

For the man of the match Elliott, however, was something that will take a 
while to sink in. “There has been lots of talk about us making the semis and 
not kicking on and I know it means a lot to the team, but you see from the 
emotions in the stands that it means a lot to a great many people and hopefully 
we can repay the faith in the final too.”

He described how he felt as the ball sailed into the stand: “I think that is 
the first moment to feel a release of emotion.Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> is a game where you have to be 
unemotional in your approach. It was a great feeling to look at the team and 
the crowd, savour the moment and know we were through to the final.”

Is it the most famous shot? “Maybe. I’m quite a level person and I like to 
stay out of the media, to be honest. I guess it will sink in after the World 
Cup, maybe I’ll look back and reassess. I guess it is my best shot. I felt the 
pressure. I knew it was up to me. I knew four would do it because a tie was as 
good as a win. I think we left the chase a little bit late, to be honest, and 
it was stressful.

“This game is amazing, once you are in the zone you play with freedom. You 
just see the ball and hit it. It would have been better to have got it with an 
over to go but credit to South Africa, they are a world- class team with 
world-class performers and they played a very good game as well.”
 