
AB de Villiers <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ab-de-villiers> insisted 
South Africa had done nothing wrong after his team were penalised for ball 
tampering as they pushed for victory late on day three of the second Test 
against Pakistan in Dubai.

The umpires, Ian Gould and Rod Tucker, were forced to change the ball and 
apply a five-run penalty, after they deemed the condition of the ball had been 
changed.

The South Africa captain, Graeme Smith, was called over by the umpires at the 
end of the 30th over – two overs after tea – and informed of the decision to 
enforce the penalty. No South Africa player has yet been charged, but TV 
replays appeared to show a player – believed to be the all-rounder Faf du 
Plessis – rubbing the ball against the zipper on his whites.

However, South Africa swiftly denied any suggestions of cheating at stumps, 
which arrived with Pakistan on 132 for four in their second innings – still 
trailing by 286.

"We are not a team that scratches the ball," the wicketkeeper-batsman De 
Villiers said. "We play in a fair manner. We want to swing the ball as much as 
we can. We try and get it to reverse, putting more sweat on one side and things 
like that. But we don't cheat. It's as simple as that."

De Villiers particularly spoke up for his team-mate Du Plessis, who was also 
brought into the on-field meeting between Smith and the match officials. "I 
know Faf very well," the 29-year-old added. "He is the last man on the field 
who will try anything like that. It is part of his responsibility to shine the 
ball, in order to get it to swing, and look after it. It is not an easy job and 
I thought he did a very good job of it."

Further sanctions could be applied on top of the five-run penalty, with an ICC 
spokesman saying that any player reported for ball tampering by the umpires 
would be subject to a hearing in front of the match referee.

Under the ICC regulations the umpires are obligated to report the incident to 
match referee David Boon, who is expected to call a hearing.

Altering the condition of the ball is a level two offence under the ICC's code 
of conduct, which carries a penalty of 50% to 100% of their match fee and/or 
suspension from one Test or two one-day internationals for a first offence.
 