
AB de Villiers <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ab-de-villiers> did not 
think it was going to be like this. When he arrived in England De Villiers 
expected to be fielding at point and trying to confirm his status as one of the 
world's best batsmen. Then Mark Boucher suffered his horrific eye injury at 
Somerset. De Villiers, 28, will replace Boucher in the tour match against Kent, 
which starts at Canterbury on Friday, and is expected to do so in next week's 
first Test.

De Villiers has kept wicket in only two of his 74 Tests, both against England 
seven years ago. "I'm a bit undercooked when it comes to keeping in Test 
cricket but I've had a lot of experience in T20 and ODIs for my country, and my 
keeping has improved a lot," he said. "I probably wouldn't be here without 
Bouch; he's done a lot for my cricket. It's been a bit of an emotional thing."

The absence of the totemic Boucher will take some getting used to for 
everyone. "At practice Smithy [the captain Graeme Smith] called me 'Bouch'. I 
was like: 'Bud, it's me now.'" South Africa will be using Boucher's absence as 
a stimulus. "There's definitely a bit of extra motivation. It'd be great to win 
the series and give it up to him."

De Villiers is third in the ICC Test batting rankings and averages 77 in his 
last 15 Tests. Plenty of high-class batsmen, including Kumar Sangakkara and 
Alec Stewart, have been much less effective while keeping wicket, but the extra 
burden does not concern De Villiers. "I rest a bit more when I keep," he said. 
"The only thing I have to look after is my back and using different muscle 
groups. When I'm fielding at point I'm running all over that field and I'm 
really tired by the end of the innings. I don't think it'll affect my batting."

He is No2 in the ODI batting rankings, when he usually doubles up as keeper. 
"I love keeping. I'm in the game all the time. I see angles that I wouldn't 
normally see and I feel part of what the captain does." He is also in the best 
place to bother the ears of the England batsmen – De Villiers joked that 
Boucher has given him "some messages to pass across".

De Villiers is aware of the unique challenge of English conditions, both as a 
batsman and a keeper. "The ball does swing after it's passed the stumps, but 
I've seen English keepers drop the ball as well, so it's not just a foreign 
thing – a guy coming in, dropping the ball and he's so pathetic," he said with 
a smile. "I expect to fumble a couple but hopefully I've got enough skill to 
watch the swing and follow it into my hands."

Or on to the middle of the bat. "The ball will definitely move around. I 
played and missed at around 100 balls in my century at Headingley in 2008, but 
that's what it's all about over here: facing your fears, going through the 
tough patches and then cashing in. If you get on top of the bowlers it becomes 
an amazing place to score runs."

De Villiers picked Stuart Broad as England's most improved bowler but did not 
say who of the current team he least enjoyed facing. "[Andrew] Flintoff is not 
there any more, thank goodness for that. I can't pinpoint one guy from the 
current team. They're a very well balanced attack. Both batting line-ups are 
going to have a lot to think about."

De Villiers has even more to think about than the rest. This was not as he 
planned it, but he looks ready for the challenge.
 