
South Africa, inspired by their captain, AB de Villiers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ab-de-villiers>, and aided by a wanton 
England batting lineup, won the final one-day-international of a captivating 
quintet of matches by five wickets with six overs to spare. Thus they won the 
series 3-2.

It was quite a comeback, not quite in the Lazarus league, but winning from 2-0 
down in a five-match series has only happened twice before in the hurly burly 
of ODI cricket. The last time was when Bangladesh beat Zimbabwe a decade ago.

De Villiers was delighted by the turnaround. “Record or not, in my eyes that 
was something special. I asked the guys to keep believing, and they did.”

England drop the ball as Chris Morris smashes South Africa to series leveller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/12/south-africa-england-fourth-odi-match-report>
The captain himself set a superb example, hitting a magnificent century, a 
leisurely one by his standards since it took 94 balls, which calmly navigated 
his side from the choppy waters of 22 for three. He was fortunate that the 
target was only 237, which meant there was no time pressure on the South 
Africans after Reece Topley had snatched three wickets in a potent opening 
spell. First Hashim Amla kept De Villiers company in a partnership of 125 and 
towards the end David Wiese, rather more vigorously, was his accomplice.

Eoin Morgan juggled his fielders anxiously; occasionally he juggled his 
bowlers – though he loves to bowl his spinners in tandem in long spells – in an 
attempt to rescue the situation, but after Topley’s initial burst he was 
increasingly dependent upon the South African batsmen making mistakes. The 
blunt truth was that England, despite an excellent century by Alex Hales – his 
second in this format – had squandered their chances of posting an exacting 
target.

Hales, after four half-centuries in this series, reached those cherished three 
figures without mishap this time, thereby joining an august band of Englishmen 
who have exceeded 50 in five consecutive innings in ODI cricket (Geoffrey 
Boycott, Graham Gooch, Alec Stewart and Jonathan Trott). He batted with great 
composure, positive in outlook, measured in execution – unlike the rest of 
them. Afterwards he was made the man of the series and now there is no debate 
about his worth to the England side – in this format.

So profligate were some of his colleagues that Hales was more likely to finish 
short of a hundred from a lack of partners rather than an onset of the nervous 
90s. There was much scatty batting from England. The determination to play with 
no fear does not give the excuse to play with no brains.

This game had most of the properties of a final. The South Africans are 
supposed to wobble in these circumstances, but in fact England can be suspect 
on these occasions. Last summer with the ODI series level at 2-2 against 
Australia they werebundled out for 138 at Old Trafford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/13/australia-ease-past-england-to-clinch-series-after-eoin-morgan-injury>
 and defeated by eight wickets.

In a final, more tension abounds; as a consequence runs are generally harder 
to come by and a mammoth total is not so essential. Viv Richards, whose record 
in finals was brilliant, would rein himself in a fraction on these occasions. 
For this was his stage. De Villiers did something similar on Sunday .

Hales apart there was not much evidence of England’s batsmen reining 
themselves in. Some, like Jason Roy, who was befuddled by a regulation 
leg-break from Imran Tahir, and Jos Buttler, stuck on the crease against Kagiso 
Rabada, were just beaten. Others self-destructed.

At least Joe Root had been there a while when he swept at a straight ball from 
Tahir without hitting it. However, Morgan did not have that excuse when he ran 
down the pitch to the first ball he received from Wiese, swishing and then 
edging it to a grateful keeper. Morgan, the batsman, is an oddity. The worse 
form he is in, the more shots he tries to play as he desperately searches for 
the magic elixir. Among players of true quality it is usually the other way 
round.

Ben Stokes suggested permanence until he was bowled around his legs by Rabada, 
having taken an exaggerated step to the off-side. Moeen Ali and Adil Rashid 
kept blazing away leaving Hales a calm, yet perplexed onlooker at the 
non-striker’s end. Eventually Hales drove Chris Morris to the boundary to reach 
three figures. Soon after a hook shot against Rabada sped into the hands of 
Rilee Rossouw on the square-leg boundary, but Hales’ innings was beyond 
reproach.

At the start of South Africa’s reply Topley offered hope when a good review 
found that Quinton de Kock’s inside edge had made contact with the ball. Faf du 
Plessis was bowled off another inside edge by the next delivery and in Topley’s 
next over Rossouw drove the ball straight into the hands of short extra cover.

However Amla was unflustered and so too was De Villiers in a smooth 
partnership whose progress was increasingly inevitable. By the time Amla was 
neatly stumped by Buttler off Moeen, South Africa were in calmer waters.

Farhaan Behardien succumbed to Rashid but towards the end Wiese swung without 
inhibition, leaving his captain with just enough time and space to complete his 
24th ODI century.

Afterwards Trevor Bayliss, when asked about the difference between the teams, 
concluded that “they were a better fielding team than us”. No doubt the painful 
memory of those dropped catches at the Wanderers still lingers, although there 
were no mishaps at Newlands. He was more forgiving about his batsmen.

“The positive, aggressive approach has worked on most occasions,” he said, 
“but to win the series they should take a leaf out of De Villiers’ book. I hope 
they learnt from watching him.”

South Africa v England: fifth ODI – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/feb/14/south-africa-v-england-fifth-odi-live> 