
AB de Villiers <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ab-de-villiers> is unsure 
whether he will take over as South Africa’s Test captain following Graeme 
Smith’s unexpected retirement.

Smith made his shock call to step away from international cricket after day 
three of the decisive third Test against Australia in Cape Town.

As Smith’s vice-captain and the Proteas’ one-day captain, De Villiers is the 
most obvious choice to take charge of the world’s top-ranked side.

But he told Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Australia’s TV 
channel: “I’m not sure. We’ll have to wait and see what happens.

“I’ll have a few discussions with the coach (Russell Domingo) and team 
selectors. If it does come my way it’d be a huge honour.”

Smith took over as captain as a 22-year-old and Domingo said: “I had an 
inkling that it might be around the corner with what has been happening in his 
life and it is a lot of pressure doing it for 12 years.

“I’m not entirely surprised but I am a bit surprised by the timing of it. His 
presence alone is going to be sorely missed.”

Smith will shift his focus to an English county career with Surrey, for whom 
he played three Championship games last season before undergoing ankle surgery.

Surrey director of cricket Alec Stewart was surprised by Smith’s international 
exit but believes the 33-year-old will still have the drive to succeed at the 
Oval.

Stewart told Sky Sports 2: “I didn’t have an inkling at all. I took a phone 
call last night from his manager and I was thinking, ‘is he injured?’, and he 
just said, ‘no, he’s going to retire from international cricket but he’s very 
keen to continue with Surrey’.

“It was a very short time last year before he had to go home for his ankle 
operation but he has two years minimum with us and hopefully he can help take 
us forward.

“You know Graeme Smith, he’s an excellent professional. He’s 33, he’s still 
got some unfinished business as far as he’s concerned with Surrey.”

Stewart also revealed Smith has recently qualified for an Irish passport 
through marriage, meaning he will not be classed as an overseas player.

Mark Boucher led the tributes from Smith’s former international colleagues. 

The former wicketkeeper described Smith as “a great bonus for Surrey” and 
added: “I think he’s getting out at the right time.

“A lot of people might say he’s still got a lot of cricket in him, and yes he 
has, but sometimes you know when that decision’s right to get out.”

Jacques Kallis added: “I think it came as a surprise to a lot of us. Having 
spoken to him a little bit I knew he was there and thereabouts but I didn’t 
realise he was that close.

“It’s obviously a difficult call to make when this has been your livelihood 
for so long, it doesn’t just get made overnight. “He’s a family man and that 
probably played a big role in it, and there’s lots of pressures that go with 
being captain.”

Another great all-rounder, Shaun Pollock, said: “He became captain at 22 and 
maybe he made mistakes, some people might have thought he was a bit brash, but 
he backed it up with performances after that.

“To have that longevity in the game is a real remarkable effort and a feather 
in his hat.”
Smith had described his retirement as the toughest decision of his life after 
ending his international career after almost 350 appearances for his country.

 