
The only serious hiccup for AB de Villiers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ab-de-villiers> as he guided South Africa to 
a 146-run win over the United Arab Emirates to confirm a World Cup 
quarter-final place was being dismissed one run short of his 21st one-day 
international century.

The South Africa line-up appeared scratchy at times after being sent in to bat 
but piled on late runs to post a total of 341 for six. It was always going to 
be too much for the bottom-place team. The UAE were dismissed for 195 in the 
48th over in response, with Swapnil Patil scoring an undefeated 57.

The victory means South Africa finish the group stage with eight points and 
stand second behind India in Pool B.

The captain once again subdued the opposition with his big hitting. His 99 
came off 82 balls and included four sixes and six fours. Going for a drive to 
reach triple figures, he instead found an edge and was caught at third man in 
the 43rd over.

Farhaan Behardien saw through the end of the innings with an unbeaten 64 from 
31 balls, with South Africa adding 40 runs in the last two overs.

South Africa seemed far less assured in the first half of their innings and 
need to improve as they prepare for the knockout stages. The Proteas have been 
inconsistent in their pool games, twice posting 400-plus totals, against the 
West Indies and Ireland, but also losing to India and Pakistan.

South Africa again lost an early wicket after Hashim Amla was out for 12 in 
the third over when he top-edged an attempted pull shot. Quinton de Kock’s 
struggle for form continued as he made a scratchy 26 off 45 balls before being 
caught behind. Going into the match, the 22-year-old opener had scored just 27 
runs in five World Cup innings, prompting speculation about his place in the 
starting line-up.

When the UAE captain Mohammad Tauqir caught Rilee Rossouw off his own bowling 
for 43, South Africa were in some bother at 96 for three.

There could have been more damage – David Miller survived a run-out chance, 
and De Villiers survived an lbw appeal when he was on 10 and then a dropped 
catch on 63.

The UAE faced an overwhelming target, needing to score at nearly seven runs an 
over against a world-class bowling attack. Shaiman Anwar scored 39, but when he 
was out in the 30th over the chase was effectively finished.

Morne Morkel intimidated the UAE batsmen, twice hitting Khurram Khan with 
short deliveries and then getting him out caught behind. Morkel went for just 
2.3 runs an over and picked up two wickets. Never far from the action, De 
Villiers also picked up two wickets for 15 runs off his three overs.
 