
Loan impairment charges doubled at Abbey in the first quarter of the year 
though the Spanish owned bank, which also owns Alliance & Leicester and the 
savings of Bradford & Bingley, granted £5bn of home loans in the first three 
months of the year.

Defying the trend, the UK arm of Santander reported a 25% rise to £372m.

Total profits at the Spanish bank, the sixth largest in the world, also held 
up, slipping 5% to €2bn, despite taking a €2.2bn charge for impaired loans 
during the same period.

The charge at Abbey was "significantly higher" than a year ago, doubling from 
£90m to £189m. But the charge was down on the fourth quarter of 2008, the first 
downward quarterly move for 12 months.

The number of properties in possession increased by 79 from 969 – which at 
0.07% of the overall portfolio is lower than the industry average.

Abbey, which has pulled back from using A&L in the mortgage market for now, 
reported a net mortgage lending of £800m in the first quarter. Net lending 
takes account of new loans and those which have been paid off. At time when the 
overall industry figure is expected to flat – or even negative showing more 
loans were paid off than taken out – it appeared to indicate that Abbey was 
dominating the mortgage market.

Other high street banks, including Barclays, Royal Bank of Scotland and HSBC, 
are all due to give trading updates in the coming weeks which could shed more 
light on the activity in the mortgage market. Its gross lending of just over 
£5bn gave it a 15% share of the market, just above its traditional share of 12%.

Abbey's chief executive António Horta-Osório insisted that the bank was 
continuing to a take a "prudent approach" to lending.

"We have increased mortgage and SME (small and medium sized enterprises) 
lending, demonstrating our ongoing support for the UK economy," Horta-Osório 
said.

He pointed out that amount of lending conducted by Abbey in the first quarter 
was balanced by the size of deposits at the bank. This means that Abbey is not 
dependent on its Spanish parent for funding to lend in the mortgage market.

Abbey received net deposit inflows of £800m and its savings book was bolstered 
by inflows from B&B and A&L, both of which contributed profits in the first 
quarter.
 