
Abbey announced yesterday it had sharply increased its share of the mortgage 
market in the past three months but optimism about the housing market was hit 
by a new report predicting further price drops next year.

The lender, part of Spanish banking group Banco Santander 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/santander>, said it had grabbed more than 
a fifth of a shrunken mortgage market between July and September as it filled 
the gap left by struggling rivals. That was well up from its more usual market 
share of about 13%. But the market has contracted so far that the £19bn of 
gross lending Abbey made in the July to September period was down more than a 
third from the same period last year. Abbey said new mortgage lending of £5.1bn 
– overall lending less repayments – represented more than half the estimated 
market size.

The group has two million borrowers and also owns Alliance & Leicester and the 
savings business of Bradford & Bingley. It lifted pre-tax profits by more than 
30% to £1.16bn in the third quarter of 2009.

Although mortgage approvals and house prices have been recovering in recent 
months, they remain well off the highs of the housing boom that ended two years 
ago.

And Think-tank Oxford Economics says in a report out today that there is a 
significant risk of renewed falls in house prices next year and in 2011. Neil 
Blake, director of economic analysis , says that the rises in house prices in 
Britain, Spain, France andIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> 
since 2001 can only be explained by an explosion in the availability of credit 
rather than any fundamentals of supply and demand. Now that credit is hard to 
come by, the report says, house prices risk a "double dip".

"Our research suggests that had we not experienced the massive expansion in 
credit after 2001 there would have been barely any growth in house prices in 
real terms.

"Credit conditions are key to the housing market, but even a strong recovery 
in credit will not be sufficient to prevent house prices dipping again next 
year."

The report estimates that 81% of Ireland's house price growth was due to 
changing credit conditions. But there are also instances, it said, where there 
was no significant correlation between house prices and credit growth, such as 
Germany, Sweden, Italy andFinland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/finland>.
 