
Aberdeen Asset Management 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/aberdeenassetmanagement>, one of the UK’s 
biggest investment companies, said emerging markets are continuing to cause it 
trouble as expectations of higher interest rates in the US curbs investor 
appetite.

The firm took a further hit as institutional investors pulled out of Asia and 
emerging markets. Net fund outflows increased to almost £10bn in the quarter to 
June, from £6.5bn the previous three months, and marking the ninth quarter of 
outflows from emerging markets. Total assets under management fell 7% to 
£307.3bn.

Chief executive Martin Gilbert vowed to maintain Aberdeen’s emerging markets 
focus, even though he admitted: “It’s painful watching those outflows. Our 
style of investing is out of fashion. Hopefully people will love emerging 
markets again at some stage.”

The news pushed the shares down by more than 6% to levels last seen in March 
2014 (373.1p), making them the worst performer on the FTSE 100 index.


Expectations of a Federal Reserve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/federal-reserve> rate hike in coming 
months are putting people off investing in high-yielding, but risky emerging 
market assets, alongside China’s economic slowdown and stock market collapse 
and falling commodity prices.


The prospect of higher US rates and the ensuing rise in the dollar have 
prompted fears of renewed volatility in emerging economies’ currency, bond and 
and stock markets. The Fed’s message in 2013 that the end of quantitative 
easing was nigh sent shockwaves through many emerging markets, but 
international economistNouriel Roubini says the risk of outright crises is more 
limited this time 
<http://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/fed-interest-rate-rise-emerging-markets-by-nouriel-roubini-2015-06>
. The 2013 “taper tantrum” caught markets by surprise, but the Fed, chaired by 
Janet Yellen, has long signalled that rates will go up, but that they will rise 
only gradually.

Gilbert said sentiment could turn “late this year or even next year”. He 
argued: “The long-term investment case for Asia and emerging markets is 
unchanged and we believe that committed investors will be rewarded over time.”

Mike van Dulken, head of research at Accendo Markets, said: “Traders in 
Aberdeen Asset Management shares are jumping ship today almost as quickly as 
investors did from its funds in the third quarter. The outlook looks little to 
get excited about, especially with the prospect of rate rises in the agenda on 
both side so of the pond.”

Wall Street economists see a 50% chance of the first US rate rise coming in 
September, the same as last month – despite global turmoil, from Greece’s 
worsening crisis to woes in China.

Gilbert is expecting the first US rate rise later this year, and the first UK 
increase early next year.

Aberdeen has a quarter of its assets invested in emerging markets, but Gilbert 
said in terms of revenues and sentiment the effect on other parts of the 
business is bigger. The firm has tried to diversify and has been making small 
acquisitions – and has been “underweight” on China.

“That hurt us badly on the way up, but in theory China going down should help 
us,” Gilbert said. Aberdeen funds did not benefit from the rally in Chinese 
stocks, but were also not exposed to the recent rout, which started in mid-June 
and prompted Chinese authorities to take unprecedented measures to halt the 
slide.

 