
The best thought through diet won't work if people can't stick to it. All 
diets ask people to avoid food. They state, for example, that we must eat fewer 
calories, eat less fat or avoid unhealthy snacks such as crisps and chocolate. 
But these attempts at avoidance ultimately make people preoccupied with food. 
It's as if the thought "today I will not eat chocolate" makes chocolate-eating 
a priority. In addition, dieters sometimes show lowered mood and report hunger.

Alok clearly showed an increased preoccupation with food during the 
experiment, in terms of both what and where to eat. He also reported an initial 
rise in hunger. All these changes are in line with what we would expect from 
diets in general

But Alok did not show a desire to break the diet, or a wish to overeat, nor 
did he show lowered mood. And his increased hunger fell back to normal after 
the first couple of weeks.

I would speculate that Atkins may create preoccupation with food but without 
the denial. Because it states "eat no carbohydrate" and rice, potatoes, pasta 
and bread are not our treat foods, not eating them does not generate the same 
sense of longing that we see with other diets.

Also, diets usually fail because their rules are blurred and easy to fudge. 
The intention to eat less at breakfast can easily run to lunch which can soon 
be dinner, tomorrow or even next week. Atkins offers clear boundaries which 
make sticking to the rules easier and a clear "science" to back these rules up.

Then there is the hunger factor. Perhaps Alok felt less hungry after a while 
because protein (as claimed) does wonders for satiation. We don't know this 
yet. Perhaps, and I think this more likely, he was less hungry because Atkins 
makes it difficult to snack. And eating meals, not snacks, is the best way to 
avoid hunger. The jury is out on whether Atkins is nutritionally sound. But by 
avoiding denial, offering clear rules and reducing hunger, perhaps it is 
psychologically sound.

· Jane Ogden is a reader in health psychology at King's College London
 