
An academic journal has retracted dozens of articles and apologised to readers 
after falling victim to what it described as a “peer review ring” that appears 
to have involved more than 100 bogus scholars.


The Journal of Vibration and Control (JVC), a leading publication in the field 
of acoustics, said it was withdrawing 60 papers published in print and online 
over the past four years, after discovering that articles were being approved 
and cited by academics with “assumed and fabricated identities”.

The journal’s publisher, Sage, said in a statement that the ring appeared to 
centre around Peter Chen, a researcher formerly of National Pingtung University 
of Education, in Taiwan. Chen provided an “unsatisfactory response” when 
confronted, and has since resigned from his post. Chen could not be reached for 
comment on Thursday.

“We regret that individual authors have compromised the academic record by 
perverting the peer review process and apologise to readers,” the publisher 
said in a statement. “On uncovering problems with peer review and citation Sage 
immediately put steps in place to avoid similar vulnerability of the Journal to 
exploitation in the future.”

Ali Nayfeh, the journal’s editor-in-chief since its establishment in 1995 and 
a professor emeritus in the college of engineering at Virginia Tech, resigned 
in May following the findings, the publisher said. Nayfeh did not respond to a 
request for comment on Thursday.

Sage said that a “complex investigation” was carried out after evidence 
emerged last year that the online submission system used for papers published 
in the journal was being manipulated.

“While investigating the JVC papers submitted and reviewed by Peter Chen, it 
was discovered that the author had created various aliases on Sage Track, 
providing different email addresses to set up more than one account,” the 
statement said.

“Consequently, Sage scrutinised further the co-authors of and reviewers 
selected for Peter Chen’s papers, these names appeared to form part of a peer 
review ring. The investigation also revealed that on at least one occasion, the 
author Peter Chen reviewed his own paper under one of the aliases he had 
created.”

The 60 articles were eventually retracted because “evidence points towards 
them having at least one author or being reviewed by at least one reviewer who 
has been implicated” in the fraudulent ring, according to the publisher.

The mass withdrawal of papers by the journal was first reported by Retraction 
Watch 
<http://retractionwatch.com/2014/07/08/sage-publications-busts-peer-review-and-citation-ring-60-papers-retracted/>
, a blog monitoring academic publications. Sage said in a statement to the blog 
that while it did not have a “definitive number of individual scientists 
involved in this ring”, it had contacted 130 email accounts, “a large number of 
which” were believed to be bogus accounts or aliases.

Sage said that three senior editors and 27 additional associate editors, all 
“with expertise and prestige in the field” had been appointed to run the peer 
review process for the journal following the inquiry findings and Nayfeh’s 
departure.
 