
Leading academics and artists, including the art historian Martin Kemp, 
archaeologist Martin Biddle, the Chinese artist Ai Weiwei, and historian Lisa 
Jardine, are accusing theUniversity of London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/university-of-london> of breach of trust 
over the future of a unique library, smuggled out of Germany as the Nazis rose 
to power.

Despite denials from the university, they believe that the Warburg Institute 
is in danger of losing its independence within the university, and at worst of 
having its collections broken up.

Jardine, a former trustee and fellow of the institute, said: "The Warburg 
Institute is the jewel in the humanities crown of the University of London, 
which continues to foster the very best of European scholarship. I have been 
lucky to have worked in the institute since my 20s and the thought of the 
University ofLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> losing it is heart 
stopping."

Kemp, a world authority on the work of Leonardo da Vinci, said: "I have worked 
in libraries all over the world, and as a tool of discovery, the Warburg is the 
most valuable I have ever discovered."

Now housed in its own handsome building in Woburn Square, London, the library 
was originally the vast collection reflecting the eclectic intellectual 
interests of a German Jewish scholar, Aby Warburg. His treasures were brought 
from Hamburg to London in the 1930s as the Nazis rose to power, shipped in two 
small steamers paid for by the textile millionaire Samuel Courtauld, founder of 
the Courtauld Institute of Art.

The collection had several temporary homes in London before coming into the 
care of the university. It is best known for art history books and photographs 
– one of its most famous directors was the art historian Ernst Gombrich – but 
it also encompasses science, astrology, magic, the history of ideas and of the 
classical tradition.

The emblem carved in stone over the door symbolises the breadth of its 
interests and collections: taken from a 15th century woodcut of the 
interactions of the four elements of the world which originally illustrated a 
6th century text by Isidore of Seville, which in turn quoted from a 4th century 
text by St Ambrose.

The protesters are suspicious of a legal action launched by the university – 
the result is due in the autumn – seeking to clarify the terms of a trust deed 
signed in 1944 which committed it to caring for the collection "in perpetuity".

Members of the Warburg family are understood to have indicated that they would 
be happy to return the collection to Germany, or transfer it to the US, in 
order to preserve its independence.

The Warburg is believed to be running at a substantial deficit, which critics 
believe is largely because the university increased the buildings charge for 
its premises some years ago.

It is seeking a new director to succeed Peter Mack, who was appointed in 2010 
on secondment from the University of Warwick where he is professor of English 
and comparative literary studies.

The university, in a brief statement, defended its record and said that it had 
no intention of breaking up the collection. "The University of London has at no 
point recommended that the Warburg Institute's unique collection be absorbed 
into Senate House Library.

"Under the university's management over the past 70 years, the Warburg 
collection has grown substantially from the original 80,000 volumes to the 
350,000 in the collection today. The last thing that the university wants is 
for this exceptional cultural resource to be merged or absorbed elsewhere. We 
await the decision of the court in due course."

However an online petition 
<http://www.change.org/en-GB/petitions/petition-save-the-warburg-institute> 
pleads with the university "to keep the Warburg just as it is". It has 
attracted more than 17,500 signatures, including Kemp, who commented online: 
"The legal action is a historical breach of trust of the very highest order. 
The institute is the spiritual home for all who care about the history of 
culture.

"For London university to achieve what Hitler could not is beyond belief."

Biddle called the Warburg "the world's finest library for the study of ideas 
in image", and added: "As the latest attack by the administration of the 
University of London on books and print-based research, the threat to the 
Warburg demands an answer to the question: 'who guards the administrators 
themselves?'"

Ai, currently confined to Beijing by having his passport confiscated, also 
signed, writing: "Warburg Institute, not only being one of the most important 
sources of humanist studies, is also an intellectual legacy of great value, a 
symbol of a memorable history. London university has the duty to protect its 
integrity."

The petition has also been signed by scholars across the world including the 
US, Canada, France, Italy, the Netherlands, Switzerland, China, Australia and 
Israel.

Anna Somers-Cox, editorial director of the Art Newspaper, called the 
university "Gradgrinds" who did not understand the value of their treasure. 
"The London university is simply breaking faith. They shouldn't be destroying 
something but helping it to raise funds internationally, which given the fame 
of the Warburg should not be difficult."

She said the collection, where almost all the books are on open stack 
shelving, has unique value as it is. "It does not censor the thought of the 
past: if Newton was an alchemist as well as the father of experimental physics, 
you don't sweep this fact under the carpet, but look to see how it contributed 
to his thought; astrology may be unscientific, but people in the past believed 
in it and painted pictures about it,so if you study it you find out what it 
meant to them."

The trust deed, signed in November 1944 by the university and Eric Warburg, 
then a major in the US army, on behalf of his family,survives on a single sheet 
of cheap wartime paper 
<http://warburg.sas.ac.uk/home/aboutthewarburginstitute/trust-deed/>, typed on 
both sides.

It lists the contents of the library as "about eighty thousand books and a 
large collection of photographs". It states: "The University will maintain and 
preserve the Warburg Library in perpetuity in accordance with this Deed and 
will accordingly as soon as possible house the same in a suitable building in 
close proximity to the University centre at Bloomsbury and will keep it 
adequately equipped and staffed as an independent unit."

Apart from the value of the collection, described by Kemp as "the world's 
greatest research engine", many of those who signed the petition feel it 
deserves specially gentle treatment because of its unique history.

Amos Benvered wrote from Jerusalem: "The Warburg Institute library is one of 
the free world's treasured memorials to its victory over Hitler's barbaric 
hordes. Destroying it would be like chopping the head off a major statue that 
graces one of London's squares."
 