
What will I learn?
Accountants are vital to the running of the financial world – they are 
numerate, articulate, analytical and understand how companies work. It's the 
advice of an accountant that can sway how business bosses make important 
decisions. This sounds like a huge amount of responsibility – and it is – but a 
degree in the field can give you the skills, background knowledge and 
confidence necessary to succeed.

The modules on offer vary between universities, but most cover the same core 
topics. There will often be an introduction to the principles of finance – 
looking at, for example, the time value of money or the different sources of 
finance – as well as introduction to accounting, which will guide you through 
the regulation and basics of bookkeeping. Courses may also cover statistical 
methods, business law, macroeconomics and the basics on how organisations are 
structured. Optional modules might include taxation, pensions or public sector 
accounting.

Students are taught through a combination of lectures and seminars. Some 
institutions offer sandwich courses, where undergraduates can spend a year on 
an industry placement learning on-the-job.

What skills will I gain?
Students will leave university with an understanding of accountancy practices, 
an awareness of how business or public sector organisations are run and an 
ability to think critically. Graduates will also be highly numerate and capable 
of interpreting data. Most courses will introduce you to the IT tools used by 
the business world to collect, present and analyse financial information.

As well as having strong maths and economics skills, graduates will be able to 
persuasively argue their case, compromise when necessary and work as part of a 
team. Future employers will expect job candidates to have an eye for detail and 
experience of report writing – both of which students will develop at 
university, particularly if they conduct a business research project as part of 
their degree programme.

What job can I get?
If you want to work as a chartered account after graduation you will need to 
study examinations set by the major professional bodies, such as the 
Association of Chartered Certified Accountants (ACCA), the Chartered Institute 
of Management Accountants (CIMA) and the Institute of Chartered Accountants in 
England and Wales (ICAEW). Some degree courses are accredited by these 
organisations, which means that – depending upon what and where you study – you 
may be exempt from sitting some of the official tests.

As well as working in professional accountancy, many graduates find roles in 
areas such as investment banking, management consultancy and financial 
management. There are employment opportunities at the "big four" accountancy 
firms – Deloitte, Ernst & Young, KPMG and PricewaterhouseCoopers – smaller 
companies and the public sector. Many also work in a private practice. Salaries 
compare favourably with those offered by other industries.

Salaries for those working in accountancy and finance compare favourable with 
other industries.

What will look good on the CV?
• The ability to think critically
• The ability to work as part of a team
• Attention to detail
 