
Every year, a friend sends exuberant texts on his hols in Beer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/jun/02/guardianspecial4.guardianspecial248>
. "Sitting outside pub, gls wht wine, glorious!" At last I shall see this tiny 
fishing village for myself, because there is a new holiday apartment to try, 
above a little shop.

This former smuggling enclave is reached by steep a descent (in fact, there is 
nothing flat about Beer). The narrow gap I must negotiate between two buildings 
to reach a rear parking space freaks me out, so I ditch the car in a public car 
park and walk. Pretty high street, and here's the shop – as yummy-looking as a 
cream tea.

Owner Liz Robinson is here to give me the keys – a nice personal touch, which 
she or her husband always try to do, she says.

So, when the motor and I do make it through here together, where, exactly, 
should I park? The "lane", skinny as a sock in Lily Cole's underwear drawer, 
threads behind cottages to a turning circle. Liz indicates a space by a garage 
(with a tiny patch of garden). Hmm – bit of signage wouldn't go amiss. Still, 
no mistaking which door belongs to the holiday home – a laminated brochure is 
stuck in the window.

Inside, it takes two minutes flat to see that The Gallery does exactly what it 
says on the tin. It wouldn't increase Kevin McCloud's pulse rate, despite some 
exposed beams and stonework, but as a base for a family seaside holiday, it 
ticks a lot of boxes.

Stairgate, tick, high chair, tick, baby listening, toybox, brand new kitchen, 
more ticks. Well laid out too: ground-floor lobby (lots of buggy parking), 
three bedrooms and bathroom on first, and a large open-plan kitchen/living and 
dining area beneath the eaves on the top floor. The dining table is roomy 
enough for folks to eat at while others draw or do a jigsaw, there is Freesat 
and very comfy seating. Home from home, especially if you shop at Ikea.

Eco-paints in restful green and grey have been used throughout and, as the 
light through Velux windows in the roof fades, and traffic below ceases, 
there's a sense of being completely tucked away in my own eyrie, while supper 
cooks.

It could do with a second loo – especially for a capacity booking of six – and 
after a week here I'd be itching to take a screwdriver to the brown metal 
hanging racks in the smaller two bedrooms. Some lamps in the sitting area would 
be good, but since I've forgotten my book, I'm texting the Beer-loving mate.

"Guess where i am!" Ping, goes my phone. "Walk over Beer Head to Branscombe 
Hole – gorgeous." Ping, ping. "Tks bout 45min. And don't miss Hive Cafe in 
Burton Bradstock on wy hm. Superb fish dishes."

Comfy bed, good towels, digital radio – bliss – and top marks for double 
blinds (privacy with or without daylight, see) at my bedroom window.

First thing, I take the stunning clifftop walk over Beer Head as recommended, 
stopping for coffee when I drop back down into Beer, sitting in sharp sunlight 
outside the Anchor Inn, overlooking the pebbly beach. No wonder my friend keeps 
coming back – even in winter, Beer's a bit of a gem.

Gastro-file I didn't make it to the Hive Beach Café 
<http://www.hivebeachcafe.co.uk/> (+44 (0) 1308-897070, hivebeachcafe.co.uk) 
but found fresh seafood at the wonderful wet fish shop on the beach, fruit and 
veg at Woozies Deli (+44 (0) 1297 20707) on Fore Street and three butchers in 
Seaton.

• Fore Street (+44 (0) 1297 20307, devonretreat.com 
<http://www.devonretreat.com/#/the-gallery/4534602620>). Sleeps six. From £350 
for two nights low season to £1,100 per week high season. Further information:
visitdevon.co.uk <http://www.visitdevon.co.uk/>.

sally.shalam@theguardian.com <>

This article was updated on 10 May 2012
 