
Somewhere off the A30 near Launceston, I find the farmhouse I'm looking for 
and the track with a little parking area. When I unload, whistling gently to 
myself, no one comes rushing up to greet me, ply me with questions about my 
journey or chatter on about facilities that I'll find for myself anyway. Left 
to my own devices to find the wheelbarrow provided for ferrying luggage, a 
sense of tranquillity is already descending when I wheel my bag and food 
supplies along a gravel pathway, rounding a tall hedge, enjoying the build-up.

First I encounter a garden table and chairs, then the lights in a wooden hut 
(Pip's Cabin) and finally, on the other side of a fire pit (how cool), Pip 
herself, a 1930s steamroller wagon, which contains my bed for the night, parked 
up a few metres from the cabin. It seems daft to be thinking in superlatives 
this early in 2010, but how many such delightfully orchestrated arrivals can I 
expect to encounter in the months to come?

A key hangs in the cabin door which I push open. There's a sofa, a wood burner 
on a wide brick hearth (which doubles, later, as my coffee table), a window 
seat and a dining table for two, with fresh flowers and auction-find chairs. An 
unfitted kitchen is at the far end, in which bits of oak and marble washstand 
counters find new life as worktops and old cupboard doors create an under-sink 
unit. There's a gas cooker, fridge and kettle (but no toaster), a small range 
of pots and pans, sharp knives and wooden spoons. A hand-written welcome note 
tells me that Rick Finney, who has createdQuirky Holidays 
<http://www.quirky-holidays-cornwall.co.uk/> (which also includes two other 
wagons and a newly built self-catering barn on the same site) with artist wife 
Kym, will pop in later to check all is well, unless I hang out the "do not 
disturb sign". How thoughtful to give me the option of making contact. I cannot 
see the other wagons, either, though they must be here somewhere. Strikes me 
this would be the place to come and write a book.

Instead of a TV there is a 50s cocktail cabinet and radiogram; I can't find 
any lamps though, just overhead light or candles. A basket of logs also 
contains twigs tied in rustic bundles for kindling. I can replenish firewood 
from outside and just put money in a tin provided.

Through an etched glass door at the far end lies a shower room – very 
spacious, with plenty of hooks for my own towels (not provided, neither are 
toiletries. I can't figure out why – they could put in biodegradable stuff).

Rick appears at the door just as I'm about to inspect Pip. "Belonged to 
Cornwall Council – the workmen would have had their tea and biscuits inside," 
he says. Pip's interior is more simple even than the cabin – just a bed 
platform, hooks, lamp, the old brake, and a small heater. Shame the original 
stove is not in use and, wimp that I am, I think the handmade duvet cover, 
though colourful, a little rough.

Night cloaks the garden in darkness. The only sound is wood crackling in the 
stove. While supper cooks (bangers and baked potato, since I cannot find a 
masher), I read. Much later, I nip across my "patch" with a torch to bed, to 
wake when daylight filters in between branches clutching at the tiny wagon 
windows.

Best for Dog-owners (pet-friendly). Campers frustrated by winter. 
Simplicity-seekers who can't ditch creature comforts.

• 07842 199011, quirky-holidays-cornwall.co.uk 
<http://www.quirky-holidays-cornwall.co.uk/accommodation.php?id=7>. From 
£65-£114 per night, three-night minimum. 

sally.shalam@theguardian.com <mailto:sally.shalam@theguardian.com> 
 