
Taiwan PC maker Acer reported a worse-than-expected quarterly loss, the first 
in the company's history, as it paid to reorganise the firm in a troubled first 
half.Acer <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/acer> also said it would be 
impossible to break even for the full year.

Acer has been a dominant force in the PC business, particularly in the 
low-cost notebook market, but has failed to counter the runaway success of 
tablets such as Apple'siPad <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ipad>.

The company has been refocusing on mobile devices to drive growth after a 
first half that saw the acrimonious departure of its chief executive following 
a row over the company's strategy and a series of cuts to its shipment 
forecasts.

Shares of Acer, the world's No 2 PC vendor, closed down 2.92% on Wednesday 
ahead of the earnings announcement.

They have fallen 65% this year in a broader market down 16.4%. Rival Asustek 
gained 6.8%.

The Acer chairman, JT Wang, told an investor conference that the 
second-quarter was a "correction period" and its loss was worse than expected 
because the company cleared up excessive inventory and made severance payments 
for senior management resignations.

Among those who resigned was Gianfranco Lanci, the former chief executive, who 
left abruptly in April amid a row over strategy and after a sharp cut in Acer's 
revenue outlook that triggered an 18% fall in shares in four days. Wang did not 
say how much Lanci received.

Wang said although he expects the "fever" for tablet PCs receding and 
notebooks to regain consumer interest, Acer will see a loss in the third 
quarter, though it would be better than the second quarter.

"Today I have to say, trying to break even this year becomes impossible," Wang 
said, citing a worsening macro environment in Europe and the need for "more 
time and effort" for the restructuring.

In July, Wang had indicated the company would report a loss in the second 
quarter before returning to profit in the third and posting a small full-year 
profit.

Acer said in June it would take a $150m (£90m) charge to write off inventory 
and doubtful payments in Europe and will cut 300 jobs there.

The Macquarie analyst, Andrew Chang, said in a report that recent checks 
indicate Acer has no new competitive products to launch in the third quarter to 
lift momentum and margins.

Macquarie expects flat revenue growth in the third quarter from the previous 
quarter and a 29% drop from a year ago.

Acer posted a net loss of T$6.79bn (£141.7m) in April to June, much wider than 
the consensus forecast of a T$3.3bn loss from six analysts polled by Reuters.

The unaudited net loss figure compared with a net profit of T$1.19bn in the 
first quarter and earnings of T$$2.65bn in the same period a year ago.
 