
The French MEP who resigned his position in charge of negotiating the 
international Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement (Acta) has said it "goes too 
far" by potentially cutting access to lifesaving generic drugs and restricting 
internet freedom.

In an exclusive interview with the Guardian, Kader Arif – a member of the 
European parliament's international trade group, who was the lead negotiator 
overActa <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/acta> – said that despite 
talks over the agreement having begun in 2007, "the European parliament, which 
represents the rights of the people, had no access to this mandate, neither had 
it information of the position defended by the commission or the demands of the 
other parties to the agreement".

Arif resigned in protest on 26 January as the EU signed the treaty, saying 
that he wished to "denounce in the strongest manner the process that led to the 
signing of this agreement: no association of civil society [and] lack of 
transparency from the beginning".

He said that it now threatens online freedom, access to the use of generic 
versions of drugs for treating illnesses, and could potentially mean that 
someone crossing a border who has a single song or film on their computer could 
face criminal charges.

Asked what he thought European citizens should do, Mr Arif said: "Showing that 
there is interest and concern about this agreement is the best way of creating 
a real public debate, which was never possible until now because of the lack of 
transparency on this dossier. Especially if the timeframe is short, raising 
awareness of members of parliament will be crucial. And because Acta is a mixed 
agreement, it will have to be ratified both by the European parliament and by 
every member state of the union, so there is also an opportunity to organise 
debates at the national level."

He says that it is now impossible to renegotiate the agreement because the 11 
key parties to it concluded their discussions on 1 October 2011: "the European 
commission negotiated it on behalf of the EU, on the basis of a mandate given 
by the member states in 2007."

That means, he says, that "at this stage one can only accept or reject the 
agreement – no change of the text is possible. If the right wing of the 
European parliament had not imposed such a tight calendar, the members of the 
European parliament could have drafted an interim report, which would have put 
conditionalities to the ratification of the agreement, by giving 
recommendations to the commission and member states on how to implement it. But 
this is no longer a feasible option."

"The title of this agreement is misleading, because it's not only about 
counterfeiting, it's about the violation of intellectual property rights," he 
told the Guardian. "There is a major difference between these two concepts."

Acta has triggered public protests in a number of European and other countries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2012/jan/27/acta-protests-eu-states-sign-treaty>
, as well as online attacks by the hacking collective Anonymous. The US, EU 
member states, Australia, New Zealand, Canada, Japan and a number of other 
countries have signed it, although none has yet ratified it in national 
legislation.

The agreement would create an international framework and set of standards for 
a voluntary legal regime to enforce intellectual property rights across 
national boundaries.

Arif said one example illustrates this difference particularly well – the case 
of generic medicines. "Generic medicines are not counterfeited medicines; they 
are not the fake version of a drug; they are a generic version of a drug, 
produced either because the patent on the original drug has expired, or because 
a country has to put in place public health policies," he said.

A number of countries such as India and African nations have sought to use 
generic versions of drugs for infections such as HIV, which has often been 
resisted by pharmaceutical companies. Under Acta, Arif fears such countries 
would not have the same freedom to determine their own actions.

"There are international agreements, such as the Trips agreement 
<http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/trips_e/intel2_e.htm>, which foresees this 
last possibility," he said. "They're particularly important for developing 
countries which cannot afford to pay for patented HIV drugs, for example.

"The problem with Acta is that, by focusing on the fight against violation of 
intellectual property rights in general, it treats a generic drug just as a 
counterfeited drug. This means the patent holder can stop the shipping of the 
drugs to a developing country, seize the cargo and even order the destruction 
of the drugs as a preventive measure."

He thinks that is a key flaw: "Acta also limits the flexibilities listed in 
the Trips agreements to support developing countries in need of generic drugs. 
When the question of finding the right equilibrium between protection of 
intellectual property rights and protection of final users is so crucial, Acta 
appears to be very unbalanced in favour of patent holders. This is one of the 
major problems with the agreement."

Internet <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/internet> freedoms could also 
be under threat if Acta is ratified in its present form, he says. "The chapter 
on internet is particularly worrying as some experts consider it reintroduces 
the concept of liability of internet providers, which is clearly excluded in 
the European legislation." That could make ISPs, who provide internet access, 
liable for users' illicit file-sharing.

Arif also expressed concern that there could be more intrusive checks at 
borders to fight counterfeiting.

"I see a great risk concerning checks at borders, and the agreement foresees 
criminal sanctions against people using counterfeited products as a commercial 
activity," he said.

"This is relevant for the trade of fake shoes or bags for example, but what 
about data downloaded from the internet? If a customs officer considers that 
you may set up a commercial activity just by having one movie or one song on 
your computer, which is true in theory, you could face criminal sanctions.

"I don't want people to have their laptops or MP3 players searched at borders, 
there needs to be a clearer distinction between normal citizens and 
counterfeiters which trade fake products as a commercial activity. Acta goes 
too far."

The text of the finalised treaty (PDF) 
<http://www.mofa.go.jp/policy/economy/i_property/pdfs/acta1105_en.pdf> has now 
been made public, and the European commission has begun to try to explain how 
Acta would work. It has also published a document called10 Myths about Acta 
<http://trade.ec.europa.eu/doclib/docs/2012/january/tradoc_148964.pdf>, 
asserting that the public was informed "since the launch of the negotiations"; 
that it is drafted "in very flexible terms" and that "safeguards and exceptions 
under EU law or under the Trips agreement remain fully preserved".

It also insists that "Acta is about tackling large-scale illegal activity … 
there is a provision on Acta specifically exempting travellers from checks if 
the infringing goods are of a non-commercial nature and not part of large-scale 
trafficking".
 