
European lawmakers rejected the global Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement 
(Acta) on Thursday, signalling that the European Parliament may soon use 
new-found rights to derail an international agreement for the first time.

"This vote is the penultimate nail in Acta's coffin," Jan Philipp Albrecht, a 
German Green politician in the legislature said, after the European 
Parliament's International Trade Committee (Inta) recommended 19-12 that the 
European Parliament reject the treaty in its upcoming vote on 4 July.

The decision was the fifth European committee in a row to recommend against 
Acta <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/acta>.

The Acta deal, in the pipeline since 2008, aims to reduce intellectual 
property theft by cracking down on fake consumer goods and medicines and 
digital file-sharing of pirated software and music.

The European Commission has said the agreement would target large-scale 
operations which enable illegal digital file-sharing, but the movesparked 
protests from citizens <> and also from some governments, who said it would 
criminalise people downloading files for personal use.

It also triggered the resignation in January of Kader Arif 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2012/feb/01/acta-goes-too-far-kader-arif>
, a French MEP, from his role as the lead negotiator for the EU on Acta: he 
complained that it could cut access to lifesaving generic drugs, and would 
restrict internet freedom.

Arif told the Guardian in February that the only remaining options were to 
accept or reject the treaty, because no further change to the text was then 
possible.

A handful of EU countries, including Germany, have held off signing the 
agreement while others have expressed concerns about its impact on their 
citizens. The US, Australia, New Zealand, Canada and Japan are among countries 
which have signed Acta, but none has yet ratified it in national legislation. A 
number of countries, including India and some African nations, have been uneasy 
about the implications of Acta's effect on shipments of generic pharmaceuticals 
– which have the same structure and action as branded versions – to their 
countries.

Lawmakers said the cross-party vote is a signal the legislature will reject 
the Acta in a final vote, the first time the European Parliament has written 
off an international agreement since an increase in its powers in 2008.

"This is about much more than just Acta. It's about the European Parliament 
acting as an independent and democratic institution," said Joe McNamee from the 
European Digital Rights lobby, EDRi.

Peter Bradwell, of Open Rights Group, said: "MEPs have listened to the many, 
many thousands of people acrossEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> who have consistently demanded 
that this flawed treaty is kicked out. This is the fifth consecutive committee 
to say Acta should be rejected. It now falls to the vote of the whole European 
Parliament in July to slam the door on Acta once and for all, and bring this 
sorry mess to an end."

The 31-member trade committee in the European Parliament agreed that the 
proposed agreement risked criminalising individuals who download files like 
music or films from illegal torrent websites.

The European Commission, which negotiated the deal on behalf of the EU, has 
asked the highest European Union court to decide if Acta infringes people's 
privacy. A ruling could take up to a year.

"By recommending the rejection of Acta, the INTA committee today has said yes 
to democracy and fundamental rights", said Raegan MacDonald, senior policy 
analyst at the US pressure group Access. "This is a crucial step forward in 
this long fight, and now we're closer than ever to burying this agreement once 
and for all."

She added: "The movement against Acta has been a defining moment for the 
future of the open and universal internet. We're very excited about today's 
decision, but it's not over yet. Access will continue to work up until the very 
last hour until there is no more Acta left."

Corrected: Raegan MacDonald is female, not male.
 