
The dismissal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2012/jul/04/acta-european-parliament-votes-against>
 of Acta, the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement, by the European parliament 
has left the treaty's opponents delighted, and its supporters – who principally 
work in the industries that rely on copyright and trademarks, whether virtual 
or physical, for their living – downhearted.

Acta's creators had the poor luck – or lack of foresight – to create their 
baby in what feels like the Jurassic age of the social internet. They also made 
the bad decision to negotiate it in secret – the sort of thing that drives 
conspiracy theorists wild, but which is also sure to get anyone's antennae a 
bit twitchy. After all, if an agreement is for everyone's good, then why do its 
terms have to be kept secret? (The answer – that multipartite negotiations are 
kept secret because many sides adopt extreme negotiating positions they might 
not want publicised just in order to, well, negotiate – is inconvenient, but 
true.)

What is, or was, Acta? In essence, it wants to be a subset of the World Trade 
Organisation, but dealing only with copyright and trademarks. Some people have 
the idea that it was solely about shutting down internet sites and trying to 
stop content piracy; that's only a sliver of it.Acta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/acta> wanted to deal with physical 
goods too – pharmaceuticals, bags, shoes, anything that gets counterfeited and 
moved across borders (most countries have their own laws to deal with 
counterfeiting inside their borders.)

Acta began its life in 2006, as part of a bipartite conversation between the 
US and Japan. The European Union and Canada pitched in the same year; official 
negotiations began in 2008, also involving Australia, New Zealand, South Korea, 
Singapore, Mexico and Morocco. Wegot wind of it at the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2008/jul/10/intellectualproperty.law> 
and – using a draft that appeared on WikiLeaks – pointed out that as far as 
could be understood (because of course the negotiations were still secret), 
Acta's strictures on cross-border intellectual property theft might mean that 
customs agents would have the right to examine your iPod, and the songs on it, 
as you entered any signatory country.

Absurd? Overblown? The supporters of Acta said that such ideas were crazy, 
nobody would take things to those extremes, you'd never get your iPod searched 
and seized just because you might be carrying a few counterfeit songs.

Then again, I'm sure that much the same was said when the UK signed the 
extradition treaty with the US. Perhaps someone could ask Richard O'Dwyer and 
Gary McKinnon.

There were good intentions behind Acta. No, really. This will be hard for some 
to countenance, but it is useful to be able to co-ordinate the prosecution of 
the production of fake pharmaceuticals that have arrived in one country, after 
being shipped from another, and made in yet another. Acta could give that sort 
of case coherence, and simplify prosecution. You don't have to have watched The 
Third Man to know such fakes are bad.

But Acta ran into problems there too; countries such as India were concerned 
that the big pharmaceuticals companies, which protect their profits 
aggressively, would have banned the production or import of cheap "generic" 
drugs which have the same chemical formula and effect as the branded ones.

However, it was over the measures applying to the internet that things really 
got hairy – and that has been building up in a manner that Clay Shirky, the 
guru of the social, is doubtless nodding his head at. Shirky, author of Here 
Comes Everybody, would recognise what happened: a social crowd formed online 
with one aim, of killing Acta.

The treaty's aim regarding the internet was that sites in one country that 
infringed the copyrights of rightsholders (people, companies) in another could 
easily be shut down. At present, it's pretty difficult; some countries just 
don't have laws to that effect, creating the net equivalent of offshore tax 
havens, housing sites that profit by selling ads and let anyone download the 
(ripped-off) content. Acta wanted a simpler way to shut those down.

Similarly, as far back as 2008, the US trade representative Sean Spicer was 
saying that the cross-border content inspection stuff that opponents said could 
be applied to your iPod was really about large-scale copyright infringement – 
"which can frequently involve criminal elements".

But of course if you stick together, the idea that you're stopping people 
copying stuff, and that you're looking to close down websites, you're going to 
make yourself unpopular with the easily mobilised online groups of … well, lots 
of people. Especially the ones who like getting stuff for free.

Thus it was that Anonymous came out very strongly against Acta, and the 
lobbying against Acta turned ferocious. It was comparable to Sopa (the Stop 
Online Piracy Act), except that was US-based, debated in the open, and had only 
one aim – to shut down sites outside the US infringing US copyrights. That it 
only took a day of protest to kill it shows the US political system's weakness, 
and the internet's strength.

Acta, by contrast, is much more complex, and the European parliament's sudden 
discovery of democratic accountability to all the people who have protested, 
while welcome, shows that it's still not a very effective theatre for politics. 
Effective politics would have watered down or changed Acta long ago, to make 
the internet strictures less strong. But high-level secretly negotiated 
treaties don't work like that. They're all or nothing, and in the past it used 
to be simple: they got pushed through, and it was all.

But we're in a different age now. If you can't get your laws passed with some 
consent, and there's any way of routing around them online, then people will. 
(See: Pirate Bay.) Acta didn't have to die, but its creators never stood a 
chance against the internet tidal wave.

• Follow Comment is free on Twitter @commentisfree 
<http://twitter.com/commentisfree>
 