
The European Parliament has overwhelmingly defeated the international Acta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/acta> anti-piracy agreement, delighting 
its opponents and plunging its supporters into gloom.

The vote is the first time that the parliament has used its powers under the 
Lisbon Treaty to reject an international trade agreement.

However, other countries such as the US and Japan are expected to continue 
with implementing it.

Acta could still be revived if the European Commission, the executive arm of 
the EU, considers that it needs to be implemented and wins a court decision 
over it.

The parliamentary vote on approving the bill on Wednesday saw 478 against and 
39 in favour, with 165 abstentions.

The defeat brings to an end years of secret international negotiations, during 
which opponents of the treaty had complained that it was not being given 
sufficient public examination to determine whether its proposals were excessive 
or reasonable.

When it finally surfaced and became the topic of European Parliament 
discussion, opponents complained that it could, if interpreted strictly, lead 
to censorship and loss of privacy online.

Fears that the treaty would limit internet freedom had mobilised broad 
opposition across Europe, leading to demonstrations in a number of cities in 
the spring.

Wednesday's decision means that as far as the EU is concerned, the treaty is 
dead – at least for the moment – though other countries may participate.

A spokesman for the European Commission said it might try again after it 
obtained a court ruling on whether the agreement violated fundamental EU 
rights. If it did not, the EC might revive it – a move that the treaty's 
supporters called for after the vote.

Frances Moore – chief executive of the International Federation of the 
Phonographic Industry, representing record labels – urged the European 
Parliament to make effective intellectual property rights enforcement a top 
priority in its external trade policy.

Supporters said Acta, which stands for Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement, 
was needed to standardise international laws that protect intellectual property 
rights.

"Acta is an important tool for promoting European jobs and intellectual 
property," said Anne Bergman-Tahon, director of the Federation of European 
Publishers, a member of a coalition of more than 130 organisations supporting 
Acta.

"Unfortunately, the treaty got off on the wrong foot in the parliament, and 
the real and significant merits of the treaty did not prevail."

Opponents of Acta were jubilant. David Martin, Socialists and Democrats Euro 
MP and author of the parliamentary report on the treaty, said after the vote: 
"ACTA is now dead in the EU thanks to the European Parliament.

"I am very pleased that the parliament has followed my recommendation and 
rejected Acta. The treaty is too vague and is open to misinterpretation. I will 
always support civil liberties over intellectual property rights protection in 
the EU."

Jim Killock, executive director of the UK's Open Rights Group (ORG)said: "This 
is a tremendous victory for the movement, for democracy and for every European 
citizen that has demanded that their rights be respected. Acta must be 
abandoned. The commission must drop its calls to try again.

"ORG would like to thank the thousands of activists from the UK that helped 
persuade MPs to stand up for democracy."

Supporters of Acta noted that its international status meant some countries 
would implement it anyway.

"[That] is a significant loss for the 27 EU member states," said Alan Drewsen, 
executive director of the International Trademark Association.

Socialists and Democrats president Hannes Swoboda said in a statement: "The 
commission and the council will now be aware that they cannot overrun the 
Parliament, which represents and defends citizens.

"But now it is time to look forward and tell the commission that we are 
willing to work hand in hand on fighting counterfeiting and protecting 
copyright with full respect to fundamental freedoms. This time we will do it in 
the light of public opinion and involve a wide range of citizens and 
stakeholders from the start."

But Dominick Luquer, secretary-general of the International Federation of 
Actors, said: "The debate around Acta has unfortunately been framed in terms of 
censorship and 'breaking of the internet' rather than about protecting the 
economic basis for jobs in Europe."

Organisations supporting Acta said that it had the backing of organisations 
which employed more than 120 million workers in Europe.
 