
Approval of the controversial international anti-counterfeiting treaty Acta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/acta> has been stalled by the European 
commission, which is to ask Europe's highest court whether implementing it 
would violate any fundamental EU rights.

The decision comes as the treaty faces growing opposition in parliaments, city 
streets and the internet, with some countries including Germany, the 
Netherlands and Poland declaring they would not approve the agreement in its 
current form – a stance that would make it impossible to ratify, because it 
requires every European country to sign up and approve it.

EU trade commissioner Karel De Gucht said on Wednesday that an opinion from 
the European court of justice would clear what he called the "fog of 
misinformation" surrounding the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement.

"This debate must be based upon facts and not upon the misinformation or 
rumour that has dominated social media sites and blogs in recent weeks," De 
Gucht told reporters in Brussels. "Acta will not censor websites or shut them 
down; Acta will not hinder freedom of the internet or freedom of speech." The 
ECJ will assess Acta's compatibility with the EU's fundamental rights and 
freedoms, such as freedom of expression and information or that of protection, 
he said.

The decision to refer the treaty to the ECJ appears to reflect recognition by 
EU officials of the political obstacles Acta faces. Earlier this month 
protesters marched against the agreement in several European capitals including 
London, Berlin, Helsinki, Paris and Vienna.Internet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/internet> lobbyists and health 
campaigners have rallied against it, saying that overly strict controls of 
copyright would exclude people from the internet and prevent developing 
countries from accessing generic medicines. The agreement asks internet 
providers to co-operate with national authorities to crack down on online 
piracy, for example by cutting off internet access to users who illegally 
download music or films if that is part of the legal framework in that country.

"Intellectual property is Europe's main raw material, but the problem is that 
we currently struggle to protect it outside the EU. This hurts our companies, 
destroys jobs and harms our economies," De Gucht said.

At the same time MPs in a number of countries have said they will not sign it. 
Although the EU and 22 EU member states signed the treaty on 26 January 2012 in 
Tokyo, and the European council unanimously approved Acta in December, all 27 
member countries have to formally ratify it for the EU to be a party to the 
treaty.

The US has signed the agreement. Others include Australia, Canada, Japan, 
Morocco, New Zealand, Singapore, and South Korea. Mexico and Switzerland 
participated in the negotiations but have not yet signed.

However Germany, Poland, Bulgaria, Slovakia, Latvia, Estonia, Cyrus, the Czech 
Republic and the Netherlands have all refused to sign the agreement on the 
grounds that it endangered freedom of speech and privacy

The hacking group Anonymous claimed responsibility last week for a series of 
hacks against the US Federal Trade Commission and consumer rights websites, 
whose front pages were replaced with a violent German-language video satirising 
Acta.

Acta has been under negotiation – almost all in secret – since June 2008. Its 
drafters say it is needed to harmonise international standards to protect the 
rights of those who produce music, movies, pharmaceuticals, fashion goods, and 
a range of other products that often fall victim to piracy and intellectual 
property theft.

The treaty has been questioned by members of the European parliament. In a 
statement Wednesday, David Martin, a spokesman on the issue for the Socialists 
and Democrats, the second-largest bloc in the parliament, welcomed the decision 
to get the court's opinion.

"Trade commissioner Karel de Gucht today admitted that there are still many 
question marks about Acta and what the implementation of the agreement, as it 
stands, would mean for citizens and for the freedom of the internet," Martin 
said. "The parliament has been calling for more clarity for a long time, and we 
already requested legal opinions from several committees in the European 
parliament. Now this ruling will be a good guarantee for the impact on 
fundamental rights.

EU officials say the agreement will not change EU law. They insist what was 
legal pre-treaty would remain legal the day after, and what was illegal would 
remain illegal.

But they have said the EU must ratify it as an example to other countries 
where intellectual property rights are less well protected than they are in the 
EU, in order to protect European products and ideas from being stolen elsewhere.

Opponents fear Acta would lead to censorship and a loss of privacy on the 
internet. The plan to gain court approval of the agreement has left at least 
some of them unimpressed.

"No legal debate can fix Acta or give it a legitimacy that by design it cannot 
have," said Jérémie Zimmermann, co-founder of the internet advocacy group La 
Quadrature du Net.
 