
Allison Arden, vice president & publisher, Advertising Age
 Allison Arden Photograph: unknown/AdAge 
Allison Arden was named Vice President/Publisher of Advertising Age in 2007 & 
added the title of Managing Director of Internet Week, upon Crain's 2012 
acquisition of the festival the celebrates evolution and innovation in business 
and the thriving tech community in New York City. Since joining Crain in 1996, 
Ms. Arden's primary focus has been on aggressively expanding Advertising Age's 
portfolio of products into conferences, custom content, research and digital 
with an eye toward innovation and creativity. Products launched under Allison's 
leadership include Ad Age's Global Cover Competition, Small Agency Conference & 
Awards, and the Ad Age Goodworks Effie in partnership with the Effie Awards.

Allison is the author of The Book of Doing, a book created to help democratize 
creativity and empower personal exploration. Ms. Arden is a graduate of the 
University of Maryland and the proud mother of Max, 12 and Maya, 9. Allison is 
a two-time finisher in the ING New York City Marathon. She serves on the Board 
of Directors for the American Advertising Federation (AAF), and VCU 
BrandCenter. Allison was inducted into the AAF's Advertising Hall of 
Achievement in 2009.

Yochai Benkler, co-director, Harvard University's Berkman Center for Internet 
and Society
 Yochai Benkler Photograph: Yochai Benkler 
Yochai Benkler is the Berkman professor of Entrepreneurial Legal Studies at 
Harvard, and faculty co-director of the Berkman Center for Internet and 
Society. Since the 1990s he has played a part in characterizing the role of 
information commons and decentralized collaboration to innovation, information 
production, and freedom in the networked economy and society. His books include 
The Wealth of Networks: How social production transforms markets and freedom 
(Yale University Press 2006), which won academic awards from the American 
Political Science Association, the American Sociological Association, and the 
McGannon award for social and ethical relevance in communications. His work is 
socially engaged, winning him the Electronic Frontier Foundation's Pioneer 
Award for 2007, Public Knowledge's IP3 Award in 2006, and the Ford Foundation 
Visionaries Award in 2011. It is also anchored in the realities of markets, 
having been cited as "perhaps the best work yet about the fast moving, 
enthusiast-driven Internet" by the Financial Times and named best business book 
about the future in 2006 by Strategy and Business. Benkler has produced reports 
or served in an advisory capacity for a range communications and intellectual 
property regulators and policy makers at the national and international levels. 
His work can be freely accessed at benkler.org.

Michael Bloom, CEO, Guardian US
 Michael Bloom Photograph: MB 
Michael Bloom is the CEO of Guardian News & Media, U.S. In this capacity, he 
leads the company's business and commercial operations and drives digital 
innovation across the web, mobile, tablet and emerging platforms.

Bloom is a veteran internet entrepreneur and senior operating executive who 
co-founded his first company, Stockpoint.com, in 1995 and later served as 
President of iAmaze, Inc., an early web platform company acquired by AOL.

At AOL, Bloom served as Vice President & General Manager, AOL Products, where 
he led several product divisions. He subsequently spent 5 years at Viacom / MTV 
Networks where he served as Senior Vice President & General Manager, Digital 
Media, and built the company's digital music business from the ground up and 
led all aspects of strategy and operations.

Before joining the Guardian, Bloom served as the Chief Digital Officer of 
Wenner Media / Rolling Stone. He is an advisor to technology startup companies 
and non-profit organizations and lives in the New York area with his wife and 
two children.

Pierre Chappaz, founder and CEO, Ebuzzing
 Photograph: Pierre Chappaz 
Pierre is one of the Europe's leading entrepreneurs having spoken at many of 
the top marketing and tech conferences such as Le Web and DMEXCO. Pierre held 
various marketing and communications positions at Toshiba, Computer Associates 
and IBM before founding the price comparison site Kelkoo in 1999, which he sold 
to Yahoo in 2004 for €475 million. Briefly president of Yahoo Europe, Pierre 
Chappaz created Wikio in 2005, a recommendation based search engine and 
participated in the launch of Netvibes.

Wikio merged with Ebuzzing in 2009, a social media and video platform created 
by Bertrand Quesada in 2007 with the help of Pierre Chappaz. Pierre, as CEO, 
has helped turn Ebuzzing into one of Europe's most successful Internet 
start-ups, making $52 million in revenue last year.

Susan Crawford, professor, Cardozo School of Law 
 Susan Crawford Photograph: Susan Crawford 
Susan Crawford is a professor at the Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law, a 
fellow at the Roosevelt Institute, and a co-director of the Berkman Center. She 
is the author of Captive Audience: The Telecom Industry and Monopoly Power in 
the New Gilded Age, and a contributor to Bloomberg View and Wired. She served 
as Special Assistant to the President for Science, Technology, and Innovation 
Policy (2009) and co-led the FCC transition team between the Bush and Obama 
administrations. She is a member of Mayor Michael Bloomberg's Advisory Council 
on Technology and Innovation.

Jim Daily, Jim Daily, executive vice president of sales, Ebuzzing
 Jim Daily Photograph: Ebuzzing 
Jim Daily, Ebuzzing's US General Manger, is an expert in online video 
advertising. With over 8 year's industry experience Jim previously worked in 
sales at Undertone and as Director of East Coast Sales for Break Media. Jim 
joined Ebuzzing in June 2013 to launch and grow the company's operations in the 
US.

Kate Darling, research specialist, MIT
 Kate Darling Photograph: KD 
Kate Darling is a Research Specialist at the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology (MIT) Media Lab and a Ph.D. candidate in Intellectual Property and 
Law & Economics at the ETH Zurich. After graduating from law school, she went 
on to pursue her passion for innovation policy at the intersection of law and 
technology. Her work has covered economic issues in copyright and patent 
systems, and she now also increasingly writes and lectures about robots, with a 
particular interest in social and ethical issues. After her doctorate is 
completed in 2013, she will be working on the intersection of law and robotics 
as a fellow at the Harvard Berkman Center for Internet and Society.

Chris Dixon, general partner, Andreessen Horowitz
 Chris Dixon Photograph: Noah Kalina/Chris Dixon 
Chris was the cofounder and CEO of two startups, SiteAdvisor and Hunch. 
SiteAdvisor was an internet security company that warned web users of security 
threats. The company was acquired by McAfee in 2006. Hunch was a recommendation 
technology company that was acquired by eBay in 2011.

As an investor, Chris cofounded Founder Collective, a seed venture fund, where 
he made early stage investments in GroupMe, Buzzfeed, Betaworks, and MakerBot. 
He's also been an active angel investor, making personal investments in 
technology companies including Foursquare, Kickstarter, Stripe, Warby Parker, 
Pinterest, OMGPOP, Behance, Stack Overflow, and others.

Chris started programming as a kid, and was a professional programmer after 
college at a high-speed options trading firm, Arbitrade. He has a BA and MA in 
Philosophy from Columbia and an MBA from Harvard. When he's not meeting with 
entrepreneurs, he's often writing blogs about his theories and experiences of 
investing and building startups at http://cdixon.org/

Stacy Donohue, director, investments, Omidyar Network
 Photograph: guardian.co.uk 
Stacy leads Omidyar Network's government transparency initiative in the United 
States. In this role, Stacy works to encourage accountability and effectiveness 
in government by increasing people's access to credible information about 
government activities and money in politics.

Prior to joining Omidyar Network, Stacy spent nine years at Hewlett-Packard in 
senior roles spanning strategy, corporate development, and merger and 
acquisition transactions. Previously, Stacy was a project leader at the Boston 
Consulting Group, where she provided analysis and consulting for clients across 
multiple industries from healthcare to financial services. Stacy is a board 
member for Code for America, Global Integrity, and the Sunlight Foundation.

David Edelstein, senior vice-president, global programs, Grameen Foundation
 David Edelstein Photograph: Frank Huster/DE 
Over the past five years, David has lead the transformation of the Grameen 
Foundation into a global organization recognized for its innovative solutions 
to address some of the most persistent problems in developing countries. These 
solutions, enabled by mobile phones and other technologies and often 
incorporating financial services, have proven that market failures can be 
overcome by working directly with the poor to develop impactful and sustainable 
business models.

Previously, at Microsoft, David designed technology-enabled business models to 
deliver affordable technology products to people in emerging markets. At 
McKinsey & Company, he worked extensively in the telecommunications and 
consumer goods sectors, with a focus on creating business strategies tailored 
to the needs of consumers and businesses in developing countries.

Ricky Engelberg, senior director of innovation for digital sport, Nike
 Ricky Engelberg Photograph: Nike 
Ricky Engelberg is the Senior Director of Innovation for Digital Sport at 
Nike. In his prior role as Experience Director his team was responsible for the 
end to end Experience for the entire Nike+ family including products such as 
the Nike+ Fuelband, Nike+Running, Nike+ Basketball and Nike+ Kinect Training 
from idea creation to launch. Ricky has been at Nike for over 11 years working 
in various roles in digital including leading Digital Innovation and Digital 
Marketing globally as well as helping drive key partnerships with companies 
such as Facebook, Path, Google, EA and Apple. He also spent almost 3 years 
working in Asia Pacific focused on Digital Communication and Marketing with a 
focus on the Beijing Olympics.

Janine Gibson, editor-in-chief, the Guardian US
 Janine Gibson Photograph: Janine Gibson 
Janine Gibson is editor-in-chief of the Guardian US, the Guardian's New 
York-based digital newsroom, where she leads a staff of reporters and editors 
who cover American news for an online, international audience. Under Gibson's 
leadership, the Guardian has seen an increase in traffic of 25% year on year. 
The US site has won a range of prestigious awards, including three prizes for 
interactives at The Malofiej Awards and first place in the "explanatory 
reporting" category at the 2012 Online Journalism Awards.

Previously, Gibson was executive editor of Guardian.co.uk. Under her 
leadership, Guardian.co.uk was named best newspaper website at the 2009 Webby 
awards, won two awards for data journalism at the inaugural Online Media 
Awards, as well as two prizes at the 2011 Webby Awards and 6 awards from the 
Association of Online Publishers.

Gibson began her career working for Televisual, first as staff writer, then as 
news editor and finally deputy editor. She joined the weekly trade newspaper 
Broadcast in July 1997 as international editor and moved to the Independent as 
media correspondent a year later. In 1998, she joined the Guardian as media 
correspondent and by 2000 was appointed editor of the market-leading 
MediaGuardian. She helped launch the section's spin-off website, 
mediaguardian.co.uk, which quickly established itself as the breaking news 
source for the media industry.

Rachel Haot, chief digital officer, City of New York
 Rachel Haot Photograph: Rachel Haot 
Rachel Haot is the Chief Digital Officer for the City of New York, leading NYC 
Digital, part of the Mayor's Office of Media and Entertainment. The mission of 
NYC digital is to realize Mayor Bloomberg's digital roadmap for New York City, 
a plan to fulfill the City's digital potential.

Prior to this role, Rachel was an independent digital strategy consultant, and 
Founder and CEO of GroundReport, a global, crowdsourced news startup. She has 
also served as an Adjunct Professor at Columbia Business School, specializing 
in social media and entrepreneurship.

A lifelong New Yorker, Rachel attended public schools and graduated magna cum 
laude from New York University with a BA in History. In 2012 she was named a 
Young Global Leader by the World Economic Forum, and serves on the digital 
advisory board of Women@NBCU and the NY/NJ 2014 Super Bowl Social Media 
Advisory Committee.

John Havens, founder, The H(app)athon Project
 John Havens Photograph: John Havens 
John C. Havens is a contributing writer for Mashable, frequent speaker, and 
author of the upcoming book, Hacking Happiness — Why Your Personal Data Counts 
and How Tracking it Can Change the World (Tarcher/Penguin, March 2014). He is 
also the Founder of The H(app)athon Project, a non-profit organization, 
"Connecting Happiness to Action one phone, one heart, and one city at a time" 
through the use of interactive, sensor-based smartphone surveys. A former EVP 
for a top-ten global PR firm and ongoing marketing/PR consultant, he has 
counseled clients like Gillette, HP, and P&G on emerging and social media 
issues, and has been quoted on issues relating to technology, business, and 
well-being by USA Today, Fast Company, BBC News, Mashable, The Guardian, The 
Huffington Post, Forbes,INC, PR Week, and Advertising Age.  Havens was also a 
professional actor in New York City for over 15 years, appearing in principal 
roles on Broadway, television, and film.

John Hendra, UN assistant secretary-general, deputy executive director for 
policy and programme, UN Women
 John Hendra, Deputy Executive Director of UN Women Photograph: UN 
Women/Catianne Tijerina 
John Hendra is Deputy Executive Director for Policy and Programme at UN Women, 
where he leads the agency's global policy work and its programmes in over 70 
countries and manages the Bureau supporting policy analysis, research and 
programme management. Since 2012 he has served as Co-Chair of the UN 
Development Group (UNDG) MDG Taskforce and also as a member of the Senior 
Coordination Group of four UN Assistant Secretary-Generals tasked by the UN 
Secretary-General to coordinate UN System support to Member States to formulate 
the post-2015 development agenda. His 28 year career in the UN spans roles in 
four different regions including 13 years as UN Resident Coordinator in Latvia 
(1993-1997), Tanzania (2002-2006) and Vietnam (2006-2011), where he lead a very 
successful UN reform effort at country level – the 'Delivering as One' 
Initiative. Mr. Hendra has also served at UN headquarters as Director of 
Resource Mobilization (1998-2002) and Deputy Director of UNDP's Bureau for 
Resources and Strategic Partnerships (2000-2002). He has a Masters in 
International Development Studies from the University of Toronto and an Honors 
BA in Political Studies from Queen's University, and in 2009 was selected to 
serve as a Yale World Fellow.

Chris Hughes, co-founder, Facebook & editor-in-chief, The New Republic
 Chris Hughes Photograph: Jason Gardner/Chris Hughes 
Chris started his career in his Harvard dorm room where he co-founded Facebook 
along with roommates Mark Zuckerberg and Dustin Moskovitz. Obsessed with 
consumer technology from a young age, Hughes was responsible for user 
experience and product development for Facebook in the early years of the 
social web.

In 2007, he became Director of Online Organizing for Barack Obama's 
presidential campaign, creating a social network that empowered Obama 
supporters to create tens of thousands of grassroots groups and events, and to 
give over $500 million online. The average online donation was $80.

As Publisher and Editor-in-Chief of The New Republic, Hughes is transitioning 
a nearly 100-year-old media company to the digital age, while holding onto its 
uncompromising focus on quality journalism about politics and culture. 
Integrated across mobile, tablet, web, and print, The New Republic is setting 
the standard for how mid-sized, traditional media brands can transition to the 
participatory web.

Hughes is also an independent investor in technology and media companies, a 
trustee of the Knight Foundation, and a board member of GiveDirectly.  He has 
been named a Young Global Leader for the World Economic Forum and one of 
Forbes' 30 under 30 in the media category. Hughes graduated manga cum laude 
from Harvard in 2006 with a degree in History and Literature.

Ben Huh, founder and CEO, Cheezburger 
 Ben Huh Photograph: G. Kenny Hornung/Ben Huh 
Ben Huh is the Founder and Chief Executive Officer of Cheezburger.  The former 
journalist turned successful entrepreneur has been credited with pioneering 
Internet culture as entertainment, crowdsourcing, and bringing Internet memes 
to the mainstream.

Since first acquiring I Can Has Cheezburger? in 2007, Huh has grown the media 
company to now include more than 50 online humor sites that generate more than 
400 million page views monthly.  His Internet culture empire includes popular 
sites such as FAIL Blog, The Daily What, Know Your Meme and Memebase. 
 Cheezburger has also released five books, two of which are New York Times 
bestsellers, and was the focus of the LOLwork reality television series, which 
aired on the Bravo network in 2012.  

Jeff Jarvis, professor, CUNY Graduate School of Journalism 

Jeff is the author of Public Parts: How Sharing in the Digital Age Improves 
the Way We Work and Live and What Would Google Do? He directs the Tow-Knight 
Center for Entrepreneurial Journalism at the City University of New York 
Graduate School of Journalism. Jeff was founding editor of Entertainment Weekly 
magazine, TV critic for TV Guide and People magazines, Sunday editor and 
associate publisher of the New York Daily News, and a columnist for the San 
Francisco Examiner.

David Karp, founder and CEO, Tumblr
 David Karp Photograph: Tumblr 
Tumblr founder David Karp was born and raised in New York City, attending the 
Bronx High School Science before dropping out at age 15. An internship at 
Frederator Studios led to a gig leading product at UrbanBaby. When CNET 
acquired the company in 2005, Karp started his own development agency, 
Davidville. In 2007 his team launched Tumblr, now the home and platform for 
more than 140 million creators. Tumblr serves an audience of more than 300 
million people worldwide.

Bob Kerrey, executive chairman, Minerva Institute for Research & Scholarship
 Bob Kerrey Photograph: BK 
January 1, 2011, Bob Kerrey completed his tenure as seventh President of The 
New School, a university founded on strong democratic ideals and daring 
educational practices, an environment that was well suited for his leadership. 
 He also served as New School's President Emeritus from January 1, 2011 to 
January 31, 2013.

Prior to coming to The New School Bob Kerrey represented Nebraska in the 
United States Senate.  For two terms, Senator Kerrey emphasized the direct 
connection between citizens and their laws, and made a concerted effort to 
allow Nebraskans to participate in writing laws that defined the quality and 
inclusiveness of their health care system, their schools and the safety of 
their communities. He served on the Senate's Agriculture and Forestry 
Committee, Senate's Appropriations Committee, Senate's Finance Committee, and 
last but not least on the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence where he 
worked to restructure our intelligence agencies to improve their capacity to 
meet the threats faced by our country. Prior to serving in the U.S. Senate Bob 
Kerrey served a single term as Nebraska's Governor. He established a reputation 
as a fiscal conservative who regularly crossed political party lines for the 
good of Nebraska and the Country.

Bob Kerrey served three years in the United States Navy. While in Vietnam, he 
was wounded, permanently disabled from the injury, and from this injury 
received a great gift:  Sympathy for those who are suffering and an 
appreciation for the capacity of government to save your life. Before his time 
in the Navy Bob Kerrey attended the University of Nebraska graduating in 
January 1966 with a BS degree in pharmacy.  He was born in Lincoln and attended 
public schools there.  In 2002 he published a memoir "When I Was A Young Man."
 
Bob Kerrey is married to Sarah Paley and lives in New York. The couple has a 
12-year-old son, Henry, and Mr. Kerrey has two children from his previous 
marriage, Ben and Lindsey Kerrey, and four grandchildren.

Rebecca MacKinnon, senior research fellow, New America Foundation and 
co-founder, Global Voices
 Rebecca MacKinnon Photograph: Brooke Bready/Creative Well 
Rebecca MacKinnon is a Senior Research Fellow at the New America Foundation 
where she conducts research, writing, and advocacy at the intersection of 
networked technologies, human rights, and corporate accountability. She is 
author of the award-winning book, Consent of the Networked: The Worldwide 
Struggle For Internet Freedom (2012) and co-founder of Global Voices Online, 
the citizen media network and digital rights advocacy organization.

A founding board member of the Global Network Initiative, a multi-stakeholder 
organization that advances corporate responsibility and human rights in the 
technology sector, MacKinnon also serves on the Board of Directors of 
the Committee to Protect Journalists. She is concurrently an adjunct lecturer 
at the University of Pennsylvania Law School and affiliate at the Annenberg 
School for Communication'sCenter for Global Communications Studies where she 
leads a new project, Ranking Digital Rights.

Susan Markham, director, women's political participation, National Democratic 
Institute (NDI)
 Susan Markham Photograph: Susan Markham 
Susan Markham serves as NDI's director of women's political participation 
supporting the aspirations of women around the world to be equal and active 
partners in shaping and leading democratic societies.

Previously, Markham worked at EMILY's List where she managed its Campaign 
Corps program and later the Political Opportunity Program (POP) supporting 
women candidates running for state and local office. Ms. Markham started her 
political career as a fundraiser. Since that time she has served as the finance 
director for the Ohio Democratic Party, executive director of Participation 
2000 and campaign manager for four statewide campaigns. She also acted as 
director of Senate services at the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee.

She has a B.A. in political science and international studies from the Ohio 
State University and a master's degree in public policy and women's studies 
from George Washington University.

Ziv Navoth, advisor, Tech City UK, founder and CEO, Paragraph 
 Ziv Navoth Photograph: ZN 
Ziv Navoth is the founder and CEO of Paragraph. Previously he was Senior Vice 
President of Marketing & Partnerships at Aol. Ziv joined Aol through its 
acquisition of Bebo, where he was responsible for marketing, business 
development and mobile, and a member of the executive team that led the 
negotiations and eventual sale of the company to Aol for $850M.

Before joining Bebo he founded Verve, a boutique management consultancy 
offering strategic advisory services to leading companies in the US, UK and 
elsewhere. Before this he ran Startup Station, an internet accelerator he 
founded in 1999 and sold to a UK public company. He is the author of Nanotales, 
a collection of short stories, and lives with his wife and two daughters in New 
York City.

Kathryn Peters, co-founder, TurboVote
 Katy Peters Photograph: Katy Peters 
Kathryn Peters is co-founder of TurboVote, a service that brings the 
awesomeness of the Internet to the process of voting. Her belief in better 
democracy has taken her from campaign organizing in rural Missouri to a 
Master's in Public Policy at Harvard's Kennedy School of Government to 
political rights monitoring with the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights 
Commission to teaching digital security for political activists with the 
National Democratic Institute. In 2011, Kathryn was honored as 
one of Forbes magazine's "30 Under 30" in the field of law and policy.

Chuck Porter&, chairman, Crispin Porter + Bogusky and chief strategist, MDC 
Partners 
 Chuck Porter Photograph: Chuck Porter 
Chuck was co-founder and creative director of Crispin & Porter Advertising in 
Miami in 1988.  Today, the agency has offices in Miami, Boulder, Los Angeles, 
London and Gothenberg, Sweden, and in 2010,Crispin Porter + Bogusky was 
selected by Advertising Age as Agency of the Decade.  In addition to his role 
at CP+B, Chuck is Chief Strategist for MDC Partners, CP+B's parent company.  He 
has served as Co-Chairman of Advertising Week in New York, as well as Chairman 
of the American Association of Advertising Agencies. Along with Martha Stewart 
and Michael Dell, he was named one of Inc. Magazine's "Entrepreneurs We Love".

Ben Rattray, founder and CEO, Change.org 
 Ben Rattray Photograph: Ben Rattray 
Ben Rattray is the founder and CEO of Change.org, the world's largest petition 
platform. He has been named one of Time's 100 Most Influential People in the 
World and one of Fortune's 40 Under 40 rising young business leaders.

Since its founding in 2007, Change.org has achieved international prominence, 
attracting 35 million users from every country, hundreds of thousands of 
user-generated petitions, and coverage in every major media outlet, including 
the New York Times, Wall Street Journal, and USA Today.

Time Magazine writes: "Rattray's site has quietly enabled tens of thousands of 
people, many with little exposure to social activism, to launch homegrown 
crusades on issues ranging from corporate malpractice to immigration reform 
without ever gathering in a park or square. By marrying one of the world's 
oldest organizing tools, the petition, to one of its newest, the social-media 
loop, Change.org is putting companies and governments under tremendous pressure 
to change their policies, sometimes in a matter of a few weeks or less, and it 
has invited everyone around the globe to participate."

Jordan Raynor, co-founder, Citizinvestor
 Jordan Raynor Photograph: JR 
Jordan Raynor is a co-founder of Citizinvestor - a crowdfunding and civic 
engagement platform for government projects.

Prior to Citizinvestor, Jordan served on the executive team at Engage, leading 
a team of digital strategists responsible for premier political brands like 
John Boehner, Paul Ryan and the Voting Information Project. In 2010, a project 
initiated and developed by Jordan led to Foursquare's first "I Voted" badge.

Jordan was recently named one of four appointees to the State of Florida's 
User Experience Task Force. He has twice been selected as a Google Fellow and 
served as a White House intern in 2006.

David Risher, president and co-founder, Worldreader
 David Risher Photograph: David Risher 
David served as an executive at Microsoft Corporation and oversaw the 
development and marketing of Microsoft Access and Microsoft Investor, then 
served as Amazon's first Senior Vice President for US Retail where he helped 
grow the company from a small bookstore into the world's largest internet 
retailer. He is a Draper Richards Kaplan Social Entrepreneur and a Microsoft 
Alumni Integral Fellow, and serves on the Advisory Board of Barcelona's ESADE 
Business School.

Mood Rowghani, partner, Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers
 Mood Rowghani Photograph: Mood Rowghani 
Mood Rowghani joined Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers as a partner in 2011. He 
focuses on investments in the firm's digital practice, targeting high-growth 
Internet companies that have achieved strong adoption and scale.

Before joining KPCB, Mood worked for five years at Summit Partners, where he 
led the firm's Internet and digital media practice in North America. Mood was 
actively involved across Summit's Internet portfolio, including serving as a 
director at Announce Media, where he helped lead the take-private acquisition 
of Answers Corp. (Nasdaq: ANSW). Earlier in his career, Mood was with Highland 
Capital Partners, where he was actively involved with Vistaprint (Nasdaq: VPRT) 
and Coremetrics (acquired by IBM). He also spent two years at McKinsey & Co., 
where he served Global 1000 clients in the high-tech industry.

Mood has a B.A. degree from the University of Texas and an M.B.A. from 
Stanford University's Graduate School of Business.

Mark Thompson, CEO and president, The New York Times Company 
 Mark Thompson Photograph: Kevin Percival/New York Times 
Mark Thompson became president and chief executive officer of The New York 
Times Company in November 2012. Before joining the Times Company, Mr. Thompson 
served as Director-General of the BBC since 2004, where he reshaped the 
organization to meet the challenge of the digital age, ensuring that it 
remained a leading innovator with the launch of services such as the BBC 
iPlayer. He oversaw a transformation of the BBC itself, driving productivity 
and efficiency through the introduction of new technologies and bold 
organizational redesign. Between 2002 and 2004, Mr. Thompson was CEO of Channel 
4 Television Corporation in the United Kingdom.

Erin Vilardi, founder, Women's Leadership Works
 Erin Vilardi Photograph: EV 
Erin Vilardi is the founder of Women's Leadership Works. She also directs 
leadership development for The Athena Center for Leadership Studies at Barnard 
College, Columbia University. Her work focuses on developing Athena's CORE10 – 
a innovate set of leadership competencies for 21st century women leaders – as 
well as professional education programs and strategic partnerships.

She spent the last 18 months traveling to a dozen international cities 
teaching leadership, from Cairo to Dublin to Mexico City. Formerly Vice 
President of Program and Communications at The White House Project, a 
nonpartisan, nonprofit organization working to advance U.S. women's leadership, 
she created Vote, Run, Lead – the largest national political training program 
readying women for public office and civic life – training over 14,000 women 
since 2004.

Werner Vogels, chief technology officer, Amazon.com
 Werner Vogels Photograph: Werner Vogels 
Dr. Werner Vogels is Vice President & Chief Technology Officer at Amazon.com 
where he is responsible for driving the company's technology vision, which is 
to continuously enhance the innovation on behalf of Amazon's customers at a 
global scale.

Prior to joining Amazon, he worked as a research scientist at Cornell 
University where he was a principal investigator in several research projects 
that target the scalability and robustness of mission-critical enterprise 
computing systems. He has held positions of VP of Technology and CTO in 
companies that handled the transition of academic technology into industry.

Dr. Vogels holds a Ph.D. from the Vrije Universiteit in Amsterdam and has 
authored close to 80 articles for journals and conferences, most of them on 
distributed systems technologies for enterprise computing.

Jasmine Whitbread, CEO, Save the Children International
 Jasmine Whitbread, Save the Children International Photograph: Douglas Fry/SC 
Jasmine was appointed the first international chief executive officer of Save 
the Children in 2010.  Save the Children is the world's leading independent 
organisation for children operating in 120 countries with annual revenues of 
$1.6 billion.

Jasmine's career was initially in the private sector, with a background in 
international marketing in technology, rising to managing director at 
Boston-based Thomson Financial (now Thomson Reuters).  She moved to West Africa 
with Oxfam in 1999 and was promoted to international director before being 
appointed as CEO of Save the Children UK in 2005.

Jasmine became a non-executive director of BT Plc in 2011.  Earlier this year 
the BBC named her one of the 100 most powerful women in the UK and she was also 
featured in the CNN International Leading Women series. 

Jasmine graduated from the University of Bristol in 1986 and completed the 
Executive Program at the Stanford Graduate School of Business in 1997.  She 
holds dual British/Swiss nationality and is married with two children.

Jasmine is a non-executive director of BT Group Plc and a governor of the 
Dragon School.

Zach Sims, co-founder and CEO, Codecademy 
 Zach Sims Photograph: Julia Robbs/Zach Sims 
Zach is the co-founder and CEO of Codecademy, a company dedicated to teaching 
the world skills that help them make things and find jobs.  Codecademy has 
millions of users across the world and has raised money from investors 
including Kleiner Perkins Caufield and Byers, Index Ventures, Richard Branson, 
and more.  He is also a Venture Partner at Bowery Capital.  Zach worked with 
GroupMe (acq. by Skype), drop.io (acq. by Facebook), and AOL Ventures before 
dropping out of Columbia University to start Codecademy.  Zach was named to 
Inc. Magazine and Forbes Magazine's 30 Under 30 lists, as well as voted one of 
TIME Magazine's 100 Most Influential People in 2013.

More speakers to be announced 
 