 Ada Lovelace Day encourages people to champion the female scientists and 
engineers that have inspired them. Illustration:Alex Bertram-Powell 
<http://www.alexbpart.com/> 
Today is  Ada Lovelace Day <http://findingada.com/about/our-mission/>, a 
worldwide grass-roots event set up to promote female role models in science, 
technology, engineering and maths (the STEM subjects). The idea is, by making 
these women more visible, not only are their profiles raised, but the profiles 
of all women in these fields.

This year, Ada Lovelace Day has also produced an ebook 
<http://findingada.com/book/>, for which I wrote a chapter, alongside a 
selection of other scientists and writers. I wrote about Jean Golding, the lady 
who set upChildren of the 90s <http://www.bristol.ac.uk/alspac/>, the dataset I 
use for my PhD, but to hear about her you'll have to get the book! Instead, 
I've asked friends, colleagues and people I admire to share their tales of 
inspirational women.

Professor Jenny Thomas, CBE, physicist, leading the Minos experiment in 
Fermilab
Jenny Thomas is a neutrino scientist who arrived at UCL at the same time as 
me, in 1996. I was very green. There was a lot about UCL that we liked, but a 
lot that we wanted to change. Without Jenny's uncompromising lack of fear and 
"we have to stick together" mantra, I think I would have bounced off into 
mediocrity, or another institution anyway. But together we succeeded. She had 
(and has) an amazing ability, in science and in institutional politics, to see 
where we ought to be, regardless of where we happen to be right now. This is 
liberating and inspirational. I've learned a huge amount from Jenny, both about 
science and about how to get it done effectively.
Professor Jonathan Butterworth, physicist working on the Cern LHC, and 
Guardian Science Blogger

Dr Jane Mellanby, emeritus fellow in physiology and psychology
Dr Jane Mellanby, physiologist and my tutor at Oxford University, is 
intimidatingly clever and staunchly individual. She turns her research powers 
to whatever interests her, including why women are less likely than men to get 
firsts. Dr Mellanby accepted me into St Hilda's (at the time an all-female 
college) to study Psychology, Philosophy and Physiology and backed me up when I 
wanted to study all three subjects (something you now aren't allowed to do). In 
tutorials she cut through the vague and asked questions about whatever I didn't 
understand. She held a week-long reading party in her own home where mobile 
phones were banned and journal authors visited. She taught me to question 
whether research really says what it claims and she inspired me in her refusal 
to let her interests be constrained by subject, role or expectation.
Dr Lucy Maddox, clinical psychologist, lecturer and BSA media fellow

 Beatrix Potter, author, illustrator and natural scientist
My grandmother had a wonderful set of heavy brass Beatrix Potter character 
figurines that almost wore away from the constant rubbing of my sister's and my 
hands when we were children. We loved them. And we loved her stories. But aside 
from her children's books, Potter had always been deeply involved in studying 
and painting animals, plants and insects, becoming a noted botanist with a 
particular penchant for fungi. Despite having no formal scientific training she 
performed experiments at her home in the Lake District, painstakingly recording 
her observations that led to her submitting a scientific paper. Her work 
epitomised the spirit of the Victorian amateur scientist in a changing world 
dominated by heavily whiskered men. A brilliant painter, a fastidious observer 
of the natural world, a wit and a rebel. Just like Peter Rabbit.
Dallas Campbell, science broadcaster

Professor Caryn Lerman, Mary W Calkins professor of psychiatry
I've been fortunate enough in my career to have worked with some outstanding 
senior colleagues; this matters enormously, since scientists learn to be PhD 
supervisors, mentors and so on through these interactions early in their 
careers. In other words, if you're lucky enough to work with supportive, 
intellectually generous people, this influences your own internal model of how 
to behave. One of the most important of these is Caryn Lerman at the University 
of Pennsylvania. I was a visiting fellow in her lab as a postdoc, just before I 
moved to Bristol to set up my own research group. My time working with Caryn 
taught me two things. The first was the value of integrating multiple research 
perspectives, from the basic (animal models, genetics) to the applied (human 
psychopharmacology, clinical trials), and that this could be achieved in a 
single group. The second was the importance of trusting the members of your 
group to think and work independently, make their own mistakes (and hopefully 
learn from them!), and feel ownership of their successes. She continues to be a 
friend and colleague, and I would not be where I am without the time I spent 
working in her lab.
Professor Marcus Munafò, biological psychologist

Dr Joan Bond, research chemist and head teacher
A deciding factor in my wanting to work in science was our head teacher, Dr 
Joan Bond. Dr Bond had been a research chemist before moving into teaching and 
she took us for chemistry O-level. She evidently was a successful synthetic 
chemist (I was delighted to find a load of her publications online) but as 
impressive to me was the stories she used to tell about her research life. I 
found these endlessly fascinating, not least because she was continually having 
accidents (most stories ending up with holes burnt in floors, things stuck to 
ceilings, handfuls of sulphur being chucked at fugitive mercury escaping under 
floorboards). I loved all these stories, and (the possibly slightly clumsy) Dr 
Bond made working as a research chemist seem very dramatic.
I'm struck now that this was probably the first time I'd ever heard a woman, 
who wasn't a teacher, talking about her working life and her job. Dr Bond 
seemed to me both a great teacher and a wonderful role model: she was a woman 
of dignity and intelligence and you really wanted her to like and respect you, 
even as she wandered over and broke all your test tubes (she remained notably 
clumsy). I know I'm both lucky and privileged that my interest in science was 
met by an example of the kind of adult woman I could aspire to be.
Professor Sophie Scott, neuroscientist

Professor Kia Nobre, and Professor Dorothy Bishop
Growing up, I had lots of science books and I was particularly drawn to the 
story of Marie Curie. Her sacrifice and achievements at such a period in 
history were astonishing. In my academic life I know many inspirational women, 
but two in particular have had a profound effect on my work. The first is 
ProfessorKia Nobre <http://www.ohba.ox.ac.uk/team/core-staff/kia-nobre> from 
Oxford University. Kia is a powerhouse in the cognitive neuroscience of human 
attention and memory. I remember, several years ago, the first time I saw Kia 
give a lecture and being blown away by the pace and sophistication of her 
research. The second is ProfessorDorothy Bishop 
<http://oscci.psy.ox.ac.uk/people/dorothy-bishop/>, also from Oxford. Dorothy's 
blog articles <http://deevybee.blogspot.co.uk/> inspired me to pursue science 
communication and, in particular, the long-overdue reforms we need to 
scientific publishing. From Kia I've developed an aspiration to do better, more 
ambitious, cognitive neuroscience; from Dorothy I've been inspired to try and 
change the way we do science in the first place.
Dr Chris Chambers, senior research fellow in psychology

Professor Penny Gowland, physicist specialising in MRI
I've been particularly inspired and encouraged by Professor Penny Gowland, a 
physicist who specialises in Magnetic Resonance Imaging. She was my tutor and 
the only female lecturer during my undergraduate degree in physics with medical 
physics at Nottingham University, and has two children. When I met her she was 
working part-time so she could balance her work and home responsibilities, and 
seeing her as a respected physicist and hands-on mother showed me it was 
possible to be both. Penny's accomplishments are evidence that part-time 
working doesn't automatically hamper your productivity, which is a breath of 
fresh air in today's "long hours" culture.
Dr Heather Williams, senior medical physicist for nuclear medicine, and 
director of ScienceGrrl

Dr Claire Johnston, medical doctor and PhD immunologist
She isn't a famous scientist, a group leader, or highly cited – she's my 
sister, Claire Johnston – and she's the reason I'm a scientist.
When we were growing up, we had no relatable scientific role models. I 
remember us doing crazy "chemistry experiments" when we were kids with 
household chemicals. Claire was the only person I knew that had gone to 
university. Without her, it's likely that university wouldn't even have seemed 
like an option to me. That was the reality of our schools.
She studied microbiology at Manchester University, before moving to Imperial 
College for her Masters, and then back to Manchester to complete her PhD 
investigating immunity to parasites. Postdoctoral positions around the UK were 
followed by a postgraduate medical degree at Swansea University. She's 
currently a foundation medical doctor in Edinburgh – and still inspiring me.
Dr Rich Johnston, materials researcher and BSA media fellow

Mrs Francine Thomas, secondary school science teacher (now head of physics)
It would be tempting to name one of the many important but overlooked 
historical female scientists, but as someone who essentially bumbled his way 
into science, the most obvious choice for influential female scientist would be 
my A-level chemistry teacher, Mrs Francine Thomas. I knew I wanted to do 
science, but Mrs Thomas was the first person who taught me to really engage 
with and enjoy it for its own sake (particularly chemistry, which I always 
struggled with). Plus, I remember me as a teenager, and not once did she snap 
and try to stab me with a broken test tube. For both these reasons, she 
deserves maximum kudos.
Dr Dean Burnett, psychiatry lecturer and Guardian science blogger

Professor Emer Colleran, microbiologist
The woman scientist who inspired my career in science is Professor Emer 
Colleran. She trail-blazed a way through the very male world of wastewater 
engineering and microbiology in the 1980s and 1990s. During this time, she was 
the foremost Irish expert in environmental science, and a top European leader 
in bioenergy production and wastewater treatment. Until her retirement in 2007, 
Prof Colleran was chair of microbiology at the National University of Ireland 
Galway, where she inspired thousands of undergraduates and steered scores of 
PhD students. Throughout her career, she was a prolific environmentalist and 
heritage campaigner, and much of this positively spilled into her teaching and 
mentoring.
 Dr Gavin Collins, lecturer in microbiology and BSA media fellow

 Professor Eileen Kowler, vision psychologist 
My PhD looked at how we make predictive eye movements towards moving blobs on 
a screen. It sounds pretty dull, but understanding how that process works 
underlies a lot of our understanding about how we make decisions. One of the 
most important researchers in that field is Professor Eileen Kowler at Rutgers 
University. Reading her work really brought home to me how exciting and 
important basic science can be, and definitely helped to spur me on through the 
early stages of my research career. The fact that she won the2013 Davida Teller 
award <http://www.visionsciences.org/davida_teller_2013.html> for an 
outstanding woman vision scientist with a strong history of mentoring just 
underlines what a brilliant scientist and teacher she is.
Dr Pete Etchells, lecturer in biological psychology and Guardian science 
blogger
 