
Adam! Who’s got the dog while you’re away? Are you planning a holiday? Will 
you take your mum and dad? Was this the best night you’ve ever had? Adam Peaty 
had an idea that life was about to be very different. “It is going to change a 
bit,” he said in one of the many press conferences he gave afterhe had won his 
100 metres breaststroke gold medal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/08/adam-peaty-breaks-world-record-again-on-memorable-eveningfor-britain>
. But he did not know exactly how.

As the media closed in around him, eager to learn every last detail about his 
life, he must have been beginning to get an inkling. Who is your girlfriend and 
what does she do? How does this all feel for you? Did you always know you could 
beat the rest? And by the way, how big is your chest? When Peaty was done, his 
mum, dad and girlfriend took a turn. Does he know how to cook? Who’s his best 
friend? What does he eat? How much does he spend?

Giddy as Peaty seemed, he was a lot more sober than the British press. Few 
people are as rapaciously inquisitive as them when they havea new British 
superstar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/08/adam-peaty-swimming-club-celebrates-success>
 to write about. Peaty may have won gold medals at the Commonwealth Games and 
the world championships, but nothing he had experienced could have prepared him 
for this, let alonehis family. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/08/rio-2016-adam-peatys-grandmother-olympicnan-celebrates-win-on-twitter>
 His dad, Mark, works at Lidl, and his mum, Caroline, at a nursery. They had 
never been on a plane until they flew to Rio and, Caroline explained, the 
experience of walking down the corridor to get on board was only a little less 
terrifying than the one of watching her boy dive into the water for the 100m 
final. Now here they were being quizzed by a dozen journalists about how many 
Twitter followers they have and how competitive they are when they are playing 
games.

Peaty, we learned, used to throw the board in the air when he lost at 
Monopoly. He still lives at home because he did not want to make any major 
changes to his routine before these Olympics. He is planning to buy a house but 
has not started looking. He has been with his girlfriend for three years but 
she will not be moving in because she is studying at Loughborough University. 
She used to be a swimmer herself and now wants to do a Masters in sports 
psychology.

Peaty is very patriotic, loves to eat pasta and potatoes, is a good cook but 
never cleans up after himself. He drives a Mercedes. His best friend is in the 
army so they do not see each other that much. And he is planning to go to the 
Maldives for his next getaway. And, unlike his mum, he loves grime music.

Peaty says he does not think he will change. “I’ll still be me.” And his mum 
agrees. “He’ll be fine.” It was his father, Mark, who said in a wise aside, “He 
doesn’t know what he’s done yet.” Everything has happened so fast for Peaty, it 
must all be beginning to blur together. He has accomplished so much in the last 
four years that he struggles to keep track of his own achievements. “When I was 
17 or 18, it must have been 18, I went 59.9,” he said at one point, trying to 
remember the time when he first realised how fast he was. As recently as five 
years ago he hated swimming in finals so much that he used to feel as if he 
wanted to throw up before his races. “It’s almost like you want to puke, you 
think, ‘I just don’t want to do this.’”

Adam Peaty makes light work of pressure as hard work pays off in Rio pool | 
Andy Bull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/08/adam-peaty-breaks-his-own-world-record-again-in-golden-olympic-swim>
Peaty says that the key reason he has improved so much is that he has spent as 
much time training his mind as he has his body. He learned to imagine that all 
his doubt “was a boat”, which he could burn. And that very phrase, “burn the 
boats”, was one of the last things his coach, Mel Marshall, said to him before 
the final. “I knew exactly what she meant‚” he said.

If you are looking for the key figure in Peaty’s progress, the one person who 
has steered him through his bewilderingly rapid rise, it is Marshall. His 
parents say that they “never doubted him” because everything Marshall told them 
he would do has come true. Soon after Marshall started working with Peaty she 
said that he was an Olympian in the making. And Caroline clearly remembers 
Marshall’s prediction that he would become the first man to swim the 100m in 
under 58 seconds. He was.

Marshall was a great swimmer herself and won a lot of medals. But it was the 
ones she missed out on which have shaped her career as a coach and Peaty’s as a 
swimmer. Marshall was ranked No1 in the world in the 200m freestyle at the 
Athens Olympics in 2004 but did not win a medal at the Games.

“If I look back now, I’d say that was my defining moment as a coach,” Marshall 
said. “I would never have been able to guide him to this if I had not had that 
experience myself.” Peaty, she says, has absorbed so much of what she has told 
him about what went wrong for her, what she wishes she had done differently. If 
Peaty seems experienced beyond his years, it is because he has learned so much 
from her.

Oh, yes, and, for those who want to know, Peaty’s mum thinks he is “about a 44 
in the chest”. Which seems a little small. Perhaps she lost the run of herself 
in all the excitement. She would not have been the only one.
 