
Over the course of three seasons of Comedy Central's Workaholics, Adam Devine 
has developed a nice career based on throwing raucous house parties andbeing 
generally debaucherous <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GT3eakvJesM>.

Having written and starred in the show alongside three friends he met in Los 
Angeles, the Iowa-born comedian is getting ready to host his own show, suitably 
named Adam Devine's House Party, in the fall.

Backstage at Comedy <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/comedy> 
Central's annual outdoor standup event in New York City's Central Park, the 
29-year-old sat down with the Guardian to give advice on how to move across the 
country and make it onto a high school sports team.

I want you to defend the mid-west.

People hate on it. It's very okay – it's not shitty, it's not awesome. If you 
can, live in New York City or LA, but there are cool towns in the mid-west. 
Omaha is a cool town, there is a ton of cool music there … and weed. That's 
about it, those two things. And if you love drinking, that's your place. If you 
love drinking, move to the mid-west, because you can go pro there so easily. 
Everybody's about it. Steak … do you like steak?

I'm a vegetarian. 

You're a vegetarian, so you would hate this, but for the readers, if you want 
a good steak, Omaha's what's up. I sold steaks over the phone in Omaha, 
Nebraska. Marbling, fantastic. That's what makes a great steak, a lot of people 
don't know.

Okay, so then you moved to LA – what is your advice for someone who makes a 
huge cross-country move?

I did it so young, I made the move right when I was 18, so I think I was too 
naïve to know it was such a big thing. The best advice I can give is to do it 
and don't think about it, just move. Don't think about it too much, about all 
the friends you're going to miss and all that. If you really want to go after 
something, in whatever field you are trying to get into, just pack up your shit 
and move and you'll still have your old friends and make new friends and it 
will be all good and you'll become super successful.

Guaranteed? 

That's how it works for everyone I think. 

When did you decide: I'm going to leave Omaha for the big city? 

My senior year of high school, I got into UCLA, but my family couldn't afford 
it. So I was going to move out there and go to community college, get my 
residency, because it's a lot cheaper. Then I started doing standup and I 
thought: 'I'm a professional comedian,' but I wasn't at all – I was doing 
open-mics and $15 shows. That's another piece of advice: don't go to college, 
follow your dreams. Unless you're a doctor, then go to college.

So my friend graduated from college and all her friends moved away and now she 
doesn't have any friends except me, obviously, so how do you make friends?

I think making friends is not being afraid to look stupid, because everyone 
wants a friend who is willing to be stupid and fun. If you try and be too cool, 
it only works in high school. After that, being uncool is a very cool thing to 
do. So just have fun, and don't worry what other people think of you and people 
will want to be your friends. People want to be friends with someone who likes 
to have a good time.

On Workaholics, you get to throw really crazy parties. If you had unlimited 
resources and the promise that no law enforcement would interfere, what is the 
dream party?

Dream party? I think booze is the prerequisite, and water slides and jet skis. 
So if you can build, in the ocean, we're in Fiji or somewhere where the water 
is super cool looking, a huge water park, in the middle of the ocean and just 
jet skis. There's a hundred jet-skis. Not too big, because too big means you'll 
never get to meet everybody and if it's too out of control, somebody might get 
hurt, somebody might die. So, a hundred people, a hundred jet skis, ten water 
slides – that sounds like the best time of my life. [pause] No clothes! It's 
fun, let your fat fly, it doesn't matter. You're going to see my weird squishy 
parts, let me see your squishy parts.

So you were on Arrested Development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/arrested-development>, possibly the 
greatest television show ever written …

So cool, so cool. Workaholics is better, and better written. Shots fired. No, 
it was a dream come true because it is one of my favorite shows. They actually 
contacted us, Mitch Hurwitz, the creator of Arrested Development, said I love 
what you guys are doing. It was after season one, we were writing season two, 
he said I just think you guys are really talented and want to support you in 
anyway I can. And we were just [Devine sits out of the chair and yells wahhhh]. 
We lost our minds.

[He coughs, seemingly from the aforementioned noise] What if I just died 
halfway through this interview? That would be the best end to this.

Have you met any of your idols in LA and freaked out?

When I meet comedians or actors – even if they are super famous – I'm a bit 
like: 'I can do that too.' It's when I've met sport stars, because I can't do 
that at all. I met Blake Griffin, he's a big fan of Workaholics and a power 
forward for the Clippers, and he said come out to a game, me and my girlfriend 
went in the locker room and she said: 'I've never seen you like this.' I was 
just sweating and making jokes, every second.

Who else is on your 'athletes I want to meet' list? 

Shaq, Charles Barkley – it's mostly basketball players. I tried out for my 
basketball team every year and I never made it. You had to buy the shoes before 
you knew if you were on the team because it took a few weeks for them to ship. 
I bought the shoes every year, never once made the team, had a ton of high 
school basketball shoes. Senior year, I'm trying out for the basketball team 
and the coach said: 'Devine, you do not need to buy the shoes, you are not 
making the team.' And I said: 'Ya right, I trained so hard this summer.' Really 
I didn't, I smoked weed and hackey-sacked. Maybe I should have trained a little 
harder if I wanted to be on the team.

Is that your advice for wannabe high school basketball players – train harder, 
don't smoke weed?

Yes, don't smoke weed and hackey sack – a lot. Smoke weed a moderate amount, 
they'll put you in, kiddo.

This interview has been edited for length
 