
Mark Arber, former Dagenham & Redbridge defender

With all due respect sometimes Adam was just too quick for the ball – he'd run 
past and he'd have to wait for it. So you could see he had exhilarating pace 
just on the football pitch.

He played full-back and that was probably the best decision by the manager 
because that gave him the whole length of the pitch to run – it was perfect.

He's just such an athlete on a football pitch and the athleticism sometimes 
overshadowed the technical side of his game. Sometimes players are too quick 
for their own good and have just one pace and its 100 miles per hour, and it's 
probably not his fault.

I was aware that he was doing the athletics as well but it was a little bit of 
a secret – some of the youth-team lads coming up would say: "Have you seen this 
boy run?" So it was spoken about on a low level and all of a sudden it's come 
to fruition.

He was at Dagenham & Redbridge for a couple of years [from 2009] and he also 
had a loan spell: he was training with us and went into non-league at Thurrock 
last season. I think he featured a couple of times in pre-season games for us 
and for the reserve team as well but on the training ground it was evident that 
he was in the wrong career and that's been proven.

Good luck to him. He made the decision and I know he had a little bit of an 
injury last year because when I had surgery he was in the gym – he had a 
problem with his knee and was out for around six weeks. So he was putting 
himself on the line as the football could have stopped his athletics.

He's not only done what he's done, but he's done so while juggling two sports. 
So in that respect you can only look at it and think that he can improve. He's 
obviously at a young age, 18, and he had to choose and it looks like he's done 
that with athletics and it's such a fantastic achievement. For someone to do 
what he has – Adam won't have been 100% focused on the athletics side because 
he was obviously still playing his football – so to have become the world 
junior champion and be selected for the Olympics at such a young age is amazing.

Tommy South, Thurrock chairman

You would want Adam as your son-in-law. He's a really lovely boy. There's 
nothing flash about him, he's down to earth, humble – a very nice person, and 
his mum and dad are lovely people too.

He was a Dagenham & Redbridge player and he couldn't get in their team at all 
so we approached him because we'd seen him in a couple of reserve games and he 
came on loan for about four months [last season].

Adam won't mind me saying that he wasn't a fantastic footballer but he would 
put the ball past you and keep running. The classic one was when someone in the 
crowd said: "You'd better shut the gate otherwise he'll end up on the M25." He 
was so quick it was unbelievable, the only way they could stop him was by 
kicking him.

Of course a big danger to him and his sprinting career would be an injury 
which can happen at any time in football but thankfully that never happened 
despite other teams trying to get at him – they just couldn't get anywhere near 
him. He was so quick he could play any position but no disrespect to Adam I 
don't think he had a football brain. I think in the back of his mind he always 
wanted to be a runner. But you never know he might be able to return and play 
football – he's only 18, only a baby.

To be honest, no, I wasn't aware of his speed and his athletic ability when he 
first came to us. He had this film on his phone that he was showing people from 
when he was younger to show how fast he could run but we didn't really take it 
too seriously.

Then he left us in January and said he was going to concentrate on the running 
and now he's built himself up so strong and for the better – the top half of 
his body is so powerful now. He looks unbelievable, though he's still our Adam.

We're all rooting for him, all of Thurrock, and I imagine all the people at 
Dagenham & Redbridge. You just wouldn't think he was going to be at the 
Olympics because he is not a pushy person. Since he left we have been texting 
and [swapping] emails so of course I wish him all the best. He deserves 
everything he gets that boy because he works so hard: even at our club where we 
train every Tuesday and Thursday he was always there, despite the sprinting.
 