
Adam Gemili, the British teenager whose annus mirabilis saw him go from 
playing non-league football for Thurrock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jul/12/adam-gemili-london-2012-olympics>
 to racing against Yohan Blake and Tyson Gay in front of 80,000 people in the 
100m semi-finals at London 2012, believes he is in "great shape" and capable of 
breaking the 10-second barrier this year.

Gemili has yet to run in 2013 because he has been focusing on completing the 
first year of his sport and exercise science degree at the University of East 
London. But he is hoping to run in Bedford in an under-23 race later this month 
and put the benefits of a first season of winter training into practice.

"My technique is much better, I am stronger and I have a lot more confidence," 
he said. "Last season I only started training in January. This time I've been 
progressing bit by bit since the autumn and am in great shape. I've made lots 
of technical improvements, breaking the sprint down bit by bit. I am now 
squatting 150kg for reps and cleaning nearly 100kg, which is a big improvement. 
I'm hoping I will run very fast this year.

"Studying has also helped with my running, as it has given me a much better 
understanding of how the body works. The university has been brilliant – I've 
been able to fit my lectures around my training."

Gemili's meteoric rise began a year ago this week when he ran a personal best 
of 10.08sec at the Sparkassen Gala in Regensburg in Germany – a time he soon 
lowered to 10.05 when winning gold at the world junior championships in 
Barcelona. He then made it to the semi-finals of the 100m at the Olympics where 
he finished third behind Blake and Gay in 10.06 – just 0.05 faster and he would 
have made the final.

And Gemili, who was the youngest member of Britain's Olympic athletics squad, 
believes he has also learned from his mistakes. "I'm less naive than I was," he 
said. "Last season everything was new to me so when I got to the Olympic 
semi-finals and was racing Blake and Gay I was so nervous. That's why I 
struggled at the start.

"But the last 12 months have been absolutely crazy. Winning the world juniors. 
Semi-finalist at the Olympics. Going to Buckingham Palace to see the Queen. My 
mum is more of a royalist than me but it's good to see her in real life because 
I've only seen her on money and stamps."

Things got crazier still when, according to Gimili, he became the first man to 
race against a robot, aspart of an advertising campaign for Confused.com 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9Dpat0KpPvo&feature=youtu.be>. Gemili's time of 
10.2, while laughing at the robot going past him in 10.1, suggests he is in 
reasonable shape.

Bigger challenges await, of course, including getting under 10 seconds for the 
100m, but Gemili insists it is not his only priority. "Breaking 10 seconds is 
one of my aims for 2013 but if I don't achieve it I won't be too upset," he 
said. "I'd like to say it is going to happen but my main goals are to make the 
final of the world championships in Moscow and win the European Under-23s."

Gemili has also been following Greg Rutherford's intention to run the 100m in 
Moscow with interest. "Greg and I shared an apartment in the Olympics so we get 
on well," he says. "I think he should go for it: he has an excellent PB and it 
would be great for him and the sport."

While Gemili was warm-weather training in Florida he also met Gay, who 
generously dispensed some career advice. "He told me don't let people rush your 
progress," he said. "You have a long career ahead of you. Don't rush it. Don't 
get injured. Enjoy it. That's exactly what I intend to do."
 