
Adam Curtis <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/adam-curtis> insists 
that he is not a documentary maker, but a journalist who tells stories that 
"take serious journalism and fine tune it with low-end trash and jokes" and he 
dismisses anyone who considers his films – with their unique convergence of 
quick-fire visual images and off-beat music and background noises – to be some 
kind of modern art form.

In fact, the former academic and producer of classic documentary series such 
as The Trap and The Power Of Nightmares goes out of his way to be self-effacing 
about the effect of his films; they may have won him six Baftas, but he 
believes he is still learning and at the moment his teacher is the internet.

When we meet to talk in a north London restaurant on a Sunday morning, it is 
clear that Curtis, who was in the final stages of editing his new three-part 
series All Watched Over by Machines of Loving Grace (which is being shown on 
BBC2), likes to shake up his audience whether they are viewing his films or 
sharing a cup of coffee. Curtis says he doesn't tweet nor use Facebook because 
these new media tools are "just for showing off", but he blogs because he sees 
that as a way of directly interacting with his audience.

The BBC has also encouraged Curtis to experiment online with material from the 
BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> archive, including using unedited 
footage on his blog. "I've put up the rushes of Tony Blair arriving in Kosovo 
in 1999 and it's nine and a half minutes of raw footage from one cameraman, but 
the audience is completely fascinated by it because you watch Blair's reactions 
and it tells you more about why he wanted to go into Iraq a few years later 
than a lot of political analysis. He's the hero who has come to save the 
people."

Curtis thinks the immediacy and speed of the internet is causing people to 
crave a different pace in documentaries. "We're entering a period of high 
romanticism where you'll get more really emotional pieces on film and not 
necessarily just factual; it's a style reaction."

He says that today's audiences like slow, emotional shots and that in turn 
will lead to the death of the wobbly camera. "People's leisure time is up," 
adds Curtis. "Hollywood movie lengths have gone up, people are really happy 
with longer things. Audiences don't need patronising explanations in their 
documentaries, they're prepared for more complicated things. It's even in 
drama; look at The Killing [the 20-episode Bafta-winning Danish thriller that 
was a sensation on BBC4]. "

Philosophical ideas

And meeting that craving is a big part of his new film; it juxtaposes static 
camera shots, snatches of pop music and grainy interview footage with 
emotional, slow sections, exploring deep, philosophical ideas, mixed with 
famous faces such as the novelist Ayn Rand and former head of the US federal 
reserve Alan Greenspan. The Curtis style is a signature and as he races along 
in the digital age, this is a film-maker with a wide palette who is happy to be 
different.

"If I do a style analysis on my films, it's serious journalism, not flippant, 
but at the same time there are silly western songs mixed with Islamists dancing 
to draw the poison of the fear. That's a trash, silly, jokey thing and it 
works. I have a running joke in this latest film about spot-the-marmot. It's my 
current favourite animal. Most doc makers are so serious and somehow feel that 
if they're silly or react how they're really feeling it would lessen what they 
are doing."

As Curtis finishes this exchange, he suddenly returns to self-deprecating 
mode: "If twentysomething film-makers look at the generation before them, they 
never want to be like the last lot; they should look at me and think 'What a 
tosser' and then try to do things their way." Not surprisingly for a 
controversial documentary maker, Curtis definitely thinks that's a good thing.
This article was produced in association with Crossover Labs and Sheffield 
Doc/Fest
 