
Retiring Sydney legend Adam Goodes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-goodes> says he hasn’t thought about 
playing any role in AFL grand final festivities as debate continues over 
whether he should participate in the annual lap of honour for retired players.


Goodes announced the end of his 372-game career with Sydney after their 
semi-final home loss to North Melbourne on Saturday.


Adam Goodes leaves a hole that only the truly great can fill | Russell Jackson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/sep/20/retiring-adam-goodes-leaves-a-hole-that-only-the-truly-great-can-fill>
There was a financial sting in the tail for Goodes, with the match review 
panel fining him for kicking out at Kangaroos defender Scott Thompson. He can 
accept a $1,000 fine with an early guilty plea.

Goodes isn’t expected to attend the grand final. The dual Brownlow Medallist 
didn’t conduct a formal press conference at the club’s Mad Monday function but 
informally advised some media he hadn’t thought about the grand final.

“Rumours are rumours. It’s my last Mad Monday and I want to enjoy it with my 
team-mates,” Goodes told the ABC. “I haven’t even thought about it to be 
honest. I didn’t think we’d lose this weekend.”

Essendon legend Tim Watson believes the booing that has followed Goodes over 
much of his final season would likely be repeated on grand final day.


“Because after all this, all that took place, after he stood down from the 
game for a week because of the mental anguish associated with booing, he came 
back and there was still booing,” Watson told SEN Radio.


“He went to Fremantle last week and there was a lot of booing. There was 
booing again at ANZ Stadium [on Saturday] even though it was a small crowd of 
31,000. I think that he doesn’t want to put himself in a position like that 
again.”

Collingwood president Eddie McGuire hoped the AFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> would convince Goodes to attend the 
season-ending showpiece as he felt fans would want to send him off in 
appropriate fashion.


“Let him have a couple of days, let him have his Mad Monday, settle down and 
have a week – and later in the week go to him and say ‘come on, we really want 
you to be there’,” McGuire told Triple M on Monday.


“I think all fans would love to send him off. I know there’s been all this 
booing at times and at times it’s been gratuitous and other times it’s just 
been part of the play, but I wouldn’t think anyone would boo Adam Goodes on a 
farewell lap at the MCG. Surely not. I’d love him to get a big round of 
applause.”

Swans star Luke Parker also felt fans on grand final day would treat Goodes 
with respect.


“It would be great for the fans to be able to celebrate his career and show 
how much respect they have for him, because I think the majority of them do,” 
Parker said. “I think it’s pretty hard for him to go down there and watch the 
grand final.

“I think most of the boys, knowing we had the opportunity to be there, would 
rather not watch the grand final. It’s going to be just up to him, whether he 
wants to or not.”
 