
Adam Gemili <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-gemili> came into these 
world championships under the radar, yet after what he produced in Moscow on 
Friday night there can be no hiding his extraordinary talents. Not only did the 
19-year-old from Dartford crash through the 20-second barrier – only the second 
British athlete, after John Regis, to do so – but in running 19.98sec in his 
200m semi-final he lowered his personal best by 0.32sec.

Usain Bolt <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/usainbolt> now awaits in 
Saturday's final but while slaying the Jamaican giant is surely beyond him, a 
silver or bronze – along with Regis's record of 19.94, set at altitude – is 
very much up for grabs.

"I can't believe it," said Gemili. "Honestly, that's the best feeling in the 
world. To beat 20 seconds – I'm over the moon. I didn't realise the time was 
me. Crazy, crazy, crazy. I'm speechless."

For much of 2013 Gemili has struggled with injury and dabbled in 
understatement. Before these championships, he described his form as "OK" and 
warned that "I've got to do my dues and eventually one day I can be up there 
with those guys". It has been a quick apprenticeship.

In the morning he lowered his personal best by 0.13 in winning his heat in 
20.17 – a time that put him fifth on the British all-time list. His dubious 
reward was a semi-final with four men who had run under 20 seconds, all inside 
him.

It was at this point at the London Olympics that Gemili became twitchy and 
star struck when he realised he was in the same heat as Tyson Gay and Yohan 
Blake. This time, however, he relished the drama. He was second off the bend, 
behind the Jamaican Nickel Ashmeade, but produced teenage kicks in the last 20 
metres to come through for victory.

There was also a pleasant surprise in the men's 1,500m as Chris O'Hare, a 
student of exercise science at the University of Tulsa, showed plenty of 
practical expertise to finish fourth in his semi-final and make it through to 
Sunday's final.

O'Hare, who came home in 3min 43.58sec, behind the winner Asbel Kiprop, 
admitted he was shocked by how well he had performed. "I pretended like I knew 
what I was doing," he said. "In races like this you've got to blag it. I've got 
to go back and get my recovery and then I'll think about what I can 
realistically do and then I'll shoot for a bit higher than that."

The news in the women's 800m was not as good for Brtiain, however, as both 
Laura Muir and Marilyn Okoro finished seventh in their respective semi-finals 
and missed out on the final.

Earlier in the day, Britain's 4x400m relay team of Eilidh Child, Shana Cox, 
Margaret Adeoye and Christine Ohuruogu looked highly impressive as they 
qualified for Saturday's final in winning their heat in 3:25.39, exactly two 
seconds clear of second-placed Nigeria. But the usual suspects – Russia, United 
States and Jamaica – all qualified in even faster times, and it promises to be 
a battle royale in the final.

But the British team will have to do without Perri Shakes-Drayton, who has 
flown home for treatment on the knee she injured while finishing seventh in 
Thursday's 400m hurdles final. On Friday night her coach, Chris Zah, confirmed 
that she had chipped some cartilage in her left knee, news which suggests that 
she is likely to miss the rest of the season.

Zah said on Twitter: "She felt a little tightness as she was warming up [and] 
didn't think much of it but the cartilage chipped away as she came out of the 
blocks."

After the 4x400m relay, Ohuruogu expressed her deepest sympathy for her fallen 
comrade but insisted that the team still had the talent to win gold.

"It is a shame Perri's not here; we really are going to miss her and we wish 
her a speedy recovery," she said. "But we have to stay here and get the job 
done. That's what we're here for."

Meanwhile Tiffany Porter qualified for the semi-finals of the women's 100m 
hurdles by winning her heat in a bright and breezy 12.72.

Porter, who posted the fourth fastest time behind the American favourite 
Brianna Rollins, who ran 12.55, believes she is in the form to seriously 
challenge for a medal.

"It was just a matter of working off the cobwebs" she said. "The main focus 
this season has been the world championships, so hopefully I can put my races 
together and come out victorious."
 