
Adam Curtis <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/adam-curtis>, the 
documentary-maker behind Power of Nightmares, has said he may draw inspiration 
from hit HBO series The Wire for his next major TV project.

In a wide-ranging interview at the Sheffield Doc/Fest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sheffield-doc-fest> Curtis also attacked 
Twitter as a "self aggrandising, smug pressure group" which promoted a "narrow 
non-social view of the world".

He said the site has been used by journalists reporting the Arab spring to 
simplify the complexities of the uprisings to narrow stories of individuals 
writing on the site.

"Twitter is fun and it feeds the rat of the self but it is almost as if you 
miss large chunks of the world [through it]," he said.

Speaking about ideas for his next project Curtis, whose three-part series All 
Watched Over by Machines of Loving Grace recently aired to acclaim on BBC2, 
said he was thinking of examining the links between "managerialism and 
criminality".

"I am thinking about doing a series on how managerialism and criminality 
mirror each other," he said. "In a series like [BBC2 drama] The Shadow Line or 
The Wire we see they mirror each other and I'm thinking of doing something like 
that."

In The Wire, which aired on FX channel in the UK, the brutal activities of the 
Baltimore drug cartels are portrayed alongside the often corrupt and 
bureaucratic public institutions.

The character Stringer Bell, played by British actor Idris Elba, is shown 
studying a business course at college while the machinations of institutions 
such as Baltimore's school system, city hall and the world of newspapers are 
also explored.

Curtis is usually given enormous licence and time to make his films and his 
next project has not yet been green lit. But his disclosure provides the first 
indication of what his next project might be.

He told the packed audience at the city's Lyceum theatre that his principal 
guide to picking a project is a "really good story".

Curtis began making films in the early 1980s. His most famous include The 
Century of the Self in 2002 which examined how Freud's theories of the 
unconscious shaped the development of PR and advertising.

His 2004 series The Power of Nightmares was a polemic on the war on terror and 
the use of fear by western governments to manipulate the population.

In All Watched Over by Machines of Loving Grace he examined, among other 
things, the theories of the later American thinker Ayn Rand and the Silicon 
Valley pioneers and argued machines make us believe in a stable world.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 