
Adam Gemili <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-gemili> led the men’s 
4x100 metres team to glory on the final day of the European Championships, 
securing the British team a record gold medal haul. On a golden final day of 
the championships Britain overtook the previous record of nine gold medals set 
in Budapest in 1998.

Having already seen Mo Farah and the men’s 4x400m team triumph on the final 
day, the quartet of James Ellington, Harry Aikines-Aryeetey, Richard Kilty and 
Gemili followed suit at the Stadion Letzingrud.

Gemili, gold medallist in the 200m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/aug/15/adam-adam-gemili-gold-european-athletics-championships-2014>
, brought the team home in a European-leading 37.93sec, coming close to the 
previous record of 37.73sec which has stood since the 1999 World Championships.

The Olympic and Commonwealth gold medallist Greg Rutherford added European 
long jump champion to his impressive list of honours. He overcame injury to 
triumph at Hampden Park a fortnight ago and secured his place at the top of the 
long jump podium in Zurich with an impressive leap of 8.29m – 14 centimetres 
ahead of his nearest rival, Louis Tsatoumas of Greece.

Earlier Martyn Rooney anchored Great Britain’s 4x400 metres relay team to gold 
as the favourites fulfilled their potential in breaking the three-minute 
barrier on the final day of the European Championships.

Having seen their female compatriots win bronze, Conrad Williams, Matthew 
Hudson-Smith, Michael Bingham and Rooney were charged with bringing the baton 
home and did not disappoint.

Williams produced a sturdy first leg, handing the baton over to Hudson-Smith 
at the front of the pack. The teenager,fresh from winning individual silver on 
Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/aug/15/martyn-rooney-matthew-hudson-smith-400m-gold>
, followed it with a strong leg which was matched by Bingham, who handed over 
to anchorman Rooney in second place.

Taking the confidence brought by Friday’s gold medal – his first at a major 
championship – the 27-year-old powered past the Russians, crossing in a 
Europe-leading 2min 58.79sec.

In the final action on the track Britain’s women completed a superb 
championships by taking victory in a new national record of 42.24sec ahead of 
France and Russia, beating the previous mark set at the Moscow Olympics 34 
years ago. The British quartet of Asha Philip, 100m bronze medallist Ashleigh 
Nelson, 200m silver medallist Jodie Williams and Desiree Henry hung on to win 
the team’s 12th gold.
 