
When Adam Gemili <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-gemili> was 
introduced to the Stadion Letzigrund he responded with a transcendental smile 
and a shy ‘Aw shucks’ head roll. But there was nothing relaxed or retiring as 
he “ran for his life” to shatter the 20-second barrier and win European 200m 
gold in 19.98sec.

The time brought Gemili his first major title and equalled his personal best. 
And, given it was on a chilled-to-the-bone Zurich night and into a 1.6 m/s 
headwind – roughly equivalent to a 19.90 performance in windless conditions – 
it was undoubtedly the best of his young career.

“Towards the end I was very messy but I was just running, running for my 
life,” said Gemili, who three years ago joined the semi-professional football 
side Thurrock on loan, before committing to athletics later in 2011. “It’s 
really cold and late so to run sub-20 seconds is great.”

As the 20-year-old did his lap of honour, someone from the crowd asked for his 
race number as a souvenir. Gemili, one of the nicest guys in the sport, happily 
obliged. Afterwards he also spoke of his delight at joining his training 
partner James Dasaolu, who won the 100m, in claiming his first major title. “We 
are rooming together,” he added. “I was watching the 100m and I almost lost my 
voice screaming for him.”

Christophe Lemaître, who finished behind Gemili in 20.15sec, was far less 
ecstatic. “Congratulations for my silver medal? No, not for me, please,” he 
said.

There was further gold – and a silver –for Britain in the men’s 400m as Martyn 
Rooney, the tallest athlete in the team, produced a giant performance to see 
off 19-year-old wunderkind Matthew Hudson-Smith. Rooney’s time of 44.71 was the 
fastest in Europe this year but Hudson-Smith was only a half-gasp behind in 
44.75. “I’m delighted,” said Rooney. “It’s been a long time coming. I’ve never 
won a championships in my life.”

In the women’s 200m Jodie Williams added European to Commonwealth silver with 
a personal best of 22.46sec but there was no catching the Dutch athlete Dafne 
Schippers, who thundered home in 22.03 – lowering her personal best by 0.31sec 
and posting the world’s fastest time in 2014 – as she added a second gold to 
her 100m crown.

Williams has tattoos with ‘pain is temporary’ and ‘victory is forever’ on her 
wrists. She is yet to experience the latter at these Championships but could 
yet get her wish, as she is planning an audacious attempt at both the 4x100m 
and 4x400m relays.

Bianca Williams was fourth in 22.68, a tenth of a second behind Myriam 
Soumaré, who took bronze. But 18-year-old Dina Asher-Smith, so impressive in 
qualifying, was unable to finish the race after injuring her hamstring. “Me and 
my hammy have a love-hate relationship,” said Asher-Smith. “This was one of the 
hate days.”

In the women’s 1500m Laura Weightman took bronze behind the Dutch athlete 
Sifan Hassan and the Swede Abeba Aregawi but there was no medal for the 2013 
world champion Christine Ohurougu, who was fourth in a desperately tight 
women’s 400m.

The Italian Libania Grenot won gold in 51.10, with the Ukrainian Olha Zemlyak 
second in 51.36, while the Spaniard Indira Terrero snatched bronze in 51.38, 
the same time as Ohuruogu.

In the long jump the Olympic champion, Greg Rutherford (8.03m), Chris 
Tomlinson (7.89m) and JJ Jegede (7.81m) all made it through to Sunday’s final 
but Rutherford knows he needs to improve. “My jumping was awful,” he admitted.

There should be more British success . Eilidh Child is a piping hot favourite 
in the 400m hurdles, Lynsey Sharp has a shot at gold in the 800m and Jo Pavey – 
the 40-year-old mother of two – is seeking to add the 5,000m crown to her 
10,000m title.

Meanwhile the French athlete Mahiedine Mekhissi-Benabbad, who was stripped of 
his 3,000m steeplechase gold medal for taking his vest off and sticking it in 
his mouth, insisted he has no regrets despite his “immense sadness” at being 
disqualified.

Mekhissi-Benabbad, a keen supporter of Paris Saint-Germain, said he was trying 
to make the crowd happy by performing a goal celebration. “Je ne regrette rien,
” he said. “I did not know that I could be disqualified for such a thing. In 
every sports you can take your vest off. Only in athletics you cannot.”
 