
Television no longer has the dramatic techniques to explain today's world, 
according to leading documentary-makerAdam Curtis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/adam-curtis>.

At a masterclass session at the MediaGuardian Edinburgh International 
Television <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/television> festival, Curtis 
will claim that the traditional techniques television uses, such as the 
identifying of good and bad guys and a linear narrative, are obsolete.

"The problem is that the big areas where power is being exercised – finance, 
managerial theory, computers – are not reducible to dramatic stories," he told 
the Guardian. "These worlds have made themselves 'unstorifyable' – they have 
become deliberately dull."

This dullness, he argues, masks the damage and influence that these sectors 
exert but it also make it impossible to create stories because events like the 
financial crisis cannot be reduced to a simple narrative.

"In the old days journalism was about fighting battles against bad people," he 
said. "But in the modern era those things don't apply: we have tried to find 
baddies but we all know that is not substantial enough." Curtis argues that 
rather than looking at the world from above and trying to make sense of the lie 
of the land, too many people who make TV programmes have become trapped into 
using the opaque language of the very people they're meant to be reporting on. 
"Every month we are told the eurozone is going to collapse and the jargon used 
is utterly dense … but then nothing happens. We need new tools to be able to 
tell these stories."

Curtis's trademark style of documentary-making eschews the usual techniques of 
talking heads and relevant archive. In series such as The Century of the Self, 
which looked at the way Sigmund Freud influenced the birth of advertising, and 
his most recent series All Watched Over by Machines of Loving Grace, which 
examined how we have been colonised by the machines we have built, Curtis 
mashed together old advertisements, apparently irrelevant archive and classic 
pop songs and self-shot interviews often deliberately filmed poorly to 
highlight their artificiality.

That approach can help viewers approach topics in a very different way from 
most current affairs documentaries. In his Edinburgh session Curtis will argue 
that programme-makers will need to turn to ever more dramatic means to tell 
stories about the new sources of power.

"I am a huge fan of [HBO series] Game of Thrones," he said, "and that takes a 
fantasy world and makes it real and turns into a struggle for power. The 
journalism of the future is going to have to be incredibly high blown, almost 
romantic and it will need to turn what looks dull and impenetrable and turn it 
into Game of Thrones."

Curtis dismisses the suggestion that the internet is now a source of scrutiny 
and agent for transparency. "I am hugely sceptical about this idea that 
interactivity will create a new kind of democracy and spread of power," he 
said. "If you look at the years since the rise of the internet, power has 
become more consolidated, more elitist, less open to examination, so the 
interactive utopians have failed to deliver the power to the people they 
promised."

After his appearance at Edinburgh, Curtis will continue his work on a new 
theatre piece for the Manchester festival, and he is also working on creating 
what he calls an "anti-website" where text, video and images will seamlessly 
scroll.

Despite his forays outside television Curtis says he remains upbeat about the 
health of the medium. In 10 years the internet will just be TV with your local 
library attached he predicted. "I'm not scared of the internet killing TV," he 
said. "People like watching programmes but we need to find new ways to explain 
the world we are living in because right now television is falling down on the 
job."

Adam Curtis: A Masterclass, chaired by Sarfraz Manzoor, is at the 
MediaGuardian Edinburgh InternationalTelevision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television> festival on Thursday
 