
Adam Goodes <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-goodes> says he has 
achieved closure on the turbulent final year of his career, crediting league 
boss Gillon McLachlan for playing a big part in that process.

Swans’ games record holder Goodes called time on his career last September 
after the club’s semi-final loss to North Melbourne. It was the 372nd game of a 
glorious career which included two premierships, four grand finals, three club 
best and fairests, four All Australian nods and a Rising Star award.

Former agent Ricky Nixon admits he was a 'bloody idiot' in Duthie dealings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/07/afl-player-agent-ricky-nixon-tell-all-autobiography>
Much of Goodes’ last season was overshadowed by persistent booing from 
supporters of opposing clubs. The strain created by that behaviour prompted 
Goodes to take a week away from the game late in the season before he came back 
and completed the campaign.

Two days before doing a half-time SCG lap of honour with former teammate and 
fellow retiree Mike Pyke at this Saturday’s Sydney derby, Goodes revealed he 
had reached closure and was focusing on his many achievements rather than 
dwelling on the bad treatment he had received.

“I’ve been able to read letters, emails, cards from people,” Goodes said on 
Thursday at the Swans’ Legends breakfast. “I definitely feel the love and 
support out there – there is no doubt about that.

“I think the biggest closure for me was when I did have a sit down meeting 
with Gill [McLachlan] and had a chat about last year. I thought that was a big 
step forward for me dealing with what happened last year. I’ve got great 
closure on last year and I am now able to reflect on my career.”

Goodes clearly has no regrets about his decision and isn’t missing playing. “I 
think seeing the guys run around down at Etihad Stadium [last weekend], I know 
I’m a fair bit off the pace right now after seven months of doing not much,” 
Goodes told Swans TV. “I’m very much happy to sit in the stand and be a 
supporter.”

Although some have suggested former Australian of the Year Goodes could look 
at a political career or become even more involved in indigenous issues, Goodes 
clearly isn’t bothered by not being part of the daily grind of theAFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl>.

He will head overseas on Sunday, take in some of the NBA finals and have 
Boomers and Spurs guard Patty Mills show him around San Antonio.

“I’m really happy with the routine I’m in at the moment. I’m comfortable where 
I’m at,” Goodes said. “I’m not too fussed about what’s going to happen in the 
near future and it’s nice. To have that freedom and time to do what I want is 
quite refreshing.”

Reflecting on his early days, Goodes disclosed a couple of little-known facts 
from the time he was injured before getting drafted by Sydney. When he broke a 
hand in the first match of the national Under-18 carnival, he was replaced at 
centre half back by future Geelong star Matthew Scarlett.

He also revealed he umpired for 10 weeks back home in Horsham in country 
Victoria, as he waited for his hand to heal.
 