
The coach of Adam Gemili <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-gemili>, the 
fastest British junior in history, has been made redundant by UK Athletics, the 
Guardian understands.

Michael Afilaka, who discovered Gemili last year, and Tony Lester – one of 
Britain's most respected coaches who guided Roger Black to an Olympic silver 
medal in 1996 as well as coaching the world silver medallist Nicola Sanders and 
Olympic 4x100m medallist Marlon Devonish – have lost their jobs after the 
governing body asked coaches to reapply for their positions as part of a 
restructuring of the sport following the London Games.

In a move that reduces the number of UKA-employed coaches from 14 to eight, 
Afilaka has lost his position despite coaching Gemili to a world junior 100m 
title this summer in a championship record of 10.05sec. The then 18-year-old 
later lined up alongside the world champion Yohan Blake in the semi-finals of 
the Olympic Games, missing out on a place in the final by 0.04sec.

Gemili, hailed by Tyson Gay, the second fastest man in history, as 
"phenomenal", while the biggest name in world athletics Usain Bolt has also 
fawned over the teenager's ability, first came to Afilaka in 2011 as a raw 
talent whose running technique was said to be a mess. In their first full 
season together the coach guided the former Dagenham and Redbridge defender to 
the sixth-fastest junior time in history, a European junior silver in the 100m 
in 2011 and gold in this year's World Junior Championships in Barcelona.

Afilaka's coaching group, which is based at Lee Valley – a former National 
Performance Centre now being downgraded by UKA as the sport looks instead to 
centralise in Loughborough – also includes the 2008 Olympic finalist and world 
indoor silver medallist Jeanette Kwakye.

A confidential UKA document titled "The Road to London 2017", seen by the 
Guardian this week, states that coaches must be willing to relocate to 
Loughborough or else be in charge of a current world or Olympic medallist or 
finalist who can reasonably argue that they would be at a disadvantage by 
moving to the new UKA Performance Institute, to qualify for funding. Neither 
Afilaka nor Lester meets those stipulations, with Afilaka cruelly missing out 
by that 0.04sec in the case of Gemili.

Lester, who has been in full-time employment with UKA since 2000, has coached 
six athletes to Olympic and World Championship medals and a further two to 
finals including the 400m runners Black, Mark Richardson, Tim Benjamin and 
Sanders as well as the sprinter Devonish – who has won over 20 medals in an 
illustrious career – and the 4x100m Commonwealth champion Abi Oyepitan. The 
former Army officer, based at the Windsor and Eton track, has also coached the 
men's and women's 4x100m relay teams.

The rest of UKA's coaches wait to hear of their fate over the weekend. One of 
those who faces uncertainty is Toni Minichiello, coach of the Olympic 
heptathlon champion, Jessica Ennis, and winner of the prestigious UK Coach of 
the Year award this week. Under the new specifications which stipulate that a 
coach must have more than one world-class athlete in his or her group to 
qualify for a full-time role he stands to lose up to 50% of his earnings if the 
UKA recruits him only on a consultancy basis.

A spokeswoman for UKA refused to confirm the names of any redundancies or 
appointments and said only that an announcement regarding the new coaching 
structure will be made next week.
 