
Adelaide United have been tossed out of the Asian Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/asian-champions-league> by China’s 
Shandon Luneng, who banked a 2-1 victory in Tuesday night’s playoff game in 
Adelaide.

Adelaide conceded two first-half goals and star Marcelo Carrusca missed a 
penalty in the second stanza, before Sergio Cirio offered a glimmer of hope 
with an 89th minute header.

Western Sydney Wanderers identify their away fans as problem on flare issue
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/09/western-sydney-wanderers-identify-their-away-fans-as-problem-on-flare-issue>
But the impressive Chinese outfit held on to advance to the group stage of the 
lucrative tournament after scoring twice in 22 minutes.

Shandong struck in the 17th minute when Yang Xu headed into an open goal - 
Adelaide goalkeeper Eugene Galekovic was still grounded after a superb diving 
save defied a Walter Montillo strike, only for the rebound to fall kindly to an 
unmarked Xu.

And in the 39th minute, Brazil-born attacker Diego Tardelli rewarded the 
visitors for top-shelf lead-up work with another. Shandong expertly sliced 
through Adelaide’s defensive barrier and a shrewd cross from Wang Yongpo found 
Tardelli, who sweetly angled a header past Galekovic.

United produced few chances in the first half but came close in the 14th 
minute when, after a goal-mouth scramble, a Ryan McGowan effort was cleared 
from the goal-line.

United chased the game hard in the second half against Shandong, who sat back 
and understandably tired – this was just their second competitive outing in 
what is their preseason, and they’d come from minus-four degree temperatures at 
home to play in balmy 30 degree Adelaide heat.

But the Reds, despite repeated chances, were frustrated until Cirio, facing 
away from goal, deflected a header over Shandong’s keeper Wang Dalei a minute 
before injury time.

Late drama followed: Adelaide’s Sergio van Dijk and Cirio could have pinched 
an equaliser in time added on – the former sprayed a close-range header wide, 
then the latter headed straight into Wang’s gloves.

The frantic finale followed Carrusca slamming a penalty into the crossbar in 
the 83rd minute, coming after Shandong playmaker Yongpo was sent off for a 
second yellow card 15 minutes earlier.

But the Reds ultimately couldn’t convert their advantages – numerical, 
territorial and possession – into another goal, much to the disappointment of 
their parochial 8,487-strong home crowd.

Adelaide United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/adelaide-united> coach 
Guillermo Amor praised the fighting spirit of his side for their late rally. 
“We had our opportunities ... but the result is a difficult moment,” Amor said. 
“The players were fantastic with how hard they worked.”

Shandong coach Mano Menezes described the encounter as a “difficult” given his 
side’s lack of game time and being pitted against an Adelaide side in midseason.

“For me, Adelaide was a good team, they have style and their whole level is 
very high,” he said. “The second half, we had a problem with the fitness ... we 
wanted to finish the game in 90 minutes.”
 