
Adobe is the latest tech company to extend its paid parental leave policy 
after Netflix said it would offer corporate employeesup to a year of paid leave 
to care for new babies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/us-money-blog/2015/aug/09/netflix-parental-leave-policy>
.

Adobe <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/adobe> Systems Inc said Monday 
that it will offer parents who are the primary caregivers 16 weeks of paid 
leave after the birth or adoption of a child. That’s in addition to 10 weeks of 
paid medical leave following childbirth, so a new mother could take a total of 
26 weeks off – up from the current nine weeks.

Non-primary caregivers will receive four weeks with full pay, up from two 
weeks previously. Adobe will also cover up to four weeks of family leave to 
care for a sick family member. The 10 weeks of medical leave that applies to 
childbirth is an increase from seven weeks.

Adobe defines primary caregiver as the parent who takes the main 
responsibility to care for a child during work hours. The non-primary caregiver 
is the other parent. So if a gay couple working at Adobe adopts a baby, one of 
them would get to take 16 weeks off, and the other four weeks, depending on who 
cares for the child during work hours.

The new policy applies to Adobe’s 6,000 US employees and takes effect 1 
November. San Jose, California-based Adobe makes popular software such as 
Photoshop and Acrobat.

“Caring for yourself and your family at home helps you be your best at work. 
But in the US, government mandates for paid leave are currently slim to 
nonexistent,” Donna Morris, senior vice-president of people and places at 
Adobe, wrote in a blogpost Monday. “That means companies must navigate the 
tough balance between supporting employees during major life events and meeting 
business goals. Too often, employees have not had the support they need.”

Technology companies looking to lure and keep top talent are sweetening the 
benefits they offer to highly sought-after workers. This includes perks such as 
free massages and meals, along with parental leave and vacation policies that 
go above and beyond the rest of corporate America.

Netflix announced last week that it is giving mothers and fathers paid leave 
for up to a year following the birth or adoption of a child. The company said 
the leave is “unlimited”, meaning that parents can take as much or as little 
leave during this year as they would like. The new baby-benefit policy covers 
all of the roughly 2,000 people working at Netflix’s internet video and 
DVD-by-mail services, according to the Los Gatos, California, company.

Microsoft Corp followed suit, saying it will offer 20 weeks of paid leave to 
new mothers, up from a current 12 weeks paid and eight weeks of unpaid leave. 
New fathers will get 12 paid weeks, instead of four paid and eight unpaid.

The US and Papua New Guinea are the only countries among 185 nations and 
territories that don’t have government-mandated laws requiring employers to pay 
mothers while on leave with their babies, according to a study released last 
year by the United Nations’ International Labor Organization.
 