
A song just came on the radio: my three year old daughter started dancing, and 
I started crying. She told me "it is a happy song, daddy." OK, so I am a bit 
soft, and please believe me that I don't normally start crying at songs on the 
radio, or for other 'random' reasons, but it is six months into our adoption 
now, and this is the first time I have seen our daughter dance. Most children 
who are adopted have experienced upset in their lives, even those adopted as 
babies experience the loss of their birth mother, and so they tend to be so 
busy coping (in fight or flight mode) that they don't have any spare capacity 
to relax and learn to reach some of the basic developmental milestones. 
Remembering what our kids couldn't do even six months ago – when they first 
came to us – and then celebrating their achievements, is really special (given 
the balance between what we might think is "catch-up" and just natural timely 
development.)

For example, when our darling Daughter arrived, we were told she struggled 
with her fine motor skills … the other day not only was she changing her 
t-shirt (dressing herself was another thing we were told wasn't possible), but 
at the same time she was also balancing on her kids' space-hopper while asking 
when she could play with her jigsaw. It was a great moment. To help her develop 
some of the skills that other children develop without any effort, we have 
shown her how to play "pretend" (dolly's tea-parties, favourite toys' names, 
being a "lion", etc). In fact, I would get quite protective just when someone 
even asked the name of a dolly. Sometimes, the fears would manifest in subtle 
ways: at first our children were reluctant to play hide and seek (a great game 
to repeat as it reinforces permanence/attachment – a sense that things are 
still there even when you can't see them!), they wouldn't dance or sing, and 
heartbreakingly they would stay in their cots wide-awake not calling or crying 
until we came to collect them, and they ate all they were given.

But things have changed. Woohoo! Our son (words take place of actions), who at 
first could only just toddle 3-4 steps, is now saying: "Dad, I am just climbing 
onto the big bed in order to walk over to you to get my bottle of milk". On and 
on: they are both avidly reading (well looking at all the pictures anyway), 
whenever we go for walks sticks are collected and used with gusto, our son 
insists on using his own spoon, there has been a veritable vocabulary 
explosion, and every day there is something new to celebrate (Kangaroos and 
wands spring to mind). What makes us most proud (and frustrated too, to be 
honest) is that they are NOT eating all we serve up. Our kids have the 
confidence that we will still love them even if they don't do (or eat!) 
everything we ask them to.

What a nightmare, our children are now active, demanding, and noisy. It's 
fantastic and we asked for it!

• Anthony Watt is writing a regular blog on his experiences of adopting 
children. He writes under a pseudonym.
 