
I have spent most of today being fed, drinking tea from a bottle and having my 
head stroked whilst being read a story. No, I am not an investment banker. I am 
letting my daughter take control in a bid to let her know its OK to be a baby 
once in a while. Neither of our adopted children are the age it says on their 
birth certificates. For example, DD can be anything from four months, to four, 
to 40 in a given day, in any given moment, and in the speed of light. Sometimes 
she is being the grown-up because she's learnt how to cope with experiences 
beyond most children her age. Sometimes she acts like a baby because she hasn't 
had some of the basic baby opportunities, and sometime she behaves like a 
ranting, raving toddler because she is one. It can be confusing, occasionally 
demoralising and exhausting.

"Regression" is a common theme for all children, not just adoptees. That 
time-warp that exists when children are involved, where the normal passage of 
time is slowed down or put into hyper-drive, and when things don't follow the 
normal order, or take far-far longer than usual, or even don't happen at all, 
will ring a bell with all parents. It can be the thing that makes bringing up 
our children such fun – seeing our DD climbing trees, or doing jigsaws – 
achievements we were told not to expect. To make up for some of the stages DD & 
DS have missed, to teach them how to trust, they need to be able to do those 
stages again. So, they need absolute reassurance from us that it's OK. And, 
after all, who wouldn't want to go back to the comfort of childhood, or even 
infancy? We try to give them the chance to be babies whenever we can – for 
example, playing peek-a-boo, letting them wear nappies or feeding them.

It is not all straightforward. Not knowing what age they are can make boundary 
setting a minefield. When is letting them wear nappies undermining the hard 
earned ability to use the loo on their own? Is a tantrum actually another step 
through the early stages (terrible twos) of life, or just little girl trying to 
get her own way, or both? The questions for an adoptive parents don't stop: How 
old are we now? How should I react to this? Am I making things worse? Where 
does this behaviour come from? Where did you learn that?

Simple games like peek-a-boo, find-the-bottle-under-the-high-chair, or 
face-exploration are used to build trust, to learn that things exist when they 
can't see them, or to have fun in a safe environment. Happily, ours are young 
enough to enjoy these and accept the games. Although, sometimes our DD 
struggles to really let go and accept the love she is being offered. So, today 
I am letting her be in control and hopefully showing her that even grown-ups 
can be babies sometimes. Failing that, I am at least being well taken care of.
 