
What a difference a year makes: I've learnt that I had never actually done a 
hard day's work before having children, that sleep deprivation is indeed 
torture, and that somewhere between 4-5pm every toddler turns into a cross 
between a spinning top and an over-stimulated chimpanzee. On the plus side, I 
really feel we've formed a strong bond with our children, and that as well as 
love, there is trust – we really are doing this by trial and error but we hope 
we are getting something right.

I remember the anxiety of going to the play park with our children in the 
early days, when they struggled to recognize us. For a long time, they'd be 
looking round, and you could see on their faces the question: "Is that Daddy? I 
think it's that man over there, he looks tall enough." Likewise we would be 
panicking if we couldn't see them in case they ran off and didn't come back to 
us. Not to mention having two active toddlers with a fondness for mud, water 
and (weirdly) gravel, running in opposite directions straight towards trouble. 
Now at the play park, they recognize our voices instantly, they both "check in" 
with regularity and they occasionally even do what we ask them to. They still 
run off but are secure in the knowledge that, if they turn around to check, one 
of us will be there.

I remember taking a trip with them to the hairdresser, after a couple of 
months together, and I am not sure we would've been welcomed back – the 
children were totally overwhelmed by the new experience and practically pulled 
the place apart. We had no idea how to manage it. Recently we all did the same 
exercise again, we all had a haircut in turn, and our children sat well-behaved 
and calm throughout. It helped that we got the timing right so no one was 
tired, we had food/bribes and we knew what to do to distract them. Like most 
parents, we've had to learn how to be parents alongside learning about our 
children.

It has taken time to get to know each other's personalities, foibles and 
eccentricities. But the knowledge has made us all more secure. I no longer 
worry if people can spot I have no idea what I am doing when I am changing a 
nappy or trying to handle a toddler tantrum in the post office, and I now know 
when our DD gets redder and redder she's desperate for sleep. She no longer 
holds herself still and quiet at bedtime, instead she presses every button she 
can to get me to let her stay up, just like every other toddler does.

We like to think we know what will make them both giggle and when they are 
frightened or just hungry; and we recognize their cries/shouts of "mummy/daddy" 
amongst all the other cries at playgroup. Knowing them better helps us 
empathise with our children (adopted or not) when, through crankiness, they are 
just trying to control the situation, or genuinely being fearful when they're 
doing something for the first time.

Parenting adoptive children has quite a few challenges, but I can say the 
rewards of getting to know your children –and allowing them the time to get to 
know themselves – definitely outweigh the difficulties. Now that we've built 
our attachment, we're about to face the next challenge: nursery …

Making of U – review

The Making of U by Kendra Fairbairn has identity as its main theme, and how we 
learn to love and trust. The book tackles adoption issues and aims to help 
young people, adopted or not, to understand their life story and how they 
became the person they really are. Obviously, for a number of adopted people, 
especially, this brings a unique set of challenges.

The story is written by a collective of adopted young people for other young 
people, and they explore a range of themes including how our personalities and 
characters are formed, belonging and insecurities. As well as tackling some big 
issues, it's an entertaining read. The story is thoughtfully illustrated, and 
the book is engaging and warm.

The end is nicely upbeat – issues around identity faced by children can be 
resolved it seems. But for me, the real test was when I left it nonchalantly on 
the kitchen table. Both my (adopted) children loved it, constantly fetching it 
and asking to have it read to them. I don't know if the messages are resonating 
with them, but it gave me an opportunity to talk to them about adoption as a 
part of their life and the individuals they are. So, if you are committed to an 
open adoption, and relating your child's life story in an age-appropriate way, 
then this book may help to address these issues to younger audiences.
 