
Our first day as a family is over. It started with sitting in a supermarket 
carpark (classy!) near our children's foster carers waiting for the final OK 
from social services to say we could start our new life together. This was 
followed by a sad and happy goodbye with the foster carers, who helped us to 
settle the children into our car before we headed home. We kept looking over 
our shoulders to see if it was really true – were the children really there?

The day sped by, following their routine as much as possible and trying to 
keep things as normal for them as we could. For now, as we try to make thing a 
little safer, a little more loving. We are trying to make it all as familiar as 
possible: familiar toys, clothes, smells, familiar routines, and familiar 
scenes. Having finally got them to sleep, we spent most of the first evening 
checking on them every five minutes and looking down on their beautiful little 
sleeping faces.

Adopting toddlers who have experienced trauma has a unique set of challenges. 
Sadly, but understandably, our children have had a few issues with settling in. 
Since they are too young to express themselves verbally, we have to interpret 
their behaviour to help them cope with loss (of their birth family and foster 
families), to help them build trust in us to meet their needs and to reassure 
them that this family is for keeps.

In order to keep themselves safe, our little tigers hold back. They don't 
exhibit the inquisitiveness or self-confident, demanding and egocentric 
behaviour of other toddlers. This has seen heartbreaking times, when, for 
example, our DD (Darling Daughter) lies awake in bed too scared to call out. In 
her little life, she's learned that it's not worth crying because no one will 
come. As they try to figure out what this new world means for them, both our 
little tykes try their level best to do exactly what we want/they think we 
want. So, for the moment, we have toddlers who will eat whatever is put in 
front of them, who will do whatever they are asked, and who will make no 
demands. We can't wait for the day when they trust us enough to say "no" and 
have a tantrum.

We have tried various ways, some more successfully than others, to give 
reassurance. Games including "peek-a-boo", "hide-and-seek" and putting coins 
into a piggy bank help in maintaining some sense of their own permanence. DS 
(Darling Son) loves me constantly retrieving things from his tray table on his 
high chair, which apparently helps build trust even if my back is aching. We 
also have a reading list of books for bedtime, which gives us a chance to help 
reassure them that this time they are staying for keeps.

Something about us always being here ...

However, there are moments of pure joy for us all – watching them running 
around the garden barefoot and throwing their heads back with laughter, chasing 
the neighbour's cat and shooing birds and, of course, watching their beautiful 
sleeping faces – and we see what our new family could be.

• Anthony Watt is a pseudonym. Read part one of his adoption blog here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/joepublic/2010/nov/02/adoption-blog>.
 