
Today was not a good day. It started with a small child screaming "Mummy, 
Daddy," running full pelt into our room: "Wakey, Wakey!" It was 5.15 am.

Several eternities later we all collapsed into our beds, exhausted. We had 
just come back from holiday the day before, surely we should all be relaxed and 
ready for life …

The morning was a complete disaster. At playgroup both our children acted like 
whirling dervishes; completely out of control. Let's skip lunch, you really 
don't want to know.

In the afternoon, we went out with some friends and their children. The park 
seemed a good idea, to use up some excess energy. However, whilst all the other 
little people played nicely on the swings and slides, our DD did everything in 
her power to get our undivided attention, including insisting on "uppies" and 
then flopping onto the muddy ground when I said no.

Our DS decided to try the wild mushrooms and required some medical attention 
just in case they were poisonous. You would think that this would slow him 
down, but no, he returned with a vengeance covering himself head to toe in mud.

The rest of the day was spent in endless rounds of "put the scissors down", 
"don't draw on the table", "don't hit your sister/brother" "share the toys" and 
"please, don't do that". In sharp contrast, all the other children seemed to be 
playing so nicely.

To put our son out of his misery, we decided to put him to sleep at his normal 
time at our friends' house, which resulted in an hour of sustained high pitch 
screaming. Needless to say, we were embarrassed and felt totally out of control.

Being the analytical, and slightly (okay, very) naval gazing parents we are, 
we spent the entire journey home that evening wondering what we had done, or 
not, to make this happen.

In adoption, the issues we face are deeply emotionally rooted, stemming from a 
lack of permanence as a result of multiple sets of carers and poor experiences 
in early life. These experiences can manifest themselves as poor or even 
anti-social behavior. Having a sense of permanence means you know that things 
and people exist when you can't see, touch or hear them, but without it 
children fear that they themselves don't exist and need to reassure themselves 
constantly.

So were our children going ballistic because they feel unsettled, insecure in 
their attachment to us and need to draw our attention constantly back to them? 
Have they been damaged by their early life experience and just cannot master 
self-control? Was it our fault – are we just awful at this parenting lark and 
can't manage our own children? Do they just have energetic personalities and is 
it nature rather than nurture?

Or do they simply need a good sleep?

Phew. In adoption nothing is straightforward.
 