
This week is Adult Learners' Week. It is an annual festival with thousands of 
events across the country, and is based on a simple premise – to celebrate the 
achievements of adult learners in all their diversity in transforming their 
lives through learning, and to encourage others to take the plunge.

There can never have been a time when the need for adults to carry on learning 
was greater. Yet, while both Tory and Liberal Democrat election manifestos 
recognised the importance of protecting school budgets, there is much less 
clarity about whether support for adult learning will be a coalition priority.

Despite this, the agenda for adult learning grows all the time: learning is 
good for your health and mental well-being. Global warming challenges us to 
learn different ways of living; adult learning for offenders reduces 
recidivism; and greater longevity gives most people time and space to develop 
new interests in later life.

The annual survey on adult participation, published by Niace and reported on 
here last week, showed that three in four recognise that when adults learn, it 
benefits their children, too.

As for the workplace, report after report stresses the need for a more 
technically and socially skilled workforce; able to respond to the challenges 
of globalisation, technological innovation and new ways of working. And it is 
not only the young who need up-to-date training and skills. As the postwar 
baby-boomers enter their sixties and retire, we shall need to replace their 
skills in engineering, in the electrical supply industry, in teaching, ship 
repairing, and in management. Since there are just not enough young people to 
replace them, we will need to find ways to extend their working lives, and to 
share some of their skills with other people already at work.

Yet one consequence of the recession is that employers are now training fewer 
people – down from 14 million in 2007 to 12.8 million. Government funding for 
adult learning, too, has flatlined – with expansion in work-based learning paid 
for with reductions in spending on community-based learning.

Some of the slack arising from major cuts in public funding for 
community-based learning has been taken up by rapid expansion in organisations 
such as U3A (the University of the Third Age) and the web-based self-help 
groups like the one for people with Parkinson's disease. They show how 
inventive communities can be in developing new forms of association. Libraries 
and museums are strengthening their learning offer; there are 350,000 downloads 
each week ofOpen University 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/openuniversity> materials from iTunes U; 
and large numbers follow up prime-time programming on the BBC with web-based 
study. The 2009 white paper, The Learning Revolution, helped, too, in creating 
a Transformation Fund to promote informal learning with a short burst of 
funding.

However, most of these new forms of study attract people already confident as 
learners. The more you enjoyed learning at school, the more likely you are to 
go back. And adult literacy and numeracy programmes, courses to teach English 
for Speakers of Other Languages, and provision for adults with profound and 
multiple disabilities need stable public funding, coupled with good outreach 
work to make sure they reach the communities for which they are designed.

The 2010 Niace survey showed an increase in participation in some kinds of 
learning, most notably among the poorest and least skilled, and a significant 
increase in the numbers planning to take up learning in the next three years 
(up from 37% to 47%) – almost certainly in response to the recession. As the 
distinguished writer Raymond Williams reflected, at times of change people turn 
to learning to make sense of change, to adapt to it and to shape it.

The challenge facing the new government is to build on that enthusiasm. While 
it faces an unenviable task in bringing down public spending, it has to create 
the preconditions for future prosperity and of a society worth living in 
together. It will need to resist any temptation to see adult learning as an 
optional extra. In tough times, above all, we need to work together to learn 
our way out of the recession.

Alan Tuckett is chief executive of the National Institute of Adult Continuing 
Education (Niace)
 