
The winner

My ancestor John Jewitt was captured off the west coast of Canada in 1803 by 
Chief Quatlazapé Maquinna of the Mowachaht, leader of the Nuu-chah-nulth tribe, 
who slaughtered the entire crew but held John as a slave for nearly three 
years. His subsequent book, the "Narrative", has been described as a classic of 
captivity literature.

Feeling drawn to follow in his footsteps, I made the journey to Nootka island. 
It took John seven months to travel this far from his home town of Hull. I did 
it in three days, travelling by plane, ferry, Greyhound bus and supply ship.

Transport runs out at Campbell river, so for the first time in my life I 
hitchhiked and was picked up by pensioners Joan and Ethel, who took me to where 
the road ends in Gold River and warned me about cougars.

At the Gold River Chalet Hotel, manager Lana told me: "There are no cabs in 
this town." Then she got her husband out of bed on a Sunday morning to drive me 
down to the quayside for the final leg of my epic voyage, across the stunning 
sound to Nootka island.

On arrival, I was welcomed by the current chief Mike Maquinna to the annual 
tribal meeting at Yuquot (the name translates as "where the wind blows in all 
directions"), their traditional summer home for more than 4,300 years. This 
beautiful wilderness island is timeless, and the people are warm, open and 
friendly. In John's day, there would have been more than 500 warriors and 1,500 
people. Today there are 250 of the estimated 350 remaining Mowachaht (People of 
the Deer) at the celebration, where they sing of traditions and dance to drums.

The next day I hiked through ancient forests inhabited by wolves and bears, to 
a hidden lagoon along the famous Nootka Trail and total seclusion for 
sunbathing au natural.

Each day I woke from vivid dreams in a log cabin overlooking the sparkling 
Aa-aak-quaksius lake, where I bathed. A small wooded islet at the centre once 
housed the Whaler's Shrine at which the Mowachaht conducted purification 
rituals before going whaling - rituals so secret even John didn't know of their 
existence. The carved wooden figures, human skulls and the shelter that 
protected them are now in the American Museum of Natural History in New York.

To my amazement, when leaving Nootka, the captain suddenly cut the engine. Two 
leviathans burst from the ocean, blow holes spraying a cloud of water before 
their immense tails disappeared beneath the waves. The Mowachaht believe that 
whales are the spirits of our ancestors, and I named these two John Jewitt and 
Quatlazapé Maquinna. John had been desperate to leave this place, but I had 
become a willing captive.

• Flight with Canadian Affair from Gatwick to Vancouver (£550 return - current 
deals from £129). Bus and ferry to Vancouver Island with BC Ferries (£20). 
Nanaimo to Campbell River by Greyhound, greyhound.ca (£15). Haida Inn Hotel in 
Campbell River, £40 per night. Gold River Chalet Hotel £40 per night. Uchuck to 
Yuquot, mvuchuck.com; Yuquot and the Mowachaht (yuquot.ca <http://www.yuquot.ca>
).

• Neil wins a week's walking tour of Andalucia's Moorish trails with Explore (
explore.co.uk <http://www.explore.co.uk>).

A beautiful game, Thailand

Sauntering in the oppressively close night, I found myself at the seafront. As 
I wandered aimlessly around the concrete wasteland, the backdrop of the dock 
was suddenly filled with colour and noise. Proudly wearing fake Premier League 
shirts, a group of local boys of all ages was playing football. Awed by the 
furious pace of the match and the complicated rotation of players, I sat and 
watched, and within no time, I was invited to play.

Without a mutual language, we found communication in the appreciation of the 
beautiful game. I played with this scruffy group of strangers for what seemed 
like hours. It was the most fun I'd had on my travels.

It was the early hours of the morning in Ang Thong, Ko Samui, and my joy was 
short-lived. Triggered by the sound of screeching tyres and fast approaching 
headlights, the boys bolted. In the few seconds it had taken them to disappear, 
I hadn't managed to move a step. I stood alone as five confident Thai men 
stepped out of an old Mercedes. I knew exactly who they were.

I stood clueless as to what the ringleader was saying. Somehow, "How are you?" 
- the only Thai phrase I could remember - didn't seem likely to help, and 
realising he knew as little of my language as I did of his, I opted for silence.

Becoming increasingly agitated by my perceived insolence, this short, 
square-faced man reached inside his jacket. I saw two firearms nestling there. 
But my heart leapt when he proceeded to pull out nothing more lethal than a 
pocket calculator. Punching in a series of digits, he showed me the screen and 
what was clearly the fee the Thai mafia required for playing on their dock. I 
withheld any sign of relief, as what amounted to no more than about three 
English pounds was handed over. They were gone in seconds.

No sooner had they disappeared than the boys were back, surrounding this pale 
foreigner who had paid for their right to stay. With the money I felt I'd saved 
from my dangerous encounter, 27 cans of Coke were purchased. And after a 
celebratory drink and more play, we sat in the moonlight and laughed.
Ben Seed 

Tacos and turtles, Mexico

I bounced around in the back of the truck, trying not to fly out as the driver 
with painted black fingernails hit huge potholes faster and faster. When you're 
hitchhiking and someone finally stops, it's hard to say no, however crazy they 
look.

This summer I spent two weeks surfing and hitching down the Pacific coast of 
Mexico, camping on the beach and waiting for lifts at roadside taco-stands. I 
left the teeming resort of Acapulco as quickly as I could, eager to get to the 
remote Michoacan villages and perfect, sandy beaches.

The driver with painted nails took me all the way to Rio Nexpa, a scattering 
of wooden shacks at a river-mouth. But it took longer to get to the next beach, 
Maruata. Finally, an elderly woman drove me, asking in return that I write a 
letter to her friend in America.

I pitched my tent on the silent beach, and at dusk, a few families arrived, 
set up candlelit tables at the water's edge and quietly ate. Then turtles the 
size of sheep emerged from the water and dragged themselves up the sand to lay 
their eggs. The locals watched the ancient-looking creatures intently, as if 
they had come to deliver important news. Soon, the turtles turned around, fell 
clumsily back into the water and disappeared.
Duncan Drury

A tattoo too far, Albania

As the Montenegrin border disappeared behind us, my co-driver and I sped into 
the desert landscape of northern Albania. Aside from the odd wooden house or 
scraggy donkey, all we could see were hundreds of decaying military bunkers.

In the distance a flag caught our eye, the words "Tatoo! [sic] Pain is Good!" 
emblazoned below were a skull and crossbones. We spun the car on to a dirt 
track and drove towards a bunker adorned with scenes of hell. Suddenly an 
enormous tattooed man with a black goatee and cropped hair appeared at the 
entrance.

As he invited us in, I nervously asked him where he'd learned English. 
"Thirteen years in a US penitentiary," he replied with a gruff laugh.

We followed him inside, where every surface of concrete was daubed in satanic 
images. He sat down at a table covered in bottles of inks and drawings and 
explained the meanings of his designs and how he came to live in the bunker. 
Then, after a few whiskies, he looked us in the eyes and announced: "I going to 
tattoo you".

Now whenever anyone looks at my ankle and sees the poorly drawn semi-circle 
and asks what it means, I tell them I'm just happy to be alive.
Christoph Courth

That sinking feeling, Zambia

"Huh, Huh, Huh!" The distinctive "laugh" of the hippo had become familiar, but 
this time I felt uneasy. The 15 creatures to my left bobbed up and down while 
the smaller group to my right grunted in defiance, as if discussing when to 
attack. Suddenly our guide shouted as a crocodile launched itself into the 
water ahead of us. I'd read that canoe safaris were the exciting way to see 
game in Zambia, and this was certainly no disappointment!

A few hundred kilometres downstream from the Victoria Falls, the Zambezi, 
which borders Zimbabwe, becomes an easygoing river perfectly suited to 
canoeing. In two Canadian-style canoes we wound our way for 165km from Chirundu 
to the Mozambique border, immersed in a wilderness of elephant, hippo and 
buffalo.

It was hard to reconcile such beauty with the hard reality of Zimbabwe. This 
was true wilderness, though, and we had two national parks to ourselves. Only 
once did we encounter other people - five white Zimbabweans trying out their 
new boat. Made from old oil drums and used timber, it was called "Titanic". At 
least they still have a sense of humour, I thought.
Alex Ferrier

Kung fu kicks, China

The midday heat had unleashed its assault on the slopes of Song Shan mountain 
in the Northern Province of Henan, China. Dwarfed by the boulders overhead, I 
was closer to death than I have ever been, hanging by three fingers to the 
roots of a sapling. Then somehow, I flipped my body to safety, only to be 
greeted at the next clearing by the sight of shattered human bones and 
scattered clothing.

Thanks to our kung fu master in London, who had himself trained at nearby 
Shaolin Temple, we had the unique opportunity to sleep, eat and train at 
Quipanshan, the home of more than 200 students in a discipline that has been 
shrouded in secrecy for centuries.

Wang Hi Ying, who runs the school, took us to eat in silent monastery dining 
halls and to attend daily Buddhist services. He also took us to his birth 
village, where he challenged us to an all-you-can-eat pork dumpling fest. 
Drinking games then ensured the night became a blur of beer and rice wine.

My stay was spent either catching my breath in awe at the martial artists 
around me or totally exhausted by our twice-daily workouts and sword practice. 
Every day Song Shan mountain supervised our efforts, and every night she wound 
herself into my dreams.
Sara Newman

Heart melting glacier, Patagonia

"Once you've seen Perito Moreno," says Megan, our Chilean gaucho guide, 
"you'll never need to see another glacier in your life - it's that beautiful." 
So we cross the border in high spirits, and soon we are driving through 
Patagonian estancias as big as English counties, heading for El Calafate.

The town buzzes with people and motley street dogs. Crammed with restaurants, 
bars, shopping and travel agents, it is commercially charming in the way ski 
resorts are. But it's ice, not snow, we're interested in.

In its mountain and lake setting, Perito Moreno really is heart-stoppingly 
gorgeous. Its front edge is a mass of rupturing columns, the top a life-defying 
ice-scape of crooked needle teeth. But I'm struck by how animated a glacier is, 
alive with creaks, groans and explosions.

It's a magnificent and defiant beast, but one that is also delicate and dying. 
Huge shards detonate into the lake to become shortlived icebergs. We are 
watching our giant shed a skin it's unlikely to regenerate. Glaciers are almost 
extinct: this is the wonder of seeing a living dinosaur.
Trai Anfield

Fragile paradise, Borneo

I sat by the tea-coloured river watching as it transported its cargo of 
branches and leaves downstream. The continual flow of debris was stark evidence 
of what was happening upstream - the Borneo rainforest was being lost.

A pair of rhinocerous hornbills passed overhead and alighted in a tree. Their 
resting place was part of an ever-shrinking forest that cloaks the lower 
reaches of Borneo's Kinabatangan river. The area has become an ark for many 
species, but the demand for timber and palm oil threatens its survival.

I was staying at one of several visitor camps along the lower Kinabatangan in 
the Sabah region of north-east Borneo. The dollars they attract are helping to 
convince the authorities to preserve what remains of this area of forest.

Our first morning cruise brought us a close encounter with an impressive male 
orang-utan. It's said these creatures could once cross the entire forest 
without touching ground. I wondered how this vulnerable animal would adapt to 
its new circumstances.

I'd have been satisfied to leave with these memories, but we also spent 30 
wonderful minutes observing a family of elephants. I left knowing that I'd been 
privileged to spend a few days in this fragile paradise.
Andrew Bumbulis

Bridging the gaps, Vietnam and China

Not many tour guides have an appreciation group on Facebook. Yet Farmer Tang, 
diminutive in stature but big of heart, wins the affection of all he meets. He 
was just one of the locals who made our visit to China and Vietnam this summer 
so special.

When we found ourselves on our second night on a junk in Vietnam's Ha Long Bay 
we feared the rest of our holiday must be an anti-climax, but each place 
brought new pleasures.

Wind-and-rain bridges, with their picturesque wooden roofs, act as both market 
and meeting place. Women chat, sew and sell their wares. Men play cards, smoke 
and doze. We were soon surrounded by old ladies bent double by years in the 
rice paddies. In the river below our children larked around for hours among the 
local kids. At Long Shen, Farmer Tang was there to greet us, and a hot sweaty 
climb to our guesthouse was rewarded with magnificent views.

Our 48 hours in Yangshuo were brimful. We cycled through extravagant 
landscapes, climbed Moon Hill, swam in the river and cooked a Chinese banquet 
at the Yangshuo cooking school, before emerging as if dipped in chocolate from 
a mud bath in the caves.
Fiona Anderson

Flight of the Condor, Argentina

"Run, run, run, run, run." You lean forward, your feet struggling for grip as 
the wind fills the wing pulling you back and up, but after a few steps your 
legs are pedalling in mid-air and you sit back in the harness, airborne. Then 
suddenly the valley floor drops away and now it's 400 metres to the ground as 
your pilot adjusts direction and you gaze out over the expanse of Argentina

We'd arrived at the Hostel Palenque in Cordoba, north-west Argentina, having 
read that the best paragliding was in nearby La Cumbre. The girl at the desk 
had made some calls before passing us a name and number: "Call Pablo, he is 
flying tomorrow."

At the launch site, we watch people take their first solo flights; a perfect 
launch by a tiny French girl who is soon just a dot in the valley, flying as if 
on a zip wire direct to the landing zone. Then Pablo "The Condor" Kuniss 
arrives, renowned for his 80km flights.

Smoking and lean, he resembles a paragliding Mick Jagger. A quick handshake 
and the briefest of pre-flight tutorials ("Run, sit back and enjoy, and lift up 
your feet when we land") and then it's our turn to launch.

"Run, run, run, run, run." We fly for 40 minutes. Descending into the valley 
in great spirals, hunting the thermals, until the whooshing power is under the 
wing, straining as we ascend again.

Eventually we line up to land back at the launch site, making a perfect 
landing on the second attempt. And after another handshake, Pablo is gone.
Peter Hope

Lost in the desert, Arizona and Utah

It's all pretty prehistoric in Arizona. Dinosaurs walked through here once - 
left their tracks in the red sandstone plateau. Their claw marks, still 
visible, still look fresh. This is concrete, right?

Henry, a Navajo, shows us round the site, facts cribbed from a child's 
dinosaur book. Hand-drawn scrawls pinned by the fossils help us visualise what 
these fierce beasties looked like. They used to let scientists take the bones 
for science. No more. The footprints belong to the Navajo.

A mountain river runs dark, crisp, and cold. Gold miners panned the waters 
here, below Mount Baldy, but now their shacks are piles of planks, the stoves 
in rusted pieces, manufacturer seals still emblazoned.

We turn up a side road in Marysvale, Utah, heading up into those low hills, 
forested and bulbous. The road turns from tarmac to potholed tarmac to grit to 
potholed grit. These woods are eerie. Hollywood taught us this. Best stay at 
home. Best watch a video.

What's THAT? A crash through the trees. Over there. See the branches still 
moving? I saw a flash of dappled hide. I sense fangs and claws. There is 
nothing around. Just silence, and a twist of a road climbing onwards and 
upwards - nowhere to retreat from fear. This is the emptiness of America.
James Lawrenson

Throw a boar on the barbie, Malaysia

"No telephone, no car, no even bike," said Supang, owner of the Batu Ritung 
Lodge. She was describing her village, Pa Lungung. On my second day trekking in 
this remote part of the Kelabit highlands in Malaysian Borneo, I did something 
I thought I never would and joined a hunt. With my guide, Redi, and Stephen and 
his dogs, I set off in search of wild boar. After four hours squelching through 
the jungle, I thought, with some relief, that we were out of luck. Then we 
heard a blood curdling noise. Stephen said a boar had attacked a dog and that 
the pack would now chase the boar until it was exhausted and he would shoot it.

There followed a bewildering three-quarters of an hour of running and 
shouting. I felt big and slow next to Redi and Stephen, but I did feel more 
than a faint buzz of adrenalin. Then suddenly, we heard barking. Stephen ran 
off, and we found the injured dog hopping along with a nasty bite to his leg. 
After 10 minutes, we heard a gunshot.

The boar was jointed and the less appetising bits thrown to the dogs. And that 
evening, Stephen and Redi lit a barbecue made from an oil drum.

I was invited to join them and was passed a big slice of boar heart. My good 
manners did not stretch to saying "yes" to the question "you like fat?". I just 
hope that my slowly filling shirt pocket went unnoticed.

But thanks to Supang, I had some delicious in Pa Lungung; pineapple curry, 
boar in honey, smoked fish and ferns with wild ginger - all of it, as she said, 
"from the jungle supermarket".
Darren Shepherd 

Elephants' midnight feast, Botswana

You need to keep your hands in or they get ripped by the reeds. Sitting just 
above the waterline, we brush our way through, parting pink and white-headed 
lilies and ducking the fronds.

 Suddenly we glide to a halt. A pair of ears appears in the water in front of 
us; they twitch and are then submerged. Hippo? We wait. Eventually two nostrils 
appear and water rushes as the giant raises its head. Blinking in the sun, 
Africa's most dangerous animal seems to be winking at us. We keep our distance 
before slinking away.

The camp is totally isolated. Undergrowth rustles outside the protective 
cordon of carefully placed tents. "Leave room for elephants," our guide says. 
We sit underneath an amarula tree, an elephant's favourite food.

Just after dawn we start out on a "nature walk", squelching through murky 
water to reach a plain populated by zebra, warthog and, in the distance, an 
enormous bull elephant. As we move to within 50m, its huge presence reduces us 
to spontaneous silence. It stares at us as it chews on breakfast, then turns 
its back, no longer curious.

Back in camp we prepare to leave. Once the tents are down we see the tracks. 
Circular pads, twice as big as our feet, meander through the camp and come to a 
halt beneath the amarula tree. The elephants have been feasting.
Emily Hardwicke 

Speeding on sand, Peru

"Don't worry, it doesn't always start first time..." With these reassuring 
words, our Peruvian guide and driver Eduardo introduced himself. The sandbuggy 
- a metal frame with no doors, windscreen or bonnet - was about to take us into 
the middle of the desert so we could learn to sandboard. If our remote 
destination promised to be great for boarding, it wasn't ideal for 
temperamental transport.

After coaxing the engine to life, Eduardo set off along the dusty streets of 
Nazca. We'd soon left the town behind and were making our way along a track. 
Passing through a village, we attracted the attention of some wild-eyed dogs 
who chased us. Further on, we stopped at a cemetery which had been ransacked by 
grave robbers, who had left the sand littered with human skulls.

We drove on, eventually reaching our destination where Eduardo gave us a 
masterclass in sandboarding. Strapping the heavy wooden planks on to our legs 
and slip-sliding down the sand was exhilarating. It was a far cry from the 
crowded Alpine slopes, though the sand was as spotless as fresh powder.

Finally, we marched to the highest dune. At the top we were rewarded with a 
view over the desert and mountains beyond, stretched out like a child's sandpit 
beneath us. Having been brought up in the Lake District, surrounded by fields 
and fells, I'd never thought a desert could be so beautiful.
Heather Gregson

Weasel coffee, anyone? Vietnam

The humidity is suffocating as we ooze through the streets of Hanoi's old 
quarter. To our surprise, every shop we pass sells nothing but exhaust pipes. 
We pass Silk Street to our left, Zip Street to our right, Broom Street, Basket 
Street, Flip Flop Street - you name it and there is a whole street of people 
selling it.

Today we are on a search for "Weasel shit coffee". A legend among travellers, 
this Vietnamese luxury is said to be made from coffee beans that have been 
passed through the bowels of a weasel. In reality they are fed to a civet. And 
when the beans pop out they are cleaned, roasted and ground.

In Football Street, each little roadside shop has its doors wide open, some 
with huge TVs showing premiership football, others crammed with teenagers on 
PlayStations. We pull up stools at a bar where Arsenal v Chelsea is just 
kicking off. A group of women street sweepers sit down with us and offer me 
tea. They talk at me and I talk at them. We don't understand a word, but it 
doesn't seem important.

The sun is all but gone, our feet are tired and heads fuzzy from Hanoi beer. 
We approach a jaded looking cafe and to our delight see a sign that exclaims, 
"Trung Nguyen, Weasel shit coffee sold here!" The drinks placed before us 
resemble Greek coffee, thick and dark. It is awful, like sweet tar. The waiter 
grins at us in that lovely Vietnamese way. "Very nice. You like?" He asks. 
"Delicious," we both agree.
Katherine Latham
 