
In the months leading up to the revival of 90s America's reigning teen angst 
drama, Bevely Hills 90210 - now simply 90210 - it was literally impossible to 
guiltily peruse a tabloid or gossip site and not be assaulted by the huge 
burning questions: is Shannen Doherty coming back? How is she going to get 
along with one-time frenemy Jennie Garth? Why won't they pay Tori Spelling the 
money they're paying the other old-timers? The reins of the show were first 
handed to Veronica Mars creator Rob Thomas and when he had to drop out, his 
replacements were a pair of Judd Apatow acolytes who had written numerous 
episodes of Freaks And Geeks. The casting of Tristan Wilds (Michael the corner 
boy on The Wire) as the male lead and Jessica Walter playing essentially the 
same boozy matriarch as she did on Arrested Development were intriguing 
choices. So why has the show, which on its debut outing, pulled in the 
network's biggest-ever ratings, been subsequently dismissed as a crushing 
disappointment?

Two reasons. Firstly, in its heyday, 90210 was the only glossy night-time teen 
drama on the schedules. Now, we're living in a world of Gossip Girl, The Hills, 
and The Secret Life Of The American Teenager, a simple-minded, staggeringly 
popular show about a pregnant high-schooler. The new 90210 isn't as 
sanctimonious as that show but there's nothing about the storylines, the 
dialogue, the wardrobe or the performances that differentiate it from all the 
other, similar fodder aimed at that audience.

The second reason: it took Shannen Doherty a full season to incur waves of 
hatred for herself and her character, Brenda Walsh. It took Canuck actress 
Shenae Grimes, who plays a Brenda 2.0 called Annie Wilson, approximately, two 
seconds. All she had to do was flash that cleansing, I-have-love-for-everybody 
smile and the knives were out. This Annie Wilson has a forgiving, understanding 
smile and a big dollop of smalltown common sense that heals the hatred 
festering in the heart of West Beverly Hills High's biggest bitches and makes 
all the rich dudes cluster around her like moths to a perky flame. Ironically, 
the real Brenda Walsh is also back and seems locked in competition with her 
replacement as to who can be the nicer and more helpful to those around her. 
The makers of the new 90210 didn't want to wallow in the same excess as Gossip 
Girl but, in embracing the sunshine and light of Annie Wilson, they've turned 
their show into a celebration of a high-school Sarah Palin.

Fringe

I have no complaints about an over-abundance of smiling from Anna Torv, the 
icy lead actress onFringe, JJ Abrams's new science-fiction conspiracy thriller. 
Torv's dogged FBI investigator is plunged into the world of the inexplicable 
when a planeload of passengers flying into Boston suddenly and collectively 
melt. Facing stonewalling and suspicious silence wherever she turns, Torv digs 
a genuinely mad scientist (John Noble from Lord Of The Rings) out of 
decades-long seclusion and then recruits the only other living being who can 
get any sort of sense out of the free-associating old nutcase, his smirking 
ne'er do-well son (Joshua Jackson).

Father and son have been at odds since the dad went to work for mysterious 
bio-tech giant, Massive Dynamics, where he experimented in mutation, 
reanimation and alien life-forms. All three of them have a niggling feeling 
that Massive Dynamics had a hand in the melting passengers on the Boston plane, 
but, while they're trying to join the dots, there are plenty of other bizarre 
cases to investigate.

My remaining impression of the first episode was the floating title graphics 
that give the location at the start of every scene. And how much Anna Torv 
looks like Cate Blanchett. Then I read a few reviews of the show and they all 
mentioned the graphics and Torv's Blanchett resemblance. No speculations on the 
conspiracy. No congratulations to Abrams on coming up with a worthy successor 
to The X Files. When your pilot episode strips its lead actress down to bra and 
panties, injects her with a hallucogenic and submerges her in a pool as part of 
a mind-meld experiment and all people remember is how cool the floating 
graphics looked, you might have a problem.

Bonnie Hunt

In the opening moments of a recent episode of Bonnie Hunt's new daytime 
talkshow, the comic-turned-host tearfully reminisced about the death of one of 
her dogs, then she made a cocaine joke, then she iChatted with her mother at 
such length and with so little regard for the audience that it seemed like she 
had forgotten she was still on TV.

The survivor of countless failed sitcoms, I don't believe anyone was expecting 
just how interesting Hunt would turn out to be. This is Bonnie Hunt, a regular 
Letterman guest, renowned for her deadpan sarcastic comebacks. But this is also 
Bonnie Hunt who, it turns out, is so sentimental, she weeps at other people's 
baby pictures. But this is also Bonnie Hunt whose marriage just broke up. So 
she'll segue from introducing her cousin in the audience who just had a liver 
transplant to a reference to her ex-husband's inattentiveness.

The streets of Hollywood are paved with the broken bones of actresses who 
thought a daytime talkshow would be the proverbial piece of piss - I just 
walked over Megan Mullally - but even if Bonnie Hunt doesn't end up becoming 
every American housewife's best friend, it's still a pleasure to watch her and 
her many personalities.
 