
After weeks of political paralysis, Afghanistan’s new president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/29/afghan-president-ashraf-ghani-inaugurated>
 has fulfilled what many thought should have been his first duty: he has formed 
a government.

A long dispute over last year’s election was only resolved after the winner, 
Ashraf Ghani,agreed to share power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/21/afghanistan-power-sharing-deal-abdullah-ashraf-ghani-ahmadzai>
 with his rival Abdullah Abdullah in a government of national unity.

It took Ghani and his chief executive more than three months to complete their 
first collaborative task. The announcement on Monday of 25 new ministers in a 
low-key ceremony in Kabul brought some relief to Afghans who worried that the 
government would not be able to function.

As the country’s economic crisis deepens and a rekindled insurgency gains 
ground, the need for political leadership grows by the day. That is a job that 
Ghani still has to prove he is up to. Known as a steamrolling reformer, he also 
has a reputation as a fastidious micro-manager.

Haroon Mir, a Kabul-based political analyst, said that to avoid the gridlock 
that had so far hampered the government, Ghani now needed to let go of the 
reins. “There is still a long process ahead. We will see if [Ghani] will have 
confidence in his ministers or if he will intervene,” Mir said.

Public pressure had been mounting in recent weeks as the president missed one 
self-imposed deadline after another. With the spring approaching, insurgents 
are gearing up for their annual fighting season, and a recent surge in violence 
coupled with political uncertainty has stirred anxiety among many Afghans.

Ghani and Abdullah are said to have haggled in particular over appointments to 
the main security organisations – the defence and interior ministries and the 
National Directorate of Security, the intelligence agency.

Ghani took charge of the defence ministry, to which he appointed Sher Mohammad 
Karimi, current chief of staff to the Afghan army. Abdullah picked Nur ul-Haq 
Ulumi, a former governor of Kandahar, to run the interior ministry.

As a general under the Soviet-backed regime that fell in 1992, Ulumi 
represents a time few Afghans wish to go back to, but his appointment is also a 
sign of a diversified cabinet.

The government, which still has to be approved by parliament, is dominated by 
new faces, including a handful of inexperienced politicians in their 30s and 
representatives of different ethnic backgrounds and regions.

Three cabinet posts went to women – the ministries of higher education, 
information and culture, and women’s affairs – fewer than the four previously 
promised by Ghani.

Nazifullah Salarzai, the president’s spokesperson, said finding the right 
cabinet balance had been the main cause of the delay. “It’s a national unity 
government so the cabinet should also be one that reflects national unity,” he 
said.

Since the election, Afghanistan’s new leaders have worked hard to demonstrate 
good governance. As one of his first tasks, Ghani took a swipe at corruption by 
reopening a fraud inquiry involving the country’s largest bank.

Abdullah was the first top Afghan official to chair a United Nations event to 
drum up humanitarian support. And the vice-president, Abdul Rashid Dostum, a 
notorious former warlord, posted photos on social media of more than 100 
Taliban fighters he had allegedly convinced to lay down their arms.

Yet little work was done in unison. The bad atmosphere of the elections seems 
to have bled into the two leaders’ personal relationship, leaving them in a 
perpetual power struggle. Many Afghans who had hoped for change feel 
disregarded.

“People in Afghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> have 
very bitter memories of the previous government because it didn’t pay any 
attention to the grievances of the public,” said Najib Sharifi, a civil society 
activist who runs the youth empowerment programme Afghan Voices. “If people get 
the impression that this government is the same, the government will lose its 
legitimacy, which will be very costly and very, very difficult to restore.”
 