
Afghanistan’s president has kicked off his Washington visit by thanking US 
troops and taxpayers for their sacrifices in nearly 14 years of war. He pledged 
that his impoverished country will not remain a burden to the west.

Afghan president launches charm offensive to win over Washington
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/22/afghan-president-ahraf-ghani-launches-charm-offensive-washington>
“We do not now ask what the United States can do for us,” Ashraf Ghani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ashraf-ghani> said in remarks on Monday 
meant to bolster the Obama administration’s conviction that Ghani is a reliable 
partner worth supporting over the long term.

“We want to say what Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> will do for itself and for the 
world,” he added. “And that means we are going to put our house in order.”

Ghani’s relationship with Washington stands in stark contrast to that of his 
predecessor, Hamid Karzai, whose antagonism toward the US culminated in a
refusal to sign security agreements with Washington and Nato 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/24/hamid-karzai-refuses-to-sign-us-afghan-security-deal>
 before leaving office last year. Ghani signed the pacts within days of 
becoming president in September, and has since enjoyed a close relationship 
with American diplomats and military leaders.

Ghani and his chief executive, Abdullah Abdullah, were welcomed by the US 
defense secretary, Ash Carter, at a ceremony in the Pentagon’s center courtyard.

It was a poignant setting for the start of Ghani’s visit. On 11 September 
2001, terrorists hijacked an American Airlines jetliner and flew it into the 
Pentagon, killing all aboard and 125 people in the building. The US responded 
to the attacks on Washington and New York’s World Trade Center by invading 
Afghanistan a month later, beginning the longest war in American history.

Ghani and Abdullah Abdullah were headed later on Monday to the Camp David 
presidential retreat for closed-door meetings with Carter and the secretary of 
state,John Kerry <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/john-kerry>. Later in the 
week Ghani is to meet with President Barack Obama at the White House and 
address a joint meeting of Congress.

Carter praised Ghani as a committed leader who knows that “Afghanistan’s 
future is ultimately for the Afghans to grab hold of and for Afghans to decide”.

Those themes emphasized by Carter and Ghani – that Kabul’s new leaders are 
more reliable and appreciative of US assistance, and that the US alone cannot 
solve Afghanistan’s problems – are central to the administration’s approach to 
carrying out President Obama’s pledge to end the war.

Obama has promised to remove the remaining US troops from Afghanistan by the 
end of his presidency. But deficiencies in the Afghan security forces, heavy 
casualties in the ranks of the Afghan army and police, a fragile new government 
and fears that Islamic State fighters could gain a foothold in Afghanistan have 
combined to persuade Obama to slow the withdrawal.

Instead of trimming the current US force of 9,800 to 5,500 by the end of this 
year, US officials say the administration now might keep many of them there 
well into 2016. Obama has said that after that, the US would only maintain an 
embassy-based security force in Kabul of perhaps 1,000 troops.

Ghani needs a firm commitment of American support in his fight against the 
Taliban and other insurgent groups, including an Islamic State affiliate, which 
he fears is finding a foothold in Afghanistan. With that in mind, Ghani 
proclaimed at the Pentagon ceremony on Monday that the US is supporting the 
winning side.

“We die. But we will never be defeated,” Ghani said. “Terrorism is a threat. 
It’s evil. But we the people of Afghanistan are willing to speak truth to 
terror by saying no, you will never overwhelm us, you will never subdue us. We 
are going to overcome.

“And in this endeavor our partnership with the United States is foundational 
because we will be the first line of defense for freedom globally,” he added.
 