
Ahmed Wali Karzai <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ahmed-wali-karzai>, the 
younger brother of the Afghan president, Hamid Karzai, has been on the CIA's 
payroll for almost eight years, it was reported today.

The New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2009/10/28/world/asia/28intel.html?hp>, quoting unnamed 
current and former US officials, reported that the CIA was paying the 
president's brother, long alleged to be a powerful druglord, for "a variety of 
services".

The report said these included the recruitment of a paramilitary group to do 
US bidding in and around Kandahar, where he is the head of the provincial 
council.

The paramilitaries – known as the Kandahar Strike Force – have been accused of 
conducting rogue operations and score-settling. They are based in a Kandahar 
compound that Ahmed Wali Karzai also rents to theCIA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cia> and US special forces as an 
operations base, the report said.

The president's brother was also reported to act as a middle man between the 
CIA and Taliban loyalists as part of attempts to persuade them to change sides. 
He has long been alleged to be involved in the opium trade in southern
Afghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>, and the CIA links 
are a cause of deep divisions in Barack Obama's administration, the New York 
Times said.

Ahmed Wali Karzai denied being involved in drug trafficking, or being paid by 
the CIA, in an interview with the newspaper. "I work with the Americans, the 
Canadians, the British, anyone who asks for my help. They [CIA] do their own 
recruitment. I have no idea where they get their recruits. It's absolutely 
ridiculous," he told the Associated Press.

Associated Press quoted a US congressional official as confirming the New York 
Times story, and saying some in Congress had known of the link "for some time".

Speaking to the Council on Foreign Relations on Monday, the US senator John 
Kerry said he had asked US intelligence and law enforcement for solid evidence 
against Ahmed Wali Karzai but had not been given any. "I have requested from 
our intelligence sources and law enforcement folks the smoking gun, the 
evidence," he said. "Nobody has given me the sort of hard and fast 'here's what 
we heard them say' or 'here's what we've caught him doing' or 'here's what he's 
involved in'. So this swirls around."

Kerry said there were "things that Ahmed Wali Karzai has done that haven't 
been helpful. There are things he does that are very helpful for us."

He added: "We need to look hard at the balance of how we can best manage 
Kandahar and that particular region."

The report of CIA ties comes at a time when the Obama administration is 
contemplating increasing US troop numbers in Afghanistan, and 10 days before 
the second round of the country's presidential elections, called after evidence 
emerged of widespread voter fraud in the first round by Hamid Karzai's brothers.

The president is widely expected to win the second round against a former 
foreign minister, Abdullah Abdullah, and it had been hoped that the poll would 
help bolster Karzai's flagging legitimacy among Afghans. But reports of ties 
between his brother and the CIA are likely to damage his credibility still 
further.

The report will also revive debate in the US over the CIA's role. The agency 
was heavily criticised for its links with rightwing paramilitaries and drug 
lords in Latin America in the 1970s and 80s. But after the 11 September 2001 
attacks, critics argued it had become too timid and was so constrained by rules 
and political correctness that it was virtually unable to gather intelligence 
in troubled parts of the world.
 