
A suicide bomber in Afghanistan’s eastern city of Jalalabad killed at least 33 
people and injured more than 100 after setting off a blast outside a bank where 
government workers collect salaries, the city’s police chief has said.

The Afghan president, Ashraf Ghani, blamed Islamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> militants, without giving further 
details. If true, it would be the first such major attack carried out by the 
group in Afghanistan, marking a significant step in its expansion into south 
Asia.


Up until now militants claiming allegiance to Isis in Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> have been widely identified as 
former Taliban fighters disillusioned with their leadership. The Taliban itself 
condemned Saturday’s attack as “evil”.

The explosion smashed windows and sent debris flying across a tree-lined 
street, filling the air with smoke and dust.

“It was a suicide attack,” police chief Fazel Ahmad Sherzad told a press 
conference. He added that officials were investigating witness reports of a 
second explosion after people had rushed to the area to help the wounded.

Police said a later blast that shook Jalalabad was a controlled detonation 
after experts discovered a further bomb close to the scene of the initial 
explosion.

Local media said a former spokesman for the Pakistani Taliban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/taliban> had claimed responsibility on 
behalf of Isis in both Pakistan and Afghanistan.

Islamist militants of various hues already hold sway across unsettled and 
impoverished areas of south Asia, but Isis has started to draw support from 
younger fighters in the region, impressed by its rapid capture of territory in 
Syria and Iraq.

Ghani visited the US last month and warned that Isis posed a “terrible threat” 
to his country.

Taliban insurgents denied responsibility and did not comment on the alleged 
Isis link. The militants, who were ousted from power by a US-led invasion in 
2001, rarely claim attacks that kill large groups of civilians, saying they 
target foreigners or the Afghan military and government.

“It was an evil act. We strongly condemn it,” a Taliban spokesman, Zabihullah 
Mujahid, told Reuters.




 