
The head of Afghanistan’s main intelligence agency has resigned over 
disagreements with the president,Ashraf Ghani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ashraf-ghani>, laying bare divisions that 
have hindered efforts to fight the growing Taliban insurgency.

The resignation of Rahmatullah Nabil follows a series of setbacks in recent 
months including the fall of the northern city of Kunduz to theTaliban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/taliban> and an insurgent raid on Kandahar 
airport in the south on Tuesday in which 50 civilians, police and security 
personnel were killed.

Already without a permanent defence minister due to conflicts within Ghani’s 
national unity government, the country now has no spy chief just as the 
Kandahar raid underlined the Taliban’s ability to inflict serious damage on its 
forces.

Nabil, who strongly opposed Ghani’s moves towards a rapprochement with 
Pakistan, said in his letter of resignation from the National Directorate of 
Security (NDS) that there had been “a lack of agreement on some policy matters” 
in recent months.

He said the president had imposed unacceptable conditions on the way he did 
his job, with “repeated verbal summons” that put him under impossible pressure.

Relations between Ghani and the NDS had been strained since at least the fall 
of Kunduz, which caught security forces badly unprepared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/29/taliban-capture-kunduz-major-blow-afghan-government>
 and which an inquiry last month blamed on poor leadership.

However long it lasts, Taliban capture of Kunduz is a major blow to Afghan 
government
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/29/taliban-capture-kunduz-major-blow-afghan-government>
Later, Ghani dismissed some NDS officials, including the agency’s provincial 
chief, who he said had neglected their duty to defend Kunduz. The Taliban held 
the city for several days before government troops regained control.

Ghani issued a statement on Thursday saying he had not wanted Nabil to resign 
because of the difficult security situation but he respected the decision. An 
interim replacement would be named soon, he said.

The resignation raises fresh questions over the leadership of Afghanistan’s 
security apparatus, which has struggled to contain a Taliban insurgency that 
has gained momentum since international forces ended most combat operations 
last year.

It also clouds prospects for a coordinated effort to resume peace talks 
including both the Taliban and Pakistan which were broken off this year. Ghani 
attended a Heart of Asia peace conference in Islamabad on Wednesday.

The president’s official Facebook page, which announced the resignation, was 
immediately flooded with hundreds of angry comments, most of them abusing the 
government.

“Shame on the presidential palace, Nabil resigned because he was anti-Taliban 
and anti-Pakistan,” wrote one user in a comment typical of many others.

The Taliban said the Kandahar operation had succeeded in “humiliating” the 
government “by sending a message that the mujahideen are able to reach the most 
secure enemy locations undetected”.

In an angrily worded post on Facebook that appeared before the resignation 
letter was made public, Nabil made clear his frustration with efforts to work 
with Pakistan, which many inAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> accuse of controlling the 
Taliban. He said the blood of innocent people spilled in recent attacks was 
“the same colour as the red carpet we trod like a catwalk”.
 