
AFL boss Gillon McLachlan says retired great Adam Goodes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-goodes> would be an ideal candidate to 
become the league’s first Indigenous Commission member.

McLachlan said the AFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> was looking 
forward to working with the Swans’ dual premiership winner, two-time Brownlow 
medallist and former Australian of the Year in some capacity whenever Goodes 
decided the time was right.

“Commission decisions are beyond my pay grade but there’s no doubt that Adam 
Goodes has the potential to be an outstanding candidate for a commissioner,” 
McLachlan said on Wednesday after announcing Sydney would host the AFL draft 
for the next two years.

2016 AFL season preview: Fremantle Dockers and Sydney Swans | Russell Jackson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/23/2016-afl-season-preview-fremantle-dockers-and-sydney-swans>
“Adam is a legend of our game. He’s in the handful of most influential people 
in the history of the modern AFL.

“He knows about how the AFL feels about him. Our game’s been wonderful to him, 
but he’s more than given that back and been extraordinary for our game and ... 
there’s many roles that are available to him any time he feels he wants to do 
that.

“He’s having a break from football. He’s been great for football and he’s been 
playing for a long time and we’ll pick up that conversation at some point.”

Goodes retired last year after a decorated career spanning 372 games but the 
final year of his career was marred by ugly booing from supporters, which 
Goodes and Sydney believed was racially motivated.

Worn down by the ongoing controversy, Goodes sat out the Swans’ round 18 game 
against Adelaide after the booing had reached a crescendo in the previous 
week’s loss to West Coast in Perth.

He returned to complete the season, but declined to participate in the annual 
parade of retiring players on grand final day.

The AFL was criticised for not addressing the issue more quickly and 
decisively at the time, although an official apology to Goodes was included in 
the annual report.

“There are private conversations and then there’s a public demonstration of 
that,” said McLachlan. “The annual report records the history of 2015 and there 
was a lot done and we had a national conversation about race.

“But what I articulated was it was complicated and we were talking about a lot 
of things and there were moving pieces. But we were a week late and I want to 
put that on record and I think that’s appropriate.”
 