
If any city can take the arrival of a trainload of musicians from Africa and 
Britain in its stride, it's Bristol. After all, half a mile up the road from 
the Creative Commons big top where they are playing, gangs of actors dressed as 
zombies are roaming the city centre in the mass participation street game, 2.8 
Hours Later, part of the annual IgFest. Compared with the undead,Africa Express 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/africa-express> seems pretty normal.

And this is also the city that, 30 years ago, became the home base for the 
Womad organisation, after a group of idealistic punks persuaded Peter Gabriel 
that bringing musicians from across the world to a west country festival was a 
good idea. The spirit of cross-cultural pollination that Womad was always keen 
to foster has been taken on by Damon Albarn and his travelling troupe, with all 
the modern updates of Twitter feeds, rolling blogs and photos uploaded by the 
musicians as they travel between cities, rehearsing, jamming and clearly having 
a ball. They spread out in groups across the city during the day after pulling 
in to the Brunel-designed Temple Meads station. Malian singer Afel Bocum and 
John Paul Jones played a pop-up set in the Canteen, one of the many independent 
bars and clubs rejuvenating the Stokes Croft area.

Back in the big top, the evening audience contained a mix of the curious and 
the converted, with many veterans of Womad events who were entirely familiar 
with the various African instruments – koras and balofons, tama drums and ouds 
– on show. With up to 20 musicians crammed on to the stage at any one time, 
there was a sense of barely contained anarchy – with one very muscular stage 
manager changing mic stands, making sure the right guitars were on stage at the 
right time for the right musicians, and generally keeping a lid on the 
simmering chaos.

In a rolling four-hour programme, themes and stars emerged. It was striking to 
realise just how much hip-hop has moulded the sound of the younger African 
artists – and how they in turn are changing it. Also notable was the absence of 
the long, noodly guitar solos that can dominate in an improvised show (and many 
of these songs are worked up and rehearsed on the train). Instead, everyone 
plays in complete service to the rhythm, with lots of urgent eye contact 
between players.

For this kind of thing to work the musicians have to be better than good – as 
everyone here was. The British jazz drummer Seb Roachford shone, as did the 
elegant Malian singer Rokia Traoré. Her duet with Albarn on the Gorillaz song 
Melancholy Hill was a gentle and heartstopping quiet in the storm. Amadou 
Bagayoko, here without his singing partner Mariam, showed what a creative 
guitarist he is, lifting a version of the Clash's Train in Vain (well, there 
had to be one train song, surely?)

Albarn may be the public face of Africa Express, but he was determined to 
remain mainly in the background, playing keyboards and rarely coming to stage 
front. He sang lead on one song, apologising before its start because it was, 
he said, a rehearsal for the following night's London show, where it would be 
played with a special guest on vocals. His attempt at mimicking Paul 
McCartney's high vocal line on the 1970s Wings single Coming Up – was well 
worth the apology, but greeted with good humour. Expect it to be a lot better 
when the original singer joins up and the song's African roots – its snaking 
guitar line owes much to McCartney's stay in Lagos while recordingBand on the 
Run – are fully explored.

The second biggest roar of the evening greeted the leviathan bass line of Led 
Zeppelin's Kashmir, remade here with British and African rappers rushing over 
and under the beat, Traoré adding a ghostly vocal and John Paul Jones, the man 
who wrote its epic, North African-influenced string arrangements, playing 
mandolin in a maelstrom of noise.

Here was a moment that summed up the night: a horn section valiantly trying 
but failing to lead the huge band into a key change, a host of young rappers 
yelling wildly at an avuncular bloke in a suit with a mandolin – and a beaming, 
no longer harassed stage manager enthusiastically joining the percussion 
section.

In all the hothouse of new, unfamiliar, exhilarating material, it was 
forgivable that the evening's biggest cheer was reserved for the end of this 
well loved warhorse of a song, written long before many of those performing it 
had been born.
 