
Reporters and presenters:

Presenter:

JV John Vidal

Reporters:

DS David Smith

EE Ellen Elmendorp

LF Liz Ford

RK Richard Kavuma


SJ Sam Jones

Participants:

AS Angel Siyavuya Swartbooi, known as ‘Siya’


N Nonzuzo, Siya’s mother

WK Wyclif Kukiriza


DLD David Lewis Dieumerci

HAK Hannah Adzo Klutsey


B Benjamin, Hannah’s father

DMM Debrah Matei Mwololo

ZSA Zainab Salehe Abu 

Innocent Smoke

 Sijjin Kuang

 Prosper Mumba

Podcast

JV It all began with a few people sitting around in a room in London talking 
about debt relief in Africa and millennium goals and statistics and policies. 
What we realised that we didn’t have was the voice ofAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, we didn’t have people telling their 
own stories.

My name is John Vidal and I am normally the environment man at the Guardian. 
And ten years ago I went to Zambia, Malawi,Tanzania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/tanzania> and Uganda. This idea that the 
millennium development goals were going to change the future of a continent 
over a long period of time gave us the idea of the birth of the idea being 
matched by the birth of children.

 It’s really a journalistic enterprise to witness and to record the voices of 
ten children as they grow up and as they develop and as their countries and 
their continent develops into something we know not what.

DS My name is David Smith. I’m the Africa correspondent of the Guardian, based 
in Johannesburg. I just flew to Cape Town to visit Angel Siyavuya Swartbooi 
born in 2005 and living in a township called Khayelitsha on the outskirts of 
Cape Town.

AS My name is Angel Siyavuya Swartbooi. My age is ten years old. 

DS South Africa, as we know, is in many ways the superpower of the continent. 
Yet 21 years after the end of racial apartheid there is what many people would 
say is still a total crisis in the education system. Around half the children 
who begin school proper inSouth Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica> will drop out by the time they 
come to the metric exam which I guess is the equivalent of GCSEs really.

A South African child's tale: Angel Siyavuya Swartbooi at 10 years old | David 
Smith
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/31/africa-children-south-africa-angel-siyavuya-swartbooi-at-10-years-old>
 What’s your favourite subject at school? 

AS Medicine. 

DS Siya, as he’s known to his family, he’s now at a primary school in 
Khayelitsha. He has a bit of a long walk to get there but it’s free at the 
point of entry, it’s a government school that’s 20 years old. Many schools are 
underperforming but in Siya’s particular case it’s going reasonably well.

DS What time do you get up every day to come to school? 

AS Six o’clock, or half six. 

DS Is that too early? 

AS Yes. 

DS It’s been fascinating to watch Siya’s family, his father, Benson, and his 
mother, Nonzuzo, gradually incrementally sort of hauling themselves up. They’re 
still in a very modest shack in Khayelitsha in South Africa; there’s a lot of 
poverty and there’s a lot of crime but over the years they’ve very gradually 
expanded the shack from one room to two, from 12 square meters to about 25 
square meters to sort of slowly but surely improve their daily lives. Nonzuzo 
is very determined to study. She quit her job as a waitress at a casino, she 
got a bursary, she’s begun a three-year teaching diploma at a college and she 
has ambitions to go to university, study for a degree and become a teacher.

EE Nonzuzo, when you finish your studies, can you teach in a school like this?

N Yes when I finish, I’m going to teach from grade R to grade 9. 

EE What’s the salary?

N The salary? 

EE With your teaching. 

N I think it’s ten. 

DS In the long term they hope to move out the shack and the township to a more 
middle-class area. They’re very hardworking and lots of ambition and slowly but 
surely getting there.

A Ugandan child's tale: Wyclif Kukiriza at 10 years old | Liz Ford
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/31/africa-children-uganda-wyclif-kukiriza-at-10-years-old>
LZ I’m Liz Ford, and I’m deputy editor of the Guardian Global development 
section; and I was lucky to go toUganda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/uganda> and speak to Wyclif.

WK My name is Wyclif Kukiriza.

LZ And how old are you, Wyclif? 

RK He says, ‘I am ten years old.’

LZ When Wyci was born the family was living in a three-bedroom house in 
Kampala. Five years ago he was in school, everything was doing okay. 
Unfortunately over the last ten years life seems to have taken a bit of a 
downward spiral for the family. Five years ago they were moved to a two bedroom 
bungalow and now after Dad left three years ago the family is now living in one 
room in Bwaise. Mum, Deborah, is struggling so she washes clothes and she sells 
second-hand shoes to support herself and Wyci and his younger brother, and an 
older daughter from a previous relationship. So life is difficult for her.

 The school that he was going to up until a few years ago actually closed. It 
was a government-run school so there were no fees. This is an area that floods 
a lot and the government decided that this school was too dangerous to keep 
open, so it closed it. And rather than give an alternative it’s just kind of 
almost like walked away. The nearest schools generally are private institutions 
and mother Deborah just cannot afford the fees. So Wyci is not in school at the 
moment.

JV Every single family who we picked ten years ago has gone through their own 
dramas of just surviving in sometimes very difficult circumstances. InMalawi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malawi>, Innocent Smoke’s parents they 
uprooted themselves from Lilongwe, the capital, in a desperate attempt to try 
and earn more money. The problem with that was that the schools around there 
are absolutely hopeless. So young Innocent, although he started off well, and 
did very well for the first couple of years in class, has really now stopped 
and he hasn’t learnt any English at all and he really hasn’t got any 
confidence. And a lot of that I think is to do with the school system.

A Malawian child's tale: Innocent Smoke at 10 years old | John Vidal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/31/africa-children-malawi-innocent-smoke-at-10-years-old>
 They thought that by becoming farmers and by growing tobacco and growing 
maize they could do better. And in a way they did, it was absolutely 
tremendous. What they were hit by was climate change he says so he’s only had 
two good harvests in seven/eight years. And hit by commodity prices; so tobacco 
partly because of the west getting out of smoking cigarettes, tobacco prices 
have gone down. So they’ve been hit by things much greater than themselves and 
now want to go back. He wants to go back and be a builder. He feels that 
there’s an elite middle-class in Lilongwe and he can build for them and he can 
make a lot of money as he wants to become a property developer, whether he 
could ever so do is another matter; but that’s his dream is to make money from 
the wealthy new class which is arriving in Lilongwe.

DS It’s interesting to see this within the narrative of changes in Africa over 
the past decade. A lot has been said and written about Africa rising, about the 
economic boom in many countries, not least driven by Chinese investments and 
Chinese seeking resources. And a lot of that is true, there are great headline 
figures. But when you dig deeper into it there has been rising inequality, and 
while there is an elite who are benefiting and certainly an expanding middle 
class, also millions of people being left behind. So it’s important to temper 
all the euphoria with some reality.

DL My name is David Lewis. I’m in fifth grade at St Clement’s School. 

JV Young David Lewis in the Democratic Republic of Congo – tell me what 
happened to him because this is quite an extraordinary story.

A Congolese child's tale: David Dieumerci Lewis at 10 years old | Aaron Ross
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/31/africa-children-democratic-republic-congo-drc-david-lewis-dieumerci-10-years-old>
LF He was going to a Catholic school which was a short walk from where he 
lives with his parents and three siblings. Maths was his favourite subject. But 
unfortunately his dad has been out of work for quite a while and mum needed an 
operation to recover the vision in her right eye quite recently and that was 
about $600. So the school that he was going to would charge $50 in school fees 
each semester and there’s no way the family could afford it.

DL I’m not able to attend school as a student seated on the bench. As soon as 
I arrive I’m immediately sent away. When Mama brings me back to plead, they 
don’t want me to enter because she has to pay the school fees as papa doesn’t 
work and there’s no-one there to help us.

LF It does seem possibly that there’s concerns about street gangs in this 
particular part where they are living, so the next five years are going to be 
crucial for his development and the avenues that he could find himself going 
into. So it’s just really difficult to say. You can be going along quite well 
in a lot of places there isn’t that safety net. So things could be fine one day 
and then the rug is pulled under you the next day and you’ve got very little 
choices or opportunities.

DL When I grow up I need to become president. I could become president of 
Europe, of Angola. Yes I could replace President Kabila. As president I’m going 
to develop my country.

SJ My name’s Sam Jones. I’m the Guardian’s Global Development correspondent 
and I’ve been in Accra,Ghana <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ghana>, looking 
for one of our Hear Africa babies, a 10-year-old girl whose name is Hannah 
Klutsey.

HK My name is Hannah Klutsey. I am class three. My school name is … 
[inaudible].

A Ghanaian child's tale: Hannah Adzo Klutsey at 10 years old | Sam Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/31/africa-children-ghana-hannah-adzo-klutsey-at-10-years-old>
SJ I think we need to recognise that Ghana has done incredibly well on poverty 
reduction. Hannah Klutsey who is now 10, like all the other children whose 
progress we’ve been following, is still in school. It’s a big struggle for her 
family but she’s carrying on getting education and she’s doing pretty well 
health-wise. That said, the reality as ever is a little bit more complicated. 
While average-wise across the country things are doing well, in the north it’s 
very different. And even in the outskirts of Accra where Hannah and her family 
live, life is not easy.

B Well I’ve heard of them.

SJ And do they [the goals] have any practical impact on his life, does he see 
anything getting better because of this talk?

B I am seeing improvements in my life. I got electricity about three months 
ago. Formerly I was connected to someone else’s line.

SJ Her dad is sort of getting by in a hand-to-mouth existence taking work, 
digging topsoil to get sand that is taken into Accra. He gets to work some 
days, some days he doesn’t. So the family struggle by on about eight quid a 
week and they’re managing but it’s basically just that, it’s managing.

SJ Does she help her mother, what does she do to help her mother? 

SJ You fetch water. And you fetch water from … over there? So off we go a 
little way from your house and past some chickens, and it must be about 15, 20 
yards away there is a concrete well and I can see somebody’s beaten us to it 
and they’ve already got a bucket.

SJ The family is getting by, they’re happy. And as dad, Benjamin, told me that 
their house now has its own electricity and they don’t have to tap to be able 
to survive anymore. They’ve got an outside toilet they can use and the water 
that Hannah draws from the well it’s clean and doesn’t make them sick. And he 
says those are all new things that he’s seen over the past 10 or so years. So 
even though he’s scraping by living hand to mouth supporting his family he has 
seen some concrete improvements.

DMM My name is Debrah Mwololo. I am ten years old. Five years ago I was 
smaller but now I am big. I am tall now.

A Kenyan child's tale: Debrah Matei Mwololo at 10 years old | Murithi Mutiga
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/31/africa-children-kenya-debrah-matei-mwololo-at-10-years-old>
DMM I have one brother and one sister. 

LF Debrah in Kenya, our 10-year-old in Kenya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/kenya> it’s just so nice to have an upbeat 
story. She says how much she loves school and she loves her teacher and she 
loves Christian religious education particularly, at school. She’s got her best 
friend. She loves reading. So this school that’s quite near the family home in 
Nairobi. So very positive. A completely different view on how well education 
and how well a child can do just in a different environment.

DMM My favourite storybook is Grandmother Visits.

LF Life is very rosy and very positive – and that’s just a brilliant thing to 
hear. The house they have electricity, she has TV, she has friends, she likes 
playing hide and seek with her friends. There is a slight concern, there’s 
rumours that where they’re living, the houses may be demolished at some point 
because it’s a poorer area and these kind of areas are quite fragile places to 
live. But I think that for now they’re not thinking about that and she just 
seems a very happy child.

SJ A little earlier this year I was also in the outskirts of Dar es Salaam in 
Tanzania, looking for another of our Hear Africa children, a little girl called 
Zainab.

ZSA I go to … [inaudible] … primary school. I’m in class four.


A Tanzanian child's tale: Zainab Salehe Abu at 10 years old | Sam Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/31/africa-children-tanzania-zainab-salehe-abu-at-10-years-old>
SJ Zainab’s family they’re really struggling. Life is far from easy for them. 
Just talking about health, Zainab’s life is punctuated with bouts of malaria. 
When I was there she said she had very bad malaria in January. She had to take 
a week off school, she felt light-headed. She told me she thought she was going 
to die.

 In May 2005 Guardian colleagues found Sijjin Kuang 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2005/jun/21/hearafrica05.development14>; he 
was born in a mud hut on the outskirts of Rumbek in what was then southern 
Sudan. He was born on 16 May and he died on 23 May, so he died a week after he 
was born. Several reasons, by the look of things, for this. It looks like his 
umbilical cord was cut with a dirty razor which gave him tetanus. He seems to 
have got an infection of the airways as well. And on top of that he was bitten 
by a mosquito and probably had malaria as well. So three incredibly difficult 
conditions all at once, and at a week old, there was no chance.

JV In Malawi the child mortality certainly in the Smoke family is not a 
problem. They started off when I met them, there were three children now there 
are seven children. The family is happy, the family believes strongly that the 
improvements in child mortality have led to their wealth, have led to their 
confidence in the future. So actually it’s a very positive story from Malawi.

 What I found really problematic was the health, and I’ll talk just very 
briefly about young Innocent Smoke because he was doing quite well at school 
and then he’s got very early signs of trachoma which is an eye disease which, 
inevitably, will blind him over the next ten years unless he gets to a clinic 
pretty fast in Lilongwe. And this was a story right way through all the 
families I talked to in Malawi had some child, one child which was very, very 
ill.

SJ The big story really has been HIV and Aids. South Africa still has the 
biggest case load in the world. But after those years of denialism by the South 
African governments, now there’s ahuge programme of [anti-retrovirals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2013/nov/20/hiv-aids-poorer-countries-treatment-antiretroviral>
] and it’s made a real impact in terms of improving life expectancy; and 
importantly in this context reducing mother-to-child transmission and therefore 
improving the child mortality figures. There are still major problems clearly 
and again in rural areas children do suffer. But South Africa apart from one or 
two areas does not have malaria and does not have a lot of the major issues 
that we’re talking about elsewhere.

LF Millennium development goal number six which talks about combating HIV and 
Aids in Uganda which has made significant progress over the years of tackling 
that particular issue; Wyci’s mum, Deborah, actually when Wyci was born in 2005 
there were worries that he might become an Aids orphan because his parents were 
both HIV positive but not on antiretrovirals. Wyci himself was born free of the 
virus because he had the right care and his mum had the right care in hospital 
when he was born, which was brilliant news. In 2005, or by 2005, both mum and 
dad were on ARVs and Deborah is still on them – she collects them free. So her 
health, from that point of view, is really good and the family seem well in 
that regard.

DS Siya and his parents are happy, they would say. They’re a very strong 
couple and really dream of getting married one day. But for that Benson would 
have to pay a lobola, or bride price, to Nonzuzo’s mother of about £1,000. He’s 
got a fairly steady job as a chef and he’s trying to raise that money. Of 
course life is very tough but the couple of occasions when I’ve been to see 
them they’re friendly and aspiring and looking at the next opportunity.

JV It was very difficult for them in the north of Malawi. The one thing which 
struck me though was that the aspirations were still high, there was still that 
absolute will to improve life for the children and also for the parents for 
themselves.

LF For Wyci he still talks about wanting to be a doctor. He did want to be a 
pilot a few years ago but now it’s a doctor. But the big question is whether he 
actually gets any education at all. Deborah is not a woman I think that’s going 
to sit back and … Things have happened but I think she’s quite a tough woman, 
she’s not somebody that wants sympathy. She was just telling this is just life. 
And it was difficult. You could see it was difficult for her. The house that 
they’re in mum’s made it look nice, she’s put lace curtains. She cares about 
where she’s living but there’s no electricity, the roof leaks. But they do have 
a water tap nearby which they contribute to the cost of. And she’s had training 
in tailoring and now she just needs to find the money to buy a sewing machine 
and the materials. There could be good things. She’s being supported by an 
organisation called United We Stand that works in Bwaise, so she’s on their 
radar. Wyci’s on their radar. So I think she’s getting support that she needs 
which is great.

A Nigerian child's tale: Confidant Danjuma Martins at 10 years old | Isaac 
Abrak
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/31/africa-children-nigeria-confidant-danjuma-martins-at-10-years-old>
N He says he loves football because it keeps him fit and he loves running 
about.

DS Right now, Siya himself is 10 years old and literally wants to become a 
professional footballer, ideally for Barcelona. That’s like boys around the 
world, probably not super-realistic. And like some of the other children he’s 
not yet learned English even though he’s 10, and that could hold him back 
within South Africa where English still dominates business and politics. But 
the family overall, they’re on an upward trajectory and Nonzuzo is very 
determined to get this education and try to become a teacher. From what I’ve 
seen of her I don’t think she’ll let the normal barriers stop her.

N My aim is for them not to grow up being the men staying … I want to build a 
better home for them.

DS They’ve got a real shot at it, a real chance. Even though South Africa is 
one of the most unequal societies in the world and there’s no doubt it will be 
very difficult. Unemployment is officially 25%, unofficially about 35%. It 
won’t be easy but I think Nonzuzo and her husband Benson could get there.

SJ Hannah’s dream is to become a doctor. She wants to do that. She wants to 
help people. As simple as that. Given where she’s living and how hard her 
family’s life is, my god, it’s going to be extraordinarily difficult. Zainab, 
who’s pretty good at maths, got 90% in her last exam. English not quite so 
good, but her dream is to become a teacher which is quite an impressive one 
seeing as the school she goes to there are 108 children in her class. By her 
own,frankly rather difficult, experience of education Zainab is very keen to be 
a teacher. And I wouldn’t be surprised …

JV The children can now speak. They had nothing to say when they were born and 
when they were five they were very, very, very shy and now they’re getting 
their confidence. And now they’re talking with their own voice and so it’s no 
longer the voice of the parents. They’re not speaking for Malawi or Tanzania or 
Ghana or anywhere but they’re individuals and they reflect a broader truth 
about Africa which I think we all recognise. In five years time it will be a 
different story. They’re lives effectively will have been set.

SJ I think it’s a really good way of putting a human face on these huge 
overarching global initiatives. Sometimes you miss out on the precise human 
implications of all this. And seeing a baby when he or she is born, seeing them 
five years later, ten years later, following the family and hearing about their 
daily struggles, what’s going well for them, what their aspirations are, what 
their dreams are – it’s just an incredibly valuable way of understanding what 
impact the MDGs are having.

JV Once you get involved with a family even if it’s only once every five years 
you begin to want the best for them in every way. My hopes for the families are 
exactly the same as the family’s hopes that they will do well, that they will 
better themselves, that they will be responsible citizens in very difficult 
circumstances.

KS All of our programmes are available on the Guardian’s website. That’s 
theguardian.com/global-development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development> and on SoundCloud, iTunes and 
all podcasting apps. This programme was presented by John Vidal and the 
producer was Kary Stewart. Until next month, goodbye.
 