
Ridiculously some people have chosen this as an opportunity to question South 
Africa's ability to host the World Cup. It's very odd logic: did the unrest in 
Paris in 2005 cast doubt on the 2006 World Cup in Germany?

Well, a few days ago the focus on this game would have been on the hosts' 
attempts to take on one of the most talented teams in the tournament. Now, the 
debate is whether Togo should stay in the tournament.At the moment, it seems 
they will return return home after Friday's attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/jan/10/togo-prime-minister-calls-national-team>
. Let me know what you think.

Mali <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mali> are many people's choices for 
dark horse for the tournament. Although, I'm not sure if a team boasting 
players from Real Madrid, Barcelona, Juventus and Sevilla can really be 
described as dark horses.

"Really excited by your min by min Tom. I think Mali will win, and if
they don't then Angola <https://www.theguardian.com/football/angola> could. Or 
it may be a draw," says Sachmo Nakro from Delaware, who might be my colleague 
Sachin Nakrani giggling to himself across the office. He's a lonely may in many 
ways. In every way.

Your teams, sir (or madame)

Angola: Fernandes, Mabina, Kali, Rui Marques, Stelvio, Xara, Dede, Zuela, 
Gilberto, Flavio, Manucho.
Mali: Sidibe, Diamountene, Berthe, Tamboura, Soumare, Diarra, Traore, Traore, 
Bagayoko, Maiga, Kanoute.

"The action gets underway in 12 minutes!" says the man on Eurosport, with 
commendable accuracy. Keita is out for Mali with a thigh injury.

1 min: And we're off. "I'm having a terrible time with the COCAN2010 official 
website," says Colin Smith. "Seems to be running low on server space or 
something. It keeps crashing on me. Can you recommend a decent and 
comprehensive website to follow this tournament?" I can name one pretty close 
to home which has inaccurate, poorly written coverage but I'll get the sack if 
I recommend any other websites. Just type "dead good websites for football and 
that" into Google. Something will turn up.

2 min: Angola find some early space down the left and Sidibe has to zoom off 
his line to claim the ball.

3 min: The Patriots are being absolutely done by Baltimore over on Sky Sports 
2. I know that's not veryAfrica Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> but Kanoute is 
wandering around aimlessly about at the minute.

6 min: Flavio trots across the edge of the box but his shot is straight into 
the arms of Sidibe. I should say that Sissoko is also out for Mali with an 
injury making their horse that little bit darker. Is a team a darker or lighter 
horse the worse they get? An interesting question.

8 min: Hmmm. Angola are the better team at the moment, obviously spurred on by 
the buzz from the crowd. Manucho frees Flavio down the left again but he 
tackled as he advances into the box.

10 min:  Malian ace and sometime Bon Jovi guitarist Richy Samboura tricks his 
way down the left but he can't keep possession.

12 min: Corner for Mali, who are starting to come into the game more. Traore's 
centre is cleared easily though and Berthe is then caught offside as Mali 
attack again.

15 min:  Both sides are finding it tough to cut through the midfield murk.

17 min:  Flavio, who has been Angola's best player by far, has his pass cut 
out as he hangs around the penalty area. Mali then lump a free-kick straight 
into the loving arms of Fernandes.

20 min:  Soumare messes about on the edge of the box while he decides whther 
to put in a wicked, skimming cross in or get tackled. In the end he plumps for 
the latter. Bah!

23 min: Mali launch a counter-attack after an Angola corner but Miaga 
misplaces his pass. "I always wondered why Manucho never seemed to get a fair 
whack at playing for Man Utd, the last time I saw him in action was at this 
tournament 2 years ago and he impressed me. He couldn't have been any worse 
than Welbeck." He's probably been the second best player on the pitch so far, 
Flavio apart. He's going to score an own goal now, isn't he?

25 min:  Dede catches his studs in the turf and is stretchered off. Djalma is 
on in his place.

28 min: Djalma has his first significant touch and wins a corner for Angola. 
Gilberto takes and manages to land the ball fairly near the centre circle. Well 
done sir!

30 min: "There's no pattern to the game yet," says the Eurosport commentator. 
He's wrong though, it's a pattern of manure sprayed against a wall. Kanoute 
wins a goal-kick for Angola. See?

33 min: Our news desk have told me that Togo have definitely left the 
tournament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/jan/10/togo-prime-minister-calls-national-team>
. On the pitch we have the first clear cut chance as Djalma's flashing header 
is well saved by Sidibe.

35 min:  Maiga is off for Keita, who seems to have got over his thigh injury 
pretty quickly. Nope, I don't understand either. Keita's first piece of action 
is to sky a free-kick into the night sky.

 GOAL! Angola 1-0 Mali (Flavio 37)  Free-kick to Angola. It's whipped in, Mali 
sit back and admire and Flavio, the most dangerous man so far, gets a whole lot 
more dangerous as he finsihes from six-yards out.

 39 min:  Angola have hardly been brilliant but they've been far more 
ambitious than Mali and deserve their lead.

41 min: Eurosport are now reporting Togo may go home for three days and try 
and return to the tournament afterwards. That would be pretty tough to schedule.

GOAL! Angola 2-0 Mali (Flavio 42) Mabina whips a cross straight onto the head 
of Flavio. The pace is already on the ball and Flavio only needs to redirect 
the cross. Sidibe has no chance.

44 min: Stelvio picks up a booking. The crowd are happy if happy is jumping up 
and down and whooping your lungs out ... yep, they're happy.

And that's half-time: Soumare picks up a booking after pulling Manucho back. 
The hosts thoroughly deserve their lead. Mali haven't threatened and are 
strangely subdued. Dark horses aren't what they used to be.

46 min:  We're off again. "Re: your question about dark horses (6min)," writes 
me to myself. "If a dark horse is a team that has an outside chance of winning 
a tournament then the better it gets the better its chances of winning the 
tournament making it less dark or less of a horse. Conversely if it gets worse 
then it has less chance of winning also making it less dark or less of a horse. 
It's a bit of a paradox." Interesting points there, Tom.

47 min: Keita stands over the ball as Mali line up a free-kick. It takes a big 
deflection and but Angola clear the corner. Here's Khudael Ashraf: "I 
appreciate the comparison you've made between Paris 2005 and the World Cup in 
Germany in 2006, however, if someone does suggest moving the World Cup from 
Africa, it won't be THE most ridiculous idea ever. The African Cup of Nations 
is a huge football tournament played in that contininent and something terrible 
happened there and a World Cup, another football tournament will be staged in 
the same continent in just a few short months, so the suggestion, while trying 
to cause a moral panic is certainly not a completely stupid idea."

49 min: Mali create an actual chance! Diarra cushions the ball on the edge of 
the six-yard box but Fernandes bolts out to block the shot. Superb goalkeeping 
and Mali are looking a tad more lively. Alot more lively actually.

52 min: Another chance for Mali. Kanoute's curled shot floats over. Gilberto 
is stretchered off for Angola. The second-half is already 586% more interesting 
than the first.

55 min: Fernandes boots clear Mabina latches onto the pass and makes a fairly 
clumsy dive in the area. No one pays any attention. "Not so much a thought for 
the day as a question," says Russell Fraser. "Is that the surface the game is 
being played on in the picture of the Mali players or did they go on a group 
bonding hiking expedition prior to the tournament?" No, that's a bonding trip 
they went on the Luanda MegaBowl. That's on the Krazy Gold course outside. 
Kanoute stomped off home early because he couldn't get the ball throught the 
windmill. Wily windmills!

57 min:  Mabida crosses to the near post and Manucho's diving header flumps 
wide. Mali have pretty much failed to deal with any crosses into their own box.

60 min: Mali work the ball across the field but their final ball is horribly 
awry and Kanoute gets nowhere near it.

62 min: Xara is booked for a clumsy foul and Mali have a free-kick around 40 
yards out. Poor delivery once again and Angola clear. Mali can't cross and 
can't defend crosses. Apart from that, they're brilliant.

65 min: PENALTY TO ANGOLA!Bagayoko brings down Gilberto ...

... and Gilberto scores! GOA... Hang on, the ref orders a retake. Gilberto 
steps up again ...

... and Gilberto scores again. GOAL! Angola 3-0 Mali (Gilberto 66) Gilberto 
goes the other way and smashes the ball past Sidibe.

68min: A fair scoreline. Mali have been oddly listless and disjointed.

70 min: A halfway decent move from Mali sees Kanoute race on to a through ball 
but Kali does well to nip in and clear.

71 min: Bagayoko dives for an attempted header as the ball flies into the box. 
Oddly, he was stretching got it with his hand so it's probably just as well he 
didn't make contact.

PENALTY TO ANGOLA! Keita brushes Gilberto who goes over very easily. Manucho 
to take...

GOAL! Angola 4-0 Mali (Manucho 73) Manucho gets a go at penalty taking. He 
does pretty well to sliding the ball to the right of Sidibe.

76 min: Flavio pelts after an overhit pass. He doesn't get there, but that 
shows Angola's attitude throughout the game and offers a clue to why they're 
coasting this.

GOAL! Angola 4-1 Mali (Keita 78) Fernandes drops an innocent cross, there's a 
scramble in the six-yard box and Keita eventually stabs it home.

80 min: All a little too late for Mali and it's telling that when they finally 
score it's from a keeping error.

82 min: Angola chew a bit of clock as they attack Mali. Mabinda eventually 
shoots over.

84 min: Cabungula is on for Flavio who leaves to loud cheers from the Angola 
fans.

86 min: It's nearly five! Angola lump the ball up long, Manucho latches on to 
the pass and it takes some decent defending to rid him of the ball.

GOAL! Angola 4-2 Mali (Kanoute 88)Mali finally put together a good move. They 
zing it across the pitch before Tamboura lofts the ball to Kanoute, who leaps 
to plant a magnificent header past Fernandes. Too little, too late? Yep.

90 min: Fernandes just about gathers a tame shot from Mali. Angola indulge in 
a fine spot of time wasting. Four minutes of injury time.

90 min + 2 min: Mali drift in another cross too close to Fernandes.

GOAL! Angola 4-3 Mali (Keita 93min)Hmmm. Mali are given too much time to 
cross, Keita takes the ball on the volley and wallops the ball past Fernandes. 
Too late? Yep-ish.

GOAL! Angola 4-4 Mali (Yattabare 94)  Eh? That's why they're dark horses. 
Fernandes can only parry a shot and Yattabare slams the rebound home.

PEEP!I have no idea what happened there. Both sets of players drop to the 
floor for different reasons. Angola were 4-0 up with 16 minutes to go. I'd like 
to say it was excellent play from Mali to come back but Angola tired very, very 
badly: Mali were terrible for most of the game. Angola need Graham Onions in 
defence.
 