
Hello and welcome to exclusively typed live text commentary on Angola v Algeria
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/algeria> with me, Barney Ronay.

First up, here are the teams: 
Angola Carlos Fernandes; Jamuana, Mabina, Kali, Rui Marques; Zuela, Xara, 
Djalma, Gilberto, Ze Kalanga; Manucho
Algeria Fawzi Chaouchi; Madjid Bougherra, Rafik Halliche, Abdelkader Laifaoui; 
Nadir Belhadj, Karim Matmour, Hassan Yebda, Yazid Mansouri, Karim Ziani; Hameur 
Bouazza, Abdelkader Ghezzal
Referee: Jerome Damon (South Africa)

So, no Flavio for Angola <https://www.theguardian.com/football/angola> and 
Bouzza comes in for Algeria, who really could do with winning this one. And 
plenty of pace in their team, even if they have looked a little edgy so far.

Manucho's playing on his own up front for Angola today. He is a vast 
intimidating beast of a man - and scorer ofthis goal  
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LsutX4kWGy8>last time around. So another one of 
those would be good.

Henni Ouahes writes: "Key to Algeria's success is whether they will wear the 
white or green shirt. The accursed green shirt has been a source of precious 
little luck. Prediction: Algeria put in their best performance of the 
tournament but legendary "home advantage" in the ACN plays a part in a 2-2 draw 
which due to results elsewhere sees them out of the competition. No Algerians 
will be especially bothered by that; our focus is entirely on the world cup." 
Ha. You say that now.

Right, well this should be exciting. I'll be keeping you up to date with 
significant happenings in the other game in this group by the power of 
split-screen TV viewing and by the end of it we'll know who's going through to 
the next stage. The players are out for the anthems and Algeria's is very jolly 
and uplifting, not that you'd know it from the look of them. Which is frowning, 
sombre and very serious.

Angola's anthem is even more depressing. Makes God Save The Queen sound like 
the theme tune to Lazy Town.

Tom Hopkins notes: "Algeria do seem to have been a bit average thus far, that 
should make it that bit more humiliating/hilarious when England can't beat them 
in the summer?" Ah dear. England will beat them though, and in a way that 
raises feeble false hopes before they meet their first decent opponents and 
lose heroically but mainly ineptly.

1 min Angola kick off and keep the ball for a bit before a long punt towards 
Manucho gives the ball to Algeria.

2 mins And in the other game Mali have scored after 50 seconds!! What a goal 
too, another keeping howler as the goalie scuffs a clearance to Freddie Kanoute 
who volleys home from 40 yards. Great finish. What a start.

3 mins And in the other game Mali are now 2-0 up!!. Keita got it - an 
absolutely brilliant smashed free kick into the top corner. Well blow me.

5 mins  All a bit quieter here. Algeria having some good possession on the 
right flank but no real penetration. A much tighter affair here, which is fine, 
really, and who needs a goal-feast anyway.

7 mins a deep cross from the left from Belhadj but the ball drifts over 
Ghezzal and out for a corner. Back down the other end Djalma bursts through on 
the left side of the area as Belhadj gives the ball away in fancy-dan cocky 
fashion but Djalma's shot is blocked.

9 mins It's very hot out there, which might explain the cagey start to 
proceedings. No one has done much so far. Algeria, in particular, look really 
scratchy, although they do have a lovely white kit with a hint of green, the 
kind of colour your wife might come up with after six months of research into 
what colour to paint a really small patch of wall in the kitchen, called 
something like Apple Calico.

11 mins The problem we have is that a draw here will take these two teams 
through with Mali 2-0 up. And they will surely be aware of that. Certainly, 
they're not doing much. Have Mali scored too soon?

13 mins Pat O'Brien agrees: "Have Mali made the mistake of making the outcome 
of their own game known too early? Can't Angola and Algeria comfotably play out 
a draw knowing both of them will go through at the expense of Mali? Time to put 
a few quid on 0-0? Or have I got this all wrong?" No, I think you're right. 
This could yet be an Austria v W Germany situation. Nice skill from Mabina wins 
a free kick on the left wing and the ball is launched into the Algeria box, but 
headed away. Mabina looks the business on that flank.

16 mins Gilberto has the first real shot on goal, a left-footed wang from 30 
yards that flies over the bar. That's more like it.

18 mins Mabina again has the ball on the left wing and sends in a deep cross 
for Manucho and Gilberto to attack but it drifts on to the roof of the net. 
Some proper pressure at last however, including a blocked shot from Ze Kalanga, 
who has a very nice Afro-Portuguese name.

20 mins Algeria simply haven't done anything yet. They look pretty woeful to 
be honest. No thrust or real idea how they want to attack. They do have a 
useful free-kick now on the left flank awarded rather softly by referee Damon, 
who's quite good in that new Nelson Mandela film

22 mins And what a save by Carlos! The free kick from Belhadj bounces all the 
way through to Bougherra and his attempt from three yards is horribly scuffed. 
Still, good composure from the keeper to grab it as his defence totally 
disappeared.

23 mins Carlos comes rushing from his goal to try and welly a long through 
pass into the crowd, then wimps out of it and allows Ghezzal to get a shot in. 
Fortunately it drifts weakly wide. That was an opportunity for some more keeper 
mayhem just about passed up.

26 mins And now a decent save from [ ] as Ze Kalanga has a dip from a free 
kick 30 yards out and the ball is tipped just over the bar as it dipped. The 
best effort on goal so far. And Madjdy says: "barney if scores stay the same 
angola and mali go through, with mali edging algeria by goal difference. hence 
the w germany austria analogy does not apply..." The thing is, that's what I 
thought but it's not what the people on Eurosport are saying. Let's just dig a 
little deeper...

30 mins My sources here have confirmed that if this stays as a draw and Mail 
win then both these two go through, so there you are. Anschluss it is. And you 
have to say it does look like that kind of game too. Only Angola are really 
trying to attack in any numbers and that's probably because they've got a home 
crowd yodelling and trumpeting and apparently drumming them on.

32 mins A nice swift attack by Angola and the ball breaks to Manucho on the 
left. His shot is powerful and seems to swerve but the goalie palms it down 
easily enough. Mabina was in a lot of space but Manucho was right to have a 
dip/buy a ticket/hoof it blindly towards goal. and Patrick O'Brien has more: 
"if Algeria are sitting back, perhaps they are signalling that they "don't want 
any trouble", and would rather play Ivory Coast rather than risk going out. A 
win is as good as a draw for Angola, so as long as Algeria make it clear they 
won't attempt to score... Odds of 0-0 is falling fast at Betfair...""

35 mins Good goalkeeping from Carlos, coming out to sweep up an underhit 
backpass, and you really do feel if either team is going to score it might be 
something like that. This game needs a goal - ideally from Angola who have at 
least given it a go here.

37 mins that's more like it from Algeria, Belhadj picking up a nice pass form 
Yebda and crossing only for Rui Marquez to clear with one of those look-at-me 
diving headers under no pressure at all that you kind of imagine Colin Hendry 
doing and then standing up and pointing at someone and shouting a bit. while 
the TV commentator describes him as "brave".

39 mins Better from Algeria though, a bit of pace in their play at last.

41 mins Laifaoui is very harshly booked for a minor tug on Gilberto who goes 
down like a man who has suddenly and unaccountably run out of batteries 
mid-stride. That could make things hard for him with the lively Mabina on his 
flank. The free kick comes to nothing beyond a hefty blow to the head for 
Algeria keeper Chaouchi who rolls around like a big soft boy before getting up 
shaking his head bravely like he's been chinned by Mr T and somehow survived.

43 mins Angola coming back into this and Djalma draws a save from Chaouchi, 
who hack away a low sidefoot shot with his feet after a great pull-back from 
Gilberto who had evaded the defensively suspect Belhadj. There was nice little 
bit of approach play in there from Angola but the finish was weak. And Andrew 
Fitchett who seems to be saying he was once a small Angolan boy, muses: "With 
no side really looking tip-top thus far in the tournament, do you think Angola 
could pull an England/South Korea/Portugal and get really close to winning but 
not actually do it, thus dashing a nation's hopes and making a 13-year old 
Angolan boy cry in his bedroom a la me, 1996?"

45 mins More diffuse Angola pressure with no real heft behind it. And Paul Fox 
observes: "Appears that the Algerian keeper was just hit by a mysterious "hand 
of God". How else do we explain him going down on that corner?" He was still 
holding his head when he made that save you know.

45+1 mins Half time  and the end of a frankly quite poor half between two 
teams either unwilling or unable to fashion out any proper chances. I wonder 
what's going to happen next? Maybe Mali would be better off letting Malawi 
score twice quickly. That would shake things up. I'll be back after a trip to 
the frankly quite nasty but very expensive-looking coffee machine.

So, this is it then. 45 minutes for these two teams to brush aside the cynics 
and produce a performance that breathes fresh life into the notion of glory and 
honour and the joy of playing to win in all circumstances. Or just pootle about 
for a bit and both go through in a blaze of yawns. Which do you think it will 
be?

Stewart Green has a prediction: "Brian Oliver may find a zebra's head in his 
bed if Mali go out. I should never have listened to Football Weekly. I do say 
that every week though. COME ON THE PALANCAS NEGRAS!" The new one's just about 
to drop any moment now by the way.

If Algeria win here it goes down to disciplinary records. Angola will go 
through at the moment barring any red cards.

46 mins Algeria kick us off again  and we're back to neurotically cautious 
keep-ball interspersed with unforced errors and the odd foul.

47 mins Oh I say a lovely lofted pass by Djalma puts the rampaging left back 
Jamuana through on goal but Belhadj goes against type by putting in a 
last-ditch sliding tackle and clearing the ball. And then right back down the 
other end Bouazza gets to the left hand byeline and cuts the ball back across 
the six-yard box, lovely ball, but the onrushing Ghezzal is crowded out by 
Mabina when he looked like he had to score. Great play from Algeria. They 
really should do it more often.

50 mins Some pppor defending from Kali, letting a long pass bounce on the way 
through to Carlos, which Ghezzal almost gets a toe to. The Angola defence, it 
has to be said, is very shaky under pressure. And Zuela has gone off in a lot 
of pain after helping Mabina clear that Bouzza cross. Angola down to ten men 
here.

52 mins Za Kalanga drops a clanger by shooting from about 50 yards with 
Manucho to his left and the ball flies over. Diascares is on for Zuela. And 
Adrian Cooper asks: "Do you think there's any chance that both teams will take 
to the pitch, only to lay out a blanket and some cushions in the centre-circle 
and continue their half-time oranges (and perhaps a sneaky half-time cigarette 
or two)? It would probably make for a more lively 45 minutes. Who knows what 
craziness could break out? Perhaps Nadir Belhadj will accidentally squirt juice 
into the eye of Hassan Yebda?" Actually they're going for bit a bit now. It's 
much better.

54 mins Angola are coming back at Algeria, having some decent possession but 
they've only got Manucho up front with Ze Kalanga lurking so it's all a bit 
vague and aimless.

57 mins Ze Kalanga explodes into life! Takes on two players, skips away from 
Belhadj and shoots low towards the near post and into the side netting. And in 
the other gameMalawi have scored and it's 2-1 to Mali. So, there's still life 
there. A 3-2 win would take Malawi through.

60 mins More aimless midfield scuffling mixed with wan and fitful midfield 
ball-giving-away. But wait... a lovely break from Bouzza, skipping past Kali 
and then having a weird stabbed left-foot attempt at goal that flies well wide. 
Algeria haven't attacked very often, but when they do you can see they're 
clearly the classier team.

63 mins Algeria continue to get ten outfield players behind the ball at all 
times, as though they're playing a Brazil 1970-style opponent and are terrified 
of being ripped apart by the rampaging Angolans should they just for one second 
let their guard drop. Ze Kalanga goes off and Biblical sob story Job comes on.

66 mins More not-much happens. Similar to the previous not-much but somehow 
slower. Everyone iswalking around.

67 mins Meghni of Lazio comes on for Bouazza of Blackpool. They both walk very 
slowly.

70 mins A throw in happens. It goes out again. Everyone looks nonplussed. And 
Malawi have just missed a sitter, the centre forward Russell sticking it over 
the bar from two yards. Amazing stuff.

72 mins That was a really appalling miss in such a vital game, almost surreal 
that he managed to get it up and over the bar. And blimey Algeria have a throw 
in near the corner flag and it's a cross that Carlos catches. He then falls 
over and rolls around for a bit and no one really minds.

74 mins More mooching at the back from Angola. no closing down from Algeria at 
all. This could go on for ever. Maybe foolishly because as Madjdy points out: 
"one more goal for malawi and they will qualify. a draw brings them level on 
points with algeria, but the fact that they defeated the north africans (and 
have a superior goal difference) gives them the edge." But both teams have got 
a bit stuck here...

76 mins This is a bit of a joke now. Angola are just patting it about in their 
own half under no pressure with both teams gambling on Malawi not scoring. 
Which you kind of hope they do watching these two pretend to play football.

78 mins As it stands Algeria will qualify having scored just one goal. One. 
Goal. Mali will be out despite scoring six times, but I suppose you do also 
have to defend properly too.

81 mins Nothing continues to happen. Some passing, this time by Algeria, 
followed by a throw-in that takes about a minute. Some of these players are no 
longer running at all.

84 mins That miss by russell will haunt Malawi. It really was amazing, the 
poor sod. Wouldn't it be great if he got one now and made all this pottering 
about look very silly indeed. But no,Mali have scored  and it's 3-1 and that 
looks all done and dusted. Oh well.

85 mins Mali have been involved in 13 goals in three matches, which makes it 
even more of a shame they're going home. You've got admire Algeria's 
stubbornness, but they are an incredibly boring team to watch. Free kick here 
to Angola thirty yards out to the left and it almost sneaks through from 
Januana as Chaouchi spills it.

88 mins Ed Poulton says "Staying late at work to catch the end of this 
thrilling encounter -probably slightly more exciting without seeing the 
pictures by the sounds of it..." Go home. Just go home. Do a sudoku. Read an 
article by Jan Moir. Pretend to care about Stephen Fry wiffling about his 
breakfast on Twitter. Do anything else but this.

89 mins The Algerian goalie holds on to the ball for about 40 seconds, rolling 
it back and forth and eventually picking it up. Then putting it down again. 
Then picking it up. And an Angolan player simply lies down in the centre circle 
until someone notices and the ref stops things. It's Manucho and he's wandering 
off looking bored.

90+2 mins And that's it. A terrible 0-0 draw here and both teams go through as 
a result. shame for Mali and Malawi, who have given us goals, but them is the 
rules for all sides and well done to Angola and Algeria (not including today). 
both teams punch the air and that's all from me for now. Thanks for reading. 
Barney.
 