


Tunisia changed the Arab world; Arab dictators and kings alike know it. They 
are afraid that what happened inTunisia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/tunisia> could happen to them. Several Arab 
governments have already taken rapid measures to contain ongoing or potential 
protests. Several others are conspiring to tarnish the Tunisian exemplar and 
retard, if not derail altogether, its progress. They know the power of what 
happened in Tunisia: an entire people marching united, civilly and 
non-violently, calling proudly and loudly with one voice, "Ben Ali, out" before 
they delivered the final knockout: "Game over." They know that freedom is 
contagious. The more they realise that they are living on borrowed time, the 
more desperate they become and the more despairing their measures.

Grassroots change in the Arab world is inevitable. Egyptians, Algerians, 
Libyans, Jordanians, Yemenis, Palestinians – almost all Arabs are struck by 
Tunisian fever. It is no longer a question of place, only a question of time. 
The real achievement of Tunisia is that it demonstrated that the hope for 
change is alive and well. The worst crime of dictatorships is the politics of 
fear they use to engineer the consent of their people – the slow and steady 
dispossession of all will to freedom and self-determination. When this fear 
insinuates itself into the mind, not only does all memory of freedom disappear, 
but so too does the willingness to pay the price for it. The crucial importance 
of what happened in Tunisia is that Arabs no longer recognise who they are 
without it.

The other real achievement of the Tunisian grassroots revolution is that 
western Europe and the United States are put on trial by the people they have 
for so long pretended to care for. The Tunisian message speaks volumes: you 
cannot continue fighting what you call Islamic extremism by supporting Arab 
despotism. You cannot go on pretending that you're the only harbingers of 
democracy. Real and lasting democracy emerges from within the singular context 
of each Arab country and cannot be imposed by outside intervention or 
manipulation. It is not a Euro-American speciality. Lastly: you need not 
support Arab dictatorships to ensure your own and Israel's security. Rather 
than urging Arab despots to ride out the whirlwind of revolution coming from 
Tunisia, it's high time you supported the Arab people's efforts to foster 
grassroots democracy.

Nouri Gana is a Tunisian writer and assistant professor of comparative 
literature & Near Eastern languages and cultures at the University of 
California, Los Angeles.
 