
Whatever the reservations expressed over Lord Burns's appointment 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2009/nov/04/lord-burns-channel-4> – too old, 
too white, too establishment, etc – it is hard not to feel a sense of genuine 
relief. After all, Burns may bring Channel 4 some much-needed leadership and 
credibility after five years under Luke Johnson and Andy Duncan that have left 
the channel, some great programmes notwithstanding, politically isolated and 
strategically bereft.

The appointment of Johnson as chairman six years ago was seen as a bold move 
by the then Ofcom chief executive Stephen (now Lord) Carter. You can see how 
combining Johnson, the free-market freewheeler, with the then C4 chief executive
Mark Thompson <https://www.theguardian.com/media/markthompson>, the heavyweight 
public service broadcaster, must have looked like a wizard wheeze. And had 
Thompson stayed at C4, so it might have proved. Unfortunately, but entirely 
predictably, Thompson went to the BBC and Johnson named Andy Duncan, formerly 
of BBC marketing and Unilever and thus a relative outsider, as his replacement. 
The die was cast.

From the outset, Duncan set his sights on securing public support – in cash or 
kind – to make up for a predicted financial shortfall, arising from structural 
changes in the broadcasting marketplace, which, it was claimed, fundamentally 
threatened C4's existence as a public service broadcaster. Almost everything 
Duncan did – or tried to do – over the following five years was designed to 
make C4 appear a more suitable and deserving recipient of public cash.

But there were problems almost from the very beginning. For a start there was 
the inability to explain how the first estimate of the deficit – £60m – had 
been arrived at. Ofcom eventually commissioned a full-on review of C4's 
finances from accountants PKF. And although the broadcaster sought to spin it 
as having supported Duncan's predictions of impending financial doom, the 
result was not that clear-cut. What's more, the focus on a shortage of cash at 
C4 re-opened (albeit unintentionally) the issue of privatisation.

There was also the uncomfortable fact that talk of financial crisis was 
accompanied by the most successful (and profitable) period in the channel's 
25-year history. In 2007, there were record revenues approaching £1bn and a 
record programme spend of £620m.

Duncan and Johnson's mishandling of the Celebrity Big Brother race row 
coincided with Duncan's record £1.2m pay cheque – all presided over and agreed 
to by the board.

The ultimately doomed big move into digital radio followed – which, given the 
costs involved, always seemed odd for a company warning of looming financial 
crisis. As did "Next on Four", an attempt to build a consensus around the plan 
to give C4 public cash by offering to share it around. But that idea too – 
recasting C4 as if it were a miniBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> – 
pretty much failed to fire.

At the end of five long years of public campaigning, with the government and 
the treasury unconvinced and Carter worrying about what damage public money 
could do to C4's creative essence, the channel was told to sling its hook and 
look after itself. It was back where it started.

Fortunately there is at least one more turn of the C4 wheel to come. As the 
economy recovers, it will gain more funds – which, given that there is still 
£200m of unspent cash in the bank, will give Burns, and his yet-to-be appointed 
chief executive, an opportunity to do what their predecessors so conspicuously 
failed to do successfully – invest commercially to secure C4's future in the 
digital age.
 