


"Nothing goes off suddenly; even the earthquakes set in motion from the depth 
of the earth to the rooftops of villages."

This line from a poem I had written two decades ago jumped into my mind when 
the youth of Tunisia turned their ruler from a mighty dictator into a 
frightened rat looking for a place to hide and, in a month of civilian 
protests, managed to change history.

As I write these words now, images are coming from Cairo where the 
anti-Mubarak demonstrators are waving the Tunisian flag and chanting the most 
famous line of Tunisian poetry: "When the people decide to live, destiny will 
obey and chains will be broken."

The Palestinian leadership in Ramallah, embattled after the al-Jazeera leaks 
revealing its co-operation with the Israeli occupation, opted to show no 
enthusiasm for the Tunisian revolution but could in no way condemn it as the 
Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi shamelessly did. "We are not Tunis," shouted the 
other ageing Arab dictators who are all fond of dyeing their hair and 
moustaches. But they are. And they are really shaken, puzzled and afraid.

This is the first time in Arab history that a dictator has been ousted by a 
peaceful popular revolution that put an end to the phenomenon of the "death of 
politics" in Arab countries. It is also the first fully successful popular 
retaliation against the politics of humiliation that have been endured by the 
Arabs since the colonisation of their countries. The real motivation behind 
Muhammad Bouazizi's self-immolation was dignity rather than hunger: he was 
slapped in the face and he was unable to hit back; the Tunisian people did it 
for him.

For the past century or so every ingredient of political life has been faked, 
sovereignty is not sovereignty, parliament is not parliament, law is not law, 
and the opposition parties are as corrupt and wasted as the ruling party. Even 
independence, since colonial forces handed power to local dictators, was not 
independence.

What happened in the Tunisian revolution is valuable for the modern history of 
the region, but equally important are two elements that were absent: no 
opposition party, including the Islamists, could claim sole credit for it; and 
the army could not redirect its energies to bring about a coup.

How is this affecting Palestine? The current leadership of the Palestinian 
Authority decided to put all its eggs in the American basket, unaware of the 
constraints on American power in the region, as evidenced by events in Tunisia, 
Algeria, Yemen and, most importantly, Egypt. They have no alternative and no 
strategy other than total dependence on the United States; hence the 
Palestinian people will find an alternative to that policy and eventually an 
alternative to that leadership.

The Palestinian Authority is selling out on all inalienable rights of the 
Palestinian people, while at the same time granting contracts to Blackwater 
mercenaries to subdue its own people. It is an authority of occupation by 
proxy, and Palestinians, inspired by Tunisia and hopefully Egypt, are likely to 
take matters into their own hands. Throughout the Arab world, popular intifadas 
may be long, painful and costly, but it now seems inevitable. When it happens, 
it will not have happened suddenly.

Mourid Barghouti is a Palestinian poet.
 