

Every time I visited Aymen's mother, in that old Cairo apartment, she would 
repeat the last exchange she had with her son.

"No, you won't go," Umm Aymen had told her son.

"I have to," Aymen said.

"No," she said, "you won't go."

It was typical of Aymen to say so little, to drive you to repeat what you had 
just said. While the rest of us would get hot about politics, Aymen was always 
the one who remained cool. I never stopped wondering what he made of us.

He was a law student at Cairo University – this was the late 1980s. His mother 
was trying to convince him not to attend one of the caged demonstrations 
permitted only inside the walls of the university. Since as far back as I can 
remember, security trucks packed with armed, mostly illiterate young men stood 
permanently parked beside the university wall under a line of eucalyptus trees. 
Aymen was shot with a rubber bullet at close range. He died instantly.

We would wait until there were at least three or four of us before visiting 
Umm Aymen. We all feared going there alone. Although she was always pleased to 
see us, it was hard not to feel guilty that we were alive and he wasn't. It was 
also unbearable on those awkward afternoons to endure her conviction, unvoiced 
yet all the more poignant for that, that what had happened was all in vain, 
that she had lost her son for nothing.

She was right. In fact, all the demonstrations then had an air of futility 
about them. They all felt like a waste of time. Until now.

The current demonstrations in Cairo, Alexandria, Ismailia, Suez, Shebein Al 
Kom and other Egyptian towns and cities are not only notable for their scale, 
but also for their ambition and energy. There is something jubilant about the 
crowds, a new confidence. Although it is too soon to say whether the events in 
Tunisia will result in a just, accountable and democratic government in that 
country, it is clear that the fact that a peaceful revolt has managed to 
overthrow a 23-year dictatorship in less than a month has restored Arab dignity 
and hope. Tunisians have altered the political landscape, as well as the 
landscape of the imagination for the whole region.

Hisham Matar is a Libyan author. His debut novel, In the Country of Men, was 
shortlisted for the 2006 Man Booker prize. His new novel, Anatomy of a 
Disappearance, comes out in March.
 