


The Arab world has not been as stagnant nor as apathetic as is widely claimed. 
This week's events inEgypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt>, while 
unusual in their scale, are a continuation of a movement that can be traced 
back through my whole lifetime: from anti-Gulf war protests in the early 90s to 
protests against IMF structural adjustments in the late 90s, to second intifada 
solidarity in 2001, massive anti-war protests in 2003, the pro-democracy Kefaya 
movement of 2004-06, wildcat strikes nationwide in 2006-08, the struggle for a 
minimum wage in 2008-09 and the anti-torture protests of 2010. The organisers 
and leaders have been active and involved for at least five to 10 years now.

However, the events in Tunisia not only injected a new hope and inspired tens 
of thousands of new protesters to participate, they spread the word 
"revolution". Since the decline of the Kefaya movement – the unofficial name 
for the Egyptian Movement for Change – common wisdom dictated that activists 
should focus on economic issues, such as the minimum wage, and the daily 
humiliations faced by ordinary Egyptians, or on justice for victims of torture 
such as Khaled Said. So the organisers of the 25 January protest, while 
inspired by Tunisia, stuck to this formula, only to be overwhelmed by tens of 
thousands of previously unpoliticised people spontaneously chanting, "The 
people want the regime to go down" (or rather the people will bring down the 
regime) – a crude, very rhythmic and totally new slogan that emerged from the 
ranks of the uninitiated, not the experienced activists.

On Twitter Tunisians responded to news that Egyptian protesters had borrowed 
two lines from their national anthem by telling us how they sang revolutionary 
songs by the Egyptian leftist duo Sheikh Imam and Ahmad Fouad Negm. From the 
internet and satellite TV a new pan-Arabism is born: my generation was not 
brought up on Arabist propaganda as past generations were, yet in our attempts 
to revolt we automatically find solidarity. Gazans have been watching the 
events with even more enthusiasm than Egyptians, for our victory will have a 
big impact on them.

This is a reality born out of technology, geopolitics and shared 
circumstances, but it is also fragile. The internet also encourages 
sectarianism and consumerism; other identities are competing, such as the 
recent football wars between Egypt and Algeria. But thanks to Bouazizi, Sidi 
Bouzid and the Tunisian revolution, a pan-Arabism rooted in a quest for dignity 
and justice is now likely to dominate.

Alaa Abd El Fatah is a prominent Egyptian blogger.
 