


The demonstrations against oppression, injustice and violations of human 
rights that are taking place in Tunisia and Egypt bring back to me the heady 
days of the first Palestinian intifada. For me then it was my first experience 
of the power of non-violent demonstrations. I saw how an army as strong as 
Israel's could be held at bay when confronted with the iron will of masses of 
human beings determined to win their freedom. We were then certain of victory. 
We were also willing to sacrifice everything for it. The years dragged and 
people endured a lot of hardship. But at the end victory eluded us. The 
occupation did not end – it was transformed to something even worse. The lesson 
I drew is that there is never any certainty of victory, whatever the scale of 
the human sacrifice.

Many of the regimes that have become entrenched in the Arab countries whose 
people are now rebelling justified the repression of their people on the 
grounds that they were engaged on behalf of the Palestinians in the war against
Israel <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel>. Yet once the police state is 
entrenched it no longer needs to justify or explain anything. It criminalises 
opposition and uses brutal force to quell it. It speaks with the voice of the 
gun and controls through instilling a fear of arrest and torture.

Palestine aspired to be different. We wanted to create the first truly 
democratic Arab state. Our intifada, about which the youth across the Arab 
world heard, might have been an inspiration to many of those demonstrating in 
the streets of Tunisia and Egypt. We believed it would produce the new 
liberated Arab man and woman. It would create new forms of democratic 
government and relations based on the rule of law. But a free Palestine was 
deemed a threat to other repressive states and they all, along with Israel, 
conspired not to allow it to be born.

Now we watch the people in Tunisia and Egypt demonstrate against their police 
states while, closer to home, we are witnessing the creation, slowly 
but surely, of a police state of our own. The irony is that while others may be 
dismantling theirs, ours is being created even before we have a fully fledged 
state.

Raja Shehadeh is a Palestinian lawyer and writer who lives in Ramallah. He is 
the author ofPalestinian Walks: Notes on a Vanishing Landscape (Profile).
 