
Joan Collins <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/joan-collins> and Pauline 
Collins – very much the gatekeeper and keymaster of famous people called 
Collins – are finally making a film together. Their collaboration, a British 
comedy called The Time of Their Lives, has been described by at least one 
person named Collins as a "buddy movie along the lines of Thelma & Louise, with 
a hint of The Best Exotic Marigold Hotel".

While the world prays that The Time of Their Lives will be successful enough 
for Joan Collins and Pauline Collins to finally pair up with Lily Collins and 
produce that Phil Collins-soundtracked remake of Michael Collins that we've all 
been waiting for, here are six more Hollywood namesake collaborations in the 
making.

Michael and Roger Moore in Fahrenheit 007
 Photograph: Carlo Allegri/AP and Allstar/Cinetext Collection 
Michael Moore wants to make another documentary about how the American 
government is definitely evil, but he's worried that he's become too much of a 
polarising figure. So he decides to hire former James Bond star Roger Moore to 
stand in for him onscreen. There's something so persuasive about the sight of 
an 86-year-old tax exile strolling into the Pentagon's reception and asking a 
secretary if she'd ever run a baby over in a tank that the government 
immediately closes down forever.Michael Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/michaelmoore> wins again.

Will and Maggie Smith in The Lonely Passion of Robot Jesus
 Photograph: Nick Wall/ITV and Jason LaVeris/FilmMagic 
After the zombies destroyed everything, the remaining core of human survivors 
banded together in a boarded-up stately home and set about trying to put their 
lives back together by adhering to pointless formalities. Their days now 
primarily involve staring longingly through windows, leaving long pauses 
between sentences and drinking tea. Then, one day, mysterious survivor Will 
Smith arrives. He doesn't wear a top very often, he appears to be part robot 
and, thanks to his role as producer, he has a slightly off-putting messianic 
quality. Can he save the survivors from doom by blowing up hundreds of zombies 
and driving around in a really cool car? Will he ever convince Dame Maggie 
Smith to shout "Aw hell no!" immediately before punching a monster in the face? 
Will it be better than After Earth? The answer to all of these questions is yes.

Wes and Pamela Anderson in The Astounding Debrecen Dial-Up Modem
 Photograph: Kevin Scanlon/Getty and Patrick Rideaux/Rex Features 
World weary but precocious would-be aristocrat Jason Schwartzman sits alone in 
his perfectly symmetrical Hungarian castle, trying to get his internet to work. 
The year is 1996 – although from the soundtrack you'd assume that it was 
anywhere between 1963 and 1975 – and all Schwartzman wants to do is watch the 
new Pamela Anderson sex tape that everyone's talking about. Sadly, the only 
English speaking telecommunications engineer in the area, played by Bill 
Murray, is both bafflingly enigmatic and three miles away. It'll take him days 
to reach the castle on the child's pushbike that he inexplicably uses instead 
of a van.

Melanie and DW Griffith in The Birth of a Working Girl
 Photograph: AllStar 

Thanks to modern technology, Hollywood can now achieve its dream of digitally 
inserting footage of peak-era Melanie Griffith in a series of outtakes from The 
Birth of a Nation. Watch as a woman in a puffy blouse shifts around awkwardly 
next to some caucasian actors in blackface! Wince as the same woman desperately 
tries to use her enormous backcombed hair to distract everyone from the 
uncomfortably heroic way in which Ku Klux Klan members are portrayed! Walk out 
after failing to reconcile your appreciation of the film's technological 
achievements with the ideological stance of the filmmaker, while Let the River 
Run by Carly Simon plays in the background!

Richard and Adam Curtis in Love: How Our Violent Corporate Oppressors Raped 
Our Dreams
 Photograph: PA and Sophia Evans 
"This is a story about love", Bill Nighy's voice intones as a dizzyingly 
abstract montage of explosions, old Open University episodes and crying 
children plays out onscreen. To be honest, most people tune out soon 
afterwards, during the bit when Nighy tries to link a Forever Friends 
Valentine's Day card he received when he was 12 with Stalin's Yezhovshchina by 
showing us a slowed-down Loony Tunes cartoon from 1935. But they're pretty sure 
that they're watching something profound. Also, the bit where Hugh Grant kisses 
a minor American actress in an airport is quite good.

Martin and Jennifer Lawrence in Momma's Hungry!
 Jennifer Lawrence and Martin Lawrence 

The Hunger Games saga is complete. Katniss Everdeen has endured endless 
traumas, both physical and emotional, after discovering how easily power can 
corrupt even the best-intentioned of individuals. She's lost her mind and 
attempted suicide but, at last, she's reached a point where she can put all 
this harrowing anguish behind her. Butwuh-oh! What's this? It's Martin 
Lawrence, dressed as a fat old lady! He's determined to start another Hunger 
Game because he has to save an orphanage. Spoiler alert: Momma's Hungry 
includes several scenes where Martin Lawrence murders children by farting on 
them.
 