


The tyrant exists only in the imagination of his subjects; the master resides 
only in the perception of the slave. Attempts at defiance have been abundant in 
the recent history of the Arabs, many of them in Palestine, but unlike those, 
the Tunisian example was successful: it widened people's imagination, changed 
their perception, increased their self-confidence and showed them how fragile 
their tyrants were.

Revolutions travel, and in the Arab world they travel faster: after the first 
world war, a wave of revolutions swept through the region: Egypt in 1919, Iraq 
in 1920, Syria in 1925, a guerrilla war in Palestine from 1922-35 and a 
full-scale popular revolt from 1936-39. After the loss of Palestine to the 
Zionist movement in 1948, Arab leaders who were perceived to be incompetent and 
complicit were punished. This time there were political assassinations and 
military coups: 1949 Lebanon and Syria, 1951 Jordan, 1952 Egypt and 1958 Iraq. 
More recently, when the Lebanese resistance was able to defeat Israel and force 
it to withdraw under fire in May 2000, the second Palestinian intifada began a 
few months later. Despite the difference in performance, Gaza 2008 was a replay 
of Lebanon 2006. In both wars,Israel <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> 
killed many civilians but was unable to achieve any of its political goals.

But Tunisia was a first in the Arab world, in that it was a non-violent, 
persistent and eventually successful people's revolution against a native 
tyrant allied with the west. The other events were either directed against a 
colonial power or were military coups, leaving the Arab rulers and their 
colonial allies with the impression that occupation by proxy was immune to 
popular anger. It also was a first in that it showed how ordinary people can be 
quite good in the art of government. Street committees were formed to prevent 
looting, some cities formed their own governing bodies to fill the vacuum after 
the fall of the regime – such bodies were democratic in the rawest sense of the 
word, legitimate and efficient.

Now the wave is coming. I will venture to say that the Egyptian regime has 
already fallen: it might take some time, but the fear, the perception that the 
regime is invincible has gone once and for all. All this is followed quite 
closely in Palestine; any future intifada will not be directed only against the 
occupation, but also against any Palestinian entity that co-operates with the 
occupation. Tunisia sent out the message that client regimes fall – that if we 
can drive the empires out, we will surely be able to drive out their vassals.

As I write, demonstrations rage in the streets of Cairo: everyone knows that 
if they stay at home, they will be compromising the safety of those in the 
streets, as well as their own freedom. Cairo knows and Cairo moves. Ramallah 
worries that an empowered Cairo means an empowered Gaza, and Tel Aviv and 
Washington know that instead of just Iran, they will now have to worry about 
Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, Egypt and Palestine all at once.

Tamim Al-Barghouti is a Palestinian poet. He is currently a visiting assistant 
professor at Georgetown University's Center for Contemporary Arab Studies.
 