


Egypt's anti-regime protests are unprecedented in size, frequency and 
ferocity. In Shubra, Dokki, Mohandaseen and Bulaq, the people of Cairo have 
chantedash-sha'ab yureed isqaat an-nizam, or "the people want the fall of the 
regime", and braved tear gas and baton-wielding thugs in the central Tahrir 
Square. Alexandria, Tanta, Suez, and the labour stronghold of Mahalla al-Kubra 
have also demonstrated. A government building has been burnt in Suez. Posters 
of Mubarak have been ripped down and burnt in several locations.Mish ayazeenu, 
the people shout: "we don't want him."

When Tuesday's Day of Anger started, police at first allowed protesters to 
move freely in the streets. This was unusual, and suggests fear on the 
authorities' part, as does the abrupt shift back to traditional methods as 
night fell. At the time of writing, at least 1,000 people have been arrested, 
several killed, and hundreds beaten. Uniformed police are backed up by 
plainclothes goons, many armed with iron bars. (One hopes that someone is 
collecting photographs of these people in order to identify and shame them.)

Certain developments illustrate why Hosni Mubarak's regime will be harder to 
dislodge than Ben Ali's in Tunisia. Trade unionists have been at the forefront 
of Tunisian change; in Egypt the state's co-opted Egyptian Trade Union 
Federation has ordered its branch heads to suppress protests. And the country's 
largest opposition party – the Muslim Brotherhood – has so far played a 
negligible role. When the regime, predictably, blamed the Brotherhood for 
organising the protests, the Brotherhood quickly proclaimed its innocence. 
Indeed, events seem to have taken the Brothers by surprise. It may be that the 
leadership has gambled on regime survival, either for pragmatic reasons or 
because what Brotherhood ideologues consider the "Islamisation" of society to 
be proceeding smoothly under the status quo. But the demonstrations have been 
bigger than anyone expected. Interestingly, al-Azhar clerics, often tools of 
the regime, have ruled that protests are not counter to Islamic precepts.

The initiators of what is now perhaps a growing intifada organised the 
protests in the name of Khaled Said, a blogger beaten to death by police who 
has now become Egypt's Mohammed Bouazizi (the street vendor whose 
self-immolation was the catalyst for Tunisia's uprising). These organisers, and 
the trapped and wounded, and those prepared to continue to meet state 
repression, are to be praised and congratulated for their bravery, and envied 
for their privileged position as agents of historical change. If nothing else 
has been achieved, Gamal Mubarak's hopes of inheriting the kingdom from his 
father must now have been dashed.

Revolutionary momentum is still carrying Tunisia, where journalists have taken 
over the media, and now it's rolling through Egypt. If the coming days show 
sustained and spreading protest, the crack that has appeared in Egypt's order 
will rapidly expand. The west is bracing itself. Another fait accompli, this 
time in the Arab world's most populous nation, on Palestine's border, would be a
nakba for western control. So the American administration is immediately 
speaking of Mubarak's "opportunity . . . to implement political, economic and 
social reforms to respond to the legitimate needs and interests of the Egyptian 
people". The phrase "managed change" is uttered. You can be sure America's 
managers are hard at work. What they have to lose in Egypt is as incalculable 
as what the Egyptian people have to gain.

With its young population, and a bureaucracy run by the same authoritarian 
party for four decades,Syria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> is by no 
means exempt from the pan-Arab crisis of unemployment, low wages and the 
stifling of civil society, conditions that brought revolution to Tunisia. 
Nevertheless, in the short to medium term, it seems highly unlikely that the 
Syrian regime will face a Tunisia-style challenge.

A state-controlled Syrian newspaper, al-Watan, blamed the Tunisian revolution 
on the Ben Ali regime's "political approach of relying on 'friends' to protect 
them". Tunisia's status as western client was only a minor motivator for the 
uprising there, but still al-Watan's analysis will be shared by many Syrians. 
Unlike the majority of Arab states, Syria's foreign policy is broadly in line 
with public opinion – and in Syria foreign policy, which has the potential to 
immediately translate into a domestic security issue, matters a great deal. The 
regime has kept the country in a delicate position of no war with, but also no 
surrender to, Israel (which occupies the Golan Heights), and has pursued close 
co-operation with Lebanese and Palestinian resistance movements as well as 
emerging regional powers such as Turkey and Iran. This is appreciated by "the 
street", and the president himself is no hate figure in the mould of Ben Ali or 
Mubarak. Where his father engineered a Stalinist personality cult, 
mild-mannered Bashar al-Assad enjoys a reasonable level of genuine popularity. 
Much is made of his low-security visits to theatres and ice cream parlours.

We are seeing in Tunisia a democratisation that didn't require religious 
mobilisation, foreign invasion, or colours coded in Washington. This revolution 
is the result of a mass popular movement focused on straightforward, practical 
demands that everybody can understand, whether they're religiously observant or 
lax, Christian or Muslim, Sunni or Shia. Lessons will be learned, in Syria and 
elsewhere. In future years, the regime would be well-advised to proceed with 
great flexibility.

Robin Yassin-Kassab is a Syrian author. The Road from Damascus is published by 
Penguin. He co-edits pulsemedia.org and blogs at qunfuz.com
 