
Andy Murray wanted pain and he got it but it was sharper than it was long. And 
this time there was no dividend. He knew his best chance of taking Novak 
Djokovic'sAustralian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> 
title from him was a drawn out struggle similar to the one over nearly five 
hours in New York four months ago, when he drained the energy from the Serb's 
legs to win his first grand slam title.

On the Rod Laver Arena on a warm and gentle evening, blood and blisters first 
delivered the agony, then played at least a small part in cutting it short 
(although Murray made no excuses) as, his right foot wrapped and anaesthetised, 
he could not match the champion for movement in the closing stages of a 
four-set final that ebbed away from him.

By the attritional standards of the modern game, Djokovic took a relatively 
whizzbang three hours and 40 minutes to win 6-7, 7-6, 6-3, 6-2 and complete a 
hat-trick of titles here (the first to do so since Roy Emerson), to go with his 
first Australian championship five years ago.

This time, he did not want what Murray wanted: a dogfight. He wanted as quick 
a kill as he could devise. "All our matches in the past three years have been 
decided in a very few points," Djokovic said. Here he won 139 to 126, not a 
huge margin over four sets.

"So it's really hard to say if I've done anything different tonight to what I 
did in New York. But I tried to be more aggressive. I went for my shots, 
especially in the third and fourth sets, came to the net quite often [winning 
the point 35 times in 41 visits]. It worked well for me. I needed to be the one 
who dictated the play and I'm really glad that I've played my best."

Djokovic, naturally, loves this place. Murray does too. But maybe not so much. 
He suffered to the point of tears in the final against Roger Federer in 2010 
and did not enjoy his three-set humiliation against Djokovic in 2011. Here he 
played much better than that, while not getting anywhere near the level of 
Flushing Meadows in September. No tears at bedtime, though. He handles defeat 
so much better than he once did and that is part of the process too.

Murray played down the inconvenience of having to get through the final two 
sets with his right foot wrapped to guard against further irritation to 
blisters that needed pain-freezing spray. Nor did he blame the scheduling and 
the rigours of a four hour semi-final against Federer, while Djokovic had an 
extra day's rest after a veritable stroll in his semi-final against David 
Ferrer.

"I had no taping on my foot during Roger's match," Murray said, "and then 
obviously I had to have it done today. I very rarely get blisters. But 90% of 
the players on the tour will have played this tournament with some sort of 
blister or problem. It had no bearing at all on the result. It just hurts a bit 
when you run."

It was not the sort of suffering he had in mind before the match. While he 
wanted to use the enormous store of stamina built up in his winter training 
camp in Miami, ultimately he had to fight on a different front, as Djokovic 
controlled the stuttering pace.

Murray did well to hold him off in the first set, capitalising on a lapse in 
focus to take the tie-break. He started well in the second but could not build 
on three break points in the second game and paid for it when Djokovic hit a 
new level to take the second tie-break.

"They went a remarkable 30 games before a break in serve; when it came, the 
cards tumbled to the table for Murray, although he gave it his best all the way 
to the end. The serve, as ever, was crucial. "I was serving better against him 
today in the first two sets than I've done in any of the matches in the last 
two years," Djokovic said.

"But I know that he's an incredible returner and has that ability to make you 
play always an extra shot. To be able to get a lot of free points on the serve 
was definitely a positive."

Ivan Lendl can look back on a wonderful first year as Murray's coach. "I 
thought he had a very good tournament," he said. "He played a tough match with 
Roger, played a very tough match with Novak, and he did very well the first 
five matches. It's disappointing not to win but you just have to keep putting 
yourself in those situations and some of them will come your way eventually.

"As I said in New York, there's so little in it. If Andy had broken for 2-0 in 
the second set, who knows what might have happened? He could have run away with 
it. But these are very little margins.

"That's why I don't want to talk about strategies and weaknesses, and I never 
will. Two or three points, that's all. I was just looking at the points and 
Novak won 13 points more than Andy – 13 points is nothing; 6-3, 6-2 looks 
comfortable but it was only 13 points in the match.

"But Novak produced a lot of good shots when he really had to, just like Roger 
did the other night. He played stronger as the match went on. He played like a 
No1 player should play."

However, Lendl is convinced Murray is on an upward path. "Oh yeah, and it will 
be [like that] until the end of Andy's career. He is getting better and he is 
getting closer.

"Other than when he lost to Novak here in 2011, he has always played the No1 
player in the world in the finals and those are difficult to win. "[Andre] 
Agassi beat Rainer Schüttler, I beat [Miroslav] Mecir. I'm not trying to say 
they were bad players, however they were not No1 at the time they were in the 
finals.

"This is the era the way it is, the top four are clearly better than everyone 
else. You don't get No7 in the finals. Andy didn't have any of those yet.

"Of course, when you get them, you have to take advantage of that as well, but 
it's just a tough era, as we keep saying all the time.

"I just hope Andy will keep putting himself in position and something will 
come his way again."

And he will, no doubt, welcome the sacrifice.
 