
What will I learn?
Put aside images of country squires in Burberry tweed driving around their 
estates in Range Rovers, and think GM crops, food security and international 
markets. Students studying agriculture and forestry are now just as likely to 
debate issues surrounding climate change and conservation as farming techniques 
and animal rearing.

A degree in this area will give you an insight into some of the most pressing 
issues of today. How can agricultural systems adapt to changing weather 
patterns? How can the demands of food supply and environmental sustainability 
be achieved? What is the position of UK agriculture in world production and 
food supply?

Courses tend to be divided between the more vocational land management degrees 
and those that have a big slice of applied science, so choose carefully. Some 
courses in this area are based on rural campuses, set in acres of land, so you 
can, literally, get out in the field and put the theory into practice. Others 
are based on large campuses with dual access to university farms and a diverse 
student population covering all disciplines.

What skills will I gain?
A wide number of disciplines are incorporated into agriculture, forestry and 
food – from science (biology, chemistry, physics, biosciences and social 
sciences), environmental studies and food technology, to economics and 
management – so by the time you graduate you'll be brimming with both 
professional skills and the facts gleamed from a range of subjects.

Given the nature of these courses, an employer will expect you to be up to 
date with the issues of the day, and have the ability to hold an argument and 
present your point of view.

You will be expected to conduct in-depth research and to evaluate your 
conclusions.

You should gain an awareness of the moral, ethical, environmental and social 
issues associated with this discipline, and understand why it has professional 
codes of conduct.

The practical aspect of these courses means you will probably have spent some 
time on the farm, in the forest, or at the lab bench, so you should have 
acquired some solid hands-on experience, as well as having interacted with a 
range of agricultural professionals. With that in mind, be prepared to roll up 
your sleeves and get stuck in, probably from day one of your new job.

What job can I get?
Graduates will often find themselves in farm management, research and advisory 
work. Those with an interest in sales and marketing could get roles that deal 
with agricultural products, such as animal feed or fertiliser, for example. 
Students with more an interest in food sciences could become dietitians, food 
technologists, scientists or product developers.

What will look good on the CV?
• The ability to plan and conduct research.
• The ability to think holistically and laterally and to present a reasoned 
argument.
• The ability to demonstrate awareness of moral, ethical and environmental 
issues.
 