
The death of Ahmed Wali Karzai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ahmed-wali-karzai>, who was killed by a 
close associate this week, epitomised the chaos, uncertainty and betrayal that 
have characterised much of the post-2001 western intervention in Afghanistan. 
The course of his life, both as a refugee after the invasion of his homeland by 
Soviet forces in 1979 and after returning at the fall of the Taliban regime, 
reflected the troubles afflicting Afghanistan in recent decades.

The half-brother of the president, Hamid Karzai, Ahmed Wali was shot three 
times in his residence-cum-office in the southern city of Kandahar by a trusted 
commander, who had worked for his victim for many years as a bodyguard.

Ahmed Wali Karzai was born in the small southern Afghan town of Karz, son of a 
senior leader of the Popalzai tribe and well-known politician who was later 
killed in exile by the Taliban. He had six brothers and a sister. Little is 
known about his childhood, but the 1960s and early 1970s are now seen as a 
golden time of relative stability in the country.

In his late teens, however, Karzai was forced to leave Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>. His father opposed the Marxist 
regime in power in Kabul since 1978, and fierce fighting had broken out, 
pitting rebels against government and then Soviet forces, which arrived in 1979 
in the part of the country where the family lived. These southern and eastern 
provinces were to suffer massive damage during the subsequent decade-long 
Soviet occupation and the civil war that followed.

Karzai found his way to the US and worked in an Afghan restaurant in Chicago. 
He travelled to Pakistan regularly and was in Quetta, the southern Pakistani 
city, when his brother, Hamid, headed into Afghanistan as the Taliban regime 
crumbled. Highly practical, he provided crucial logistical support for his 
brother's risky, but eventually successful, bid to rally local tribes against 
the hardline Islamic militia.

Following the fall of the Taliban in 2001, Hamid Karzai consolidated his and 
his family's power in Kabul, and Ahmed Wali Karzai rose rapidly to become a 
major power broker in the family's native south-east. His election to the 
Kandahar provincial council in 2005 was the formal recognition of already 
extensive informal influence.

However, the sometimes charming and occasionally forceful Karzai was already 
attracting controversy. Secret American intelligence briefings from 2006 
alleged that he was in league with the narcotics barons who had exploited the 
poor security and governance of the south to boost production massively. 
Detailed charges appearing in the American press, often as a result of leaks 
from frustrated officials, led to repeated calls for his dismissal and removal 
from Kandahar, with one American ambassador suggesting that he be sent overseas 
as an ambassador.

All accusations were denied, no direct evidence ever appeared, and protection 
came from two powerful sources: his own brother in Kabul and the American 
secret services, which saw Karzai as a useful asset. The CIA is believed to 
have used him to raise a secret force to hunt insurgents and other targets and 
to gather intelligence.

Karzai's many tribal connections and influence were seen as useful in 
stabilising the south and, when it became of interest, in communicating with 
the insurgents themselves. He managed to retain his position in Kandahar – even 
after apparently playing a key role in the intimidation and fraud that marred 
the presidential election of 2009, and as new American commanders introduced 
fresh strategies.

In their efforts during the past 18 months to regain full control of the south 
of the country, senior international officers in Afghanistan decided that it 
was better to co-opt Karzai rather than confront a man whose capacity to cause 
them trouble was evident. Karzai had survived another turn of Afghan politics 
and war. His skill, wile and connections were insufficient, however, to allow 
him to survive indefinitely.

He is survived by a wife and, it is thought, four children.

• Ahmed Wali Karzai, born 1961; died 12 July 2011
 