
Ahmed Wali Karzai <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ahmed-wali-karzai>, who 
was gunned down in his home in Kandahar by a bodyguard, was in many ways the 
personification of modern-day Afghanistan – corrupt, treacherous, lawless, 
paradoxical, subservient and charming. Now with his violent death Karzai has 
also come to symbolise Afghanistan's enduring tragedy.

"My younger brother was martyred in his house today. This is the life of all 
Afghan people. I hope these miseries which every Afghan family faces will one 
day end," said his brother,Hamid Karzai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hamid-karzai>, the Afghan president. But the 
hopes of American military commanders will be focused on a more immediate 
concern: how to prevent a power vacuum undermining their against-the-clock 
efforts to stabilise Kandahar and Helmand.

Karzai's was the modern face of warlordism, a man who had long been a force to 
be reckoned with in southernAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>. He batted away repeated waves 
of allegations of drug trafficking, kleptocracy and money-laundering. His close 
personal connections to the presidency in Kabul was one important protection. 
His senior role in the Popalzai tribe and his chairmanship since 2005 of 
Kandahar provincial council bolstered his reputation as an Asian version of a 
mafia don.

Crucially, he was seen as a born survivor and indestructible powerbroker, a 
rain-maker who could not be bypassed or sidelined. After all, Karzai had 
overcome US attempts to push him out of the way and had shrugged off several 
assassination attempts. He once boasted nine suicide bombers had died in 
attempts to kill him. It couldn't last. Early on Tuesday morning his luck ran 
out.

The story could have been very different. As US and Nato efforts to pacify the 
south ran into ever greaterTaliban <https://www.theguardian.com/world/taliban> 
resistance from 2007 to 2009, allied commanders and the western media began to 
apply ever greater scrutiny to the reliability of the west's Afghan partners. 
The US wanted the Afghan government to do more, do it better, and do it 
quickly. The war's growing unpopularity meant there was less tolerance for 
shifty allies like Karzai perceived to have a foot in both camps.

American frustrations burst into the open in October 2009 when serving and 
retired officials told the New York Times Karzai was a key player in 
Afghanistan's illegal opium trade, which helps fund the Taliban insurgency, 
while on the CIA payroll. Specifically, it was alleged Karzai helped recruit 
and run a paramilitary militia, known as the Kandahar Strike Force, used to 
conduct covert raids on Taliban leadership targets – a death squad.

The floodgates opened. Even as Karzai denied the allegations, new claims 
surfaced that he was secretly dealing with Taliban leaders; that he lived 
rent-free in a luxury home owned by a notorious drug dealer; that he 
masterminded massive fraud and ballot-rigging in the 2009 presidential election 
that saw his brother returned to power; that he was using his local influence 
to lease illegally acquired land to Nato and American forces for inflated 
rents; that he was a money-launderer on an epic scale.

As usual, none of these claims could be definitively proved and Karzai denied 
all wrongdoing. "I am not a drug dealer. I never was and I never will be. I am 
a victim of vicious politics," he said in 2008 when claims emerged he was 
profiting from the $4bn a year drugs trade. A year later, he was stonewalling 
again. "I don't know anyone under the name of the CIA. I have never received 
any money from any organisation. I help, definitely. I help other Americans 
wherever I can. This is my duty as an Afghan."

All along, it was whispered, people in Kandahar who knew the truth kept their 
mouths shut, either for fear of retribution or because they were on the payroll 
too. Talking to the Times's Anthony Lloyd, one western official compared 
Kandahar to Boston during 1930s prohibition: "If you exist outside of the 
sphere of Karzai cartel influence, then life is tense," the official said. 
"There is an awful lot of violence here, motivated by power, money, and drugs. 
There is a desire to preserve instability, cloaked under the figleaf of 
respectability."

Unable to push Karzai aside (in part due to the steadfast support of his 
president brother), and apparently fearful of the consequences if they 
eliminated him themselves, the Americans changed tack in the spring of 2010, as 
General David Petraeus's surge strategy came into operation in the south. 
Instead of vilifying him, they co-opted him, and bolstered his standing by 
involving him in planning for the new strategy.

The decision raised hackles both in Washington, where it was feared it would 
tarnish the credibility of the war effort, and in Afghanistan, where many local 
people concluded the Americans were not serious about rooting out corruption 
and misgovernance.

"The plan is to incorporate him, to shape him. Unless you eliminate him, you 
have to," one coalition official conceded. "You can't ignore him. He's the 
proverbial 800lb gorilla and he's in the middle of a lot of rooms. He's the 
mafia don, the family fixer, the troubleshooter." And so Karzai survived again, 
by all accounts running Kandahar like a personal fiefdom.

Born in the southern city of Karz in 1961 and one of eight children – he had 
six brothers, including Hamid Karzai, and a sister – Ahmed Wali Karzai could be 
charming as well as ruthless. Visiting VIPs and Nato generals would routinely 
be given the royal treatment when entering his compound. Britain's 
Major-General Nick Carter, who served as Nato commander in Kandahar, once 
described a conversation in which Karzai enquired enthusiastically about 
Chelsea football club's Premier League performances, claiming to be a keen fan. 
In numerous interviews Karzai smoothly handled western reporters, a skill that 
sometimes escaped his brother.

Much as his presence posed a problem for the US and Nato, Karzai's sudden 
departure from the scene raises another set of worries, not least that the 
Taliban may be encouraged in their efforts to roll back hard-won gains across 
Kandahar province. The vacuum caused by his death is potentially dangerous in 
itself, while the implications for stuttering US attempts to engage the Taliban 
in peace talks may be equally unhelpful.

If nothing else, Karzai was a man whose life experience spanned both sides of 
the Afghan divide. His murder renders that gulf just a little bit wider.
 