
Ahmed Wali Karzai <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ahmed-wali-karzai>, the 
powerful half-brother of the Afghan president, Hamid Karzai, has been killed by 
one of his security guards inside his house in Kandahar, raising the prospect 
of turmoil in a city widely seen as the key to the war in Afghanistan.

The president confirmed the death at a press conference in Kabul intended to 
mark the visit of the French president, Nicolas Sarkozy, to the capital.

"Ahmed Wali Karzai was killed at about 11.30am," General Abdul Razaq, 
Kandahar's chief of border police, said. "He was killed by his bodyguard inside 
his house." Officials said the assassin, named as Sardar Mohammed, reportedly 
Ahmed Wali Karzai's chief of security, had been killed on the spot.

"After Sardar Mohammed killed Ahmed Wali Karzai, other bodyguards shot Sardar 
Mohammed," Colonel Mohammad Mohsen, of the Afghan national army 205 Atal (Hero) 
Corps in Kandahar, said.

"The bodies have been taken to the [local] hospital. We expect some officials 
including President Karzai to come to Kandahar for his brother's funeral."

Razaq said an investigation into the assassination was under way, but 
according to initial reports from Kandahar, Sardar entered his boss's home and 
approached him with papers to sign, shooting him at close range with a pistol 
concealed under the papers.

The Taliban claimed responsibility for the assassination, saying it was one of 
their "biggest and most successful" operations. However, western officials said 
it was possible that he could have been killed as part of a settling of scores 
among tribal leaders or drug traffickers. Ahmed Wali Karzai had frequently been 
accused by western officials of being a regional kingpin and warlord in the 
opium trade. He also faced allegations of being on the CIA's payroll. He 
rejected all the charges, claiming they were made by western forces to cover 
their own shortcomings.

Ahmed Wali Karzai was a powerful figure in Afghan politics. He had been a 
member of the provincial council in Kandahar since 2005 and was its chief at 
the time of his death, although his family, tribal and business contacts gave 
him influence far beyond his official title.

"He was the president of Kandahar," said provincial elder Abdul Samat Zarih. 
"The governor, police chiefs and other officials all had to discuss things with 
him before they made a decision."

Zarih added that Ahmed Wali Karzai had many enemies, including the Taliban. 
"Maybe the Taliban killed him because he was close to the government. Maybe he 
didn't obey or follow whatever the foreigners said to him. It's a situation in 
which you can't figure out what is going on," he said.

Ahmed Wali Karzai was also seen as a keystone of security in the south and his 
assassination will raise fears about a potential power and security vacuum in 
the insurgent-ridden region. President Karzai also valued him as a trusted 
liaison between the government in Kabul and the nation's second-biggest city.

"People are asking what tomorrow will bring," said a senior US official, 
speaking on condition of anonymity. "Who is capable of replacing Ahmed Wali on 
the provincial council? As an intermediary between Kabul and Kandahar? Who is 
going to try and keep at bay the different rivalries bandaged over for the last 
few years? Who will fill the various holes occupied by AWK? These are all 
important questions." He added his death was "first and foremost a setback for
Afghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> as a whole".

Other western officials predicted that although there would be "turbulence" in 
the short term, while a new power structure took shape in Kandahar, in the 
longer term the absence of Ahmed Wali Karzai as a power broker could provide an 
opportunity to strengthen legitimate local government.

Ahmed Wali Karzai had been the target of previous assassination attempts. In 
2009 four suicide bombers stormed the provincial council office in Kandahar, 
killing 13 people.

Departing US commander General David Petraeus said the International Security 
Assistance Force had halted the Taliban's momentum in key areas. However, the 
Taliban strategy of targeted assassinations in Kandahar province demonstrates 
its continued ability to strike Isaf and the Afghan government where it hurts.

The Kandahar deputy governor, Abdul Latif Ashna, and provincial police chief, 
General Mohammad Mojayed, were killed in suicide attacks this year. The Taliban 
claimed responsibility for both deaths.

The Isaf spokesman, Carsten Jacobson, agreed it was not yet certain the 
Taliban had carried out the attack. He denied the assassination was a setback 
for Isaf.

"We must find out how he was killed," Wahid Mujda, a former member of the 
Taliban turned analyst, said. "We don't know whether it was carried out by a 
power rival or by the Taliban."

Mujda added the death would have an impact on the government and the progress 
being made in reconciliation talks with the Taliban. Karzai supported the peace 
process and had chalked up a few reintegration successes in the province.

Haji Padsha, an elder of the Alikozai tribe in Kandahar province, said Karzai 
had been shot on his return from a meeting with foreigners at the former house 
of Mullah Mohammed Omar, the fugitive leader of the Afghan Taliban.

Karzai had come under criticism in the past from Afghans for renting the 
property to international officials. It was reported in the New York Times in 
2009 that he received rent from the CIA and American special operations forces 
for allowing them to occupy a large compound outside the city that is the 
former home of Mullah Mohammed Omar. The Kandahar Strike Force, a militia run 
by the CIA, also shares the compound.
 