
The Doldrums, the strip-zones of low pressure which roam equatorial seas, are 
notorious for their punishing tranquillity. Silver water basking under blue 
skies; painted ship, painted ocean. As sailors have long known, though, the 
Doldrums are also given to violence. Squall lines sweep suddenly across them. 
Hot water makes hot, wet air, which rises in fierce up-draughts, before 
thickening and braiding into typhoons and tornadoes.

In his aeronautical masterpiece, Wind, Sand and Stars (1939), Antoine 
Saint-Exupéry describes the first seaplane crossing of the South Atlantic, made 
by his friend Jean Mermoz in May 1930. When Mermoz reached the Doldrums, they 
were in a turbulent mood:

"Waterspouts stood in apparently motionless ranks like the pillars of a 
temple. On their swollen capitals rested the dark and lowering arch of the 
storm, but blades of light sliced down through cracks in the arch, and between 
the pillars the full moon gleamed on the cold stone tiles of the sea. Mermoz 
made his way through those empty ruins, banking for four hours from one channel 
of light to another, circling round those giant pillars with the sea surging up 
inside them, following those flows of moonlight towards the exit from the 
temple."

Saint-Exupéry's writings, the finest in aerology - among the finest in all 
exploration - are full of moments such as these: moments when, aloft, one 
suddenly "passes beyond the borders of the real world", and into a realm so 
elemental that it seems otherworldly.

In Night Flight (1931), Southern Mail (1929), and Flight to Arras (1942), he 
writes of crash-landings in the "mineral country" of the desert, of long 
journeys in darkness over sea and sand, of crossing high mountain passes while 
"sprays of lightning" illuminate the peaks. He writes, too, of miracles; of 
how, on a night-flight south, a pilot will move through seasons in a matter of 
hours, "leaving behind the rains and snows of the North, repudiating winter, he 
throttles back his engine and begins his descent through a midsummer sky into 
the dazzling sunlight of Alicante".

No one has written about air like Saint-Exupéry. Air was a substance whose 
beauty so astonished him that he often lapsed into dream-like states while at 
the controls: the aeroplanes he was flying did not have autopilot. "I live", he 
once wrote, "in the realm of flight".

Saint-Exupéry, or Saint-Ex as he was widely known, learnt his trade as a pilot 
while working for Latécoère, the company which in the late 1910s opened up the 
first air routes into Africa and South America. The Latécoère pilots were not 
today's stern men of gold braid and flight-bag, shuttling between the duty-free 
zones of the world's cities. They were a clerisy of risk-takers, a young aerial 
aristocracy. Men like Mermoz pushed their planes far above their operational 
ceilings. When they returned, "it was only to set out again". Saint-Ex began by 
venerating these men, then he became one of them.

With Latécoère, Saint-Ex flew some of the most hazardous early mail routes 
over the Mediterranean, the Sahara and the Andes. During these years, he 
encountered the two elemental trinities - "wind, sand and stars", "mountain, 
sea and storm" - which he would worship for the rest of his life. And he came 
to understand that he was a man who found himself by getting lost. Flying, 
radioless, with limited fuel, above desert or ocean expanses, was his preferred 
state. He felt most at home in "a remoteness beyond possibility of homecoming".

It is extraordinary that Saint-Ex lived as long as he did. He describes once 
piloting over the lightless Libyan desert for hours on a clouded night. 
Glimpsing "the gleam of water at the bottom of a crevasse in the fog", he 
realises that he has been flying mistakenly over open sea - a navigational 
error which almost kills him. On another occasion, he and a navigator 
crash-land in the Libyan desert and, against all odds, walk to safety. They 
pass on foot through a vast area of dunes which are covered "with a single 
layer of shining black pebbles". "It is", wrote Saint-Ex, "as if we are walking 
on scales of metal, and all the domes around us shine like armour. We have 
fallen into a metallic world. We are locked in an iron landscape."

On another occasion, piloting a seaplane through stormy air far above water, 
he notices the "great white palm leaves which seem to cover the sea's surface, 
marked with veins and flaws and petrified in a kind of frost". It is an 
exquisite sight, but Saint-Ex knows that this is "no place to put down," for 
the frost is in fact the sign of turbulent water seen from altitude: not 
"beautiful palm leaves" at all, but "poisonous flowers".

In Saint-Ex's writing, we are always seeing down on to the world, and 
reinterpreting it as a consequence. "A person taking off from the ground," he 
once remarked, "elevates himself above the trivialities of life into a new 
understanding." The Greeks had a name for the person who saw from above. They 
called him the katascopos - a word which later came to mean spy, or explorer - 
and for them, the sight gained from height was close to god-like. Saint-Ex was 
a katascopos in every sense of the word, and to read his prose - terse, 
epigrammatic, visionary - is to share in some part that salutary aerial view, 
that fresh cosmic perspective.

"We are living on a wandering planet", he beautifully observed. "From time to 
time, thanks to the aeroplane, it reveals to us its origin: a lake connected 
with the moon unveils hidden kinships. I have seen other signs of this." This 
idea of connection - an idea that was both environmentalist and humanist in its 
implications - joins all of Saint-Ex's writing, right through to his mystical 
work, Citadelle, unfinished at the time of his death (he died as he dreamed, 
disappearing in July 1944 during a reconnaissance flight over the 
Mediterranean). Up in his sky-lab, Saint-Ex developed a socialist version of 
heroism: a belief - in the words of his best English translator - William Rees, 
that "human solidarity was the only true wealth in life, mutual responsibility 
the only ethic".

This ideal was deeply involved, for Saint-Ex, with the view from above - the 
aeronaut's vision. In the short, exquisite prologue to Wind, Sand and Stars, he 
described his first night flight in Argentina:

"It was a dark night, with only occasional scattered lights glittering like 
stars on the plain. Each one, in that ocean of shadows, was a sign of the 
miracle of consciousness. In one home, people were reading, or thinking, or 
sharing confidences. In another, perhaps, they were searching through space, 
wearying themselves with the mathematics of the Andromeda nebula. In another 
they were making love. These small flames shone far apart in the landscape, 
demanding their fuel. Each one, in that ocean of shadows, was a sign of the 
miracle of consciousness ... the flame of the poet, the teacher, or the 
carpenter. But among these living stars, how many closed windows, how many 
extinct stars, how many sleeping men ..."

"We must", Saint-Ex concluded, "surely seek unity. We must surely seek to 
communicate with some of those fires burning far apart in the landscape."
 