
Efforts will be intensified on Friday to lift the tail of the crashed AirAsia 
plane after strong currents and blinding silt thwarted an attempt by divers on 
Thursday to find flight 8501’s black boxes.

The flight data and cockpit voice recorders are crucial for determining what 
caused the jet carrying 162 passengers and crew to vanish on 28 December, 
halfway into a two-hour flight between Surabaya,Indonesia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia>, and Singapore.

Four bodies recovered on Thursday raised the total to 44, Indonesian Search 
and Rescue Agency chief, Henry Bambang Soelistyo, said.

Days after sonar detected apparent wreckage, an unmanned underwater vehicle 
showed the plane’s tail, lying upside down and partially buried in the ocean 
floor.

Divers looking for the black boxes on Thursday were unable to make it past 
currents and one-metre visibility, Soelistyo said.

He said efforts will be intensified on Friday to raise the tail – either with 
a lifting balloon or crane.

Ping-emitting beacons in the black boxes still have about 20 days of battery 
life, but high waves had prevented the deployment of ping locators, which are 
dragged by ships.

Three ships equipped with six ping locators were in the search area in the 
Java Sea, said Nurcahyo Utomo, an investigator of the National Commission for 
Transportation Safety.

Based on pictures taken by divers, he believed that the black boxes were still 
in their original location in the plane’s tail.

“Once detected, we will try to find and lift up the black boxes as soon as 
possible,” he said.

Officials are hopeful many of the bodies not yet recovered are inside the 
fuselage, which is thought to be lying near the plane’s tail. Divers reaching 
the tail on Thursday said they did not see bodies trapped in the broken-off 
tail section.

It’s not clear what caused the crash, but bad weather is believed to have been 
a factor. The pilot told air traffic control he was approaching threatening 
clouds, but he was denied permission to change altitude because other planes 
were nearby. The plane soon lost contact.
 