
A team of Indonesian navy divers has located both black boxes from an AirAsia 
airliner that crashed two weeks ago, which is believed to have exploded as it 
hit the sea.

Indonesian officials announced on Monday that the first black box, the flight 
data recorder, had been retrieved from the Java Sea for analysis. Hours later 
they said the cockpit voice recorder had been located but not yet brought to 
the surface.


Flight QZ8501 crashed on 28 December on its way from Indonesia’s 
second-biggest city of Surabaya to Singapore, killing all 162 people on board.


The plane lost contact with air traffic control in bad weather less than 
halfway into its scheduled two-hour flight.

“At 7:11, we succeeded in lifting the part of the black box known as the 
flight data recorder,” Fransiskus Bambang Soelistyo, the head of the National 
Search and Rescue Agency, told reporters at a news conference. The data 
recorder was found under the wrecked wing of the plane.


Later his colleague Suryadi Bambang Supriyadi, the agency’s operation 
co-ordinator said the cockpit recorder had been located, but was stuck under 
heavy wreckage, which divers were working to lift.

Officials hope the black boxes will reveal the cause of the crash. The 
national weather bureau has said seasonal storms were likely a factor.

S B Supriyadi, a director with the national search and rescue agency, said 
that initial analysis of the wreckage so far recovered indicated that the plane 
exploded on impact with the water.

“It exploded because of the pressure,” he told reporters in Pangkalan Bun town 
on Borneo island, the search headquarters.

“The cabin was pressurised and before the pressure of the cabin could be 
adjusted, it went down – boom. That explosion was heard in the area.”

Investigators said the flight data recorder would most likely be taken to the 
capital, Jakarta, for analysis and that it could take up to two weeks to 
download the data.

However, the information could be accessed in as little as two days if the 
devices are not badly damaged.

Soelistyo did not provide any details of the condition of the flight data 
recorder.


Over the weekend, three vessels detected “pings” that were believed to be from 
the black boxes’ emergency locator transmitter. But strong winds, powerful 
currents and high waves hampered search efforts.

Indonesian navy divers took advantage of calmer weather in the Java Sea on 
Monday to retrieve the flight recorder and search for the fuselage of the 
Airbus A320-200.

Forty-eight bodies have been retrieved from the Java Sea and searchers believe 
more will be found in the plane’s fuselage.

Relatives of the victims have urged authorities to make finding the remains of 
their loved ones the priority.

“All the ships, including the ships from our friends, will be deployed with 
the main task of searching for bodies that are still or suspected to still be 
trapped underwater,” Soelistyo said, referring to the multinational force 
helping with the search and recovery effort.

Indonesia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia> AirAsia, 49% owned by 
the Malaysia-based AirAsia budget group, has come under pressure from 
authorities in Jakarta since the crash.

The transport ministry has suspended the carrier’s Surabaya-Singapore licence 
for flying on a Sunday, for which it did not have permission. However, the 
ministry has said this had no bearing on the crash of flight QZ8501.

President Joko Widodo said the crash exposed widespread problems in the 
management of air travel in Indonesia.

Separately on Sunday, a DHC-6 Twin Otter operated by Indonesia’s Trigana Air 
crashed on landing at Enarotali Airport in Paniai, Papua.

Strong winds caused the aircraft to roll over, domestic news website Detik.com 
reported, with no injuries to the three crew members on board. The plane was 
not carrying any passengers.
 