
Four more bodies were recovered from the wreckage of AirAsia flight 8501 on 
Saturday but Indonesian salvage teams failed to raise the fuselage of the 
crashed passenger jet from the sea bed.

Rescuers workers managed to lift the fuselage of the jet nearly to the water’s 
surface before it sank to the ocean floor again when the lifting balloons 
deflated, in a setback in the effort to recover more of the victims’ remains.

Divers were struggling with strong current and poor visibility to prepare to 
retrieve the 30-metre-long wreckage, said Suryadi Bambang Supriyadi, the 
operations chief at the National Search and Rescue Agency.

“We now need additional balloons,” Supriyadi said after Saturday’s setback.

He added that the cockpit was reported to be about 500 metres from the 
fuselage at a depth of 30 metres and that the bodies of the pilot and co-pilot 
might be inside. “Divers would evacuate [them] if they are there,” he said.

Divers were able to enter the main section of the plane, which crashed in the 
Java Sea last month, for the first time on Friday and retrieved six bodies.

A total of 69 bodies have now been recovered from Flight 8501, which crashed on
28 December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2014/dec/28/airasia-flight-loses-contact-with-air-traffic-control-on-route-from-indonesia-to-singapore>
with 162 people on board while flying from Surabaya, Indonesia’s second largest 
city, to Singapore.

Poor weather for the past week had prevented salvage workers from reaching the 
main part of the Airbus A320-200 since its location was determinedearlier this 
month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2014/dec/30/missing-airasia-flight-qz8501-china-and-france-join-expanded-search>
.

Passengers’ belongings including milk cartons, hair rollers and an iPhone with 
headphones still attached, as well as aircraft parts such as seat cushions and 
tables, floated out as the fuselage was being lifted, according to one report.

Detritus including wires and seats floating inside the fuselage stopped divers 
from entering the main section to find more bodies on Friday.

“The divers said it was dark inside, the seats were floating about and the 
wires were like a tangled yarn,” Supriyadi said.

Rescue officials hoped that more bodies could be retrieved when the fuselage 
had been raised.

The plane’s black boxes – the cockpit voice and flight data recorders – were 
recoveredlast week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/11/airasia-black-box-recorder-found-indonesia>
, and were being analysed by investigators and Airbus advisers.

Indonesian transport minister Ignasius Jonan said this week that the plane 
climbed unusually fast before stalling and plunging into the sea.

Moments before the plane disappeared from radar screens, the pilot had asked 
to climb to avoid a major storm but was not immediately granted permission due 
to heavy air traffic in the area.

Tatang Kurniadi, head of Indonesia’s national transportation safety committee, 
has ruled out sabotage and said a preliminary report was expected to be 
submitted to the International Civil Aviation Organisation next week.

A full analysis of what went wrong could take up to a year, he added.
 