
Indonesian search and rescue teams have likely detected signals from the black 
box ofAirAsia flight QZ8501 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/airasia-flight-qz8501>, raising hopes that 
investigators will soon obtain key information on why the plane went down.

The pings were detected on Friday morning, 12 days after the plane went 
missing over the Java Sea while carrying 162 people from Surabaya,Indonesia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia> to Singapore.

On Wednesday, an unmanned underwater vehicle located the plane’s tail about 
30m underwater off the coast of Borneo, upside down and partially embedded in 
the sea bed. While the black box and flight recorders were installed in the 
plane’s tail section, officials warned that they may have come undone, 
suggesting that they may be buried in the mud.

“We received an update from the field that the pinger locator already detected 
pings,” Santoso Sayogo, an investigator at the National Transportation Safety 
Committee, told reporters. “We have our fingers crossed it is the black box. 
Divers need to confirm. Unfortunately it seems it’s off from the tail. But the 
divers need to confirm the position.”

Searchers have pulled 46 bodies of the plane’s passenger and crew from the 
water, as well as a scattering of debris. No survivors have been found.

Experts say that the crash was at least partially caused by bad weather. Yet 
the pilot did not issue a distress call, and the the circumstances of the 
flight’s final moments remain unclear.

Indonesian armed forces commander general Moeldoko told reporters on Thursday 
that signals from the plane’s black box had been found, but later lost again. 
Divers searching for the black box on Thursday were thwarted by strong currents 
and low visibility.

Black boxes typically emit signals for about a month after a crash before 
running out of batteries.

Indonesia AirAsia, 49% owned by the Malaysia-based AirAsia budget group, has 
come under pressure from the authorities in Jakarta since the crash.

The transport ministry has suspended the carrier’s Surabaya-Singapore licence, 
saying it only had permission to fly the route on Mondays, Tuesdays, Thursdays 
and Saturdays.

Flight QZ8501 took off on a Sunday, though the ministry said this had no 
bearing on the accident.
 