
The captain of the AirAsia jet that crashed into the sea in December was out 
of his seat conducting an unorthodox procedure when his co-pilot apparently 
lost control, two people familiar with the investigation said.


 Details emerging of the final moments of Flight QZ8501 are likely to focus 
attention partly on maintenance, procedures and training, though Indonesian 
officials have said that it is too early to draw any firm conclusions.

 The Airbus A320 jet plunged into the Java Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/29/missing-airasia-qz8501-plane-likely-sea-indonesian-rescue-chief>
 while en route from Surabaya, Indonesia, to Singapore on 28 December, killing 
all 162 people on board.

 It had been suffering maintenance faults with a flight control computer for 
more than a week, and one person familiar with the matter said the captain had 
flown the same faulty aircraft just days before the crash.

AirAsia pilots may have turned off plane computer system before crash, report 
claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/30/airasia-pilots-turned-off-planes-computer-system-before-crash-report>
AirAsia said it would not comment while the matter was under investigation by 
the National Transportation Safety Committee (NTSC) ofIndonesia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia>.

 Reuters reported this week that maintenance problems on the flight 
augmentation computer (FAC), and the way the pilots reacted to them, were at 
the heart of the investigation.

 After trying to reset this device, pilots pulled a circuit-breaker to cut its 
power, Bloomberg News reported on Friday.

 People familiar with the matter told Reuters it was the Indonesian captain 
Iriyanto who took this step, rather than his less experienced French co-pilot 
Remy Plesel,who was flying the plane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/29/airasia-co-pilot-was-in-charge-of-plane-when-it-crashed-investigators-reveal>
.

 The outage would not directly upset the aircraft but would remove flight 
envelope protection, which prevents a pilot from taking a plane beyond its 
safety limits, leaving the junior pilot to fly the jet manually in delicate 
high altitude conditions.

 The decision to cut off the FAC has surprised experts because the usual 
procedure for resetting it is to press a button on the overhead panel.

 “You can reset the FAC, but to cut all power to it is very unusual,” said one 
A320 pilot, who declined to be identified. “You don’t pull the circuit breaker 
unless it is an absolute emergency. I don’t know if there was one in this case, 
but it is very unusual.”

 It is also significant because to pull the circuit breaker the captain had to 
get out of his seat.

 The circuit breakers are on a panel behind the co-pilot and hard or 
impossible to reach from the captain’s seat on the left of the 
cockpit, according to two experienced pilots.

 Shortly afterwards the junior pilot pulled the plane into a sharp climb from 
which investigators have said it stalled or lost lift.

 “It appears he was surprised or startled by this,” said a person familiar 
with the investigation, referring to the decision to cut power to the affected 
computer.

 The captain eventually resumed control, but a person familiar with the matter 
said he was not in a position to intervene immediately to recover the aircraft 
from its upset.

 Data already published on the plane’s trajectory suggest it may have been 
difficult for someone to move around the cockpit in an upward-tilting and by 
then possibly unstable aircraft, but there is so far no confirmation of the 
cockpit movements.

 “The co-pilot pulled the plane up, and by the time the captain regained the 
controls it was too late,” one of the people familiar with the investigation 
said.

 Tatang Kurniadi, chief of Indonesia’s NTSC, told Reuters there had been no 
delay in the captain resuming control but declined further comment.

 Airbus declined to comment.

 Lawyers for the family of the French co-pilot say they have filed a lawsuit 
against AirAsia in Paris for “endangering the lives of others” by flying the 
route without official authorisation on that day. Investigators have said the 
accident was not related to the permit issue.

 AirAsia did not immediately respond to requests for comment on the lawsuit.

 Although more is becoming known about the chain of events, people familiar 
with the investigation warned against making assumptions on the accident’s 
cause, which needed more analysis.

 Safety experts say air crashes are most often caused by a chain of events, 
each of which is necessary but not sufficient to explain the underlying causes 
of the accident. 



 