
Indonesian divers have found the black box flight recorders of the AirAsia 
plane that crashed in the Java Sea a fortnight ago with 162 people on board, 
the transport ministry has said.

However, they did not retrieve the box immediately from the seabed because it 
was stuck under debris from the main body of the plane.

“The navy divers in Jadayat state boat have succeeded in finding a very 
important instrument, the black box of AirAsia QZ8501,” said a senior ministry 
spokesman. The recorders were at a depth of 30-32 metres (99-106 feet), he said.

Divers will try on Monday to shift the position of the wreckage to access the 
black box. “However, if this effort fails, then the team will lift part of the 
main body using the same balloon technique used earlier to lift the tail,” the 
spokesman said.

After a frustrating two-week search hampered by bad weather, officials on 
Sunday reported that strong ping signals had been detected coming from the 
seabed less than 0.6 miles (1km) from where the tail was found.

The Indonesian meteorological agency has said stormy weather likely caused the 
Airbus A320-200 to crash as it flew from the Indonesian city of Surabaya to 
Singapore on 28 December.

But a definitive answer is impossible without the black box, which should 
contain the pilots’ final words as well as various flight data.

SB Supriyadi, a director with the national search and rescue agency, told 
reporters that an object believed to be the plane’s main body had been detected 
near the source of the pings.

The search, which has involved US, Chinese and ships from other navies, has 
recovered 48 bodies so far.

Supriyadi said many bodies were believed to be trapped in the cabin, so 
reaching that part of the wreckage was a top priority.

The tail of the plane, with its red AirAsia logo, was lifted out of the water 
on Saturday using giant balloons and a crane. It was brought by tugboat on 
Sunday to a port near the search headquarters at Pangkalan Bun on Borneo.

All but seven of those on board the flight were Indonesian. The bodies of a 
South Korean couple were identified on Sunday, but their 11-month-old baby 
remains unaccounted for, Indonesian authorities said.

The other foreigners were one Singaporean, one Malaysian, one Briton and a 
Frenchman – co-pilot Remi Plesel. Their bodies have not been recovered.

While the cause of the crash is unknown, the disaster has once again placed 
Indonesia’s chaotic aviation industry under scrutiny.

Indonesian officials have alleged Indonesia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia> AirAsia did not have a licence to 
fly the route on the day of the crash, although the airline rejects the claim.

Indonesia’s transport ministry quickly banned AirAsia from flying the 
Surabaya-Singapore route. On Friday, it suspended dozens more routes operated 
by five other domestic airlines for licence violations.
 