
Indonesian search teams have said a sonar scan may have located the fuselage 
of the AirAsia airliner that crashed two weeks ago with the loss of all 162 
people on board.

Searchers have also been detecting pings, believed to be from the aircraft’s 
black box flight recorders, near where the tip of the Airbus A320’s tail was 
raised on Saturday. The rear fuselage section that contains the recorders was 
not attached to the tail.

AirAsia flight 8501 lost contact with air traffic control during thundery 
weather on 28 December less than halfway into a two-hour flight from the 
Indonesian city of Surabaya to Singapore. There were no survivors.


Supriyadi, operations co-ordinator for Indonesian search and rescue, said a 
sonar scan had revealed an object measuring 10 metres by 4 metres by 2.5 metres 
on the sea floor.


 “They suspect it is the body of the plane. There is a big possibility that 
the black box is near the body of the plane,” said Supriyadi, speaking in the 
town of Pangkalan Bun, the base for the search effort on Borneo.

 “A team of divers has already been sent to prove this data. The diving 
operation has started,” he said.

 Forty-eight bodies have been found in the Java Sea off Borneo and the 
fuselage would likely contain more remains.

 “If it is the body of the plane then we will first evacuate the victims. 
Secondly we will search for the black box,” Supriyadi said.

 Strong winds, currents and high waves have been hampering efforts to reach 
other large pieces of suspected wreckage detected by sonar on the sea floor.

 Another official involved in the search said three ships had detected pings 
about two miles (4km) from where the plane’s tail tip was raised on Saturday, 
in water about 30 metres deep.

 If and when the recorders are found and taken to the capital, Jakarta, for 
analysis, it could take up to two weeks to download data, investigators have 
said, although the information could be accessed in as little as two days if 
the devices are not badly damaged.

 On Saturday teams of divers in rubber dinghies battled the swell to attach 
inflatable balloons to the tail tip, which was later hauled onto a rescue 
vessel.

 The aircraft carries cockpit voice and flight data recorders – or black boxes 
– near its tail but once the wreckage was visible it quickly became apparent 
that not enough of the rear section was attached to contain the devices.

 While the cause of the crash is not known, the national weather bureau has 
said seasonal storms were likely to be a factor. The pilots were reportedly 
denied permission to divert above a storm.

 President Joko Widodo, who took office in late October, said the crash 
exposed widespread problems in the management of air transport in Indonesia.
 