
In the back room of a pub in Kentish Town, a group of middle-class Londoners 
are perched on velvet-covered stools, eating hummus and talking about property. 
On the wall, above a pile of empty beer kegs, a slide presentation is in 
progress. A video of Airbnb’s recentadvert 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fQN9Uflzp9I> shows smiling hosts opening their 
front doors and declaring their support for Sadiq Khan’s post-Brexit “London is 
open” campaign.

The audience of Airbnb hosts are there after receiving individual invitations 
from the company to a “home sharers” meet-up – a concept largely unfamiliar to 
the slightly bemused crowd. Jonathan, an enthusiastic CalifornianAirbnb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/airbnb> employee, who was recently 
seconded to London to set up the clubs, is happy to explain: “Homesharing clubs 
are simply a way of organising this into something … that has a unified voice … 
then actually takes actions as a collective,” he says, in a less than clear 
answer.

More simply, homesharing clubs are advocacy groups made up of Airbnb hosts – 
loose, informal lobbying groups that push the company’s agenda to politicians. 
The clubs are part of a what is fast becoming a concerted fightback by Airbnb, 
the website founded in 2008 when three college friends rented out air 
mattresses in their San Francisco flat as a way of making money, to become one 
of the biggest online travel brands in the world.

But its phenomenal growth is proving to be its greatest liability. Authorities 
in cities around the world fear the impact it is having on their communities 
and are now seeking to arrest Airbnb’s near unfettered expansion.

The latest in a series of attempts around the world to curb its growth came 
earlier this month whenNew York governor Andrew Cuomo signed a bill 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-10-21/n-y-governor-cuomo-signs-bill-to-fine-illegal-airbnb-hosts>
 that will fine tenants or landlords who let out unoccupied flatsfor less than 
30 days.

Meanwhile, in Dublin, the owners of one flat have recently been prohibited 
from using it as an Airbnb let without planning permission, raising the 
prospect of copycat actions elsewhere.

Airbnb is driving up the rent in your urban neighborhood | Alexander Zaitchik
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/17/airbnb-rent-unaffordable-elizabeth-warren-neighborhoods>
In Berlin, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/01/berlin-authorities-taking-stand-against-airbnb-rental-boom>
 people who let more than half of their flat short-term without obtaining 
permission from the city council now risk a fine of €100,000. And in London,a 
90-day rule was introduced last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/feb/10/airbnb-to-be-legalised-in-london>
 under which no property can be rented out on Airbnb, or any similar service, 
for more than three months a year without planning permission.

So how is Airbnb responding? In New York the company has filed a lawsuit in 
the US federal court. But at a wider level the company is now supporting 
efforts to prevent these types of actions from taking place in the first place. 
And the best way to do this, Airbnb thinks, is to get its millions of hosts to 
rise up on its behalf.

Last year the company announced plans for 2016 to create homesharing clubs in 
100 cities around the world. The aim, it said, was to form “a powerful 
people-to-people based political advocacy bloc”.

The bulk of the clubs are in North America, with a couple in Australia, South 
America and Asia, and an increasing number in Europe. In Britain, however, the 
number of clubs is negligible, even though there are more than 40,000 listings 
on Airbnb. The company is concentrating its efforts on building this UK base. 
Meetings, such as the one at the Abbey Tavern in Kentish Town, have been 
happening all over London as Airbnb seeks to build a grassroots campaign to 
fight the threat of greater regulation and more restrictive policies.

The hosts at the Kentish Town meeting are told that, earlier this year in 
Berlin, Airbnb “dropped the ball” after the city’s ruling on short-term lets – 
the suggestion being that it did not want this to happen again elsewhere. As a 
result of that ruling, theBerlin Home Sharers Club 
<https://www.airbnbaction.com/berlin/> was created and started lobbying to try 
to change what it saw to be an unfair policy. In London, the 90-day rule may 
itself not be onerous compared to other cities, but there are growing calls for 
further regulations .

Airbnb’s Jonathan steers clear of telling the group that they should lobby for 
change. “On the one hand, would Airbnb like to see homesharing groups set up 
all over Europe? Absolutely,” he says. “Would it share in their interests? 
Absolutely. But whether those sharing clubs decide that their only interest is 
to share electricians and plumbers or to take political action is completely up 
to them,” he says.

The next slide focuses on Barcelona, a city where, in 2014, Airbnb was fined 
€30,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jul/07/airbnb-fined-illegal-tourist-lets-barcelona-catalonia>
 for breaching tourism laws. Later, another slide listing “write to your MP” as 
a suggested activity is shown. “Writing letters to local newspapers and 
selected officials is obviously something that we would want to see concerned 
hosts do, but only if it applies to them and if they’re motivated to do so,” 
Jonathan says.

Lawmakers join Elizabeth Warren's call for US to 'step in' on illegal Airbnb 
hotels
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/13/airbnb-cities-urge-government-crackdown-elizabeth-warren>
Chris Lehane, Airbnb’s head of global policy and communications, said the 
clubs act as “a voice against the powerful”.

“These folks absolutely should have the capacity to go out there and represent 
themselves, and we’ve been clear that we want to provide that support and 
provide some of the infrastructure,” he said. “This can be an incredibly 
effective advocacy tool. I think we’ve been pretty transparent and open about 
that.”

The networks of host groups, which in effect lobby on behalf of the company, 
are an illustration of how far Airbnb has grown since its inception in 2007. 
Back then, founders Brian Chesky and Joe Gebbia could not afford the rent on 
their San Francisco flat and so put three airbeds on the floor and charged $80 
a piece for their first guests.


Even by the rapid standards of growth in the tech industry, the company has 
expanded very quickly. It is nowvalued at $30bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/22/airbnb-valuation-500-million-funding-round>
, and claims two million property listings in 191 countries. That valuation 
puts the worth of the Californian firm at more than Hilton Hotels.

Wouter Geerts, an analyst for Euromonitor International, says this rapid 
growth has led to the “corporatisation” of Airbnb, with more listings from 
other hospitality companies and people with multiple properties. “That might be 
hotels or estate agents, serviced apartment providers. They all look at Airbnb 
and think ‘actually what is stopping us putting these properties on Airbnb as 
well and making extra money?’. And of course there are more and more stories 
about landlords that push out long-term tenants because they can make more 
money through Airbnb,” he said.

One of the most frequent criticisms of Airbnb has come from the hospitality 
industry, which has complained of the differences in regulation that hoteliers 
have to operate under, compared to Airbnb. But the organisation that acts as 
the voice of this industry in the UK says it is not just about them. “Many 
councils in London have expressed their concerns recently,” says Ufi Ibrahim, 
chief executive of the British Hospitality Association. “Much of that is 
because the sharing economy – and in particular we are talking about the 
unlawful professional landlords, the pseudo-landlords operating illegally – has 
put a huge strain on rental prices.”

Increasing levels of hostility to Airbnb have also started to come from the 
neighbours of those who let their homes through the website. Last montha 
property court in London ruled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/09/beware-pitfalls-airbnb-rental-plansbreaching-leases-mortgages>
 that homeowners whose leases say that their homes can be used only as a 
private residence cannot rent out their properties as short-term lets. The case 
came after the neighbours of Slovakian interior designer Iveta Nemcova informed 
the freeholder of the building that she was listing her flat in north London on 
Airbnb. As a result, Airbnb hosts have been warned that they could be in breach 
of the terms of their mortgages and building insurance policies.

One homeowner who spoke to the Observer said that the ground-floor flat in her 
building had been rented out on Airbnb by a tenant without the knowledge of the 
owner. As a result, the house insurance of the whole building was potentially 
invalidated.

The 'Airbnb effect': is it real, and what is it doing to a city like Amsterdam?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/oct/06/the-airbnb-effect-amsterdam-fairbnb-property-prices-communities>
In London, Westminster City Council is investigating 1,200 properties alleged 
to be let in excess of the 90-night limit. Enforcement notices have so far only 
been issued against two. “In practical terms it is a real challenge for us to 
gather evidence to prove that individuals are letting properties for over 90 
nights,” a council spokesman said.

The scrutiny that Airbnb faces from both users and policymakers around the 
world comes after the site’s runaway growth. John O’Neill, director of the 
Centre for Hospitality Real Estate Strategy at Pennsylvania State University, 
estimates that the number of hosts has doubled in the last year with revenue up 
60%. With that growth has come an ecosystem of support companies, typically 
property management firms that submit the advert for the property onto the 
website and then may manage guests arriving and leaving, dropping off and 
collecting keys, for example.

The exact effects of this growth on the hotel industry are unclear. The 
British Hospitality Association said it would be “unfair” to say there had been 
an impact on the demand for its members’ services as a result of Airbnb – and 
instead the association focuses its criticism on the effect on housing. Airbnb 
says that its growth has been a reflection of how people live, and describes 
the attacks from the hotel industry as “disappointing but not surprising”,
rejecting claims that it has a negative effect on the housing market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/29/airbnb-europe-managing-director-olivier-gremillon-london-house-prices>
.

“Homesharing puts money into the pockets of regular people and spreads guests 
and benefits to more communities and businesses,” the company said in a 
statement. “Countless cities around the world have introduced clear 
home-sharing rules, and we will continue to be good partners to policymakers 
and work together on progressive measures to promote responsible homesharing.” 
The vast majority of hosts follow the rules, it said.

Where the Airbnb debate goes next, after such a period of rapid growth, is 
unclear. Some hotel companies, instead of continuing to fight Airbnb, have 
chosen to join it. “The larger hotel chains are moving away from trying to 
combat Airbnb. Initially there were some kneejerk reactions of ‘we have to 
lobby against this, we don’t exactly know what’s happening, they are not 
regulated well’. Most of the companies have moved on from that now and they 
have started to realise certain potentials that it brings,” said Geerts. “There 
is this movement of looking at short-term rentals not as a negative, but more 
as a positive, and seeing the changing demands of consumers.”

This was illustrated in April when French hotels group Accor, said to be 
Europe’s largest hotelier by room numbers,paid £118m to acquire Onefinestay 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-onefinestay-m-a-accorhotels-idUSKCN0X20BG>, 
which offers short-term lets on expensive homes.

Airbnb raises at least $500m in new funding at $30bn valuation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/22/airbnb-valuation-500-million-funding-round>
O’Neill estimates that there are 70 lobbyists working for Airbnb in the US, 
trying to get favourable legislation passed to benefit the company. “Most 
hoteliers I speak with have accepted Airbnb’s existence and growth. Their 
concerns have more to do with levelling the playing field between hotels and 
Airbnb operators, because Airbnb has so many unfair competitive advantages 
relative to hotels,” he said.

Others have said that regulators need to be fair in how they set out the rules 
that Airbnb and other similar companies must adhere to. Robert Vaughan, an 
economist with accountancy firm PwC, said there was a huge variation in those 
affected – from someone renting out their sofa, to landlords with multiple 
properties – and there is a difficulty in applying the same rules to all of 
them.

O’Neill says that while Airbnb may continue to grow, it will not have the free 
rein it had previously. “I don’t think there will be a free-for-all of 
unregulated growth as there has been in the past,” he said.

Back at the meeting in Kentish Town, the night ends with a positive response 
to the homesharing clubs idea. “We need to write a letter,” suggests one host. 
“We should meet every three months,” suggests another. As the meeting draws to 
a close, nearly everyone agrees on the need for a club. Jonathan jumps in 
again: “I do want to stress that there are other sorts of flavours to 
home-sharing clubs,” he says, launching into a description of a collective 
bedsheet-washing initiative, but few are listening. As the meeting ends, the 
group are asked to put their hands up if they want a local club. Nearly every 
hand goes up.


The Observer reporter who attended the Kentish Town meeting is an Airbnb host


Growing concern around the world


BARCELONA

Authorities in the Catalan capital recently stepped up their campaign against 
homes illegally rented out to tourists using homesharing websites. Hundreds of 
listings were ordered to be removed, and Airbnb and another online rental firm, 
Homeaway, faced fines of €60,000 each.


Homeowners who want to rent out properties to tourists must apply for a 
licence, and a team of 20 inspectors has been set up to find those who do not 
adhere to the rules. The city’s mayor, Ada Colau, who took office in 2015, 
stopped the granting of new tourist licences for homes and hotels. She has 
blamed the rise in Airbnb popularity for growing tensions between residents and 
rowdy tourists.

The number of people using Airbnb in Barcelona tripled to 900,000 in the three 
years to 2015.

REYKJAVIK

The 1,600 short-term property lets in Iceland’s capital have to operate under 
strict rules introduced in June. The legislation allows residents to let their 
property for 90 days a year before they must pay business tax. The move comes 
as Iceland’s population of 332,000 is set to welcome 1.6 million visitors this 
year – a 29% increase on last year – drawn by the glaciers, fjords, lava 
fields, hot springs, hiking trails and midnight sun.


The move is one of a series aimed at controlling the rapid rise in visitor 
numbers, includingGame of Thrones fans travelling to the filming locations of 
the television drama. One report estimated there was a 124% increase in Airbnb 
rentals in one year as residents cashed in on the popularity of the country, 
with more than 100 flats available on the capital’s main street alone.

MOSCOW

Airbnb said last year that the Russian capital was one of its fastest-growing 
markets, fuelled by high inflation and low incomes. Activity doubled in one 
year, driven by an increase of single rooms in apartments, which were being 
listed for short-terms lets in an attempt by many homeowners to make ends meet, 
given the country’s economic problems.


The growing interest in Moscow on Airbnb brought it into the top 10 most 
popular cities by bookings on the website at a time when there was no sign of 
legislative regulation to restrict use of the service. The sharp increase came 
at the same time as falling wages, which were down 8.8% in the first half of 
last year. The average price of a private room for a night in the city is £27, 
and £45 for an entire home, according to the site.

LISBON

The city has bucked the trend of some of its European neighbours, and instead 
worked to make it easier for short-term rentals to operate. Hosts are required 
to register their properties as short-term rentals but there is no limit on the 
number of nights per year that they can operate.


Mayor Fernando Medina has said people should not be scared of the new tourism 
dynamic and wants the city to be able to take in more tourists, in turn 
reducing the number of empty buildings in Lisbon. Tourism is seen as an 
important part of Portugal’s economic recovery. Airbnb listings in the greater 
Lisbon area have almost tripled in the past three years.

SAN FRANCISCO

Although the city is home to Airbnb’s HQ, it also operates strict rules for 
hosts, who have to register with authorities. If Airbnb advertises an 
unregistered property it can be fined $1,000 a day for each listing. One action 
group has posted “wanted” flyers. The crime? “Airbnbing our community” and 
“destroying affordable housing for immigrant, minority, and low-income 
families”. Resident groups have campaigned against Airbnb and there have been 
reports of tenants being evicted so landlords can list on the site. Last year 
Airbnb successfully campaigned against Proposition F, or the “Airbnb 
initiative”, planned legislation that would have reduced the number of days 
owners can rent their properties. Airbnb’s victory was helped by its grassroots 
homesharing club, which voted in large numbers against the law.

 