
A quarter of London homes listed on Airbnb were rented for more than 90 days 
last year, many illegally and in breach of an act intended to stop landlords 
turning badly needed housing into unofficial hotels. The booming homesharing 
website admitted on Thursday that 4,938 of its “entire home”London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> listings – 23% of the total – were let 
out for for three months or more, despite a law requiring anyone doing so to 
apply for planning permission.

The San Francisco-based website published an independent report into its 
activities by the thinktank IPPR that concluded: “It is likely there are many 
cases where planning permission for a change of use has not been obtained.”

The report warned that Airbnb <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/airbnb> 
and other homesharing sites are causing landlords to remove properties from the 
already stretched private rented sector and placing them into short-term lets 
in a trend that poses “potential future risks to housing supply in London”.

Airbnb announced on Thursday that from next spring it will ban hosts in London 
from renting out entire homes for more than 90 days a year without official 
consent.

Airbnb is driving up the rent in your urban neighborhood | Alexander Zaitchik
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/17/airbnb-rent-unaffordable-elizabeth-warren-neighborhoods>
“The problem was that a website that was about people making a little money 
letting out rooms was being abused by professional landlords turning their 
properties into hotels by the back door,” said Tom Copley, Labour’s housing 
spokesman on the London assembly, who campaigned for the change.

He said it adversely impacted on the already squeezed housing supply in the 
capital and affected local communities, with people in some areas complaining 
of Airbnb guests coming and going at all times.

It was already against the law for property owners to let out their homes on 
short term, hotel-style lets without planning permission, if the total letting 
period was over 90 days per year. But, according to Copley, town halls did not 
have the resources or data to enforce it.

Sarah Hayward, leader of the London Borough of Camden, welcomed the ban. 
“Swathes of properties in Camden had effectively been removed from the 
longer-term rental market, making it both more expensive and difficult to find 
a longer-term rental property in the borough for those working here,” she said. 
“It was abundantly clear to all councils involved that many users of the site 
were flouting the 90-night limit, and the simplest way to stop that was for 
Airbnb to stop it at source.”

In a letter to hosts sent on Thursday, Airbnb said: “We want to help ensure 
that home-sharing grows responsibly and sustainably, and makes London’s 
communities stronger. That is why we are introducing a change to our platform 
that will create new and automated limits to help ensure that entire home 
listings in London are not shared for more than 90 days a year, unless hosts 
confirm that they have permission to share their space more frequently.

Airbnb faces worldwide opposition. It plans a movement to rise up in its 
defence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/29/airbnb-backlash-customers-fight-back-london>
“The new measures will begin from 2017. If you want to host more often, you 
will need to certify that you have permission to do so or apply for the 
relevant permissions from your local council.”

In March, Airbnb said London was the third biggest city in terms of places to 
stay 
<http://www.techworld.com/startups/london-is-third-biggest-airbnb-city-in-world-uk-ireland-general-manager-james-mcclure-explains-why-3637003/>
, with a little over 40,000 places, and that this was growing at a rate of 75% 
per year.

“I welcome this move,” Copley said. “Airbnb have engaged constructively since 
I raised this with the mayor a couple of months ago. I now call on other 
short-term letting websites to do the same.”

Airbnb, which has been valued at $25bn (£20bn) and helps let out 3m properties 
around the world, has faced a regulatory backlash in some cities where leaders 
have grown concerned about its impact on housing supply.

Berlin levies a €100,000 (£85,000) fine for anyone renting out more than half 
of their home for less than two months without a permit, while hosts in San 
Francisco who do not register with the city authorities can be fined up to 
$1,000 per day. In New York there are strict laws against short lets in 
apartment blocks if hosts are not staying the apartments at the same time as 
their Airbnb guests.

“While independent research shows that home-sharing has no significant impact 
on housing affordability in London, we believe it’s important to take action 
against unwelcome commercial operators who have no place on our platform,” 
Airbnb told hosts.
 