
It may be one of the more audacious terrorist plots to be hatched in 
Afghanistan, but it was certainly not the most original. The same al-Qaida 
masterminds behind 9/11 attacks on New York and Washington planned to commit a 
similar attack in the capital of the country that once harboured them, 
according to a file amongUS military 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-military> intelligence documents 
published this week by the WikiLeaks website.

Ayman al-Zawahiri, al-Qaida's second in command, is said to have given the 
order for a team of 22 to board one or more planes at Kabul airport, hijack the 
aircraft and steer them toward a number of "important objectives".

The targets were to include Hamid Karzai's presidential palace, Nato 
headquarters, the British and US embassies and the Ariana hotel – the whole 
which the CIA rented and used as its station in Kabul.

The details of the plot have emerged as the leak of secret intelligence 
continues to create controversy in Kabul and Washington owing to the large 
number of references alleging that Pakistan's spy agency, the Inter-Services 
Intelligence (ISI), supported the Taliban inAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>.

Karzai today told reporters that Islamabad was the source of the conflict in 
his country, and called on his western allies to "destroy" the Taliban's 
sanctuaries insidePakistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan>. It was 
a striking return to the sort of anti-Pakistani rhetoric that he, who has 
sought better relations with Islamabad, has refrained from for many months.

Karzai also criticised the publication of files naming Afghan informers as 
"extremely irresponsible and shocking", echoing widespread fears that their 
lives are now at risk from Taliban reprisals. Several logs published by 
Wikileaks have been found to contain information about local intelligence 
sources including names, locations and even grid references. The three news 
organisations which published reports based on theAfghan war logs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/afghanistan-the-war-logs> this week, 
the Guardian, the New York Times and Der Spiegel, took care not to publish any 
material that would identify informers or otherwise put troops at risk.

The report on the alleged hijack plot, recorded by intelligence officers on 23 
March 2009, highlights the mixed quality of western intelligence, particularly 
the large number of "threat reports" fed to coalition forces each day – there 
are almost 2,500 for Kabul alone in the five-year period covered by the logs.

On the one hand the airline plot report is detailed, naming a number of 
conspirators, including Afghan or Pakistani generals and a pilot from the 
Afghan national carrier, who were allegedly involved in providing the hijackers 
fake IDs and "facilitating anti-coalition training".

Whereas the 9/11 hijackers went to flight schools in Arizona and Florida, the 
Kabul plotters were due to receive flying lessons at a "private air club in 
Karachi". Apparently their ideological indoctrination had already begun as they 
attended a madrasa in Khukitan, in Pakistan's Swat valley.

All 22 were al-Qaida members and included Arabs, Pakistanis, Chechens and 
Uzbeks with fake Afghan IDs, the report claims. At an unspecified date they 
would enter Afghanistan and try to obtain Russian, Chinese and Iranian visas to 
allow them to fly to those countries.

"During the flight they will hijack the plane and conduct attacks in Kabul," 
said the report. Although it is categorised as a "C3", meaning the source is 
regarded as "fairly reliable" and the information is "possibly true", the 
report is imprecise, both referring to a single plane being hijacked and to a 
number of different "attacks" against various targets.

Iran's Fars news agency reported that an attempted hijack of an Ariana 
aircraft by a lone hijacker was foiled in May.

Even if the intelligence report referred to a serious plot it seems very 
unlikely to have succeeded.

A 9/11-style attack would be ruled out by the fact that only a couple of 
commercial flights take off from Kabul every hour, and there are no direct 
flights to China or Russia. Kabul airport is also an exceptionally difficult 
place from which to hijack planes, with some of the most stringent security 
procedures in the world.

It is normal for passengers to have their bags searched twice and to be 
frisked four times, with varying degrees of effectiveness, before they reach 
check-in – there's another frisk and bag check before getting onto the plane.

• This article was amended on 30 July 2010. The original referred to a "loan 
hijacker". This has been corrected.
 