
Al-Shabaab <https://www.theguardian.com/world/al-shabaab> militants have 
retaken a key coastal stronghold in Somalia, underlining the resilience of the 
extremist group.


Fighters retook the port of Merka on Friday from African Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africanunion> troops who had held the town 
since 2012. The loss of Merka, 60 miles south of the capital, Mogadishu, is one 
of the most significant reverses for the multinational AU force in its nearly 
decade-long battle against al-Shabaab.

The AU had captured the historic port in August 2012 as it pushed the 
militants out of a series of towns inSomalia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/somalia>. There was no immediate explanation 
for why Merka appears to have been given up.

“The AU troops pulled out of the town and al-Shabaab militants entered and 
have secured control without fighting,” said Ibrahim Adam, governor of the 
Lower Shabelle region.

Control of Merka gives al-Shabaab access to a port again. This will provide a 
financial boost to the organisation, allowing both taxation of local commerce 
and facilitating a wide range of lucrative smuggling activities.

“It’s symbolically important because it was one of the major towns retaken 
from al-Shabaab and underlines the resilience and longevity of the group,” said 
Ahmed Soliman, a regional analyst at Chatham House in London.

There was no immediate response from the AU force, known by its acronym 
Amisom, or government officials.

The seizure of Merka, as well as a series of high-profile al-Shabaab attacks 
on AU bases, indicates a new offensive spirit and capacity. The insurgents have 
lost ground in their campaign to overthrow the internationally backed 
government in Mogadishu since withdrawing from the city in 2011.

Soliman said: “Al-Shabaab has the ability to absorb losing control of key 
towns and have consistently been able to regroup in rural areas as well as 
strike in urban areas.”

Locals confirmed the takeover of Merka, saying heavily armed fighters had 
swept into the town with black Islamist flags before addressing residents.

“Amisom forces moved out at midday and the local administration and all other 
Somali security forces left a few minutes later – and then heavily armed 
al-Shabaab militants entered the town,” Ibrahim Mumin told the Agence 
France-Presse news agency. “They have been addressing residents at the district 
headquarters.”

International forces have suffered a series of setbacks in Somalia in recent 
weeks. Al-Shabaab fighters over-ran a base in the south-west manned by Kenyan 
troops. The extremists subsequently claimed to have killed 100 and captured 
more. Kenyan authorities have refused to comment on any losses.

Investigators are continuing to assess a blast on a commercial airliner that 
ripped a hole in its fuselage 15 minutes after take-off from Mogadishu on 
Tuesday.

One passenger was killed, apparently sucked out through the ragged hole ripped 
in the metal, which the pilot and experts suspect was caused by a bomb.

Al-Shabaab have not yet claimed responsibility for the attack and Somalia’s 
transport minister, Ali Jama Jangeli, has called on people to await the results 
of the investigation.

Last month at an AU summit, Kenya’s president, Uhuru Kenyatta, called for more 
“resources for the forces in Somalia so that Amisom can have robust power on 
land, air and the sea.”

More than 20,000 AU troops are deployed in the country. However, they have 
been hampered by a lack of air power, including attack helicopters, leaving 
their bases often isolated and supply lines vulnerable to attack.

On Friday in Mogadishu a car bomb exploded, killing three people. An airport 
official who appeared to have been the target escaped unharmed.
 