
More than a dozen people have been killed in Mogadishu after al-Shabaab gunmen 
forced their way into a hotel and exchanged fire with guards before government 
security forces ended the attack, a police official said.

The civilian death from the Friday night attack in the Somali capital had 
risen to 14 by Saturday.


A suicide bomber rammed his car into the SYL hotel’s entrance and blew it up, 
allowing gunmen to fight their way past hotel guards at the first security 
barrier, Capt Mohamed Hussein said.

Four gunmen and the suicide bomber were also killed, he said, adding that the 
attackers did not get past the last security checkpoint.Al-Shabaab 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/al-shabaab> has claimed responsibility for 
the attack.

Hussein said 12 civilians died at the scene, while Dr Mohamed Moalim, of the 
Medina hospital, told Agence France-Presse that two others died overnight of 
their injuries. Sixteen people were wounded.

The SYL hotel, which is located across from the presidential palace, is 
frequented by government officials and business executives. It was the target 
of a suicide bombing in January last year, which killed five people.

Abdirahman Ahmed, a witness who was inside the hotel at the time, told AFP he 
saw several people injured, including three security guards.


“The gunmen who tried to storm the hotel were killed outside, they could not 
manage to enter,” he said. “The blast was so huge and windows broken everywhere 
but the gunfire was outside. Everyone was safe inside, but terrified.”

The security minister, Abdirizak Omar Mohamed, said the bomb was the biggest 
blast to hit the city in recent years, more powerful than an attack last July 
when a suicide bomber rammed a truck of explosives into the outer wall of the 
Jazeera Palace hotel, killing 17 people.

Despite being pushed out of Somalia’s major cities and towns, al-Shabaab 
continues to launch deadly guerrilla attacks across the horn of Africa. It has 
carried out attacks on three of the five countries contributing troops to the 
African Union peacekeeping mission inSomalia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/somalia>.

The group, which is linked to al-Qaida, has carried out deadly attacks in 
Kenya as well, including one in 2013 on the Westgate mall in Nairobi, which 
killed 67 people.
 