
Alabama’s parole board decided on Wednesday against freeing a one-time Ku Klux 
Klansman convicted in a church bombing that killed four black girls more than 
50 years ago.

The decision to keep Thomas Edwin Blanton Jr, 76, imprisoned was met with 
applause at the hearing. Relatives of the girls killed spoke against Blanton’s 
release during the hearing.

Blanton is the last surviving KKK member convicted of murder in the bombing of 
Birmingham’s 16th Street Baptist church.

Blanton was convicted of murder and sentenced to life imprisonment in 2001 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/may/03/michaelellison1> for being part 
of a group of Klansmen who planted a dynamite bomb that exploded outside the 
church on 15 September 1963. The blast killed 11-year-old Denise McNair and 
14-year-olds Addie Mae Collins, Carole Robertson and Cynthia Morris, also known 
as Cynthia Wesley.

The girls, who were inside the church preparing for worship, died instantly in 
a hail of bricks and stone that seriously injured Collins’ sister, Sarah 
Collins Rudolph. Their deaths inside a church on a Sunday morning became a 
symbol worldwide of the depth of racial hatred in the segregated south.

Doug Jones, a former US attorney who prosecuted Blanton on the state charge, 
had previously said Blanton should not be released since he has never accepted 
responsibility for the bombing or expressed any remorse for a crime that was 
aimed at maintaining racial separation at a time when Birmingham’s public 
schools were facing a court order to desegregate.

Long a suspect in the case, Blanton was the second of three people convicted 
in the bombing. Robert Chambliss, convicted in 1977, and Bobby Frank Cherry, 
who was convicted in the bombing in 2002, have both died in prison.

Blanton and Cherry were indicted in 2000 after the FBI reopened an 
investigation of the bombing. Evidence against Blanton included secret 
recordings that were made using FBI bugs at his home and in the car of a fellow 
Klansman turned informant.

Blanton can be considered for parole again in five years.
 