
A Republican Alabama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alabama> lawmaker 
said Tuesday that he is filing an impeachment resolution against GOP governor 
Robert Bentley in the wake of a scandal involving one of the governor’s top 
aides, who has since resigned.

The resolution by Representative Ed Henry of Hartselle will likely be sent to 
the House rules committee for consideration, and it’s not clear if it will have 
enough support to move forward. Some lawmakers have said impeachment 
discussions are premature until investigations into Bentley’s conduct have been 
done.

Alabama governor under fire for giving massive pay rises amid financial crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/22/alabama-governor-robert-bentley-pay-rises-financial-crisis>
“We are looking at this governor who has essentially betrayed the trust of the 
people of Alabama through actions and lies that have caused us to have some 
doubt about his leadership,” Henry said during a press conference.

Bentley lashed out at the effort, saying he would vigorously defend himself.

“Today’s press conference is nothing more than political grandstanding 
intended to grab headlines and take the focus away from the important issues 
the Legislature still has to address before the end of the session,” Bentley 
said in a statement.

Henry and Bentley have clashed previously, most recently over the governor’s 
push to raise taxes in the face of a budget shortfall.

The Alabama constitution lays out a loose procedure for impeachment for 
offenses including moral turpitude, willful neglect of duty and corruption, 
among other things. Henry said his filing accuses Bentley of all those things, 
as well as incompetence.

He added later: “If he truly loves the people of this state, he’ll step down.”

Bentley last month admitted making inappropriate remarks to his former senior 
political adviser, Rebekah Caldwell Mason, 44, but denied accusations of an 
affair. The admission came after Bentley’s former law enforcement secretary, 
Spencer Collier, accused the governor of having an inappropriate relationship 
with Mason. Collier said he heard a recording of an overtly sexual conversation 
between the governor and a woman he presumed was Mason. Collier also accused 
the governor of interfering with law enforcement investigations.

Dianne Bentley, the governor’s ex-wife, filed for divorce in 2015 saying their 
50-year marriage had suffered an irreparable breakdown.

Recordings obtained by the Associated Press purportedly show the governor – 
before his divorce – professing love to someone named Rebecca or Rebekah and 
telling her how much he enjoyed kissing and touching her breasts.

“I love you so much; I worry about loving you so much,” Bentley says on the 
call.

The governor in a press conference last month said that he did not have a 
“physical affair” with Mason and that there was no “sexual activity”.

The scandal has engulfed Bentley, a mild-mannered dermatologist and former 
Baptist deacon whose political ascendency was based partly on his morally 
upright, honest reputation.

Mason played a key role in Bentley’s administration but was not on state 
payroll. She was paid with the governor’s leftover campaign funds and also did 
work for a not-for-profit organization formed to promote Bentley’s agenda.

House Minority Leader Craig Ford, the ranking Democrat in the GOP-controlled 
House of Representatives, appeared with Henry at the press conference in 
support of the effort.

Ford said the impeachment effort had nothing to do with Bentley’s personal 
behavior with Mason, but he was concerned about Collier’s allegations of 
interference with law enforcement business.

The impeachment resolution faces stark odds with only 11 meeting days 
remaining in the 2016 legislative session. But its introduction is indicative 
of Bentley’s transition from lame duck to political punching bag.

Representative Mac McCutcheon, chairman of the rules committee, said Henry’s 
impeachment resolution would be accompanied by a resolution establishing an 
investigatory commission, which would examine if there are grounds for 
impeachment. He doubted the issue would be resolved before the end of the 
session next month.

Republican representative Will Ainsworth said Bentley needed to be held to the 
same standard as other government employees.

“Could someone else talk inappropriately or touch inappropriately someone 
that’s in their chain of command and not get fired? I think the answer is no, 
and I think that’s the big problem we have to look at,” Ainsworth said.
 