
Alabama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alabama> politics are at a low 
point even by the state’s own high – or low – standards: three top elected 
officials are embroiled in scandal or facing removal from office while a former 
governor serves time in federal prison on a corruption conviction.

US supreme court won't stop Alabama's first same-sex marriages
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/feb/09/alabama-judge-same-sex-gay-marriage>
On Friday, chief justice Roy Moore was suspended from his job. He faces 
possible ouster over his attempts to block gay marriage following the US 
supreme court ruling that effectively legalized same-sex marriage nationwide.

It is familiar territory for the Republican, a Christian conservative who was 
removed from the same position in 2003 over a Ten Commandments monument, then 
easily won re-election later.

Other Republicans tried to remove Governor Robert Bentley by impeachment in 
the just-ended legislative session, over a sexually charged scandal involving a 
top political aide. An investigation continues. GOP House speaker Mike Hubbard, 
meanwhile, awaits state trial on 23 felony ethics charges.

If convicted, Hubbard could even join the ranks of the imprisoned like former 
governor Don Siegelman, a Democrat who was convicted on federal 
influence-peddling charges.

All in all, it’s some of the worst of times for Republicans who promised to 
clean up state government after seizing control from Democrats who dominated 
for generations.

Among the nation’s poorest states, Alabama is troubled by problem areas 
including physical and mental health; comparatively low high school graduation 
rates; and too many occupational deaths, according to a report by the United 
Health Foundation.

Yet the ranking leaders elected to sort out the mess face confounding troubles 
of their own.

In its list of civil charges against Moore, the Alabama Judicial Inquiry 
Commission (AJIC) said the 69-year-old chief justice abused his office by 
issuing an administrative order to probate judges in January, telling them an 
Alabama court order and law banning same-sex marriages remained in effect 
despite the US supreme court decision affirming same-sex marriage six months 
earlier.

Most counties issued same-sex licenses anyway.

In a statement after his suspension, Moore said the commission did not have 
the authority to police the order he issued. As during a news conference last 
week, Moore criticized the AJIC by referring to a recent protest outside his 
office that included gay and transgender people.

“The JIC has chosen to listen to people like … a professed transvestite and 
other gay, lesbian and bisexual individuals, as well as organizations which 
support their agenda,” Moore said. “We intend to fight this agenda vigorously 
and expect to prevail.”

The court of the judiciary will decide whether Moore violated judicial ethics, 
and he could be removed from office if found guilty. The same court removed 
Moore from office in 2003 for his refusal to follow a federal court order 
directing him to remove a washing machine-sized Ten Commandments monument from 
the rotunda of the state’s judicial building.
 