
Alan Bridges, who has died aged 86, was a leading director during the glory 
days of theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>, from the mid-60s to the 
early 70s. Today, whenever media pundits analyse the history of television 
drama, they wax lyrical about The Wednesday Play and its successor Play for 
Today, bemoaning the virtual disappearance of the single play.

By the time Bridges started working in the Wednesday Play slot, he was already 
one of the BBC's most experienced TV directors – he had directed excellent 
10-part adaptations of two 19th-century classics, Great Expectations and Les 
Misérables (both in 1967) – but he relished the "right to fail" ethos at the 
BBC, enjoying working with exciting contemporary writers.

While continuing to have a distinguished television career into the 80s, 
adeptly moving from the popular to the experimental, from the modern to the 
classical, and from the underground to the drawing room, Bridges found time to 
direct eight feature films.

One of them, The Hireling (1973), won the coveted Palme d'Or in Cannes 
(sharing it with Jerry Schatzberg's Scarecrow). The Hireling was the first and 
best of Bridges' films dealing with the repressive nature of class and the 
conflict between sexual desire and social conventions. There is no cinema in 
the world more class-conscious than Britain's, and most of Bridges' movies are 
in that long tradition.

Bridges, who was born in Liverpool, first wanted to be an actor, and studied 
at Rada in London. But after a few years in rep, he decided that he would 
rather direct. In 1961, he produced and directed a six-episode crime series, 
You Can't Win, for the BBC. He went on to direct realistic single plays in the 
series First Night (1963-64), a forerunner of The Wednesday Play, as well as an 
episode each of Z-Cars and Maigret (both 1963).

In his first feature, Act of Murder (1964), a programme filler made for the 
Edgar Wallace Mystery Theatre series, Bridges managed to squeeze a great deal 
of tension out of a love triangle between an actor, his mistress and her 
husband, all in 62 minutes. It was shot cheaply at the tiny Merton Park studios 
in south-west London, as was Invasion (1966), an unusual, small-scale 
science-fiction film in which a sleepy English village is visited by aliens.

Bridges returned to "serious" television work with The Wednesday Play and Play 
for Today, which included four plays by David Mercer and two by Dennis Potter. 
Looking back on Mercer's plays, Ian Penman, in the Sunday Correspondent, 
recalled "monochrome anger, intense beards, polo-neck politics". This was well 
represented by Let's Murder Vivaldi (1968) and Mercer's remarkable trilogy, On 
the Eve of Publication (1968), The Cellar and the Almond Tree (1970) and Emma's 
Time (1970), focusing on an ageing socialist writer, for which Bridges 
juxtaposed cuts between past and present, fantasy and flashbacks.

The Potter plays, Traitor (1971), a spy drama, which gave John Le Mesurier a 
rare dramatic leading role, and Joe's Ark (1974), a religious allegory, added 
to Bridges' prestige. The Lie (1970) was based on half a play by Ingmar 
Bergman, one of Bridges' heroes. "We had to improvise dialogue at times, but 
his direction in what he wrote was amazing," said Bridges. "But then, I'm a 
northerner, half-Scottish, and we're a bit bleak." This also explains his 
attraction to Ibsen - he directed a production of Ghosts for the Royal 
Shakespeare Company at the Aldwych in 1967, with Peggy Ashcroft as Mrs Alving, 
and The Wild Duck (1971) for BBC's Play of the Month.

His impressive TV work led inevitably to bigger-budget features such as The 
Hireling. Based on a novel by LP Hartley, it skilfully explores the social 
unease and sexual tensions between an aristocratic widow (Sarah Miles), 
recovering from a nervous breakdown, and her chauffeur (Robert Shaw), beneath 
the elegant period detail of England in the 1920s.

Out of Season (1975) pursued the passions behind controlled contentment in a 
sexual power game played by an American (Cliff Robertson), a middle-aged 
Englishwoman (Vanessa Redgrave) and her teenage daughter (Susan George) in a 
wintry English seaside resort. Age of Innocence (1977), shot and set in Canada, 
told of an English teacher (David Warner), whose pacifist leanings disturb the 
narrow-minded postwar community. Again dealing with the conflict between desire 
and social convention, The Return of the Soldier (1982) focused on an amnesiac 
first world war veteran (Alan Bates), his cold, middle-class wife (Julie 
Christie), his cousin (Ann-Margret) and his working-class old flame (Glenda 
Jackson).

The Shooting Party (1985) was a languorous, melancholy valediction to the 
Edwardian era with a built-in critique of the class system, although the only 
feathers that are ruffled are those of the birds that are gunned down. The 
shooting of game, of course, foreshadows the first world war. It was Bridges' 
last movie. In 1987, a production of Apt Pupil, based on the Stephen King 
novel, was shut down after 10 weeks of shooting, owing to lack of funds.

Bridges' wife, Ann, died in 2011. He is survived by a son and daughter.

• Alan Bridges, film and television director, born 28 September 1927; died 7 
December 2013

• This article was amended on 7 February 2014. The original stated that Alan 
Bridges' wife Ann survived him
 