
Steve Coogan's Alan Partridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/alan-partridge> will return for a big 
screen sequel and a new series on Sky, including a Coast-style spoof, its 
makers have confirmed.

Henry Normal, co-founder of Coogan's production company Baby Cow, said a 
sequel to the fictional Norfolk DJ's film debut, last year's Alpha Papa, was in 
the pipeline, along with a new series forSky Atlantic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-atlantic>, where Partridge moved to in 
2012 having previously been on the BBC.

"We are planning a sequel [to Alpha Papa], yes, that will be great," Normal 
told the Guardian.

"We are also looking at doing more Mid Morning Matters and another Sky 
special, a little bit like Coast with Alan Partridge, except I don't think he 
goes out of Norfolk.

"I think it's things of interest in Norfolk, that's the general theme."

Normal added: "We start writing now. I think we make it at the end of summer."

Documentary series Coast, going around the coastline of Britain and originally 
fronted by Nicholas Crane, began on theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> in 2005.

After the second series of I'm Alan Partridge aired on BBC2 in 2002, Coogan 
returned to the character eight years later with a Foster's funded online 
series, Alan Partridge's Mid Morning Matters.

The series later transferred to Sky Atlantic, along with a pair of specials, 
Alan Partridge: Welcome to the Places of My Life, and Alan Partridge on Open 
Books with Martin Bryce, talking about Partridge's spoof (and best-selling) 
autobiography.

"I'm Alan Partridge was so well received, to make the next series you really 
had to find a way of coming at it in a different way," recalled Normal, 
speaking after he appeared atAdvertising Week Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/advertising-week-europe> in London on 
Wednesday.

"It was great to do something on the internet which was only 11 minutes long. 
We did some specials for Sky, which again gave it a different life.

"Steve wanted to do other things. You do get with Alan, if they are sitting in 
a room long enough, they do get 'Alan mad'. Alanageddon."

Normal said his company had approached the BBC with the 2012 series adapted 
from the Foster's funded programmes, but they wanted to make something 
different.

"Obviously the BBC has been involved with Partridge and we did go to see the 
BBC, but they said they didn't want a second series, they wanted something 
different.

"Steve said no, I want to do this as a second series and luckily we went over 
to Sky and Stuart Murphy and Lucy [Lumsden] said fantastic, what else have you 
got?"

Partridge's well received (and long-awaited) big screen debut, Alpha Papa, 
featured the staff of Partridge's Norfolk broadcaster, North Norfolk Digital, 
taken hostage by a disgruntled colleague, played by Colm Meaney, leading to an 
unlikely gun-toting finale on Cromer pier.

Baby Cow, whose TV credits include The Trip, Gavin and Stacey, Nighty Night 
and the Mighty Boosh, is also making a biopic of tennis star turned fashion 
icon, Fred Perry.

Normal used his appearance at the conference to urge advertisers to do more to 
fund television programming.

He said broadcasters should do more to embrace product placement and ad-funded 
content, flagging up the producer's new animated football comedy for ITV4, 
Warren United, as an example of where it could work.

"It is being done very aggressively in cinema, but TV is quite reticent," 
Normal told the conference.

"If you look at ITV, at the moment the only product placement they've really 
got is in Coronation Street. It's very limited. They are afraid of upsetting 
people I think. We've done three ad-funded shows in 14 years. In the next 14 
years I'd love all our shows to be funded by ads."

Coogan's other recent big-screen outing, Philomena, which he also co-wrote, 
has just passed the $100m (£60m) worldwide box office mark, Normal added.

"I haven't seen a penny of it, but [its US distributor] Harvey Weinstein is 
very happy with it, apparently."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 