
After months of gossip and attack, Alan Yentob has finally been convinced that 
questions about his involvement in the Kids Company affair are a “serious 
distraction” for the BBC and that he shouldgive up his role as a highly paid 
BBC executive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/03/alan-yentob-steps-down-bbc-kids-company>
.

“The BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> is going through particularly 
challenging times and I have come to believe that the speculation about Kids 
Company and the media coverage revolving around my role is proving a serious 
distraction,” said Yentob, in a statement announcing his resignation.

The question is, why now? At 68, having agreed to stay on past retirement to 
help his great friend, director generalTony Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/tony-hall>, deal with running the BBC during 
charter renewal, Yentob could have been put on a temporary leave of absence 
earlier this year when the controversy over the financing of Kids Company, the 
now defunct charity he helped establish, first emerged.

 Even before the Kids Company debacle, Yentob had long provoked controversy 
over his £183,000-a-year salary and his high-profile friendships with the 
stars. Over the past year, he became the lightning rod for the sense that the 
BBC was both profligate and unaccountable, and at a time in which the BBC needs 
all the support it can muster in the run-up to charter renewal, Yentob’s 
involvement in Kids Company was a major problem.

Instead of a withdrawal from both roles, he was left in situ as both a senior 
executive and on-screen talent, a highly respected and admired broadcaster but 
one who raised eyebrows for behaviour increasingly deemed unacceptable, even 
within the BBC, for such a great friend of the boss.

Whether over details of his expenses – still claiming first class flights for 
long haul travel – or his lifestyle, Yentob’s every move was seized on for 
signs of excess. Almost exactly a year ago, he hosted a lavish event to 
celebrate his award from the Media Society. Held at the Millennium Hotel in 
central London, the event lasted several hours and featured film tributes from 
Mel Brooks, Mick Jagger and Harry Enfield. Sitting next to Hall, Yentob’s table 
included Conservative minister Ed Vaizey, Rona Fairhead and BBC non-executive 
director Sir Howard Stringer, the former boss of Sony.

Later it emerged from a freedom of information request sent by the Sunday 
Times that the BBC paid for 16 of Yentob’s associates to attend the party, 
using £2,400 of licence fee-payers’ money.

But it was his involvement in Kids Company that seems finally to have done for 
the much-admired broadcaster.

At every event that director general Hall has attended in recent months, 
whether to talk about the future of the BBC or the present, there is always a 
question, usually from the Daily Mail, about whether Yentob should have been 
sacked.

In October, Yentob said the idea that he was leaving the BBC was “ridiculous 
and completely untrue”. Yet, it seems he had already started talking to Hall 
about his position and privately worried that his ability to attract headlines 
could affect the public’s view of the BBC.

In his public statement, Hall said that a man described by insiders as his 
right hand man did not “influence” the BBC’s reporting of Kids Company.

But in October, Yentob admitted to MPs that he had telephoned a staff member 
at Newsnight to ask him to delay a critical report into the charity. There was 
“shouting” involved.

Even more controversially perhaps Yentob also admitted that while Camila 
Batmanghelidjih, the founder of Kids Company, was interviewed on the Radio 4’s 
Today programme in July, he stood beside one of the show’s producers. BBC news 
executives say his appearance in the control room, a place only open to senior 
BBC executives, was a mistake.

He may not have any direct reports in news but phone calls to his friends on 
presenting teams are tricky for a man known to be so close to the ultimate 
boss. “If it was intimidating I regret it,” he told MPs.

In his statement regarding Yentob’s decision to step down, Hall said: “For the 
record, BBC News considered whetherAlan Yentob 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alan-yentob> had influenced the BBC’s 
journalism on the reporting of Kids Company,” said Hall. “They concluded that 
he did not.”

The BBC Trust has also said it found no evidence that news output had been 
affected and that now Yentob has stood down it would “not be proportionate, 
appropriate or cost effective” to launch an investigation.

Perhaps ironically, a woman considered a busted flush all year was in fact the 
one to indicate that the timing was right for Yentob to stand down. When Rona 
Fairhead, chair of the BBC Trust, said there were still questions to be asked 
about the creative director on Wednesday’s Today programme she was obviously 
closer to the decision making process than many realised.

Even those BBC executives who are not friends of Yentob believe he was a great 
defender of the corporation. Passionate and extremely knowlegeable, Yentob 
could not resist holding forth about the failures of the government’s position 
over News at Ten in front of reporters in September, at the height of the 
controversy over Kids Company.

His support for the charity, which he partly funded with his own money, was 
entirely genuine, and he spoke repeatedly about fears for the children involved.

A senior executive close to both Hall and Yentob said the impact of Thursday’s 
announcement would not be as great as people think, as Yentob will continue to 
advise Hall, a man he is said to have identified as a director general many 
years before Hall took on the role.

This executive also backed the corporate line that it was Yentob’s decision to 
step down to avoid the continuing drum roll of discontent.

“Alan is a lovable guy,” he said. “And his idiosyncratic intellect should be 
more helpful than ever now.” More helpful perhaps without the official 
executive role and pay packet.
 