
Hello, Alanis <http://www.alanis.com/>. Where are you?

I am at home in Los Angeles.

What can you see?

I see my husband's sink. I'm in his little area.

Do you each have your own sink?

We have our own sinks. It keeps our marriage quite lovely. I think space is 
tantamount to keeping harmony going.

How do you think you are perceived by the general public in 2012?

My whole thing is to stay the course. I see the movement in terms of the 
60s and 70s being all about social and political commentary around the Vietnam 
era, and the 80s were really about entertainment. And then the 90s was about 
emotional landscape commentary and I was a big part of that(1). The 2000s were 
all about entertainment again with the economy doing what it was and I think 
people wanted a break from the inward-looking, quandary-esque approach (2) and 
then now, not a moment too soon, I see us segueing back into a more 
psychological, emotional, spiritual commentary movement in music.

I read a reference to you as "the former angry young woman". Does that label 
annoy you?

When someone says that I'm angry it's actually a compliment. I have not always 
been direct with my anger in my relationships, which is part of why I'd write 
about it in my songs because I had such fear around expressing anger as a 
woman. I thought I would be retaliated against or physically hit or vilified. 
Anger has been a really big deal for women: how can we express it without 
feeling that, as the physically weaker sex, we won't get killed. The 
alpha-woman was burned at the stake and had her head chopped off in days of old.

Some of your new songs deal with equality in marriage. If, for example, your 
husband(3) had a snack, perhaps a sandwich, but didn't clean up after himself, 
would you do it and note that it's his turn next time?

I definitely wouldn't do it for him, but I also think that part of the 
beautiful, masculine quality is single-mindedness. So I wouldn't interpret it 
as a direct affront to me.

Maybe he was just busy.

Yeah, he must have been in the solution mode and saw something else that 
needed solving and he went and did that.

There's also a song on your album called Celebrity, which features the line: 
"I am a tattooed sexy dancing monkey." Is it about Paris Hilton?

(Laughs) No comment. But, you know, I think fame became exciting for me in the 
late 90s because I could actually use it as a means to an end. I could actually 
have it help me serve my vocationfulness(4). I could offer comfort and 
upliftment(5) and be a leader and take on that responsibility, rather than see 
it as this daunting thing. Fame became a great tool. But I still have PTSD from 
the Jagged Little Pill era. It was a profound violation. It felt like every 
millisecond I was attempting to set a boundary and say no and people were 
breaking into my hotel rooms and going through my suitcase and pulling my hair 
and jumping on my car.

How bored are you by people saying there's nothing ironic about Ironic (6)?

I wouldn't say bored, I would say interested because I love to get to the 
underbelly of why things bug people so much. People must be very at odds with 
the idea of being profoundly stupid. I mean, malapropisms; big fucking deal. 
It's kind of like in traffic when you're yelling at someone for cutting you off 
and you're cutting someone off too.

Pre-Jagged Little Pill, you toured with Vanilla Ice. What was he like?

I was instructed not to look him in the eye.

What?

I ended up never really being near him so I didn't have to apply my restraint. 
Bless him, I think he was in the middle of the mayhem and it can be 
overwhelming.

Did you have any moments of mayhem?

There was a period of time during the Jagged Little Pill era where I don't 
think I laughed for about two years. It was a survival mode, you know. It was 
an intense, constant, chronic over-stimulation and invasion of energetic and 
physical literal space.

Do you still practise iyengar yoga? 

Parts of it, yeah. I'm the integrator. I have an aspiration for full 
integration, so I do hatha and iyengar and I know it's unpopular sometimes to 
integrate bikram with everything, but I also do ashtanga . 

Blimey. The Iyengar one sounds a bit mad. Doesn't it involve belts and blocks?

It's beautiful. It's probably the best experience I've ever had using ropes 
and dangling from things.

That might look weird out of context.

(Laughs) "She uses pulleys and levers in bed." Please protect me from that 
pull quote.

What was Madonna like as a boss (7)?

(Hesitantly) It was an interesting dynamic. It was kind of like back to the 
antiquated system of 80% record company and 20% artist. There was an inherent 
win-lose quality to that dynamic, so less a boss and more a psuedo-partnership, 
but it wasn't really a partnership because that's win-win or no deal, right?

I'm guessing she wasn't that hands-on?

We met a couple of times and she was actually quite lovely with me … early on.

You played God in Dogma and in your new video you're an angel figure. Do you 
think quite highly of yourself?

I think quite spiritually of myself. I feel like I'm here to support the human 
evolution. We're such fragile creatures, you know. So by no means do I think 
I'm the only one, but I think I'm an active participant in that community, yes.

Foot notes

1 1995's Jagged Little Pill has sold more than 33m copies.

2 2008's Flavors of Entanglement has sold more than 600,000 copies.

3 Alanis is married to rapper Mario "MC Souleye" Treadway.

4 We think she means fame helped her do her job.

5 We think she means she could make people feel better about themselves by 
doing that job.

6 Sample lyric: "An old man turned 98, he won the lottery and died the next 
day", which is bad luck.

7 Alanis was signed to Madonna's Maverick label from 1995–2010.
 