
Alan Yentob was told by BBC director general Tony Hall that his behaviour was 
“improper and he shouldn’t do it” after the BBC creative director sat in on a 
radio interview about the failedKids Company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/kids-company> charity he chaired.

Yentob stood down from his executive role earlier this month following weeks 
of criticism over his involvement with Kids Company and allegations he 
attempted to influenceBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> coverage, 
including an appearance in the gallery at an interview with the charity’s chief 
executive Camila Batmanghelidjh.

Alan Yentob to step down as BBC executive over Kids Company row
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/03/alan-yentob-steps-down-bbc-kids-company>
Asked during a hearing of the Commons culture media and sport select committee 
by MP Damian Collins whether the row over the Today recording made Yentob’s 
departure inevitable, Hall said the resignation had been caused by the 
“cumulative impact” of the BBC veteran’s involvement with Kids Company.


“[It] doesn’t make it inevitable, but what Alan and I were talking about over 
the autumn, which led to the decision he made, [was that it was] cumulatively 
the impact of the story of his chairmanship of Kids Company ... He said I do 
not want the BBC to be drawn into this other than the way it has already.”

“Alan is someone who believes in the BBC passionately. He saw himself it was 
time to go.”

Though he has stepped down from his executive role, he will continue to 
present the corporation’s Imagine series.

Hall added that Yentob’s involvement in the Kids Company coverage had been no 
different from attempts by other interested parties to influence BBC reporting. 
“This is the sort of stuff that does go on with others outside who call up and 
pressure,” he said.

The BBC Trust announced earlier this month that it would not investigate 
whether Yentob had tried to influence coverage, saying it would not be 
“proportionate, appropriate or cost effective”.


Hall said he agreed with the Trust’s decision not to take the matter further, 
saying he was satisfied with an earlier investigation by deputy head of news 
Fran Unsworth that found no BBC reporting had been influenced by Yentob.

“For me the most important issue is has any of the coverage been altered 
changed or diminished, and the answer is no,” he said.

Hall said that although Yentob had played a crucial role at the BBC in helping 
other departments, he would not be replaced. “At the time we are now, in where 
I am seeking to reduce numbers in the top table, we won’t be replacing him.”
 