
Alan Yentob’s career may have been dented by the Kids Company scandal and 
expenses rows, but he will leave a legacy of hitBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> shows.

Yentob has been at the BBC all his working life, having joined the corporation 
in 1968 as a trainee, starting with the BBC World Service.

His talent as a producer and director emerged in the early 1970s with the 
David Bowie documentary Cracked Actor and the star became one of the earliest 
of a string of big name friends that would include Orson Welles and Mel Brooks.


He went on to make a name for himself as the editor of influential arts show 
Arena, overseeing documentaries on topics such as the Ford Cortina and the song 
My Way.


In the late 1980s Yentob took over BBC2, commissioning long-running hits Have 
I Got News For You and Absolutely Fabulous.

The early 1990s saw him take on BBC1 and big drama commissions including Pride 
and Prejudice, which launched Colin Firth’s career into the stratosphere, 
Middlemarch and Ballykissangel.

It was Yentob who famously axed the £10m soap Eldorado 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-21688913>, which was shot on 
Spain’s Costa Del Sol.

He went on to launch children’s channels CBBC and Cbeebies.

Yentob’s star continued to rise and he was talked of as a possible successor 
to the director general John Birt, though he lost out to Greg Dyke when he was 
appointed to the top job in 2000.

In 2004, Yentob was appointed as creative director, a year after he stepped in 
front of the screen to start presenting now long-running BBC1 arts series 
Imagine.

“Over his long career at the BBC he has overseen more great programmes than 
any other BBC leader,” said Wayne Garvie, chief creative officer of 
international production at Sony Pictures Television.

Garvie spent almost a decade at the corporation and its commercial arm BBC 
Worldwide, working extensively with Yentob in a range of roles including head 
of entertainment.

“From Cracked Actor on David Bowie right up to Strictly – it is no coincidence 
the last great period when BBC creating shows like Dragons’ Den, launching 
CBBC, making comedies like The Office – who was the man overseeing production 
at that time? Yentob. It’s never been the same since,” says Garvie.


“He has a brilliant gift for inspiring and motivating people. He is fantastic 
with talent. With everything going on now people keep forgetting that. His 
contribution has been brilliant.”

As Yentob’s career hit its peak, his reputation began to take a battering when 
the BBC investigated his expenses.

The investigation followed public revelations such as that in 2002 the BBC 
paid for an official fancy-dress party at Yentob’s Tudor mansion in Somerset 
during the Glastonbury festival.

In 2004, Yentob was cleared of any wrongdoing over his expense claims but 
received a rap on the knuckles for taking “insufficient care over some aspects 
of his affairs”.

During the dark days of the Jimmy Savile and Lord McAlpine scandals, which 
claimed director general George Entwistleafter just 54 days in the job 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/nov/10/george-entwistle-bbc-resigns-profile>
, Yentob was seen as the BBC’s “Mr Fixit”, helping to steer and rehabilitate 
the corporation.

After a lifetime serving the BBC, it turned out to be a role at another 
organisation that proved his undoing.

Yentob became embroiled in ongoing allegations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/aug/07/bbc-alan-yentob-kids-company> 
that he tried to influence the corporation’s coverage of the scandal-hit 
charity Kids Company, of which he was the chairman.

He has been unable to shake the fallout of accusations of a conflict of 
interest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/feb/16/alan-yentob-bbc-compete-google-apps>
 after making a phone call to Newsnight ahead of a report on Kids Company, as 
well as accompanying the charity’s chief executive Camila Batmanghelidjh to an 
interview on Radio 4’s Today programme.

Boss and longtime friend Tony Hall, the BBC’s director general, has said that 
Yentob has been cleared of influencing coverage of Kids Company but recognised 
the scandal made keeping his executive role untenable.

Yentob will give up his £183,000 a-year salary when he steps down from his 
senior management position at the end of the year.

 However, he will continue to receive a six-figure sum for fronting Imagine as 
he focuses on programme-making and TV production.


After rising high as an executive, it will be a return to the roots on which 
he built his 50-year career at the corporation.

 