
Alan Bond, the controversial business tycoon who backed Australia’s ultimately 
successful bid for the America’s Cup yacht race, has died aged 77. He was just 
12 years old when he stepped ashore in Australia for the first time. His 
parents, Frank and Kathleen, like many thousands of Britons in the aftermath of 
the second world war, had taken the momentous decision to emigrate from the 
grey austerity of northern Europe to the sun-kissed southern hemisphere.

Young Alan, born in Hammersmith, west London, was plucked from Perivale school 
in Ealing and on arrival in Australia attended Fremantle boys’ school near 
Perth. He took a job as a signwriter on leaving school, but quickly realised 
that his future lay in business. Such was his talent and determination that 
before he reached his 40s, his name was known throughout Australia and beyond. 
In 1978 he was named Australian of the year.

His fortune was derived initially from property development, an activity which 
he started soon after leaving school. In 1959 he set up Bond Corporation, one 
of the first true “conglomerates” (corporate entities which own other, quite 
disparate, businesses), a form of entrepreneurship that came to dominate the 
stock markets internationally during the 1970s and continues to this day.

Outside the business world, however, Bond achieved fame and honour for his 
dedicated pursuit of the America’s Cup, the world’s most prestigious yacht 
racing trophy. He financed the first America’s Cup challenge in 1974, but it 
took a further three attempts before, in 1983, the 12-metre yacht Australia II 
brought the Auld Mug to the Royal Perth Yacht Club. It was the first time the 
trophy had been wrested from the New York Yacht Club since the competition was 
set up in 1851. Bond had bankrolled all four attempts, and his status as a 
national hero was confirmed.

Bond was big of build and charismatic of nature, and his status and 
personality undoubtedly contributed to an extraordinary run of successes in 
business. His Bond Corporation expanded from property into brewing, oil and 
gas, television, mineral exploitation and even airships. His personal fortune 
mounted up until he could be counted as one of the richest men in Australia, 
worth billions of dollars.

He was courted and feted by politicians anxious for his patronage, and bankers 
and brokers wanting his business. In an interview many years later, Bond 
admitted that all this had gone to his head. He confessed that he believed that 
if he had won the America’s Cup, was there nothing he could not do?

“Bondy”, as he was universally known, and his first wife, Eileen (nee Hughes), 
were seldom out of the society columns. He moved between Australia and London, 
where his business interests were also developing. Four years after the 
America’s Cup triumph, Bond paid US$53.9m for Van Gogh’s Irises, at the time 
the largest sum ever paid for a single painting.

Earlier in 1987, Bond purchased the Australian television network Channel Nine 
fromKerry Packer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/dec/28/guardianobituaries.cricket>, a 
fellow Australian tycoon, for A$1.2bn, a deal that was to be the high-water 
mark of Bond’s success. In October that year, stock markets around the world 
crashed, an event that proved catastrophic for Bond and many other 
entrepreneurs.

As he struggled to keep his empire afloat, his personal life also suffered. In 
1990, his marriage of 35 years was dissolved. Under pressure from the banks, 
that year he stepped down as chairman of Bond Corporation, which was collapsing 
under a mountain of debt. He began to believe that those who once feted him had 
been working to bring him down.

A year later, Bond Corporation finally went under, with Bond’s personal and 
corporate businesses inextricably entwined. He always insisted, however, that 
there was “no dishonesty” in the group or in the interlocking finances.

In 1992, he was declared personally bankrupt over a loan guarantee. He was 
accused of secreting away money and real assets such as diamonds and art 
treasures in overseas locations, places where neither the authorities nor his 
creditors could touch them. He claimed to have personally lost A$900m.

Nevertheless, he was jailed for dishonesty in relation to an Australian 
merchant bank, Rothwells, that had collapsed. He spent three months in prison 
but was later released and acquitted. Meanwhile, despite having other charges 
hanging over him, which led to two more convictions and prison sentences in 
1995 and 1997, Bond was already beginning to lay down the foundations of a 
second life and a second career. He spent a total of four years in jail.

In 1995, he was released from bankruptcy. He married for the second time, and 
once again Bond and his new wife, Diana Bliss, began to appear in society. She 
was a former Qantas flight attendant whom Bond had met when she was working in 
public relations. Banned from holding directorships in Australia, Bond moved 
his centre of business overseas. He acquired interests in diamonds and oil, 
mostly in Africa. He lived in London but based his business interests elsewhere.

While his wealth steadily accumulated, much to the chagrin of investors who 
had lost money in the earlier Bond ventures, his personal life was more 
difficult. One of his daughters, Susanne, an equestrian show jumper, died in 
2000 from a suspected accidental overdose of prescription medicine. Diana, who 
had carved a successful career as a theatre director, took her own life in 2012.

Bond was knocked back by these tragedies but found solace in Farm Street, the 
Jesuit church in Mayfair, London. His own health, however, was deteriorating. 
He had undergone open heart surgery in the 1990s, and in the week of his death 
returned to Perth for further surgery. His first wife, Eileen, travelled to 
Australia to be by his side.

He is survived by her, and by his sons, John and Craig, and daughter Jody.

• Alan Bond, businessman, born 22 April 1938; died 5 June 2015


• This article was amended on 5 June. A reference to Alan Bond’s second wife, 
Diana, being given the nickname “Big Red” by gossip columnists was deleted: it 
was his first wife, Eileen, whom they had given the nickname to.
 