
Newspapers are failing to cover issues such as corporate corruption and tax 
avoidance because the industry’s declining fortunes make fighting costly legal 
battles even more difficult, Guardian editor-in-chiefAlan Rusbridger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alanrusbridger> has said.

“The economics of the industry are changing and not many people are doing this 
kind of work,” he told a packed audience at the Guildhall School of Music & 
Drama in London.

“Local newspapers, they basically can’t fight. They basically can’t afford the 
cost of even a couple of solicitors’ letters.”

However, he said the press retained the power to hold companies to account.

“They really don’t like newspapers to get up them. If you can afford to do it, 
the power of the media is still not to be underestimated.”

This power had a knock-on effect on broadcasters, particularly the BBC, he 
said.

“There’s this terrible terrible thing going on at the moment with the BBC is 
sitting there under assault from the rightwing media and the rightwing media 
are saying ‘the BBC is to the left, because we say the centre is here’.

“And the poor old BBC, [the rightwing press] shout it so loudly and viciously 
and prominently every day, and you’ve got the Guardian whispering over here 
because the Guardian is a very mild-mannered paper. The BBC is struggling to 
know what to do about climate change.”

Rusbridger said that social media offered a new route to hold companies to 
account as much of the press retreats from expensive and risky stories.

“The power of social media, things like Twitter, once you get a mass consumer 
revolt against a company, that is very powerful,” he said. “And the company is 
terrified of that too.”

Rusbridger said the Guardian was more able to take on investigations against 
powerful organisations that might sue because of its ownership structure and 
cash reserves following the sale of its stake in Auto Trader.

“The Guardian, we’re in a very solid financial position now … there’s a very 
solid financial legacy to hand on to the next editor.”

He added that the Guardian’s ownership by the Scott Trust meant it was able to 
invest in managing the transition to digital.

“Not having shareholders, not having people who wanted set levels of profit, 
or increased levels of profit, has meant the Guardian has been able to think 
flexibly and invest in a way that BuzzFeed or Twitter [have],” he said.


“None of those make a profit, but nobody thinks they are stupid for losing 
money because they see that as an investment for the future.”
 