
Adult education is boring, right? Worse, it’s non-productive, economically 
useless. It’s just flower arranging, tap dancing, Pilates, lonely old folk 
going to dusty classrooms to learn about the Tudors. With so many other calls 
on public funds – not least schools and universities that can give young people 
a start in life and raise levels of social mobility – why should taxpayers 
cough up for any of that?

That was roughly the government’s view when Alan Tuckett took over as chief 
executive of the National Institute of Adult Continuing Education in 1988. Even 
now, it is not a million miles from the official attitude to anything that 
doesn’t involve an economically useful skill and a paper qualification. But 
Tuckett has answers. Pilates? Look at how many hours are lost to the British 
economy through bad backs and you may think Pilates could increase 
productivity. Old folk going to history classes? A project in a West Country 
care home found that, if learning programmes replaced pills, people lived 
longer and care costs fell. Flower arranging? Tuckett recalls: “In 1991, the 
government wanted to stop funding adult education of all sorts. So we found a 
Brixton [in south London] florist who’d been a merchant banker and went to 
evening classes to learn floristry. He ended up employing half the class, all 
of them men, most previously unemployed, in a shop opposite Brixton tube, in 
the heart of where the riots were in those days. That’s the beauty of adult 
education. It’s where people of different social classes meet and learn about 
one another. What happens on a wet Wednesday night in January doesn’t make 
headlines but it can change lives.”

Thanks to Tuckett, who enlisted the Women’s Institute to write hundreds of 
indignant letters to MPs, as well as persuading the Independent to profile the 
merchant banker, the government’s 1991 plans were swiftly seen off.

Tuckett stayed at the institute for 23 years, raising its turnover from 
£600,000 to £45m and increasing the staff from 18 to 300. He became, by general 
consent, the voice of adult education, its foremost defender and guru, 
celebrated by honorary degrees from eight universities. “Others have championed 
the cause, but he has … made it his own,” says Tim Boswell, a Tory education 
minister from 1992 and later a shadow spokesman. Ian Nash, former assistant 
editor at the Times Educational Supplement, quotes Boswell in Seriously Useless 
Learning, a recently published tribute to Tuckett’s work, which includes a 
selection of the regular columns he wrote for the TES.

In the 1970s, Tuckett was among the chief pioneers of adult literacy 
programmes. In the 1980s, he more or less invented the idea of the “adult 
learner”, arguing that learning took place inside and outside classrooms, in 
formal and informal contexts, in workplaces and voluntary associations. In the 
1990s, he started Adult Learners’ Week, an annual festival with thousands of 
events, adopted by Unesco and now held in 55 countries. At 66, he is now 
president of the International Council for Adult Education, campaigning on an 
even wider stage for the great cause of his life.

The golden age

Though he is proud of his achievements, he admits that he did not always 
repeat the success of 1991 and that, in many respects, adult education has gone 
backwards over the past decade. We talk over tea and his wife’s fruit cake at 
his home in a posh inner suburb of Leicester, a few minutes from Niace’s 
headquarters and the Leicester Tigers rugby ground, where he has a season 
ticket. “If you’re over 30,” he says, “chances have been systematically 
withdrawn from you.” There was a golden age after New Labour took office in 
1997 with David Blunkett at the education department. “We had wave after wave 
of bright new ideas: the University for Industry, an e-university, individual 
learning accounts – if anything, there were too many initiatives. Adult 
participation rose measurably.”

But from 2003, after Blunkett had moved on, the climate changed. “We’ve had a 
consistent focus on vocational qualifications, on short-term utilitarian 
returns from skills acquisition. The government had a scheme called Train to 
Gain which involved going to companies such as Tesco and even to the Army, 
persuading them to take money for the training they were already doing. It was 
90% deadweight money, taken from schemes such as Esol [English for Speakers of 
Other Languages]. The training ministry wanted to show the Treasury it was 
hitting its targets, and badging established training was the easiest way to do 
that. Employers became convinced that training was something the government 
would pay for and, when the scheme ended in 2008 because of the financial 
crisis, many firms were out of the habit of investing in staff development. The 
coalition made the same mistake, at least initially, with its apprenticeships.”

Tuckett admits that campaigning for adult education is often like pushing 
water uphill, but he has no regrets even though he could have been a politician 
or an academic. Born in Devon to a family of Cornish origin, he had a 
peripatetic childhood, attending 10 different primary schools because his 
father was an RAF sergeant. He went on to state boarding school in Cornwall 
before taking a degree in English and American literature and then starting a 
doctorate at the University of East Anglia. Among his fellow postgraduates was 
the novelist Ian McEwan. The two of them – Tuckett first – would consecutively 
marry and divorce the same student contemporary, Penny Allen, whose bitter 
break-up from McEwan still makes headlines.

Tuckett abandoned his doctorate and decided academia wasn’t for him. Nor was 
politics, though he helped to create and run the National Organisation for 
Labour Students (now Labour Students), whose 1970s luminaries included several 
future ministers. He gives the rather odd reason that “in meetings of 2,000, 
3,000 people, I found I could change people’s minds and I thought that kind of 
demagoguery isn’t altogether a good thing”. Married with a young family and 
broke, he taught briefly in Norwich before, in his mid-20s, becoming principal 
(and sole employee) of a small adult learning centre at the Friends Meeting 
House in Brighton. It was run in the 1970s by its students who included retired 
Whitehall civil servants.

As Tuckett talks about this period, it becomes evident that helping to 
organise university sit-ins, which were then ubiquitous, was the formative 
experience of his life. He speaks about them in terms I haven’t heard (at least 
not expressed with such passion) for more than 40 years. “There was such energy 
and excitement in the cultural moment of a sit-in,” he says. “That is the 
excitement in Hong Kong just now – people coming together in fresh social 
relations. It’s what we need at the heart of education. The more it is policed 
and accountable – ruled by targets, works for accountants – the less likely we 
are to get that.” So, when Brighton council proposed funding cuts for adult 
education, Tuckett organised a week-long, round-the-clock teach-in. “Half the 
people who came had never been to adult education classes before. By the end of 
it, the leader of the council admitted he’d been badly advised.”

The Brighton centre persuaded figures of international renown, such as Ivan 
Illich, the de-schooling guru, to come as guest speakers. It also encouraged 
people to drop in and talk about their needs. Tuckett noticed that a large 
proportion had literacy problems. At that time hardly anybody thought adult 
illiteracy existed on a significant scale, still less tried to do anything 
about it. Tuckett did try and “we immediately became national experts because 
we’d done 10 minutes more work than anybody else”. Only children’s books were 
then available for those struggling to read and Tuckett helped produce the 
first literacy materials aimed specifically at adults. Because they covered 
subjects such as squatting and homelessness they attracted three government 
inquiries into bias, with Tory MPs accusing Tuckett of “influencing vulnerable 
minds”.

Those turned off education

Throughout his career – at Niace, in Brighton and in London, where at 32 he 
became principal of an adult education institute with 18,000 students – Tuckett 
has been as interested in the people who don’t come through the door as those 
who do. “If you were educated well in the first place, you’ve seen a great 
expansion in things like the University of the Third Age for people who have 
the confidence to organise things for themselves. I wanted to involve those who 
were turned off education and that won’t happen unless we have serious public 
investment. But that doesn’t fit with targets. Adult education has a complex 
undergrowth and that’s because those who’ve left formal education need a whole 
variety of different routes back in.

“In the 1970s, we had the emerging wave of feminism. Not every woman wanted to 
join a consciousness-raising group. Some just wanted to put a toe in the water 
and find out what it was all about. That’s exactly the function of adult 
education. Women’s studies, like black studies in America, is a perfect example 
of something that began in the informal sector but is now accepted in 
universities.”

Sir John Daniel, former assistant director-general for education at Unesco, 
once said that adult educators had the reputation of being “boring, 
sanctimonious, backward-looking and paternalist”. Tuckett is none of those 
things. He may have rejected a conventional political career but he could 
hardly have led a more political life and, in doing so, has surely changed more 
lives than any politician.
 