
"It's very busy for three, four weeks in the summer," says Alan Warner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alan-warner> as we walk through Jávea and 
down towards the front. Strolling past palm trees and apartment complexes, 
along dusty streets, Warner is incongruous: a 6ft 3in Scottish novelist, too 
hot in the afternoon sun of this small Spanish resort town.

"My wife's from here. She grew up here – it's her place," he explains. "We 
bought a place here yonks ago with money from Hollywood, and it's been a useful 
hideout. It's very quiet in the winter. That's why I decamp here – to work. The 
distractions are minimal."

Today we have forgone his usual haunts in favour of one of the temporary bars 
that set up on the beach in summer. Warner peruses the drinks menu, 
contemplating whether the mojitos here could ever rival those consumed this 
past weekend at his 50th birthday celebrations in Benidorm. "I don't see them 
being equalled again," he concludes sombrely.

It has long been the custom that any journalistic profile of Warner must be 
laced with hard liquor. Since the publication of his first novel, Morvern 
Callar, in 1995, through to that of his last,2012's The Deadman's Pedal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jun/01/deadmans-edal-alan-warner-review>
, most interviews have taken place in the pub. "I don't drink as much as I used 
to," he says, a few sips into a rum and Coke. "Ten years ago, you would've had 
to have put up with me banging on all day." There has been no great awakening, 
more a general softening. "I just got older," he says. "I had a lucky escape 
because I slowly grew out of it."

In any case, those early portraits of a boozy young novelist may have been an 
exaggeration — playing up, perhaps, to the caricatures of the writer and the 
Scot. "I was never a great drinker," he insists. "Although it used to be that 
when I finished a novel – well, you never finish a novel, but when the first 
draft was finished – I'd go to the pub for three or four days: wake up at 
midday, be back in the pub by two and stay till closing. But, you know, it all 
catches up with you."

Whether or not he thinks a writer ever really finishes a novel, Warner has 
just published his eighth, Their Lips Talk of Mischief 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/aug/10/their-lips-speak-of-mischief-review-alan-warner-withnail-and-i>
 – the story of Cunningham and Llewellyn, two aspiring young novelists living a 
ramshackle life in a tower block in Acton, west London in the early 1980s. It's 
a stunning book: tender, funny and sharp, a study of youth, London and 
Thatcherite Britain, and a love story of sorts – run through with a passion for 
Aoife, the novel's object of desire, and the bond between the two male 
characters, as well as a love for literature and a youth spent reading.

Warner is half-revisiting his own past here. "I did stay in Acton for a while, 
so I kind of knew the geography," he explains. "I was at Ealing College of 
Higher Education …" He pauses, and re-routes the conversation, as if heading 
off the inevitable question at the pass: "I suppose you could surmise that 
Cunningham's the me character and Llewellyn is someone else … but it's not 
autobiography in the least. It's complete fiction."

But even in fiction facts are important to Warner. He talks of his books' 
rigorous approach to geography, and of learning to ride a motorbike the better 
to know how a character felt when kickstarting a moped.For 2011's The Stars in 
the Bright Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/may/15/stars-bright-sky-alan-warner>, 
he delved into Met Office weather reports for 9/11, and for his latest book 
spent some while investigating licensing hours in 1980s London.

They are details, he explains, that are digested in early drafts and then 
thrown out, the facts making way for his imagination. "You fictionalise," he 
says. "You know,the painter [Pierre] Bonnard 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artists/pierre-bonnard-781> said an amazing thing 
with regard to painting, but I think it applies to writing as well. He said 
that it's 'a thousand little lies to tell one big truth'. And Ballard said 
something similar – that you fictionalise to reach the truth." He smiles. "What 
the truth is is open to discussion."

And what is his truth in this novel? "Cor, that's a biggie," he laughs warmly. 
"I've been teaching creative writing at Edinburgh University 
<http://www.ed.ac.uk/news/all-news/writer-090511>. And I've been spending a lot 
of time speaking with young people about how they came to writing, and why they 
want to write."

It reminded him, he says, of his own early writing life. "I just looked back 
to that very pure period that was completely corrupted by becoming a published 
author, when your relationship was utterly between you and books. I didn't read 
the TLS [Times Literary Supplement], I didn't read reviews or anything. Just 
books, books, books.

"In Lou and Cunningham's case, and my own case, it's a defence mechanism, in a 
way," he continues. "You can retreat into the world of books, and being young, 
and you can put up a kind of haughty wall. It defends you from your own faults 
and the troubles going on around you."

Warner is struck by how conventional this novel is. "Much more so than 
anything I've done," he says. "It's also much more of a first novel than 
Morvern Callar, as if I decided to do a first novel eight novels in." He 
describes Morvern Callar, the story of a young woman who disposes of her dead 
boyfriend's body and publishes the manuscript of his novel under her own name, 
as "this cleverly disguised, bitter first novel".

With Morvern acting as the narrator of his first two novels, and the third – 
1998's The Sopranos – recounting the tale of five teenage girls heading to a 
choir contest, Warner quickly earned a reputation for capturing the young 
female voice. "I'm fascinated by that period between 15 and 22 where lives are 
formed and destinies are mapped out," he says, but the femaleness he seems to 
attribute to happenstance.

Morvern, he explains, began predictably enough, as a story told through the 
eyes of her boyfriend. It was only after reading through an early draft and 
realising the girlfriend's perspective was considerably more interesting that 
he killed him off and gave Morvern her own voice.

"And then I thought, now I've got a female narrator," he frowns, "and that 
will throw up a few things as well – but I just kind of worked my way through 
it like you would with any character." But it was liberating, he agrees. "Oh 
yeah. But I was very, very uncomfortable and nervous about it – I didn't think 
it was convincing. I thought the rhythm was very strange. I didn't think it was 
any good. And I didn't show it to anyone."

He still doesn't show anyone his writing until the first draft is complete 
"and all the Is are dotted". Indeed, much of Warner's writing starts out as an 
exercise in self-deception. "Every time I start a book, I get far into it and I 
never quite believe it's going to be published," he laughs. "Sometimes when the 
loose galleys come back, it hits me between the eyes: fuck me, people are going 
to read this rubbish."

So what does he tell himself he is doing the first day he sits down to write? 
"Er," he says, "well, it's complicated by the fact I've got a bad habit of 
having a quarter-started novel and a 30-page-started novel," he smiles. "I can 
handle two novels bubbling away, because one's a cover, an excuse, for the 
other. And then, suddenly, one gets wings, and I feel it – this is the one, 
here we go."

He has, he adds, a particular, near-visual way of working. "I've got a big 
sheet of paper up on the wall, 6ft tall, and I write from the top to the bottom 
of that, a big structure. And into that I insert notes, dialogue, pictures, 
things ripped out of newspapers, sketches, everything." As the months go by, he 
begins to see a structure emerging. "You see fat bits and thin bits, you think, 
why is nothing happening around chapter seven? Jesus, what can happen there? 
And on it goes, like that."

It's pleasing to hear Warner talk about writing with such brimming enthusiasm. 
He praises the "fullness and massiveness of the novel",the poetry of John 
Burnside <https://www.theguardian.com/books/john-burnside> ("all his 
collections add up to one poem about frost on the underside of leaves and the 
fragility of the morning") and the short stories of Cormac McCarthy.

"The metaphors he shamelessly hangs out ..." he says with awe.

"I like metaphors and similes, and they're stripped out of a lot of modern 
writing. But if you can find a perfectly apt metaphor it can make your day: 
'The moon was like a snipped fingernail,'" he says with relish. "But I'm 
careful with them. Because people rarely think in similes and metaphors, just 
the odd cliche, you know?"

At the moment he is contemplating setting a book in Stafford, where he once 
lived for a while with a girlfriend. He is, he explains, craving a kind of 
ordinariness in fiction. "Not much of that features in novels these days – 
ordinary lives. There's always the feeling that the daily is looked down on in 
some way in literary culture."

It's James Kelman's The Busconductor Hines that Warner credits with showing 
him there could be a kind of literature that felt familiar, identifiable, real. 
"It's just great art," he says. "It's just amazing, the voice he got, and the 
transitions between thought and speech. And the way he unquestioningly made the 
main character, a bus conductor, have profound thoughts. I think that's the 
crux – a certain school of literary thought doesn't believe profundity can 
happen in a working person's daily life. But profundity does happen: we all 
think about philosophy as we're washing dishes and as we shovel the shit around 
and as we ring up the till in the shop."

It was while living in Acton in the 80s that he first fell in love with 
Scottish literature. "I read masses of it," he recalls. "Which is quite 
strange. It was something to do with homesickness." Despite passing a good part 
of the year in Spain, and despite being half-English (his father was from 
Sheffield),Warner remains keenly Scottish and is fiercely in favour of Scottish 
independence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/19/scottish-referendum-independence-uk-how-writers-vote>
.

"I'm a Yes man, yeah," he nods. "It's not Scottish patriotism or nationalism 
with a capital N, or derogatory towards England in any way. I love England, I'm 
amazed by England: the old pubs; the leafy lanes;Edward Thomas's poetry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jun/28/saturdayreviewsfeatres.guardianreview22>
. I just see it as a democratic improvement, as a way forward. I see it as 
progressive that a small country is represented by its own parliament 
democratically."

He suspects that most Scottish writers feel the same way. "There's a school in 
Scottish literature that goes back to the 20s when writers and poets felt they 
were through literature building a nation, a virtual nation, an imagined 
nation. And if you read Hugh MacDiarmid's treasury of Scottish poetry, it's a 
construct, a fabulous construct of a country.

"Personally, I feel my work falls into that tradition," Warner continues. "A 
construction of an identity of a country through your work. With Morvern 
Callar, I felt that it was bringing into literature a voice and a world and a 
way of speaking and seeing that, to my knowledge, hadn't been done."

A No vote, then, would "strike an enormous blow for that project and that 
concept," he argues. "Because it means the majority of Scots don't share that 
vision."

But he is wary, always, of mingling a writer's vision with those of his 
readers. "I always feel like a poor spokesperson for my own work," he says. "I 
always feel very uncomfortable at the intervention between the purity of the 
reader's experience and a lurking Alan Warner," he laughs. "I don't want to get 
in the way of the reading experience."

He tells the story of being in Dublin airport once when a young woman sat down 
opposite him and began reading The Sopranos. "And, as I sat looking at her," he 
remembers, "she turned the page and read, and her shoulders moved and she 
chuckled. And I thought, fuck it, I've got to know what page she's reading. So 
I surreptitiously stood up and walked around the back of her and looked 
over her shoulder."

It was a strange feeling, he says: a smugness and a terribleness and a wash of 
irrelevance. "I was like the boyfriend in Morvern Callar who vanishes. Morvern 
buries him up the hill! He's gone!" he laughs. "And it was an eerie feeling, 
but it's the truth: even when I was right there, I was invisible."
 