
The president-elect of Ivory Coast has heralded "the dawn of a new hope" after 
the arrest of his rivalLaurent Gbagbo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/laurent-gbagbo>.

In a television address to the nation, Alassane Ouattara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alassane-ouattara>, said his predecessor 
would receive "dignified treatment", and called on fighters in Ivory Coast to 
lay down their arms.

"After more than four months of post-electoral crisis, marked by so many human 
lives lost, we are finally at the dawn of a new era of hope," Ouattara said on 
Monday night.

He said Gbagbo, his wife Simone and the former president's entourage would be 
investigated by Ivorian authorities. He said he intends to establish a truth 
and reconciliation commission and called on all fighters to put down their arms.

The UN's top human rights body on Tuesday appointed three independent experts 
to lead an investigation into allegations of serious abuses by both sides.

Sporadic shooting was heard from the French military base in Abidjan in the 
early hours, but on a smaller scale than in recent days. A convoy of French 
military vehicles left the base at about 8am local time. The streets appeared 
quiet and calm

It is hoped rebuilding can now begin. The UN World Food Programme (WFP) said 
it is planning airlifts in the coming days to provide food to tens of thousands 
of internally displaced people inIvory Coast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ivory-coast> and refugees in neighbouring 
Liberia.

"We need to open up a humanitarian lifeline to the many Ivorians who are now 
the victims of alarming shortages of food, water and other basic needs," said 
WFP's executive director Josette Sheeran.

After four months of a growing crisis which threatened to tip Ivory Coast into 
civil war,Gbagbo was detained on Monday by forces loyal to Oauttara at the 
presidential compound 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/apr/11/laurent-gbagbo-humiliating-fall>. 
French troops and UN peacekeepers, who had earlier struck Gbagbo's home in 
Abidjan from the air, provided crucial support.

One of Ouattara's top military aides described the final assault by the rebel 
New Forces, now renamed the Republican Forces 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/mar/16/ivory-coast-revolution-rebels>.

"It was a big battle from midnight until the afternoon," said Cisse Sindou, 
the group's deputy leader. "The militias were everywhere. We had to advance on 
the residence from 1.5km away. The French troops didn't want to be on the 
ground in the last 1.5km.

"The Republican Forces got into the garden of the residence. There were no 
heavy tanks left there after the UN and French air strikes. But the garden was 
full of militias. There was some resistance from these militias outside the 
bunker, not inside."

He continued: "We won the battle. We had to have a strategy to keep Mr Gbagbo 
alive. President Ouattara and prime minister [Guillaume] Soro had made clear 
that he should be taken alive."

"Our military intelligence knows well the structure of the bunker.

Gbagbo was believed to have been holed up with 50 family members and 
supporters. Sindou said he went quietly once he knew the game was up.

"We just went in the bunker and got him. When your guard is reduced, what 
resistance can you put up?"

Gbagbo, who had been hiding in the bunker for a week, was interrogated and 
then taken to the Golf hotel, where Ouattara has been based under UN protection 
since early December. The two rivals came face to face, but Ouattarra did not 
speak, Sindou said.

He added that a presidential swearing in ceremony would be held soon.

He said Ouattara may move the seat of government away from Abidjan to the 
official capital, Yamoussoukro.

"The important thing now is to secure Abidjan, clean up the streets and deal 
with those militias. You cannot let the people suffer."

Abidjan – the country's main city – has been the scene of fierce fighting for 
the past week after Ouattara's forces swept down from the north, his stronghold.

Following the arrest, Soro called on Gbagbo's troops to switch sides. "To all 
the forces, I make a last appeal to rally [with us] … there cannot be a 
manhunt," he said, in an address to the Ivorian people on French television.

Some analysts the said conflict, which has cost more than 1,500 lives, would 
be difficult to end, especially because of the French role in removing Gbagbo. 
The former president – once a history professor who had studied at the Sorbonne 
– portrayed the conflict as a fight against foreign forces, and France's 
Licorne peacekeepers in particular.

"This is just the start of the crisis," said Kwesi Aning, head of research at 
the Kofi Annan International Peacekeeping Centre in Ghana. "The role of French 
Licorne forces undermines Ouattara's credibility. There may be a lull for a 
couple of months, but certainly there will be attacks to try to reverse this 
defeat."

Deep divisions in Ivory Coast, which has been split into north and south since 
the brief 2002 civil war, mean Ouattara will have to tread carefully in his 
handling of Gbagbo, who over the past decade stoked xenophobia aimed at 
Ivorians whose parents or grandparents came from neighbouring countries. For 
all his failings, which included repeatedly postponing elections to stay in 
power, Gbagbo still commanded a lot of support, winning 46% of the vote in 
November.
 