
There was at least some rare good news for Alastair Cook at the end of 
England'sfive-run defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/26/australia-england-final-odi> by 
Australia in the final one-day international at the Adelaide Oval. England's 
captain is – after 93 days, 13 domestic flights, three unscheduled farewells, 
1,186 balls faced in the middle and not a single meaningful victory in sight – 
finally going home.

"I'll enjoy seeing my pregnant wife, I'll enjoy seeing a few sheep," Cook said 
of his plans for that much discussed return, which will include significant 
discussions with Andy Flower, the head coach, and Paul Downton, managing 
director of England cricket, regarding the team's immediate future. "And then 
have a little bit of time off, and then start making plans. It's hard to say 
when I'm 15,000 miles away with jet-lag to come but we'll cross that bridge in 
the next two weeks or so."

These are issues of some consequence as England will announce their squad for 
the one-day matches in the West Indies at the beginning of next week, a 
selection that – as is the way these days – touches on wider issues of 
personality and team politics. Kevin Pietersen's presence or otherwise in the 
squad is now in its own reductive way perhaps the most significant part of its 
announcement.

Cook will not be going to the Caribbean and has two months to sift the debris 
of a disastrous tour and work also on his batting after a mediocre return in 
both formats. "Its been a challenging tour for me. A real tough tour," he said. 
"But that hunger comes back quickly and for us to improve as a side we have to 
put some hard yards in over the next 12 months."

England had bowled with skill to restrict Australia to 217 in Adelaide, before 
crumpling towards the end of their chase against some accurate bowling. There 
was also an element of controversy to Ravi Bopara's dismissal with eight runs 
needed. The TV umpire Kumar Dharmasena gave Bopara out stumped after the ball 
bounced back off Matthew Wade's chest, but there was no clear evidence his foot 
had been raised at the crucial moment. "I don't know if I'm being biased here 
or not, I thought the rule was the bail had to leave both grooves," Cook said. 
"Looking at the TV screen I thought there was enough doubt not to be given out. 
I'm sure the third umpire can explain his decision."

Cook was justified in taking some familiar positives from England's 4-1 series 
defeat, reserving praise for Jos Buttler, Ben Stokes and Chris Jordan. "Stokesy 
bowled really, really well and we know the talent he has with the bat," he 
said. "I hadn't seen Chris Jordan bowl really before this trip. He's got 
everything you want as a bowler. He's got pace, he swings it and you saw today 
he can handle himself at the death."

If Cook's immediate future will involve as much power-brokering as time spent 
in the nets – the relationship with Downton is at the "getting to know you 
stage", but seems set to become a lot more familiar – for Michael Clarke, 
thoughts will turn to the tour of South Africa. Asked if England were scarred 
by their defeat in the Ashes series, Clarke couldn't resist a final little 
nudge in the ribs. "I don't know the answer to that question," Australia's 
captain said after a long and unavoidably pointed pause. "I think there will be 
a few England players keen to get on that plane tomorrow and spend some time 
away from cricket."
 