
Among the various statistical milestones to come rolling balefully in from 
England's eight-wicket defeat in the second Twenty20 international at the MCG – 
three straight series losses, 11 defeats to Australia, no sixes hit all night – 
perhaps the most striking was the attendance figure of 64,385, which completed 
a new combined record in an Australian international summer.

The Aussie public may not love English cricketers, but clearly they do love 
watching them lose - and with some justification on this tour.

This has been a sporting disaster that just keeps on giving, a 
cast-of-thousands collapsible spectacular; not just the worst performance on 
tour by any England team, but also a simultaneous drama of departures, as 
members of England's party have gone pinging down, one after another, like 
sideshow ducks in a hail of pellets.

At first glance, and with just one dead-rubber Twenty20 in Sydney to come on 
Sunday, this looks like a tableau of complete cricketing disintegration. 
Jonathan Trott, Graeme Swann, Steven Finn and nowAndy Flower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andy-flower> have all experienced some form 
of premature departure. Others are firmly in the out tray, from Graham Gooch 
and possibly David Saker, right down to the multifarious backroom hands 
(spin-bowling coach: how's that coming along?) and there could be a 
generational collapse across the playing staff. Some will probably not play for 
England again: Michael Carberry, Chris Tremlett, Boyd Rankin. Others could yet 
join them: Trott, Monty Panesar, Tim Bresnan –even, if you believe the more 
hyperbolic rumours, Finn. At the same time, Flower's departure may do Kevin 
Pietersen no favours: new brooms can sweep quite a few things away.

Faced with this array of flashing red lights and parping emergency klaxons, it 
is only natural to search for a one-shot solution, some superman of the 
coaching fraternity to step into Flower's outsize shoes and set about putting 
right this vision of grand-scale corporate disintegration.

This seems likely to be the dominant theme of the next few months. England's 
next Test Match is in June. In the coming five months they have a tour of the 
Caribbean, a World Twenty20 and a home ODI series, ample time in which to scout 
and interrogate selected heavyweights of the coaching class – Gary Kirsten, Tom 
Moody, Peter Moores, perhaps – while allowing Ashley Giles an extended, 
all-or-nothing public audition (as Giles will, of course, have to go now should 
he fail to get the main job).

There is, though, another option. Rather than charging Giles or an established 
world-class team director with the task of righting the listing ship, England 
could shift sideways. It is unlikely to happen because the system that built 
the system is still the system. But England might be better served by altering 
the structure of power, its tone and texture, rather than simply changing the 
name at the top.

The team director or head coach is, after all, a relatively new role. England 
have only had seven of them, with each incumbent assuming greater power and 
reach – from the hands-on evolution of the Duncan Fletcher era to the refined 
micro-management of the past five years of Flower power.

There is a compelling argument that the preoccupation with the coach is part 
of the problem, that England have made an undue fetish of this role, in outline 
and in practice – just the wrong side of control, into controlling – that 
players have been nannied, and that there has been too much in the way of 
top-down data management, of over-coaching; a tyranny by laptop.

The early success of Flower's methods has embedded this notion that to manage 
properly is to intervene decisively in all areas. Hence, perhaps, the 
vague sense that none of the obvious domestic options – Giles, Mike Newell, 
Moores – will quite be able to match the Flower-shaped hole at the heart of the 
England setup.

Yet a slightly less dominant, less professionally intrusive coach might have 
the effect of empowering the captain a little.Alastair Cook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alastair-cook> is not so much a poor captain 
as an invisible, textureless one. Flower, ever astute, has suggested Cook has 
been crowded and suffocated by powerful influences within the team, without 
ever appearing prepared to accept that he might be one of them.

The most common argument against appointing Giles straight away is the sense 
of a stature gap between him and Flower, a step down in terms of heft and basic 
leadership muscle.

Flower is undoubtedly the more impressive figure up close: great cricketer, 
coach of distinction and a man of almost overbearing personal gravitas. Yet 
this is perhaps a part of the problem, too, the sense of airlessness within the 
team environment.

More practically, the case against Giles is that the one-day team have failed 
as abjectly as the Test team in Australia, albeit England's fortunes were 
already pretty much set on this tour.

Against this, Giles has various factors in his favour. He is half in place 
already. He is pretty much in the wrong job in any event, a man who only played 
in two Twenty20 matches and who would be better suited, in terms of specialist 
experience, to coaching the longer game.

Beyond this, he is not Flower; he is, in fact, less of a coach, less of a 
presence, less of a complex multilayered sporting character. This may be 
beneficial if the sense of a little less coach at the helm encourages Cook to 
fill the space that is left, or others to feel more empowered alongside him.

There is already a long list of casualties from this tour. But among the 
wreckage there are opportunities too: for the likes of Eoin Morgan, Sam Robson 
and Jos Buttler to play Test cricket in what may yet be a more permeable team 
atmosphere; for Cook and Stuart Broad to flourish as post-Flower leaders; for 
the coaching staff to be refreshed; and, above all, for the team to 
re-establish that frayed sense of connection with the wider watching public, to 
emerge from the protective shadow and to breathe a little again.
 