
Alassane Dramane Ouattara was honest about the personal cost of his fight for 
the presidency ofIvory Coast <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ivory-coast>. 
"It's been rough, but I never thought it would be so dirty," he said. "For some 
men, hanging on to power is a matter of life and death. They went as far as to 
order my 80-year-old mother to a hearing to find out if I was really her son. 
My friends were thrown in jail. It was very distressing."

An interview about the deadly power struggle that led to the overthrow of 
Laurent Gbagbo <https://www.theguardian.com/world/laurent-gbagbo> last week? 
Not quite. This was Ouattara speaking in 2000, after one of numerous violent 
convulsions that have wracked the west African country over the past two 
decades. He has lived out the aphorism that history doesn't repeat itself, but 
it does rhyme.

Before it was a matter of survival – in 2002 he hid from Gbagbo's death squads 
at the home of a French diplomat. Now the wheel has turned and, at 69, Ouattara 
has made it to the top. He is preparing to move into the presidential palace in 
Abidjan next week after a disputed election victory that led to the killing of 
thousands of people and displacement of at least a million. The four-month 
stalemate was finally brokenon Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/apr/11/ivory-coast-former-leader-arrested>
 when Ouattara's forces, backed by the French military, stormed Gbagbo's bunker 
and paraded him on TV, a pitiful man in a vest.

But the febrile mood on the streets of Ivory Coast suggests that Ouattara – 
known as "Ado" because of his initials – is about to climb his steepest 
mountain yet. He will need all of his economic expertise to revive the world's 
leading cocoa producer which, having tottered for a decade, has come crashing 
down and is in the throes of a humanitarian emergency.

He also inherits a country deeply scarred by political divisions, inflamed 
ethnic tensions, xenophobic persecution and a catalogue of unimaginably 
gruesome atrocities – some allegedly committed in his name.

Investigators for the NGO Human Rights Watch have reported that pro-Ouattara 
forces killed hundreds of civilians, raped supporters of Gbagbo and set homes 
ablaze in Duékoué and other western towns. Ouattara's pledge to set up a South 
African-style truth and reconciliation commission has been hailed as a right 
and proper response.

Matt Wells, Ivory Coast researcher at Human Rights Watch, said: "Most 
important now is committing to the promise he made that there will be 
even-handed justice. Long-term Gbagbo supporters need to see he's bringing to 
account everyone including those who fought for him. That would go a long way 
to rebuilding public trust."

But rights groups would be less reassured by the views of Anne Desiree Ouloto, 
Ouattara's spokeswoman and election campaign manager in the west. In an 
interview with the Guardian she refused to acknowledge that a single 
pro-Ouattara fighter had perpetrated any violations.

"The pro-Gbagbo press is trying to blame president Ouattara for the massacre 
in Duékoué," said Ouloto, sitting in the lobby of the Golf hotel, Ouattara's 
home, office and seat of government throughout the crisis. "They are trying to 
make president Ouattara look as bad as possible, but it was Gbagbo's forces who 
started these atrocities.

"Just before the election, Gbagbo supporters started abuses in that part of 
the country but none of the human rights organisations went there then. After 
the first round of voting, Gbagbo resorted to more violence because he knew he 
couldn't win. The local people organised themselves and started revenge 
killings. So I'm surprised the human rights organisations are only talking 
about this now."

Far from an impartial investigation, Ouloto implied that the new president was 
already confident his soldiers would be exonerated. "If president Ouattara was 
aware his own forces committed atrocities, he would never have set up a 
commission to investigate them," she said.

Ouattara did not set up the northern-based rebel army but was increasingly 
content the ride the tiger after the civil war of 2002-03, which effectively 
split the country in two. His loose alliance with them tightened during this 
year's political crisis as the rebel New Forces were incorporated into the 
Republican Forces under the command of Ouattara's prime minister, Guillaume 
Soro.

By last week's dramatic denouement, the "pro-Ouattara" army was an unwieldy 
alliance of hardened rebels, so-called "invisible commando" militias who had 
seized parts of Abidjan, thousands of men who defected from Gbagbo's army and 
police and, it has been claimed, mercenaries from Liberia. While all may have 
come to be anti-Gbagbo, it is less certain that all are pro-Ouattara, with 
rumours of division and factionalism already emerging.

Ouattara was a convenient symbol for years of frustration and marginalisation 
felt in the mainly Muslim north, where many migrants from neighbouring 
countries have settled to work on cocoa farms and plantations. Gbagbo's mantra 
of pure "Ivorianness" fanned hostility towards foreigners. Ouattara, by 
contrast, is a man of the world.

The country's first "fully" Muslim president is nothing if not a pluralist: 
his first wife was Jamaican, he is now married to a French-Ivorian Catholic of 
Jewish descent, and he has Protestant children. He traces some family roots to 
Burkina Faso (this was exploited to disqualify him from standing in past 
elections), studied and worked in America and was on the phone to Nicolas 
Sarkozy as French forces played a decisive role in the battle for Abidjan.

His career has alternated between politician in Ivory Coast – he was prime 
minister between 1990 and 1993 under founding father Felix Houphouët-Boigny – 
and economist in Washington, rising to number two at the International Monetary 
Fund (IMF). He is said to enjoy champagne, swimming and table tennis, and is 
possibly more at home in the air-conditioned boardrooms of the US capital than 
rallying bandana-wearing, rifle-wielding revolutionaries. "From Ivory Tower to 
Ivory Coast", as one headline put it.

Adekeye Adebajo, executive director of the Centre for Conflict Resolution in 
SouthAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, said: "I see him as a 
really suave, urbane and very able technocrat which is why Houphouët-Boigny – 
who always liked using talent wherever it came from – plucked him out of 
obscurity to be prime minister.

"He can operate in both Anglophone and Francophone environments. Also 
impressive is that he is able to command grassroots support and interact with 
global elites."

Ouattara has a doctorate in economics and a network of friends in high places. 
His friend Michel Camdessus, his boss at the IMF, said: "I was impressed by his 
personal integrity, judgment, sharp intellect and ability to find intelligent 
solutions to very difficult problems. He demonstrated there were solutions to 
the most intractable African conflicts based around ethnicity.

"He is well prepared for his own country. He told me he will try to do what he 
learned at the IMF and World Bank. He said, 'My first problem is to recreate 
the human social unity of Cote d'Ivoire and get all those who were with me or 
against me to come together and rebuild a peaceful country.'"

Camdessus, who later worked for Tony Blair's Africa commission and sits on the 
Africa progress panel, denied charges that Ouattara is too westernised. "Within 
three months you will be convinced he is a man motivated only by serving his 
country and rescuing it from this false poverty. He has experience of life in 
America and France, but before anything he is an Ivorian."

France's role in bringing Ouattara to power remains a potentially festering 
sore, however. Claims that it was French special forces who seized Gbagbo from 
his bunker have been vehemently denied, but few doubt that French and UN air 
strikes and ground artillery tipped the civil war in Ouattara's favour.

"The French used the Ouattara forces as a smokescreen to cover their 
neocolonialism business," said Phillipe Amoule, 35, an engineer. "The game is 
not over, it has just started. We should arise as one people and stand against 
the former colonial master who is trying to re-conquer our lands, our country."

France has maintained strong ties and cultural influence over Ivory Coast 
since it gained independence in 1960. But Gbagbo loathed Houphouët-Boigny's 
strong alliance with France and has recently whipped up anti-colonialist 
sentiment reminiscent of Robert Mugabe's rants against the British.

Assita Kolo, 27, a student, said: "By supporting his forces and firing rockets 
on Gbagbo's residence, France has decided to impose its puppet,Alassane Ouattara
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/alassane-ouattara>, as president of Ivory 
Coast. Ouattara is the best friend of western powers. They will plunder the 
resources of Ivory Coast without any trouble. Gbagbo's gone and Ivory Coast 
will return in a state of semi-slavery."

Better known for hard-working efficiency than charisma or soaring rhetoric, 
Ouattara will probably have to win over such sceptics with tangible 
achievements – including laying the foundation for the next election and the 
possibility of his own defeat. Democracy has made progress in Africa in recent 
years but the Ivory Coast debacle was a setback.

Speaking in the US in 2003, in an interview published by allAfrica.com 
<http://allafrica.com/stories/200305090007.html>, Ouattara said: "I came to 
this country when I was 20 years old. I believe in elections. It's only ballots 
which should put people in power; everyone who has been through coups and 
violence knows it has not worked.

"I've learned that in school, I've learned that here [in the US] and this is 
the dream I have for my country. I don't believe in military coups and military 
regimes. They don't work and even if you get into power by force, you cannot 
impose force on the international community, even if you can do it at home 
through repression. Why do you go into politics? To help your people."
 