
Labour could be finished if Jeremy Corbyn wins the leadership, Alastair 
Campbell <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alastaircampbell>, Tony Blair’s 
former chief spin doctor, has said.

In a lengthy blogpost 
<http://www.alastaircampbell.org/blog/2015/08/10/nice-guy-good-mp-making-the-weather-but-it-has-to-be-abc-anyone-but-corbyn-labour-is-finished-if-he-wins/>
, the former Downing Street head of communications and strategy urges the party 
to choose “anyone but Corbyn”, despite having previously said he would not 
intervene in the contest.

He says he changed his mind about weighing in because he believes the party 
would head for a “car crash, and more” under the Islington MP’s leadership.

“Whatever the niceness and the current warm glow, Corbyn will be a leader of 
the hard left, for the hard left, and espousing both general politics and 
specific positions that the public just are not going to accept in many of the 
seats that Labour is going to have to win to get back in power,” Campbellwrites 
<http://www.alastaircampbell.org/blog/2015/08/10/nice-guy-good-mp-making-the-weather-but-it-has-to-be-abc-anyone-but-corbyn-labour-is-finished-if-he-wins/>
.

Yvette Cooper is the only candidate who looks like a prime minister | Richard 
Leese
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/10/yvette-cooper-labour-leadership-manchester>
In stark terms, he says Labour’s consideration of Corbyn must stop if it wants 
to be a serious party of power rather than just a “party of protest that 
marches, campaigns, backs strikes, calls for ministerial resignations, more 
money for every cause going, shouts and bawls and fingerjabs”.

“Whilst I accept that I cannot survey the post-electoral scene and say with 
any certainty that a Labour party led by Andy Burnham, Yvette Cooper or Liz 
Kendall will win the next election,” he says, “I think I can say with absolute 
certainty that a Corbyn-Tom Watson ledLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party will not.

“For that reason alone, I agree with Alan Johnson that what he called the 
madness of flirting with the idea of Corbyn as leader has to stop. That means 
no first preferences, no second preferences, no any preferences. It frankly 
means ABC: Anyone But Corbyn.”

Campbell also seeks to remind Labour activists of occasions on which former 
leaders – Ed Miliband and Michael Foot – have convinced themselves that 
thousands of passionate supporters amount to the overall public support of the 
electorate.

He acknowledges that Corbyn is an “OK guy, a good MP, and his stance clearly 
chimes with many people’s views of anti-austerity”.

However, he warns people who see Corbyn as “some kind of cross between Russell 
Brand, Nicola Sturgeon and their favourite uncle” should examine Labour’s 
recent history and the record of leaders from the left of the party.

“Everything I have seen both of leadership, and of Labour, tells me Corbyn’s 
ability to lead and hold the party together is likely to be low,” he says, “his 
ability to reach those parts of the country we have been losing, whether to the 
Tories, to Ukip or the SNP, will be even lower.”

Campbell ends the post with a call to Burnham, Cooper and Kendall to step up 
to the challenge and save the party by “showing that they too know how to make 
the weather in a campaign”.

Senior figures within the Labour establishment from the Blair and Brown era 
have been increasingly panicked in recent weeks about the prospect of a Corbyn 
victory.

Jeremy Corbyn could be the result of Labour's democratic experiment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/09/labour-leadership-jeremy-corbyn-result-partys-democratic-experiment>
Politicians including Alan Johnson have sounded the alarm about the 
electability of a leader from the left of the party but the warnings do not 
appear to have dampenedthe momentum behind Corbyn’s campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/09/labour-leadership-jeremy-corbyn-result-partys-democratic-experiment>
.

Campbell’s comments came before a YouGov poll for the Times showed that Corbyn 
has the support of more than half of those with a vote in the Labour leadership 
contest.

The poll of 1,411 eligible voters found Corbyn had nearly doubled his lead 
over Andy Burnham in a week by 32 percentage points.

It gave him 53% - enough to win without a need to count second preferences - 
with Andy Burnham losing five points to 21%.

On Monday night, the Islington MP launched his policy for young people, who 
make up much of his growing support. Speaking in central London, Corbyn said he 
would restore the educational maintenance allowance for college students, allow 
housing benefit for under 21s, scrap university tuition fees, bring back 
student grants and introduce properly paid apprenticeship schemes as well as 
reducing the voting age to 16.

Meanwhile, Burnham gave an interview to the Huffington Post describing his 
frustration at having had to work as an unpaid intern for a local newspaper for 
three months while some of his Cambridge colleagues went straight on to jobs at 
national papers.

“Who says I’ve never done a real job? It was fairly real actually. It got me 
going, but I’ve always had this thing about unpaid internships because of it,” 
he said. In the interview, he also pledged to scrap the 5% rate of VAT on 
sanitary products, known as the “tampon tax”.

Amid growing consensus within Labour that Corbyn is heading for the most first 
preferences, his rivals are now trying to position themselves as the candidate 
most likely to beat him in a final round of voting.

Backers of Cooper say an analysis by independent psephologists suggest she has 
a 2% advantage compared with Burnham in her ability to get transfers.

Some within Labour, including Barry Sheerman, a Kendall supporter and MP, are 
even calling for a pause in the contest to stop “entryists” signing up to vote 
for Corbyn despite not being true party supporters.

However, Diane Abbott, who supported Corbyn’s nomination, said this was 
“ridiculous”.

She told the BBC’s World at One: “It would be absurd if you just halted an 
election because you were worried your side was going to lose. This election is 
being fought under rules that were agreed by the whole party last year. These 
people had the opportunity to object to them then. They’re only complaining 
because they’re worried they’ll lose.”
 