
Alasdair Roberts <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alasdair-roberts> is an 
angular, tentative presence, thin as twigs and full of caveats and quiet 
amusement, but the cerebral star of what he would never call "vogueish nu-folk" 
music is sure about one thing: "I am not interested in this individualistic 
one-man-singing-of-his-pain-with-his-acoustic-guitar bullshit. I never listen 
to singer-songwriters. I'd rather listen to Bach."

Given that Roberts often gives the appearance of being one man singing his own 
songs with an acoustic guitar, this can lead to problems of presentation. He 
has developed various strategies to undermine that image. For a long while, for 
example, Roberts sang under the name Appendix Out; he says he has not abandoned 
the idea of future aliases. Other than that, he rarely uses a simple first 
person in his songwriting, preferring older models of storytelling, 
particularly ballad traditions in which individual experience takes on a 
mythic, universal quality. As a result, he gives the intense impression of 
channelling songs rather than simply playing them; at their best the delicate 
tenor of his voice and the otherworldly dexterity of his guitar-playing speak 
to the present moment across centuries.

Roberts, raised in Callander, last town before the Scottish Highlands, was 
fated to this vocation. His father was a guitarist and banjo-player, mostly of 
bluegrass songs; in the 70s, with Roberts's German mother, he ran an agency in 
Bavaria, booking British folk acts. When Roberts was a boy in the 80s his 
father became a successful importer of German beer to Scotland. Their house was 
full of LPs and musicians and Roberts absorbed it all, and added several 
complex layers of lyrical ingenuity, a bleak wit, and a forensic interest in 
northern European folklore. He studied comparative literature at university in 
Glasgow and Strathclyde, and if it hadn't been for the music, he says, by now 
he'd have been "deep within some historical linguistics department at a 
Scottish university… "

To satisfy this part of his character he still spends time in the School of 
Scottish Studies archive in Edinburgh, fossicking for myth and music. He is 
just about to release a second album of traditional songs; the first,No Earthly 
Man(2005), was entirely composed of murder ballads, savage killings and 
desperate hauntings; this one,Too Long in This Condition, takes in infanticide 
and arson and a healthy quota of ancient broken hearts and lost loves. The 
songs seem an act of compulsion on Roberts's part as much as anything.

He agrees, to a point. "At certain times, certain songs will come to the fore 
in my mind, and I'll feel it necessary to explore them, for often personal 
reasons.

"Some of them are songs I have sung for a long time. It sometimes feels as 
though the songs have entered me in some way. I always have them with me. For 
this record there were seven or eight like that, songs I had to get out."

He is at pains to argue that his versions of standards such as "Barbara Allen" 
have nothing at all to do with preservation, or archaeology. "I am always 
wanting to make them relevant to now," he says. He got his start after giving a 
tape to "alternative country" pioneer Will Oldham, aka Bonnie "Prince" Billy, 
with whom he now shares a record label, and a friendship, and a gift for 
renewing folk tunes. When Roberts describes this process it is almost as if he 
feels shackled to the tradition in some way, and needs to make some sense of it 
for himself.

"The melodic stock is very primal," he suggests. " And I do have a love-hate 
relationship with all the songs. I find them even cathartic to sing sometimes 
and then other times I feel totally burdened by them, I hate them and don't 
want to sing them any more."

His escape route is into his own writing. It would be fair to say that Roberts 
writes songs like no one else, in a curious mixture of dialect and linguistic 
display. The last album he wrote for himself, last year'sSpoils, includes such 
lines as: "I was bilious and saturnine/As I walked from shrine to wayside 
shrine" and "The cosmos is desacralised/Now the world must be rebarbarised". 
"Oops!… I Did it Again" it is not.

Roberts laughs when I suggest to him that he seems on a one-man mission to 
test the limits of rhyme. Does he set himself challenges?

"Sometimes," he says. "I like to think the writing is getting a bit simpler, 
but I managed to work 'mitochondrial Eve' into a song I just wrote, so I guess 
I've a way to go…"

These excesses, sometimes conceived in earnest, sometimes as jokes, are one of 
the reasons why the traditional music "establishment" in the UK has found it 
hard to categorise Roberts's music. He's not quite on any circuit. "There are 
loads of festivals and things," he says. "But for some reason people don't see 
what I do as folk music, so I don't often get invited. In Europe I have played 
with everyone from crazy German free jazzers to Norwegian percussionists, and 
there are few problems with playing in America. But here, sometimes I've been 
told I can't play because I write my own songs, which seems a bit 
anti-creative."

The fundamentals, he argues, never go away. A song Roberts has just completed 
dwells on the financial crisis, in a Scottish context. "I'm no economist," he 
says, "but it's hard to think it's not all fucked again. It is hard to make a 
living as a musician these days, certainly. The song is basically someone 
complaining about this feeling of powerlessness. The banker, the broker, the 
money lender: you can find those figures in songs throughout history."

Roberts is reluctant to talk about his life outside his music ("Where's your 
couch?") beyond saying he is unmarried, but would like kids. His father died in 
2001, and that certainly seems near the heart of some of his morbidity; he 
agrees that he is always singing for his dad "in some sense". When I ask what 
he learned from his old man, he sings with hairs-on-the-neck clarity the only 
song his father taught him, when he was 18 or 19, a 17th-century ballad called 
"The False Bride".

"That was the first traditional song I had really engaged with myself," he 
says. "It was passed down to me from him. It was the only song he passed on, 
really."

It always seems to me, I suggest, that those ballads were a primitive form of 
psychoanalysis, a way of releasing the collective unconsciousness, with a bit 
of self-help and cognitive therapy thrown in. Does he see them in that way?

"Certainly," he says, "and particularly in their interest in dark familial 
relationships, those Jungian archetypes and fears." Roberts was at an artists' 
retreat in the west of Scotland recently and talked with novelist Alasdair 
Grey, also in residence, about exactly that. Grey gave an impromptu analysis of 
the resonance of "Little Sir Hugh", a song about a ritual child murder that has 
not lost its power to shock over 800 years, without knowing it was the darkest 
of the songs on Roberts's new album.

I wonder, as he gets older, and life seems more frail, if he finds this kind 
of song harder to sing.

He smiles. "I've always been drawn to heavy, big old ballads. Perhaps that's 
age, perhaps that's temperament," he says. "But some of my new songs have a bit 
more levity to them."

Having heard a few, I'd say that their lightness was relative. Roberts's "nu 
folk" or "freak folk" is many things – subversive, inspired, authentic – but do 
not expect wall-to-wall jigs and reels any time soon.

Too Long in This Condition is released on Navigator on 16 August. Alasdair 
Roberts plays at the Green Man festival on 20 August and at Kings Place, London 
N1 on 17 September
 