
Alastair Cook <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alastair-cook> has offered 
the broadest hint so far that he has received assurances he will stay on as 
England captain. Speaking at the Melbourne Cricket Ground before the first 
one-day international against Australia, England's captain also stopped short 
of offering any support for the prospect of Kevin Pietersen's international 
future.

Like a cartoon doodle the exact outline of England's post-Ashes whitewash 
shakedown continues to take shape a single sketch stroke at a time, with a hint 
here, a nudge there, and a general sense of blanks very slowly being filled. We 
may not be able to see what it is just yet, but Cook added another stroke of 
colour by revealing he has now had the chance to speak to the new ECB managing 
director, Paul Downton, and felt free enough discussing his own future to refer 
with some enthusiasm to the prospect of finessing his leadership of the England 
team over the next few years.

"It is reassuring," Cook said, when asked about reports of assurances offered 
by the ECB on his future as captain. "I have had a couple of meetings with Paul 
Downton and Andy [Flower] before he went home. It is nice knowing that and the 
opportunity to make amends as a captain. I am desperate to try and do it. The 
challenge is whether I am good enough to do it and we will see over the next 
few years or however long."

While Cook was at pains to point out that there were still formal decisions to 
be taken on "the Test team, the one-day team, my future, all that kind of 
stuff", it was notable England's dual-format captain looked significantly more 
relaxed, and even – whisper it – quite cheerful a week on from his appearance 
at the end of the Sydney Test.

On that occasion Cook cut a distressingly hollow-eyed figure, constrained by 
protocol from giving voice to his obvious anger and frustration. At that stage 
the only vote of confidence Cook had received was a news agency story reporting 
comments by David Collier, the ECB chief executive, that popped up on his 
mobile phone on the morning of the final day of the match. Here, though, Cook 
was far more sprightly, cracking the odd joke, playfully chiding one reporter 
and generally giving the impression of a cricketer in a far more settled state.

The only real glimpse of something flintier came with mention of Pietersen, 
who was always due to be rested from the one-day team, but whose absence here, 
combined with the background theatre of his non-retention by the Delhi 
Daredevils, has added to the sense of a KP-shaped shadow hovering over the 
short-form leg of England's tour.

Asked if Pietersen had a Test future with England Cook presented a pointedly 
dead bat. "When you lose a series 5-0 a lot of things get thrown up and in your 
face as a captain," he said. "You start looking at everything and it is 
important we do that. What also is important is that it has only been a week 
since it all happened."

Asked about his relationship with Pietersen Cook would only say: "We have had 
a good relationship." On the issue of whether having Pietersen around right now 
might be an advantage he was similarly rigid. "I don't know the answer to that 
question. The decision to rest him was made a long time ago."

Cook added: "We need to change a lot of things. It's been a real reality check 
for us, the Test series, and when you win games of cricket it might paper over 
that. When you lose like we've lost, 5-0 in the series, it gives you a chance 
to have a bit of a blank sheet of paper and really start afresh."

England now enter their intensive second phase of the tour with the first of 
five one-day internationals in 15 days. It is a vital period in Cook's 
captaincy of England, the first concerted push at refashioning the ageing 
collective he inherited into something more clearly his own team. It is a 
depleted squad but it is also laced with an encouraging sense of freshness. A 
good thing too as there is a lengthy to-do list.

First up, England must find a new No3 batsman during this series. Jonathan 
Trott has, at his own pace, been one of England's finest one-day batsmen, 
maintaining an average of 51 over 68 matches, a remarkable achievement and 
streets ahead of anyone else.

Whoever gets a turn now will have to produce a weight of runs to fill that 
hole. England have one convincing all-rounder in Ben Stokes, but they also need 
another with genuine firepower at No8. Perhaps the excitingly pacy Chris Jordan 
can take his chance at some stage. Most obviously there is a clear opportunity 
for Jos Buttler to translate his obvious and compelling talent into a defined 
role with England. Buttler's A-list batting record is exceptional, his 
inventiveness in tight moments sublime. His keeping just needs to keep pace.

Beyond this England simply need to find a little medicinal joy and verve in 
the next three weeks. They already look a little looser in training, indulging 
in some larking about, a little rugby and even some impromptu hugs: Boyd Rankin 
embracing Steven Finn made for a particularly striking spectacle. Much has been 
made of Michael Clarke's ability to rebuild on the hoof after Australia's own 
losing Ashes tour. Cook has licence now to do something similar.
 