
21 November 2000 Moscow Lunch was very good-humoured, oodles of caviar, nice 
salmon, not nice meat. Putin was much more confident and humorous than before. 
When the waiters came round with vodka for a toast and I put my hand over the 
glass, one of the Russian diplomats was harrumphing, and Putin noticed. TB 
said: "It's OK, he's not allowed, he's a reformed drunk." Putin said: "I hope 
you redeem yourself in other areas."

August 2001 On holiday, Puyméras, France It was incredibly hot part of the 
time and we had the World Athletics Championships [in Edmonton, Canada] on TV 
to keep me and the boys occupied during the day and we were out pretty much 
every night. I was out running most days but just couldn't get my head straight 
as to what I wanted to do.

Fiona [Millar, partner] was convinced that I was clinically depressed again. 
The kids were brilliant but I was definitely worried about the old demons 
coming back, and about my falling off the wagon.

I'd never drunk enough to be "drunk" but I had been testing myself with it a 
bit. Interesting that this is the first time I've actually put anything in here 
about it. Maybe denial, don't know. Fiona seemed to think it was no real 
problem, provided she knew, and provided I drank no more than she did, which 
was never more than a glass or two at dinner. I had a chat with Neil [Kinnock] 
about it. He felt it was OK too but I had to watch out. I can't remember the 
first time I actually had a drink. I can remember having a couple on the boat 
coming back from the Dome on Millennium night. But that wasn't the first time, 
I know that.

As I went so long without – 13, 14 years – you'd think I would remember. I 
can't. I remember having a drink on one of the EU trips, Germany I think, I 
remember being worried about it, so stopped again. But this holiday I was 
drinking more, not every day, far from it, and never a lot. But I must be 
worried, or else I would have recorded it before, I think.

It must be part related to the mood too, so I knew I needed to watch it. 
Funnily enough, on one of the calls, when I was at the bar, TB was asking how I 
was feeling, and I said OK but he could tell not, and he said: "Thank God 
there's no danger of you hitting the bottle – now that really would freak me 
out." I said to Fiona partly it was a desire to feel "normal" but I really did 
not want to get into the habit.

I said she would have to keep an eye on it, as would I. Only she and the kids, 
and now Neil and Glenys [Kinnock], Philip [Gould] and Gail [Rebuck] knew that 
I'd had these mild falls off the wagon. It wasn't a great sign, and yet it was 
interesting that I had no sense I was going to go off on a great bender.

Campbell on … Sounding out Sky's Boulton as successor

21 January 2000 Both yesterday and today I confided to Anji [director of 
government relations] and Liz Lloyd [home affairs policy adviser] that I was 
seriously thinking about moving on. I felt no ownership of my life at all.

22 March Lisbon I had a long swim in the dark, which cleared my head, and 
after TB went to bed early, stayed up talking to John [Holmes, UK ambassador to 
Portugal, former principal private secretary to Blair]. I had pretty much 
reached the view that I wouldn't mind getting out of it all, but he said TB 
wouldn't let me and I'd be there till the end.

26 February 2001 After the 11 o'clock [lobby briefing], I asked Adam Boulton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/adam-boulton> [Sky News political editor] up 
to the office to sound him out as a possible replacement in the event I went. 
He was clear he would want to do it as a civil servant, he would want to wait 
till the new year, partly for share options, partly to be distant from the 
election. I was clear with him that it wasn't certain I would go but that what 
we were talking about was a director of communications job rather than PMOS 
[PM's official spokesman]. He was basically up for it but not straight after 
the election. Fiona feared if I stayed even for a week after the election, I 
would never leave.

Campbell on … 'Sorting out' the Middle East peace process

30 June 2000 Flight back from Germany We were briefed that Special Branch were 
planning to investigate claims of a plot to kill [Libyan leader Muammar] 
Gaddafi*. TB said it was totally wrong and scribbled on the report that we 
should do everything we legitimately could to stop it going ahead.

*AC note: Former MI5 officer David Shayler claimed there had been an MI6 plot 
to assassinate Gaddafi. Despite Robin Cook dismissing the allegation as 
fantasy, the FCO later admitted: "We have never denied we knew of plots against 
Gaddafi."

6 September UN general assembly, New York We saw [Palestinian leader Yasser] 
Arafat. TB came up with a great line at the end of the Arafat meeting: "If I 
had a bit more time, we could definitely sort out this Middle East peace 
process." Arafat had told him the Jerusalem problem might be insoluble.

7 September We had breakfast with [Israeli prime minister Ehud] Barak, TB 
giving him his tuppenceworth of advice. I sensed Barak was more on top of 
things than before but he despised Arafat, felt he was a liar and that he just 
used the other Arab leaders. They went over the Jerusalem problem, TB saying he 
could see how hard it would be for any Israeli PM to hand it over, that it 
would be like giving Westminster to Germany.

19 July 2001 George Bush visit to Chequers Bush … said he had been very tough 
with Putin, claimed he had told him: "If you carry on arming rogue states, 
you're going to end up eating your own metal." Putin had insisted they were 
only selling conventional weapons and Bush claimed he had said: "No, you're 
not." He said the good news was Putin looked a bit scared.

Campbell on … How Carole Caplin caught Clinton's eye

18 July 2001 We went for another walk round the garden and he [TB] was in very 
boisterous mood, telling the story of Clinton at Chequers when Bill told Carole 
[Caplin] about his bad back and she showed Bill how to stretch by bending over 
the piano. Clinton said to him afterwards that he could not believe that Cherie 
let her anywhere near him.

Campbell on … Letting the cameras in at Downing Street

Michael Cockerell's 2000 film, News from Number 10, offered unprecedented 
access to the Downing Street press offices

18 April 2000 London and Belfast TB was still very antsy re Cockerell, 
wouldn't let them film on the plane for example. Peter [Mandelson] said it was 
a great big ego trip for me, and I would regret it.

10 July 2000 At the office meeting, we discussed Cockerell, and after all the 
mauling I had been getting in the press, there was quite a lot of distancing 
going on. I hadn't exactly helped myself. It was almost certainly a mistake, 
both the fact of the film, and also pulling back from the press during the 
filming. TB felt the best line to run was that I was more spinned against than 
spinning, but long term I needed to get back on an even keel with them. Fiona 
was convinced that Peter M was using it all to stir against me.

Campbell on … The Henman theory of European unity

Monday 9 July 2001 TB … had a weird new theory today, saying that [British 
tennis hope] Tim Henman's failure [at Wimbledon] was another reason to go 
deeper into Europe!

Unbundle that one for me, I said. He said it is about confidence, that we 
currently lack confidence because we have not seized our future where it really 
lies. I said I didn't know about Henman but his parents looked like Tories to 
me.

About the book

Power and Responsibility: The Alastair Campbell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alastaircampbell> Diaries, 1999-2001 is 
published by Hutchinson on 7 July at £25.

Alastair Campbell raised £25,000 for two causes – Leukaemia and Lymphoma 
Research and theLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party – by 
auctioning the dedication to his diaries. Joe Hemani is hailed in the 
dedication for "his friendship, and his generous support of the political and 
charitable causes I believe in".
 