
For some, they are an ugly, podlike reminder of Albania's paranoid past that 
should be allowed to disappear unmourned. For others, the communist-era 
concrete bunkers that litter the small Adriatic state are a piece of cultural 
heritage that should not be lost.

Decades on from the heyday of the Albanian dictator Enver Hoxha, the domed 
bunkers are vanishing fast. Once upon a time there were as many as half a 
million of them, built to protect the isolated communist state from 
"imperialism and revisionism". Now most have gone.

But some are determined to save the architectural oddities, with a range of 
creative solutions for reusing them. In Lezhë, 30 miles north of Tirana, a 
joint German-Albanian tourism venture is in the process of transforming a 
bunker into a no-frills hostel. At Tirana Ekspres, a vibrant arts centre near 
the capital's dilapidated train station, a stage has been fashioned from three 
reconditioned bunker heads. Keq Marku Djetroshan, a tattoo artist, has gone one 
better, transforming one of the myriad bunkers built along the border with 
Montenegro into a tattoo parlour.

A new book featuring step-by-step guides for converting derelict bunkers into 
everything from hostels and toilets to cafes and gift shops was feted at the 
Venice Biennale, where it was recently launched. Elian Stefa, one of the 
authors of Concrete Mushrooms, estimates the cost of repurposing a triple 
bunker for campers at just €150 (£120). "The potential is huge, especially for 
tourism," he said.

The dilemma – to destroy or refashion – splits Albanians. "There used to be 
bunkers in every town, every neighbourhood, but most have gone now," said the 
veteran Albanian journalist Llazar Semini. "They [the Albanian government] have 
just closed an eye and an ear and let people destroy them slowly. Most people 
are happy for them to just disappear."

Reputedly inspired by France's interwar Maginot line and Vietcong defences 
against the US army, and erected with assistance from Chinese and North Korean 
engineers, Albania's "bunkerisation" strategy accelerated in the mid-1970s. An 
increasingly paranoid Hoxha – who severed ties with Moscow in the wake of 
Nikita Khrushchev's reforms – feared attack from the Soviet Union and 
Yugoslavia, as well as "the imperialist west".

Though the bunkers were officially the purview of Albania's ministry of 
defence, after the fall of Communist party rule in 1991 many farmers simply dug 
them up. More recently, impoverished Albanians have taken to blowing them up 
for their steel, typically worth around £100-150 for a large bunker for about 
10 people.

"The technology for destroying the bunkers is spreading rapidly," said Dorian 
Matlija, a lawyer who has defended a number of Albanians accused of blowing up 
bunkers. Explosives, typically ammonium nitrate, are often prepared in family 
homes. Bunker-busting is a dangerous business, but with average monthly incomes 
inAlbania <https://www.theguardian.com/world/albania> about £200, the lucrative 
explosions are unlikely to abate soon.

While many, particularly older Albanians, are unconcerned about the gradual 
obliteration of the concrete reminders of a brutal, highly militarised regime, 
others believe the igloo-shaped pillboxes and spacious underground shelters 
should remain.

"They are a testament to Albania's past. They should be protected as cultural 
monuments. You cannot destroy them," said Fatos Lubonja, a writer who spent 17 
years in prison under the communists.
 