 The pathologist at the centre of the Alder Hey Children's hospital scandal 
secretly ordered the removal of organs from dead infants' bodies, the General 
Medical Council has ruled.
It found 46 out of the 48 charges proved against Dick van Velzen, 56, who took 
the organs without relatives' consent while working in the pathology department 
of the Liverpool hospital between 1988 and 1994.

The GMC's fitness to practise panel, sitting in Manchester, will decide today 
whether these charges amount to a finding of serious professional misconduct.

The Dutch pathologist faces being struck off the UK medical register. 

Andrew Collender QC, counsel for the GMC, said during the hearing that the 
Professor van Velzen had caused the parents of the children whose organs he 
removed "considerable and understandable distress".

He added: "The parents of those whose organs were retained had not agreed to 
the long term retention of the organs, only becoming aware of that long term 
retention many years after their child had been buried or cremated."

More than 2,000 pots containing body parts from around 850 infants were 
discovered during an investigation at the hospital.

The panel heard from Paul Dearlove, a former laboratory officer, at Alder Hay 
that Prof van Velzen kept the pots of body parts in a "filthy" cellar below his 
laboratory.

Mr Dearlove said some of the organs had deteriorated because they had been 
retained for so long and that a few of the labels were wearing off the pots due 
to damp. "The cellar was filthy and there was so much material in some of the 
pots that it was in quite a bad condition," he said.

"Some of the material was kept in pots with plastic lids and the formula in 
one or two of them dried out, which meant the samples deteriorated rapidly.

"In the end we had to abandon care of the pots because it was just too big a 
task."

Prof van Velzen, from Oegstgeest, was not present at the hearing and did not 
send any legal representation on his behalf.

Last December the Crown Prosecution Service decided against prosecuting the 
pathologist, saying there wa s not enough evidence to secure a conviction.

The extent of the Alder Hey scandal was catalogued in the Redfern Report 
published in January 2001.
 