 Alder Hey children's hospital and the University of Liverpool today formally 
apologised for their roles in the scandal over the retention of children's 
organs.
The trust confirmed that all but 12 of the 1,154 parents of children whose 
bodies had been wrongly retained by the hospitals had accepted a £5m out-of 
court settlement, equivalent to £5,000 for each child.

Hundreds of organs, including complete hearts and brains, were stored at the 
Liverpool hospital following post-mortems on children. Their parents only found 
out that parts of their children had been kept in storerooms in late 1999.

Angela Jones, who chairs the Royal Liverpool children's NHS trust, today said: 
"As part of the mediation proposals, the trust willingly agreed to make a 
formal and public apology for organ and tissue retention, which wrongly 
occurred in past times and for the way in which inquiries were handled for some 
parents.

"The death of a child brings unimaginable grief and the trust, through me 
today, profoundly apologises where we made this suffering worse."

The trust has agreed to publish a document setting out how it has responded to 
criticisms of its post mortem procedure and complaints process made by a public 
inquiry into the scandal in April 2001.

It is to send out personal letters of apology and regret to parents, has 
agreed to put up a commemorative plaque at the hospital, and make a £5,000 
contribution to a memorial to be located in Liverpool.

The hospital plaque reads: "This plaque is dedicated to the memory of children 
and pre-viable babies who died and from whom organs were wrongly retained in 
former times. This dedication acknowledges the role of parents in bringing 
about appropriate change."

Professor Drummond Bone, vice-chancellor of the University of Liverpool, also 
apologised for the institution's role in the scandal. He said: "TheUniversity 
of Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/education/universityofliverpool> 
would wish to say how sorry it is for the distress caused to so many people by 
the events of the past and we express our deepest sorrow to all those affected."

Neither Mrs Jones nor Prof Bone was in charge of the hospital and university 
when the organ retention took place, mainly in the 1980s and 90s.

Although parents had been promised that a government minister would be present 
at the conference, health minister David Lammy was unable to attend and sent 
his apologies.

He sent a statement which read: "I sympathise deeply with any parents who have 
lost a child. Families who have, in addition, been directly affected by organ 
retention suffer a double blow.

"As a government we have taken clear steps to ensure that nobody again 
experiences this kind of distress.

Ian Cohen, solicitor for the majority of parents, said today's apologies were 
a crucial factor in settling the litigation and allowing parents to move on.

He said: "Had it not been for today's press conference, the letters of apology 
and the plaque to be erected at Alder Hey, the litigation would have continued 
for the simple reason that no amount of money could ever compensate the parents 
for the trauma which they have had to endure during the course of the last 
three and a half years."
 