
One of England's four children-only hospitals has "very worrying problems" in 
its operating theatres, according to safety watchdogs.

Alder Hey <http://www.alderhey.nhs.uk> in Liverpool failed to meet four of 
five national standards checked by inspectors from theCare Quality Commission 
(CQC) <http://Care Quality Commission> in December. There was a faulty 
emergency call alarm system, potential safety incidents, and "near misses" went 
unreported, while operations were cancelled because of staff shortages.

There were also concerns in the theatres about lack of sufficient equipment to 
monitor patients and poor maintenance checks.

Staffing problems meant that patients in the theatre recovery area after 
surgery were at increased risk, too.

There were also complaints from theatre staff that managers did not listen to 
their "repeated concerns". Some wards at the hospital did not have sufficient 
qualified, skilled and experienced staff, according to the CQC.

The CQC's regional director, Malcolm Bower-Brown, said: "The problems we 
identified at the Alder Hey hospital are very worrying. We have told the trust 
where further action must be taken to ensure national standards are met and 
that patients receive the quality of care they are entitled to expect."

The unannounced visit by the CQC in December came after it was alerted by 
theatre staff over their concerns about standards. Its report fails the 
hospital on care and welfare of those using its services, staffing, support of 
workers and quality monitoring. Cleanliness and infection control met national 
standards.

A report by the hospital's director of nursing, Gill Core, had already warned 
of shortcuts in safety processes, "limited reporting of incidents", and a 
belief among staff that senior managers condoned the working conditions.

Two years ago, the Royal College of Surgeons warned that relations within the 
surgical department had broken down, although overall surgical performance was 
safe. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/the-northerner/2011/dec/07/alder-hey-surgery-report>

Louise Shepherd, chief executive of the foundation hospital trust, said there 
was "no evidence that patients have been harmed as a result of these concerns 
and we remain confident that we are providing a safe service for our children 
and young people". An action plan had already been developed and "many" parts 
of it implemented.

But Shepherd said it was regrettable that a small number of the theatre staff 
felt they had had to contact the CQC about how they were supported at work. 
"Theatres by nature are highly stressful, demanding working environments and we 
are also facing an increased demand on our services," she added.
 