 A pathologist secretly removed and stockpiled the body parts of hundreds of 
babies and children without their parents' consent, a medical tribunal heard 
today.
Around 850 babies' organs were harvested by Professor Dick van Velzen during 
the six years that he was the head of foetal and infant pathology at 
Liverpool's Alder Hey children's hospital, the General Medical Council (GMC) 
heard.

More than 2,000 pots containing infant body parts were discovered during the 
inquiry into the scandal, said Andrew Collender QC.

Professor van Velzen, 55, faces a charge of serious professional misconduct 
and, if found guilty, could be struck off the medical register. The GMC 
suspended the Dutch pathologist from practising medicine in the UK four years 
ago, but that suspension expires on August 1.

The pathologist, who returned to Holland with his wife following the Alder Hey 
scandal, is charged with failing to seek permission of the children's parents 
and of failing to keep records of organ removals.

He did not attend the fitness to practise hearing in Manchester and sent no 
legal representatives to enter a plea on his behalf.

Mr Collender said: "At the heart of the charges against Dr van Velzen was his 
practice, while at Alder Hey, of removing and retaining the internal organs of 
infant patients following post mortem examinations.

"During the period from September 1988 to 1994 a very substantial store of 
foetal and infant organs built up at the Alder Hey hospital. Investigations 
carried out after September 1999 found more than 2,000 pots containing organs 
from approximately 850 post mortem examinations in store at the hospital."

Mr Collender told the hearing in Manchester that in some cases parental 
consent had not been obtained before a child's organs were removed. In other 
cases, parents had given limited consent to minor biopsies to specific organs, 
but had not agreed to their long-term retention.

The barrister added that many parents had only become aware that organs had 
been retained long-term many years after their child had been buried or 
cremated. This had caused those parents "considerable and understandable 
distress".

The tribunal heard how Prof Van Velzen from Oegstgeest, Holland, ordered 
changes to post-mortem examinations after he took up his post at Alder Hey in 
1988.

Mr Collender described how the professor would remove most of the organs 
whole, and would rarely ask the laboratory officers to process them into blocks 
and slides.

He said the techniques and processes used by the doctor led to a "build up of 
unprocessed organs in storage pots stored in a particular building in the 
hospital".

Mr Collender told the GMC panel that they could expect to hear evidence from 
staff at Alder Hey, parents of the deceased children and pathologists who had 
examined the organs found in the hospital store.
 