
Research into cures for children's cancers is being set back by parents' 
unwillingness to allow small tissue samples from tumours to be stored for 
future study and doctors' reluctance to ask them, according to a leading cancer 
charity.

The impact of the scandal at Alder Hey hospital in Liverpool, where dead 
children's organs were retained for research without discussion with parents, 
lingers on. Donations of tissue to the national tumour bank for children's 
cancer fell by 40% after the scandal, according to Cancer Research UK, which 
yesterday launched a campaign to change attitudes.

The UK Children's Study Group, with Cancer Research UK, set up the tumour bank 
in 1998. It collects small samples of tissue - generally smaller than a sugar 
lump - from tumours in children.

But in the first half of 2000, after it was discovered that organs had been 
removed from children's bodies without their parents' knowledge, the number of 
samples donated to the tissue bank almost halved.

Between July and December 1999 there were more than 200 donations, but from 
January to July 2000 there were 120. Donations to the bank have remained low 
since and only just started to creep up to 150 during the first half of this 
year.

Part of the problem was the uncertainty of pathologists as to what it was 
acceptable for them to retain and pass on to the tissue bank, according to 
Kathy Pritchard Jones, a paediatric oncologist and member of the study group. 
Many doctors are now reluctant to ask for consent from parents and a third of 
paediatric pathologists' jobs were vacant, which put the rest under pressure. 
But loss of confidence among parents also needed to be addressed.

"When we first set up the tumour bank, we had high hopes that it would bring 
children's cancer research in this country forward by strides, so it's very 
frustrating that donations to the bank have fallen," she said.

"We need an information drive to explain to the public the value to medical 
progress of keeping the "left over" bits of tissue removed during operations. 
These samples are small, usually less than the size of a sugar lump."

Dr Pritchard Jones said most people were happy to donate tumour samples if the 
issue was properly explained. However, getting consent took up a lot of time 
and involved extra paperwork. She criticised the Department ofHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> which sent down "200 page edicts" 
for busy doctors to read.

Most people were ignorant about tissue collection and research and the 
Department of Health was too frightened of public opinion. "There is a 
considerable amount of confusion and fear," she added.
 