 The families of hundreds of children whose organs were wrongly retained by the 
Alder Hey hospital in Liverpool have accepted a £5m out-of-court settlement.
The compensation agreement was settled yesterday when a judge ruled that the 
cash offer of £5,000 for each child was a "sensible and fair settlement".

But 13 of the 1,154 claimants have either rejected or not responded to the 
offer. They have been given leave to join a national group pursuing litigation 
over other organ scandals across the country.

Other aspects of the settlement included individual letters of apology to 
parents, a memorial to the children, a university donation to charities 
nominated by the parents' trust and a future meeting with parents to discuss 
changes in practice and procedure at the hospital.

Janet Valentine, 43, whose daughter, Kayleigh, was one of the children, said: 
"It's not about the money. Our fight is to get the law changed and we want to 
see an apology, not only from the hospital but from the government."

She added: "The hospital was not responsible by themselves, and the university 
got off very lightly when the hospital took the full brunt of everything.

"We had a second funeral and they let us go ahead with the second funeral, 
even though they knew they still had our child's body parts."

Pauline O'Hare, who is a member of the campaign group Parents Interring Their 
Young Twice (Pity II), said she had not gone ahead with a claim for 
compensation.

"Our main aim is to make sure that the promise of our government that organ 
retention will never happen again is exactly what we want to see happen," she 
said.

The financial agreement was made after negotiations between lawyers 
representing the Merseyside hospital, the University of Liverpool and the 
hundreds of families affected. The offer will be met by the NHS litigation 
authority.

In 1999 it emerged that the Dutch pathologist Dick Van Velzen had taken 
thousands of organs from the bodies of children at the hospital without their 
parents' knowledge, and stored them in his laboratory.

The University of Liverpool employed Prof Van Velzen, who stockpiled body 
parts over a period of seven years when he held the post of chairman of foetal 
and infant pathology.

His job was spilt between the university and Alder Hey hospital. 

Aftter the scandal broke the government ordered an inquiry, which led to new 
regulations on the removal of organs, their storage and how relatives give 
their consent to research.

Mr Justice Gage, sitting at Nottingham crown court, ruled that the £5m 
settlement was fair, and said he hoped the families could now begin to move on.

The judge also ruled that a national litigation group, pursuing claims over 
other organ scandals nationwide, should be opened up to those claimants in 
Liverpool who had so far either rejected or failed to respond to the offer.
 