
The fallout from the Trayvon Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trayvon-martin> shooting in Florida has 
forced the controversial rightwing lobbying network the American Legislative 
Exchange Council, Alec, to make a strategic retreat from its widely condemned 
involvement in social and electoral issues.

Alec's chairman, David Frizzell, has announced that the network has dismantled 
its public safety and elections taskforce – the source of some of its most 
contentious legislative interventions. The taskforce was responsible, critics 
say, for helping to disfranchise millions of Americans in the presidential 
election year, as well as spreading stand-your-ground laws modelled on the one 
that prevented Trayvon Martin's killer George Zimmerman from initially being 
charged.

"We are eliminating the Alec public safety and elections task force that dealt 
with non-economic issues and reinvesting these resources in the taskforces that 
focus on the economy," Frizzell said.

In recent months Alec's activities have come under increasing scrutiny as more 
and more detail about its influence on American politics has emerged. The 
network brings together big American corporations with mainly Republican 
politicians in an attempt to set the political agenda at state level, 
sponsoring "model laws" that are then replicated in state assemblies across the 
country.

Among its innovations are voter ID laws that make it more difficult for people 
to register to vote,which the Brennan Center for Justice has calculated 
<http://www.brennancenter.org/content/resource/189_electoral_votes_restrictive_voting_laws_have_significant_impact_in_2012/>
 have been adopted by states that command 70% of the electoral college votes 
needed to win the presidency.

Alec has also been seminal in promoting stand-your-ground laws modelled on 
Florida's, which have been replicated in full or in part in 34 states across 
the US. It has also had a hand in seeding harsh anti-illegal immigration laws 
across America.

Campaigners seeking to expose Alec's activities hailed its change of tack as a 
victory for their collective efforts. In recent weeks, a spate of top companies 
and organisations, including Coca-Cola, Pepsi, Wendy's, the Gates Foundation 
and, most recently, the health insurers Blue Cross Blue Shield have pulled 
their subscriptions to the network.

But Lisa Graves, head of the Center for Media and Democracy that runs a 
dedicatedmonitoring unit called Alex Exposed 
<http://alecexposed.org/wiki/ALEC_Exposed>, warned that the announcement should 
not be taken as a change of heart. "This is a PR manoeuvre from Alec, which 
is backpedalling to distance itself from the controversial bills on guns and 
voting that it promoted."

Graves said that many of those laws remained on the books in multiple states, 
and Alec had made no commitment to unpicking them. "Alec has already succeeded 
in putting in place laws that will make it harder for Americans to vote, and in 
creating more than a dozen legal changes that will make it more difficult to 
prosecute vigilantes shooting guns."

Rashad Robinson of ColorOfChange <http://colorofchange.org/>, a campaigning 
group that seeks to amplify the black political voice, also insisted that the 
battle against Alec could not end here. "To simply say they are stopping 
non-economic work doesn't guarantee that Alec will not continue to push laws 
that endanger African Americans and trample our voting rights," he said.

Alec played a role in the resignation of the UK defence secretary Liam Fox 
last year over his close ties to his friend Adam Werritty. Werritty was chief 
executive of the Atlantic Bridge, which acted as a transatlantic conduit 
between British Tories and Alec.
 