
Alec Woodall was born in Hemsworth, West Yorkshire, and served for 13 years as 
its MP. He belonged to a mining family, to the savage extent that he worked, 
and his father broke his back in, the same colliery in which his older brother, 
Wilfred, was killed. He is a reminder of the sort of person who used to become a
Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MP.

Woodall, who has died aged 92, went down South Kirkby pit soon after leaving 
Southmoor Road school, Hemsworth, at the age of 14. He waived his right to 
exemption from military service in the second world war, and joined up in the 
King's Own Yorkshire Light Infantry, landing in Normandy two days after D-day. 
He saw through the battle of Caen and was shifted to a Canadian regiment. A 
sergeant, he took temporary command of his platoon after the senior NCO was 
killed before his eyes.

Woodall was caught in an explosion during the fight for Tessel Wood in 1944, 
hospitalised and returned home. He was left partially deaf. B and this would 
later cause him difficulties during his eight years of local government and 13 
in the Commons. Better care for those with impaired hearing became one of his 
causes. He returned to the pit and was promoted to traffic foreman.

The political career which duly followed was characteristic of so many union 
franchises. A union, back in the 1950s and 60s, owned an equity in certain 
seats, of which control might be shared with members of the local party or 
another trade union. Sometimes an outsider might be chosen, but the Yorkshire 
miners generally chose another Yorkshire miner. Although Woodall was deemed 
"unacceptable" to some on the left, he succeeded Alan Beaney as MP for 
Hemsworth at the 1974 general election, with a majority of 34,000.

He had the credentials. A Labour party member from 1950, he had acted as an 
election agent in 1959 and was elected to the local council in 1966. Woodall 
became the MP his record suggests – supporting the 1984 miners' strike because 
the National Union of Mineworkers supported it, campaigning for better care for 
injured miners and specifically for Mobility Allowance, supporting Denis Healey 
for leader of the Labour party in 1976 and 1980, and hating everything Arthur 
Scargill andMargaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher> stood for. He would 
eventually, in 1986, be de-selected by the left, when pits were closed or 
closing. He took the defeat with some bitterness. As he said, every previous 
Yorkshire miners' MP had retired with honour. This one had been caballed 
against and sacked. He had enjoyed a good name as an MP for constituency 
duties. He continued to be active as a case worker for the Soldiers, Sailors, 
Airmen and Families Association.

He is survived by his wife, Molly, and a son and daughter.

• Alec Woodall, miner and politician, born 20 September 1918; died 3 January 
2011
 