
Aleksandar Hemon was visiting Chicago in 1992 when his home town, Sarajevo, 
came under siege, and he was prevented from returning. His debut, a short-story 
collection calledThe Question of Bruno, was published in 2000; he has also 
written two novels,Nowhere Man and The Lazarus Project, and a memoir, The Book 
of My Lives.

The Making of Zombie Wars centres on a would-be screenwriter making a film 
about the US government enslaving immigrants by turning them into zombies. He 
also has an affair with one of his English-language students. And it’s a 
comedy. How did all this start?
It’s a long story! It began with this illicit love affair between a student 
and a teacher, because that was once a situation where I made a different 
choice: not to have an affair. But I was interested in the logistics of it all. 
I also wanted to write something funny, where humour would be a way to connect 
with the reader. And I was fully aware that there was a higher risk in doing 
that, because if things are not funny, then there’s no connection at all. And I 
was also enraged by the war in Iraq, and everything after it – it’s been 
unthinkable, in my mind, from the beginning until now.

Indeed, the book is set in 2003, against the backdrop of the US invasion of 
Iraq...
I wanted Joshua’s madness to rhyme somehow with the madness that overtook 
America around that time: this misplaced patriotism, the desire to believe the 
lies that were offered, the gung-ho patriotism with no precise target. It would 
have been easier and far less interesting to me if someone who was blatantly 
patriotic and interested in kicking Arab ass was the main character.

Joshua is a pretty conflicted character, isn’t he? 
He is nominally against that whole thing, he’s not a fan of Bush and his 
cabal, but he gets caught up in a thoughtlessness that was symptomatic of the 
Bush years, the beginning of the war and then throughout – the thoughtlessness 
that comes from a kind of entitlement, where we do it because we do it, that’s 
what we do. And in Joshua’s case, and in Bush’s case, it’s male entitlement.

At that point you’d been in the country for a decade. What was your 
perspective?

I became an American citizen in 2000, exactly at the time between the 
elections and the Supreme Court decision to end the counting in Florida. So my 
first sentiment as an American was an embarrassment about the way the political 
system worked.

And then I was appalled by 9/11, but I was also appalled by the response. I 
think one of the first things that Bush said after the news came out, was

You had been visiting America when war broke out in Bosnia. As a writer, you 
later chose to write in English, though you also write in Bosnian. How does 
having a dual linguistic identity feel?
Well, it feels twice as good as having one identity! I have two languages at 
my disposal, and I love it. And they interact, obviously, in my head in various 
ways. It’s like having an extra dimension to see the world in, and it’s a great 
privilege. It doesn’t confuse me.

Do you translate your English-language work into Bosnian? 

No, I have a very good translator. Once upon a time, I translated some of my 
work and it was a dreadful translation. I didn’t have enough distance.

Aleksandar Hemon: A personal history of Sarajevo
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/feb/23/aleksandar-hemon> 
Tell me about the zombies. 
What interests me about zombies is that they are dangerous because there’s so 
many of them. They don’t have individual power, they don’t have individual 
agency, unlike vampires or serial killers or some kind of beyond-the-grave 
force. They appear in masses, they’re slow and cumbersome, and they don’t have 
special powers except that there’s so many of them and they do not die.

You use them as a metaphor for the dehumanisation of immigrants. What are your 
thoughts on the current crisis?
It is appalling in so many ways; these people are refugees and they’re being 
shut out. There are so many instances in history where Europe, and other 
countries too, shut their doors to refugees, somehow hoping that they would die 
or vanish. The saddest thing is that the tragedy of people having to risk their 
lives, and losing their lives crossing the sea or half of Europe, is seen as a 
desire to steal from us what we have, this wonderful privilege of living in a 
democracy and having a stable life. And that we must protect it from them, and 
the only danger for us is their coming – it’s another variation of the zombie 
fantasy.

Because zombies aren’t human, and we can’t communicate with them? 
Yes, by virtue of being dead, they don’t have life, they only want our life. 
And to understand that those refugees are trying to get here precisely because 
they have a life which is precious to them, and to their children, hoping that 
there would be a better life, that is heartbreaking. And one way to avoid 
confronting that – that these are people with names and lives and pasts and 
desires – is to mass them into the category of migrants or even refugees, to 
deindividualise them.

Do you think there’s hope for the future? 
Hope is a spent word in the US. I’d rather think of having agency, 
individually and collectively; that we have goals and then we act upon our 
desire to achieve those goals. And for that we have to fight those who have a 
vision of excluding other people. My concept of any just society is based on 
the notion of inclusion at every level, not passive inclusion but active 
inclusion.

Refugee crisis: what can you do to help?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/03/refugee-crisis-what-can-you-do-to-help>
And that’s based on your own experience? 
My parents were refugees in Canada. And I remember my father once called me in 
panic and fear. He needed $250 to buy tools so that he could get a job in a 
factory. I had no money to give to him, I was poor then, although I would have 
looked for it in various ways. But I said, before I do that, why don’t you ask 
your social worker if you could borrow money from them and buy tools. So he 
borrowed money and bought tools and got a job and then returned the money. But 
if that social worker or that money and those tools weren’t there, the story 
would have been different.

The Making of Zombie Wars is published by Picador (£12.99). Click here to 
order it for £10.39 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/322590/>
 