
“It is the perfect moment,” Aleksandar Hemon  <http://www.aleksandarhemon.com/>
said in his sonorous voice when I asked if it was a good time for our 
interview. Born in Sarajevo, the novelist came to the United States just prior 
the Bosnian war, took up residence in Chicago, and swiftly colonised the 
English language for his own artistic purposes.

His latest novel, The Making of Zombie Wars 
<http://www.npr.org/2015/05/03/402564139/with-comedic-touch-zombie-wars-tackles-impact-of-real-violence>
, was published in the United States on Tuesday. It relates the travails of a 
somewhat wilted aspiring screenwriter named Joshua Levin, who, like many of 
Hemon’s characters, teaches English as a second language in Chicago to make 
ends meet. Seduced by a married student, Levin must negotiate the student’s 
terrifying husband, his own girlfriend and his PTSD-ridden landlord, in 
addition to his questionable creative efforts as a screenwriter. The novel 
originated as a counterfactual history; 20 years ago when Hemon himself worked 
as an ESL teacher, an attractive (married) student made a pass at him. He 
declined the offer “because I strive to be decent, sadly”.

All of Hemon’s novels employ frame narratives – complex forms of scaffolding 
that hold up a story – of varying style and efficacy. His first novel,Nowhere 
Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/jun/28/featuresreviews.guardianreview18>
, is the story of a person displaced across space, time, and narrative. His 
second novel,The Lazarus Project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/sep/06/fiction>, which has been called 
his “Abu Ghraib novel”, is both a buddy road trip and historical investigation 
into state violence. Zombie Wars is constructed around Joshua’s screenplay in 
progress, a zombie film filled with all the expected blood and viscera. The 
effect of Hemon’s narrative architecture is always original and always strange. 
James Wood memorablydescribed Hemon as a “postmodernist who has been mugged by 
history” in a 2008 review in the New Yorker 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2008/07/28/the-unforgotten>.

Hemon didn’t do any new research into the zombie genre despite writing during 
what he calls a “zombie renaissance” in American culture: “I didn’t want to 
write a book about zombies; I wanted to write a book about someone who has 
creative fantasies about zombies. It was OK for Joshua to come up with clichés, 
as long as I wasn’t coming up with them.”

As it turns out, Hemon doesn’t even watch The Walking Dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-walking-dead>, although its 
grotesqueries and brand of cliché haunt Levin’s script. But he has views on why 
Americans are so obsessed with zombies, particularly post-9/11: “The zombie 
trope was deployed at times throughout this country’s history to deal with its 
anxieties.” And America, Hemon says, “believes in violence deeply on the 
political level – when in doubt, invade a fucking country”. On the individual 
level, “the people who believe in guns really believe that if they are deprived 
of access to violence, they are deprived of civic agency”. Chicago, 
specifically, is a place where violence is being played out every day. “I do 
not love that conflict,” Hemon says, “but it is also morally and intellectually 
stimulating.” Hemon’s conversation naturally drifts toward politics. Eventually 
we are on to the “scam of American capitalism”.

“This is a rant now,” Hemon says ruefully. “I usually slip into rants.”

Violence is central to much of Hemon’s work – both the specific violence 
endured or enacted by people who survived the Bosnian war of 1992 to 1995, and 
the more general violent tendencies, including his own, of men who are 
“formulated and formed in a society that pushes them toward violence”.

This makes his writing sound unbearably grim – it’s not. Hemon is remarkable 
for his playful, loving and endlessly generative relationship with language, 
even when it is deployed on painful topics. In Zombie Wars, a cat looking out a 
window finds a street “where leafless tree crowns scrambled the morning light, 
where bicycles with training wheels lingered on the porches, Andersonville 
dreaming itself up”. But he always betrays readers who are beguiled by the 
beauty of sentences into cosiness. (This reader will never trust him after the 
last line of Szmura’s Room, an extraordinary short story from among a corpus of 
extraordinary short stories: “He was folding the photo to put it in his pocket 
when Szmura charged across the room, leaping over the bed, and blew Bogdan’s 
left eye right out of the socket with his first punch.”)

The sinister tones in Hemon’s work often have a deliberately comic edge. For 
him, this too is political. He tells me that humour is a form of currency in 
places where citizens have “reduced agency in the face of state violence and 
history”. He has a favourite anecdote about this, of a starving family staring 
at a lone, scraggly potato that served, in the absence of television, as a 
source of entertainment during the siege of Sarajevo.

Hemon’s work often portrays his native city as a site of cosmopolitanism and 
plurality before the war. He warns both against teleology – the tendency to 
find the inevitability of a historical moment in all its preceding moments – on 
one hand, and nostalgia on the other, citing America as an analogue: “Suppose 
that sometime in the future, God forbid, there was an actual armed racial 
conflict in this country. Someone might say it’s been going on for hundreds of 
years and yes, there has been that continuity. But simultaneously there is a 
continuity of contrary discourse and activism, of people who fought against 
racism and the power structures that enforce it and reproduce it. To say that 
it’s one way or the other simplifies them in a way that is deeply ideological.”

If there is any hope for pluralism and cosmopolitanism, though, Hemon believes 
it lies in the cities. And in literature, which works best “when it’s a field 
that covers a lot of ground, a lot of experience”. We are fortunate, Hemon 
says, to see a moment when the canon of white male authors is being challenged 
due largely to “an influx of people from other parts of the world into the 
language – look at any of those writers under 40 in the New Yorker or in 
Granta. Of course, you’ll see some white men, and God bless them; it’s OK as 
long as they’re not the only ones.”

His own upcoming projects include a kind of travelogue on the United Nations 
to be released in October, and a group of planned essays on Nabokov (to whom he 
has often been compared) based on lectures Hemon delivered during a residency 
at the University of North Texas.Fiction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/fiction> is on the back burner for the 
moment. “I don’t like to write new fiction while this book is not fully 
actualised,” Hemon said. An actualised book is one that has made its way to its 
readers. “Then I am released from my bonds with the book and I can move on to 
the next one.” It’s the perfect moment, I think.
 