
If this year's intake of celebrity dancers on Strictly Come Dancing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/strictly-come-dancing> were racked 
with first night nerves – then they must have been nothing compared to the new 
judge Alesha Dixon.

The 2007 winner of the hit BBC show has been brought in to bring some youthful 
glamour to compete with Cheryl Cole on rival ITV'sThe X Factor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-x-factor>. The hiring of the 
former Mis-teeq singer Dixon has been controversial after the axing of judge 
Arlene Phillips, 66.

Dixon, 30, has being coached in recent weeks on how to comment on dance 
performances and has joined the other judges for joint rehearsals.

"It's not easy to be able to do a very pithy comment on someone's dance 
performance. It's being able to sum up very quickly and eloquently without 
repeating yourself and that's what Alesha will have been working on," said a 
source familiar with the programme.

With The X Factor claiming record ratings this year, the pressure on the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> to renew the Strictly format has been 
keenly felt.

The coaching of Dixon and her debut as a judge will not have been without a 
few nerves for the performer whom host Bruce Forsyth dubbed "Britain's Beyoncé" 
when she won. Executives will be hoping that there is no knock-on effect on the 
other judges Len Goodman, Craig Revel Horwood and Bruno Tonioli. "It is going 
to be difficult for the other three as well because they have been used to 
Arlene," said the source.

Dixon is the most visible change in an attempt to freshen up the show, which 
last year suffered an unprecedented bad press. John Sergeant quit the programme 
after continued judicial condemnation, and a flaw in the voting system forced 
producers to put three couples into the final.

Before this year's show the teasing about D-list celebrities was layered with 
disquiet about the axing of Phillips and 39-year-old dancer Karen Hardy. It was 
felt that the BBC had tarnished the feel-good nature of one of its most prized 
assets. Meanwhile ITV basked in Susan Boyle-mania.

Whereas Phillips was sharp of tongue, producers hope Dixon's perceived star 
quality will repeat the success of Cole, who has readily stepped into the role 
of Britain's sweetheart. And if she brings younger viewers to the programme, 
that will be an added bonus, as the average age of BBC1 viewers is 52.

Producers have denied that they are trying to ape Cole's triumphant stint, but 
both women are younger and more glamorous than their fellow judges.

The programme, which started life as Come Dancing in 1949 as a tour of 
regional dance studios in an era of postwar austerity, has been supercharged 
for the internet age, with online viewers able to judge the dancing couples via 
comment buttons on the BBC website. If enough online viewers are in agreement, 
comments such as "gasp", "boo" and "wow" will flash up on screen during dances.

A source at the show confirmed Dixon had been locked in rehearsals with her 
fellow judges.

"She has been preparing with the others," the source said. "She's looking 
forward to making her debut, she's no shrinking violet, she's looking forward 
to telling people what she really thinks about their dancing.""They wanted to 
add a new element and Alesha's uniquely placed to do that," a source at the 
programme said. "She knows the individual journeys the contestants go through 
and she knows what it takes to win."

After Strictly, broadcasters have a slate of dance programme planned. In 
January, after Strictly and The X Factor has finished, Sky1 will screen Just 
Dance, fronted by Big Brother host Davina McCall, while the BBC will screen a 
US rival to Strictly, So You Think You Can Dance? developed by Simon Fuller, 
the creator of Pop Idol. The corporation, perhaps stung by accusations of 
ageism, have hired Phillips as a judge.
 