
The early 1960s were a good time to be the child of British communists. For 
every achievement of capitalism, we were able to point to a similar triumph of 
the dictatorship of the proletariat. Half the globe lived under some kind of 
Marxist regime; the USSR was way ahead in the space race and the Daily Worker 
reported successes all over the east in the sciences and the arts. But for 
somebody in their early teens obsessed with the idea of cool, this was one area 
where communism couldn't compete with the decadent west.

Yuri Gagarin, the first man in space, may have had his charms, but he really 
couldn't be considered hip. No matter how hard I searched I couldn't find 
anybody in Bulgaria, Russia or North Korea who possessed the combination of 
effortless style and sinuous-hipped sensuality of an Elvis, a John Lennon or a 
James Dean. That is until 1968, when I went to see a double-bill of Polish 
films, Andrzej Wajda's Kanal andAshes and Diamonds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/77689/ashes.and.diamonds>, and first 
saw Zbigniew Cybulski.

This charismatic young actor styled his hair in a luxuriant black quiff, wore 
a leather biker jacket and tinted sunglasses. Later I read that he had to wear 
them because he'd fought in the Warsaw Uprising – the three month long 
insurrection against the Nazis – where the guerillas moved about in the sewers, 
so he couldn't take bright light. Which, even if it wasn't true, was a 
brilliant excuse to wear shades after dark. In Ashes and Diamonds Zbigniew 
Cybulski not only got to wear an outfit that was completely wrong for the 
period, but he also got to carry a German 9mm MP 38 submachine gun all the time 
– which was pretty much my dream. There was, too, an air of doomed romanticism 
around Cybulski, because the year before I came upon him he had, like James 
Dean, lost his life in an accident. Though unlike the Hollywood star, who was 
killed at the wheel of his Porsche, Cybulski died in true socialist fashion, 
running for a train.

Until my discovery of Cybulski and Wajda the only films from the communist 
sphere that I had seen were either po-faced socialist propaganda or the movies 
of Eisenstein, films such as Battleship Potemkin or Alexander Nevsky which, 
though clearly masterpieces, were highly stylised early-20th-century artefacts 
with seemingly limited relevance to my postwar world. In these Polish movies 
there existed characters who were not symbols of dialectical and historical 
materialism but instead possessed inner lives as complex as any of those 
portrayed in western cinema.

Now Second Run DVD is releasing a quartet of Polish movies from the late 1950s 
– Night Train, Innocent Sorcerers, Eroica and Goodbye, See You Tomorrow?, two 
of which star Cybulski and one of which is directed by Wajda. If you didn't 
know Night Train was the product of a communist country you would not deduce it 
from the film. There is no hint of socialist propaganda, only the atmospheric 
tale of a disparate group on a night train, one of whom may be a murderer. The 
film won best actress at the 1959 Venice Film Festival and something called the 
Golden Duck, as voted by the readers of Polish magazine Kino.

Innocent Sorcerers is about Andrzej, a young, hipster medic with bleached 
blond hair, who divides his time between being a doctor at a boxing stadium, 
having sex with women and playing jazz in a local dive. Goodbye, See You 
Tomorrow? is a romantic comedy set in Gdansk and, as well as Cybulski, features 
a young Roman Polanski in a supporting role.

There is the occasional episode of eastern European ludicrousness in these 
films. The opening credits of Goodbye, See You Tomorrow? featuring the work of 
the Bim Bom Theatre group and their "Theatre of Hands" brought back memories of 
my time as a child in communist Czechoslovakia, forced to sit through 
officially sanctioned puppet shows. "Theatre of Hands" turns out to be 
somebody's arms waving about incomprehensibly against a black screen. 
Nevertheless, watching these films was an intensely rewarding experience, once 
I had adapted my mind to their different rhythms, manners and concerns. In 
trying to come to terms with these movies I was reminded of the process of 
meditation. I found you have to quell your expectation for fast-cutting 
monkey-minded western cinema and instead try to acclimatise yourself to the 
slow-breathing pace of these films. The US psychologist John Kabatt Zinn 
describes the process of meditation as not trying to fall asleep but instead 
trying to "fall awake". And if you can manage to match yourself to these 
pictures' alien style you will find you're suddenly tumbling into a world that 
is rare and strange and unlike anything you may have encountered before.

• Restored versions of Night Train and Innocent Sorcerers are are screening as 
part of this year'sKinoteka Polish film festival <http://www.kinoteka.org.uk/>. 
The Polish Cinema Classics DVD box set is released on 12 March.
 