
As the Three Musketeers avowed, it was “all for one, one for all” (tous pour 
un, un pour tous).

The device, created by Alexandre Dumas père, the French writer, summed up the 
brotherly solidarity between Athos, Porthos, Aramis and their friend 
D’Artagnan, a near-penniless adventurer.

Today it neatly encapsulates the pressing need for some modern-day fraternity, 
in the form of hard cash, to stop the author’s historic home from falling down.

Local campaigners are desperately seeking funds to save the Chateau de 
Monte-Cristo <http://www.chateau-monte-cristo.com/main/> – a three-storey, 
neo-renaissance castle, which Dumas described as his personal “paradise on 
Earth” – from decrepitude or rapacious property developers.

“The chateau is worth saving,” Frédérique Lurol, its director, told the 
Guardian, during a private tour of the property on Friday.

Lurol pointed to damp stains from the leaky roof on the ornate plasterwork of 
one ceiling, as well as cracks in the north African-inspired Moors Salon – 
restored by King Hassan II of Morocco – and peeling paint arising from the 
water-logged foundations. “We have to act now because as you can see the 
situation is becoming pretty catastrophic.”

Dumas <http://www.dumaspere.com> was at the height of his fame in 1844, after 
the publication ofLes Trois Mousquetaires, when he acquired a piece of land 
used as a vineyard near Saint-Germain-en-Laye, 20km west of Paris.

Seduced by the bucolic atmosphere of the area overlooking the Seine, he had a 
magnificent property built byHippolyte Durand 
<http://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hippolyte_Durand>, a celebrated architect of the 
day.

Dumas told Durand: “Right here, you’re going to make an English park in the 
middle of which I want a Renaissance chateau facing a gothic pavilion, 
surrounded by water.”

In July 1847, one year after Dumas completed his classic Le Comte de 
Monte-Cristo, the chateau was finished. Dumas named it after what would become 
one of his most successful works and invited 600 friends, admirers and sundry 
hangers-on for a lavish housewarming party.

The writer liked a good party and it was to be the first of many sumptuous 
fetes and gastronomic dinners at the castle, before Dumas’s fortune ran out.

In order to escape the revelries and write, Dumas set up an office in an 
impressive neo-gothic pavilion in the garden, named the Chateau d’If.

While grandly called a “chateau”, the main house barely qualifies as a 
mansion. Its facades, decorated with floral motifs, angels and musical 
instruments as well as strange mythical animals, compensate for its modest 
size. Above each ground-floor window is a sculpture of a celebrated historical 
writer, including Shakespeare.

High above the front door is the Dumas family shield . It has three eagles and 
the author’s motto:J’aime qui m’aime (I love those who love me).

Honoré de Balzac wrote that the Chateau de Monte-Cristo was one of the “most 
delicious sweet-box folies to ever be made”. It certainly cost a small fortune: 
about 500,000 gold francs at a time when aParis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> labourer earned two or three francs a 
day.

However in 1848, having squandered the fortune made from writing on high 
living and women – scholars have suggested he had 40 mistresses – Dumas was 
forced to sell the property for just 31,000 francs. He fled his remaining 
creditors and went into exile in Belgium in 1851.

The property was rented to the British School of Paris in the 1950s and 60s 
before falling into ruin. In 1969 its owners, a property development company, 
applied to demolish the chateau and replace it with 400 flats. It was only 
saved when three local authorities stepped in to buy it.

After a major renovation 20 years ago, the association that runs the chateau 
now needs €921,000 (£664,000) to carry out essential repairs. Unfortunately, 
since theappeal for funds 
<https://www.fondation-patrimoine.org/fr/ile-de-france-12/tous-les-projets-593/detail-domaine-de-monte-cristo-31392>
 was launched two weeks ago only €1,800 has been collected.

“For some reason the Chateau de Monte-Cristo has always been undervalued as a 
historical asset,” Lurol added. “Parts of the property, including some of the 
rooms, are listed as part of the national heritage but, strangely, not the 
whole chateau or estate. So while we have some public money, we still need to 
raise half ourselves.

“We are calling it an appeal for funds, but in fact it’s an urgent call for 
help. Having saved the chateau from destruction once, we have to save it again 
for future generations.”
 