
I had a reasonably happy childhood. I was brought up in Rhodesia [now 
Zimbabwe] and it was a fairly conventional childhood for that time and place. 
It was at the tail end of the empire and the circumstances that prevailed were 
unusual, and in many respects somewhat difficult.

My parents were very supportive and always encouraged us. My father was a 
gentle, nice man. My mother was quite a colourful character and a keen reader 
who encouraged me to write. She spent a lot of time writing an immensely long 
saga, which she kept in a cardboard box and which never saw the light of day. 
I'm not sure if it was ever finished. It was a novel set in Congo and she made 
a request that it should be destroyed after her death, which was honoured.

I have three older sisters, so we were a reasonably large family and, in 
general, a happy one. I don't think I was spoiled by my sisters. I suppose 
being the only boy, one was not so much in competition with them. Many of my 
books are written from a female perspective. I rather enjoy the take that women 
have on the world, and certainly I enjoy the conversations that women have.

I was a very keen reader from an early age. I liked school stories in 
particular. As a boy, I was a great fan of the William books and the Jennings 
books, which I read with tremendous enthusiasm. I remember writing a story at 
the age of eight and having the effrontery to send it off to a publisher. I got 
a courteous and kind reply, which I was most grateful for, because had I 
received a very dismissive reply that might have discouraged me from writing.

I have been very lucky in that I have a very happy and united family. My wife 
Elizabeth and I started The Really Terrible Orchestra for people like us who 
are pretty hopeless musicians who would like to play in an orchestra. It has 
been a great success. We give performances; we've become the most famous bad 
orchestra in the world.

I have two daughters, who have been a great joy to us. They have both done 
well; one is a doctor, the other is on the point of qualifying as a doctor. I 
have not set out to give them too much direct advice on how to lead their 
lives, although obviously we must have conveyed a lot of messages to them, as 
parents do. I think they know that we want them to find their own way of 
leading a good and happy life.

I think my family are pleased that I've been fortunate with my books, and are 
quite proud that the books have had some degree of impact. They all have their 
favourite characters. My daughter Lucy is a great admirer of Mma Makutsi, Mma 
Ramotswe's assistant in The No 1 Ladies' Detective Agency, because they share 
an interest in fashionable shoes. When I describe Mma Makutsi's shoes or any of 
the characters' clothes, I phone Lucy and she tells me what the character would 
wear. I recently had to describe the shoes worn by Big Lou, one of my Scotland 
Street series characters, and Lucy said she would be wearing scuffed, cream 
kitten heels. I thought, that's going to really impress people, they'll think I 
know what kitten heels are, but I didn't. In fact, I still don't.

A Conspiracy of Friends by Alexander McCall Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alexander-mccall-smith> is available next 
week, published by Polygon, £16.99. The Dog Who Came in From the Cold, 
published by Abacus, is out in paperback, £7.99.
 