
Nebraska is the first film you've directed that you didn't have a hand in 
writing. How did it come about?

Two dudes who produced Election for me many years ago showed me the script and 
asked if I knew someone who would be right to direct it. I said, "How about 
me?" But I didn't want to do it right afterSideways because I didn't want to do 
a second road movie in a row, so I returned to it afterThe Descendants.

You grew up in Nebraska <https://www.theguardian.com/film/nebraska> and this 
is your fourth film set there [afterCitizen Ruth, Election and About Schmidt]. 
Is it a case of "film what you know"?

I like filming there. It's filming what I know but also filming what I don't 
know, because I don't know those rural areas very well. Other Americans know 
Nebraska as a place they either drive through or fly over, and if they happen 
to drive through it, they say, "Boy, that state is flat." Omaha, where I grew 
up, is the Paris of Nebraska.

Is it important for you to put Nebraska on the map?

No. I don't work for the chamber of commerce. Nobody thinks to ask Woody 
Allen, why do you shoot in New York? It's just where I'm from. I still live 
there half the time, and also it's kind of funny to shoot there.

The film is about a father and son's journey from Montana to Nebraska to claim 
prize money...

Some of my instruction to the actors was informed by the fact I have ageing 
parents who can drive me crazy but whom I must cater to, especially with 
regards to the dutiful son and how he conducts himself.

I've noticed that your characters often move in interesting ways. Jack 
Nicholson takes little shuffling steps inAbout Schmidt. George Clooney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/georgeclooney> has a goofy run in The 
Descendants, and Bruce Dern shambles around in this film. Do you pay particular 
attention to the way people walk?

I do. As dialogue-driven as my films may be, I'm only ever really thinking 
about silent comedy, and so I like to see figures in space and shoot them 
full-frame, as Chaplin was shot. I like a cinema of walk and gesture.

Would you have been at ease in the silent era?

The only thing that keeps me from wanting more to live in the past is our 
medicine – arthroscopic surgery and cancer drugs and everything like that. But 
to have been a director in the late teens and 20s in Hollywood: man, that would 
have been fun. It was one of those great cauldrons of creativity – we won't see 
the like of it again.

Was Nebraska always going to be black and white?

Yes.

How did the studio feel about that?

Oh, they were completely against it. Everyone was against it except me and the 
cinematographer. They actually put their foot down and I walked away from the 
project. The cost of it all was a highly shrink-wrapped budget.

What attracts you to the format?

Ninety per cent of the movies I watch are in black and white. It left cinema 
only for commercial reasons – it never left fine-art photography. I can't have 
a career as a film director and not make at least one black-and-white picture. 
My argument was: can you absolutely prove to me that fewer people sawManhattan, 
Raging Bull and Schindler's List because they were in black and white?

Road trips recur in your films. Have you been on any life-changing road trips?

I don't know about life-changing, but I drove from LA to Omaha just a few 
weeks ago. I made it in three days. Had I had the time, I would have stretched 
it to a week, but I had a diabetic cat on the back seat so I had to get on with 
it.

Which of your films do you get most compliments on?

Election [his 1999 comedy about a high-school election starring Reese 
Witherspoon].

More than Sideways?

Oh, yeah. From film people, it's always Election. Even my mother, she saw 
Nebraska and said, "Yeah, it's pretty good, but why can't you make one more like
Election?"

Did the urge to make movies come early?

The urge to be around them did. I didn't know I wanted to make them until a 
little bit later, but from the age of five I was head over heels in love with 
movies and watched everything. I've been a film buff since I was five.

Did you have a formative viewing experience?

Chaplin's Modern Times. Later, Buñuel was quite influential, and later again, 
Kurosawa.Seven Samurai is probably the film I've seen the most. It's between 
that andThe Good, the Bad and the Ugly and The Godfather Part II and 8½. Coming 
from Omaha, as the grandson of Greek immigrants, it was a distant dream to 
become a film director. I always had it in mind but I had to come to it slowly. 
After college I applied to film school, and when I got in, I knew I had to try 
it, even if I fell flat on my face. Then I found out that my love of watching 
films translated into a love of making them. And then I found I had just enough 
talent to be able to build on. Plus, I made comedies, and not a lot of people 
make comedies.

You strike me as a director who'd enjoy working with the same actors again and 
again, but you rarely do. Why not?

I would love to have a stock company, but I find that the parts don't lend 
themselves. The screenplay has to drive the boat.

You're quite rigorous about matching actor with part. George Clooney wanted to 
play Jack inSideways [played by Thomas Haden Church] and you turned him down.

It's all about the screenplay. I'm willing to take less money with which to 
make the film in order to have the proper casting, as I see it.

In Sideways, Paul Giamatti's character says some nasty things about merlot. 
After the film came out, US sales dropped by 2%. Did you get any feedback from 
disgruntled winemakers?

My only anecdote about that is a pleasant one. About a year after the film was 
released, I received in the mail a magnum of merlot from a winery in Napa 
called Trefethen, and the letter said: "DearAlexander Payne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alexander-payne>, I bet Miles and Jack never 
tried my merlot. Sincerely, Janet Trefethen." I like merlot. Château Pétrus is 
one of the greatest of all wines, and that's merlot. It was just a joke.

Do you read reviews of your films?

Sometimes. The smart ones.

Do you value film criticism and are you concerned about its decline?

I think if we want a better cinema we're all in it together. Roger Ebert said 
something lovely: a film critic is there to tell a film snob to go see a 
certain popular film, and to tell a popular audience to go see a certain 
rarefied film. Good critics help bring audiences to films. I work intuitively, 
so I might look to a critic to shed insight, to nudge me – this part was a 
little bit lazy or this part was good. Not that I have to take it, but a good 
idea can come from anywhere and a helpful word can keep me on the right track.

Are you able to switch off from work?

I can. I took a lovely six-week holiday this summer, my first actual summer 
holiday in years. I travelled around Europe. But you're always thinking about 
film, somehow – it's hard not to.

Nebraska <http://www.nebraskamovie.com/intl/uk/> is on general release in the 
UK from 6 December
 