
1802-1870

"The rape of history is allowed on the condition that you give her a child."

Birthplace

Villers-Cotterêts, 80km northeast of Paris

Education

He attended the local religious school.

Other jobs

As a teenager, Dumas found a job with a notary. As a young man, he worked in 
the offices of a future king of France, Louis-Philippe.

Did you know?

His last unfinished novel, The Knight of Sainte-Hermine, was published for the 
first time in June 2005 and became a runaway bestseller. It was pieced together 
by the world's leading authority on Dumas, Claude Schopp, who also wrote an 
ending from Dumas' notes.

Critical verdict

Frequently imitated but rarely surpassed, Dumas is a master of ripping yarns 
full of fearless heroes, poisonous ladies and swashbuckling adventurers. But 
his novels also grapple with weightier themes, such as the loss of youthful 
ideals (Twenty Years After) or whether vengeance can be justified (The Count of 
Monte Cristo).

His friend, Victor Hugo, said that Dumas "betters the human spirit with an 
undefinable light that is both happy and strong; he inspires the soul, the 
brain, the intelligence of men; he creates the thirst for reading and raises 
the human genius".

Dumas wrote plays, novels and short stories non-stop, mainly because he had 
massive debts to repay and a constant stream of children to support. He has 
often been dismissed as an author who wrote nothing but cheap pulp. Legions of 
his fans would beg to differ.

Recommended works

The Count of Monte Cristo is a wonderful tale of one man's revenge against 
three of his friends who landed him in jail for a crime he did not commit. It 
has everything a good epic should: a chilling plot, a tragic love story, and 
even ponderings on the meaning of God.

The Three Musketeers is a textbook adventure story, but its real strength lies 
in its description of how the three become four and the unswerving loyalty of 
the four friends. The sequel, Twenty Years After, combines the excitement of 
new adventures with a consideration of what age does to friendships and the 
realisation that youthful dreams are but illusions waiting to be shattered.

Influences

Romanticism, especially Byron, Walter Scott, Fenimore Cooper, and Goethe's 
Werther.

Now read on

Try Victor Hugo's The Hunchback of Notre Dame or Walter Scott's Ivanhoe for 
more historical adventuring. Or for something a little more contemporary, the 
Spanish writer Arturo Pérez-Reverte is a great admirer of Dumas, paying tribute 
to him in his thriller, The Dumas Club. Try some of his Dumas-inspired 
historical fiction, such as The Fencing Master or his bestselling series about 
a 17th-century Spanish D'Artagnan, Captain Alatriste.

Adaptations

Dumas' novels have made frequent appearances on the silver screen. The Three 
Musketeers alone has been adapted over 30 times, including some bizarre 
offerings, such as Zorro and The Three Musketeers (1963) and a couple of porn 
films.

One of the better films is Patrice Chéreau's La Reine Margot (1994), starring 
French cinema goddess Isabelle Adjani as the Catholic queen who is to be 
married to a Protestant king, the future Henri IV. For good old-fashioned 
adventure, you could try the 1948 version of The Three Musketeers, starring 
Gene Kelly as D'Artagnan and Lana Turner as Milady, or the 1973 adaptation 
starring Oliver Reed as Athos and Richard Chamberlain as Aramis.

Recommended biography

Claude Schopp's Alexandre Dumas: Genius of Life is the result of a lifetime 
devoted to the study of the French writer.

Useful links and work online

Work online
· Full text: The Count of Monte Cristo 
<http://www.online-literature.com/dumas/cristo/>
· Full text: The Man in the Iron Mask 
<http://www.online-literature.com/dumas/man_in_the_iron_mask/>
· Full text: The Three Musketeers 
<http://www.online-literature.com/dumas/threemusketeers/>

Background
· Société des Amis d'Alexandre Dumas 
<http://www.dumaspere.com/pages/english/societe/sommaire.html>
 