
The Guardian First Book Award has been won by academic Alexandra Harris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alexandra-harris> for her book Romantic 
Moderns, published by Thames & Hudson. Her book was selected as the winner by a 
celebrity judging panel, as well as by readers from five Waterstone's reading 
groups.

Guardian literary editor, Claire Armitstead, who chaired the judging panel, 
said: "At a time when universities are threatened as never before, Alexandra 
Harris's ground-breaking book is a reminder of how important higher education 
is to literature, and to culture as a whole, and how crucial it is that the 
finest young thinkers have the time and space to develop.

"I'm excited that the judges decided to make what one of them described as 
'counterintuitive decision' in choosing this book as the winner. Serious works 
of art history rarely win populist prizes, and often have trouble finding 
publishers at all. Yet the response from our Waterstone's reading groups, as 
well as from our central panel, showed that readers of all sorts are willing to 
engage with demanding books, if they are well written and beautifully produced. 
I know we will be hearing a lot more from Alexandra in the future."

Novelist and poet Adam Foulds, who was on the judging panel, said: "This book 
was my top choice. It's a brilliant piece of work that manages to be both 
comprehensive and coherent as it tells a compelling story about twentieth 
century English art and its preoccupation with place and particularity. As I 
read it, as well as learning a great deal, I had the sensation of lots of 
scattered things I was familiar with joining together and being illuminated in 
a new way. It is beautifully written and strikes me as a significant 
contribution to the history of English culture and one that people will read 
and return to. This book has a long life ahead of it."

Harris wins £10,000 and an advertising package in the Guardian and The 
Observer, and follows in the footsteps of Zadie Smith and Jonathan Safran Foer, 
two of the previous winners of the Award. Last year's award was won by Petina 
Gappah for her short story collection, An Elegy For Easterly.

-ends-

Notes to Editors:

The Guardian First Book Award is open to all first-time authors writing in 
English, or translated into English, across all genres. Established in 1999, 
the award aims to recognise and reward the finest new writing talent for an 
author's first book.

Waterstone's reading groups to help judge the longlist were set up from their 
branches in Oxford, Bath, Manchester, Covent Garden and Edinburgh.

The 2010 judging panel comprised of Claire Armitstead (Guardian literary 
editor), Adam Foulds (novelist and poet), Richard Holmes (biographer), Diana 
Quick (actress), Ekow Eshun (executive director of the Institute of 
Contemporary Arts), Katharine Viner (Guardian deputy editor) and Stuart Broom 
(representing the views of the five Waterstone's reading groups).

Synopsis: Romantic Moderns: English Writers, Artists and the Imagination from 
Virginia Woolf to John Piper

While the battles for modern art and society were being fought in France and 
Spain, it has seemed a betrayal that John Betjeman and John Piper were in love 
with a provincial world of old churches and tea-shops.

In this beautifully written book Alexandra Harris tells a different story. In 
the 1930s and 1940s, artists and writers explored what it meant to be alive in 
England. Eclectically, passionately, wittily, they showed that 'the modern' 
need not be at war with the past. Constructivists and conservatives could work 
together, and even the Bauhaus émigré, László Moholy-Nagy, was beguiled into 
taking photographs for Betjeman's nostalgic Oxford University Chest.

This modern English renaissance was shared by writers, painters, gardeners, 
architects, critics, tourists and composers. John Piper, Virginia Woolf, 
Florence White, Christopher Tunnard, Evelyn Waugh, E. M. Forster and the 
Sitwells are part of the story, along with Bill Brandt, Graham Sutherland, Eric 
Ravilious and Cecil Beaton.

Alexandra Harris 

Alexandra Harris was born in Sussex in 1981 and was educated at the University 
of Oxford and the Courtauld Institute, London. She is the editor (with Lara 
Feigel) of Modernism on Sea and is currently Lecturer in English at the 
University of Liverpool.

The other four books on the shortlist were:

Boxer, Beetle, by Ned Beauman (Sceptre)
Your Presence is Requested at Suvanto, by Maile Chapman (Jonathan Cape)
Black Mamba Boy, by Nadifa Mohamed (HarperCollins)
Being Wrong: Adventures in the Margin of Error, by Kathryn Schulz (Portobello 
Books)

For further information contact:

Hayley Dunlop, Press Office, 020 3353 3818 / 07879 430474

 