
His last opera explored the Lady Macbeth tendencies of female Botswana 
baboons, so it is almost an understatement to say that Alexander McCall Smith's 
next one is wildly different: a story based on surveyor of the Queen's 
paintings and spy, Anthony Blunt.

The writer revealed tantalising details of his new opera, at the Edinburgh 
international book festival <http://www.edbookfest.co.uk> on Thursday.

McCall Smith said he was writing the libretto of a work called Blunt, with Ben 
Macintyre, the writer and historian who this year published A Spy Among Friends 
– a portrait of Kim Philby.

"It is really exciting because there is so much in the story," said McCall 
Smith. "There is something for everybody; you've got friendship, loyalty, 
betrayal and a sense of horror when you realise that you've been supporting 
something that you thought was ideologically attractive before discovering it 
was tyranny."

The two men have written the first act, which includes a scene where Blunt has 
tea with the Queen Mother. Another character will be Margaret Thatcher – who 
revealed Blunt's treachery to parliament – to counter what was "a fairly male 
story", with the four central characters being the Cambridge Spies – Guy 
Burgess, Donald Maclean, Kim Philby and Blunt.

The composer Nigel Osborne is writing the music. "He has all the work to do, 
really," said McCall Smith. "The libretto is relatively straightforward, the 
composer has to compose screeds... and he's making progress."

McCall Smith said he hoped it would be completed next year. It could not be 
more different to his previous opera, The Okavango Macbeth – the tragedy as 
played out by a troop of baboons.

The 65-year-old writer is one of Britain's most prolific. This year he 
published a novel called The Forever Girl, which explores concepts of true love 
and following one's heart; a novella called Fatty O'Leary's Dinner Party, which 
tells the story of an overweight American's journey to Ireland; while The 
Handsome Man's De Luxe Cafe – the latest in his hugely popular No 1 Ladies' 
Detective Agency series – comes out next month.

He is also halfway through his next Isabel Dalhousie novel, part of his Sunday 
Philosophy Club series; while on the horizon is the next instalment of his 44 
Scotland Street series, which he thinks will be called The Revolving Door of 
Life.

McCall Smith said he had no plans to include much on the referendum. "I feel 
very strongly I shouldn't espouse any political position," he said. "It would 
be an abuse of my particular situation to use it to expound on my own private 
views."

The writer has kept his thoughts on the issue to himself, but he told the 
festival: "It is a very difficult issue for people in Scotland. It is a very 
sad situation that Scotland has become so divided; the message of these 
Scotland Street books and my other Scottish books is that it is possible to 
feel affection for Scotland."

Another project, which he finished last year, is a contemporary reworking of 
Jane Austen's Emma. He admitted that he took 30 seconds to say yes to it. "It 
was tremendous fun and I finished that book with a real sense of loss. It took 
me two months to write and I just absolutely lived in it and loved it."

McCall Smith is one of a number of recruits to HarperCollins's Austen project, 
with Joanna Trollope's Sense and Sensibility out last year. Val McDermid will 
tackle Northanger Abbey and Curtis Sittenfeld has Pride and Prejudice.

The modenised Emma is due out in November, and McCall Smith revealed a few 
details: the heroine is a Mini-driving student at the University of Bath, her 
father Mr Woodhouse worries about viruses as opposed to draughts, and that Mrs 
Goddard, mistress of a school for young ladies, is now teaching English as a 
foreign language in a disused airfield.

With so many characters, books and series on the go, had McCall Smith ever 
considered crossing characters over? "I've always resisted because fiction is 
enough of a suspension of disbelief," he said. "To take it even further by 
confusing fictional worlds is imposing on the credulity of readers."

It was a full house for the Edinburgh-based writer, one of 750 authors who 
will appear in 800 events over the 16-day festival staged in association with 
the Guardian.
 