
Supporters of the jailed former Metropolitan police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> commander, Ali Dizaei, 
claim he could be freed tomorrow when lawyers present fresh evidence to the 
court of appeal.

The 47-year-old was sacked from Scotland Yard and sentenced to four years in 
prison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/feb/08/ali-dizaei-guilty-metropolitan-politce>
 in February for corruption, after he was found guilty of attempting to frame a 
business acquaintance, Waad al-Baghdadi, when they fell out over money.

The new information, which his lawyers believe will persuade the judges to 
reconsider his case, is said to be related to the status of Baghdadi, who was 
the chief prosecution witness in the trial.

It is alleged that the website designer, who told the trial that he was 
assaulted by Dizaei, used an adopted Iraqi name and nationality when he 
appeared in court. Baghdadi could not be contacted for comment.

The Independent Police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Complaints 
Commission, which investigated the Dizaei case, insisted that it had been shown 
documents about Baghdadi's nationality and identity.

A spokesman added: "When investigating allegations that led to the conviction 
ofAli Dizaei <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ali-dizaei>, the IPCC reviewed the 
immigration checks conducted by the [police] when Mr Baghdadi was arrested. The 
[police] established that Mr Baghdadi had been granted the right of residence 
in this country. He also had a variety of official documentation in this name. 
Irrespective of the veracity of the allegations about Mr Baghdadi's identity, 
everybody has the right for a proportionate investigation to be conducted when 
they make an allegation of crime.

"In this case a jury listened to all the evidence, much of which was 
independent from both parties and included CCTV that corroborated Mr 
Baghdadi's, and found Ali Dizaei guilty. It is a matter for the court of appeal 
to consider the relevance of any information that maybe put before it."

On the "official Ali Dizaei support" website, his youngest son, Kourosh, said 
the "injustice" will be exposed. "We must understand that although Ali is and 
always has been in the right, that we cannot always expect what is due," the 
site says.

The court heard that the Iranian-born officer threatened, assaulted, falsely 
arrested and faked evidence against the younger man, who had built him a 
personal website. The two men clashed in the street after being caught on CCTV 
arguing at a Persian restaurant, Yas, in west London.

At the court of appeal hearing tomorrow, Dizaei will ask a panel of judges to 
reconsider his appeal against conviction and sentence. The move comes after a 
senior judge sitting alone ruled earlier this year that he had no grounds for 
an appeal.

The central plank of the appeal focuses on the evidence of Baghdadi. A second 
part examined the weight given to evidence by pathologist Dr Nathaniel Cary, 
who was employed by Dizaei's team to examine bruising on his body.

It is also claimed that Dizaei was not given enough time to consider papers 
served after prosecutors decided to treat waiter Ahmad Golizadeh as a hostile 
witness.

Dizaei has reportedly been attacked and covered in slop in jail, and has been 
moved several times for his own safety.

Stephen Fox, senior partner at Ralli solicitors, confirmed the appeal will be 
heard tomorrow.
 