
Ali Dizaei <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ali-dizaei>, the top Scotland Yard 
officer who was convicted and jailed for attempting to frame a man in a dispute 
about money, was today sacked from the force.

Commander Dizaei's 25-year police career formally came to an end when he was 
dismissed by the MetropolitanPolice <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> 
Authority (MPA).

In February Dizaei was jailed for four years and described as "a criminal in 
uniform" after being convicted of misconduct in public office and attempting to 
pervert the course of justice.

Speaking after today's decision to sack the 47-year-old, James Cleverly, the 
vice chairman of the MPA's professional standards cases sub-committee, said: 
"The tribunal recommended that the only appropriate sanction was dismissal from 
the service.

"The sub-committee has accepted the tribunal's recommendation and has 
dismissed Commander Dizaei from theMetropolitan police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> service with immediate 
effect."

It is unclear what will happen to Dizaei's pension. He is also facing 
expulsion from the National Black Police Association, of which he was once the 
president.

Dizaei was an outspoken critic of the police on race and a key figure in a 
race row that erupted at the top of Scotland Yard in the summer of 2008.

His lawyers have said they will appeal against his conviction and sentence.

A jury unanimously convicted him of falsely arresting the web designer Waad 
al-Baghdadi in a dispute over money and then lying in official statements in 
which he claimed he had been assaulted and threatened by him.

Dizaei tried to frame 24-year-old Baghdadi, who wanted the payment of £600 he 
was owed for building a website for the Scotland Yard commander, charting his 
career and media coverage of him.

Dizaei also faces a demand for £60,000 towards the cost of his trial, at which 
he denied all charges against him. His lawyers say he does not have the money.

Since being imprisoned, Dizaei – who was once tipped as a future chief 
constable – has reportedly been attacked by fellow inmates.
 