
A man who says a police chief tried to frame him in a row over money has 
denied being a liar, as he admitted using fake documents to get into Britain.

Waad al-Baghdadi claims that Commander Ali Dizaei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ali-dizaei> falsely arrested him in July 2008 
outside a west London restaurant.

In heated scenes at Southwark crown court on Tuesday, Baghdadi clashed with 
Dizaei's barrister, Stephen Riordan QC, prompting the judge to intervene.

Riordan said: "You are a liar aren't you?"

Baghdadi said: "No, of course not, I think you are a liar."

Later, Riordan said: "You are lying about everything in this case," which 
Baghdadi denied.

Baghdadi, 28, admitted under cross-examination that he and other family 
members came into the UK using false documents. Baghdadi admitted that a 
document he used gave a false date and place of birth. He said he continued to 
use these details until a year ago.

At one stage Baghdadi said he did not want to answer questions about his 
immigration status or give details of his family in Iran without a solicitor 
being present.

Mr Justice Saunders had to intervene repeatedly and told Baghdadi: "It is very 
important the jury can make up their own mind about who is telling the truth."

Baghdadi and the crown say Dizaei falsely framed Baghdadi for assaulting him 
because Baghdadi demanded £600 for a website built for the police chief.

As Baghdadi and Riordan clashed over his immigration status, the witness said: 
"May I ask how do you know all these details." He claimed Dizaei had used his 
influence to have Baghdadi branded in Iran as an MI5 spy and his family 
persecuted.

Baghdadi protested to the judge: "I've already been asked these questions by 
the Home Office. If he wants to ask these questions I want a solicitor present."

Saunders told him he had the right not to answer questions if they would lead 
him to incriminate himself. The judge said he understood that Baghdadi was not 
facing prosecution for using false details to gain entry into Britain.

Dizaei denies misconduct in public office and attempting to pervert the course 
of justice.

The trial continues.
 