
Ali Dizaei <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ali-dizaei> has been suspended from 
duty at Scotland Yard, just hours after he announced he had won his appeal 
against dismissal from the force.

The former police chief was sacked after being found guilty of corruption, but 
theconviction was quashed in May of this year. He faces a retrial on the 
charges early next year.

On Friday morning, Dizaei expressed his delight at his reinstatement by a home 
office panel but later on Friday afternoon, his employer, the MetropolitanPolice
 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Authority (MPA), having initially 
refused to comment, took the wind out of his sails by announcing that its 
professional standards cases sub-committee (PSCSC) had suspended Dizaei on full 
pay.

The MPA said the sub-committee met on Thursday and "after careful deliberation 
unanimously decided to suspend him". It said the decision was not formally 
notified to Dizaei until 4pm on Friday.

The former National Black Police Association president's return would have 
been an embarrassing prospect for Scotland Yard and the MPA. Confirming his 
reinstatement, before the announcement by the MPA, PBS Law, which represents 
Dizaei referred to his battles with the force and the MPA. It said: "Commander 
Dizaei has always maintained that his previous dismissal from the Metropolitan 
Police Force pending his criminal appeal was in haste and unfair.

"That appeal was heard in May of this year and resulted in the quashing of 
Commander Dizaei's criminal convictions.

"Commander Dizaei has ongoing proceedings in the employment tribunal against 
the Metropolitan Police Authority and a number of senior individuals in that 
organisation relating to the way in which Commander Dizaei has been treated 
over a substantial period of time."

Dizaei has also been a vocal critic of the Yard's record on race and some of 
his colleagues were said to have greeted his conviction last year by popping 
champagne corks

Before the sub-committee's decision was communicated to him, Dizaei said he 
was delighted by the decision to uphold his appeal, which was taken by the 
Police Appeals Tribunal (PAT) – whose members are appointed by the Home Office 
– on Wednesday.

The MPA said: "On 28 September 2011, the Police Appeals Tribunal (PAT), whose 
members are appointed by the Home Office, met to consider Dr Ali Dizaei's 
appeal against his dismissal from theMetropolitan police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> service.

"The PAT upheld his appeal against dismissal. On receipt of their decision on 
29 September, the Metropolitan Police Authority's professional standards cases 
sub-committee (PSCSC) immediately convened to consider the current status of 
outstanding matters concerning Commander Dizaei.

"On receipt of their decision on 29 September, the Metropolitan Police 
Authority's professional standards cases sub-committee (PSCSC) immediately 
convened to consider the current status of outstanding matters concerning 
Commander Dizaei.

"After careful deliberation the PSCSC unanimously decided to suspend him. 
Suspension is not a disciplinary sanction and it is emphasised that suspension 
should not be taken as a presumption of guilt. This has been approved by the 
IPCC in accordance with police regulations. Commander Dizaei was formally 
notified by the MPA at 4pm on Friday 30 September 2011."

Dizaei was jailed for four years in January 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/may/16/ali-dizaei-corruption-charges-dismissed>
 after a jury at Southwark crown court found that he had abused his position as 
a police officer and tried to frame a young web designer in a row over £600. 
Dizaei was dismissed from the police service in disgrace, ending a 25-year 
career. But in May this year, the court of appeal quashed the conviction after 
new evidence was presented.
 