
The Metropolitan police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> 
commander Ali Dizaei was jailed for four years today after being convicted of 
falsely arresting a man and making up an account that he had been assaulted and 
threatened.

A jury at Southwark crown court today found the 47-year-old guilty of 
misconduct in public office and attempting to pervert the course of justice. 
Dizaei, a controversial and high-profile officer, faces being sacked from the 
force in disgrace.

The jury took two hours and 31 minutes to reach its unanimous verdicts. As the 
verdict was announced, Dizaei, once tipped as a future commissioner of the 
Metropolitan police, stood motionless in the dock. He stared in the direction 
of the jury. They did not glance back.

In between the verdict and sentencing Dizaei was able to leave the dock to hug 
and kiss his wife, Shy. The offences he has been convicted of carry a maximum 
of life imprisonment.

The case was investigated by the Independent Police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Complaints Commission (IPCC). After the 
verdict its chair, Nick Hardwick, branded Dizaei a "criminal in uniform" who 
had behaved like a "bully".

Dizaei is president of the National Black Police Association and was suspended 
over the incident in September 2008 at the height of a race row that convulsed 
the force.

The trial was the second time in seven years Dizaei had faced criminal 
charges. In 2003 he was cleared by a jury and later returned to duty. He is 
believed to be the most senior officer in recent times to stand trial.

The crown said Dizaei was involved in the "wholesale abuse" of his powers by 
bullying, threatening and intimidating a man in the culmination of a personal 
vendetta. He was charged with threatening and falsely arresting Waad 
al-Baghdadi, who said Dizaei had failed to pay him money owed for a website he 
designed for the officer.

The crown said that the £600 Dizaei allegedly failed to pay Baghdadi led to 
months of rising tension, which spilled over into verbal and physical clashes 
outside a west London restaurant in July 2008.

Peter Wright QC told the jury that Dizaei was on trial for falsely claiming 
that Baghdadi had made threatening gestures and assaulted him.

Dizaei arrested Baghdadi and called 999 for help. He maintained his account to 
officers at the scene and after Baghdadi was in custody by making verbal and 
written statements, the court heard.

Wright said the senior police officer's account was contradicted by a 
recording of a 999 call Baghdadi made to police, during which Dizaei arrested 
him.

Wright told the jury: "These are allegations, we say, that involve the 
wholesale abuse of power by a senior police officer for entirely personal and 
oblique motives."

Dizaei said Baghdadi had made threatening gestures towards him and he decided 
to arrest him for a public order offence. The officer said his wife was left 
terrified by the verbal tirade and threats from Baghdadi.

Dizaei claimed that during the arrest he was poked or stabbed in the stomach 
with an object that he believed to be the top of a shisha pipe. There was a 
struggle as he tried to handcuff Baghdadi.

A forensic medical examiner later concluded Dizaei's injuries were not 
consistent with being stabbed by a shisha pipe but were more likely to be 
"self-inflicted". However, an accredited Home Office pathologist challenged 
that finding and said it was based on a "fundamentally flawed approach".

The crown claimed that during the arrest Dizaei threatened Baghdadi, saying: 
"I'll fuck your life … You think I don't know what you do in London … I'll find 
every single detail of your life in London."

Hardwick said: "When Mr al-Baghdadi tried to get Commander Dizaei to pay him 
the money he owed him, Dizaei assaulted and then arrested him. He went on to 
lie about what had happened and, if he had been successful, Mr al-Baghdadi may 
have been sent to prison.

"Dizaei behaved like a bully and the only way to deal with bullies is to stand 
up to them. Mr al-Baghdadi has shown tremendous strength of character 
throughout this case ‑ from the moment he was confronted byAli Dizaei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ali-dizaei>, throughout our investigation, and 
finally when giving evidence at court. We are grateful for the confidence he 
placed in the IPCC and, as a result of that, justice has been done today.

"The greatest threat to the reputation of the police service is criminals in 
uniform like Dizaei."
 