
The court of appeal has quashed the conviction of a former police chief who 
was found guilty by a jury of framing a man.

Former Scotland Yard commander Ali Dizaei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ali-dizaei> was jailed for four years in 
February 2010 for abusing his office after a row in a London street with Waad 
al-Baghdadi, who was the main prosecution witness.

The court of appeal has ordered a retrial.

Lawyers for Dizaei told the court of appeal the conviction was no longer safe 
because Baghdadi had lied to secure thousands of pounds of benefits, as well as 
in his court evidence.

On Monday appeal court judges decided the conviction was unsafe.

Dizaei's 25-year police career ended after his conviction, when he was drummed 
out of the Metropolitan police in disgrace.

The appeal court heard Baghdadi had lied to the pension and benefits 
departments to pretend his father was alive so he could collect his £100-a-week 
pension, plus an allowance for caring for him. Thousands of pounds in benefits 
went into bank accounts controlled by Baghdadi, said Michael Mansfield QC, 
representing Dizaei.

The fraud went on long after his father's death in March 2006, and he was 
still claiming up until February this year.

Lord Justice Hughes, after hearing the evidence, declared on the first day of 
the hearing: "There is a clear prima facie case of benefit fraud."

Baghdadi was arrested by police on 6 March and bailed until May.

In all, Baghdadi claimed £18,000 from an attendance allowance for his dead 
father, a carer's allowance and a pension, as well as income support. There was 
also an application to the social fund for a loan bearing the signature of his 
dead father, the court heard.

Mansfield alleged Baghdadi had lied to get into Britain, falsely claiming he 
was fleeing persecution in Iraq. In fact, he had been born and raised in Iran. 
This falsehood was also told by Baghdadi at the original trial of Dizaei, where 
his accuser had also wrongly stated his name and age, as well as his 
nationality.

Some of the fraud, said Mansfield, was ongoing at the time of the 2008 clash 
with Dizaei and at the time of the trial, where the jury were told nothing of 
the alleged fraud and Baghdadi was presented as a witness of truth.

Mansfield said the evidence showed Baghdadi was capable of a "pattern of 
persistent and elaborate deceit" and in recent police interviews had still not 
been telling the truth.

Hughes, after accepting the "clear prima facie case he [Baghdadi] is a 
fraudster", told Mansfield he would have to show how this made the jury's 
decision to believe Baghdadi's evidence over Dizaei's testimony unsafe. "It's 
all very well showing this man is a fraudster, how does it affect the 
conviction?" Hughes asked.

Mansfield replied: "It impacts on the safety of the conviction quite 
dramatically," adding that Baghdadi had been pivotal to the conviction.

The crown argued that much of the material about Baghdadi's benefit claims may 
have been known by Dizaei at the time of the trial and thus did not count as 
new evidence, which is needed to overturn the jury's verdict in the original 
trial.

Dizaei, a former leader of the National Black Police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Association, was an outspoken critic of 
the police on race and a key figure in a racism row that erupted at the top of 
Scotland Yard in 2008.

Dizaei was convicted of falsely arresting Baghdadi in a dispute over money and 
then lying in official statements, claiming he had been assaulted and 
threatened by Baghdadi.

The crown alleged that on 18 July 2008, Dizaei clashed with 24-year-old 
Baghdadi, who claimed the police commander owed him £600 for a website he had 
designed.

In 2003 Dizaei was cleared of criminal charges after a massive covert 
operation against him by his own force. He returned to the Metropolitan police 
after that acquittal, but few if any leaders in the force want Dizaei, who has 
been a constant thorn in their side, to return.
 