
The witness whose evidence convicted former Scotland Yard commander Ali Dizaei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ali-dizaei> is a fraudster, an appeal court 
judge has said.

Dizaei is appealing against his conviction for assaulting Waad al-Baghdadi, 
25, in a row over money outside aLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> 
restaurant, and then trying to frame him. Lawyers for Dizaei told the court of 
appeal the conviction last year was no longer safe because Baghdadi had lied to 
secure thousands of pounds of benefits, as well as in his court evidence.

The court heard Baghdadi lied to the pension and benefits officials to pretend 
his father was alive and collect his £100 a week pension, plus an allowance for 
caring for him long after he had died. Thousands of pounds in benefits went 
into bank accounts controlled by Baghdadi, said Michael Mansfield QC, 
representing Dizaei. The fraud went on after his father's death in 2006 until 
six weeks ago, in February this year. Baghdadi was arrested over the fraud on 6 
March, and bailed until May.

In all Baghdadi claimed £18,000 from an attendance allowance for his dead 
father, a carer's allowance, and a pension as well as income support. There was 
also an application to the social fund for a loan bearing the signature of his 
dead father, the court heard.

Mansfield also alleged Baghdadi had lied to get into Britain, claiming he was 
fleeing persecution from Iraq when he had been born and raised in Iran, and 
this falsehood had been repeated by Baghdadi at the trial of Dizaei, where his 
accuser had also wrongly stated his real name, age, as well as his nationality.

Some of the fraud, said Mansfield, was continuing at the time of the 2008 
clash with Dizaei and at the time of the trial where Baghdadi was presented as 
a witness of truth.

Mansfield said the evidence showed He was capable of a "pattern of persistent 
and elaborate deceit" and in recent police interviews was still not telling the 
truth.

Lord Justice Hughes said he accepted there was the "clear prima facie case he 
is a fraudster", but told Mansfield he had to show how this made unsafe the 
jury's decision to believe his evidence over Dizaei's: "It's all very well 
showing this man is a fraudster, how does it effect the conviction?" Mansfield 
replied that Baghdadi had been "pivotal" to the conviction.

The crown will argue that much of the material about Baghdadi's benefit claims 
may have been known by Dizaei at the time of the trial and thus not count as 
new evidence, needed to overturn the verdict in the original trial.

Peter Wright QC also said that, if the jury been told the evidence about 
Baghdadi's benefits claims, the crown would have applied to have the jury hear 
claims that Dizaei was not of good character. Wright said that evidence would 
have been produced of threatening messages Dizaei had left on the answerphone 
of a one time lover, which the crown would claim showed he had previously used 
his position to threaten someone during a row, and also his volatile temper.

Dizaei was an outspoken critic of the police on race, a former leader of the 
National BlackPolice <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Association, and a 
figure in a racism row that erupted at the top of Scotland Yard in summer 2008.

Dizaei's 25-year police career ended after his conviction and jailing for four 
years, with him being drummed out of the Metropolitan police in disgrace.

Dizaei was convicted of falsely arresting Baghdadi in a dispute over money and 
then lying in official statements, claiming he had been assaulted and 
threatened by Baghdadi.

The crown alleged that on 18 July 2008, Dizaei clashed with 24-year-old 
Baghdadi, who claimed the police commander owed him £600 for a website he had 
designed.

The hearing continues.
 