
A man who says he was framed by a police chief is a benefits fraudster who 
falsely claimed £27,000, a jury has heard.

Waad al-Baghdadi was released last Friday from prison after serving a sentence 
for fraud which saw him use the name of his dead father to claim benefits.

Baghdadi says that in July 2008 the Metropolitan police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> commander Ali Dizaei 
falsely arrested him in a row over money. Dizaei denies the charges.

Baghdadi told Southwark crown court on Wednesday that he regretted the benefit 
fraud, but objected to being asked about it in detail by Dizaei's barrister, 
Stephen Riordan QC. The jury heard Baghdadi was jailed for the fraud in 
September 2011, and received an eight-month sentence. The court heard he was 
released from prison last Friday. The jury have been told this is a retrial and 
heard in the first trial Baghdadi gave false personal details.

He gave the wrong details about his place of birth and age, including to the 
trial judge. Baghdadi said he did not realise it could make a difference: "I 
apologise if that was a lie. I did not mean to lie."

The judge in this trial, Mr Justice Saunders, often intervened to press 
Baghdadi to answer questions. He also told Baghdadi that he had the right not 
to incriminate himself as "to tell deliberate lies on oath is a criminal 
offence". Baghdadi accused the defence of "character assassination" and making 
a big deal out of the false personal details he had given in the first trial.

The jury heard that Baghdadi continued to receive carer's allowance for his 
father after his death, and switched the payments to an account which he used: 
"I'm really not proud of this. I'm ashamed of it," Baghdadi said. He claimed to 
have had respect for Dizaei but said the police chief had changed into a 
"devil".

Baghdadi and the Crown say Dizaei falsely framed Baghdadi for assaulting him, 
because Baghdadi demanded £600 for a website built for the police chief.

Dizaei denies misconduct in public office and attempting to pervert the course 
of justice.

The trial continues.
 