
There are many things you can do on a soundstage at Shepperton Studios, but 
some settings are impossible to recreate. So it was that 23-year-oldAlicia 
Vikander <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alicia-vikander>, one of the most 
exciting actresses in Europe right now, found herself bound for St Petersburg 
with a small crew, including her co-star Domhnall Gleeson. From there, they 
travelled deep into barely charted Russia: nine hours north by train, then five 
hours on a bus without heating and finally a hovercraft for a couple of hours 
over the ice. There are times when acting can be just about the most glamorous 
gig on Earth; this was not one of them.

"It was 40 below, we didn't have hot water for five days and slept in a cabin, 
on a bench," Vikander recalls. "On our call sheets it actually said: 'Beware of 
wolves. They are known to attack lone humans.' We saw a wolf one time, and a 
bear, but there were some very tough Russian security guys who came along."

Yet Vikander seems to have found the experience amusing more than terrifying. 
"It was one of the most fantastic adventures I've ever had in my life," she 
giggles. "But I don't need to do it twice."

Vikander is big on first experiences at the moment and Anna Karenina marks her 
debut in English-language cinema. She trained as a dancer with the Royal 
Swedish Ballet and only turned to acting in her late teens after suffering from 
niggles in her feet and back. Her first lead role, as a stalker in 2010'sPure, 
won her a Golden Beetle (better known in Sweden as a prestigious Guldbagge 
award).

It was this performance – which is wild and wonderfully unhinged – that 
brought her to the attention ofAnna Karenina's casting department. They 
suggested that Vikander might like to meet directorJoe Wright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/joe-wright> for lunch some time to talk about 
the film. "I booked a ticket for two days later," Vikander says, smiling. "Then 
I called them and said, 'Oh, now I'm in London we can have that lunch.'"

Wright decided that Vikander would be perfect for Kitty, who is initially 
besotted with Count Vronsky (Aaron Johnson) before slowly, after some public 
humiliation, coming round to the dependable charms of Levin (Gleeson). The 
director's only concern was whether Vikander could nail the British accent – he 
needn't have worried. The actress gives a moving and deftly economical 
portrayal that calls to mind the breakthrough roles of previous Wright muses 
Keira Knightley and Carey Mulligan.

A bigger challenge for Vikander was reassessing a book about which she had 
mixed feelings when she first studied it, aged 15. "I was very judgmental about 
the women characters, particularly Anna and Kitty," she says. "I looked down on 
Anna because of all the wrong things she did, and I thought Kitty was this 
young, naïve girl who didn't stand up for herself. I had to have more 
experience in life and now I understand every decision and the things they gave 
up or fought for."

One final peal of laughter: "I thought I knew everything when I was 15 and I 
probably didn't."
 