
Alisher Usmanov <https://www.theguardian.com/business/alisher-usmanov> said at 
the weekend that he does not want to be on the board of a "trophyless" club. 
Perhaps that is because he knows he does not need to be on the board in order 
to know Arsenal's financial operations in as much detail as any director.

The Russian billionaire has built his stake in the north London club to almost 
28.5% in recent days, after putting out an open offer of £14,000 a share. That 
exceeds the £11,750 a share that Stan Kroenke paid to take his holding to 
66.64%, with an offer that closed on Saturday. If Usmanov's offer takes his 
stake beyond 30%, he will under Premier League rules have the same access to 
management accounts as any director. And that will mean seeing the wages paid 
to Cesc Fábregas, Robin van Persie and every otherArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> player.

When the Premier League rules were written it is unlikely that an intended 
consequence was to open such access to accounts to minority shareholders whose 
relationship with their club's owner might be described as strained at best.

However, it is clear that Usmanov will be able to use the rules to gain more 
insight into the workings of the club than any other fan. The rules state that 
anyone with a stake of more than 30% is considered to exercise "control" over a 
club's policies, affairs or management. This confers the right to have access 
to "brief particulars of each material transaction sufficient to identify its 
date, its amount and nature". These "material transactions" include all 
transfer fees, player remuneration and payments to agents and other 
third parties.

Usmanov is said to believe that by taking his stake above 30% he can "make 
sure things are done properly".

Hard road for Stortford

As an aftershock of the catastrophe at Rushden & Diamonds, the 137-year-old 
Bishop's Stortford club has been placed in peril. Diamonds' expulsion from the 
Conference means that Bishop's Stortford have been forced to switch to the 
Conference North. Next season will therefore entail the Blues taking total road 
trips of 6,800 miles, up from 4,052 last season, with several journeys 
requiring overnight stays. Gates will be hit, as derbies against Chelmsford 
City, Dover Athletic and Dartford – who each bring between 200 and 300 fans – 
will not take place. Players will also expect more money, to compensate for 
time off work. "We are run so tight on the lines in the Conference South that 
this could tip us over the edge," said the club's football secretary, Ian 
Ketteridge, who has, understandably, lodged an appeal with the Football 
Association and the Conference. If the Blues do relocate, the northernmost club 
in the Conference South will be Boreham Wood. They are inside the M25, so 
English Football's north-south divide will begin in Watford, rather than 
Watford Gap.

EA Sports stays in the game

EA Sports, the computer-software developer behind the football games in the 
Fifa series that have done more than anything else to turn football's world 
governing body into a household name, appears to be standing by the embattled 
governing body. Senior EA Sports executives have in the past privately 
expressed their discomfiture regarding the activities of certain Fifa 
executive-committee members, but although several such members have now been 
banned from Fifa, this has not translated into EA Sports deciding to dump the 
Fifa brand in order to protect its own image. As EA Sports is so proud to say, 
it's in the game.

Lamb in for Sheepshanks

Keith Lamb, the long-serving Middlesbrough chief executive, will replace David 
Sheepshanks on the Football Association board, to which Barnet's Tony 
Kleanthous has been re-elected for a three-year term. Lamb will be the Football 
League's representative on the board, after the decision was reached at the 
League's summer conference in Cyprus. Blackpool's Karl Oyston, Shaun Harvey of 
Leeds United and Colin Sexton of Bristol City will be challenged by a newcomer, 
meanwhile, to be the Championship representative on the League board. Leonard 
Brody is a 40-year-old entrepreneur from Canada who became a Coventry City 
director last November. But Digger gets the feeling his relentlessly upbeat 
style – as evidenced by his use of Twitter on Tuesday regarding a 
venture-capital exercise he is promoting: "Yo... Deadline for GrowLab coming up 
fast. Bring your A game" – might prove to be a little too out there for some of 
the League's dustier citizens.
 