
Alisher Usmanov <https://www.theguardian.com/business/alisher-usmanov> is the 
second-richest man in Britain and the second-largest shareholder in Arsenal 
football club. But when it comes to colourful tales, there are few who can bump 
the oligarch from a leading ranking.

The Uzbekistan-born metals tycoon was back in the news last week as MegaFon, 
the Russian telecoms firm in which he is the largest shareholder, said it was 
to become the latest company emerging from the old Soviet Union to list on the
London Stock Exchange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/londonstockexchangegroup>.

It was not an easy birth. The investment bank Goldman Sachs withdrew from the 
listing: with sources close to the telecoms group stating that the bank felt it 
had not been given enough time to conduct its due diligence. Meanwhile, USM 
Holdings, the umbrella structure used by Usmanov to control a majority stake in 
MegaFon, responded to investor concerns by stressing that the oligarch – rather 
than his two USM partners Vladimir Skoch and co-shareholder in Arsenal, Farhad 
Moshiri – would control all the voting rights.

Usmanov's effective 25% stake in the business is worth about £2bn but 
everybody in the City already knew before last week that he was exceptionally 
wealthy. Instead, a more titillating fact drew at least as much attention, 
after it emerged that the oligarch's PR representatives had been secretly 
refining his online image by removing details of his past onthe online 
encyclopedia Wikipedia <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alisher_Usmanov>.

The PR company was Finsbury, which is run by one of London's best-known 
spinners, Roland Rudd, and it quickly apologised for making the changes, 
admitting they were "not done in the proper manner nor was this approach 
authorised by Mr Usmanov". But the events merely served to reignite previous 
intrigue over its client's history: meaning that the flotation salesmen not 
only had to field the usual questions of valuation and whether foreign 
companies should be encouraged to list a small proportion of their shares in 
London, but also ones about the largest shareholder's history.

Precise details about Usmanov's past have always been difficult to nail down, 
but it is not disputed that he spent six years in an Uzbek prison from 1980. 
Usmanov has consistently maintained his conviction for corruption, fraud and 
the theft of state property was politically motivated because his family 
opposed the corrupt local communist regime. He has providedthe Observer with 
documents detailing how it was expunged in 1989 and that the Uzbekistan supreme 
court then quashed the conviction in 2000. Rivals still question the 
independence of the country's judicial system.

There is some evidence that Usmanov could have been the victim of a fit-up – 
for example, a former jailer once told corporate investigators probing 
Usmanov's background that the oligarch was "convicted unlawfully".

However, his enemies relay stories of Usmanov's closeness to Uzbekistan 
president Islam Karimov – although Usmanov denies he has any relationship with 
the head of state and says he only knows one of his daughters – while he is 
also routinely asked about his relationship with Gafur Rakhimov, who he admits 
knowing, but denies any close connection to or ever having done any business 
with.

"He knew Gafur Rakhimov as a neighbour of Mr Usmanov's parents," a spokeswoman 
for Usmanov said. "There is a culture in Uzbekistan to show respect and 
politeness to your neighbours."

These are all questions which Usmanov's spokespeople would have hoped not to 
have to answer again – or at least not so frequently again – instead looking to 
concentrate on selling the tycoon's latest business story. But with the 
emergence of details of how advisers unilaterally tweaked Wikipedia, the 
questions were always likely to resurface and confuse the sales pitch.

That sale should include Usmanov and the company's second largest investor, 
the Swedish telecom group TeliaSonera, offloading about 15% of MegaFon shares – 
not enough of a sale to qualify for the FTSE 100, as not enough "free floating" 
shares will be available in the wider market. But it will still be enough to 
potentially raise between $1.7bn and $2.1bn and give those investors with an 
appetite for emerging markets a slice of the Russian telecoms space – and value 
the business at between $11.2bn and $14bn. Now that the company structure has 
been approved by regulators, it is just left to investors to decide what price 
they are willing to pay.

Certainly, Russian telecoms looks like a reasonably sellable investment 
opportunity and MegaFon has a decent slice of it with 63m customers – more than 
a quarter of the market.

There is also a growth story as the market moves from voice to data as 
Russians increasingly use phones to surf websites – websites that include, no 
doubt, Wikipedia.

• This article was amended on 29 January 2013 to remove an incorrect reference 
to Gafur Rakhimov.
 