
Judging by their work alone, Alistair Beaton and Anthony Neilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/anthonyneilson> have little in common. Both 
are known as rebels, but the means by which they have secured these reputations 
could not be more different. As a writer, Beaton has spent the past decade 
skewering New Labour in a string of neat political satires for theatre (notably 
2001's Feelgood, a debunking of spin set during a Labour party conference) and 
television, delving into the affair between David Blunkett and Kimberly Quinn 
in A Very Social Secretary (2005), and attacking the former prime minister's 
post-Iraq legacy in The Trial of Tony Blair (2007).

Meanwhile, writer-director Neilson has been challenging, even antagonising, 
theatre audiences with his disturbing forays into the human psyche. He is 
notorious for his 2002 play Stitching, in which a couple grieving the death of 
their baby unravel, anticipating Lars von Trier's film Antichrist with its 
scene of female genital mutilation. Even when he's in a light mood, Neilson 
can't help being controversial: witness the song-and-dance routine in his 2005 
show Realism, in which the main character chanted the line "what a bunch of 
cunts" while black-and-white minstrels tap-danced around him.

Although they knew each other's work in passing, the two men might never have 
crossed paths. So how did they come to work together on Caledonia, the 
centrepiece of this year's Edinburgh international festival? It's all down to 
Vicky Featherstone, artistic director of the NationalTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> of Scotland. Featherstone was 
attracted to Beaton because "I've always been fascinated by the notion of a 
political satirist. A lot of playwrights wouldn't profess to be that, but 
Alistair nails those colours to the mast." When she commissioned Beaton some 15 
months ago, the playwright assumed he would deliver a modern political play. 
What interested him was Scottish nationalism and banking – and there was plenty 
in the news to inspire him. At the time, the Royal Bank of Scotland was 
scrabbling back from the brink of collapse, while its former chairman, Fred 
Goodwin, was under attack for netting a £700,000 pension.

But then Beaton spotted a brief reference in a newspaper to Darién – the 
region of Panama in which Scotland attempted to establish a colony in the 
1690s. Here, he discovered, was the perfect story about Scottish nationalism 
and banking. William Paterson, the man responsible for plotting the colony, was 
a Scot who had returned to his homeland after establishing the Bank of England. 
He persuaded his countrymen to invest half the nation's wealth in the venture. 
When it failed, and Scotland was almost bankrupted, Paterson lent his support 
to the 1707 Act of Union with England. It isn't a story many Scots know, Beaton 
says. "It being a Scottish disaster, it's not much taught in schools."

So that accounts for Beaton. What about Neilson? Hiring him as Caledonia's 
director seems counter-intuitive, but for Featherstone it made perfect sense. 
"Anthony demands that theatre is modern," she says. "A different kind of 
director might allow Caledonia to exist purely within its setting – Anthony 
will set it within a modern context." And while she acknowledges that they are 
"incredibly different" people, she also points out some telling similarities: 
not least, that they are "both Scots who are passionate about being Scottish, 
yet who chose to live elsewhere". Beaton, 62, is from Glasgow; Neilson, 43, is 
from Edinburgh. Both moved to London when they were in their 20s. Leaving, 
Featherstone thinks, has given them "a distance and a perspective on Scotland 
that makes them an interesting match".

It's hard to work out how united they are when it comes to Caledonia; on every 
level, their approach seems to be different. For Beaton, the play is "full of 
echoes of modernity. This happened in the early days of modern capitalism: it's 
the beginning of everything that we live with today. A little country deciding 
to be a big, rich country overnight: what does that remind you of? I hear the 
word Iceland." What interests Neilson is the story's mythic aspect. He sees 
Paterson as a version of Icarus. "He has this vision of how trade could 
transform the world and lift the poor out of poverty – yet because of his 
short-sightedness, his ambition exceeding his grasp, and interference by vested 
interests, he brings his country down. I love that kind of mythical narrative."

Rip it up and start again

The pair definitely have one thing in common, Beaton says – "a desire to take 
a serious subject and, without patronising the audience, make it accessible, 
entertaining and theatrical. It is essentially a fruitful union, but at times 
we both have to struggle to make it work." Part of that struggle, he thinks, 
comes down to the fact that Neilson is himself a playwright. On the plus side, 
the director's perceptive script advice and "heavy prodding" has changed the 
play for the better: for instance, by encouraging Beaton to transform extracts 
from journals documenting the Darién expedition into "a proper bit of drama". 
On the down side, Beaton says: "Anthony likes to think he wrote it himself."

Writing in advance, however, isn't Neilson's style. He prefers to start 
rehearsals with little more than an idea, and will produce and edit text on a 
daily basis right up until a play opens. Working on someone else's script, he 
says: "I try to create the same conditions of spontaneity."

You wonder what this means for Beaton. Neilson isn't like any director he has 
worked with before: "He explores more on the rehearsal room floor than I'm used 
to." While Beaton is in a meeting, Neilson sets to work on Caledonia's opening 
scene, in which Paterson – played by a wiry, riveting Paul Higgins (best known 
as the foul-mouthed Jamie in The Thick of It) – and an innkeeper plan a lavish 
dinner for a group of Scottish MPs. Neilson runs through it twice, pacing back 
and forth in front of the actors, squinting and scowling as he assesses the 
scene's shape and sound. Then he makes them do it again, only this time adding 
a third character as a comic foil. It instantly livens up the scene – but it 
isn't what's on the page. When Beaton enters the rehearsal room, he can't 
immediately see the point of the change. You sense he's going to have to accept 
it.

Beaton say he has come to appreciate Neilson's more fluid approach. "Anthony 
is more visual than me. He has a way of moving scenes around, of taking them 
somewhere else. My first reaction is horror, but my second reaction is: That's 
really interesting – it opens the play up in a way I would never have thought 
of." The ultimate aim, Neilson says, "is something that neither of us could 
have made individually".

The story of Caledonia isn't one that Neilson would have thought to write 
himself, which he likes. It's quite different from the Scottish satire he 
produced in 1999: a film called The Debt Collector, in which Billy Connolly 
plays a former gangster struggling to change his ways, but who ends up stabbing 
his nemesis underneath Edinburgh Castle to the strains of the Tattoo. "I 
thought it was a fairly explicit satire about the character of Scotland, the 
sense of grievance and the macho culture," says Neilson. "But everybody else 
just saw it as a violent gangster movie."

Neilson still has family and friends in Edinburgh, but says he feels 
disconnected from Scotland, having lived in London for two decades. Even when 
he was growing up, he felt he didn't fit in. "I was odd, because I was the 
child of people who worked in the theatre, so I was culturally middle class. 
However, because they worked in the theatre they were broke all the time, so 
economically we were possibly worse off than the working class. You were 
slightly shunned or vilified by either side."

A rich tradition of miserabilism

Neilson doesn't like to be described as a Scottish playwright, preferring to 
think of himself as European – an attitude Beaton shares. For Beaton, though, 
feeling European "takes you back to 18th-century Scotland, and the Scottish 
Enlightenment, when Scotland was a vibrant and important intellectual centre in 
Europe". Despite his suspicion of nationalism ("The idea of saying you're proud 
to be English or proud to be Scots strikes me as weird: it's just an accident 
of birth"), Beaton can't help betraying a certain pride in his heritage.

He shares Neilson's glee in puncturing the hubris of 1690s Scotland. What 
amused Neilson most about the Darién story, he says, was the "great optimism" 
of everyone who invested in the putative colony, compared with the "rather 
miserabilist culture of Scotland nowadays. I thought, God, maybe this is 
somehow the root of our general despondency." He is toying with the idea of 
playing Ally's Tartan Army, the novelty song that led Scotland's football team 
into the 1978 World Cup, at the end of the show. "That was the next time we got 
optimistic," he says, "and that went to shit as well."
 