
Alisher Usmanov <https://www.theguardian.com/business/alisher-usmanov>, the 
Uzbek billionaire and Arsenal shareholder, has laid the blame for the team's 
failure to win any trophies in the last six seasons at the door of the club's 
board.

The 57-year-old, who is not an Arsenal director even though he owns almost 30% 
ofArsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> Holdings, believes 
self-interest among the board members is stymieing the club's chances of 
on-field success.

Usmanov also said that there would need to be a switch in emphasis if he is to 
end up on the board. He told the News of the World: "If the role of a board 
member is to oversee a trophyless period while making significant personal 
profits and asking fans to pay inflation-busting ticket price increases then, 
no, I would not want to be on the board.

"If instead it is to try to deliver sustained success, to increase your 
personal investment in the club, to help develop the commercial position and to 
ensure the fans have a say in the running of the club then, yes, I think I 
certainly have something to contribute.

"In terms of doing things differently, let me give you a very clear example. 
Arsenal has all of its major commercial contracts coming up for renewal in the 
next couple of years. It's no secret that to maximise the value of those you 
want to have success on the field and be winning trophies. To do that you need 
to invest now in building a winning team. This is simple commercial logic. 
Whether it comes to pass, we shall see."

Arsenal's season collapsed following their Carling Cup final defeat to 
Birmingham in February, with their challenges in the Champions League, FA Cup 
and Premier League all crumbling.

Usmanov is of the opinion that the manager Arsène Wenger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsene-wenger> needs to be given the 
financial backing to bring in experienced players to complement the talented 
young players they have.

"There is a widely-held view among most commentators – and one that I agree 
with – that the club needs to stiffen the defensive spine of the team, with a 
dominant keeper, strong centre-halves and a powerful defensive midfielder in 
the mould of Claude Makelele," he said.

"The Premier League is one of the most competitive in the world and whilst we 
have consistently challenged for honours, the club needs to develop talent and 
buy top-class players. This requires greater investment which, I believe, has 
been lacking thus far.

"What, however, is not clear is whether the board shares this view. For too 
long they have seemed happy to sanction second, third and fourth as being 
acceptable, whilst at the same time they are planning to sell their shares."
 