
The underlying tensions within Arsenal's ownership structure have resurfaced 
as time ticks down towards the transfer deadline after the major shareholder,
Alisher Usmanov <https://www.theguardian.com/business/alisher-usmanov>, claimed 
the board's lack of spending and inability to hang on to the club's best 
players have effectively rendered them a feeder team for their rivals.

Usmanov, who owns just under 30% of Arsenal, has regularly expressed his 
frustrations at the running of the club by the majority shareholder, Stan 
Kroenke, and offered his latest outburst in an interview with L'Equipe.Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> have not claimed a trophy since 
the FA Cup in 2005 and have lost the likes of Robin van Persie, Samir Nasri and 
Gaël Clichy to the two Manchester clubs – as well as Cesc Fábregas and Alex 
Song to Barcelona – in recent years.

"The greatest achievement of Arsène Wenger is to have created two teams: the 
one that now plays for our rivals and the one that is trying to be among the 
best in the Premier League," Usmanov said. "That's why I say it's not enough to 
merely flatter the coach, but to give him the possibility to buy the best 
players, superstars. But not just stars, but those chosen by Wenger.

"For me, he's one of the best coaches in the world, but it's not easy for him. 
I think he deserves that players are brought in at Arsenal when they're needed. 
The best players, and not being satisfied with selling our best players to our 
rivals.

"If that happens, we can ask everything of him. But, today, he's sacrificed. 
Because of the policy and we're all to blame. Everything's in Mr Kroenke's 
hands and I hope he succeeds, even if he doesn't go along with my ideas.

"It's unthinkable that the shareholders get well paid while, for small clauses 
in contracts, we lose key players like Robin van Persie, Mathieu Flamini or 
Patrick Vieira. We should have increased their salaries when they started to be 
courted, started to look elsewhere. I don't know why we didn't propose that to 
them."

Arsenal may now not add to their ranks before the transfer window shuts on 
Thursday night, despite interest in the West Ham United midfielder Mohamed 
Diamé – a target for Tottenham Hotspur – and Barcelona's David Villa, as they 
seek to reach the Champions League for a 16th successive season. They currently 
lie sixth, four points off Tottenham, and host Liverpool on Wednesday. Thomas 
Vermaelen should be fit to return for that fixture, but doubts remain over 
Mikel Arteta's involvement.

Kroenke has consistently stated his support for Wenger, whose contract has one 
more season to run, and that he has no intention of selling the club. Yet 
Usmanov suggested Thierry Henry, Arsenal's record goalscorer, has urged him to 
buy out the American and take control.

"I like many footballers and I'm in contact with some of them," he added. 
"Perhaps my favourite of the last 10, 15 years is Thierry Henry. He's pushing 
me to buy all of Arsenal's shares, but I cannot predict the future.

"When I had the chance to buy some shares and become one of the main 
shareholders in the club, I didn't hesitate for a second. I was even ready to 
take total control. That wasn't possible because certain people preferred to 
make a profit and create, using me, an outside enemy. I remain portrayed as a 
pirate, an enemy. They have won that game."
 