
Alisher Usmanov <https://www.theguardian.com/business/alisher-usmanov> has 
confirmed that he plans to hold on to his 27% stake in Arsenal, despite Stan 
Kroenke's move to take majority control of the club.

The metals and mining magnate from Russia, who has a fortune estimated at 
$17.7bn (£10.9bn) by Forbes magazine, has resolved to retain his stake, worth 
around £198m, despite the fact he would make a profit on selling. "I'm not 
going to sell my stake," Usmanov told Bloomberg from Moscow. "I loveArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal>, that's why I'm a shareholder."

Kroenke has acquired the shares of Danny Fiszman and Lady Nina 
Bracewell-Smith. Fiszman, who sold his stake to the American because he was 
gravely ill and wanted to ensure an orderly future for the club, died on 
Wednesday aged 66.

Fiszman, who joined Arsenal as a director in 1992, was described by the club's 
chairman, Peter Hill-Wood, as "a visionary director, a gentleman and a true 
Arsenal fan". Hill-Wood added: "His voice, wisdom and presence around the 
football club he so dearly loved will be sorely missed.

"Arsenal Football Club will forever be indebted to Danny for his invaluable 
foresight and contribution during the move from Highbury to our new stadium."

Kroenke triggered a mandatory offer for the whole of Arsenal's share capital 
at £11,750 per share after taking his holding to 63% over the weekend. Usmanov 
acquired his shares over the past four years, through his Red & White 
investment company, at prices ranging from £8,500 to £11,500.

The Arsenal Supporters' Trust (AST) has voted unanimously to retain the 3% 
stake held through its Fanshare scheme andhas welcomed Usmanov's commitment to 
the club <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/apr/13/arsenal-stan-kroenke>. 
"AST welcomes Red & White's commitment to Arsenal and calls on all shareholders 
to work together," it said. "Their priorities should firstly be making Arsenal 
a successful football team, secondly placing no leveraged debt on the club and 
no dividends or management fees that take money out of club, and thirdly 
Arsenal Fanshare and supporters being directly involved in the club's ownership 
structure."

If Usmanov had sold to Kroenke, delisting may have become mandatory. That 
would have left the supporters without a stake in the club and less 
transparency.

The Russian businessman, who made his money through a range of industrial 
investments then began buying media assets, first acquired a stake in Arsenal 
in 2007 and became the club's largest shareholder the following year. That 
precipitated a lockdown agreement among Arsenal's directors including Fiszman 
and Bracewell-Smith, who have since chosen to sell to Kroenke.

Usmanov attempted to block Kroenke's deal in a dramatic move on Sunday night, 
when he trumped the American's offer to Bracewell-Smith. But his higher offer 
was turned down.

Like AST, Usmanov is seeking undertakings from Kroenke that he will not draw 
cash out of the club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2011/apr/11/stan-kroenke-arsenal-glazer-united>
. He is also seeking clarification in the full offer document on how Kroenke is 
funding the £500m takeover offer and his intentions for the club.

Usmanov, who is said to have a civil but distant relationship with the club's 
board, has four seats in the directors' box and also pays for an executive box 
at the Emirates. He does not have a seat on the board but would be likely to 
lobby for one under any restructuring that may follow the takeover. The 
Missouri-born Kroenke, who has a range of US sporting interests including NFL, 
NBA, NHL and MLS teams, has promised not to alter the club's board or executive 
team in the short term.
 