
So we're saying goodbye to KP. Again. This isn't the first time that England's 
Best Batsman (© Pietersen Industries) has found himself on the outside of the 
tent, performing whatever functions of micturition people in those 
circumstances proverbially do. There was the summarydispatching from the 
captaincy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/jan/08/england-kevin-pietersen-andrew-strauss>
 in 2009; a time-out on thenaughty step after Textgate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/15/kevin-pietersen-apologised-provocative-texts>
; not to mention the flouncy retirement in 2012, which lasted a nanosecond. 
Luckily for us cricket lovers, KP, like the Vicar of Bray, had a happy knack 
for recanting.

And yes, we're going to miss him. We're infuriated that he's gone, angry at 
another incomprehensible management decision, one which seems to make even less 
sense in the wake of Andy Flower's departure and the ECB's desperately clingy 
attitude towards Alastair Cook. We're losing the England batsman whose presence 
in the side offered the promise of an explosive, match-changing innings in the 
most pessimistic of fans' hearts, no matter the circumstances. No one ever 
regretted seeingKevin Pietersen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kevin-pietersen> walk to the wicket.

So we're frustrated and sorry to see him go. But sorry for him? That's a 
harder emotion to summon. It's difficult to feel empathy for someone who has 
always seemed to find other people's perspectives so incomprehensible, and 
other needs than his of little relevance. He is Coriolanus: the man who knows 
exactly how vital his talents are to the realm, and who can't contain his 
contempt for the paltry magistrates of management who want to rein in both him 
and his mighty ego.

I claim no more insight into the workings of Pietersen's mind and soul than 
the next cricket geek. I've met him twice, once at the start of his career, 
when he had just arrived back in England from his pyrotechnic debut in a 
one-day series against South Africa, and again five years later. At our first 
meeting he was uncomplicated – thrilled with his batting average, with the 
mounting freebies, with the yellow streak in his hair. "I'm a good-looking lad, 
I can pull anything off, eh?" he told me. And then he winked.

He had just made his first international appearance in front of crowds of his 
fellow-countrymen baying for his blood – in his own words, "every single 
person" had hated him – and he had responded with greatness. I noted that his 
patriotism for his new home was "so fierce it is almost self-parody" and mused, 
knowingly, that "feeling wanted will be pretty important to Pietersen".

Was I right? I don't know. The second time we met Pietersen had just sat out 
the one-day series against Pakistan in 2010 – an omission he had responded to 
angrily on Twitter, and been fined for. He seemed a chastened man, with a 
quieter voice and a humbler mien; he was, by this point, a dad, and spoke as 
one with a newfound maturity and perspective. But there was still something 
curious in the words he chose and the phrases he used. He was "mortified" by 
the Twitter row, he told me; "it was one of the things that hurt me most about 
anything." He still sounded like a man who could understand the effect he had 
only in relation to himself.

I recalled that exchange two years later, when he took to YouTube with his 
Brass-Eye worthy response to Textgate – and again during his 'reintegration'. 
It seemed that summer that whenever an England batsman passed a landmark, KP 
was to be seen standing on the balcony, his hands above his head in applause. 
If KP was going to do humility and team spirit, he was going to do it where 
everyone could it see it.

Michael Vaughan made the powerful argument on Radio 5 Live last week that 
Pietersen's best performances – his best years, in fact – were concentrated at 
the beginning of his career, when there was the most to prove (and the most 
profile to be gained). His inexplicable slumps in form and erratic behaviour 
have led some – me included – to award him that catch-all title, 'enigma'. But 
now I'm not so sure. If you know a man by the company he keeps, you only need 
to look at KP's closest champions – Shane Warne, Darren Gough and Piers Morgan 
– to know who we're saying goodbye to. Farewell KP, you unrepentant, show-off. 
We'll miss you.
 