
Until last week Antony Worrall Thompson was solely a man of food. He had nifty 
ways with Raspberry Fool. He could show you how to knock up a Shepherd's Pie. 
He believed in shop-bought custard and stock cubes. Then, last Tuesday, he 
turned up on the platform at the Conservative Party Conference in Bournemouth 
giving William Hague the backing of his substantial celebrity - along with Jim 
Davidson, Mike Yarwood and Dana. Instantly,Antony Worrall Thompson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/antonyworrallthompson> became a man 
of politics.

Now, as a man of politics, he must have policies. Here he is, then, on fox 
hunting: 'I think it's awful the way foxes are finally killed but the hunt is 
still the only way to get the animals out of the ground. So, once they've got 
them out of the ground, then they should shoot the poor things.'As definitions 
of caring Conservatism go, they don't get much better than that: keep fox 
hunting. Just make sure the fox is killed nicely.

So how do you get the fox away from the baying hounds? He looks pensive for a 
moment. 'It's a difficult one, isn't it,' he says. 'You're never going to 
please everyone, are you?' We are sitting in the carefully tended back garden 
of his five-acre estate in Oxfordshire, an inherited property made beautiful on 
the proceeds of his various successful restaurant businesses. Around us a BBC 
crew are setting up the next shot for the Food and Drink show of which, for the 
past two series, Worrall Thompson, 49, has been main presenter and which is now 
recorded here at his home, hard by the Thames. He lights a cigarette - one of 
many - and points away towards the fields out front of the house where his 
three dozen chickens are penned. 'Personally I catch the foxes over there and 
then release them in woods 20 miles away.' But it wouldn't work if everybody 
did that would it, because people would come and release their foxes by your 
fields? He agrees. That wouldn't work either. Tricky business, this politics. 
No matter. He's still keen to be involved. 'I would like to be a politician 
some day,' he announces. What? An MP? Really? He nods. There has only just been 
a selection process for a new MP in his local constituency of Henley, currently 
occupied by Michael Heseltine who is stepping down. The local Conservative 
Party chose Boris Johnson, editor of the Spectator , to succeed him. 'In five 
years time I might have gone for it,' Worrall Thompson says, 'But Heseltine 
resigned too early for me. I'm not ready just yet.'

The prospect of Antony Worrall Thompson MP seems at first absurd. He has a 
cosy, soft, even huggsy persona which is reflected perfectly in the kind of 
modern comfort food he now cooks on screen; the fishcakes and stews and roasts. 
He does not seem at all suited to the flinty cut and thrust of political life. 
Then again perhaps the world of television chefdom has provided him with the 
ideal training. Last month, during a interview, Delia Smith laid into Worrall 
Thompson. She called him 'dreadful, just repulsive' and described Food and 
Drink as 'the most disgusting thing on television'. He hit back, calling her 
'the coldest woman on television'.

'I also called her the Volvo of cooking which I meant as a term of 
endearment.' He shrugs. 'I just meant she was safe but obviously she thought I 
meant she was boring. But she does make lousy scrambled eggs. They're horrible 
and runny.'

And what about Gordon Ramsay, who came to Delia's defence, announcing that he 
always gives her books to his wife as Christmas presents? 'Ramsay and I have 
always had a spat,' Worrall Thompson says. 'The sort of food he cooks is 
outmoded, outdated and not what people want any more. It's destined to sit next 
to the dinosaurs in the Natural History Museum.' The honourable member for 
Henley smiles. He may want the fox dispatched humanely but he's clearly more 
than happy to see Mr Gordon Ramsay ripped limb from metaphorical limb.

For all his political ambitions the TV chef is undoubtedly happiest talking 
about food. Last week Tim Yeo, Shadow Agriculture Minister, announced that he 
would appoint him as an adviser on organic food if the Conservatives win the 
next election. Worrall Thompson is definitely up for the job. 'I want to get 
the message across that food is an important part of people's lives,' he says. 
'Nobody's working out what's wrong with our food production. I mean, why in the 
age of more sprays and pesticides are we suffering from more allergies? Our 
immune systems are shot to hell and organic food can change that.'

He practises what he preaches: as well as the chickens, he keeps pigs, two 
Middle Whites called Lunch and Dinner, from which he hopes to breed. He uses 
their manure to fertilise a large organic vegetable garden which supplies both 
of his London restaurants and a nearby pub that he has recently taken over. At 
weekends he and his wife Jay run a stall in a farmer's market at Henley selling 
organic chutneys and eggs. He is, in short, a big believer in the organic food 
movement. Unfortunately it turns out that he's not such a big believer in the 
Conservatives' policy on food. 'Tim Yeo said we should push ahead with GM 
testing in this country. Well, I'm against that. This country is too small. If 
we get it wrong then we've ruined nature for life and you can't go back.'

So why give his support to the Tory party if he doesn't agree with them? 'I 
want to change them. I believe they can be changed.' OK, then, he doesn't see 
eye to eye with them on food policy. And, I suggest, while we're at it, he 
can't really agree with their stance on single mothers, can he? After all, now 
into his third marriage, he's created a few of those himself. He has two 
teenage sons living in Australia by one former wife, whom he supports, and 
another child by a previous relationship whom he does not see. (He now has two 
more children by Jay, Toby-Jack, five and Billie-Lara, three.) 'No,' he says, 
'I don't agree with that. But then I'm not going to agree with any government 
on every policy, am I?'

What about Ann Widdecombe's stance on cannabis? Have you, Mr Worrall Thompson, 
ever been stoned? 'No.' What, you've never smoked dope? 'Oh yeah, I've smoked 
dope. It just made my legs go to sleep. All right, no, I didn't agree with 
Widdecombe on that. Yes, we must get tough on law and order. We all want that 
but the police haven't got time to go chasing after every cannabis user.'

We move on. Asylum seekers? 'The majority of the people in this country don't 
want us to be a dumping ground for every foreign national,' he says. 'Yes, they 
want the deserving ones to get in but not every chancer.' Ah, progress. That 
sounds like the voice of Toryism. 'But I don't agree with the idea of penning 
them all up in compounds.' Oh dear. And we were so close to what political 
pundits call consensus.

On taxation Worrall Thompson has a whole raft of policies. He would like to 
see VAT raised to 21 per cent and direct taxation lowered. But at the same time 
he thinks that a 50 per cent tax rate on high earnings of £150,000-£200,000 
might not be the worst idea in the world. These are both interesting policies 
in themselves, innovative policies perhaps. They just don't happen to be 
Conservative Party policies at the moment. Finally we find something he does 
agree with the Tories on: the retention of Clause 28. 'I'm an open-minded 
person but most of the country do not want homosexual education stuffed down 
their kids' throats.' He thinks William Hague is 'a great orator - he knocks 
spots off Blair. But I do sometimes wonder if Hague is the right leader. He 
does have to create an image outside the chamber. He's a brilliant politician 
but maybe he's not number one.'

Still, for the moment, Hague's the man. 'More Tories have to come out of the 
closet,' he says. 'I reckon there are a lot out there but I think they're 
frightened to admit it. You've got to be brave to be in the Tory party right 
now.' Perhaps you have to be particularly brave if you are in the restaurant 
business. It is driven almost entirely by fashion and Worrall Thompson knows 
that. He made his name in the Eighties with a restaurant called Ménage à Trois, 
which served only starters and puddings and caught the mood of diners who 
wanted to go to restaurants to see and be seen rather than to eat. (It was a 
favourite of Princess Diana.) In the late Eighties he moved on to restaurants 
like dell'Ugo, serving up an early form of fusion cooking. Now, with his London 
restaurant Woz, which does one set menu a day, served family style in the 
middle of the table, he has simplified everything just when it was becoming hip 
to do so.

Is he concerned that some punters might not want to eat in his restaurants 
because of his unfashionable politics? He drags deeply on another unfashionable 
cigarette. 'I'll lose the 10 per cent who are radical, maybe, but that's not 
much is it?'

Anyway, he says, he has never pursued trends. 'I'm the one who sets the 
fashions that others follow.' Perhaps he's right. If so, expect the 
Conservatives to come up with new policies on GM foods, fox hunting, asylum 
seekers, single mothers, taxation and drugs any day soon.
 