
Beached and scuppered submarines, crushed minesweepers with mangled gunnery 
and useless propellers. The U-boat goes to the bottom, sunflowers lashed with 
rusty wire to its hull. Barbed wire loops across a sullen beach. Courbet's wave 
endlessly breaks; Turner's light and weather obliterate the horizon and 
collapse the difference between sea and sky. The bleak distances of mudflats 
and coastal defences - reminiscent of a place we recognise from Paul Nash's 
paintings - harbour a beached submarine, brought in on a tide of history, myth 
and Romanticism.

Such are the cargoes of Anselm Kiefer's recent paintings, littered with 
flotillas of broken, wallowing, empty vessels - lead ships on painted seas. On 
some of these indeterminate horizons is a hand - one of Kiefer's painting 
gloves, filled with plaster. Not waving, not drowning: more like one of those 
apparitions sailors see.

The story is told across 30 large paintings, hung three deep and ranged along 
the two pristine side walls of a building that appeared, as if from nowhere, in 
London's Hoxton Square a little over a week ago. Across the square, in the 
White Cube gallery, hang another three, more grandiose works; upstairs, a lead 
submarine flounders on shattered concrete.

As much as the paintings it contains, the building itself is part of Kiefer's 
new show, Für Chlebnikov. Clad in grey, corrugated steel sheets, it has the 
appearance less of a real structure than of a vast drawing, or some 
long-destroyed, brutally proportioned mausoleum that has been clipped from an 
old photograph and montaged on to the real world. It is a monumental 
incongruity.

At the end of the building, on an otherwise empty wall, is an inscription in 
German, written in Kiefer's cursive, old-fashioned handwriting. It reads: 
"Time, Measure of the world - Fate of the people. The New Doctrine of War: 
Naval Battles Recur Every 317 Years or in Multiples Thereof, for Velimir 
Chlebnikov." For more than 20 years, Khlebnikov - to use the English rather 
than German transliteration of this somewhat obscure Russian's name - has been 
something of a fixation for Kiefer. Put very briefly, Khlebnikov was a poet and 
founder of Russian futurism. One of his several improbable and faintly 
ludicrous ideas was that he wished to purify the Russian language, ridding it 
of its western elements; he came to write his own poems in this invented 
language. This sort of thing is infinitely tiresome, as undoubtedly was this 
ridiculous magus - whose origins lay in an obscure, nomadic Buddhist tribe. 
When he died, in 1922, he was buried in a coffin embellished with a blue planet 
Earth and the words The President of Planet Earth, Velimir 1. Were it not for 
his peculiarity, and the fact that he lived when he did, Khlebnikov would 
doubtless be forgotten.

Talking last week at White Cube, Kiefer happily admitted that Khlebnikov's 
ideas were "complete nonsense". Yet not only has the German artist dedicated 
his strange pavilion and numerous other works to the poet, but the paintings 
are littered with allusions to Khlebnikov's bizarre idea of the cyclical 
recurrence of sea battles.

What we never expect from Kiefer is something entirely new. In the show's 
catalogue, the critic and curator Kevin Power talks of Kiefer having abandoned 
his earlier preoccupation with German history, especially with the history and 
legacy of the second world war - yet it is impossible to avoid the handmade 
lead submarines and minesweepers, some bigger than a man, attached to the 
canvases. On and around the vessels are handwritten notations, the names of 
ships (Aurora, Leviathan, Behemoth), battles and innumerable sums and notations 
that try to count out the impossible cycles of naval war. The paintings, 
heaving with matter, are highly believable depictions of seas - which we 
inevitably take for the north Atlantic, where the last great sea war took 
place, its final shameful coda occurring far to the south, with the sinking of 
the Belgrano in the Falklands war. Khlebnikov's theories provide Kiefer with 
the opportunity to collapse time and space.

So dense are the accumulations of coagulated, weathered and decaying plaster, 
resin, oils and acrylics in Kiefer's paintings that they barely seem to have 
been painted at all. Instead they might have been swept up into heaving swells 
and choppy waves, the horizon disappearing under powdery cloud layers and 
spattered squalls, sour atmospheres and blizzards of paint. The colours are 
rust and salt, battleship grey, oxide, decay. It is as if the paintings 
themselves had weathered years of rain, been tattered by winds, bleached by 
sunlight, assailed by hailstorms, cracked by frost. Which indeed they may have 
done: Kiefer stockpiles canvases and materials and leaves them lying about in 
the open air, or shoves them into dank cellars and broiling transport 
containers, for as long as a decade before he picks them out and reworks them, 
to produce both an image of some sort and a physical embodiment of the very 
conditions he seeks to represent. These paintings are dismal rafts, laden with 
their own material history - embodiments, perhaps, of what WG Sebald called a 
Natural History of Destruction. Except that Sebald had much more pertinent 
things to say about war and history than Kiefer ever has. Kiefer, after all, is 
a painter, and painting, however much it aspires to history or to literature, 
works in a different register of thinking.

You might say that Kiefer's working method verges on gimmickry. Since he left 
Germany to live and work in Nîmes in the south of France, he has adopted his 
own magus-like approach: he is forever building ramshackle sheds to house his 
art, or burrowing in cellars among his vast accumulations of canvases, models, 
old photos, wormy manuscripts, half-finished and half-destroyed sculptures. 
This requires an unusual sort of self-belief. No wonder he is attracted to 
Khlebnikov.

Yet it would be a mistake to diminish Kiefer's achievement, and to ignore the 
conviction of his work - even if doubt always lurks in the back of the mind. I 
don't think we should believe him when he says that what appeals to him about 
submarines is their simple shapes; previously, he was beating the lead in order 
to build doodlebugs. But we need to give artists the latitude to be perverse 
and contrary, even to lie to us. Generally, what we hope is that their thinking 
will be as creative as the things they make, and in Kiefer's case we have 
abundant evidence from the past 30 years that this is so. He has, in his way, 
created a painted world, and set up his studios and his working methods as a 
sort of grand statement. Unlike Khlebnikov, or Beuys, he is no holy fool. His 
paintings and sculptures are convincing, however much we might want to resist 
them.

And he is, after all, a German artist who attempts - sometimes directly, 
sometimes not - to deal with recent German history. But illustrating or 
mythologising it and saying valuable things about it are two different things. 
His interest in the utopian madness of Khlebnikov, whose example I believe he 
sees almost as a case study in self-mythology and the will to power, might be 
taken as a metaphor for artistic struggle. We cannot forget Hitler wanted to be 
an artist, too.

The context, for Kiefer, is - aside from painting itself - history and myth, 
the latter of which he believes we are more in thrall to and have more reason 
to grasp for than ever before. For Kiefer, Khlebnikov's 317-year cycle is 
useful in that it allows him to depict these broken 20th-century vessels in the 
light of naval engagements, long sea journeys, shipping losses and the battles 
of the past - in short, to acknowledge both the human and the historical scale 
of past events, and their place in our larger models of the world.

Kiefer's art is as ambitious as it is magnificently grandiose, uncomfortable 
and brooding. His work is as deeply troubling as it is impressive - and that is 
as it should be.

· Anselm Kiefer: Für Chlebnikov is at White Cube, London N1, with Part I 
running until July 30 and Part II from August 2 until August 27. Details: 
020-7930 5373.
 