
I am not entirely new to boats. I've been on several cross-Channel ferries; I 
nearly killed myself in a canoe on the Ardèche; I've spent time on a Turkish 
gulet (blissful); I've done feluccas in Egypt; and I had a week on a barge on 
the Welsh border. I have discovered I actually rather like boats: I like the 
portholes, compact kitchens and cooking on the move. In fact I like boats so 
much I'm seriously considering buying one and making a new life on the water.

So a recent trip to Portugal to spend a few days on a houseboat on an enormous 
reservoir in the middle of nowhere was a perfect opportunity to test my "sea" 
legs. Even better, this boat came with sunshine and a vast swimming pool, and 
without locks, tunnels or horizontal rain (though I like all that too). The 
trickiest element, apart from the chemical toilet (of which more later), was 
parking the thing, but then I find that difficult in a Nissan Micra.

As my children grow older there are many joys, but one of the small sadnesses 
is that they are not quite so easily pleased. Whether it's packed lunches, 
T-shirts, birthday parties or holidays, they now have their own strongly held 
views. There was a time when they were thrilled to spend a week with us 
anywhere – in a longhouse in Wales, on a canal boat in Shropshire, at my 
parents' place in the Midlands. Now holidays have to be carefully negotiated 
around friends, girlfriends, sporting events and parties. At home we rarely 
spend all day together, just the four of us. And while I like boats, do they? 
How would we survive on a cramped motorboat on a deserted reservoir?

But that was before I'd seen the reservoir. Alqueva lake, in the unspoilt 
Alentejo region of southern Portugal, is the largest lake in the country, 
covering a surface area of 250 sq km, 83km from end to end. It was created in 
2002 after the majestic Alqueva dam was built on the Guadiana river to irrigate 
the impoverished and arid Alentejo. Locals were promised much from its 
construction in 2002. Something may still materialise, but probably not enough, 
and not quickly enough for the poorest part of a country in an economic mess.
 Alqueva lake. Photograph: Alamy 
The Alentejo covers a third of the country and is its least populated region. 
As you pass through, by car or on water, what strikes you is its emptiness – 
it's a vast, barren, unchanged and unchanging landscape. There is little 
development, just a few isolated villages and stunted trees.

For tourists, that must be one of its great pleasures. The only tourists we 
met were an English couple who had been on a boat fortwo weeks. He was a keen 
fisherman, crates of Super Bock piled up next to the rods. I have no idea how 
she kept herself entertained: maybe she was a keen open-water swimmer.

But for a few days, with a couple of kids, it was the most brilliant fun. The 
boat (worth €150,000) was a mobile playground. We all wanted to be captain and 
fought to be at the wheel. We all loved the GPS, and the sonar system, which 
showed depth of water and obstacles, including large shoals of fish. And it was 
lovely to be out on the water, self-contained and independent.

We motored gently down the length of the lake (travelling at about eight 
knots, which feels very slow when the sun is setting and you're struggling to 
reach the next jetty to moor for the night, but super fast if you're swimming 
and your family think it's funny to drive off without you). Really though, 
these boats are incredibly sedate – no driving licence or sailing experience is 
needed – and virtually without risk.

The nearest we came to disaster was on our first day when we radically 
underestimated the time it would take to reach our destination. The light began 
to fail and there was no coaxing this boat to go any faster. I don't think 
you're meant to travel at night and the advice is not to drop anchor in the 
middle of the lake because there's a flooded village and lord knows what else 
down below. (Of course we made it to the next jetty and then had a spectacular 
row as we tried to park.)

Mapped from above we probably steered a peculiar course, but it was fun. If 
the youngest was driving, we went into 360-degree spins just for the hell of 
it; the older boy took it much more seriously, while all the time listening to 
Portuguese radio at full blast. We often stopped to hurl ourselves into the 
water, which was clean and warm. And we all loved the kayaks which we pulled 
behind us, often with the boys in them, being towed like mini banana boats.

We could have taken bikes, which might have been useful for exploring – 
villages that long predate the lake are quite a way from its shores. We took 
fishing rods, but didn't catch a thing, despite one night seeing hundreds of 
fish surfacing in a seething mass of plops and splashes. There is sailing and 
water-skiing from the Amieira Marina (our youngest had a go at wakeboarding), 
and there are visits to nearby villages. Marina staff will help you with taxis 
and activities – they'll even do your shopping for you, and are very, very nice.

We didn't do culture or villages. We did nice food – at the restaurant at 
Amieira Marina and at a fantastic former olive oil factory calledSem Fim 
<http://www.sem-fim.com/eng/home_eng.html> on the outskirts of fortified 
Monsaraz, where the food was delicious, wholesome and hearty, and the setting 
was even better. We also spent a day in Evora, one of Portugal's best preserved 
medieval towns, with its Aqueduto da Água de Prata (aqueduct of silver water) 
and its Capela dos Ossos, a macabre chapel built by 17th century Franciscan 
monks entirely out of bones and skulls as a memento mori or reminder of death.
 Capela dos Ossos in Evora. Photograph: Alamy 
Traditionally Brits don't make it to the Alentejo. It's the Algarve for us. 
But a new flight in and out of Beja airport (which is very hard to find – if 
you're in Portugal, I mean. I'm not sure how it works from the air) has opened 
the area up and I hope it does well. It is widely described as a hidden gem, 
and it really does feel like that.

Ah, the toilet. Yes, the boat comes with all mod cons. TV, shower, fridge, 
barbecue … and chemical loo. I didn't quite conquer that one. You turn the 
handle this way and that – water comes, water goes, things disappear and then 
they reappear. I just didn't get it. I am famously squeamish about this sort of 
thing, so it is some measure of the joyousness of this holiday that even the 
primitive loo could not put me off.

• Sunvil Discovery (020-8758 4722, sunvil.co.uk <http://www.sunvil.co.uk>) has 
weekly flights from Heathrow to Beja from £169 return. Amieira Marina (
amieiramarina.com <http://www.amieiramarina.com>) has boats sleeping from two 
to 12, with the four-berth Duo from €163 a night, plus a one-off tax of €76. 
For more information on the region, seevisitalentejo.pt 
<http://www.visitalentejo.pt/vEN>, and on Portugal, see visitportugal.com 
<http://www.visitportugal.com/Cultures/en-US/default.html>
 