
Lawyers for the accused fraudster Allen Stanford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/allen-stanford> have appealed to a US 
judge to release the former billionaire from his Texas prison, describing him 
as "a wreck of a man" whose prolonged imprisonment pending trial could be 
deemed unconstitutional.

In a motion lodged today at a Houston court, defence lawyers said Stanford's 
condition had deteriorated alarmingly since he was beaten up by a fellow inmate 
in September – a fight that landed him in hospital. The document said Stanford 
had lost all feeling in the right side of his face and had partially lost 
vision in his right eye. He has been treated for a heart condition, dangerous 
blood pressure, ulcers and severe depression.

Stanford, who once bankrolled cricket's Twenty20 international tournaments, 
has been charged with fiddling investors out of $7bn (£4.9bn) at his defunct 
Stanford International banking empire, which spanned the US, the Caribbean and 
South America.

Considered a flight risk because of his overseas homes, he has been in jail 
since June last year and his trial, due to begin next January, is scheduled to 
last six months.

"Mr Stanford, a man who is presumed to be innocent, is being, and has been, 
subjected to substantial and undeniable punishment long before the trial of his 
case has even begun," said the motion, by defence counsel Robert Bennett.

Bennett continued: "He has been physically assaulted, he has suffered 
significant medical injury and psychological debilitation; he was held in 
solitary confinement two separate times for a total of 40 days; he has been 
subjected to 335 days of pretrial incarceration as of May 18 2010; and before 
his scheduled trial concludes, he will predictably serve another nonspeculative 
439 days."

A doctor treating Stanford diagnosed abnormal liver function. He was said to 
be malnourished, underweight, depressed, dishevelled, unable to sleep, unable 
to concentrate and struggling to concentrate on constructing a defence.

Stanford, 60, has made several previous attempts to obtain bail on 
compassionate grounds. He argues that he never fled or resisted arrest and that 
it is virtually impossible, in a high security prison, to get access to the 8m 
pages of evidence for his upcoming trial.

He was charged last year with soliciting investments from US bank customers 
under false pretences, claiming that so-called certificates of deposit were 
safe investments in low-risk securities while using the money to finance a 
lavish lifestyle. Stanford denies wrongdoing, claiming that any fraudulent 
activity was carried out by underlings behind his back. A court-appointed 
receiver last week sold Stanford's 112ft yacht, Sea Eagle, for $3.25m (£2.27m). 
The government of Antigua last month formally rescinded a knighthood bestowed 
upon him in 2006 for his contribution to the country's economy.
 