
The trial of Allen Stanford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/allen-stanford>, the Texas financier 
accused of defrauding investors in a $7bn (£4.5bn) Ponzi scheme, has been 
postponed to wean him off anti-anxiety medication prescribed for him in a Texas 
jail and to determine whether he is fit to stand.

The trial was due to start on 24 January, but Stanford's lawyers argued that 
he could not prepare because he suffers from depression and has become addicted 
to a powerful anti-anxiety drug.

"The motion for a continuance is granted," US district judge David Hittner 
said at a court hearing yesterday, adding that no trial date could be set until 
all of Stanford's medical issues had been resolved.

"In my opinion ... he's unable to work effectively with his attorney to 
develop a defence against the charges," said Victor Scarano, a psychiatrist 
testifying for the defence.

Stanford has been taking large doses of the anti-anxiety drug clonazepam, 
along with antidepressants, for about a year.

In a recent court filing, a lawyer for Stanford, Ali Fazel, said: "These 
medications have left Mr Stanford in an unfocused and numbed state of mind."

The drug is probably contributing to fits of delirium, according to several 
psychiatrists who testified at the hearing,the New York Times reported 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/01/07/business/07stanford.html?_r=1&hp>.

The psychiatrists, one of whom was hired by prosecutors, said the billionaire 
financier had become mentally incapacitated by a combination of depression, 
addiction and possible severe brain injury suffered in a fight with an inmate 
in 2009.

While they disagreed on some points, they generally agreed that Stanford 
needed weeks if not months to undergo treatment for addiction and to complete 
tests to determine the severity of the brain injury.

Stanford's lawyers are seeking a two-year delay of the trial while prosecutors 
argued for a shorter delay.

The 60-year-old, best known in Britain as a sports impresario who bankrolled 
cricket's Twenty20 tournaments, faces 21 criminal counts charging him with 
leading a $7bn Ponzi scheme run out of Stanford International Bank on the 
island of Antigua. He is accused of using misleading advertising, false claims 
about returns and inaccurate statements about his investment strategy to lure 
thousands of Americans into purchasing so-called certificates of deposit, which 
purported to be low-risk savings instruments.

According to prosecutors, Stanford siphoned the proceeds offshore and used 
some of the money to finance a lavish lifestyle of private jets, Caribbean 
retreats and international cricket events.

Stanford has pleaded not guilty and argued that if his company was involved in 
any illegal activity, it was the fault of his former chief financial officer.

After his indictment and imprisonment in June 2009 he was badly beaten in a 
fight with an inmate over the use of a telephone, suffering a broken nose and a 
major concussion that left him unconscious. He has also suffered other health 
problems, including an aneurysm in his leg which caused an accelerated 
heartbeat.

Stanford, who attended the hearing dressed in a green prison jumpsuit, barely 
spoke.

However, Gregg Costa, an assistant US attorney, challenged the diagnosis of 
one of the psychiatrists, citing arguments Stanford had made in court in recent 
months and emails he had sent to friends, which Costa described as coherent and 
lucid.

Costa also said it was natural for a wealthy man to feel depressed after being 
imprisoned, and suggested that Stanford could have been faking the delirium.

Two employees at Stanford's prison, a psychologist and a guard, countered the 
testimony of the psychiatrists and described him as coherent, articulate and 
responsive in conversations they had with him.
 