
Three years ago last month one of the strangest manhunts in US history ended 
with police, journalists and satellite trucks surrounding a modest townhouse in 
Fredericksburg, Virginia. Inside was the fugitive billionaire fraudsterAllen 
Stanford <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/allen-stanford>.

Stanford had disappeared after the US authorities had accused him of 
orchestrating a "massive ongoing fraud". Billions were said to be missing and 
investors were panicking in cities from Houston to London, Caracas to 
Switzerland.

With investors still reeling from the revelations about Bernard Madoff's 
historic Ponzi scheme <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bernard-madoff>, 
Stanford had become a media sensation.

He had yet to be charged with criminal wrongdoing but $7bn of funds were said 
to be unaccounted for and the US authorities were scouring the country to ask 
him some questions.

The 6ft 4in Texan had been run to ground after attempting to flee to Antigua, 
where he spent much of his time and moored his 112ft motor yacht, Sea Eagle 
Bikini. Sir Allen, as he was known on the island, was knighted by the island's 
former prime minister. He was Antigua's most powerful businessman. He owned the 
local newspaper, restaurants and his own cricket ground. As stories of his fall 
made headlines around the world a private jet company refused to accept his 
credit card in payment to take him back to the island.

Antigua has now revoked Stanford's knighthood. But it wasn't just the 
Caribbean island left red-faced by its association with Stanford. The scandal 
proved a major embarrassment on both sides of the Atlantic. In Washington, he 
and his executives gave over $1.8m to Democrat and Republican politicians. 
President Barack Obama received $4,600 for his 2008 election campaign. He was 
also said to have been close to former president George W Bush.

It was also a blow to the august England and Wales Cricket Board, which in 
2008 signed a five-year deal with Stanford for a series of matches between 
England and an all-star West Indies team.

Announcing the deal, Stanford arrived at Lord's cricket ground in a black 
helicopter and posed with a perspex case containing $20m.

"First of all this was not any kind of Ponzi scheme whatsoever. There was not 
any intent or plan to defraud anybody," Stanford told CNBC shortly before he 
was formally charged. He said he was "devastated" by what had happened and 
blamed the US authorities for killing off his "solid, solvent" businesses with 
their "over-reaching" actions.

It was the last the world was to hear from Stanford for sometime. In June 2009 
he was charged with fraud, conspiracy and obstruction and jailed as a flight 
risk. And then matters got worse.

The disgraced tycoon was attacked and severely beaten in the Joe Corley 
Detention Facility in Conroe about 40 miles north of Houston. The assault 
happened in a cell holding 14 other men that had been designed to hold eight 
inmates. At the time of the assault the cell had no electricity, air 
conditioning and was in virtual darkness.

Shocking photos of Stanford, his face a mass of cuts and bruises, chained at 
the ankles and strapped to a gurney emerged. The altercation over a telephone 
call left him unable to recall his own name, according to reports filed in 
court. He was prescribed powerful anti-anxiety medicine that doctors claimed 
contributed to "extensive retrograde amnesia" and was "completely amnestic to 
his life prior to the assault".

Gone were the memories of his childhood in the tiny town of Mexia, Texas. Of 
how his mother, a nurse, left his father when she was nine, taking Allen and 
his brother with her. Gone were the stories of his failed attempt to crack the 
gym business, of how he made his first fortune in real estate before moving 
into investment management. No memories remained of his three decades of 
marriage to Susan and their daughter Randi, or of the women he called "outside 
wives" – mothers to at least five other children. All those happy memories of 
yachts, fast cars, a moated mansion in Miami, they had gone too.

His lawyers claimed he was unfit to stand trial.

Stanford's ever-changing legal team and the arguments over his mental health 
delayed the trial until late last year when judge David Hittner ruled the 
"preponderance of evidence" was that Stanford was fit to stand trial.

The jury never heard from Stanford during his six-week trial. But his former 
Stanford Group finance chief James Davis, testifying against him, said clients 
were told their money went into conventional, conservative investments but the 
cash really went to fund his boss's lavish lifestyle. Davis has pleaded guilty 
to three felony charges.

The picture that emerged was of one long spending spree to disaster.

By the end of December 2008 Stanford International Bank had only $88m in cash 
– it claimed to hold $1bn in assets.

As worried investors pulled out their cash, Davis told the court Stanford 
tried to use his beloved Antigua to bail him out. He cooked the books and 1,500 
undeveloped acres Stanford had bought on the island for $64m were set to be 
valued at $3.2bn, Davis told the court.

The trial has left us with a clear picture of what happened to the money but 
mystery remains.

US diplomats were warning government officials not to be seen or photographed 
with Stanford two years before he landed at Lord's.

"Embassy officers do not reach out to Stanford because of the allegations of 
bribery and money-laundering. The ambassador managed to stay out of any 
one-on-one photos with Stanford during the breakfast," a government official 
wrote in a cable obtained by Wikileaks.

While he had the money to pay, it seems few people asked him any tough 
questions. Now they can ask all they like but Stanford won't be answering.
 