
The financier Allen Stanford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/allen-stanford> is trying to force a 
reluctant group of Lloyd's of London underwriters to foot legal bills for his 
defence against $7bn (£4.5bn) fraud charges laid by the US government, in a 
battle over an insurance policy indemnifying executives of his defunct business 
empire against litigation.

The former cricket impresario and several senior colleagues from his Stanford 
International banking group began a courtroom showdown with theLloyd's 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lloydsoflondon> insurers in front of a 
Texas judge this week, seeking an injunction forcing the group, led by Brit 
Insurance, to stump up millions of pounds for an increasingly complex and 
long-running criminal case.

Stanford, 60, was once a billionaire but claims to have become destitute since 
his arrest last year on charges of defrauding US investors with savings 
certificates that were allegedly a front for a pyramid scheme. The Lloyd's 
insurers have already paid out $6m to cover lawyers for Stanford alone. But 
they balked at any further expenditure in November, arguing that Stanford and 
his co-defendants, who include accounting executives Mark Kuhrt and Gilbert 
Lopez, had breached a clause that voids the policy in the event of money 
laundering.

Stanford, say the insurers, was "participating and furthering a ponzi scheme 
that resulted in the misappropriation of millions of dollars in investor 
funds". They continue: "Therefore, underwriters are not liable for any damages 
or losses, including costs …"

Stanford, who claims it is near impossible for him to prepare for a complex 
fraud trial from behind bars, has fired his way through several sets of lawyers.

He argues about the charges that if there was any wrongdoing, he was unaware 
of it because he was not closely involved in the day-to-day operation of the 
private bank. "The evidence will show there wasn't any ponzi scheme," Robert 
Bennett, a lawyer for Stanford, told judge Nancy Atlas.
 