
The cricket entrepreneur and billionaire businessman Sir Allen Stanford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/allen-stanford> must remain behind bars 
before his multi-billion dollar fraud trial. At a courthouse in Houston, Texas, 
Judge David Hittner revoked bail for the tycoon after prosecutors argued that 
he was a flight risk due to his extensive links overseas.

The 59-year-old is charged with masterminding a Ponzi scheme 
<http://www.sec.gov/answers/ponzi.htm> that allegedly scammed investors out of 
$7bn (£4.2bn). The judge's ruling overturns a decision last week to allow 
Stanford to be freed on a $500,000 (£304,000) bond.

During four hours of argument prosecutors told the court that his 
international ties meant Stanford might have the means to flee the country, 
referring to his dual US and Antiguan citizenship and network of wealthy 
friends overseas. They also claimed that he might have access to vast sums of 
hidden money around the world.

Stanford's lawyer, Dick DeGuerin <http://www.deguerin.com/Bio/DickDeGuerin.asp>
 told the judge his client, who had an estimated fortune of around $2bn (£1.2 
bn), was now penniless after his assets were seized. DeGuerin added that 
Stanford wanted to fight the charges against him and attempted to hand himself 
in on a number of occasions before his indictment to show that he did not want 
to flee the country.

It is not yet known if Stanford will appeal against the judge's ruling.

Last week Stanford pleaded not guilty to charges that he masterminded a 
massive Ponzi scheme. Three other executives at Stanford Financial Group – 
Laura Pendergest-Holt, Gilberto Lopez and Mark Kuhrt – have also been charged 
over the alleged fraud. All have denied the charges.

Stanford already faces civil charges brought by US regulators over an 
allegedly fraudulent $8bn (£4.8bn) certificate of deposit scheme and a separate 
$1.2bn (£700m) investment vehicle.

According to the criminal indictment, Stanford and his co-defendants 
masterminded a scam in which investors were sold around $7bn (£4.2bn) worth of 
so-called certificates of deposits (CDs) after being lured by promises of high 
returns. CDs are fixed-term investment products which are supposed to be 
virtually risk-free.

It is alleged that Stanford misrepresented to investors that their money was 
safe, falsely claiming that funds were being re-invested in liquid financial 
instruments and monitored by a team of 20-plus analysts. Instead, it is 
alleged, Stanford and his co-accused misused and misappropriated the funds.

The US Department of Justice alleges that $1.6bn (£1bn) was diverted to 
Stanford himself through undisclosed personal loans.

The defendants are also charged with conspiracy to commit mail, wire and 
securities fraud.

If convicted of all 21 counts on the charge sheet, Stanford could face a 
sentence of up to 250 years in prison, officials have said.
 