
Financier Allen Stanford <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/allen-stanford> 
has suffered a severe mental and physical deterioration and is in danger of "a 
complete nervous breakdown" in a Texas prison, according to a psychiatrist's 
report. The statement is included in a fresh plea for bail by the tycoon who 
was once known for bankrolling cricket's 20/20 international tournaments.

Stanford has been in jail since June while he awaits a criminal trial, set for 
January 2011. He is charged with fiddling investors out of $7bn at his Stanford 
International bank. His lawyers have submitted a dossier of 25 emotive letters 
from family and friends attesting to Stanford's character and urging judge 
David Hittner to release him under supervision.

Defence lawyers say it is impossible for Stanford to prepare his defence 
against highly complex fraud charges from a jail cell. He has no internet 
access, limited use of a telephone and cannot easily view the 7m pages of 
documents in the case. They have pointed out that others, including the Wall 
Street fraudster Bernard Madoff, corrupt lawyer Marc Dreier and accused 
hedge-fund manager Raj Rajaratnam, have been granted bail while awaiting trial.

A 50-page petition to Houston's federal court says that Stanford, 59, has lost 
40lbs in weight in the last 90 days and is taking medicines for high blood 
pressure, depression, ulcers and an irregular heart beat. Following a violent 
assault by a fellow inmate three months ago, Stanford had to undergo 
reconstructive surgery. According to his lawyers, he has lost all feeling on 
the right side of his face and has been unable to read with his right eye.

The former billionaire recently spent two months in solitary confinement "for 
his own protection".

A psychiatrist has diagnosed him with serious depression, reporting: "If the 
present set of circumstances persist, Mr Stanford ... will suffer further 
serious physical disorders and, more likely than not, a complete nervous 
breakdown."
 