
Allen Stanford <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/allen-stanford> has been 
turned away from a Texas court after trying to turn himself in to face 
accusations that his business empire is an $8bn (£5.4bn) Ponzi scheme.

Stanford, with his lawyer, strolled up to Houston's federal building and 
declared that he wanted to give himself up to US marshals. But officials told 
him that since there was no criminal warrant outstanding for his arrest, they 
could not take him.

"There are all these rumours flying around about an indictment coming soon," 
said his lawyer, Dick DeGuerin. "We want the authorities to know that Allen 
Stanford is going to stand and fight, he's not going to run."

Stanford has been accused of fiddling US investors out of billions of dollars 
by advertising false profits and phoney investment strategies at his 
Antigua-based Stanford International Bank. Although the US securities and 
exchange commission, the financial regulator, has charged him with civil fraud, 
a criminal inquiry into his business empire by the US department of justice has 
yet to yield any action.

The 59-year-old banker and cricket impresario's stunt appears to have been 
intended to impress any judge with his willingness to co-operate, in a 
pre-emptive strike for a likely battle over bail.

Dan Cogdell, a lawyer for Stanford's chief investment officer, Laura 
Pender­gest-Holt, said: "I wish him luck with that one. Some judges might be 
bemused; others would groan and roll their eyes."

Stanford is a dual citizen of the US and Antigua. His ties to the Caribbean 
island, where he was knighted in 2006, could make him a "flight risk" in the 
eyes of the US justice department.

Since his offices were raided by law enforcement authorities in February, 
Stanford's financial empire has crumbled and his five-year, $100m sponsorship 
deal with the England and Wales Cricket Board has been left in tatters. 
Stanford's 30-year-old girlfriend, Andrea Stoelker, last week claimed that the 
couple were living off hand-outs, telling the Independent: "We're lucky to be 
living on the charity of my family at the moment, but it has been overwhelming."

In a series of eccentric media interviews, in which he has often appeared 
tearful, Stanford has claimed that he is a victim of judicial over-reach, with 
the authorities seeking his scalp as a "pretty colourful moose head to put on 
the wall". He maintains that he was unaware of any wrongdoing at his companies 
– and that the day-to-day financial details were managed by the chief financial 
officer, James Davis, who is helping prosecutors with their inquiries.
 