
Andy Hornby, the disgraced former HBOS chief executive, sought a fresh start 
today as he faced the City for the first time in his new role at the helm of 
pharmacy giantAlliance Boots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/allianceboots>.

"I think careers should be judged over the long term," said Hornby, whose 
tenure at the mortgage bank ended in its government-brokered rescue by Lloyds.

Flanked by four board members, including the company's co-owner, Stefano 
Pessina, Hornby delivered a tightly-scripted update, reporting that trading 
profits at the owner of Boots had soared through £1bn. After deducting charges 
such as the £430m interest on its debt pile of more than £8bn, underlying 
profits stood at £602m on sales of £22.5bn.

Hornby has shunned the limelight since joining the private equity-owned 
company last July but will put his head above the parapet again tomorrow night, 
delivering the British Retail Consortium's (BRC)annual lecture in London. He 
"enjoyed" the return to public life but insisted: "It's not about me," putting 
the strong results down to the wider management team which includes Pessina's 
partner Ornella Barra, who runs the pharmaceutical division, and 115,000 staff.

But for all the talk of being collegiate, Pessina's commanding presence at the 
meeting, answering all the big strategic questions, made it clear who was 
really in charge. He dismissed talk of relisting Alliance Boots, which was 
bought off the stock exchange for £12.4bn, as premature. "We will remain 
private for some years. When we did the deal (with KKR) we agreed it would be a 
long-term investment for them so there is no hurry."

Pessina also reiterated that the strictures of a listing, such as the need to 
pay a dividend, would hamper growth, adding: "We still have a lot of things to 
do with this company. We are not talking one year or two years. Five, six 
maybe, it depends."

On the back of the strong results, 55,000 UK staff, including store and 
warehouse workers, will share in a bonus pot of £50m – an average payout of 
around £900.

Hornby, who earns £1m a year, declined to comment on board remuneration but 
all will be revealed later this week when the company is due to publish its 
annual report.

Like-for-like retail sales at Boots stores were up 3% in the year to 31 March 
as women treated themselves to No7 makeup and products in the Protect & Perfect 
skincare range, which it sold at a rate of one bottle every three seconds.

With 2,500 stores, Hornby said it was not looking to add significantly to its 
footprint apart from in attractive out-of-town retail parks. But, amid 
intensifying competition from the supermarkets, the retailer has continued to 
diversify by pushing into the healthcare sector, opening more pharmacies as 
well as GP surgeries. Hornby said the trend would continue, as would new 
partnerships such as those struck with Waitrose and Mothercare - one trialling 
small food halls and the other creating a kids clothing range.

Hornby said that despite the recession, the health and beauty market had 
continued to grow, with sales of cosmetics, toiletries and over-the-counter 
medicines in Boots stores higher than in the previous year. He anticipated, 
however, a "subdued environment": "We are certainly not expecting the economy 
to improve at all."

At the time of the takeover many analysts voiced fears about the level of debt 
being taken on by the new company, which now has headquarters in Switzerland.

It was the last mega-deal to happen before the credit markets seized up in 
2007 but ironically the global recession, which led to savage cuts in interest 
rates, benefited the group, allowing it to reduce its debt by £645m to £8.4bn 
during the year. Alliance Boots finance director George Fairweather said it had 
been able to buy back its debt for as little as 60p in the pound during the 
worst of the financial crisis, although the price had since recovered to more 
than 90p. He added that more than 80% of its borrowings were covered by 
arrangements that were not due in the next five years.

During the year the company restructured its wholesale division, closing eight 
distribution centres as part of a plan that saved £30m. It has also started to 
run the old Boots manufacturing division as a standalone company to assess its 
viability. Now called BCM, the arm makes own-brand ranges such as Soltan 
suncream and No 7. Pessina said the jury was still out on the division, which 
employs 1,600 people in the UK and made a trading profit of £3m for the year. 
"It has not been a particularly favourable time for manufacturing in Europe," 
said Pessina. "We have made a lot of effort to adapt the cost and efficiency of 
this business … and will defend this unit for as long as possible."
 