
Andy Hornby's disastrous stint as chief executive of HBOS has not dented his 
earning power, with the man once regarded as the wunderkind of British business 
earning almost £2.1m for only nine months' work atAlliance Boots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/allianceboots>.

For many of the executives at the top of the banks bailed out by the taxpayer 
during the credit crunch, a return to public life would be unconscionable, or 
impossible.

This week Johnny Cameron, the former boss of Royal Bank of Scotland's 
investment banking arm, agreed to be banished from the City following an 
investigation by the Financial Services Authority, which in return has agreed 
not to pursue any disciplinary action against him.

By comparison, Hornby has made one of the most remarkable comebacks in UK 
business history. The Oxford graduate, who went on to come top of his 
800-strong Harvard MBA class, was recruited by Alliance Boots's executive 
chairman, Stefano Pessina, nine months after he leftHBOS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/hbos>, the bank rescued by Lloyds in a 
government-brokered takeover.

HBOS has since admitted the FSA is looking into the circumstances surrounding 
its rights issue in April 2008 when Hornby was at the helm.

Details of Hornby's pay package, which includes an annual salary of £850,000, 
were disclosed in the Alliance Boots annual report published yesterday. Despite 
doing just nine months' work for the owner of the high street chemist Boots, 
the chief executive was the best-paid member of the board in the year to 31 
March, earning £600,000 in salary, an £805,000 bonus and a £240,000 cash 
payment in lieu of pension contributions.

The report also shows that Hornby was gifted £400,000 as a signing-on fee.

Alliance Boots was taken private by Pessina and the American private equity 
firm KKR for £12.4bn three years ago. To silence critics of the deal who feared 
it was being saddled with a crippling amount of debt – now at £8.4bn – the new 
owners promised to publish detailed financial statements. These show that the 
group, now headquartered in Switzerland, paid £430m interest on its loans for 
the year but benefited from the downturn, which triggered a sharp fall in 
interest rates.

On Monday, Hornby made his first public appearance since he was castigated by 
MPs during last year's televised Treasury select committee hearing, when he 
presented annual results that showed the group had made a trading profit of 
£1bn on sales of £22.5bn. Speaking afterwards, Hornby said: "I think careers 
should be judged over the long term."

There has been speculation Alliance Boots is gearing up to relist in London 
but Pessina, an Italian billionaire who owns 50% of it, made it clear this is 
some way off. He said £1bn had been ploughed in since the buyout, but added: 
"We still have a lot of things to do with this company. We are not talking one 
year or two [before a listing]. Five, six maybe. It depends."
 