
My father died only a few minutes after my mother's purse, containing her 
Alliance & Leicester (A&L) card, was stolen. The police officer who attended 
told the bank and we reported it that same day. She urgently needed a new cash 
card in her sole name but instead the bank sent five replacement cards for my 
father before her own card arrived seven weeks later.

During this time, she had no access to her account. The people at the call 
centre were unhelpful, unsympathetic, and had no idea about the history of the 
problem.

In July she received, in the same post, another new pin number and Visa card 
and phoned the bank to ask why. She was asked for her date of birth as a 
security question but was told her answer was incorrect. A&L had put the 
account in her name but with my father's date of birth.

It then demanded that my mother visit the local branch with her birth 
certificate. She did not want to go there, as it is only two doors away from 
the shop in which her husband had recently died, but A&L insisted.

She set up two new direct debits, which both failed because A&L lost them, and 
my mother had to pay a £24 penalty to John Lewis.

We complained in August, but A&L lost the letter. In September we took a copy 
into the branch, but we have had no reply.JS, Swindon 

A&L's staff have acted with appalling insensitivity. The bank had already 
ignored your mother's request last August to close an account, due to an 
"administrative error", and sent her £50 and flowers.

It now gives the same reason for failing to set up her direct debits, but its 
letters make no mention of sending five debit cards to her late husband or of 
forcing her to visit the area where he had so recently died.

Putting her through this distress was not necessary. The branch could have 
confirmed her identity in another way. You then discovered the solicitor's bill 
was around £100 higher than it needed to be after dealing with A&L's errors.

The bank offered £90 compensation, including the £24 penalty, but I didn't 
think this was enough, given its many mistakes. It has now agreed to send your 
mother £160 plus £24, plus the additional solicitor's charge.

You can email Margaret Dibben at your.problems@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:your.problems@observer.co.uk> or write to Margaret Dibben, Your 
Problems, The Observer, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU and include a 
telephone number. Do not enclose SAEs or original documents. Do not enclose 
SAEs or original documents. The newspaper accepts no legal responsibility for 
advice.
 