 As before, the terror was in not knowing. Once again, a towering column of 
dark smoke disfigured the New York skyline. Once again, a plane was down and 
hundreds of innocent people, aboard the aircraft and on the ground, were 
suddenly, horribly dead. Once again, there was a gut-wrenching flood of 
feelings, a sense of panic, quickly followed by shock and sheer helplessness. 
The rage may come later. Residents of Rockaways, part of Queens, described the 
same nightmare images of flame and destruction, of burning buildings and 
shuddering, deadening noise. Despite the hideousness of what they had seen - 
parts of a plane falling out the sky, a crushing nosedive into the earth - they 
rushed into the streets to do what they could. They grabbed hosepipes and fire 
extinguishers, spontaneous actions as human and heroic as they were futile. "Oh 
my God!" was New York mayor Rudy Giuliani's first reaction. "Oh my God, and I 
just passed a church where I attended 10 funerals." Not for the first time, Mr 
Giuliani spoke for his nation - and once again, for a watching, horrified world.
The attacks on the World Trade Centre, two months and one day ago, are still 
fresh in the minds of New York and of America. They have been endlessly 
dissected and analysed. Their trauma has been faced, absorbed and, to some 
extent, dealt with. Blame has been apportioned and retribution sought, half way 
across the globe. But, when September 11 is recalled, it is still hard to 
understand how anybody could do such a thing. The terror remains in the not 
knowing. And so it was again yesterday as, with airports ordered closed, 
tunnels and bridges shut, and normal life brought to a screeching, screaming 
halt, the memories and ghosts of that terrible day returned to walk the streets 
and haunt the dreams of a people who thought they had survived.

Not knowing, in the immediate aftermath of yesterday's repeat horror, meant no 
certainty at all that it was a deliberate act, no claim of responsibility if it 
was, no warning or specific threat to the American Airlines plane, not even a 
hint of trouble from the pilot. Was the United Nations building, hosting a 
meeting on Afghanistan, the target? Was this bomb, if it was a bomb, a response 
to US attacks on Osama bin Laden? Is there more to come? Or was it just an 
accident? We do not know. That is the fear. That is how terrorism works - and 
why it must, for the sake of humankind, be defeated.
 