
An Alzheimer’s drug has been shown to successfully target the most visible 
sign of the disease in the brain, raising hopes that an effective treatment 
could be finally within reach.

A small trial of the drug was primarily aimed at assessing safety, but the 
findings suggest it effectively “switched off” the production of toxic amyloid 
proteins that lead to the sticky plaques seen in the brains of Alzheimer’s 
patients.

A decade of deadlock over Alzheimer's treatment may be drawing to a close
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/02/a-decade-of-deadlock-over-alzheimers-treatment-may-be-drawing-to-a-close>
If the tablet, produced by pharmaceutical giant Merck, is also shown to slow 
the pace of mental decline – a crucial question that a major clinical trial 
should answer when it reports next year – it could be the first treatment for 
Alzheimer’s to be licensed in more than a decade.

Prof John Hardy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/nov/09/academics-land-2m-prizes-mark-zuckerberg-breakthrough-prize-science-oscars>
, a neuroscientist at UCL who first proposed thatamyloid proteins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2010/dec/09/alzheimers-clearance-amyloid-protein-brain>
 play a central role in Alzheimer’s disease, welcomed the results. “People are 
excited,” he said. “This is a very nice drug and I’m sure Merck are feeling 
very pleased with themselves.”

Matt Kennedy, who led the trial at Merck, said: “Today there are very limited 
therapeutic options available for people with Alzheimer’s disease, and those 
that exist provide only short-term improvement to the cognitive and functional 
symptoms. They do not directly target the underlying disease processes. There 
is an urgent need for [these].”
How BACE1 blocking drug could reduce toxic proteins in Alzheimer's patients 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/11/alzheimers-bace1blocker/giv-1406qA154F6qdWUt/>
The new therapy is designed to do this by halting the steady production of 
amyloid-beta proteins, which are known to clump together in sticky plaques in 
the brains of Alzheimer’s patients. A leading theory of Alzheimer’s is that the 
accumulating proteins kill off healthy neurons, eventually leading to memory 
loss, cognitive decline and changes to personality.

Kennedy said it was too early to predict when a drug might reach the market if 
the next step is successful. “We are eagerly awaiting the results of the phase 
three clinical trials,” he said. “It is premature to speculate on availability.”

In the trial, published in the journal Science Translational Medicine 
<http://stm.sciencemag.org/lookup/doi/10.1126/scitranslmed.aad9704> on 
Wednesday, 32 patients with early stage Alzheimer’s disease were given the 
drug, called verubecestat, daily for seven days. Healthy volunteers were also 
given the drug for up to two weeks.

This was not long enough to show visible changes to the accumulation of 
plaques in the brain, by MRI scans for instance. However, samples taken from 
the fluid surrounding the brain showed the drug had reduced the levels of two 
compounds that are known to be the building blocks for abnormal amyloid 
proteins.

Hardy said that the changes to the biomarkers convince him that the drug is 
successfully targeting the buildup of plaques in the brain. The real remaining 
uncertainty, he said, was whether this would convert into cognitive benefits 
for patients.

“What we have to be worried about is that the plaques have set off other 
pathologies - that it is too late,” he said.

The drug works by blocking a brain enzyme called BACE1, which fuels the 
production of two small molecules that link together to form amyloids. 
Mutations in genes related to BACE1 have been found in people who appear to be 
protected against Alzheimer’s disease.

There have been previous attempts to develop drugs that inhibit BACE1, but 
these have mostly failed due to unacceptable side-effects, such as liver 
toxicity and eye problems.

The Merck drug appears to have very few side-effects and it will be the first 
of its kind to make it into a large efficacy trial. The company is running two 
phase three trials, in more than 2,000 patients with mild to moderate 
Alzheimer’s and in another 1,500 patients in the earliest stage of the disease. 
The results of the first of these are due to be reported in July 2017.

There are 850,000 people with dementia in Britain, and this figure is expected 
to reach one million by 2025. Alzheimer’s is the most common form of the 
condition.

Rosa Sancho, head of research at Alzheimer’s Research UK, welcomed the 
findings, adding that the Merck drug is one of several that are heading into 
the final stages of clinical testing. “There is a wave of potential new 
treatments currently being tested for dementia, with the results of these 
studies hotly anticipated over the course of the coming months and years,” she 
said.

Competing drugs include one developed by the biotech firm Biogen, which 
reported promising results in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/aug/31/tantalising-signs-that-new-alzheimers-drug-could-benefit-early-stage-patients-aducanumab>
 and which also targets the plaques. The Biogen drug aims to sweep the proteins 
away once they appear rather than halting the production of proteins in the 
first place, however.

“With us, it’s a question of switching off the tap. With them it’s mopping up 
the water,” said Ian McConnell, a spokesman for Merck.

Hardy suggested that Merck’s drug is likely to be far cheaper and easier to 
produce than the Biogen therapy, which involves injecting patients with 
antibodies.

• This article was amended on 4 November 2016 to correct the numbers of 
patients in the two phase three trials.
 