
Q In 1998 my parents were experiencing financial difficulties, so I paid off 
their mortgage for them and had the deeds of the house transferred to me. This 
was to save them being harassed for further money by unscrupulous relatives. My 
parents have now died and I am about to sell the house - I intend to split the 
proceeds with my two sisters, as this seems only fair. Will I have to pay 
capital gains tax? My parents lived rent-free and I read somewhere that 
providing accommodation for parents can help offset this tax. Can you advise me?

A Relief from capital gains tax on the sale of a house inhabited by a 
dependent relative only applies to a residence acquired before April 5 1988. 
That was one of the tax concessions phased out by Gordon Brown as part of his 
drive to boost the coffers of the Inland Revenue.

As a result, you may well be liable to pay the tax. How much depends primarily 
on whether the house was included among the assets of your parents' estate or 
was treated as belonging to you.

If it was included as part of your parents' estate and was "left" to you, then 
the capital gains tax would be based on the difference between the value of the 
property at the time of your parents' death compared with the price you get 
when selling the property.

However, if the property was not treated as part of their estate and the deeds 
had already been transferred to you, then the tax liability will be based on 
the open market value at the date of acquisition in 1998.

Open market value
 The amount you paid to eliminate the mortgage presumably represented only a 
proportion of the open market value of the house at that time. The Revenue 
would view this as a false price - it defines the market value of a property as 
the price it might reasonably fetch had it been sold on the open market.

When you come to sell the property, the Revenue will want written evidence of 
the open market value at the time of the "sale" (by transfer of ownership) in 
1998.

Generally, this can be most easily obtained from a local estate agent, 
although they may charge a fee for checking their records for the prices of 
comparable properties in 1998. Alternatively you might have to ask the District 
Valuer <http://www.voa.gov.uk/dv_services/index.htm>.

Once the 1998 market value has been established, this will be set against the 
current value of the property with the difference being liable to capital gains 
tax. That could be quite a sum bearing in mind the huge rise in house prices 
during the past eight years.

Taper relief
 You would, however, qualify for taper relief, which replaced the indexation 
allowance with effect from April 6 1998.

Assets acquired before then were entitled to relief representing the effect of 
inflation between the dates of purchase. Taper relief reduces a chargeable gain 
on a sliding scale according to the number of years involved, up to a maximum 
of 10.

The Revenue defines a year for this purpose as a continuous period of 12 
months rather than a calendar year.

There is no taper relief for the first two years, but after that the amount 
liable for tax is reduced by 5% annually for the next eight years.

Therefore, in the third year the chargeable gain is reduced from 100% to 95%, 
and by the tenth year it will reach the maximum reduction of 60%, assuming the 
rates are not changed before 2008.

In your case, if you acquired the property after March 31 l998 and sell it 
this year, the chargeable gain will be reduced to 70%, ie if the difference 
between the acquisition and sale prices is £100,000 you will be liable to pay 
capital gains tax on £70,000.

If you acquired the property before March 31 1998 you would be entitled to a 
"bonus" year. This would increase by one the number of years for calculating 
the taper relief. The chargeable gain would therefore be cut by a further 5% to 
65%, or £65,000 in this example.

The rate of capital gains tax will be 10%, 20% or 40% of the chargeable gain 
depending on whether you are a standard or high rate taxpayer.

Tax-free exemption
 You are also entitled to use the tax-free exemption from capital gains tax 
fixed in the budget each year. The current amount for capital gains tax is 
£8,800 per year, which could be deducted from the tax liability assuming you 
have not used any of the tax-free allowance to reduce any other capital gain 
made in the same year, for example from the sale of shares or other assets 
liable to tax on any gain made.

It is worth consulting an accountant or the solicitor handling the sale to see 
if any tax can be saved by either transferring ownership to the spouse paying 
the lowest rate of tax, or into joint names in order to utilise the exempt 
allowance available separately to both husband and wife.

The chargeable gain can also be reduced by five kinds of allowable costs. 
These include fees or remuneration paid for professional advice, legal fees, 
costs such as stamp duty, advertising to find a buyer, and obtaining a 
valuation. They apply both to the acquisition and disposal of the property.

You can also claim "enhancement" costs incurred for the purpose of enhancing 
the value of the property, but not the cost of normal maintenance and repairs. 
Payment of the mortgage is not an allowable cost.

So, when and if you decide to divide the proceeds of the sale of the house 
with your sisters, you will have to work out how much, if any, capital gains 
tax you have paid, plus, of course, the amount used to pay off the mortgage, 
which would be counted as a gift to your parents.
 