
Q I am 42 and am wondering whether I might be too old to change career. I 
currently work as a specialist librarian but don't have a way to move upwards 
where I am. I would like to be an administrator, but am having difficulty 
showing future employers (through applications and interviews) that a librarian 
who has spent her working life filing and organising things could be an 
administrator. Obviously my CV is weighed towards library work, but I have 
emphasised my administrative abilities. What can I do?
SH

A Is 42 too old to change career? Of course not - you still have half of your 
working life ahead of you at this point (which may not necessarily be a 
cheering thought for any of us, but is in fact mathematically true). And who 
wants to be stuck in the same job, with no way of moving up the hierarchy, for 
the next 20 years?

If anything, future employers should be impressed that you have taken stock, 
thought about the future and taken positive steps to ensure you will be 
acquiring knowledge and skills throughout your career. Really motivated staff 
can be elusive, so your determination and ambition to find a role with 
potential will stand out.

So what is going wrong? It sounds as though you could probably do with 
overhauling your CV.

I would advise making an appointment with a recruitment consultant who deals 
with administrative roles (you are lucky in that this is an area which relies 
heavily on recruitment agencies), and asking he or she to tell you frankly what 
is missing from your resume. It might be that you have all the right qualities 
but just aren't selling them in the correct language. A good recruitment 
consultant will also help you with any interview concerns.

And yes, I know, some recruitment staff are a bit horrid, but many are 
excellent and specialise in more experienced staff, so don't write them all 
off. Shop around until you find one with whom you get on.

It may be that employers and recruiters want to see more commitment to your 
new career - recruitment is often about ticking the correct box on a form, and 
if you don't easily fit into categories your skills can be disregarded. While 
your filing and organising might be tip-top, your IT or communication skills 
may not be quite so good, for instance.

Consider taking an evening course to work on any skills you are told are 
lacking - even if you are only refreshing your existing knowledge it will show 
that you are serious about changing jobs.

Also find out what is on offer in your area by contacting your local 
authority. It may be worth checking whether your local university runs any 
useful lifelong learning sessions, which are usually reasonably priced.

And will your age come into the equation at interview? Perhaps. Legally, of 
course, employers are not allowed to discriminate against candidates because of 
their age 
<http://www.direct.gov.uk/en/Employment/Employees/DiscriminationAtWork/DG_10026429>
.

In real life, it's probably not practical to start picking legal fights with 
companies who reject you for positions for which you think you are well 
qualified. Although if your age is expressly (or euphemistically - look out for 
words such as lively and dynamic) mentioned at interview, it might be worth 
politely pointing out that age can be very positive, and in any case should not 
be relevant to your application.

I would be surprised if that bagged you the job, but sometimes, workers, we 
need to stick our necks out a bit.

In any case, do you really want to work for a boss who thinks 42 is past it? I 
can't think of anything worse. Far better to hold out for an employer who 
understands that knowledge, confidence and people skills are things that all 
grow with age. And that experience - particularly in a different role - is 
something to be valued, rather than dismissed. They are surely out there - just 
hold your nerve until you find one.

(For more information on discrimination 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/discriminationatwork>, your local Citizens 
Advice bureau <http://www.citizensadvice.org.uk/> should be able to help;  Acas 
<http://www.acas.org.uk/> also offers advice on all these issues.)
 