
We asked you to leave your problems for Amanda Palmer to solve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2014/jan/14/amanda-palmer-agony-aunt-send-her-your-problems>
 – and now she’s come back with some answers. If you want more, and in audio no 
less, there are bonus answers on our Sydney festival podcast, which you can 
listen tohere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/audio/2014/jan/17/sydney-festival-podcast-episode-three-amanda-palmer>
, or subscribe by iTunes.

We’ve had to edit some of your questions for length here, but we hope not to 
have distorted your problem. Amanda replied to your questions in their original 
form.

xokatyxo asks:

How do you deal with hatred directed at you on the internet – and has the 
online hate ever spilled over into your real life? What would you advise a 
person who was experiencing cruelty/threats/bullying online to do?

Amanda advises:

People on the internet hated my band SO DEEPLY I decided to build a section of 
The Dresden Dolls' website called "Hate Mail". 
<http://www.dresdendolls.com/hatemail.html> I hand-picked the content. It was 
therapeutic. There's something very powerful about taking the hate-knives that 
are thrown at you, catching them and waving them in the air, like an internet 
jujitsu master. Or if you prefer: taking internet-hate and making internet 
hater-ade.

When I'm attacked on Twitter, I often astound the people who are griping about 
me by answering them, non-aggressively. The internet is a strange place in 
which we haven't yet sorted out the etiquette of social action, it's a 
wild-west free-for-all with a lot of yelling and hiding and ego display and 
knife-throwing. But you can humanise it by never taking the bait from the 
angriest people, and talking to everyone as if they were in the room with you. 
It disarms everybody. Don't do it with the crazy trolls. The crazy trolls are 
just crazy. Ignore them.

All that said, sometimes you need to just shut the computer and stop fiddling 
with your phone. The voices on the internet can be like the voices in your head 
– relentless and impossible to ignore, and nonproductive. So as tempting as it 
may be to stay connected to the battle and drama online, talking with your 
actual friends and hanging out in the real-life spaces of the world is the best 
antidote.

I was embroiled in a storm of internet hate last spring when I posted a poem 
to my blog inspired by the Boston bomber. And in times like that, all you can 
do is this: keep making art. Keep doing whatever it is that you're doing. Keep 
working. Keep existing and keep being a good person. There honestly is no easy 
answer, and you'll never, ever convince the people who are committed to anger 
and hatred to come out of their troll-caves. Your energy is better spent 
talking with the people who are committed to better things. And if you wind up 
feeling utterly, absolutely alone, know that you have at least one ally out 
there in the universe. Auntie Amanda will fucking hug you: she's been there.

Igorgoldkind asks:

I mainly raised my daughter when she was between the ages of 2 and 12, while 
working from home. When my daughter was 13, my then wife and I divorced as 
amicably as we could, and she now lives with her mother in England.

I have had to return to California to transition my mother who is 98 into 
assisted living – my work prospects here have really opened up and I don't want 
to just abandon my mother in a nursing home.

My problem is that I have very strong bonds to the two most important women in 
my life and I feel pulled apart between two continents. My daughter, now 15, 
has an independent social life and I feel that my mother needs me more right 
now. My daughter says she understands but I think she just says that for my 
sake. Am I doing the right thing?

Amanda advises:

My parents were divorced when I was a baby, and I grew up among a whole 
network of divorced parents (both of my biological parents remarried and so I 
had a collection of half- and step-siblings). I think 15 is a really precarious 
age, but it's also the time when girls want to be independent and do their own 
thing, so if you leave, it may not be devastating: it may be liberating.

I think the quality of connection is really important. If you stay in touch 
over text and Snapchat, call every few days, email pictures back and forth, and 
skype every once in a while, it may even be more fruitful than just being in 
the same physical space. And you should make a deeply concerted effort to get 
on a plane and give her your undivided, text-free, phone-free attention IN 
PERSON every couple of weeks/months so you don't become a ghost.

It could be that your relationship can evolve into a more adult one sooner 
rather than later if you give her space and make yourself available for 
talking. And you'll set a pretty rad example if you make sure she knows that 
your mother is a big priority, and that taking care of the sick and dying is 
something People Need To Do. Whatever happens, good luck and just love her and 
let her know you love her frequently, by any means available. That works 
wonders.

InvisibleGirl asks:

I've been having a real hard time lately and I’m finding it hard to see the 
point in living. None of my "friends" want to hear about it and it's making it 
hard to believe that people care about me. Your music has always helped me 
through rough times like these. Any advice you could give me would be greatly 
appreciated.

Amanda advises:

Oh man. Well, first of all, I'm sorry to hear you're having a shit time. I've 
been there myself many times. I wish I had a little more insight into the 
details of what you're going through, but I can unload my General Advice For 
The Depressed on you.

First of all: it may help to know that you're not alone. It might seem like 
the rest of the world and the people on the bus and in the street all have 
their shit together, but believe me, they don't. Almost everybody out there is 
suffering in their own way, and as morbid as it sounds, that can be a 
comforting thought.

There's a great old Buddhist story my best friend told me, and it goes like 
this: once upon a time, there was a young woman in a small village who gave 
birth to a baby, and when the baby was still very small, it died. The mother, 
this young girl, was inconsolable. She wailed, she agonised, she couldn't get 
over the death of her baby. She kept the baby wrapped in a blanket and carried 
the corpse around with her. The neighbours and townspeople were pretty worried 
about her, and they sent the neighbourhood Zen monk to go talk with her, hoping 
it would help.

He stopped by and she said: "My baby is dead and I don't know how I can ever 
be happy again." The monk said: "Go door to door and ask everybody in the town 
what they know about loss, and tell me if there is a single household without 
it." One by one the villagers invited her in and sat her down for a cup of tea. 
And at every table she heard stories of sickness, death, miscarriages, terrible 
accidents and lives lost and mourned … and there wasn't a single family who 
couldn't relate to her sadness. And then … she felt better.

This is all to say: even your "friends", the ones not helping you, are in 
their own stories and dealing with their own pain, and it can help to remember 
that. And about your "friends" … if they're not helping you, if they don't want 
to talk at all, if they're not available, are they your friends? Doesn't sound 
like it.

Other general advice: take care of your body. It can be really hard to do this 
when you're depressed and unmotivated, but it changes everything. Eat food that 
isn't shit and fat and sugar. Drink a lot of water. Don't make things worse by 
drinking alcohol. Don't smoke. Go to a yoga class. If you can't afford it, find 
a free one or volunteer at a studio. Drop in on a meditation class and force 
yourself to examine your own negative thought patterns. Pick up a blank journal 
and write the shit out of everything that's bothering you. Don't write for an 
audience: just write for yourself, to figure out what the hell is going on in 
your brain. If you slow down enough, you might learn something.

Hope some of that helps.

• For support and information about suicide prevention contact Lifeline on 13 
11 14 or Suicide Call Back Service on 1300 659 467. 

If this is something you have found yourself contemplating recently, please 
consider contactingthe Samaritans <http://www.thesamaritans.org.au/> or Lifeline
 <http://www.lifeline.org.au/> or going to your local doctor or hospital right 
away.

Bruxical asks:

A year ago I was unemployed and had to attend the job centre. They told me 
because of my age [56] I stood very little chance of getting a decent job and 
should accept anything. They destroyed my confidence and made me take a job on 
minimum wage. Now I once again find myself unemployed. How do I handle their 
soul-destroying inference that I am on the scrapheap, and have, at 57, nothing 
to offer.

Amanda advises:

Jesus. It sounds to me like the job centre is a god-awful place for you to be 
hanging out. Here's what I'd suggest: seek out an alternative way of finding 
work. If the job centre is going to belittle and depress you: there are other 
places.

The economy is in the shitter, as we know, and the competition for jobs is 
stiff. I'm friends with a handful of people over 60 in the United States who 
have multiple degrees and are struggling to find work. If you've tapped out 
your personal networks (have you told everyone you know, in all your circles, 
that you're for hire? Are you sure?) then I'd get creative and pile your skills 
into an email and circulate it among your friends and family, then I'd hit the 
internet and see who's offering what.

There are tonnes of listings online, you'll just have to spend a lot of time 
digging. NOBODY has nothing to offer. That's just bullshit. And if the job 
centre is making you feel that way, fuck them. But also: make sure it isn't you 
taking things too personally. The people at the job centre are probably 
stressed and busy and suffering in their own ways – and human kindness may not 
be their top priority. Just remember that.

Clare DeTamble asks:

I've been asked to spend my life with the man I love, but I'm worried that – 
as a writer – my regularly needing to be alone will ultimately get in the way 
of our relationship. Is this something you've encountered, and do you have any 
advice?

Amanda advises:

DO I HAVE ANY ADVICE? Oh darling, do I. I married a busy writer, and I'm about 
to start working on my first non-fiction book. And I've been a songwriter and 
creative thing-maker all my adult life. I have dealt with this problem in 
spades.

When I met Neil Gaiman and we embarked upon our cautious let's-date-each-other 
phase, I made it really clear that I was always going to need time alone, to 
create, be with my own thoughts, songs and work. And he just looked at me, 
barely blinked, and said "That's totally fine". And I eyed him suspiciously, 
saying: "Reaaallly? Or are you just saying that to ensnare me into your evil 
cage?" And he shrugged and said: "Really. You'll just have to believe me and 
wait and see."

He wasn’t lying. We've often booked separate hotel rooms when I've had huge 
shows to prep for. When I gave my TED talk, I kicked Neil out for two days so I 
could pace up and down my own floor, uninterrupted, to edit and practise my 
talk without having to chat about my day. An up-to-date point in case: I'm 
currently in Australia, alone, for two months, to write a book. He was supposed 
to come out for two weeks of my process and when he saw me fretting and 
stressing about my alone-time and the book deadline, he VOLUNTEERED not to come.

Meanwhile: he drove off to some friend's house in rural wherever to hole up to 
write a book (or some issues of Sandman, or whatever he's working on, I don't 
even follow his output half the time), and he gets to live totally inside his 
head for a while, which is essential for what he does. Do I miss him? Sure. But 
I also really want to write this fucking book, I want him to write his, and I 
know – speaking for myself – that locking myself up in an apartment ALONE ALONE 
ALONE is the only way to get shit done.

Now: we're extreme, and don't really even live together, but that fact in 
itself is a testament that you can do relationships any way you want. Living 
together, living apart, living next door, sharing a bed, sharing two beds, 
sharing a lover, leaving each other and coming back, keeping up your 
relationship via text, letter, carrier pigeon, whatever. Artists and writers in 
love have a reputation for doing their relationships in weird ways that work 
for them and nobody else. You make up the rules. You’re a writer, right? Be 
creative.
 