
The small Amazonian town of Nazareth is a traveller's dream. Wildlife prowls 
the surrounding jungles and indigenous inhabitants practise ceremonies that 
long predate the arrival of the Spanish conquistadores.

But it may be advisable for tourists to give the place a wide berth. Locals 
have declared their town off-limits to travellers, even though this stretch of 
the Amazon river is playing host to more visitors than ever. Their main 
complaint: tourists' behaviour, and that only a fraction of the money they 
spend trickles down to the indigenous. "What we earn here is very little. 
Tourists come here, they buy a few things, a few artisan goods, and they go. It 
is the travel agencies that make the good money," said Juvencio Pereira, an 
Indigenous Guard, Nazareth's unofficial volunteer police force.

The town of 800 people, a 20-minute boat ride from the tourist hub of Leticia, 
takes its ban seriously. At the entrance, Pereira and other guards stand armed 
with their traditional sticks to deter unwelcome visitors. Nazareth resident 
Grimaldo Ramos feels that some tourists can't distinguish between the wildlife 
and the Amazon's residents, snapping photos of indigenous families as if they 
were another animal. "Tourists come and shove a camera in our faces," he said. 
"Imagine if you were sitting in your home and strangers came in and started 
taking photos of you. You wouldn't like it."

Nazareth's actions reveal a split among the indigenous communities that live 
along the river about what role tourism should play in the region's development.

With the rise of eco-tourism, this part of the Amazon, which joins Colombia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/colombia>, Peru and Brazil, has seen a flood 
of travellers arriving to experience the world's most biologically diverse 
region. Tourists swim with the Amazon's pink dolphins, fish for piranhas, hike 
through the rainforests and take in the sunsets over the mighty river. 
According to the tourism office for the Colombian province of Amazonas, the 
35,000 people who trekked to the region in 2010 represent a fivefold surge in 
numbers over the past eight years. But as Nazareth complains, the indigenous 
people have so far seen little of the benefits, mostly just the sharp end of 
tourism.

A common concern among indigenous leaders is that local children are adopting 
the outsiders' ways, with many children more comfortable in "western" dress and 
listening to the imported music of reggaeton and Colombia's vallenato. There 
are misunderstandings of two cultures interacting. What a tourist may consider 
polite curiosity about indigenous culture can seem to some here intrusive and 
even an attempt to gain sacred tribal wisdom. "We don't like it when they ask 
members of the community about our traditional knowledge and the medicines we 
possess," said Pereira.

Other communities, however, take the view that the number of visitors to the 
region is going to rise, so they might as well profit from it. A couple of 
hours downriver lies Puerto Narino, whose mayor, Nelson Ruiz, understands 
Nazareth's worries, but says that if tourism is well-regulated it can help lift 
communities out of the poverty that troubles much of this zone.

He added that visitors are expected to abide by certain rules, such as no 
drug-taking and no sexual tourism.
 