
Jean-Pierre Jeunet's Amelie <https://www.theguardian.com/film/amelie> (Le 
Fabuleux Destin D'Amelie Poulain) has been named by the National Cinema Center 
(CNC) as the French submission for next year's Academy Award for Best Foreign 
Language Film. This ends speculation over the film's chance of an Oscar nod 
ahead of other French movies which had moved into the Hollywood spotlight. The 
rich slate of French movies in contention included Eric Rohmer's The Lady And 
The Duke, Jacques Rivette's Va Savoir, Francis Veber's The Closet and Laurent 
Cantet's Venice prize winner Time Out.

A statement from the CNC said, "The committee members were delighted with the 
number and quality of films submitted to them." Amelie, however, was clearly 
the main contender for the nomination as the CNC source added, "A consensus had 
formed around the film. Now we'll have to hope those who pick the Oscar 
nominees agree." Director Jeunet told Daily Variety, "I'm very proud."

Miramax is now expected to mount an Oscar campaign for both the film and its 
star, Audrey Tautou. The Miramax spokesperson in Los Angeles said of the 
nomination, "Obviously, we're thrilled with the attention that its selection as 
the French entry will bring to the movie and we're hopeful that the Academy 
will go beyond that to consider it in a variety of categories. We're also 
hopeful that the movie will cross over to reach an even wider audience like 
Cinema Paradiso and Il Postino did."

The film was spurned at the Cannes Film Festival this year but has gone on to 
take over $45m (£31.57m) at the domestic box office. The film has also scooped 
audience awards at the Toronto, Edinburgh and Karlovy Vary Film Festivals and 
grossed over $3m (£2.10m) in just over two weeks in the UK.

The success of Amelie reflects the current boom in French cinema. In most 
years, only about ten films will pass the 200,000 admissions target that 
qualifies any film for Oscar nomination, but this year there have been over 30 
films up for contention.

Other countries' candidates that will line up alongside Amelie for the Oscar 
include Italian For Beginners (Denmark), Dark Blue World (Czech Republic), 
Pauline et Paulette (Belgium) and Das Experiment (Germany).

Spain has named three films which have been shortlisted for its submission, No 
News From God, Sex And Lucia and Juana La Loca.
 