
A $2.2m (£1.4m) expedition seeking wreckage from aviator Amelia Earhart's 
final flight has failed to find the dramatic, conclusive plane images searchers 
were hoping for.

But the group leading the search, the International Group for Historic 
Aircraft Recovery (Tighar), still believes Earhart and her navigator crashed on 
to a reef off a remote island in the Pacific Ocean 75 years ago this month.

"This is just sort of the way things are in this world," Tighar president Pat 
Thrasher said on Monday.

"It's not like an Indiana Jones flick where you go through a door and there it 
is. It's not like that – it's never like that."

Thrasher said the group collected a significant amount of video and sonar 
data, which searchers will pore over this week to look for things that may be 
tough to see at first glance.

The group is also planning a voyage for next year to scour the land where it 
is believed Earhart survived a short while after the crash, Thrasher said.

The search was cut short because of treacherous underwater terrain and 
repeated, unexpected equipment mishaps that caused delays and left the group 
with only five days of search time rather than 10, as originally planned.

During one episode, an unmanned underwater vehicle wedged itself into a narrow 
cave, a day after squashing its nose cone against the ocean floor. It needed to 
be rescued.

"The rescue mission was successful – but it was a real cliffhanger," Tighar 
founder Ric Gillespie wrote in an email last week.

"Operating literally at the end of our tether, we searched for over an hour in 
nightmare terrain: a vertical cliff face pockmarked with caves and covered with 
fern-like marine growth."

Thrasher said the environment was tougher to navigate than expected.

The US state department had encouraged the privately-funded voyage, which 
launched earlier this month from Honolulu using 13,600kg in specialised 
equipment and a University ofHawaii <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hawaii>
 ship normally used for ocean research.

The group's thesis is based on the idea that Earhart and navigator Fred Noonan 
landed on a reef near the Kiribati atoll of Nikumaroro, more than 2,000 miles 
from Hawaii, then survived a short time.

Previous visits to the island have recovered artefacts that could have 
belonged to Earhart and Noonan, and experts say an October 1937 photo of the 
shoreline of the island could include a blurry image of the strut and wheel of 
a Lockheed Electra landing gear.

The photo was enough for the state department blessing, and led the Kiribati 
government to sign a contract with the group to work together if anything is 
found, Gillespie said.

A separate group working under a different theory plans its third voyage later 
this year near Howland Island, hundreds of miles further north than Nikumaroro.

Earhart and Noonan were flying from New Guinea to Howland Island when they 
went missing on 2 July, 1937, during Earhart's bid to become the first woman to 
circumnavigate the globe.
 