
The fallout from the controversial decision to reduce the boat size for the 
2017 America’s Cup has escalated further, with four of the five remaining teams 
issuing a collective statement openly criticising the other, Team New Zealand, 
followingthe departure of Italian team Luna Rossa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/02/americas-cup-luna-rossa-pull-out>
.

Plans agreed earlier this week to move from 62ft (AC62) catamarans to AC45s in 
the 45ft to 50ft range 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/01/americas-cup-teams-downsize-boats>
, had been passed despite opposition from both Luna Rossa and Team New Zealand.

The statement, published on the America’s Cup official website and signed by 
Ben Ainslie’s BAR team 
<http://www.americascup.com/en/news/160_Statement-from-Artemis-Racing-BAR-ORACLE-TEAM-USA-Team-France.html>
, as well as Team France, Artemis Racing and defending champions Oracle Team 
USA, said:

“We are disappointed to see how Team New Zealand are characterising the rule 
changes that reflect the collective will of the America’s Cup teams.

“During discussions last month, ALL six teams, including Team New Zealand, 
agreed on the need to change to a smaller boat to reduce costs.

“While Luna Rossa supported a less dramatic change, a majority of teams agreed 
on what has become the America’s Cup Class, a new rule written in consultation 
with ALL teams, with drafts of the rule sent to ALL teams for comment and 
feedback.

“Each team that voted for this new America’s Cup Class made compromises and 
sacrifices to get this done for the betterment of the America’s Cup. Taking 
these important decisions by a majority vote is something that was insisted 
upon by Luna Rossa and written into the rules of the event.

“Regrettably, abiding by the results of the majority vote appears to be 
something neither they, nor Team New Zealand, are willing to do ... unless they 
are part of the majority.”

Luna Rossa had confirmed their withdrawal from the 2017 event in a 
strongly-worded statement on Thursday, claiming that the rule changes were 
“founded on an evident abuse of process by surreptitious use of procedures to 
modify the protocol in order to overturn the class rule, which instead requires 
the unanimity of the teams entered.”

Following Luna Rossa’s departure, Team New Zealand, who had also voted against 
the rule changes, had issued a statement of their ownvia their official website 
<http://emirates-team-new-zealand.americascup.com/en/news/120_Emirates-Team-New-Zealand-saddened-by-Luna-Rossa-s-withdrawal.html>
.

“Emirates Team New Zealand are deeply saddened by the news of the withdrawal 
from the America’s Cup of Luna Rossa, one of the most established, respected 
and admired brands in the history of the event. Emirates Team New Zealand and 
Luna Rossa are close allies and share common values of fair play and 
integrity,” the statement said.

Team CEO Grant Dalton added: “We are quite frankly in disbelief that the 
continued actions of the America’s Cup Event Authority have lead to the 
withdrawal of our great friends Luna Rossa. It sends a clear and unmistakable 
message that the self-serving manoeuvring of rules within sports oldest trophy 
has consequences for not only the America’s Cup but also all of sailing.”

The latest developments cast further doubt on the future of the event, which 
was last held in 2013 and is due to take place in Bermuda in two years’ time. 
Uncertainty also surrounds the fate of the America’s Cup World Series event, 
which is due to begin in Sardinia in June this year.
 