
What will I learn?
The United States in all its political, cultural and social diversity is the 
focus of most courses, but Canada sometimes gets a look-in, and LatinAmerican 
studies <https://www.theguardian.com/education/americanstudies> is a tempting 
alternative, either as part of a comparative course or combined with Spanish or 
Portuguese. A degree in American Studies should develop a deeper understanding 
of the continent's ways and help answer those nagging questions – How has the 
Obama presidency reshaped American politics? Why is there a Starbucks on every 
street corner? What are the roots of US foreign relations in Latin America and 
the Middle East?

Courses should give you a good grounding in the politics, culture and history 
of the US, and an idea of its economic landscape and global significance and 
relationships. They will also include specific modules touching on anything 
from Native American land rights and the civil rights movement to the history 
of jazz or the 1950s Beat writers and America's connections to the wider world. 
Most courses will offer students the chance to specialise in a specific topic 
of their choosing, from influential American novels and films to the political 
legacy of 9/11.

Most degree courses will involve at least one semester in the US to put it all 
into context. For many students this is a defining part of the degree and an 
unforgettable experience.

What skills will it give me?
American studies degrees straddle a wide range of subjects and promote 
interdisciplinary and transnational approaches. The core disciplines are 
history, film, literature and politics, but you will often also get the chance 
to study anthropology, economics, media studies and geography, as well as a 
language, so future employers will expect you to leave your course with a wide 
range of skills and perspectives.

You should have developed empathy for how people have existed in the past, 
and, crucially, how this contributes to their present and their future. You 
should also be able to critically analyse all you've learned and know how to 
collate and present it in various forms – orally, visually and in written form.

After four years discussing America's politics, society and popular culture, 
you should be adept at forming an argument and combining different approaches 
in creative ways, and have developed a respect for other people's reasoned 
views.

Through writing essays and delivering presentations through a variety of 
media, you should leave university with a good understanding of IT and the 
ability to work as part of a team, and research and critically assess 
information from the internet and other relevant sources. You should also have 
developed self-discipline, knowing how to manage your time wisely to meet 
deadlines, which will also involve learning how to cope under pressure.

And let's not forget about that year or semester studying abroad, which will 
unleash exciting new experiences, develop your self-confidence, and test your 
ability to get on with other people, be diplomatic and explore a new country 
and culture independently.

What job can I get?
The diverse range of skills acquired during a degree means graduates in 
American studies can be found all over the place – in the media, business, law, 
financial services, management, marketing or in the civil service, including 
international, diplomatic, national and local government, and teaching.

What will look good on the CV?
• Cultural awareness and an understanding of global perspectives
• Study of a wide range of academic disciplines
• The ability to analyse and synthesise information, present reasoned 
arguments, write clearly and make oral presentations.
 