
The transition from Olympian-in-training to Olympian confirmed is always a 
strange one, say the athletes who've been through it. You train every day for 
four years in the build-up to a Summer orWinter Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/winter-olympics>, living an indescribably 
boring life of training and eating carefully and going to bed early – and then, 
if you're fortunate enough to have won a gold medal at the tournament, you 
return home to a whirlwind tour of chat shows and parties and red-carpet walks.

"Surreal," says Amy Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/amy-williams>, 
whose own transition from anonymous athlete to gold-medal darling was even more 
pronounced, in March, because she was the only British competitor to win gold 
at the 2010 Winter Games in Canada. "I couldn't share it with other people," 
says the 28-year-old, who triumphed in the skeleton luge event – a 
terrifying-looking race against the clock in which competitors ride a sled, 
head first, along an ice track at speeds of 90mph.

Williams's victory in Canada was particularly impressive because the track, in 
the Coast Mountains at Whistler, was an unusually fast one, and dangerous 
enough in its twists and turns to have killed a Georgian sledder in training 
just a week before Williams's event. The Canadian authorities were also 
controversially mean about the time they granted to non-Canadian athletes for 
training on the track. Regardless, come the Olympic event Williams 
"obliterated" the field (in her coach's words) – winning gold against more 
favoured competitors with a track-record run of 53.68 seconds.

Then came the return to the UK, and flash fame. Any nerves she felt on the 
hurtling sled, she says, pale when compared to those she felt taking to the 
stage at the Baftas (to present an award for TV sports coverage), or appearing 
as a guest onFriday Night With Jonathan Ross 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bZfD1C66nlQ>. "I didn't feel I should be in 
these places. My life was training before – I didn't do anything else. Suddenly 
I was around celebrities and actors, world-famous names and faces, still a 
little geek of an athlete."

Proof: her bedtimes were once so rigid she'd never stayed up late enough to 
watch an episode of Ross's chat show. It came as a surprise, then, when the 
unruly host interrupted their interview to don a rocket-shaped helmet and climb 
aboard his own desk, belly down, in a pastiche of Williams's luging posture. 
"He was closer than he looked," she says. "His pointy hat almost poked me in 
the face, live on TV."

Williams's life, after a season of glamour, is only now beginning to return to 
normal. She is still darting about the country making appearances and 
collecting awards (she's on the shortlist for tonight'sBBC Sports Personality 
of the Year), as well as joining the inevitable post-Olympics 
motivational-speech circuit, giving pep talks to middle-management types. But 
she is also back in proper training for the first time since March, with an eye 
on the 2014 Winter Games in Sochi, Russia.

"This is home," she says, looking pleased to be back in her training centre at 
Bath university, near to where she grew up, with its special iceless training 
track on site. It is essentially a cement hill, with a fixed sled on runners. 
The immensity of her achievement in winning gold over a field of Canadians and 
Germans, snow-spoiled, should not be underestimated.

Motivation to train as rigorously as before, Williams admits, might be a 
problem. "I don'thave to keep doing this any more. I've gone and achieved my 
ultimate dream." She says she's spoken to other gold medal-winning athletes 
about the post-Olympic dip in enthusiasm; most of them told her it can take a 
couple of years to get properly revved up for competition again.

Has there been a temptation to walk away from the sport, while she's at the 
top? "Yeah, massive. There are always negative voices in your brain, especially 
on days when you're tired, days when you don't fancy going to the gym. But I'm 
not ready to stop. I can still improve."

Bath university has made its own tribute, perhaps an attempt to keep her 
motivated. A 15ft portrait of Williams grinning, with Olympic medal and Union 
flag held aloft, has been painted on the wall of the training centre's café. 
Williams, pleased but a little embarrassed, always eats her lunch at the other 
end of the room.
 