
Canada's all right but not for the whole weekend, someone once observed and 
yet it took 10 days for Amy Williams, Britain's solitary medal winner in 
Vancouver'sWinter Olympics <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/winter-olympics>, 
to tear herself away following her thrilling skeleton run.

"I'm upset it's all over," said Williams after she arrived at Heathrow 
yesterday having stayed in Canada for the duration of the Games. The first 
Briton to win individual winter gold since Robin Cousins took the men's figure 
skating title at Lake Placid in 1980 and the first British woman since the 
figure skater Jeannette Altwegg in 1952, Williams sported a medal the size of a 
dinner gong.

Terminal 5 was hardly fit for a hero and when the Olympian was presented at an 
hotel beside the building, the British team and officials outnumbered the 
national newspaper reporters three to one. Today, however, Williams will take 
an open-top bus ride in her home town, Bath. She is used to public transport – 
the life of a struggling athlete – but with her new celebrity status she 
intends to buy a car.

"I've struggled without because I didn't want to waste money on it," she said. 
"And I do live near a bus stop. But I would quite like to have a car. I think 
there are going to be lots of places that I need to get to."

There was still a dazed look in her eyes that was surely only partly explained 
by the flight being delayed. This, after all, is one woman who is not used to 
arriving late and Williams sounded younger than her 27 years as she described 
what she will do now the Games are over. "I will just meet up with my friends. 
We've got a group and our favourite thing is to relax, cook a meal together, go 
the cinema.

"Most of my friends are athletes as well so we're always a bit tired after 
training hard, so I'm looking forward to doing that and looking forward to 
visiting all the people I've ignored for the last summer, because I've been 
training too hard."

One of the people she will not be catching up with is her rival Shelley 
Rudman, who won silver in Turin four years ago. The two fell out then about not 
sharing technological expertise, even though Rudman congratulated her in 
Vancouver. "There's been no contact," said Williams. "I believe she went home 
early. I'm not sure what she's up to. Why would our relationship change? It has 
been as it is for many, many years so there's no reason for it to change just 
because I've got a gold."

Britain's 52-strong squad won no other medals in Canada, despite £6.5m funding 
over the past four years, and Williams and her glinting medal seemed to 
highlight that failure rather than make up for it.

Andy Hunt, chief executive of the British Olympic Association, did not agree. 
"We had nine top-eight finishers and nine personal bests," he said. "We set our 
own medal target and achieved that, which was to do better than the silver we 
won in Turin. Getting our first gold medal for an individual woman in 58 years 
for me was a great achievement." And then Williams disappeared for an 
appearance on BBC's The One Show. The one and only, more like.
 