
Life will never be the same for Amy Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/amy-williams>, but as she took a seat in the 
aftermath of her gold-medal victory in the Olympic skeleton event, her face 
flushed and a union flag still draped around her neck, she looked undaunted.

"I'll embrace it all, even though I haven't got a clue what it is going to be 
like,'' she said. "I will just have to wait until I get home and see what it is 
like."

She will, but there are some things that can be safely predicted, not least 
that the anonymity that followed her to ­Vancouver is now a thing of the past. 
She arrived in Canada as the lesser known (by some distance) of Britain's two 
women's sliders – behind Shelley ­Rudman, who won silver in Turin four years 
ago – and will depart as a history maker; the first Briton to win a winter 
Olympics ­individual gold since Robin Cousins, in the men's figure skating at 
Lake Placid in 1980. The search for the last woman to pull off the same feat 
must go back all the way to 1952, with Jeannette Altwegg in the women's figure 
skating competition.

It is safe to say, too, that the country will embrace the personable 
27-year-old from Bath, the daughter of a chemistry professor and a former 
midwife.

Bubbly and with a mop of unruly long hair (her friends have nicknamed her 
"Curly Wurly"), Williams was an ­accomplished 400m runner and a ­budding artist 
until she discovered the skeleton. The year was 2002.

From ingénue to Olympic champion in just six years. Who could not fail to be 
impressed? Even Rudman, with whom Williams has a relationship as cool as 
Whistler's night air, rushed past waiting journalists so she could watch her 
rival come down the track for the fourth and final time. "She came up and 
congratulated me afterwards,'' said Williams, momentarily putting up her guard. 
"I have got respect for her as an athlete and I always have done. It's nice 
that she came up and said 'well done'."

Clearly, Britain's two finest skeleton riders are never going to be best 
friends. Still, it is not as if Williams is short of friends – her brother and 
sister, along with a legion of friends, watched her victory and partied Friday 
night away in a pub near her family home in Bath. Nor is she short of 
high-profile admirers, Steve Redgrave being among them.

The five-time Olympic gold ­medallist was trackside to watch Williams's 
­winning run and to hear the Team GB backroom staff testify to her coolness 
under ­pressure. "Before her race," Redgrave said, "I spoke to some of the guys 
and they couldn't believe how calm she was, and I was thinking, is that a good 
thing or a bad thing?

"I have been in the races where you get over the line in six minutes and you 
either finished first or third or sixth. To have all the waiting around time 
that she had [the Olympic skeleton event takes place over two days] is pretty 
tough – I know it would have been for me – and that we would find out what she 
was made of."

Suffice to say, Williams was not found wanting at any time during a week that 
had many competitors in the sliding events daunted by the track that claimed 
the life of Georgian luger Nodar Kumaritashvili. "That was on the mind of all 
of us. It was definitely on my mind, but I had to tell myself, even though it 
was the same track, the skeleton is a different sport, with different steers 
and different equipment,'' she said. "It is a really fast track. From corner 10 
onwards, you can't really see what you are doing because your head is on the 
ice and there is so much pressure. But you just have to go by feeling. You can 
feel that roof coming towards you and you have just got to hold tight."

Williams held tight from the first day of practise, surpassing even her own 
expectations while others, including Rudman, faltered. It was a similar story 
when the event started as she produced two track records in three runs to open 
up a half-second gap on her closest challenger.

That set her up for a final run for which the principal challenge facing her 
was simply to stay on the sled she has ­christened Arthur. "I didn't know how 
others had gone, but I knew this was the gold-medal run. I knew I had a big 
­margin, but anything can happen,'' ­Williams said.

All that happened was that Williams confirmed she was better than the rest, 
although when she crossed the finishing line her first thought was that she had 
lost. "I looked up at the board and all I could see was the number three. I 
thought I'd finished third."

The raucous celebrations of the British fans and the sight of her mother 
crying in the stand soon put her right. She had won, although confirmation did 
not come for another hour while the judges ruled on a spurious challenge by the 
Canadian team, which objected to the design of her helmet. "They are obviously 
­disappointed and they have to find something to bring me down,'' she said.

There is little chance of that. Williams is staying in Vancouver until the 
Games end next weekend to watch her boyfriend – a member of the Slovak 
bobsleigh team – compete and to catch a few other events. "I hope someone from 
Team GB will be able to get me some tickets,'' she said. One suspects they will.
 