
Amy Williams has Britain's first individual Winter Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/winter-olympics> gold in 30 years in her 
sights after she set a track record in the women's skeleton. The competition 
resumes in Whistler tonight with Williams holding the halfway lead.

The United States team subsequently lodged a protest against the design of 
Williams's helmet, which features a spoiler on the back which, the US team 
claimed, breached an article of the federation's rule-book which deems that a 
helmet has to be without any additionally attached aerodynamic elements. The 
complaint was thrown out by Bobsleigh Federation officials.

This means Williams will be free to pursue gold after setting a stunning track 
record of 53.83sec on her first run and held her advantage on the second slide 
to take a 0.30sec lead over Germany's Kerstin Szymkowiak, with the home 
favourite Mellisa Hollingsworth third.

The 27-year-old is taking nothing for granted, though, as she bids to claim 
Britain's first individual gold since Robin Cousins in the figure skating in 
1980 at Lake Placid. "I've had a good first day but I know I've made mistakes 
so if I concentrate I know I can do better," she said.

"The first day I'm always super-nervous but once I get down and realise I'm OK 
I really enjoy it and relax into it. Hopefully I can relax myself and not be 
too nervous tomorrow."

Turin silver-medallist Shelley Rudman was off the pace in 11th place after the 
first run and, although she improved to joint seventh, her chance may have 
gone. Rudman was much improved on her second run, registering a time of 
54.26sec, but was unable to put the disappointment of her first effort behind 
her. "I had an awful first run. I was skidding quite a lot and I couldn't find 
my line. But my second run was very good. I need a dramatic improvement but 
I'll give it everything. It all depends on what happens and if people make 
mistakes."

In the men's skeleton, Rudman's fiance, Kristan Bromley, was in fifth place 
after the opening two runs with a time of 1:45.80sec, giving him a chance to be 
in medal contention later today.
 