
While Amy Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/amy-williams> took the 
plaudits of a grateful nation, the other "member" of the duo that won Britain's 
first winter ­Olympics individual gold medal for 30 years was taking a 
well-earned rest back at the athletes' village in Whistler.

World, meet Arthur the Sled. "You name a boat, so why would I not name a 
sled?" said Williams of the 33kg ­contraption that carried her down the 
Whistler sliding track. "He comes around with me ­everywhere in winter, a lot 
of hassle at ­airports because he is so heavy. You have to bond with your sled, 
know how it works, its ­characteristics. Sometimes I don't speak to him, other 
times I do. I always give him a pat at the end of my race. Yesterday I gave him 
a few pats."

Also on the receiving end of a few pats from Williams were Rachel Blackburn 
and James Roche, a pair of post-graduate engineering students at the University 
of Southampton who designed the sled as part of their doctoral thesis.

"The concept is mine but there's a ­massive group of people that came together 
and expertise from everywhere," said Blackburn, a one-time sailor who has a 
degree in ship science. "I knew nothing about the sport. I came at it purely 
from an engineering point of view. I thought what's out there and how can we 
make it better. There were existing sleds that we could modify but there was 
too much to modify and we decided to start from scratch. It's the balance 
between the stiffness of the chassis for speed versus the sensitivity for the 
control. If you can't get the lines but you have the speed, then you're going 
to crash. It's achieving that fine balance for each individual."

Blackburn and Roche, who have formed a company together, Blackroc, started 
work on the sled four years ago, backed with money from UK Sport and logistical 
and practical support from upwards of 20 UK companies, including BA Systems and 
the McLaren Formula One team. "Many a time I've had dreams, I've had 
nightmares, I've thought that's a great idea and then it's not worked," said 
Blackburn.

"Then we came up with some ­concept designs and, before anything was made, we 
went and got approval and more ­suggestions from McLaren and they said, 'Go for 
it.' From that point on we had more belief. You can do drawings and you can try 
and perfect it but until you've actually made it and tried it, you don't know."

Once the sled was built, it was tweaked and tweaked again. Williams took a few 
bruises and some ice burns before the design team were happy. Their confidence 
was bolstered when the British slider came second at the world championships 
last year, although Blackburn and Roche arrived in Vancouver with hope more 
than expectation. "It is unbelievable that Amy won the gold. Realistically we 
didn't talk about medals or pressure or any of that, we just wanted everyone to 
do the best they could," Blackburn said.

In the end Williams' best was good enough to beat the rest of the world. But 
will it be good enough to earn the design team of Blackburn and Roche the 
­doctorate degrees from the University of Southampton? They will find out for 
sure in September, when their studies ­officially end, but the answer is 
already clear. Passed. And with honours.
 