
Great Britain planted its flag on the medal table last night with the most 
precious metal of all as Amy Williamswon the women's skeleton event 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2010/feb/20/winter-olympics-2010-amy-williams-gold>
. It was ­Britain's first individual gold at a Winter Olympics since Robin 
Cousins took the men's figure skating title at Lake Placid in 1980.

Williams, who travelled to Vancouver as the No2 skeleton slider in the British 
team, behind Shelley Rudman, winner of the silver medal in Turin, swept aside 
the competition on the track at the Whistler Sliding Centre, with a winning 
margin of 0.56sec.

Two course records in her three runs left the 27-year-old with a half-second 
lead over her closest challenger, Melissa Hollingsworth of Canada, going into 
the fourth and final round of competition. Nothing is ever certain in the 
skeleton, especially on this controversial Whistler track, but with that kind 
of advantage Williams needed only to stay on her sledge to win. She did exactly 
that, and with aplomb.

"I love this track," she said. "Once you get over the fear factor you learn to 
love it and the speed is your friend. You've got to work with it and relax and 
if you do that it's a great track to slide."

Williams insisted she had never let her position as overnight leader play on 
her mind. "I surprised myself because I wasn't really nervous," she said. "I 
slept absolutely perfectly and I was quite excited. It doesn't feel like an
Olympic Games <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games> - it just feels 
like a normal World Cup race except with more people shouting for me.

"I'm not very good at statistics so I didn't realise I'm the first 
(individual) gold medallist for a long time. But I think it shows that if you 
have the determination any country can be good at any sport and you just have 
to concentrate and do your best."

Her victory is the first British gold medal at the winter Olympics since Rhona 
Martin's women's curling squad prevailed at Salt Lake City. Before that Jane 
Torvill and Christopher Dean won gold in the ice dancing at Sarajevo in 1984.

It came at an opportune moment for the 52-member British team, which had 
secured a best-placed finished of eighth – by Zoe Gillings in the women's 
snowboard cross. It also represented a ringing endorsement of the decision by 
UK Sport to invest £2.1m – out a total of £5.8 spent on winter sports ñ in the 
skeleton event.

She has been competing in the skeleton since 2002 and won silver at last 
year's world championships in Lake Placid, New York, and lives in Bath, 
training at her event and working on a degree in sports performance at Bath 
University.

Meanwhile, Norway's Aksel Lund Svindal won a crash-strewn super-G yesterday to 
deny the American Bode Miller a first Olympic gold and claim his second medal 
in a week having taken silver in Monday's opening downhill ahead of 
third-placed Miller.

The charging Miller, who was 11th out of the start hut on a bright and crisp 
morning, had to settle for the third silver of his career to become the first 
American to win four Alpine Olympic medals. His team- mate Andrew Weibrecht, 
who had started third, was a surprise bronze medallist on another good day for 
the U.S. skiers who also have a gold and two silvers from two women's races.

The Norwegian started 19th on Friday, with Miller's time of 1:30.62 looking 
good for gold until then, and was faster by 0.28. "I think I carried a lot of 
speed through Coach's Corner, I made a small mistake before that but managed to 
carry the speed and it worked out," Svindal said.

Norway's Marit Bjoergen dominated the women's cross-country 15km pursuit oto 
claim her second gold and third overall medal. She completed the course in 
39min 58.1sec, 8.9sec quicker than Sweden's Anna Haag. Bjoergen stalked the 
leaders for much of the race before taking command at the 9km mark.
 