
This is a dreadful film. But at its heart, there is a valid idea. It's about a 
32-year-old Jane Austen obsessive called Jane, who visits atheme park where 
Austen fans dress up <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156702/austenland> 
in Regency costume and are courted by actors. Jane, played by Keri Russell, 
does ring true: I met a number of women like her in my time as curator ofJane 
Austen's House Museum <http://www.jane-austens-house-museum.org.uk> in Chawton, 
though I can't say whether any of them actually had a lifesize cutout of Colin 
Firth as Mr Darcy in their bedroom.

As far as I know, a theme park like Austenland doesn't exist, but I can 
certainly imagine one. There's aDickens World <http://www.dickensworld.co.uk/> 
in Kent with costumed actors giving tours – but I don't think they actually 
immerse visitors in the world of the books to the same extent. There's 
certainly a huge Austen industry, though. Fan fiction, in particular, is 
massive:the Lizzie Bennet Diaries <http://www.lizziebennet.com> is a very 
modern online version of Pride and Prejudice, in which Lydia, rather than just 
eloping with Wickham, makes a sex-tape with him.

The film contains several gauche nods to Austen. We see a character carrying a 
pug – there's a pug in Mansfield Park. And Jane's friend Lizzie Charming has 
affinities to Mrs Jennings in Sense and Sensibility. JJ Feild is superb as the 
dashing Henry Nobley, too. In fact, this whole film could be said to have an 
over-the-top, gothic air that's reminiscent of Northanger Abbey, though really 
it bears no comparison with Austen's art.

Austen was a very funny person. I think she might have found certain aspects 
of the film amusing – the whole idea of the Austen industry, for one. But I 
don't think she'd have liked the film's ultimate debasement of her craft. She 
was one of our truly great novelists, and yet so many people just get bound up 
with the bosoms and the bonnets. They want to delve back into a past when 
everything was simple and everyone was nice, and the hero always brought a 
happily-ever-after. I sometimes wonder if Austen shouldn't have written so many 
happy endings.Austenland is out now.
 