
Everyone knows that a university degree can do wonders for your career 
prospects. But many people overlook apprenticeships, which can also be a great 
way to kickstart your professional life.

Apprenticeships <https://www.theguardian.com/careers/apprenticeships> suit 
people who enjoy a varied learning experience. Every scheme involves some 
academia, but it's coupled with on-the-job training. So it's the ideal way to 
earn and learn, especially if you don't want the risk of student debt.

And there is something for everyone, with more than 200 different types of 
apprenticeships, lasting from one to four years — from nursing and graphic 
design, to horticulture and electric vehicle engineering. You will be learning 
skills that are beneficial to employers, with the aim of making you more 
employable in the future.

But this is a big commitment and it is essential you choose the right 
apprenticeship for you.

Here are some tips to help you through the application process:

Do your research

The more aware you are of your likes, dislikes, strengths and weaknesses, the 
better choices you will make. You'll be able to sell yourself solidly and 
hiring managers will appreciate this.

There may be different entry requirements depending on the apprenticeship and 
the industry. You can look for apprenticeship programmes via theNational 
Apprenticeship Service <http://www.apprenticeships.org.uk/> or at your local 
Jobcentre Plus. You could also approach companies directly to ask if they have 
any opportunities. They may have something coming up in the future, but haven't 
advertised yet.

Although there will be a learning provider involved in your apprenticeship, it 
will be the employer that provides the practical experience, so it's important 
to know how you will be supported. What is the culture like? Have they employed 
apprentices before? Will you have a work-based mentor? What are the 
opportunities for you afterwards?

Apprenticeships can be hard to find, but make sure you don't pick one just 
because you fear another opportunity won't come up. The programme must feel 
right for you.

Applying

Once you've found an apprenticeship you're interested in, you need to prepare 
your CV.

This may sound strange, but your CV isn't about you: it's about how you could 
add value to the employer within the role you are applying for. Try to focus on 
the following areas:

• Personal information: Don't be afraid to include details of your social 
media presence, alongside your other contact details. It's becoming more common 
for employers to search for potential employees online. You're allowed to have 
a personality and a life, but make sure that what they see online matches what 
you are telling them offline.

• Structure: Some employers may only spend seconds glancing over a CV before 
deciding if it is relevant. Use short sentences and bullet points to allow them 
to do this easily.

• Hobbies: Listing hobbies like swimming, socialising and going to the cinema 
is fine, but in this competitive market you need to do more to make an 
impression. Show an employer how your hobbies demonstrate what type of an 
employee you'll be.

• Cover letter: This is an opportunity for you to build rapport with the 
employer and give them a further insight into you and your application. Before 
you tell them why they should pick you, tell them why you picked them. No 
employer wants to feel like you've just sent out a batch of applications, 
hoping one of them calls you, so ensure you make it specific to the 
organisation.

What are the benefits?

The National Careers Service claimed that apprentices can earn £100,000 more 
on average during their career, than those who take a different route 
<https://nationalcareersservice.direct.gov.uk/advice/courses/typesoflearning/Pages/apprenticeships.aspx>
.

While on a programme, pay can often be good too. According to the 2012 
apprenticeship pay survey 
<https://www.gov.uk/.../12-p137-apprenticeship-pay-survey-2011.pdf> an average 
apprentices' wage is around £200 per week.

Aimee Bateman is a careers mentor. She appears in a series of films for BBC 
Learning Zone on apprenticeships <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b01rllxw>.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Careers 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/>. To get more content and advice like this 
direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update and receive our free 
Careers Ebook <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/>.
 