
An Education, Lone Scherfig's coming-of-age tale about a teenager who becomes 
involved with an older man in 60s London, leads the charge at theLondon 
Critics' Circle film awards <http://www.criticscircle.org.uk/film/>. The 
shortlist, announced today, included seven nominations for the drama, among 
them actress of the year and British actress of the year for star Carey 
Mulligan.

Another big beast is A Prophet (Un Prophète), Jacques Audiard's gangster 
thriller about the fortunes of an illiterate teenager in a French prison, which 
has five nominations, including screenwriter of the year for Thomas Bidegain 
and Audiard, actor of the year for star Tahar Rahim, director of the year and 
foreign language film of the year.

A Prophet, which won the Grand Prix at Cannes this year, will also go head to 
head for the film of the year gong with James Cameron's Avatar and Michael 
Haneke's The White Ribbon – another hit on the Croisette, where it took the 
Palme d'Or. Kathryn Bigelow's Iraq-set drama The Hurt Locker and Jason 
Reitman's tale of a corporate downsizer, Up in the Air, complete the lineup.

Meanwhile, Quentin Tarantino, whose film Inglourious Basterds has been a 
surprise hit with awards bodies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/dec/15/tarantino-inglourious-basterds-critics-choice>
 in the runup to the Oscars, will be handed the circle's highest honour, the 
Dilys Powell award for excellence in cinema, at the ceremony on 18 February at 
the Landmark Hotel in London.

Chairman Jason Solomons said of Tarantino: "He is currently the most 
passionate and exciting director in America, always engaged with the future and 
the history of cinema, his life blood. His award is for daring to keep cinema 
fresh and vital as an art form."

He added: "The fascinating nominations list this year reflects the wide range 
of tastes of British critics and great diversity of first-class film-making 
which is now taking place around the world, with Britain playing a major role. 
The list suggests there could be some very surprising and refreshing results 
come February."

Tarantino said: "Britain has a great tradition of film criticism and for all 
my work to be recognised among the great past recipients of this award is 
really exciting."
 