
Last year a writer I liked very much died. Jonathan Rendall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/feb/09/jonathan-rendall> published 
three books, one of which,Twelve Grand 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Twelve-Grand-Jonathan-Rendall/dp/0224092324>, is among 
my favourites by any author. He was a boozy, melancholic soul with a low-lit 
style and his obituaries didn't hold back on his dissolute, sometimes chaotic 
life. His writing was admired by Tom Stoppard and he won a Somerset Maugham 
prize but almost every piece on him noted his "wasted talent", partly because 
he had died so painfully young. Well he didn't seem to have wasted it to me.

It's the nature of talent, when it manifests itself as apparently effortless 
brilliance, for it to appear both ephemeral and carelessly used by the 
characters who possess it. Yet the life is inseparable from the art, indeed the 
art is art because it is informed by the life. Jonathan Rendall couldn't have 
written the way he did without being the person that he was, and it's analogous 
thatKevin Pietersen <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kevin-pietersen> could 
not bat in the way that he does without being the man that he is. The talent 
might appear different because those of us with lesser ability imagine 
ourselves guarding it jealously, rationing it out, tending it like a secret 
garden.

In 2004 I had become distant from the game. I'd lived in Australia for a 
while, hadn't played much, just about kept up with it in the papers. It had 
receded in my interior life. I was in my lounge one morning in the winter, the 
sun was out, I was struggling to write something or other and I realised that 
England were about to play South Africa. The area had cable and I had a bit of 
money, and before I really thought about it, I was on the phone getting Sky 
Sports turned on. In the couple of hours that it took, I realised that I felt 
more excited and happy than for a while. The game was back. I didn't know why, 
but I could feel it.

That was the series when Pietersen played his three extraordinary one-day 
innings, centuries struck at an emotional pitch as true as a tuning fork. At 
the time, and right through until the following summer, he was talked about as 
a one-day player with a technique too iconoclastic for Tests but I knew with a 
rare certainty that it wasn't true. He hit 92 in a game at Bristol and the wave 
he was making became irresistible. The story was that he was picked over Graham 
Thorpe, but really the choice was between Thorpe and Bell. After Bristol, 
Pietersen was playing either way.

Lord's was extraordinary. England were hammered but on the first morning the 
bowlers roughed Australia up and each time Pietersen batted he murdered Shane 
Warne. It was obvious from the way he walked out how much he wanted it.

From that game on, I was more invested in his batting than in anyone else's. 
Something was happening, not just to England, but to the way the game was 
played. There were some batsmen more skilled and better than Pietersen in that 
phase, but he had this innate imagination and feel. His game was an act of 
creativity and it's no exaggeration to say that he broadened the horizons of 
batsmanship.

He wasn't playing in isolation of course. The game was changing – he arrived, 
essentially, at the same time as T20 – and Virender Sehwag was pushing at the 
limits too, along with Chris Gayle and Adam Gilchrist and then lots of others. 
There was a kind of kinship between them. They were not formal heroes like 
Sachin Tendulkar or Rahul Dravid or Ricky Ponting, and their effect on the 
future would be different.

But KP was English, or at least he was playing for England, and the English 
psyche, deeply conservative, deeply repressed, is a challenging place for the 
non-conformist. It was doomed from the start and I knew it. In a way, it's 
amazing that he lasted as long as he did.

It's fair to say he was part of the reason for starting my blog 
<http://theoldbatsman.blogspot.co.uk/>. Once he had commanded the imagination, 
it was hard to resist writing about him, because in working out what he was 
doing, I was often working out what I felt I knew about cricket, or what it 
meant to me.

When a player like Pietersen or a writer like Rendall comes along, it's easy 
to develop a relationship with their work that leads you to think that you know 
more about them than you do. All you really know is that their talent speaks to 
you in some way.

Twelve Grand seems like an effortless book, and yet Rendall worked so hard on 
it he was briefly hospitalised. As Kevin Mitchell wrote about him, his love 
affair with writing "ebbed away" after that. Pietersen trained and practiced 
harder than anyone: the imagination demanded it. Nothing good can be effortless 
at that level.

I've found it quite hard to care about the arguments over who's done what and 
what went wrong that have raged today. Four men sat in a room and brought 
things to an end, and I think in years to come it will be a burden on them, 
maybe not publicly but when they have to be alone and remember it. If Pietersen 
hadn't been reintegrated, then we would not have had Mumbai, perhaps his 
greatest innings and one of the best of the modern era. So what will we not 
have now?

Overwhelming talent wants us to think it's wasted because, along with being 
apparently effortless, it seems somehow endless, inexhaustible. It works on the 
imagination. Pietersen's career will never be seen as complete, and he will 
have to live with hearing about it. His talent has not been wasted though. It's 
better to write three good books and leave them wanting more. Pietersen's 
legacy is not one of numbers, but what his batting has meant to those who have 
watched it.

For a while now I've wondered if he'll be remembered as a great player or a 
player of great innings. It doesn't matter. He will be remembered. He will live.

• This blog first appeared on The Old Batsman 
<http://theoldbatsman.blogspot.co.uk/>
• Follow The Old Batsman on Twitter <https://twitter.com/theoldbatsman>
• Follow Guardian Sport on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiansport>
 