
That first call to the photographer is crucial

When calling photographers looking to get a foot in their studio door, it'll 
probably be the photographer's current assistant who will answer the phone. As 
you are looking to assist with that photographer, you are ultimately trying to 
get that person's job – most photographers only have one assistant at any one 
time – and so they may not be that keen to pass on your message to the 
photographer. So, it's important to be persistent.

When you do speak to the photographer just ask if you can come and visit, 
offer to help out on their personal work or to come as a second assistant on a 
job. It's all about trying to work around what the photographer needs at that 
time as it will pay off. Once you have worked with them, stay in touch and if 
you performed well you'll be asked back next time you are needed. And once that 
happens you're in.

It is essential to assist people you admire

When starting out, try and push yourself to assist across a variety of genres 
because you never know what kind of job you may get in the future or whether a 
completely unknown genre will surprise you. Different types of photographers 
use different cameras, lights and computer software. Working on fast paced 
fashion shoot is a completely different experience to working in a more 
methodical still life environment, for example. Once you know what area you 
want to get into, focus on that.

The main thing to remember is to always assist for people that you really 
admire. Learn what it is that makes them great at their job and add those 
skills to your repertoire. There's no point in learning bad habits from less 
successful photographers. So take some time to research the photographers and 
their work and figure out who it is you really want to work for.

A portfolio is a great way in, but no one expects a finished book at this stage

As an assistant, coming from a photographic background/college is helpful but 
it is not essential. Either way, showing work is a great way to get your foot 
in the door.

If you are pulling together a folio, remember that at this stage in your 
career, people don't expect a highly polished finished book, it's early days 
and there is still a lot to learn (whether you have been to college or not). A 
portfolio that demonstrates your enthusiasm for photography, a grasp of the 
basics such as composition and exposure and possibly work with a bias towards 
your chosen area such as still life or portraiture, is a good start. But 
ultimately an interesting eye is really what the photographer will be looking 
for. During your time an assistant you will be able to add to your portfolio as 
well as gain a real understanding of what people look for when commissioning 
work.

On average aim for about 25 to 30 pages, any more and it's a lot to take in. 
But if you have less that's absolutely fine, as people would prefer to see 
fewer strong images rather than more that are weak or very similar.

Remember, though, when you first meet the photographer, you are selling 
yourself as an assistant, not a photographer at this stage, so you'll need to 
show that you have a passion for photography, as well as a willingness to learn 
and that you're going to be a well-organised, helpful pair of hands.

Brush up on your industry knowledge

Being a photographer's assistant is all about giving the photographer what 
they need before they realise they need it, so take the time to really get to 
know the industry. Be a sponge and learn all you can about everything.

Get your head around all the kit - digital, traditional, lighting, everything. 
There are so many software options, including the programs that the camera 
shoots to, such as Phase One and Leaf. Try downloading trial software or 
approaching dealers about workshops to learn more. Although you are likely to 
have to do this in your spare time, being able to run the camera software is a 
great help.

New photography magazines or visually interesting magazines such as Wallpaper, 
Vogue, Dazed and so on, plus websites and blogs are great resources. For 
commercial photography good websites includeIts Nice That 
<http://www.itsnicethat.com>, Features Shoot <http://www.featureshoot.com/>, 
Creative Review, <http://www.creativereview.co.uk/> D&AD 
<http://www.dandad.org/> and Campaign Live. <http://www.campaignlive.co.uk/> 
There are also many photographic organisations and clubs from online blogs 
where you post your work and a 'pro' rates your picture to membership 
associations like the AOP. All have their place in photography and can help in 
some shape or form, so get involved.

Be prepared to roll up your sleeves and get stuck in

It is perfectly normal to be assisting for three or four years before becoming 
a photographer. You'll be working long hours and you'll need to keep smiling 
even though you will find yourself doing a lot of the unglamorous stuff. But 
just roll up your sleeves and get stuck in because there is nothing better or 
more valuable than learning on the job.

Jonathan Minster is a commercial photographer represented by Vue photography 
agents <http://www.vue-us.com/>

To get more content and advice like this - including links to forthcoming Q&As 
- direct to your inbox, you can nowsign up for our weekly Careers update 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 