
I first ventured into the exciting world of temping back in 2004 after leaving 
my family home in rural Cambridgeshire to seek my fortune (or at least an 
affordable place to live) in Nottingham. I settled into the local way of life 
fairly quickly, fully embracing the vibrant music scene, the regular and 
reliable public transport and the array of strange dialectical words such as 
'cob' (which, as I eventually realised, had nothing to do with corn).

Once I'd allowed ample time to familiarise myself with the way of life, I 
searched the Yellow Pages for employment agencies and headed into the city 
armed with a file of heavily padded-out CVs.

By the time I'd left the first agency, I had a job lined up: a month of 'temp 
to perm' customer service work at a call centre. All the agency had needed from 
me was a photocopy of my passport and the assurance that I could use a 
telephone. No in-depth interview or competency testing required.

Unfortunately, I had lied. Although I was capable of 'using a telephone' in 
the very literal sense, when it came to handling calls from people I didn't 
know asking questions that I couldn't answer, I was useless. During the first 
week I must have hung up on and incorrectly redirected about half of the calls 
I received.

By the end of the month I received the inevitable news that I wouldn't be 
taken on in a permanent position. Surprisingly, my display of incompetence 
didn't seem to deter the agency from giving me more assignments. Within a 
matter of weeks I was drafted into a new role, although one that involved a lot 
less telephone work.

Fortunately it didn't take long for me to get over my telephobia, and within a 
few months of working in a wide variety of roles (well, about as wide as the 
remit of admin will allow) my office skills had advanced significantly, and I 
had become something of a commodity in the temping world. It wasn't just due to 
my reputation as being the fastest mail-merger in the Midlands either, it was 
more down to the fact that I worked hard and learned quickly.

Six months after graduating and with the first signs of unemployment-related 
insanity taking hold I have enthusiastically returned to the world of temping. 
Although the industry remains largely unchanged, the recession has made it far 
more competitive than ever before. With that in mind, here are my tips to 
making it as a temp in 2011 and beyond.

Top tips

 * Getting your foot in the door 
As I'm sure you won't be surprised to hear, getting your first temp job is 
nowhere near as easy as it was a few years ago. Competition is rife, and 
sometimes even getting to speak to someone face-to-face is a challenge in 
itself. Firstly, temp agencies hate paper. If you were to walk into your local 
office with a CV in hand they'd probably look at it as if it was the Greek 
edition of A Brief History of Time. However, you can't just email them a CV 
either as they receive hundreds of CVs a day. Your best bet is to visit their 
website, find a vacancy that interests you and then give them a call. If they 
think you'd make a suitable candidate they'll ask you to email a CV and then go 
in for an interview. Then you're officially 'on the books'. Huzzah.
 * Become a known face among agency workers 
Well, maybe not 'huzzah' just yet because it takes more than being a name on 
the system to get regular work. The key is to become a known name (or better 
still, face) among the agency workers. However, regular contact is a delicate 
balance. You want to be familiar, but not annoying, so give them a call once a 
week to let them know your availability. Chances are, once you've shown 
yourself to be a reliable employee they'll be the ones calling you.

Once you've wangled that first assignment, you'll need to work hard at it. 
Temping can be pretty boring, especially when work is in short supply, but you 
must resist the urge to procrastinate! There's always something you can be 
doing, even if it's just shredding documents all afternoon. It's all about the 
long-game. The harder you work today, the more work you'll have in the long 
run, even if it means that this particular assignment will end early due to 
your unforeseen brilliance.
 * Integrating into the workplace 
Every work place is different. Some are intense and formal, others are 
laid-back and friendly and most are somewhere in the middle. But regardless of 
the atmosphere, you have to adhere to the rules of the agency you represent. 
This doesn't mean acting like an admin drone, rather that you should maintain 
both a friendly personality and a strong work-ethic. By doing so you will often 
be rewarded by being referred to by your actual name rather than 'the temp', 
which makes you sound like a villain in an office-based superhero film.
 * Make the most of the chance to build new skills 
Even though you'll probably spend most of your temping 'career' desperately 
trying to get a permanent job, there are few vocations that offer you the 
chance to develop so many new skills in such a short space of time. Admittedly, 
not all of these skills will take pride of place on your CV, but with job 
market being so competitive, your month of 'external communication 
facilitation' (sending mail-outs) may just tip the balance in your favour.

Gordon Stribling works as a freelancer for Mixmag <http://www.mixmag.net/> 
magazine and maintains a blog of his published work atGordon Stribling 
<http://gordonstribling.blogspot.com>  