
It sometimes feels like there is an endless list of statistics used to promote 
IT careers. But these hopeful stats can be misleading as breaking into the IT 
sector without industry specific experience and robust skills can be really 
tough for graduates. A university degree isn't always enough.

Here are my top tips and insights for increasing your chances of landing a job.

Understand the nature and role of IT

Many university degrees don't provide graduates with enough exposure to the 
full product development life cycle and how this relates to the business world. 
For example, IT students may be taught to write code to solve algorithms or 
prove certain academic principles but the commercial realities of being a 
developer are not sufficiently explored.

To break into the IT industry you will need to appreciate the context of the 
industry – IT exists to enable business. IT professionals are employed to solve 
business problems and improve processes or efficiencies.

You also need to be aware that due to the nature of the industry you will need 
to work with a variety of people throughout a project lifecycle – from 
technical professionals to more business focused users. Optimum communication 
and interpersonal skills are therefore essential for IT professionals.

Take on projects outside your studies

Unfortunately curriculums for IT related degrees are broadly academic, despite 
the fact that IT employers demand technical skills. Therefore it is vital that 
you develop your skills outside of the University lecture hall.

While studying for your degree, practise the skills you are learning by taking 
on projects for people you know. Build websites or a small home network to 
understand how hardware and software integrate.

Developing phone or tablet applications is also a great example of an 
innovative way of practicing your skills. Include links on your CV to any 
technical work you have completed.

If your coursework allows, try to take on assignments with a real world value. 
You can do this by approaching organisations and offering to take on projects 
or pitching an idea and you may even end up getting paid if it's of any value.

Get the right type of work experience

While studying, approach charities and companies with low budgets. Larger 
organisations often don't have the time to take on interns and manage them. 
Smaller organisations will be in need of your skills and will allow you to get 
involved in the full life cycle of the project, providing invaluable 
experience. Plus volunteering always makes a great impression with employers 
and it can be really rewarding to put your skills to use for a good cause.

When taking on work experience, however, make sure you choose the role and 
organisation carefully. There is no point taking on a role just to fill the 
work experience criteria. Employers will want to see the benefit of your 
placements and you need to be able to demonstrate the business rationale behind 
what you did.

IT is a fast moving industry, so stay up to date

Due to the ever-evolving nature of the IT industry, graduates will need to 
stay one step ahead of the game at all times. Keep up to date with industry 
news on a regular basis and make sure you have an opinion on emerging 
technologies.

Your research must be wide and varied so trawl through industry journals such 
as those provided by Computer Weekly and subscribe to technical newsletters.

Technology forums are also a great way of tapping into what is going on in the 
industry. Join as many forums as you can and take note of what people are 
saying. You should also contribute to discussions as this is a fantastic way to 
prepare for job interviews.

It is also vital that you stay abreast of what is happening in the specific 
sector you want to branch into. For example, if you are thinking of working 
within the finance sector you will need to research that industry just as 
thoroughly and understand how IT contributes to that field.

Be prepared to talk about your projects

Employers will often be interested in your final year project and you need to 
be able to describe how and why you did the assignment and most importantly how 
you know you did it well.

Interviews for IT roles can be demanding. Employers are looking for passion, 
enthusiasm and potential, in lieu of commercial experience. Anything you have 
to demonstrate these attributes are worth mentioning in the interview.

Focus on a few technologies you feel most comfortable with

Also, focus on a few technologies you feel most comfortable with, rather than 
mentioning every technology you have vaguely encountered. Prospective employers 
don't expect the impossible but anything on your CV is fair game.

You also need to be able to remain calm under pressure as practical tests may 
be sprung on you. Be prepared to build code on demand and offer a presentation 
on how you built this code.

Although it might sound obvious the most important thing to do when attending 
an interview is to be professional. At FDM we introduce the commercial 
realities of being an IT professional from our experience of our very demanding 
and varied client base. An IT role requires you to interact with employees and 
clients at all levels and you must be seen to possess the air of 
professionalism needed to do so.

Computer science isn't the only qualification IT employers are looking for

Most IT employers will demand both academic qualifications and commercial 
experience therefore it is best to have a balance of both.

Computer Science degrees are not the only qualifications IT employers will 
accept. Maths and numerical science are popular disciplines but I would also 
stress that courses such as engineering and philosophy are also relevant 
subjects. If you want to work in IT you need to be a skilled problem solver 
with a logical mind, hence the emphasis on these subjects.

If you are considering a masters then opt for an applied course – the more 
practical the better.

When considering training in programmes such as Java and C Sharp you also need 
to understand that the mechanics are basically the same. You should aim to 
master object orientated languages so that you can apply it to a variety of 
programmes rather than studying an isolated subject.

IT employers like to see long-term contracts on your CV

IT employers don't like to see a list of short-term contracts on your CV so 
make sure you've really nailed your role before you move on. It's important to 
learn as much about the business as possible and not just about how they use 
technologies.

The need for perseverance is especially important within the banking and 
insurance sectors as graduates only really become productive to these types of 
firms after at least six to nine months of employment. Graduates who are lucky 
enough to work within these sectors, must understand and adapt to the complex 
business environment to become beneficial in their role, therefore long-term 
commitment is key.

Henry Duddy is head of the development graduate employer and IT services 
providerFDM Group <http://www.fdmgroup.com/>.

To get more content and advice like this - including links to forthcoming Q&As 
- direct to your inbox, you can now sign up for ourweekly Careers update 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 