
You'll be judged on the quality of your creative work, more than qualifications

The skill you develop in the process of gaining the qualification can be 
priceless. The qualification itself is very little use. Success post-graduation 
will be determined primarily by the quality of the creative work you generate. 
In some circumstances a qualification from a respected institution is seen as 
an indication of ability and can make a development exec, producer or agent 
more inclined to consider your submission. But whether they continuing reading 
beyond the first few pages has nothing to do with the qualification and 
everything to do with how much they like what they're reading.

Build a network of trusted readers to critique your work

Basic screenwriting fundamentals can be learned through self-study and a few 
trips to the library. A screenwriting course is worth investing in only if it 
helps you develop the critical acumen you need in order to identify the 
weaknesses in your work and to invent solutions. Most writers also need a 
network of wise and trusted readers capable of giving constructive feedback on 
works-in-progress and a university or film centre can be a good place to make 
those connections.

Start sending your scripts out - but don't expect to hear anything back first 
time

Start with BBC writersroom, the one place that welcomes unsolicited scripts 
and gives feedback on work that shows promise. Individual writers used to be 
able to apply directly to the UK Film Council for development funding but those 
funds are now distributed by theBFI  <http://www.bfi.org.uk/>which indicates a 
preference for submissions from writer-producer teams. To meet producers 
contact your regional screen agency; they should be aware of who is active in 
your area. Most importantly, expect none of this to work, at least the first 
time.

Managing rejection is a big part of the process but perseverance pays off. I 
had been in contact with Film Agency for Wales for more than two years with 
very little success but last October, after two script submissions and one 
unsuccessful application for development funding, they put me in touch with an 
independent producer who has since expressed interest in optioning one of my 
scripts.

Hollywood studios and production companies scour competitions for scripts

Part of the seductive appeal of screenwriting is the idea that you can go from 
a poverty-stricken unknown to a wealthy success story in the space of a 
weekend. It's the equivalent of Fabio Capello seeing you play street football 
on Tuesday and handing you an England cap on Wednesday. Except occasionally it 
actually happens.

The good news for British writers is that Hollywood doesn't really care where 
you live. If you've written a marketable high-concept script that jumps off the 
page and has an appealing role for a bankable movie star then you've got a 
chance of making a sale. But how do you get your script out there?

Screenplay contests offer genuine opportunities. Not all are worth the entry 
fee but some, like theNicholl Fellowship 
<http://www.oscars.org/awards/nicholl/index.html>, are well-established launch 
pads for new writers. Many Hollywood studios and production companies request 
to read not just the winning scripts but those that make the top ten or twenty 
in the major contests. In recent years websites such asInkTip 
<http://www.inktip.com/> have also developed services that help connect 
screenwriters with entertainment professionals looking for new material.

Taking a backroom job in the film industry to get your foot in the door isn't 
necessary, but if you do choose waitressing as your back up career you must 
have a stellar script at the ready

Most emerging writers need a second (and sometimes third) job to pay the bills 
and it's not essential that these jobs are within the film or television 
industry. In fact, an enjoyable non-film job that pays well and leaves you 
plenty of time to write might be more beneficial to your writing career than an 
energy-zapping position on the fringes of the entertainment industry. In the 
last three years I have worked in a variety of roles from a film producer's 
assistant in Beverly Hills to a twilight shift shelf-stacker in a supermarket 
in North Wales. I don't recommend the latter but the former won't magically 
launch your writing career either.

Working for a producer – reading the Hollywood trade papers every day and 
writing coverage of screenplays being considered for production – gave me 
valuable insight into the development process but what mattered most was that I 
was writing in the evenings and on my days off. I made a lot of connections but 
generating interest in you as a writer is only useful if you have a really good 
writing sample to show people as soon as they are interested. If you meet a 
producer while selling her tickets at a film festival and she tells you to send 
her one of your scripts (it happened to me in Toronto) she doesn't want to wait 
six months for you to finish something. Have a stellar script ready to send out 
while the person who asked for it still remembers who you are.

Be prepared to spend three to five years trying to get a break: you need 
self-belief verging on delusion

The most helpful career advice I've received came from a successful 
screenwriter who advised my class to give ourselves three to five years of 
trying to break into this industry before we even think about doing something 
else. That's three to five years of probably not making much money, not getting 
on the property ladder, not having any job security. Certainly, there are many 
easier ways to make money than writing. It's hard work that often requires 
levels of self-belief that verge on delusion. Opportunities have to be 
unearthed so search far and wide. In 2009, after a year of false starts in 
Wales, I was in danger of losing my enthusiasm so I moved to Toronto on a 
working holiday visa throughBUNAC's (a not-for-profit work abroad organisation) 
Work Canada programme <http://www.bunac.org.uk/uk/workcanada/>. I had three 
part-time jobs (at a theatre organisation, a film festival, and a concert hall) 
but it was such a stimulating environment that I found myself writing more 
there than at any other point in my life.

Any other advice?

The cliche is true: the more your write the better you get. It's never too 
early to start networking but make sure you have something to show people once 
they find out you're a writer. Be mobile, don't wait for opportunities to come 
to you. Get work experience and intern as much as you can afford to. Don't be 
afraid of screwing up, mistakes are just "research" for writers. Spend at least 
a day on a film set. Get close enough to the actors and director to see how 
they work with the script. Practice your public speaking, most working writers 
have to pitch stories at some point. Listen toJeff Goldsmith's free podcasts 
for Creative Screenwriting magazine 
<http://itunes.apple.com/us/podcast/creative-screenwriting-magazine/id77837603>
; these in-depth interviews with working writers are goldmines of screenwriting 
wisdom. Travel, it will show you that your normal isn't the same as everyone 
else's normal, and will free you to write from your own experience. Don't just 
watch films, read screenplays. Remember that good stories are full of conflict 
and emotion. Most of all, write every day. Or at least know that you are 
competing with people who do.

Stephen Davis is a freelance screenwriter, administrative handyman, and a 
graduate of theAmerican Film Institute in Los Angeles <http://www.afi.com/>. To 
follow Stephen's screenwriting adventures, you can alsofind him on Twitter 
<http://twitter.com/#!/hellostephen>.
 