
Know your industry and stay ahead of the curve

If you're passionate and serious about getting into PR, it's essential to keep 
up to date with industry news and trends, so make sure you read all relevant 
trade press such asPR Week <http://www.prweek.com/> and Campaign 
<http://www.campaignlive.co.uk/>. Don't forget websites too, there are loads of 
great blogs out there written by industry experts such asColin Byrne 
<http://byrnebabybyrne.com/>, CEO of global PR firm Webber Shandwick, or 
Futurebuzz <http://thefuturebuzz.com/> a digital marketing and PR blog. It a 
great way of staying ahead of the curve both in terms of developments within 
organisations as well as the industry itself. It will also really help you out 
at interviews as prospective employers will want to know that you've done your 
research outside of their company and that you have an understanding of how the 
industry works. If you're looking for further training, news or contacts it's 
also worth checking out thePublic Relations Consultants Association 
<http://www.prca.org.uk/>, an externally recognised body.

Be chatty

PR is all about communication, so if you're not comfortable picking up the 
phone and chatting to people you've never met before then get comfortable and 
quick. You may end up working on a campaign which isn't necessarily an easy 
sell, which means it might be harder to sell in to journalists, so you have to 
be pretty thick skinned, determined and enthusiastic - it's no good going in 
with a defeatist attitude. Be confident when you speak to journalists, it's 
really obvious when you've not committed to what you're selling in. In order to 
get that confidence it helps to establish relationships, this will allow you to 
find out what sort of stories they'd be interested in and then targeting them 
accordingly. Ask you supervisor or mentor (if on a placement) to take you along 
to a media meet, if you work in events invite a journalist down to meet you or 
simply take them out for a coffee and find out more about them and what they're 
working on.

Network, network, network

After all it's a big part of working in PR. You need to be comfortable 
speaking and connecting with people. The digital age has really enhanced this 
for PR so sign up for professional social networking sites such as LinkedIn, 
join relevant groups, get involved in discussions and, most importantly, make 
connections. It's also worth looking outside the digital sphere and going to 
industry seminars and industry events, many of which are run by guest speakers 
or lecturers at universities - they are they are great for getting face time 
with industry leaders.Adtech <http://www.ad-tech.com/> is a good one that 
focuses on digital and social media marketing and PR.

It can be tough walking into these events with the intention of schmoozing 
with industry leaders so its good to come prepared. Swat up on campaigns that 
have recently been won and personnel movements – these can be really good 
conversation starters. For example: "What did you think of Unilever's recent 
experiential campaign for Walls?" or "I hear so and so has recently moved to X 
company – what impact do you think that will have upon its PR strategies?"

Don't include everything you ever did in your portfolio

Having a decent portfolio is becoming increasingly important for PR 
professionals. Employers want to see that you can deliver and produce quality 
results so a portfolio is the best way to demonstrate this. It should be clean, 
simply laid out and structured by campaign making sure that both online and in 
print coverage are filed. You could even set up an online portfolio – it's 
great for sending over in advance of an interview. Always keep hold of press 
releases too as it's important to see the campaigns journey from start to 
finish as well as showcasing your writing skills. It's wise to treat your 
portfolio in the same way you would a CV, keep it tidy and not too long - don't 
include absolutely every scrap of coverage otherwise it will look messy – think 
of it as a best of and lay out all of your cuttings, then choose the strongest 
pieces. Also, remember to keep the content broad, so include regional press as 
well, not just national and product placement.

Jon Gloyne is head of PR recruitment for Major Players 
<http://www.majorplayers.co.uk>, a recruiter for the creative industries
 