
You don't have to be the greatest artist but you MUST love design

You can draw the analogy that the design industry is a bit like a Rugby team 
in that no matter what your skill set there is a role for you to play. 
Typically a reasonably sized packaging design agency will have brand and design 
strategists, account managers, studio planners, production artworkers and of 
course designers so it's not essential to be the greatest artist in the world 
to work in the industry. That said every one of those people is united in a 
passion for design and marketing brands that transcends the organisation. It's 
important to be realistic. On leaving college many people have high aspirations 
about designing the next Evian bottle, or Innocent brand launch however the 
reality is that design is a highly commercial business. You have to be prepared 
that for every bespoke premium design commission there is a wealth of big brand 
design roll outs and range redesigns that serve to pay the bills.

Getting the right qualification is a good starting point

The Design Council's latest report <> has shown that there are more than 
50,000 undergraduates studying design related subjects at any one time in the 
UK so ensuring that you have qualifications appropriate to the field of design 
you want to go into is obviously important. Increasingly agencies are looking 
for qualifications from a recognised establishment to demonstrate a relevant 
skill set – if it is packaging design this should of course include the 
appropriate programmes and applications required to design notably Illustrator, 
Photoshop and so on.

Getting the right qualification is just the start however. Like many 
over-subscribed industries, the first foot in the door is the hardest part. 
It's true that some agencies offer internships and work experience but for the 
most part you have to be prepared to start at the bottom; a quick survey of our 
design team showed that many started at small local agencies, sign writers, 
printers just to get the initial on the job training and experience before 
aiming their sights upwards.

Research agencies and know their clients

Design agencies vary massively in their approach and personality – from the 
large internationally networked corporates to the smaller creatively driven 
outfits. It's important to decide carefully what kind of agency would suit you 
and your aspirations at this stage – you can always change later. If you are 
approaching agencies directly research thoroughly what makes them tick, their 
design ethos and importantly their clients. Demonstrate that you have made an 
investment into their business; perhaps develop a creative thought or concept 
that relates to one of their clients that may give the agency team a reason to 
meet with you. We receive far too many generic blanket emails for creative 
positions that don't inspire. If it is packaging that you are aiming for make 
sure also that you acquire a good knowledge of the FMCG (Fast Moving Consumer 
Goods) market – what are the issues and developments that effect the agencies 
clients. Read titles such asThe Grocer <http://www.thegrocer.co.uk/> to 
demonstrate that you have an understanding of the commercial end of design.

Get to know people in the sector - and make sure they know you

The packaging design industry is a very small network with a few key players 
in recruitment and agency heads so it's essential to get known in the right 
places. Read the industry titles avidly includingDesign Week 
<http://www.designweek.co.uk/>, look also to industry bodies such as the DBA 
<http://www.designbusinessassociation.co.uk/> (Design Business Association) and 
Design Council <http://www.designcouncil.org.uk/> on what services these 
organisations offer. Speak with the specialist recruiters – they will have a 
barometer on the health of recruitment within the industry and how best to 
approach finding a role. If you can, get the opportunity to show them your work 
and discuss openly how you can evolve your presentation to improve your 
chances. Make contact with individuals – go to design talks and forums, there 
are a number of talks arranged by design bodies such asDesigner Breakfasts 
<http://www.designerbreakfasts.co.uk/>, that are informal and informative and 
good places to meet with people in the industry.

Your personal brand needs to be as strong as those you design

We are in the business of branding and marketing so it goes without saying 
that it's vital to brand and market yourself appropriately. Today packaging 
design is becoming a broader industry than just creating on shelf packaging, so 
demonstrate that you know and work in the digital environment through having a 
professional online presence through Facebook, Linked In and design forums. 
Also, be open to sharing work through design specific sites including package 
design blogThe Die Line <http://www.thedieline.com/> and expert columns site 
PopSop <http://www.popsop.com/> and develop a voice in these arenas. Plus, 
please don't clog up email systems by sending through large-sized PDF 
portfolios - links are preferred.

Finally if you do get to interview and present your work to the creative 
director of your dream agency – ask for advice and demonstrate a willingness to 
muck in and start at the bottom –it will be appreciated and may just help land 
you that first vital rung on the ladder in one of the most rewarding industries 
you could work in.

Ben Harris is brand development director at strategic branding and design 
agencyAnthem Worldwide <http://www.anthemww.com/> has more than 12 years 
experience in brand and brand marketing and has worked across leading brands 
including Heinz, Grolsch, Nestlé and Unilever.
 