
Saying you "want to get into international development" isn't specific enough. 
Have a specialism and know it

First of all, specify beyond the idea that you just "want to get into 
international development". For example, are you interested in human rights, 
campaigning, working with disaster relief and health provision in extreme 
situations? And you need to be able to explain in detail why you are interested 
in that area. Know what fields interest you before starting to build your 
portfolio of qualifications and experience, so you maintain continuity in your 
CV. Narrowing down your interests, skills and geographical focus, particularly 
in your CV and in interviews, will communicate your knowledge, commitment and 
passion to employers and generally take you in the right direction. If you are 
new to the sector, this may take time and involve research, doing a short 
course or seeing a careers adviser. If you're after recommendations, Kevin 
Cusack at World Service Enquiry and Jeff Riley at C2 Careers, part of the 
University of London Careers Group, are good advisers.

Overseas work isn't just desirable, it's essential

You will find that in international development most employers will look for 
at least six months and up to two years overseas experience. This is so you can 
demonstrate practical knowledge of the sector and an awareness of different 
working practices. It also shows important personal skills, such as being able 
to adapt to challenging situations and overcoming cultural barriers. 
Volunteering is a great way to gain overseas experience, especially if you 
enlist the support of a focused sending agency that will offer you careers 
advice and support in arranging a placement that suits your skills, career 
goals and area of specialism.Volunteering Options <> is a useful resource for 
advice.

Build your technical knowledge

Once you know the specific field you want to get into you can start to gain 
relevant qualifications. It's not just about degrees and masters courses, 
although these are great if they are relevant. Avoid doing a general 
development studies degree and instead think about more specific subjects such 
as human rights, trade, economics or environmental management. There are also 
fantastic short-term courses that will help you get to know the sector if you 
can't commit to full time education or if you have just graduated and want to 
build your knowledge in a particular field:

Merlin: health  <> 

RedR: disaster relief <>

MANGO: finance <>

LSE summer school: general development <>

Think beyond the big players

Everyone knows Oxfam, Amnesty, CARE, Action Aid, Red Cross — these are all 
fantastic organisations working in international development — but the 
competition for paid jobs is high, as these guys get a lot of press and 
advertise widely for support. It is common for one job with these agencies to 
get more than 800 applications. So, it may be worthwhile finding some 
lesser-known charities to give you that first experience in the sector where 
you may have more responsibility in your role, especially if volunteering. 
Attending events, conferences, careers shows, following online forums and 
development organisations on Twitter will help you build contacts in the field, 
and also help you identify some unknown development charities that may not 
advertise jobs widely. Networking could even be a separate heading here as its 
so important in the sector, in finding out about jobs that aren't advertised 
and getting recommendations for jobs.

Learn the lingo

There's a lot of jargon in international development, and words you should and 
should not use. Make sure you know what NGOs (non-government organisations), 
CSOs (civil society organisations) and multi-laterals are, for instance. And 
it's not just abbreviations — politically laden terms such as "the third world" 
as opposed to "economically developing countries" need to be correct. This is 
particularly relevant with big agencies such as CARE International whose human 
resources director says the organisation no longer uses the term "capacity 
building". You really need to know this information before handing in CV s or 
covering letters. Keep up to date with the websites of the charities that 
interest you, as well as general development websites and Twitter. I'd 
recommend you follow Overseas Development Institute (@odi_development 
<http://twitter.com/odi_development>), Institute of Development Studies (@IDS_UK
 <https://twitter.com/IDS_UK>) and Department for International Development (
@DFID_UK <http://twitter.com/dfid_uk>). Also go to as many events as you can — 
this will give you really up-to-date information from people in the know, as 
well as insights on how they communicate what they know.

Katherine Tubb runs a volunteer organisation called 2Way Development 
<http://2waydevelopment.com/>, and co-runs Positive Change 
<http://positivechangeautumn.eventbrite.com/> careers conferences.
 