
The online retail sector is made up of a number of diverse skillsets and 
backgrounds. There are roles for creative types, the analytically minded and 
the entrepreneurial alike. Here are a selection of routes and relevant 
experiences that will help you get ahead.

Working in a shop will give you invaluable experience

If you've worked in a high street shop, you'll have an understanding of 
customer patterns and demands, as well as knowledge of how to merchandise a 
product. Think about some of the scenarios you dealt with then consider how an 
online store would tackle similar issues.

Document these ideas as they come to mind. These little anecdotes will sound 
impressive when you get an interview; it will demonstrate that your mind is on 
appreciating the customer and delivering what they want.

There are of course, differences in selling offline and online - for example, 
offline you can communicate the mood of the brand through the store, online you 
have to use content and graphics, plus if you fail to engage shoppers online 
it's easier for them to click elsewhere.

There's demand for writing skills

The lines of publishing and retail are blurring. Online shops need editors who 
can create content which entices customers to shop and come back for more.

Product descriptions need to be cleverly written to encourage buying, email 
newsletters and blogs require good editorial features, while video content 
needs sharp script and planning.

Prove your editorial skills by writing – and keeping up – a blog. Ensure it 
has a focus, and demonstrates that you can consistently write about a niche.

Design is important, but user experience is king

Designing websites and mobile apps can make for a fun job option for those 
with an eye for design. However, be conscious that if you want to design retail 
websites, creativity will sometimes have to come second. Online shops need to 
offer an enjoyable user experience. Fancy or over design can put off consumers.

To get an idea of what works, subscribe to newsletters of retailers you'd like 
to work for. Then redesign them and play around with designing for retail 
purposes.

Brush up on your telephone manner

Joining a customer services department is one route into marketing for online 
retail. Customer services and marketing are coming together in some areas of 
online retail.

Shoppers discuss retail experiences – both good and bad – on social networks 
such as Facebook and Twitter. Most online shops will converse with customers on 
those channels to resolve issues, and typically it is managed by customer 
service and marketing teams in tandem.

Understand the internet and what drives traffic

Online retailers need marketers who can devise savvy ways to get people to a) 
visit websites, b) buy something and c) come back to do it all again.

When it comes to getting people to visit, you could become a specialist in one 
area or knowledgeable in many.

SEO – search engine optimisation – the technique of getting websites to appear 
highly in search engines when users enter relevant phrases, is seen as an 
important skill for online marketers. Learn the basic principles of SEO, but 
note that simply knowing about SEO is not enough. It is seldom the basis for a 
long term career and neither a necessity.

The industry needs individuals who can promote online brands offline. Try to 
think of ways you would promote your favourite website to its target audience 
with a tiny budget. All retail websites track how users behave; how they found 
the website, how long they stayed, what pages they looked at and whether 
anything was purchased. This is tracked with what's called an analytics package.

To learn more about how these work, start a website, install an analytics 
package (Google Analytics is free and most widely used) then teach yourself. 
Then teach yourself some more.

Follow the industry

Seek news on the retail and digital industry. The Guardian's Business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/business> section and the digital section of 
Media Guardian <https://www.theguardian.com/media/digital-media> are useful, as 
well as websites such asDirect Commerce <http://www.catalog-biz.com/>, Retail 
Week <http://www.retail-week.com/> and Econsultancy <http://econsultancy.com/uk>
.

Know the movers and shakers

Check the LinkedIn profiles of the online retail industry's key people to get 
an idea of career routes. OnDirectors Of .COM <http://directorsof.com/> we 
regularly feature internet business leaders.

Dissect websites

Pick three different types of online retailer. Follow them on a daily basis; 
analyse the changes they make to homepages and content in newsletters. 
Challenge yourself to think like them; consider why they've made particular 
decisions on messaging.

Industry knowledge is a way to impress new contacts

Research the name of the e-commerce director and make an email application. 
Impress them with your knowledge of the messaging used on their website, their 
product range and recent marketing initiatives – remember to follow keenly 
before making contact.

Following before contact is important as it shows you have taken the time to 
understand them. The process will also inspire you with ideas, and all 
directors are open to hearing ideas. You may come up with something that is 
unworkable but you'll be showing the right attitude.

Visit online trade shows and conferences such as Internet World and TFM. If 
you know what niche you want to work in look for specific events. For instance, 
in fashion industry theLondon Fashion Network 
<http://www.londonfashionnetwork.com> and Drapers 
<http://www.drapersonline.com/news/> hold talks with e-commerce leaders. Check 
these events, you'll learn from presentations and benefit from meeting people.

Leon Bailey-Green is the founder of Directors Of .COM <http://directorsof.com> 
- a network for internet business people. The network tweets at@DirectorsOfCOM 
<http://twitter.com/DirectorsOfCOM>.

To get more content and advice like this - including links to forthcoming Q&As 
- direct to your inbox, you can nowsign up for our weekly Careers update 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 