
Don't over-crowd your showreel with everything you've ever done

A showreel is your greatest calling card and should demonstrate to potential 
employers the very best of what you can offer them. It is a common mistake to 
just throw in anything and everything you've ever done. Something simple done 
well is far more effective than something complex done badly, and will better 
demonstrate your level of skill and quality of work. It's also best to avoid 
using tutorials in showreels as these tend to look too formulaic. Once you have 
got the balance of content right, get it out there. Target the companies whose 
work you admire and would like to work for, and upload it to sites like YouTube 
and Vimeo which are both great platforms to show off your work to the wider 
world.

Big breaks can come through entering and winning a competition

There are loads of people out there who think they can create the next Toy 
Story from their home computer, but it is a competitive industry and you need 
passion and determination as well as talent in order to succeed. Get as much 
experience as you can, either through work experience or through the 
traditional pathway of starting out as a runner and working your way through 
the ranks. Many of the industry's biggest talents started out this way and it's 
a great way of building your skill set, trying new areas and meeting people, as 
well as giving you valuable new material for your showreel. My big break in the 
industry came after I entered and won a competition to find new CG talent run by
Escape Studios <http://www.escapestudios.co.uk> called CG Whiz 
<http://www.escapestudios.co.uk/cg-whiz-2010/>. As well as a training course at 
Escape, part of the prize was a work placement atThe Mill 
<http://www.themill.com> – a world leading visual effects studio - which has 
since lead to a full time position here.

Leave your ego and the door and be prepared to take direction from clients

A CG artist's talents don't just revolve around your visual and artistic 
skills – you need to be a good communicator too. Being able to talk with 
clients, directors and producers to interpret their creative ideas and achieve 
their artistic visions is essential. Egos must be left at the door as you must 
be able to take direction and be prepared to have your work critiqued. By 
building good relationships and winning the trust and respect of your clients 
and colleagues you'll also be able to bring your own ideas to the table.

You must keep up with technological developments in CG

New CG software is coming out all of the time so it's really important to keep 
on top of your game and know your stuff. A course like the one I did at Escape 
Studios is great preparation for working in industry as I got to use the 
software actually used by visual effects professionals. Having a good technical 
understanding of how the software works is also really helpful and can open up 
other career opportunities such as an research and development oriented role. 
An increasing number of people from maths and science-based backgrounds are now 
coming into the industry which adds another layer of skills into the mix.

Always keep your eyes open for ideas

Always keep your ears and eyes open as creativity and inspiring ideas exist 
all over the place. Personally I really enjoy photography, going to art 
exhibitions and watching films. The most successful CG artists are those who 
are passionate about what they do with a genuine interest in the creative 
industries, and who never stop learning and opening themselves up to new ideas 
and new techniques. It goes without saying that you need to work hard and not 
be afraid to put in the hours to go that extra mile and achieve outstanding 
results. The payoff is fantastic however – nothing beats seeing your work on 
screen knowing it is being watched by millions.

Adam Droy is a 3D artist for The Mill <http://www.themill.com> - a company 
which produces moving image, design and digital projects for the advertising, 
film, TV, games and music industries
 