
Get active online

There's no hiding a behind a CV when it comes to digital journalism - editors 
will expect you to have a strong online presence already. So start your own 
blog about whatever area you want to break into and show you can bring a story 
to life. Integrate text, pictures and video wherever you can, but don't use 
multimedia tools for the sake of it – only if they help communicate the story 
and engage your target audience. Do, however, include lots of links, especially 
to websites you want to work for. And encourage as many other bloggers and 
websites to link to your site – this will move you up the search engine 
rankings.

Follow your passions and specialise

It's much easier to engage an audience if you are writing about something you 
care about. So if you have a passion for motorsport, fashion, or music, blog 
about that and focus your job hunting on websites which cater for fellow 
aficionados. If you can build a big Twitter following in your chosen subject 
area, even better.

Spot stories and get them published

More than anything else editors want people who can identify breaking stories 
ahead of the competition and come up with 'off diary' news items. So get out 
there, talk to people and find some news. Put it on your blog, or better still, 
sell it or give it to an established news website. This shows potential 
employers you have a decent news sense and that you can deliver the goods.

Master the basics

Online journalists need the same core skills as their print or broadcast 
colleagues (many, after all, work across more than one medium). So show you 
have a good grasp of media law for instance – online editors are no less 
paranoid than any other about getting sued – and make sure your research, 
interviewing and writing skills are up to scratch. There are plenty of 
journalism courses around the country to choose from.

Keep your technical knowledge up to date

Editors of traditional newspapers and magazines are under increasing pressure 
to attract online readers but some struggle to keep up with changes in 
technology. In fact, you may know more about the internet than they do. So if 
you can impress with your grasp of the latest online developments and enthuse 
about how new technologies can reach new audiences and transform the way news 
is consumed, you might just talk your way into a job.

Get involved with the blogosphere

There is a wide community of bloggers out there, so start reading their 
postings, communicate with them, and learn from what they do. Hone in on people 
blogging or tweeting in your area of interest, or for more general bloggers 
check out sites likeThe Blog Herald <http://www.blogherald.com/> and 
www.journalism.co.uk <http://www.journalism.co.uk>. One connection can soon 
lead to another, so be open about the fact that you are looking for work – 
someone might just know of a vacancy or suggest somewhere you could try.

Have you considered looking outside of the media for work experience?

Work experience placements or internships are essential these days if you want 
to land a staff job. Don't forget small charities and community organisations. 
They often have basic news websites but lack the human resources to develop 
them. If you offer to help improve their site, they may be more than happy for 
you to contribute content too – a great showcase for your work. Charities can 
also be a good source of stories, so there should be plenty of scope for news 
gathering.

Keep it snappy

Editors are usually under a lot of pressure and have little time to spare. So 
when you approach them for work, an email of just a few lines is best. Set out 
clearly what you have to offer and include a link to your blog or website, your 
CV and a mobile number. Long or rambling missives simply won't be read. It's 
fine to follow up with a phone call after a few days to check your email has 
been received. But don't be disappointed if the editor doesn't have time to 
chat. And prepare yourself for lots of rejections. In journalism, this comes 
with the territory.

Jamie Elliott is a journalist and lecturer for the SAE Institute, London 
Digital Journalism Professional Diploma course 
<http://london.sae.edu/en-gb/course/3952/Digital_Journalism_Diploma#general>
 