
James McGee wakes up in another anonymous, rented room. This time it’s in 
South Yarra, Melbourne. He is a tennis player ranked 198th in the world, the 
most successful current Irish player by a distance. He rubs the sleep from his 
eyes and stretches out a sore body. Twenty-four hours before he came within one 
game of qualifying for the main draw of theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>. He tries not to think 
about the £26,500 he would have won for qualifying, or the precious ranking 
points he would have gained. Instead, he focusses on his love of the game. It 
remains constant, in the face of the stark difficulties of surviving on the 
tour.

“I have had some very bad times, there are times when you lose a game and you 
are wondering where the next money to keep going is coming from. If you let it, 
it can really hit you hard. I remember being injured, having no coach and 
wondering how I can keep going, but you have to remember how much you love the 
game and that keeps you going and moving forward.”
James McGee (@jamesmcgee01) 
Tough loss today, Brands deserved it. No regrets as I gave everything. I'll be 
back stronger no doubt#bounceback 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/bounceback?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/iZeYO35seR 
<https://t.co/iZeYO35seR>
 <https://twitter.com/jamesmcgee01/status/688272868933672960> January 16, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/jamesmcgee01/status/688272868933672960> 
McGee’s career relies on scant sponsorship and prize money, sources of income 
that can dry up at a moment’s notice, whether through loss of form or injury. 
He travels the world playing tournaments in the hope of climbing a lofty 
ranking ladder and gaining entry to the elusive grand slam tournaments that 
promise prestige and some financial solace. Money expended on coaching, travel 
and tournaments all comes out of his pocket, which is noticeably shallow.

“I’m at the stage where I’m 28, I am putting absolutely everything into my 
tennis. There isn’t time for anything else.Tennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> has been everything to me since I 
was a kid in Dublin, but it can be tough. Loneliness is sometimes a factor, I 
can remember spending eight days out of 10 sitting at dinner alone with a book 
or a podcast at a tournament. Also, normal things like having a girlfriend are 
unfortunately hard, unless I can find someone who can constantly travel with 
me, but that’s unlikely.”


After years of living in Barcelona with minimal to no coaching, McGee has 
moved to Tampa in the US this year to be near better facilities and coaching. 
He works out all his travel and logistics himself, spending hours pouring over 
the best deals for flights and accommodation on his laptop to stretch his 
finances as far as possible to compete on the Challenger tennis circuit.

After practice, he sometimes writes letters asking for sponsorship. Yet, he 
can smile when he recalls his life three years ago, far removed from the 
freshly manicured lawns of Wimbledon. “A few years ago, I was on the Futures 
circuit, where I had to play at that time to gain ranking points. The 
tournaments are in some interesting places. I ended up playing one in Damascus, 
Syria, staying in a filthy hotel surrounded by ants, dirty sheets and noise, 
but you get on with it. The worst was probably in Libreville in Gabon, where I 
won a tournament and I was shaking about 500 hands afterwards and then tucked 
into local cuisine, before getting infected with a parasite that kept me out of 
tennis for months.”

McGee is a pioneer in Ireland, no native Irish player has been ranked as 
highly in the modern era. His national federation is run on a ragged shoestring 
budget and it leaves him concerned about any young players following his path 
into the game he loves. “I just don’t see it getting easier for Irish kids 
wanting to come through. There needs to be more funding and a vision of where 
tennis in the country can go. The reality unfortunately is, if you want to play 
this sport, you have to leave Ireland.”

Playing in wristbands in the colours of the country he has been exiled from 
for many years, McGee revels in playing a game where nothing is left to chance. 
He plays to his physical limits, exhausting himself as he throws himself at 
every ball. He understands at 28 that time is not on his side and he doesn’t 
want to leave the sport with regrets. “My biggest fear is getting to 70 and 
wondering, ‘Could I have done more? Did I give this game absolutely 
everything?’ If I never break beyond 150th in the world, but I can look myself 
in the face and say I gave it absolutely everything, there wasn’t anything else 
I could have done.”

McGee strongly believes he can break into the elusive top 100 of the world 
rankings but he needs his body to stay injury-free and retain the services of 
his coach. In 2014 he made the first round of the US Open and believes he can 
do it again. Tennis is a game that can turn on tiny margins. He is blessed with 
ample physical gifts, but understands that his mind needs the most attention.

“It’s a game where you can drive yourself crazy. You have a bad loss, your 
confidence is drained and you could let yourself become depressed and worried 
about the future sitting alone in a hotel room. You somehow have to train your 
mind to remember the bigger picture, why are you still doing this to yourself? 
I ask myself do I still love this sport, and the answer is always yes, but as 
soon as that stops I will know it’s time to say goodbye.”

Still operating just outside the privileged confines of the grand slam 
tournaments, McGee hopes that his passionate love affair with tennis will be 
requited, and he will gain a formal invite to its most hallowed courts.


• This article is from Behind the Lines <https://jdrennan13.wordpress.com/>
• Follow Jonathan Drennan <https://twitter.com/jwdrennan> on Twitter
 