
The battle between reason and superstition, between knowledge and faith, 
between atheism and religion, has been the defining one in human society over 
the past 200 years. It inspired revolutions. It produced great thinkers. It was 
fought in the academy, in debating chambers, in those sexy, smoky 18th-century 
salons, on the streets. Now, in the 21st-century, where is the profound war of 
words between the followers of reason and the followers of religion taking 
place?On the side of a bus <https://www.theguardian.com/world/atheist-bus>.

The undignified spat over the atheist adverts on buses and in train stations 
captures the decline and fall of both atheism and religion. Launched by comedy 
writer Ariane Sherine, backed by Richard Dawkins, and funded by donations from 
atheists tired of having to hide their message away, the atheist ads declare: 
"There's probably no God. Now stop worrying and enjoy your life."

Christians were outraged, and 326 of them – largely encouraged by the lobby 
group Christian Voice –complained <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/7818980.stm> 
to the Advertising Standards Authority. They said the ad was "offensive" and 
potentially "misleading", since the advertisers could never substantiate the 
claim that God "probably" doesn't exist. The ASA rejected the complaints this 
afternoon.

No doubt the New Atheist lobby will celebrate the ASA's decision as a great 
victory, while Christian Voice will consider it a profound moral defeat. But 
how has it come to this? How has the question of God's existence been reduced 
to the same level as judging whether a washing powder really does get your 
whites whiter or whether it's legitimate for Coke to say that it, and not 
Pepsi, is "the Real Thing"? This bizarre clash – the Battle of the Bus Ad, as 
history might record it (or perhaps not) – rather captures what NewAtheism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/atheism> and contemporary Christianity have 
in common: a profound crisis of purpose.

Atheism was once a dignified stance taken by men and women who were committed 
to deepening humanity's knowledge of the world. History's greatest atheists 
were less concerned with proselytising to the faithful about the benefits of 
godlessness – as today's backers of the atheist bus seem to want to do – than 
with expanding our understanding of the natural world and man's place within it.

Certainly the likes of Charles Darwin 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/historic_figures/darwin_charles.shtml>, a hero of 
the New Atheists, would never have countenanced sticking an "atheist ad" on the 
side of a horse-and-cart or the back of a tram. When he was asked by a radical 
atheist to write a few words on religion, he declined, pointing out that 
"direct arguments against Christianity and theism produce hardly any effect on 
the public … and freedom of thought is best promoted by the gradual 
illumination of men's minds which follows from the advance of science. It has, 
therefore, been always my object to avoid writing on religion."

Today, not only do atheists employ "direct arguments" against Christianity – 
they employ muddled and unconvincing ones. The increasing combativeness of 
atheists actually reveals their weakness rather than strength. The bus ad is 
the latest example of dumbed-down atheism.

However, the religious lobby is discombobulated too. The fact that Christian 
Voice had to approach the ASA in search of a condemnation of the atheist bus 
ads is a powerful illustration of the marginalisation of Christianity. Unable 
to appeal to any broad base of Christian sentiment, or to harness the power of 
increasingly crisis-ridden Christian churches, Christian complainers are 
reduced to seeking the censorious support of the secular forces that now govern 
morality in the public arena.

Indeed, now that Britain's archaic blasphemy laws 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blasphemy_law_in_the_United_Kingdom> have been 
struck off the statute books, groups like Christian Voice are increasingly 
reliant on bodies like the ASA and Ofcom to do their bidding. Christian Voice 
bombarded Ofcom with complaints over BBC TV's airing of Jerry Springer the 
Opera in 2005;Ofcom rejected its arguments 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/media/ofcom-clears-bbc-over-jerry-springer-opera-490170.html>
. Last year, however, just a week after blasphemy was finally given the boot, 
23 Christian complainers convinced the ASA to censure an advert for ghd hair 
products, on the basis that its mix of scantily clad women with religious 
symbolism was "offensive". Christians no longer have the authority to say what 
is right and wrong – they must rely instead on the whim of officialdom.

I'm glad the atheist ads haven't been banned, but I don't think this is a 
great victory for those of us who stand for reason and enlightenment. Instead 
it just looks to me like a bizarre spat that does neither side any favours.
 