
In the mid-noughties, Northern Irish power-poppers Ash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/ash> were signed to a major label and had 
the website to prove it. "We had a fancy flash site that looked great," says 
singer/guitarist Tim Wheeler. "It was set up to launch an album, but there was 
no way of maintaining it or updating it regularly ourselves. It was frustrating 
because we had to go through webmasters. It was one of those sites you look at 
once and think, 'Oh, very good, but why am I here?'"

Anyone who has ever negotiated the official site of an arena-scale rock band 
or micro-managed pop star will recognise Wheeler's description: behind the 
digital dazzle lie meagre, bland, corporate-branded pickings offering very 
little incentive to return. That was just about acceptable when a website was 
simply a box to tick on the promotional round. Now, though, the web has become 
the frontline not only in the battle for sales, but also ideas. Artists across 
the board are having to sharpen up their acts.

Ash are a test case. Dropped by Warners after their 2007 album, Twilight of 
the Innocents, they dreamed up the A-Z Series, 26 singles, one released every 
fortnight over a year. It wouldn't have worked without a fundamental 
reassessment of their web presence. Ditching the digital fireworks, they set to 
work on building something functional, clean and easy to use at both ends. "I 
became obsessed with the Huffington Post blog," says the band's bassist, Mark 
Hamilton, who was instrumental in setting up the site. "I told the designer to 
look at that as a template for a really interactive social networking site for 
the fans, and create something similar. That's what we've done, and it's been 
working brilliantly."

Today, the website acts as label, blog, forum, scrapbook and shop front. At 
its heart it's a portal to new music, offering a £13 subscription for all 26 
tracks that fans can only sign up for through the website. "The internet is all 
about content and the constant flow of information," says Wheeler. "The site 
isn't fancy, but it feels quite honest."

Increasingly, it's not enough simply to have an online presence. Whether 
you're an established indie band, a solo troubadour or a five-piece girl-group, 
fresh content is king. The worst thing a fan can see when they visit a website 
is the same thing they saw last time, or a forum with virtual tumbleweed 
blowing through it. "When I set up my site I talked through it with my 
manager," says Sam Carter, winner of best newcomer at this year's BBC Folk 
awards. "We decided it was very important to have something on the home page 
that kept changing, so when you went back people could see there was activity 
rather than the same old thing."

The Saturdays attract a youthful demographic raised on reality TV and Heat 
magazine, demanding brief, regular dispatches from behind the pop star veil. 
Their site combines hard commerce with the vibe of a teen's Bebo page. Endorsed 
video ads for Impulse perfume sit next to chatty blogs and behind-the-scenes 
footage recorded by the group on flip-cams; the latest features footage from 
Rochelle Wiseman's 21st birthday bash at the Mayfair hotel.

"When I was younger and loved the Spice Girls, I'd have wanted to see what 
Baby Spice did on her 21st birthday," says Wiseman. "We look at it from our 
fans' perspective. The whole celebrity thing is much more accessible than it 
used to be, so to stay in touch with them and get them involved is very 
important."

Interactivity is key across the board. The Saturdays tweet and talk to fans on 
their message board; Carter says people are frequently surprised when he 
personally answers their queries, sent via his site's contact page. As well as 
regularly dropping into their forum, Ash take note of petitions for obscure 
songs and are launching a "moving poll" on their site to see which of the A-Z 
songs have really hit the spot.

"You could say that's cynical target marketing, but it's good to know what 
your core audience like," says Hamilton. "I want the fan base to feel some form 
of ownership with the band. They feel much more involved if they can influence 
how we function." Adds Wheeler with a laugh: "The thing is, you don't know who 
you're talking to and how much to take seriously. It could be some 14-year-old 
kid dictating your career." Which neatly summarises the history of popular 
music.

Not everyone embraces this kind of online dialogue. Stereophonics' 
breakthrough in 1997 predated the internet age, and they have a slightly more 
austere web presence. Bassist Rich Jones says their site's primary function is 
to give information "from the horse's mouth". Though they tweet, blog and add 
photos, the band rarely interact directly. "I'm one step away from it," says 
singer Kelly Jones. "I'll write my blog or take some pictures in the studio and 
send it to the office and they'll put it up, but I've never done anything 
direct. It makes kids following the band feel like they're part of the 
procedure, but I don't think it should be to the extreme of someone like Lily 
Allen, where you're telling everybody everything. I like the mystique of people 
like Prince and Bowie. I was into AC/DC as a kid and I never knew fuck all 
about them."

Phoenix operate a similar policy. Their website began as a means of posting 
songs for free, circumnavigating the "filters" of TV and radio that prevented 
them reaching a wider audience. Now it's designed as "a visual counterpart" to 
the music without intruding on their personal lives or influencing the way the 
band works. The site remains "super-minimal", and it deliberately leans towards 
the abstract. "Maybe we're a bit old school but we aren't really into being too 
transparent," says guitarist Laurent Brancowitz. "We have a blog but it's 
pictures, very few words. I have this vision of artists being a bit like 
magicians: if you see everything, it ruins it for the audience. Distance has a 
powerful aesthetical effect."

That approach can't work, however, for someone like Sam Carter, essentially a 
one-man cottage industry. His website cost £600 to set up. He handles PayPal 
orders for his album Keepsakes, "running to the post office every week with an 
armful of jiffy bags", and uploads site content himself. Although most of his 
album sales occur directly after a show, he recognises his site as a vital 
point of access and information. His agent receives lots of gig offers via the 
website's contact page.

"It's nice to have that feeling that when I'm not gigging there's still 
something happening," he says. "I do sometimes think, 'God, do I have to manage 
this myself?' On the other hand, it's good to keep control of it, and to be 
aware of how people are responding to what you do."

All agree, however, that the key to a successful web presence is creating 
something functional and fast-moving that complements the music, contains clear 
traces of the band's involvement and reflects their personality. This often 
means edging away from the record company. "When we changed to Universal they 
showed an interest in trying to take part in the website, but we wanted to stay 
in control," says Rich Jones. "A lot of times when you involve the record 
company it becomes a marketing tool."

If you're wondering where MySpace and Facebook fit into this landscape, they 
don't, according to Hamilton. "MySpace is a dead format," he says "It's a place 
to find bands, but when you've got your own website that works brilliantly, 
you're trying to direct all your traffic to that."

Maintaining a vibrant web presence has become a priority for almost every 
artist. "It used to be all about TV and radio, but the internet is majorly 
important for us now," says Wiseman. Branco says the Phoenix website "has been 
crucial, without it we wouldn't have reached so many people". For Ash, it's no 
exaggeration to say that getting their website right has helped ensure the 
band's survival.
 