
Andrew Miller, the chief financial officer of Guardian Media Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/guardianmediagroup>, has been appointed as 
chief executive.

Miller, 43, takes over from Carolyn McCall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/carolyn-mccall>, who left GMG, publisher 
of mediatheguardian.com, at the end of last month to become chief executive of 
easyJet.

He was appointed after a recruitment process involving internal and external 
candidates with advice from the executive search firm Spencer Stuart.

"Andrew is the ideal appointment to this role, following a rigorous 
recruitment process that produced a very high-quality shortlist of candidates," 
said Amelia Fawcett, chair of GMG. "He has great financial acumen, an intimate 
understanding of GMG's portfolio and a full appreciation of our unique purpose 
and values."

Miller joined GMG as chief financial officer in August last year. He was 
previously chief financial officer of the GMG subsidiary Trader Media Group, 
which publishes Auto Trader, and played a key role in the digital 
transformation of the business and the sale of a 49.9% stake to Apax Partners. 
GMG now runs Trader Media Group as a joint venture with Apax.

"[Miller] knows how to drive successful digital transformation and has led 
large-scale financial transactions," Fawcett added. "Most importantly, he has 
the ability, desire and vision to lead GMG through the next stage of its 
development and to ensure a sustainable future for our journalism."

Miller said: "It is a great privilege and responsibility to lead GMG and to 
play a key role in supporting the independence of our journalism. While the 
media sector faces continued change, to which we will need to adapt, our strong 
portfolio of businesses and investments means we have a solid base from which 
to move forward."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 