
Andy Murray and Roger Federer crossed paths at Melbourne airport tonight as 
they made their way back to Britain and Switzerland respectively, just over 24 
hours after they crossed swords in the final of theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>. While Federer and his wife 
Mirka ferried their twin daughters on to a flight home, Murray barely had a 
minute to himself as a steady stream of well-wishers came up to give him their 
best for the future and tell him how well he had done. It is one of the nicer 
things a world-class sportsman has to deal with, and Murray looked genuinely 
touched by their support.

Anything that helps reduce the disappointment of missing out on a first grand 
slam title will benefit Murray because if he maintains the level he showed over 
the past fortnight, then the chances are that he and the world No1 will meet 
again in a grand slam before long. Today Federer did the media rounds as the 
champion for a fourth time here, thanks to his 6‑3, 6‑4, 7‑6 triumph over 
Murray, who by virtue of the past fortnight hasclimbed back to the position of 
world No3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/feb/01/andy-murray-climbs-world-rankings>
, but he did so with a realisation that it is the Scot's skills that have 
lifted his game to another level.

"Murray neutralises you very well," Federer said. "He tangles you up in these 
rallies and you can't do anything about it because if you play too aggressively 
you lose and if you play too passively you lose. You have to have this perfect 
balance, so for me to be able to come out and do it, when I'm well known for 
being hot-blooded on court sometimes and going after my shots time and time 
again, [the final] was a tricky situation. For me to come through those moments 
and prove myself over and over again over all those years is amazing."

Federer's victory extended his record of grand slam titles to an incredible 16 
and on the form he showed against Murray he is going to be tough to stop at the 
next two grand slams, the French Open and Wimbledon, where he will be defending 
the titles. Any talk of him becoming the first man since Rod Laver in 1969 to 
complete the grand slam – Australian Open, French Open, Wimbledon and the US 
Open – was neatly sidestepped, but Federer said he feels like he is close to 
the level he showed in 2006 and 2007 when he utterly dominated the sport, 
winning three of the four grand slams in both years.

"I feel I've definitely improved and my movement has come back," he said. "I 
think I lost a little edge in my movement in 2008-2009, and I feel like that's 
all come around again. My backhand is where I want it to be, my forehand is 
back because that also left me a little bit when my footwork wasn't at my best, 
and I had to press too much because I knew I didn't want to play defence. I 
don't do that too much any more and my confidence is back, so it's a lot easier 
to play again now.

"But it's hard to come up with performances like this over and over again. The 
competition has become very tough. It's very physical, very demanding. That's 
why I don't like to think too far ahead. I want to savour the moment because 
it's a big victory for me. [Winning] 20 slams was never a goal that I set 
myself. I'll just try to go for the next one if possible. There's still some 
left, I think, especially with the way I'm playing right now. I'm hoping for 
more."
 