
It was as inevitable as anything can be in sport that two of the three leading 
players in tennis would contest the final of theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> on Sunday, but what was not 
so clear was who would be left standing out of Roger Federer and Andy Murray to 
challenge Novak Djokovic for his title.

While Djokovic endured a desperate struggle to beat Stanislas Wawrinka, either 
side of that quarter-final the Serb has moved with scary ease through his side 
of the draw, never more impressively than dismissing the underpowered 
resistance of David Ferrer in the first semi-final on Thursday night. The 
victory gave him not only huge confidence but an extra day to recover.

Djokovic's challenger is Murray. He is still standing but he is bruised, too. 
It took him exactly four hours and a good deal of pent up rage to beat Federer 
in one of the ugliest matches of the tournament, a semi-final that risked 
boiling over towards the end as both players failed to hide anger that either 
arrived on the night or had been simmering for a while.

Rarely has Murray appeared so dispirited in victory as he did after beating 
Federer in five sets of rollercoaster tennis to qualify for the final. It was 
an odd sight. He was weary from the battle but it was more than that. He is the 
reigning US Open champion. He beat Federer in the Olympic final and lost 
valiantly in the Wimbledon final. He has no reason to doubt himself.

He has his moods but the new Murray walks taller than the one who sometimes 
skulked through frustrating and perplexing defeats. The new Murray smiles more 
often, shouts less, hits more winners, makes fewer errors. No, it was the pain 
of confrontation that sucked the joy from him on a night – Burns' Night – when 
the Scot should have been brimming with good feeling.

He will get it back. He has been in this place before. And he knows that he 
can beat Djokovic over five sets in a grand slam final, as he did with such 
strength of mind and body in New York. He has all sorts of incentives on Sunday.

If he beats Djokovic, he will emulate Lew Hoad, the last player to follow his 
first major with another straight away, in 1956. Victory would also pull him 
ahead of Fred Perry on 106 wins in slam matches. He shrugged off the Perry 
ghost by winning the US Open, ending that awful longueur that stretched back 76 
years.

This is his time, and he is aware of that. If he can win his second grand slam 
title, the third should come even more naturally, and the fourth. He said this 
week when reminded of the Perry record that he would like to finish his career 
with 200 wins in grand slams. That is a considerable total (Federer, who has 
won 17 majors, this week won his 250th grand slam match).

But Djokovic is renewed and buzzing. His mood is light. He has no injuries. 
And he wants revenge. It should be another classic, to go with the Flushing 
Meadows final and the semi-final here last year that preceded Djokovic's 
astonishing victory over Rafael Nadal.

Then, he had barely a day and a half to recover from the torture Murray put 
him through; here, it is Murray who is in that situation.

Federer, not as deflated as might have been expected after losing to Murray, 
went with the wide consensus that Djokovic will be the favourite. He gave 
Murray some due, despite their on-court friction.

"I think he's always played me pretty well over the years," he said. "He's 
obviously got a winning record against me [11-9 overall, and improved to 1-3 in 
slams]. The match-up's maybe a good one for him, I'm not sure. I don't mind 
playing against him. But it's normal that with time and with age you learn, you 
become more experienced, become physically better. He's put himself in that 
situation time and time again.

"So, with the win at the Olympics and the US Open, maybe there's just a little 
bit more belief or he's a bit more calm overall. You want to be excited but you 
don't want to go overly crazy on each and every point. It seems like he has 
more peace when he plays out there and in the process he has better results."

What peace there was evaporated when Murray was serving for the match for 
the first time, at 6-5 in the fourth set, but, once he pulled away in the fifth 
set, there was not a lot Federer did that troubled him unduly.

That was the most encouraging aspect of his semi‑final win, coming through yet 
another fightback by the best player of modern times.

Murray says he does not like to look back but it is unavoidable. He knows he 
has these wins in the bank, performances to bolster his spirit when things get 
tough, as they did against Federer and as they will against Djokovic.

"I've been questioned for large parts of my career about would I be strong 
enough physically, mentally, do I listen to my coaches, blah, blah, blah, blah, 
blah, whatever it is, can I handle pressure?

"I think those years of having all of those questions and then finally being 
able to answer them I think, yeah, it was all part of the process. So I hope on 
Sunday I can play a good match. Obviously having won against Novak before in a 
slam final will help mentally."

The semi-final was his first night match of the fortnight. He now has a feel 
for the court and the conditions. That familiarity is important, because it 
removes nagging doubts.

"Judging by our match that we played here last year and the one we played in 
New York, I don't think there was a huge amount of difference [in the 
conditions]," Murray said.

"I think the balls are slower here. Playing in the evening will also slow them 
down. But I actually think the court here this year is playing fairly fast. You 
can get a lot of free points off your serve if you serve well, like I did this 
evening. The courts aren't that dissimilar, it's just the time of day you play 
and the balls are a bit different."

And the opponent. If Djokovic was always a certainty to reach the final, 
Murray may be glad he has taken a harder route. He is absolutely steeled for 
battle, whatever his downcast mien in victory.
 