
Any analysis of Andy Murray's disintegration in Melbourne is rendered invalid 
if it ignores the excellence of the man who made his life a misery for two 
hours and 39 minutes in the final of theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>. Novak Djokovic was, quite 
simply, sublime in nearly every department in beating Murray 6-4, 6-2, 6-3, 
including those areas of expertise Murray regards as his fiefdoms: baseline 
defence, a strong serve and bags of intuitive tennis. Djokovic bossed them all; 
Murray did not.

These were the pretenders, it was universally agreed, to absent friends, Rafa 
Nadal and Roger Federer, except that Djokovic was not pretending and Murray, it 
transpired, could not ultimately convince himself that he belonged here. That 
is at the core of his dilemma and, until he resolves it, self-doubt will haunt 
his every challenge at the highest level.

Djokovic's climb up the ludicrously greasy pole of world rankings is 
significant, given the circumstances of his win here, his second Australian 
title and his second major, in the absence of Federer and Nadal. On top of his 
comprehensive win, one born of total commitment and self-belief, the Serb is 
overhauling Federer, an act of tennis blasphemy that is becoming more 
commonplace by the tournament. His assault on the summit was by some way the 
more convincing and he now sits just behind Federer, the god he reduced to a 
hitting partner in the semi-final, by a very gettable 115 points.

The Swiss loses 1,250 of his 9,245 world ranking points by virtue of his win 
here over Murray last year, to go to 7,995; Djokovic adds 1,640 to his tally of 
6,240, bringing his points to 7,880. These are mere numbers. What matters more 
is the impression Djokovic left on the court of the Rod Laver Arena and the 
psyche ofAndy Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray>. He owns 
this title; he might well own Murray.

For the Scot there was not even the consolation of giving such an excellent 
opponent a good fight. That sad fact alone will heap grief upon him when he 
needs it least. He has retreated to the comfort of his friends, family and 
girlfriend to reassess and it might take a little longer than people imagine 
because, once he reviews his performance, Murray will be harder on himself than 
he was immediately after the match.

Hopes were high for him and rightly so. He had looked superb over the 
fortnight: batting away impertinent but dangerous challenges from Karol Beck, 
Illya Marchenko and Alexandr Dolgopolov as well as the more cultured Guillermo 
Garcia-López and the tough Jurgen Melzer before reaching this final with a 
final acid test against David Ferrer, the second best Spaniard. Ferrer had 
spared Murray a semi-final date with Nadal – but not a lot could save him from 
the rampant powerof Djokovic when they were drawn into what ought to have been 
a monumental final. It was not, despite all the portents.

In a winter invasion of Australia that delivered England the Ashes, the second 
leg was always going to prove more problematic for a Scot who travels a lonely 
road. He'd not bought into the bandwagon thing with the cricketers - his 
Scottishness and reluctance to play the jingo card were always going to rule 
that one out - and, to milk the analogy, his own wheels came off independently.

Tennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis>, the quirkiest of one-on-one 
sports because of its delicious, maddening scoring system, was made for Murray. 
He loves comebacks. After a reasonably even first set and a near bagel in the 
second, he embarked on his task with renewed vigour in the third. But, although 
a closer tussle, that set too became one-sided. It was not supposed to be like 
this.

With Federer and Nadal eliminated, the stage belonged, finally, to Djokovic 
and Murray, ranked third and fifth in the world respectively but, in essence, 
on the same plane. This is what they had been waiting most of their tennis 
lives for. Born within a week of each other, they were all but destined to meet 
at this point in their careers and, as a consequence of that closeness, the 
collision was inevitably going to be that much more painful for the loser.

That the Serb somehow took on Murray's cloak of defensive master only 
exacerbated the pain for the Scot. To look across the net and see a blurred 
figure swoop and retrieve his best shots (those that there were in a generally 
poor performance) must have disheartened Murray to distraction.

It probably goes some way to explaining his descent into expletives and 
grimaces, an aspect of the performance that raised it to high drama. He railed 
at his mother, squawking seagulls, the occasional ball boy, the cool night air, 
innocent whitewash and, ultimately, whatever demon inside him that wrecked his 
equilibrium.

From the start it looked bad for Murray. Djokovic served to love and Murray 
took nearly a quarter of an hour to hold, surviving a break point and five 
deuces. If that was rough enough, it hardly improved for him at any stage of 
the match. Serving to stay in the first set, he sent down his second double 
fault and hit long to give it to Djokovic. He very rarely loses a set like that.

The second was worse. Djokovic won seven games in a row to lead 5-0 before 
Murray found something to save being nilled. But there was a hopelessness about 
that gesture.

The third set presented a fresh conundrum: to gamble on all-out assault or 
trust in his attritional strategy. The latter had hardly been a raging success 
so he mixed, matched and botched.

He had a couple of break points here and there but the game was up, and the 
match, when Murray netted his forehand. It might as well have been a handshake.
 