
So, Andy Murray is out, Roger Federer looks reborn and Rafael Nadal is next … 
and he looks worried. There is no denying the staying power of the established 
elite as the 2014Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> builds towards another 
semi-final clash between the two players who have defined the modern era, 
Federer and Nadal.

Nobody can be sure if these two are capable of recapturing the intensity of 
some of their epic encounters among the 32 matches they have played against 
each other since 2004, because Federer – a four set-winner against Murray on 
Wednesday – is 32 and Nadal's serving hand has a blister as red and raw as a 
lobster.

Nadal – 22-10 up on Federer overall – hit through the discomfort of the ripped 
skin on the palm of his left hand to beat the classy Grigor Dimitrov 3-6, 7-6, 
7-6, 6-2 and revealed: "With the tape [on his wound] I can lose the racket when 
I am serving. That's a terrible feeling, because you are not able to accelerate 
at the right moment. That's a big deal. When you lose confidence in that one 
important shot, you are not able to play with calm. If it does not improve, I 
won't have a chance to play in the final."
 Federer's forehand once again proves his most reliable weapon. Photograph: 
Saeed Khan/AFP/Getty Images 
 If Nadal's prognosis is as gloomy as it sounds, Federer will enter their 
match with a significant advantage, after hitting a few glorious peaks again 
over the first 10 days of the tournament. But when the rejuvenated world No6 
steps on to Rod Laver Arena to what will no doubt be a rapturous acclamation, 
it will not be with the best wishes of Murray.

The Scot was still seething an hour after losing to him on Wednesday night, 
saying the Swiss probably suspected he had hit a ball on the second bounce at a 
crucial point in the third set.

Trailing by two sets and fighting to stay in the tournament, Murray had clawed 
his way back to 4-4 and 15-15 on his own serve. Federer, coming under sustained 
pressure for the first time in the match, dashed forward to scoop up a drop 
shot, and video replays on the large screen of the main arena appeared to show 
he had not kept the ball up. Murray lost the point and, two fluffed forehands 
later, was broken for 5-5, before winning a dramatic tie-break to force a 
fourth set.

"He asked for them to stop showing it on the video because I think he knew it 
bounced twice as well," Murray said. "I was disappointed because I got broken 
in that game and ended up breaking in the next game. Every point at that stage 
is crucial because I was pushing hard to try and get back into the match and 
fighting extremely hard. Rather than spending an extra 30 minutes on that set, 
I potentially could have been serving a little bit fresher at the beginning of 
the fourth set.

"At that speed it's very difficult to see but it was right in front of the 
umpire. No, they can't use video for that but Roger asked them not to show it 
on video because it looks controversial and doesn't look great. But it's fine 
for them to show videos of me every time I get annoyed on the court or 
whatever. It's up there the whole bloody match. It is what it is."
 Murray meets his match. Photograph: Bobby Yip/Reuters 
 Federer said: "I thought I probably got it, especially the way it bounced on 
the other side. They showed it twice on the replay. It looked good. I just told 
the umpire: 'How can they show this and create this controversial moment, 
potentially?' I hope it was played the right way. If it wasn't I'm sorry."

Spats aside, Federer was simply too strong for an opponent playing only his 
seventh serious match since returning from back surgery, although Murray was 
happy that his preparation coming into the tournament, while not perfect, was 
good enough to get him through to the quarter-finals in a strong field.

"I've come a long way in four months," he said. "Obviously right now I'm very 
disappointed. But it's the first time I ever went through something like that. 
I thought I did a good job getting myself in good shape to be competitive at 
this level. Wasn't too far away in the end."

Now he looks forward to playing in the first tie of a Davis Cup world group 
match for Great Britain against the United States, which starts on Friday week 
in San Diego. He was unsure immediately after his exit from Melbourne if he 
would stay here to rest for a couple of days or return to London before flying 
back to the west coast of the United States.
 Federer celebrates after a hard-earned victory. Photograph: Greg 
Wood/AFP/Getty Images 
And he expressed doubts about playing on the drop-in clay court at the home of 
the San Diego Padres. "It's not perfect for rehabbing a back surgery," he said. 
"Ideally I'd stay on the same surface."

And who did he think would go through from the Federer-Nadal match to play the 
winner of the other semi-final between Stanislas Wawrinka and Tomas Berdych?

"It is very hard to say. This tournament is where Roger plays his best tennis 
and in the latter stages of grand slams. It will be a huge challenge. He has 
struggled against Rafa in the past. Today was a tough, physical match. If he 
recovers well and serves well, he has got an opportunity."

It is an opportunity that Murray thought might be his. "Hopefully in a couple 
of months I will be back to my best again," he said. "My body held up 
reasonably well, better than expected."
 