
Andy Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> shies away from the 
suggestion but there can rarely have been a better time to reach for his first 
grand slam title than in the absence of the two players who have made that 
quest such a forlorn exercise for so many for so long.

How completely and quickly Roger Federer and Rafael Nadal repair their 
contrasting wounds – pride and hamstring, respectively – will determine the 
shape of tennis in the months and years to come. There is a growing sentiment 
that Federer's vulnerability over the course of the tournament in Melbourne 
betrayed an underlying decay in his game, a result of the commendable 
distraction of fatherhood but exacerbated by the rise of those around him on 
the circuit.

Nevertheless, when Murray walks on to the centre court here on Sunday 
alongside Novak Djokovic to contest the final of theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>, he will glance around the 
Rod Laver Arena and either dwell upon or suppress the memory of his 
embarrassment in defeat by Federer in the same match a year ago. It will give 
him strength or nightmares.

Murray was convinced that was his time – which is why he could not quell the 
tears, devastated that, when his chance came, he did not trust his talent. He 
promised himself he would never let that happen again. In the main he has kept 
that promise.

Federer won his 16th (and possibly last) major that night, relieved that 
Murray failed to grab at least two golden opportunities that would, in all 
probability, have extended the contest into a fourth set, from which point 
Murray might have launched a second offensive.

Now Federer is gone, embarrassed by Djokovic in a one-sided semi-final on 
Thursday night that not only raised doubts about his longevity but followed the 
equally profound defeat of a limping and distraught Nadal by David Ferrer the 
night before.

To lose one legend is unfortunate, to lose two is blessed good fortune for 
everyone else. There will be wider discussion later about what their travails 
mean for the sport in general and their peers in particular but there is no 
denying this tournament will be remembered as the one that provided Murray and 
Djokovic with the stage they had always craved: a grand slam context to decide 
the championship of each other.

When Murray put away Ferrer, the No7 seed, in a fierce struggle over four sets 
in the second semi-final, his thoughts turned immediately to an opponent he has 
known for a decade and more, the one player he regarded as competing with him 
most intensely to overthrow Federer and Nadal.

Murray acknowledges that Djokovic initially pulled ahead of him; he has also 
already won a major. What more incentive could he need? Certainly he spends 
little time dwelling on the Fred Perry Question: his Scottishness, perhaps, 
inures him to the weight of expectation to emulate the great pre-war English 
tennis star, one so far away, 75 years in fact, he might be a fading Supernova. 
Repeatedly Murray says he cares little for such historical quirks.

But is this, nevertheless, his best chance to win a major? "I felt like last 
year was a good chance as well," he said. "It depends on the day. I am playing 
against a great player. Novak played unbelievable tennis against Roger. It is 
one of those matches where, if I play very well, I will definitely be within a 
shot of winning. But I will need to play my best tennis. It is a chance. 
Whether it is better than the other ones I don't know."

Obviously he respects Federer. But he does not fear him. Nor does he quake in 
Djokovic's presence. "He doesn't give you many errors from the back of the 
court," he says of the man going into the final with the greater momentum, "but 
he struggled on his serve the last couple of years. [On his] second serve he 
has served quite a lot of double faults at tight moments and that is something 
I will have to put pressure on, his serve.

"[I have to] make him feel like I am taking chances on his service games, 
hitting good returns. That is one of the things I will be focusing on."

Theirs is a rivalry not unlike that of Federer and Nadal: unmitigated but full 
of respect. They are, he says, good friends. "I think I've got closer to him 
over the past year. We always got on well. I have spent a lot more time with 
him.

"We have had quite a lot of the same experiences over the last few years. We 
have got a lot in common and the last year or so we have spent a lot more time 
practising together. We always message each other if we do well in tournaments 
and stuff. He is a very nice guy – good fun, nice to be around. I will be 
putting that to one side on Sunday but hopefully we will be friends afterwards."

So, who will win? Djokovic is favourite, rightly so after the number he did on 
Federer. He was tough on the sixth seed, Tomas Berdych, too, in three 
relatively quick sets, put an injured Viktor Troicki out of his misery quickly 
and took the final set to love against Nicolás Almagro in the fourth round. 
There was hardly a blip.

Murray's passage to the final has been the usual voyage of discovery and 
flickering concern but it might have better prepared him for the big day. In 
Karol Beck and Illya Marchenko he met strangers whose desperation he killed 
with defensive tennis of the highest order; he much enjoyed opening up his 
attacking game to beat Guillermo García-López in three one-sided sets and did a 
similar job on the determined but limited Jürgen Melzer.

Murray's trickiest assignment before the semi-finals, however, was against the 
unorthodox and charismatic young Ukrainian hitter, Alexandr Dolgopolov, of whom 
it was said his tennis resembled his surname: it was hard to know what was 
coming next.

Dolgopolov gave Murray a brief but serious scare with a serve as unusual as 
and not much slower than Andy Roddick's. Fuelled by the intemperance of youth, 
he took a set off Murray, then foundered on his own impetuosity – but it 
provided the Scot with invaluable help in putting together his all-round game 
in preparation for Ferrer.

This was some semi-final. Murray has found many ways to transmit his own 
anxiety to those in the stands cheering him on and going punch for punch with 
the Spaniard certainly did the trick for the first hour of an enthralling 
contest.

Neither betrayed a hint of surrender. Murray was not at his best in the first 
set, which Ferrer gladly grasped with uncomplicated, robust ground strokes that 
allowed his opponent barely a moment to breathe.

Normally, under such an onslaught, Murray finds a way to prick the assault 
with subtle and soft retaliation. Not here. He was rattled and he gave nearly 
as good as he got.

The second set took a similar path. Murray was in danger of going out if he 
could not find a way to stem the Spaniard's brutal game. He did, gathering his 
resources just in time to blitz Ferrer in a tie-break.

He returned to his imperious best in the third and it looked as if Ferrer 
would fold. He did not. He pushed Murray all the way in the fourth and 
impartial observers had to wonder who might emerge stronger in a fifth set. It 
was not needed. Again Murray prevailed in the tie-break.

Perhaps he knew Ferrer has not won a single tie-break in 10 attempts at the 
Australian Open. History is not all bunk.
 