
The slowness of the Metropolitan police and the then director of public 
prosecutions, Keir Starmer, to prosecute over widespread voicemail hacking was 
feeble at best. Those prosecutions needed to happen, but that does not meanAndy 
Coulson or his journalist colleagues should now be in prison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/jul/04/andy-coulson-jailed-phone-hacking>
.

The custodial sentences are ridiculous; they serve no public purpose. The 
conviction itself will be the most severe part of Coulson's punishment. If he 
should make amends, it would surely have been better to work for a worthy cause 
than cost the taxpayer nearly £40,000 a year to bang him up. Community service 
or teaching adult literacy somehow seem right.

Coulson's sentence tells us more about the vindictive nature of our justice 
system – and of public opinion – than it does about his crimes. In a century, 
we will look back on today's penal practices with scarcely less surprise than 
the way we currently see, say, the 1723 Black Act, which introduced 50 new 
hanging offences, including one for "hiding in a forest while disguised".

The Old Testament injunction to take an eye for an eye, which today sounds so 
bloodthirsty, was in fact an appeal for proportion where death or dismemberment 
were meted out for trivial offences. As a reforming measure to the Black Act, 
petty thieves were later spared the gallows and transported to Australia 
instead.

Coulson was, for his four years as one of Rupert Murdoch's capi, a member of 
that informal legislative body which has more pernicious influence over public 
policy than any other, namely the committee of tabloid newspaper editors. He 
was utterly conventional, calling for tougher sentences and berating "holiday 
camp" prisons. His incarceration, if it makes his red top friends think twice, 
will have one small consolation.

The tabloids, though, merely mirror opinion. They make money by giving people 
what they want, however vile. Schadenfreude – the delight in others' 
misfortunes – is a common human emotion. The evidence of our criminal justice 
system, and our tabloids, suggests there is something in the British psyche 
that likes to see others suffer.

Are we much different today to the 30,000 people who gathered in 1849 to 
witness the public hanging of a husband and wife at Horsemonger Lane prison, 
Southwark? Charles Dickens, ever the reforming voyeur, wrote: "The horrors of 
the gibbet and of the crime which brought the wretched murderers to it faded in 
my mind before the atrocious bearing, looks, and language of the assembled 
spectators."

If your life is hard, seeing someone worse off than you appears horribly to 
lift the spirits. Prison is the new public execution, with the tabloids 
scrambling to take pictures of any imprisoned celebrity and to invent ludicrous 
stories about their humiliations inside (as I can testify from my own 
experience).

Of course, no substantial society has yet survived without prison. Locking up 
dangerous people makes society safer. But who? Given the gravity of his crimes, 
and the suffering of innocents, custody must be right for Rolf Harris. But 
surely not for Coulson and many others on short sentences.

The general proposition that more prison means less crime is suspect. 
Internationally, crime has fallen with falling prison populations, and has 
risen with rising ones.Reoffending following community sentences is lower 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-10725163> than reoffending following a 
short prison sentence. Prison is a college for spreading best criminal 
practice. We should keep it for serious offences and serial offenders.

We are thankfully less punitive than the United States, which holds the world 
record for prisoners (relative to population). But at least in the US, as a 
country still motivated by Christian values, there is a willingness to forgive. 
What of former drug abuser, alcoholic and ne'er do well George W Bush? He found 
the Lord, so make him president.

In Britain, we have the punitive instincts of the Americans without the 
redeeming compassion. Given that 30% of English and Welsh men have a criminal 
conviction by the age of 40, this is both hardship and waste. England and Wales 
are the punishment champions of western Europe. We lock up 149 of every 100,000 
people, compared with 103 in France and 78 in Germany. If we imprisoned as much 
as Sweden, we would have 35,000 prisoners not 85,684. This would save nearly 
£2bn a year, enough to fund better community sentences and probation.

It is not just a question of more imagination over short sentences. A life 
sentence now means 12-14 years in prison, not the previous nine. Yet people who 
kill inflamed by passion are usually tortured by remorse and rarely repeat 
their crime. Why not parole them early? There are also nearly 6,000 prisoners 
on indeterminate sentences dished out under Labour. If it was right to abolish 
such sentences in 2012, it is also right to accelerate parole for those 
sentenced as such in the past.

Half of Coulson's time will come off unless he reoffends. He is then likely to 
be on an electronic tag for half the remainder, so he will have served four and 
a half months of his 18 months. Still too long, but it would surely be better 
not to indulge in a pantomime of legally sanctioned lying about the length of 
sentences, always pounced on by the tabloids. By failing to confront our ghouls 
– and their tabloid harpies – we merely let them haunt us again.
 