
Right, so this is it isn't it? Without the long shadow of Roger Federer or 
Rafa Nadal looming over him from the other side of the net, surely the time has 
come forAndy Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> to shake 
that Fred Perry-sized monkey off his back? With the top two seeds battered and 
beaten, he's never going to get a better chance, is he? Third time lucky in a 
grand slam final and all that.

Except Novak Djokovic <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic> has 
the look of a man who senses this is his moment as well. He's been waiting 
three years to graduate from the group of one-timers to the company of multiple 
grand slam champions. He's grown up, both on and off the court. And he was good 
against Federer in the semi-finals.Really good.

It all gets going at 8.30am GMT, by the way.

Tale of the tape (well, we do it for boxing, right?)

Murray-Djokovic
23 Age 23
5 World ranking 3
6ft 3 in Height 6 ft 2 in
13st 3lb Weight 12st 8lb
16 Career titles 18
0 Grand slam titles (need we say) 1
3 Grand slam finals 4
3 Wins in past meetings 4

On the subject of head-to-heads, these two friends go back a long way, having 
first met as juniors when they were 13. Djokovic remembers Murray as having 
"big hair" and finding his Scottish accent difficult to understand. Murray, 
meanwhile, remembers the score. "I won 6-0, 6-1 maybe."

Fast forward to the senior circuit and although Djokovic has the slight edge 
in their match-up, Murray has prevailed on the last three occasions, all on 
hard courts. They've never actually played each other in a grand slam before 
and this will be their first meeting at any level since the Miami final in 
April 2009.

Prediction time

The Guardian's (extremely unscientific) straw poll of experts produced the 
following results:
In Murray's corner: Rod Laver, Tim Henman, Jeremy Bates and Sven Groeneveld.
In Djokovic's corner: Henri Leconte, Pat Cash, John Newcombe, Ken Rosewall and 
Darren Cahill.
And sitting on the fence: Caroline Wozniacki and John Lloyd.

My (extremely scientific) opinion is that, before the semi-finals, I would 
probably have rated it 50:50. But given Djokovic's display against Federer, I'd 
put it about 60:40 in the Serb's favour.

So what does Murray need to do? The key will be to get off to a good start. In 
his previous two slam finals he started rather nervously and never really 
recovered. Both players love to defend – there'll be plenty of punishing 
rallies – but Djokovic has just a bit more power. Murray needs to take a few 
risks and come into the net. He would also do well to draw Djokovic into the 
net, which isn't the Serb's strong point. And of course Murray must serve well 
and get as many cheap points on the first serve as possible.

Even though it's 7.20 in the evening in Melbourne, it's still above 30C. Who 
does it favour? Probably Djokovic in terms of the quicker conditions, but from 
a physical point of view, Murray will be the stronger. By the way, there are a 
few Scots in the crowd wearing kilts. In 30 plus degree heat. Kilts.

Acutally talking of heat, this from Judy Murray on Twitter: "A rather elderly 
lady has stopped me and said 'We are praying that Tim will win.' Clearly been 
out in the sun too long." What, Tim's not playing? Oh, there he is in the BBC 
studio with Boris Becker.

The photo challenge. "Easy," declares Ulla Roberts. "Middle row left is his 
partner, sitting next to coach, dad and mum. The front row are his fitness 
coach, his aggression coach, his sparring partner and his psychologist.  The 
gang at the back are assorted hangers-on." Hmm. We'll give you 1.5/12 for that.

The pre-match interviews Murray: "It'll be a long match probably and I'm 
really looking forward to it." Djokovic: "I've been playing really well in my 
last few matches and hopefully I can have another one." Take from that what you 
will.

The players are out on court. Despite the kilted Scottish contingent, it has 
to be said the Serbs are in slightly stronger voice as Djokovic arrives to a 
boisterous "Nole, Nole, Nole."

Thump, thump, thump, thump, thump the players are warming up, Murray is once 
again looking radioactive in his garish green ensemble, Djokovic is more 
understated in white and blue and has a little bandage on his left knee. 
Djokovic will serve first. Right, here goes ...

*Murray 0-1 Djokovic (*denotes next server)
Djokovic wins a cheap first point and Murray then nets after a longer 
exchange. Murray's return sails well wide to make it 40-0 and Djokovic fires a 
forehand down the line which Murray can't get back into play. The Serb opens up 
to love. Meanwhile Gary Naylor also comes up short in the Team Murray teaser. 
"Not sure of many of the faces in the Murray's Puff Daddy-esque entourage, but 
I think that's Dinara Safina in the top row." Not sure if Caroline Wozniacki 
will be too happy with you for saying that ...

Murray 1-1 Djokovic* (*denotes next server)
What a start from Djokovic. Some amazing defence gets him to 0-15. Then he 
absolutely wallops a forehand down the line for a clean winner. Murray recovers 
but the game goes to deuce. And deuce. And deuce. And deuce. And deuce. After 
fending off one break point, and missing several opportunities at advantage, 
Murray finally holds after what I count as 15 minutes. A vital hold, even so 
early on in the contest. But Murray needs to get some cheaper points.

*Murray 1-2 Djokovic (*denotes next server)
A glimmer of opportunity for Murray at 15-30, but he mistimes an overhead 
which loops long. 30-all. The duo exchange an unforced error apiece to take it 
to another deuce. At advantage Djokovic, Murray thinks he's hit a winner but 
it's called out, before being over-ruled by the umpire. They'll replay the 
point. Murray mutters to himself. And then nets. 25 minutes for the first three 
games. You don't have anywhere to get to, do you?

Murray 2-2 Djokovic* (*denotes next server)
A more comfortable hold for Murray, to 15, the highlight a backhand winner on 
the run at 30-15. But these rallies are brutal. Peter Hall proffers his photo 
suggestions. "Is it 1. Sneezy, 2. Sleepy, 3. Dopey, 4. Doc, 5. Happy, 6. 
Bashful and 7. Grumpy?" he asks.

*Murray 2-3 Djokovic (*denotes next server)
At 30-0, it's Djokovic's turn to fluff an overhead as he slaps his smash into 
the net. That's the only blot for the Serb in the game, though. And the BBC 
offers what will probably be the first of many apologies for Murray's 
"colourful" language. He then has an exchange with the umpire at the 
changeover, not quite sure what about, though Murray tells Jake Garner to 
"RELAX, RELAX."

Murray 3-3 Djokovic* (*denotes next server)
An untidy game from Djokovic allows Murray to hold to 15. "No idea who all 
those Team Murray people are," says Mike Hopkin. "But I couldn't help noticing 
the ones who've missed out on the free adidas clobber seem markedly more 
nonplussed than the others."

*Murray 3-4 Djokovic (*denotes next server)
A big swipe of the forehand takes Djokovic to 30-0. He should really make it 
40-0 but dumps a low volley into the net. Cue Gary Naylor. "Much praise for 
Murray's backhand pass (see game four) with the commentators saying that 
Djokovic did nothing wrong, but he did. Because so few players are happy at the 
net these days, they just jog up the court and get stuck about the service box 
line instead of being right at the net. That's where Edberg, McEnroe and others 
would play, not half-court like an amateur." Djokovic's movement to the net is 
definitely not his strong point - and drawing the Serb in is a tactic that 
should serve Murray well. Djokovic holds to 15, by the way.

Murray 4-4 Djokovic* (*denotes next server)
Murray is having a bit of a funk about his rackets. Apparently he sent two to 
be restrung early on and they haven't yet returned. He'd have you believe it's 
the umpire's fault. But he manages to keep his focus and despite giving 
Djokovic a glimmer at 30-15, levels up again.

*Murray 4-5 Djokovic (*denotes next server)
Thwack. Take that. Djokovic thunders a cross-court forehand, ensuring Murray 
will have to serve to stay in the set. Though I was more busy laughing at Paul 
Bacon's email. "Isn't that Sue Sylvester, bottom right?" And you'll be relieved 
to know Murray's rackets have returned.

Djokovic wins the first set 6-4
Maybe Murray should have stuck with the old one. He doubles to go 0-15 down, 
but responds well to take the next point. A war of attrition at 15-all, which 
Djokovic takes by stepping into court and nailing a forehand past Murray's 
backhand wing. 15-30. Dangerous times. An ever bigger war of attrition, 38 
shots, 15-40.Two set points to Djokovic. And he needs just one, as Murray fires 
a fraction long. The appeal to Hawk-Eye is in vain.

*Murray 4-6 0-1 Djokovic (*denotes next server)
Not that I'm trying to be pessimistic or anything, but that means Murray still 
hasn't won a set in a grand slam final. That's seven in a row he's lost now. On 
a more positive note, he lost the first set against David Ferrer in the semis 
and came back magnificently. But he needs to up his serve percentage - it's 
down at just 44. Djokovic gets the second set under way by holding to love, as 
Murray floats a sliced backhand a foot or so beyond the baseline.

Murray 4-6 0-2 Djokovic* (*denotes next server)
Pressure on the Murray serve at 15-30, but a strong serve down the T and 
Djokovic can only net. From 30-all, Djokovic goes long with a forehand, but a 
vicious cross-court strike from the Serb on the next point and it's deuce. Long 
from Murray and Djokovic has the chance to break. A 128mph serve out wide saves 
that one, but Djokovic gets another crack. And this one he takes, as Djokovic 
reads Murray's drop shot quickly and puts it away with aplomb.

*Murray 4-6 0-3 Djokovic (*denotes next server)
A far too comfortable game for Djokovic, with Murray getting just one point on 
the board. Murray just can't break through the Djokovic defence at the moment 
and the frustration - and unforced errors - are creeping in now. That's 21 for 
the match. A must-win game for Murray coming up. And this from Dominic Taylor: 
"Ben Stiller; Ben Fogle; Britney Spears; Paul off Neighbours; Steffi Graf; 
William H Macy; Paul off Neighbours; Dannii Minogue; Franz Beckenbauer; Andre 
Agassi; Jonathan Edwards; Sarah Palin. Do we win £5?" Do you think we'rethat 
generous, Dominic?

Murray 4-6 0-4 Djokovic* (*denotes next server)
Oh dear. Murray's moody body language can sometimes be deceiving, but his dip 
right now is certainly not. Some very sloppy play brings upthree break points 
for a double break for Djokovic. A loose backhand from Murray loops well beyond 
the baseline. He looks a broken man. Farouk Samad offers his two cents. "Press 
won't talk about it, but Murray could not have had an easier run to the final. 
If he loses this match, you got to wonder if he'll ever win a slam."

*Murray 4-6 0-5 Djokovic (*denotes next server)
Djokovic adeptly turns defence into attack as he soaks up Murray's artillery 
and then comes into the net to put away a forehand volley with ease. It leaves 
Murray needing to serve to stay in the set - and prevent a second-set whitewash.

Murray 4-6 1-5 Djokovic* (*denotes next server)
Murray stops the rot, but only just. A straightforward forehand volley for 
Djokovicproduces a set point at 30-40, but the Serb doesn't hold back on the 
return, firing it long. From deuce, Murray squeaks through, though surely it's 
a case of too little, too late? And look, here's an email from my brother. 
"Murray is not playing his best," he says. "But fair play to Novak he is 
looking very good out there."

*Murray 4-6 2-5 Djokovic (*denotes next server)
A wry smile from Djokovic as he slips 0-40 down. I guess he can afford that in 
the position he's in, even if it is a grand slam final. Djokovic then goes long 
to gift Murray one of the breaks back. It's the first time in the match that 
Murray's been able to break down Djokovic's serve and at least it gives his 
opponent something to think about.

Djokovic wins the second set 6-2
From 0-30 down, Murray drags himself back to 30-all and brings up game point 
with a thunderous serve down the middle. A netted forehand and it's deuce. Some 
outstanding defence play from Djokovic andit's a second set point. Thump. A 
darting forehand down the line and that's the set. "Murray needs a morale 
boost," declares Gary Naylor, stating the slightly obvious. "News of England's 
imminent defeat in Brisbane may
be just the lift he needs."

*Murray 4-6 2-6 1-0 Djokovic (*denotes next server)
Just thinking, considering the scoreline, there have been very few 
expletitive-laden outbursts from Mr Murray, haven't there? He has, by the way, 
come from two sets down in a grand slam three times before, once against 
Richard Gasquet at the French Open last year. I was on game-by-game duty for 
that one, if that's any kind of omen. And there you go, Murray breaks with one 
of his shots of match so far - a fizzing forehand down the line - and certainly 
his biggest COME ON of the match so far.

Murray 4-6 2-6 1-1 Djokovic* (*denotes next server)
No sooner does Murray break, than he's broken, when a wild smash from the back 
of the court bangs down into the tramlines. And Murray goes all sweary, just so 
not to disappoint.

*Murray 4-6 2-6 1-2 Djokovic (*denotes next server)
An easy hold for Djokovic. Meanwhile the Serbian fans on Rod Laver are very 
happy. Or very drunk. Or both. As for the match itself - okay, Murray has not 
played particularly well, especially on serve. But who can live with Djokovic 
in this form? Federer certainly couldn't in the semi-finals. Apart from that 
minor dip when serving for the second set, he's played at his peak for two sets 
and is not showing any signs of easing off.

Murray 4-6 2-6 1-3 Djokovic* (*denotes next server)
The end would appear to be in sight. Murray slaps a backhand wide to slump 
15-40 down. He claws his way back to deuce, closes the door on Djokovic on 
another break point or two or three, but has no answer when Djokovic pings a 
screaming backhand down the line having scampered left and right and left and 
right and left and right and left first.

Meanwhile after a flurry of tweets from Jamie Murray early in the match 
(including mention ofthis <http://yfrog.com/7bnkyz> penguin shuffle), it's 
radio silence at his end. Judy doesn't look much happier in the stands either.

And this poetic email from Daniel Montefusco: "The sun's just nudged me out of 
bed with a screaming pain behind my eye and vague memories of being at Priory 
Lane yesterday and watching the town sneak one over Eastbourne. Safely back in 
London, and tuning into this slam final, it looks through my cloudy eyes like a 
total mismatch. Perhaps, Murray's just down, but Djoko looks like he's seeing 
it like a slowmotion beach ball ala sunderland vs pool." He certainly was on 
that backhand down the line.

*Murray 4-6 2-6 2-3 Djokovic (*denotes next server)
Murray's not down and out quite yet. At 15-30, Djokovic misjudges a volley, 
thinking it was going out, but has to scamper back to retrieve it. With 
Djokovic on the back foot, Murray lets rip with a forehand and sets up two 
break points at 15-40. Ace. 30-40. But Murray takes it on the next as Djokovic 
slices a backhand into the net.

Murray 4-6 2-6 3-3 Djokovic* (*denotes next server)
Murray again gets himself into a tight spot, mainly due to some sloppy serving 
on his part. 30-40. Break point saved. "HIT THAT SERVE, HIT THAT SERVE," Murray 
shouts. Advantage Djokovic. Another break point saved. Advantage Murray. Cue a 
big forehand, and that'll be the game. "I think Murray may be the first man to 
reach three slam finals without winning a SET if current form for this match 
holds," says Simon Adelman. "Not quite the stats I was hoping for..."

*Murray 4-6 2-6 3-4 Djokovic (*denotes next server)
Superb again from Djokovic as he creeps ever closer to a second slam title. A 
backhand down the line, at full stretch, being the highlight and he throws an 
ace in too for good measure. "This is agonising viewing," says Guy Hornsby. 
"Even more so than last year. But even more agonising is my dilemma. I'm due to 
be going to a Sunday lunch for my mate's birthday at 12.30, which I've 
organised. This is in a family-friendly pub with no TVs, and if Murray can win 
this set, then I'll have to leave at 2-1. I can't miss the lunch, and I want to 
gorge on succulent beef and the trimmings, but I'm also a massive tennis and 
Murray fan, and I don't want to leave my flat either. Can I throw this open to 
the floor?"

Murray 4-6 2-6 3-5 Djokovic* (*denotes next server)
A tremendous strike on the forehand side at 30-all raises a rare smile from 
Murray, but the glare is back on the next point as another forehand flies long. 
Deuce. Deuce No2. Break point Djokovic. The Serb's18th chance to do so I 
believe.He takes it and will serve for the championship.


And this from Lara Pawson: "Guy, I fear you won't have to choose. However, 
let's play with superstition for a minute and encourage you to go to your 
mate's lunch, gorge yourself on beef, in the hope that such a dismissive act to 
Andy's prowess will jinx Djokovic. Go for lunch, Guy, and regret not seeing 
Andy win. But at least the rest of us will have had the pleasure of watching 
Andy make a comeback. (She lied, hopelessly.)"

Meanwhile the monikered Hector seems to be laying the blame with poor Judy. 
"At some point in his life a man has to completely remove himself from his 
mother's skirt tail," he announces.

Djokovic wins the Australian Open title 6-4 6-2 6-3
Tame Murray backhand into the net, 15-0. Murray snatches at a shot after 
lengthy rally, 30-0. Djokovic returns the favour, 30-15. Djokovic goes for 
broke with a backhand down the line but it's well long, 30-all. Forehand on the 
run from Murray flops into the net,40-30 and championship point. Another Murray 
forehand into the net and that's it. Djokovic is theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> champion three years after 
his first triumph in Melbourne and Murray, in his third grand slam final, is 
once again the bridesmaid. "I advise Guy Hornsby to head straight for his 
friend's birthday party," says Andrew Knowles. Don't worry Andrew - I think he 
already has.

What a display from Djokovic, even though Murray did not give the best of 
himself. After they slugged it out for much of the first set, Djokovic walked 
away with it. His defence, depth on ground strokes, his serve, it was a quality 
performance. And Murray just lost the internal battle with himself towards the 
end. Djokovic raises his arms, strips off on court, throws his Serbian-coloured 
shoes and shirt into the crowd and flings his racket and the odd sweat-soaked 
towel or two at the fans as well. Murray scampers off court for a moment to 
reflect.

Simon Adelman isn't a man to hit Murray when he's down. "Reflecting on the 
previous "unfortunate" stats I realise now that nevertheless Murray is the most 
successful player in 75 years … three finals of slams even if he doesn't win 
them – I, and we, should stop being so British and focus on the positives for 
once. A little work on his first serve percentages and we will have a champion 
on our hands yet …"

Trophy time Murray is back, having changed out of his green number and 
reverted to a more subdued grey t-shirt. Djokovic, thankfully, has put a fresh 
shirt on. Some lengthy speeches follow from some big tournament suits and 
sponsor types.

Murray then trudges up to collect his runners-up trophy. After his tears 
against Federer last year, he promises to "try and keep it together." He 
congratulates Djokovic, thanks his team, hopes there will be more chances to 
come and apologises to any of the umpires and ballkids he "may have given a 
hard time to" over the last fortnight. And keep it together he does.

Then it's Djokovic's turn. He praises Murray and just as Federer did 12 months 
ago, he tells Murray he will win a grand slam one day.

Cue the final word from Gary Naylor. "An Ivanisevic of our age," he declares. 
Which at least means Murray will win Wimbledon in approximately 2018 then. 
Thanks for all your emails today, sorry I couldn't use them all. Bye.
 