
Andy Flower will retain a central role in English cricket despite his 
resignation as team director 
<http://http://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/31/andy-flower-sacked-england-cricket-coach>
 after theAshes humiliation this winter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/05/ashes-2013-14-australia-england--whitewash>
, having been appointed to a new position as technical director of elite 
coaching.

Flower will be based at the National Performance Centre in Loughborough – 
handy for the Midlands home where he has settled with his family, and thereby 
freeing him from most of the travel that ground him down in his five years in 
charge of England – and will work with players, coaches and the counties.

That will inevitably also involve a close relationship with the man who 
succeeds him in the day-to-day charge of England's Test, one-day and Twenty20 
teams, now to be known again as the head coach. Ashley Giles is still thought 
to be the favourite for that position, although it has been advertised, with no 
appointment to be made until April, after the World T20 in Bangladesh.

Flower's appointment provides tangible evidence that the 5-0 whitewash in 
Australia did little if anything to undermine the respect in which he is held 
by the England and WalesCricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> 
Board – whose new managing director, Paul Downton, wanted him to stay in his 
position as team director. "The ECB is delighted that we are able to retain a 
man of Andy Flower's experience and quality," said Downton, who is currently in 
the West Indies with Giles and the one-day team.

"His record over the last five years speaks for itself and the ECB and Andy 
are excited about the future. Not only will Andy work with players and coaches 
but he will also look to enhance the relationship between the county coaches 
and the England set-up. He will also work with Level 3 and 4 coaches in theECB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ecb> coaching structures.

"Andy will also build on the highly successful ECB coach and talent 
development programmes which have seen players such as Joe Root, Ben Stokes and 
Jos Buttler, to name a few, graduate to England senior teams, as well as work 
with a number of coaches from first-class counties who have been involved with 
the England Lions."

"The role will also involve researching the world's best practice in coaching 
and performance, driving and implementing innovation in coaching practice and 
technology, with and through the Fellowship of Elite Coaches and the National 
Performance Centre, as well as recommending developments within ECB coach 
education and CPD [continued professional development] programmes."

Flower was quoted as saying: "I see this as a great opportunity for me as I 
start a new phase of my career. I am particularly excited about the chance to 
build and mould a leadership course which is not simply about captaincy but 
much more. This role offers me a chance to make a real contribution to the 
ability and character of England players and coaches in the years to come."

Giles Clarke, the ECB chairman who had also stressed the importance of 
retaining Flower when expressing disappointment over his resignation as team 
director, has received an apology from the sports marketing company IMG four 
years after it sued him during a row with the Indian Premier League 
commissioner Lalit Modi.

The case, which was prompted by Clarke's allegation that Modi and IMG were 
involved in talks with a group of English counties about a rebel Twenty20 
competition, was settled out of court in 2012. But the issue inevitably damaged 
the "strong and long-standing relationships with sports governing bodies and 
their officials", to which IMG referred in a statement issued on Monday.

"In light of that and with the benefit of hindsight, IMG deeply regrets the 
way in which it handled the dispute with Mr Giles Clarke CBE (chairman, England 
& Wales Cricket Board) between 2010 and 2012, and sincerely apologises to Mr 
Clarke and his family for the distress that the court proceedings caused," read 
the statement.

In addition to his role at the ECB, Clarke is also the chairman of the 
International Cricket Council's Finance and Commercial Affairs committee, and 
IMG is involved in the negotiations for both domestic and international cricket 
rights that are ongoing.
 