
As only he can, Andy Murray turned a victory speech into stand-up, swivelling 
around mid-interview to notice thathis new old coach, Ivan Lendl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/15/ivan-lendl-andy-murray-novak-djokovic>
, had slipped away while the rest of Queen’s Club was celebrating his player’s 
record fifth title.

“It’s nice of him to stick around for the presentation,” he said courtside, as 
the giant screen showed an empty chair where Lendl had sat with trademark 
insouciance for two hours 12 minutes while Murray had ground down the fierce 
challenge of Milos Raonic over three sets.

“Obviously it was a good first week back together,” Murray said, in classic 
understatement. After more than two years apart they were reunited last week 
and Murray won his second title of the season before heading for Wimbledon, 
buoyed and fit and dangerous. Not too shabby, as they say.

Before dispatching Raonic 6-7 (5), 6-4, 6-3 on a slumbering, overcast Sunday 
afternoon Murray had dismissed the obvious as “uninteresting”: the presence of 
Lendl in his box and John McEnroe sitting like a pumped-up teenager alongside 
Raonic’s team as the Canadian’s quick-fix grasscourt guru. But there could be 
no doubt the crowd and the media were transfixed by them. The last time they 
had faced off at Queen’s Club, 26 years ago, Lendl beat McEnroe 6-2, 6-4 in the 
semi-finals.

Raonic, who has done wonders with his tennis over the past several months, 
coming through injury and improving his footwork and attacking awareness, 
clearly has benefited from the brief association, and said later: “He’s going 
to stick around. He and I agreed that he would help me all the way through this 
and try to make the most and make a good push in the coming weeks.”

The 6ft 6in Raonic is moving way better than he once did and bridled when 
asked if his earlier courtside remark about wanting a rematch with Murray a 
couple of Sundays from now was a flippant aside.

“I wasn’t joking,” said a player who is more lighthearted than he once was. 
“No, I would like to be there on a Sunday at Wimbledon. That would normally 
mean something significant.

“If it’s against Andy, I think it’s a great thing. I will worry about myself 
only. Let him take care of his own stuff.”

He was candid, too, about failing to husband a set and break lead, because at 
that point there were very few around Court One who did not think he was going 
to win his first grasscourt title in his first final on the surface.

“Normally I’m pretty confident up a set and a break,” he said. “There were two 
very close challenges there [one that went against him and cost him a 4-1 
lead], maybe could make a difference or not, but I thought he played well.

“I definitely expected [Murray to come back]. But that 15-love point I missed 
just by a little bit on the forehand wide... also later I had a game point 
where I missed again by a few millimetres wide... Then things sort of got going 
– and he did a good job getting things going. I started to hesitate a little 
bit.

“These top guys are quite dangerous when they start feeling comfortable. Like 
I always said, it’s about making them feel as uncomfortable as possible. I did 
that for quite a bit of time at the start and then I let him get into the match 
a little bit too much.”

There was much for a neutral to enjoy in what, fittingly, was the best match 
of the tournament between the first and third seeds – just ahead of Murray’s 
semi-final win over Marin Cilic on Saturday when for the second time he 
stuttered mid-match before winning in three sets. On Sunday, he went a set 
down: same mini-crisis, different method of getting there.

He is alive to the situation, though, and said he, Lendl and Jamie Delgado 
went into a huddle immediately after the final to talk about it. As well as he 
has played here this week he will not want any such dips at Wimbledon, because 
it was a lack of concentration that drained his legs in the first two rounds of 
the French Open, where hefaded in the final against Novak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jun/05/french-open-mens-final-andy-murray-v-novak-djokovic-live>
. The world No1 will not be anywhere near as forgiving as other opponents in 
similar circumstances.

Overall, though, Murray has to be extremely pleased with his form and his 
fitness, after seeming to strain his adductor muscles in a tumble on the damp 
grass during the Cilic match. And Lendl, whatever he does or does not say, will 
be happy too. He pretty much cannot lose in this comeback with Murray. The 
player is in shape and has put another trophy in the cabinet, pulling one Aegon 
championship title ahead of some illustrious company, including McEnroe, who 
was presented to the crowd alongside Boris Becker, Roy Emerson and Lleyton 
Hewitt earlier in the week as a four-title champion here.

That will do wonders for Murray’s confidence, which can ebb and flow. He has 
his coach back and it’s all clicking nicely.

Andy Murray beats Milos Raonic to win Aegon Championships – as it happened | 
Les Roopanarine
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jun/19/andy-murray-v-milos-raonic-aegon-championships-final-queens-club-live>
Roger Federer: ‘I need the fire, the excitement, the whole rollercoaster’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/18/roger-federer-interview-tennis-wimbledon-simon-hattenstone>
Madison Keys wins Aegon Classic title with win over Barbora Strycova
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/19/madison-keys-aegon-classic-barbora-strycova> 