
There is a ghost in Melbourne, a ghost who will not be stilled until Andy 
Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> delivers up to British 
tennis the prize the nation has craved, with ­dwindling hope, for 74 years.

It will not be the Scot's priority when he walks on to the court at the Rod 
Laver Arena today, but beating Roger ­Federer in the final of theAustralian Open
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> would surely lay to rest 
the ­burden of being British and a loser at the highest level in his sport – 
the inconvenience of not being Fred Perry. Murray might not know it, but Perry 
died in this city almost exactly 15 years ago.

Perry was 85 and had just watched Andre Agassi beat Pete Sampras in four sets 
to win his first Australian Open. Jeremy Bates, carrying the flag alone, lost 
to John McEnroe in straight sets in the second round. British aspirations were 
pitifully, predictably low.

Perry, by then an American citizen and a successful businessman, had won the 
Australian title himself 61 years earlier. He always loved his visits to 
Australia, and returned many times.

Towards the end of the 1995 championships, he slipped in the bathroom of his 
hotel and broke four ribs, which did not stop him attending a reception that 
night in honour of Australian greats Ken Rosewall and Lew Hoad. "Christ, it 
hurts," he said as he took his place at dinner.

But the pain became unbearable and he was admitted to Epworth Hospital. John 
Parsons of theDaily Telegraph was among his many visitors. Perry had watched 
the women's final on the TV at the end of his hospital bed – switching 
occasionally to inspect Mike Atherton's England team in Adelaide – and he 
wanted to know from Parsons why Arantxa Sánchez-Vicario had not lobbed the 
French girl Mary Pierce.

He was saddened, too, that ­modern players did not show more independence off 
court, and the urge to ­entertain on it.Tennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> was in his blood to the end. He died 
on 2 February, from renal ­failure. His body was taken back to ­England and a 
funeral was held in Rottingdean, East Sussex. His ashes for many years were 
under his statue at Wimbledon, although mystery ­surrounds their whereabouts 
since it was moved a few years ago.

But that was then and, as Robert De Niro says in The Deerhunter, "This is 
this, this ain't something else."

It might be Murray's motto. At this tournament and every other he has played 
in over the past five years the ghost of Perry has accompanied him, as it did 
Bates, John Lloyd, Roger ­Taylor, Tim Henman, Greg Rusedski and a whole cast of 
nondescript losers. Time and again they were reminded that Perry famously, 
boringly was the last British male to win a major – at the US Championships in 
1936, in case you did not hear.

It means less to Murray, though, than it seemed to mean to the 
­others. ­Perhaps it is because he is Scottish. More likely it is because he is 
Andy Murray, his own man – and better than all of those ­mentioned.

Mats Wilander, now an outspoken commentator, observed earlier in the week that 
the Scot probably "didn't give a shit" about winning a slam for Britain. It was 
not entirely true. He does care. But, as he has said with forbearance, his 
priority is to win it for himself, his family and the team around him. It is a 
perfectly reasonable point of view – one that stirred his critics into frothy 
­paroxysms of Little Englanderism.

Federer, clumsily but with devious purpose, tried to ignite the national 
flames when he said on Friday, "I know that he would like to win the first for 
Britain in, what is it, 150,000 years?"

There were other digs: how Murray's 6-4 lead in their career match-ups was 
irrelevant, how he'd beaten him easily in his only appearance in a slam final, 
at the US Open two years ago, how he'd not improved since then, and how his 
head would hang if he went behind early in this final.

Murray yesterday refused to be drawn on to the punch. "To me, that stuff's 
irrelevant," he said.

"I have always been pretty respectful about his game. He's probably the 
greatest player that's ever played. But, if every time he loses to me he thinks 
it's because he hasn't played his best, well, every time I have lost against 
him I don't think I have played my best either. If I play my best ­tomorrow I 
have a chance of ­winning. I'll try and do that."

He loves boxing, as he has said a few times here, but he hates the 
trash-talking hype that goes with it.

"I don't think I have ever tried to do that, through the press or anywhere. 
Whether other players do it or not, I am not sure. It's never been something I 
tried."

Did he not think that Federer was doing just that, though?

"Maybe. You'd have to ask him. He obviously deals with these situations his 
way and he's played very well in these circumstances. But in the last few years 
he's also lost a lot of close matches in five sets, including slam finals. That 
sort of gives you the belief you can win against him in these situations."

Federer expects Murray to mix his game up between passive and attack. Murray 
is giving nothing away – although Federer is surely right.

"I have played well against him in the past," Murray said, "and I have always 
felt like I have a chance against him. I haven't felt like he's going to blow 
me off the court. I think I am better now than I was four or five months ago 
[when Murray lost to Federer at the O2 Arena in London].

"It's been a great tournament so far. I have only dropped the one set [against 
Marin Cilic in the semi-finals], and the win against [Rafael] Nadal made me 
feel good about my game. Coming back from a set down against Cilic was good 
after what happened at the US Open [when he lost to him in September]. I've 
just got one more match to go now."

One more match. Not a million that have already been played. Not any of the 
losing finals that have left ­British hopes in tatters. One more match that 
matters.

Can he do it? As Fred Perry might have said that warm morning in Australia 76 
years ago when he was due to play the local hero Jack Crawford in the final, 
"Looks like a fine day for a game of tennis. Let's see how it goes."

It went pretty well. Fred won 6-3, 7-5, 6-1. History waits for Murray. But 
­Murray, like Perry, will deal with ­history in his own time.
 