
Andy Murray handed a vibrant, hungry Novak Djokovic his second Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> title today in two hours 
and 39 minutes of truly wretched tennis.

At the third time of asking, the Scot could not win a set in a grand slam 
final. He did not even get close, as Djokovic won 6-4, 6-2, 6-3.

This was one of the Scot's poorest displays in a long-time, perhaps on a par 
with his defeat by Stanislas Wawrinka in the US Open last year. He moved with 
the bounce of a sloth, served meekly and lacked any of the vim that had carried 
him this far.

Whatever ailed Murray he employed the Rafa Nadal no-defence defence, refusing 
to blame any injury.

On court, the evidence was clear. He did not like the tension in his racket or 
in his soul. He was leaden, sullen, beaten. He blinked, tugged at his leg, 
shouted at his mother, swore at the seagulls and whatever conversation he was 
having with himself would have been a very black dialogue indeed.

But his passion was misdirected; it was not his team or the seagulls who were 
losing this final; it was him.

Djokovic ignored it all. He served with outstanding consistency, blasted six 
aces past his static opponent, broke him seven times out of 18 opportunities 
and was rarely in trouble.

At least Murray did not cry this year, as he did when losing to Roger Federer 
in last year's final. Indeed, Murray looked for an instance in the glare of the 
lights as if a mild hysteria had invaded him, smiling with what surely was 
embarrassment on the podium.

"Try to keep it together this year," he joked, something he clearly could not 
manage during a match in which his opponent played classic Murray defensive 
tennis to grind him down.

Murray's post-match summary for the crowd was from the handbook of good 
manners. "You had an unbelievable tournament," he said to Djokovic, "and 
deserved to win. I look forward to playing against you in the future. I would 
like to thank my team …"

And so on. In fact, at key stages of his meltdown he looked as if he wanted to 
strangle his team. "Calm down," he gestured after losing the first set; "Shut 
up!" he screamed, after losing the second.

Much will be made of his choking or otherwise; the ghost of Fred Perry will be 
exorcised. Neither is completely true. Simply, he struck Djokovic on a night 
when the Serb would have beaten anyone in the world – maybe even a fully 
functioning Nadal or Federer.

He had already put Federer away in the semi-final; this was better than that; 
at one point he looked as if he would nil Murray in the second set, but the No5 
seed battled hard to hang on to his credibility.

It's not history that weighs Andy Murray down. It's Andy Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray>. There are too many of him.

The one who turned up at Rod Laver Arena was in few respects related to the 
buzzing, positive player who had come through six pulsating matches for his 
date with destiny, and he practically gift-wrapped this title for Djokovic.

Murray will come back. In what shape is an intriguing question. This will 
either further harden his resolve or send him into a funk. And not even he is 
sure which direction he is heading.

In boxing terms, he waited too long going for the knockout.
 