
The England and Wales Cricket Board has issued a statement on behalf of Andy 
Flower denying reports that he may consider resigning ifKevin Pietersen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kevin-pietersen> continues to be a long-term 
fixture in the Test team. Pietersen also responded to the stories, describing 
himself as “shocked” and restating his commitment to carry on playing for 
England until 2015.

It has been suggested that Flower is prepared to consider stepping down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/07/andy-flower-england-team-director-kevin-pietersen>
 if the ECB managing director Paul Downton, new national selector James 
Whittaker and Alastair Cook are convinced Pietersen remains central to 
England's prospects. In a statement released via the ECB website Flower stated 
that no firm ultimatum on the issue has been made.

The statement in full reads: “Following speculation in the media today I feel 
it necessary to reiterate much of what I said in my recent press conference. It 
would be sensible and responsible to review the tour in a calm and logical 
manner before assessing our options for the future and planning ahead. I repeat 
that neither I nor the wider ECB leadership group have made any decisions as to 
the future involvement of any individuals in the playing group or in the 
support staff. The reports that I have issued an ultimatum of some description 
to the ECB are totally inaccurate.”

While Flower has not denied the sentiments attributed to him or made any 
mention of Pietersen, he is adamant that no decision has been taken or demands 
made. It is worth noting this leaves England's team director in the slightly 
odd position of having denied doing something he has not specifically been 
accused of: there was no suggestion in initial reports of Flower's intentions 
that these feelings have been formally conveyed to the ECB.

Shortly after Flower's statement Pietersen made his own feelings, if not 
exactly clear, then at least evident via Twitter.

“I am shocked and saddened by reports in the media today concerning my future 
with England,” he tweeted. “I wish to repeat my strong desire to continue 
playing for my country, and to help us regain the Ashes in 2015.” The batsman 
also described as “complete and utter lies” a suggestion that he is facing 
disciplinary action as a result of his attitude to England warm-up games.

Pietersen has already made clear via Twitter that he is willing to continue 
playing for England, although the terms of exactly how this might work in 
practice are unclear given both the ongoing issue of his relationship with 
Flower and also his reported eagerness to play in the Indian Premier League, a 
three-year commitment that would clash with early-season first class cricket in 
England.

Quite where this leaves England's team, hierarchy and star batsman remains to 
be seen – other than in state of almost comical disarray after a 5-0 whitewash 
further seasoned by the spectacle of public third party jousting. In an 
unedifying coda the television presenter Piers Morgan has also waded into the 
argument, abusing via Twitter a journalist he believes to be loyal to Flower 
and anti-Pietersen. England's one-day series against Australia begins this 
coming Sunday. With neither Pietersen nor Flower present it seems likely 
attention will still be firmly focused elsewhere.
 