
Andy Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> flies out of 
Melbourne on Sunday, beaten but not disheartened. He heads for San Diego, where 
he will lead Great Britain's return to the world group of the Davis Cup in a 
first-round tie against the United States, and there is every chance he will 
play both singles and doubles.

That should at least wipe some of the pain away after his loss to Roger 
Federer in the quarter-finals of theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> on Wednesday night, when 
the Swiss bossed him for two sets and held off his weakening challenge in the 
fourth. Murray did not want to use his recent back surgery as an excuse but it 
seemed from a distance that this tournament might have come a little soon for 
him, despite his extensive rehab programme in Miami before Christmas.

"I don't know, to be honest," he said before leaving Australia. "I don't know 
if I'd had 10 more matches if I would have been tired. Playing these matches at 
this level, it's very hard to practise against guys as good as Roger. It's hard 
to train at this level and prepare for that. So maybe the first slam, 
regardless of when, was going to be very challenging for me physically and 
mentally but it's a big sign of progress and my back held up fairly well."

It was, nevertheless, surprising to see him out-run and out-hit by Federer 
who, at 32, is six years older than the Scot. As well as the disappointment of 
losing to an opponent he beat in the semi-finals here a year ago, Murray will 
now have to live with a drop in the world rankings. He will fall from No4 to 
No7 if Federer beats Rafael Nadal in the semi-final on Friday, and to No6 if 
Nadal wins the match. Federer moves to No3 if he wins the title, his 18th grand 
slam, No5 if he reaches the final and back to No8 from No6 if Nadal beats him.

There is obviously nothing Murray can do about any of that, so his thoughts 
are now directed across the Pacific. He had contemplated returning to London 
for a couple of days, as he has been away from home since he had surgery on his 
back in late September, but he thought better of it, given the number of time 
zones he would have to negotiate in different directions.

The Davis Cup will be a slight step down in intensity from his return to the 
environment of big-time tennis in Melbourne over the past fortnight, although 
John Isner and Sam Querrey, his potential opponents, will not be easy to handle 
on the drop-in clay court that has been specially built for the tournament at 
the home of the San Diego Padres. It is a surface that taxes Murray's suspect 
knees and ankles more than any other.

"I always enjoy playing Davis Cup," he said. "I just need to look to try and 
recover now as quickly as possible because matches like this would normally 
take a couple of days. I haven't played a match like this for a while so it'll 
take me a little bit longer to feel good again. I'll need to take a bit of 
rest, and obviously, with travel and stuff and adjusting to a new surface, 
that's going to be another challenge. Hopefully I can do that OK.

"I do all the same recovery stuff as I used to, I just don't have to spend as 
much time with the recovery stuff because it's obviously improved since the 
surgery. I just have to monitor it and stay on top of it because it's pretty 
early stages still. I played my first match only three weeks ago and I've 
played a lot of tennis since then, so I'm happy with the way it's held up and 
the rest of my body."
 