
Britain is the stage for two of the most impressively stubborn vigils in world 
sport. The England football team's inability to reach the final of an 
international tournament for 45 summers vies with the 75-year wait for a 
British man to win one of tennis's four grand slam singles titles. Fred Perry 
is just weekend wear for ageing Mods.

On Friday the Football Association's Sir Trevor Brooking launched a national 
programme to drag young English footballers into the mainstream of skills‑based 
play. And in Melbourne, Andy Murray knocked out David Ferrer to reach his third 
grand slam final. With Rafael Nadal and Roger Federer already out, Murray could 
smell his best chance of exorcising Perry's ghost, againstNovak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic>, a formidable adversary but 
not a serial finisher in the class of Federer or Nadal.

This is not Wimbledon: the Arcadia where Britain would most like to close the 
door on Perry, who won the last of his three Wimbledon titles in 1936, and who 
performed for the tennis-loving classes the role Sir Bobby Charlton and Geoff 
Hurst enact in football. In both narratives nostalgia runs low.

Perry took his laurels to the grave and the cult of 1966 acts these days as an 
indictment of subsequent attempts to compete with international football's 
major powers.

Murray has never appeared eager to take to the court as an emblem of British 
frustration. In a lonely sport of one v one there is enough to cope with 
without introducing oneself as Her Majesty's representative. The idea of him as 
a specifically British tennis player is ours, not his. History's dead hand can 
only weigh upon his strokes.

But when the grand slam final commences, these choices are taken from him. He 
is Britain'sAndy Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray>. The 
long fiasco of non-achievement in a sport that calls south-west London home 
plays out not only here but across the world. It is a default feature article 
for American tennis writers at Wimbledon and a great source of mirth, no doubt, 
in smaller countries who produce better players on a slither of the Lawn Tennis 
Association's strawberry and Pimm's-inflated budget.

The untameable itch is a staple of this sporting life. In baseball, now that 
the Boston Red Sox are off their cross, Americans offer the Chicago Cubs and 
their 103-year wait for a World Series title as a greater nag than that of 
British tennis. In Holland football's World Cup is like a ball tied to the toe 
of a clown. The Dutch reach down to pick it up and it flies back out of reach.

The grand slam of golf – all four major titles in a single calendar year – has 
remained elusive, even to Jack Nicklaus and Tiger Woods, and Pete Sampras, 
Federer and Nadal have never matched Rod Laver's tennis grand slam of 1969. In 
football Newcastle United have not won the league since 1927. In golf again the 
journeyman American Jay Delsing has contested and failed to win a record number 
of tournaments (currently 565).

With fondness we remember the Turf's worst horses: Amrullah, a serial 
runner-up, who ran 74 times without winning but surrendered that record to 
Quixall Crossett, who reached 103 outings without passing the post in front and 
was described by theRacing Post as "a seriously slow maiden in danger of 
becoming a folk hero".

In Australia today's outcome reflects another distinction: not between good 
and bad but good and good enough. Tim Henman lacked the pure talent to win a 
grand slam title but overachieved in applying all the tools at his disposal. 
Relative to capability, Henman went further than he was entitled but not far 
enough for a demanding public, which left him stranded and at the mercy of what 
Salman Rushdie called, long before the blogosphere, our "culture of 
disparagement".

Murray advanced to face Djokovic with the opposite dilemma. No less exhausting 
to watch than Henman (his important wins are seldom smooth), he is blessed with 
the necessary arsenal to pass into the small hall of grand slam title winners – 
blessed, and therefore cursed, because with real talent comes the demand that 
it must be consummated.

By an accident of history – or perhaps the failings of British tennis are too 
kindly called misfortune – Murray's career is defined by all that came before 
his graduation to the world elite, before Henman, before his own birth, and all 
the way back to the start of appeasement, when Perry was assumed to be the 
latest, not the last, of the musketeers.

On court Murray is quite plainly tied into a struggle with himself, his lapses 
of precision and aggression, not with the map of grand slam title-winning 
nationalities. Here Sunday started early and with excitement. An individual was 
on a private quest, along with an entourage of 60 million.
 