
Andy Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> had a lot of 
friends at Queen’s on Saturday, none more loyal than the green stuff on which 
he teased Marin Cilic for just under two hours to reach the final of the Aegon 
Championships, where he will face Milos Raonic, who defeated Bernard Tomic 6-4, 
6-4 in the other semi-final.

Lawn tennis is won as much with the feet as the hands, and Cilic, the 6ft 6in 
Croatian spent the first set of the first semi-final looking like someone had 
attached wheels to his shoes. But once he found his feet – literally – the 2012 
champion and 2013 finalist helped make this a memorable match.

Murray said courtside after wrapping up a 6-4, 3-6, 6-3 win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jun/18/andy-murray-v-marin-cilic-aegon-championships-semi-final-live>
: “There were some really good points in there. Marin plays really well on the 
grass here. In the third set the intensity got raised a level. I got a little 
fortunate on some shots. On this surface, the serve is an important shot. 
Hopefully I can serve like that tomorrow. It’s great to get to the final again.”

Andy Murray beats Marin Cilic: Aegon Championships semi-final – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jun/18/andy-murray-v-marin-cilic-aegon-championships-semi-final-live>
If he wins it, he will be the king of Queen’s, owner of a record five titles. 
“There have been many great players here over the years,” he reminded the fans 
on a cloudy afternoon, “and yesterday there was the presentation here for John 
McEnroe, Lleyton Hewitt, Boris Becker and Roy Emerson, who all won four titles.”

The early tumbles were as comical as they were dangerous, of course, and Cilic 
was not amused as he repeatedly stuttered when setting off to hunt down ground 
strokes that Murray put wide or dinked short.

Murray broke early and cruised through the first set in 36 minutes, with nary 
a care. But he would become agitated soon enough, upset with a few dubious line 
calls. He had used all his three challenges for the second set after only three 
games, and was thereafter reduced to gesticulating to the chair umpire about 
line calls he considered wrong.

There was a spurt of classy shot-making from Cilic in the third game of the 
second set, and Murray needed a couple of big serves and a sumptuous forehand 
down the line to hold.

It was at this stage of his quarter-final against Kyle Edmund on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/17/andy-murray-kyle-edmund-queens-club-aegon-championships>
 that Murray also lost focus and it took him a while here to rediscover the 
calm and control of the first set. The frustrations would not ease, though, and 
Cilic forced a wayward forehand out of him on the run to break for 4-3.

Murray got a look in the next game, but Cilic – more accustomed to the surface 
now – held with his fifth ace, and Murray went to the service line muttering to 
himself: “Don’t worry about it.”

Desperation brought out the best in the Scot, a leaping backhand volley a 
highlight, alongside a gorgeous crosscourt forehand and an ace as he held to 
stay in the set.

What he did not need, or want, was a third frame, but Cilic, his serve now 
humming, levelled.

Cilic had never come from a set down to beat Murray in their 12 matches, but 
he was giving himself every chance with a string of glorious shots to all parts 
of the court. The level on both sides of the net was pleasingly high, and it 
would come down to who could maintain the intensity and quality longest.

As he has done so many times in the past, Murray found the game to confound 
Cilic, despite a first double fault of the match, and raced to a 3-0 lead with 
almost indecent urgency. It was a carbon copy of his performance against Edmund.

Significantly, in this set and through most of his best patches in the match, 
Murray turned the volume down to almost inaudible in his self admonishment, and 
there were good reasons to be content. He lost only two points on his serve in 
the final set, hitting an impressive 80% of first serves into the box, which 
proved too much for Cilic, whose own dangerous serve dropped to a vulnerable 
44%.

Cilic had the ball in hand for the last time in what had been a hugely 
entertaining contest, and saved match point with his eighth ace. Murray hauled 
through five deuce points, forcing him to save for a second time as the game 
went into its ninth minute. Cilic held with a wonderful passing shot down the 
line.

The first point of the final game was extraordinary, for resilience, class and 
the killer finish: a Murray forehand that drew a final losing lunge from Cilic. 
He struck his 14th ace for three match points, and a 15th to wrap it up. That’s 
the way to win a tennis match.

Murray is gathering in confidence as Wimbledon approaches and this was just 
the sort of workout he needed. He will probably not meet many better foes in 
the first week at the All England Club.

In Halle, meanwhile, there was a very significant result indeed for Alexander 
Zverev, who scored the win of his young career when he outlastedRoger Federer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer>, 7-6 (7-4), 5-7, 6-3 to reach 
Sunday’s final. The German is 19 years and 59 days old. The last player younger 
than him to beat Federer – who turns 35 in August – was Rafael Nadal on his 
19th birthday at Roland Garros in 2005. Murray, also, was still a teenager when 
he beat the Swiss in Cincinnati the following year.

This was Zverev’s first win against a top 10 player. It almost certainly will 
not be his last. His opponent on Sunday is not, however, the one the tournament 
would have loved, Dominic Thiem, whose charge into the top 10 this season has 
been the talk of the Tour. Instead he will play the German Florian Mayer, who 
is ranked 192 in the world, and took a little over an hour to upset the 
22-year-old Austrian in two sets on Saturday.
 