
There is nobody else who transmits his internal debate from the court to the 
gallery with quite the intensity thatAndy Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> does when he plays his delicate 
yet powerful tennis.

Even for neutral observers, it is impossible to watch his talent undergo 
ball-by-ball scrutiny in a game that demands millimetric perfection without 
sharing his suffering and his joy – often within seconds of each other – so 
naked are his emotions.

Inside the Rod Laver Arenatomorrow, we will all do it again.

The pale Scot with a face of transparent anxiety will keep his audience in a 
state of suspense for possibly three hours or more in temperatures that 
threaten to touch 35C as he strives to win theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> and lay a ghost who must by 
now be screaming for execution.

If he were to beat Novak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic> – and he is in the mood and 
form to do so – he would deliver a grand slam that has famously eluded everyone 
from these islands since Alexander Obolensky beat the All Blacks 
single-handedly for England at Twickenham.

That was in 1936, and the Russian prince shared what sporting limelight shone 
on athletes in those innocent times with Fred Perry, the son of a Labour MP, 
who won his third and final Wimbledon before fleeing the suffocating climate of 
English tennis for, among other places, Hollywood.

Sport was not such a global concern then, and sportsmen were allowed almost 
normal lives, their deeds relayed in print and cinema newsreels up to a week 
later. But Perry's legend has grown in the national psyche to the point that, 
in 2011, an event that was of peripheral interest to a British audience 75 
years ago has taken on the proportions of Hamlet.

Murray, a proud 23-year-old Scot, rightly resists the hysteria, preferring to 
take on the burden critics lumber him with about his reluctance to play 
aggressively – a charge that looks ludicrous on the evidence of his stirring 
fightback to beat David Ferrer in four sets on Friday night. Murray went to the 
net 56 times, 40 times making the Spaniard pay.

So that is Murray's more immediate and significant baggage. It is heavy enough 
a load on its own, especially as he is in his third grand slam final, this time 
against an opponent he has known since they were 13 years old and who shares 
his hunger to displace the two giants of the modern game, Rafa Nadal and Roger 
Federer, who, to the surprise of most observers, left Melbourne early.

Consequently, there is a palpable sense of a new era, that catch-all 
concept, about this final. Nadal limped home on one leg, beaten in the 
quarter-finals by his countryman Ferrer; Djokovic did not just account for 
Federer, he beat him even more thoroughly than he did at the same stage of the 
US Open last August.

Murray had to fight much harder to defeat Ferrer in his semi-final, yet it 
could be argued that match was every bit as sound a preparation for the final 
as was Djokovic's assignment against the Swiss. The Scot dipped into his 
considerable resources of courage; Djokovic had his sometimes fragile 
confidence bolstered.

What is clear is they will have no secrets. There will be no mind games 
between strangers, no second-guessing, no mysteries. They have met seven times, 
and Murray's three wins have come at the end of the sequence, all on hard 
courts, but the last of those was nearly two years ago. Two of Djokovic's four 
wins were on clay, in Monte Carlo three years ago and Madrid in 2006. So maybe 
there is a hint of the unknown about this one.

They were born a week apart, in 1987, but have games as different as their 
accents. Murray, from Dunblane, has grown into a sublime touch player with a 
heart as big as a house. Djokovic, from Belgrade, still leans towards power 
tennis and is relentless when in front, but hates to have his rhythm disrupted. 
It is a dream fit.

They first met on a tennis court 10 years ago, spotty prodigies in a 
tournament called Les Petits A's, in Tarbes in the foothills of the Pyrenees. 
Murray says he won "6-0, 6-1 maybe". Djokovic say he cannot remember the score.

"A lot's changed since then," Murray said an hour after his semi-final on 
Friday night. "I'm sure it will be just a bit tougher than that on Sunday."

There have been unsubstantiated whispers of jealousy between them as they 
developed their fledgling skills but that is what teenagers are for. They both 
confirm they are friends now.

Surely, though, there had been some tension. "When we've seen each other off 
the courts, I've never been jealous of him," said Murray. "We have always got 
on well. When we were a bit younger, because we were the two trying to get 
ahead of Roger and Rafa, we wanting to push each other a little bit. So 
sometimes the matches were a little fiery, but now we get on very well.

"We played doubles here when I first came on the Tour. We spoke in Perth about 
maybe playing doubles a couple of times this year. We have never had a falling 
out and always got on well."

For Djokovic, victory in a grand slam is a place he has already been – and he 
craves more such thrills. He is every bit as driven as Murray to take his place 
at the summit of the men's game, and few are better placed.

"We both know how difficult it is to make that final step and win a title," he 
said yesterday, "especially if you have Nadal or Federer across the net. [Here] 
In 2008, I had [Jo-Wilfried] Tsonga, who had played a great tournament."

True. But he was Jo-Wilfried Tsonga; he still is. The Frenchman, born to 
entertain and perplex, faded in five sets against Alexandr Dolgopolov in the 
third round here – and the Ukrainian, dangerous as he was, could not match 
Murray in the quarter-finals. Djokovic and Murray, with Robin Soderling and 
Tomas Berdych in the mix, are the future, which might be closer than anyone 
imagines.

Nadal shrugs off talk that his hamstring problem compounds the knee injuries 
that he looked to finally have beaten over the past year, but he is no doctor. 
Federer? The concerns about him are not clouded by health issues, just his 
failure to dominate as he once did.

Tennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> etiquette and reluctance to 
create disharmony in the changing room dictate that none of their fellow 
professionals will dare utter in public what they might believe in private: at 
least one of these legends is fading, perhaps both. And, in the ruthless 
business of professional sport, the hunting pack will give them no peace.

Picking a winner in this final is as tough as in any match since the 
quarter-finals, but the money will almost certainly move Djokovic's way on the 
evidence of his win over Federer. It is compelling. But since he folded so 
abjectly against Federer in last year's final, Murray has beaten the Swiss 
convincingly, twice, in Toronto and Shanghai.

When it comes down to such minutiae, the call goes with the heart – and there 
is no denying the size of Murray's.

It is agreed that finally getting his hands on a grand slam title would change 
his life substantially, although the player sees it a bit differently from the 
British tennis writers who went through a decade of serial disappointments with 
Tim Henman.

What did he imagine the impact of his winning the title would be back in the 
UK? "I've no idea," he said. "I hope if it happens, it will be a huge story." 
Tick that box. Well, how would he feel if his fame "went through the roof"?

"I don't know. We'll have to wait and see if it happens. If it doesn't happen, 
I'll go back to being the same person I was. If it does, I hope I don't change. 
I'll try and stay away from the attention as much as possible." Forget that one.

It is a hope as forlorn as expecting fans to forget Henman.

Murray's mother Judy said, in a Twitter message on Friday, "A rather elderly 
lady has just stopped me and said 'We are praying that Tim will win.' Clearly 
been out in the sun too long."

Mrs Murray, and all those whom her son has held in the palm of his sweating 
hands for so long, should prepare for a little celebrationtomorrow.
 