
Andy Murray says he likes a fight. Well, he has got one against Novak Djokovic 
here on Friday night, one that will determine who contests the final of the 2012
Australian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> and leave 
the loser utterly spent.

This, though, is a physical confrontation with more at stake than a goblet. It 
provides Murray with a chance to erase the memory of his humiliation against 
the Serb here a year ago, a defeat that sent him into a brief spiral of despair 
from which he did well to emerge a stronger and better player.

On the eve of this tournament Murray sounded reborn when he said: "Win like a 
man, lose like a man," a proposition still untested after five relatively 
straightforward wins and a single dropped set.

However, when he meets the world No1 in the second semi-final – his third in 
succession here and fifth in a row in majors – not only will they both be 
inspired by knowing the winner of the showdown between Roger Federer and Rafael 
Nadal on Thursday (8.30am GMT) and thus their prospective opponent in the final 
on Sunday but they will bring to the Rod Laver Arena a raw aggression neither 
has been required to show fully the past week or so.

Before the quarter-finals Murray had beaten a feisty American teenager, Ryan 
Harrison, given up only 15 games against the elegant but ultimately outclassed 
Frenchmen Edouard Roger-Vasselin and Michaël Llodra and had the luxury of a 
49-minute retirement win over the 92nd‑ranked Mikhail Kukushkin. They were mere 
spars. On Wednesday it was the turn of the promising Kei Nishikori who, weighed 
down by a five-setter against Jo‑Wilfried Tsonga two days earlier, was left 
gasping after two hours and 12 minutes, hardly a marathon.

Murray won 6-3, 6-3, 6-1 and, apart from struggling with his service game and 
a cricked neck, hit some wicked groundstrokes, possibly as hard as he has 
struck a tennis ball in all his years as a professional.

Djokovic, meanwhile, has been pushed hardest after dropping a set against 
Lleyton Hewitt and looking physically distressed in his quarter-final on 
Wednesday against the Tour's acknowledged bruiser, David Ferrer, before 
finishing him off 6-4, 7-6, 6-1 in 2hr 44min.

"It was just a sudden pain," he said of pulling up quickly to tend his thigh. 
"I don't have any physical issues. I feel very fit and I feel mentally, as 
well, very fresh." There was also a worrying pause to catch his breath. "I 
found it difficult after a long time to breathe because I felt the whole day my 
nose was closed a little bit. I just wasn't able to get enough oxygen."

In the past few days Murray has spoken about the brutality of his sport, 
expressing no sympathy, for instance, for Tomas Berdych, who refused to shake 
hands with Nicolás Almagro after a fractious match in which the Spaniard belted 
a volley straight at him, knocking him on his backside.

"Like Almagro said after the match," Murray wrote in his column in the 
Australian newspaper, "he was just trying to win the point." Would he do the 
same to Djokovic, his friend since their early teens and with whom he played 
five-a-side before last year's crushing encounter? "If it means hitting them 
with a passing shot like Almagro did with Berdych … you just have to do 
whatever you have to do."

The Scot has always embraced the ugly demands of his sport but there would 
seem to be a connection between this newly expressed machismo and the arrival 
of Ivan Lendl, a stone-faced hard man who came from behind the old Iron Curtain 
to terrorise his peers and who, as a silent, brooding mentor, has the bedside 
manner of Dracula. "The reason for employing him was to give me an extra edge," 
Murray said, "to have someone in my corner who has been through the same 
things. But it is always down to the player. It doesn't matter what anybody 
says to you on the court."

While Murray wants to bury some ghosts, he said: "You want to move on from 
what's happened in the past but you also need to learn from it as well. I won't 
be going to the match thinking about last year's final. We'll soon see whether 
I've closed the gap or not."

One thing is certain: Murray has picked the right cornerman for this fight.
 