
Start well and stay aggressive

In his two previous grand slam finals, Andy Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> has started tentatively. The 
first time, at the US Open in 2008, was understandable, as there were plenty of 
nerves. Last year here he was tight as well, knowing he had a good chance to 
win. This time round, he will be more relaxed and that should help him start 
well, which could be crucial. Murray will have had only one day to recover from 
his semi-final compared to the two of Djokovic and if he loses the first set, 
it may seem like a long way to get back into the match. But in the past two 
years, the player who had less time off won, and they both won the first set, 
so the precedent is there for him to follow.

Use the drop shot and the short slice

Much like Murray, Novak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic> loves to grind from the back 
of the court, and his ground strokes are as good as anyone's, especially when 
he hits them down the line. The Serb is also a brilliant mover, but if he does 
have a weakness it is when he is required to move to the net, something that is 
not natural to him, although even though he has been working on it. Murray does 
not usually need any encouragement to use the drop shot or the short slice but 
it could be a doubly good tactic against Djokovic, who can be flat-footed at 
times. In addition, throwing in a few early drop shots will make him 
second-guess what Murray is going to do, which may allow the Scot to get his 
opponent out of his comfort zone.

Serve to the Djokovic forehand on big points

The Djokovic backhand is a shot to rival even that of Murray's, so if the Scot 
is to go at that side on big points, he will have to do it perfectly. 
Therefore, it may be worth his while to target the forehand side when he really 
needs to, since that is the one part of Djokovic's ground-stroke game that can 
break down at times. It is not a bad shot by any means, but it is a relative 
weakness and if he is pushed wide, especially from the deuce court, he can 
struggle to get enough on it. It was a ploy Roger Federer used to good effect 
in the early stages of their semi-final. Murray has to accept that Djokovic is 
such a good returner that there is a good chance he will be broken 
occasionally, but targeting the forehand could help him reduce the number of 
times it happens.

Unleash the down-the-line forehand

There were signs in his semi-final win over David Ferrer that Murray may have 
finally discovered what could be the last piece in the jigsaw, the 
down-the-line forehand. Though he has added a lot of pace to his ground strokes 
in the past year, he has usually relied on going cross-court and waiting for a 
short ball to attack. That has worked well but the very best players have been 
able to lean that side, knowing that, more often than not, he will go 
cross-court. Going down the line, especially if he can flatten it out a bit, 
might just take Djokovic by surprise and create an even easier opportunity to 
attack the net. Djokovic likes to go down the line as well, so giving him some 
of his own medicine might just work a treat.

Stay cool and let Djokovic feel the heat

When play begins, at around 7.30pm local time, the temperature is predicted to 
be 41C, which will place a bigger emphasis on fitness. Both players are 
excellent in that regard but Murray should be better suited, not least since he 
usually does his winter training in the heat and the humidity of Miami. 
Djokovic has struggled to cope in the heat before, occasionally suffering from 
cramp and exhaustion, as well as allergies. If Murray can keep the match close 
the tension could get to Djokovic. If that happens, the Scot should gain a 
significant advantage. Djokovic had to pull out of his quarter-final here in 
2009 because of problems in the heat, and Murray will hope he can cope better 
than his fellow 23-year-old.
 