
So, the estate of Fred Perry can breathe easily, as the monkey on the back of 
British tennis shows no immediate signs of dismounting. Novak Djokovic's not 
entirely unexpected victory in yesterday'sAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> final – at least, not to 
those of us who have been following the tournament on Eurosport – means British 
sports fans can continue to debate the two great questions in tennis: What does 
Andy Murray have to do to win a grand slam event and Who exactly is the British 
No2?

In fairness to the BBC, those of us rising early to listen to Radio Five Live 
before the match had our expectations suitably lowered when Pat Cash said he 
could find no one out there who believed Murray could win.

Fortunately for the bookmakers, they found plenty back here. Five Live 
interviewed some in a pub in Murray's hometown, Dunblane, one of whom said he 
felt much better than he did last year, awaiting the match with a pint in his 
hand (this was shortly after 8.05 in the morning).

If you are reading this in your paper this morning, sir, I am afraid I have to 
tell you that Murray lost. Actually, even half-cut it would not have been 
difficult to see which way the match was going. I refer, of course, to Murray's 
famous body language, which has made Desmond Morrises of us all.

My team of analysts have calculated that we get roughly 27 minutes into a 
Murray match before the question of body language is raised. I knew the Scot 
was in with a good chance against David Ferrer in the semi-final because we 
were nearly three-quarters of an hour in before the BBC commentator Andrew 
Cotter mentioned the BL issue. "Sometimes he has the body language of a man 
who's two sets down and two breaks down," said Cotter, when Murray indulged in 
some characteristic self-excoriation when one of his shots caught the top of 
the net in the first set.

"He's never been the most perky figure on court," agreed the analyst John 
Lloyd, which as an understatement ranks alongside "I don't see Andy Gray as a 
leading contender for the Orange Prize for Fiction this year".

We have been able to study Andy's BL even more closely than usual in Melbourne 
because of the Australian television director's addiction to super slo-mo. 
After almost every point we have had balletic slow motion sequences, focusing 
sometimes on the players' feet, but more often on their expressions.

It looks very lovely, but with full-face close-ups it has made Cotter feel he 
has to apologise for any expletives that might have been caught in glorious 
slo-mo. "Apologies for some of the earthy language," said Cotter during the 
semi-final on Friday morning, and then a few minutes later: "Again apologies 
for the language if you are having your mid‑morning break."

The apologies came a little less frequently during the final yesterday, but 
really they need not have bothered at all. I am something of a connoisseur of 
swearing, having hosted a discussion on the subject at the British Library 
recently, and even I could not make out exactly what words the players were 
using.

The slo-mo is so slow you would need to be not only an expert lip-reader, but 
to speed up the footage slightly to make out exactly what deprecations were 
being issued. In those circumstances, I should be inclined to advise anyone 
liable to be offended to fuck right off – which may be why I have not been 
chosen to commentate on the tennis.

Which, incidentally, is a job I feel I could do. It must be the easiest job in 
television. You watch them play the point, and then say "Oh, that really is a 
magnificent shot" or something similar, then you comment on Andy Murray's body 
language and, job done, you can go back to the crossword.

The punditry is trickier, what with tennis being a sport that almost defies 
analysis. What is going on between the ears is at least as important as what is 
happening on court, and here Eurosport has been more forthright than the BBC, 
not feeling so obliged to act merely as a cheerleader for Murray.

The excellent Mats Wilander – who may only have been chosen so Eurosport could 
call its tennis show Game, Set and Mats – suggested that Murray not only needs 
to tweak his game a little to win a slam event, throwing off his reluctance to 
chance a risky passing shot, but also needs "a tweak as a person", not in his 
mostly impeccable behaviour off the court, but in his demeanour on it.

All that negative body language – and the other language – is not helpful, 
says Mats.

Still no word, though, on the hunt for the British No2. I shall keep you 
posted.
 