


Andy Hornby, the man running HBOS when it had to be rescued by Lloyds bank in 
2008, has unexpectedly quit his £1m-a-year job as chief executive of healthcare 
groupAlliance Boots <https://www.theguardian.com/business/allianceboots> with 
immediate effect.

Sources close to Hornby insisted that his surprise departure was his own 
choice. City analysts suspected a personality clash at the top of the company.

Hornby, aged 44, indicated that he needed to step back from the demands of 
corporate life. "After an intense last five years as CEO of two major 
companies, I have decided to take a few months' break and, having discussed it 
with the board of Alliance Boots, to stand down from my post as group chief 
executive," said Hornby in a statement.

He had joined Alliance Boots in June 2009, just months after his tenure at HBOS
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/hbos> ended with the stricken bank being 
rescued by rival LLoyds TSB.

Stefano Pessina, the executive chairman of Alliance Boots, said Hornby left 
"with our very best wishes for the future".

It is understood that Hornby, whose reputation as one of Britain's best young 
business leaders was shredded by the banking crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/jun/08/hornby-reputation-advice>, 
will not receive any payoff. This indicates that the departure was his decision.

Since Hornby joined Boots the company has expanded abroad through deals in 
Turkey and Germany, and also agreed tie-ups with US multinational group Procter 
& Gamble, and Carrefour. Further overseas action is expected. Alliance Boots 
was acquired by private equity firm KKR in an £11.1bn deal in 2007, which saw 
deputy chairman Stefano Pessina appointed as executive chairman. Pessina has 
taken the dominant role whenever he and Hornby have appeared together to report 
on Boots' performance.

"I suspect the issue is that pharmaceutical wholesaling and retailing isn't 
everybody's cup of tea and that Pessina is the real power behind the throne 
there," said one analyst.

Hornby has maintained a relatively low profile at Boots, but broke cover this 
month, telling a London conference that consumer spending will be stagnant for 
the next two years.

Some institutional fund managers, however, remain hostile to Hornby and 
privately make it clear they would be extremely reticent to back another 
company run by the former banker if and when Alliance Boots returns to the 
stock market to provide an exit route for KKR. Pessina has said he does not 
anticipate a return to the market until about 2015.

Alliance Boots is split into two divisions – with Alex Gourlay running the 
health and beauty arm, and Pessina's partner Ornella Barra heading up the 
pharmaceutical wholesale division. They are seen as strong candidates to 
replace Hornby.

Hornby's departure came at the end of a week when engineering and electronics 
firm Invensys startled the City with the departure of its chief executive, 
while fashion chain New Look unexpectedly parted company with both its chief 
executive and chairman.


The fall and rise of Andy Hornby

Educated at Oxford and Harvard, Hornby excelled at Asda under Archie Norman, 
before joining the Halifax to run its high street business in 1999. There he 
rebranded the company – introducing the "Howard the singing bank clerk" 
advertising campaign – before being promoted to run the whole bank in 2006 at 
the age of 39.Two years later, his stellar career came crashing down in the 
banking crisis, when HBOS limped into Lloyds' clutches. Like Northern Rock, 
HBOS had expanded heavily in the run-up to the credit crunch, which left it 
burdened with bad debts and struggling to borrow from the financial 
markets.Hornby's nadir came in February 2009 when he was hauled before the 
Treasury select committee, along with three other bank bosses. He appeared the 
most contrite of the quartet, and also told MPs that he had suffered 
significant personal financial losses, having invested his bonus payments in 
HBOS shares.

There was surprise that Hornby bounced back so quickly by taking the senior 
role at Alliance Boots, on a basic pay packet of worth about £800,000 a year. 
Including his bonus and a golden hello, he actually picked up £2.1m in hisfirst 
year in charge. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/may/20/andy-hornby-pay-alliance-boots>
 