
So now comes the moment of truth: will Andy Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> end Britain's 75 years of tennis 
hurt (in the men's game, at least), or will he signal he is another Tim Henman, 
destined to come agonisingly close without ever quite landing the prize his 
nation yearns for so desperately?

Victory for the 23-year-old Scot on Sunday in the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> final would make him the 
first British man to win one of the sport's four biggest prizes since Fred 
Perry took the US Open in 1936 (since then, Ann Jones and Virginia Wade, at 
Wimbledon in 1969 and 1977 respectively, and Sue Barker, at the French Open in 
1976, have shown the way in the women's game).

And while the world No 5 has been in two grand slam finals before, the US Open 
in 2008 and here last year, there is a crucial difference this time. His 
opponent Sunday is neither Spain's Rafa Nadal, the world No 1, nor 
Switzerland's Roger Federer, the current Australian champion who has won a 
record 16 grand slam titles including the two finals Murray has appeared in. 
Murray's hopes picked up significantly when both were surprisingly beaten 
earlier this week.

A year ago, the Scot's tears of defeat after being soundly outplayed by 
Federer warmed him to the hearts of the Australian public – something that 
cannot always be said of his own compatriots – and 12 months on, Murray has 
been boosted by some star power in his players' box over the past fortnight, 
with the comedian Billy Connolly cheering him on in every game. Dressed in what 
he calls "Hibs green" after the Scottish football team he supports, Murray 
thrilled the crowd with his shot-making yesterday on his way to a four-set 
victory over Spaniard David Ferrer.

On Sunday he takes on the Serbian Novak Djokovic, and according to Sven 
Groeneveld, one of the sport's leading coaches, Murray has a good chance, 
despite his rival being ranked two places higher. "I think Andy is ready for 
it," Groeneveld said. "There will be long rallies and exchanges that are going 
to be extremely physical. I heard the weather is changing [with temperatures 
climbing above 40C], and I think that will favour Andy."

Having been a contender at Wimbledon for the last few years, Murray is well 
used to being asked what it would mean to break Britain's duck – but as ever, 
he is determined not to be weighed down by the burden of history. "First of 
all, it's more like a personal dream or a personal goal of mine," he said after 
today's victory. "The historical thing is not something I've thought about that 
much. I don't want to get myself so amped up about it that I play a stinker of 
a match."
 