
The England and Wales Cricket Board chairman, Giles Clarke, has revealed Andy 
Flower <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andy-flower> resigned from his role 
as England team director because he believed the job required a unified 
presence across all three roles and that a split between the short and longer 
forms was no longer feasible.

Paying tribute to the man he called "the most successful coach in England 
cricket history", Clarke denied that the performances and results in the recent 
Ashes whitewash were the driving factor behind Flower's decision to stand down. 
The decision was influenced above all by the need for a unified management 
strategy in all areas of the England team, something Flower himself was unable 
to contribute.

There was praise for Ashley Giles, an "outstanding candidate" as Flower's 
successor, and confirmation that Alastair Cook will stay on as captain. Clarke 
also played with a dead bat over Kevin Pietersen's future with England.

"In the last few hours Andy Flower has informed the ECB that he wishes to 
stand down," Clarke said, speaking in Melbourne on Saturday morning Australian 
time. "I'd like to thank him for his tireless efforts across the country and I 
look forward to working with him in his new role at the ECB. He is a man of 
enormous integrity and, while we are very reluctant to see him stand down, we 
respect that decision."

Clarke said there had been "plenty of discussion" about Flower's departure but 
that "this is Andy's decision". "Andy has been concerned that, because there 
are players who go across formats and, of course, because the management team 
go across all formats, it's really important to have the same culture in terms 
of preparation and management and the way they all relate to each other," he 
said.

"The amount of travel is very considerable for a coach with a young family. 
Since we decided with Andy we would split the roles we've learned a lot about 
what it's like. He felt it was important now to bring the roles back together.

"When Dennis Amiss and Hugh Morris interviewed Andy for his job, Andy reckoned 
it was a five-year job and he's been proved right."

Paul Downton, the new England managing director, will now take charge of the 
process of appointing a successor and Clarke was generous, but noncommittal, in 
his praise of Giles. "I think we would all agree he is a very strong candidate. 
Ashley is a very valued employee of the ECB and we all have the highest regard 
for him both as a man and a coach. He is a man of high integrity.

"He's played a lot of cricket for England and is very respected in the game. 
Having said that, for all I know there may well be other candidates who emerge. 
That will be a matter for Paul and whoever he chooses to advise him on that."

Clarke also confirmed he would be talking to Flower about remaining within the 
ECB in an as yet unspecified role. "Andy Flower has a great deal to give 
English cricket. There are some other major roles Paul Downton and David 
Collier have been discussing with him and I'm very confident he will remain 
with us."

There was a vote of confidence for Cook, whom Clarke expects to be captain for 
the first Test next summer and the one-day internationals, but no words of 
comfort for Pietersen, whose future remains uncertain.

"I don't think there's been any decision [on Pietersen playing on with 
England]," Clarke said. "What Jimmy Whitaker and the selectors decide will be a 
matter for them. I have to say I have spent zero time on Kevin Pietersen. Today 
is about Andy Flower."
 