
If Andy Murray beats the odds and Novak Djokovic on Friday to reach the final 
of theAustralian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> for 
the third year in a row – against his third different opponent, Rafael Nadal – 
he will go to battle with Ivan Lendl's clear-cut rhetoric ringing in his ears. 
Anything is possible, is the new coach's message.

Roger Federer beat Murray convincingly in 2010, Djokovic beat him badly in 
2011 – and starts favourite to prevent him going any further when they go on to 
Rod Laver Arena (at 8.30am UK time) – but Old Stoneface, as Lendl must 
affectionately be known on his return to tennis, will not countenance 
negativity.

"The ranking says [Djokovic] is No1 so people think he can win," he said on 
Thursday night. "I think anyone is beatable. If you don't think anyone is 
beatable then you shouldn't be playing. All the top guys – whether it's Roger, 
who has won 16, or Rafa or Novak with his great year last year, or Andy – are 
good enough to win if you get enough opportunities."

Nadal said after his sometimes breathtaking performance to put Federer out in 
Thursday's semi-final: "I think Andy should be more aggressive if he wants to 
beat Novak — but maybe I don't know, as I lost to him six times last year."

Federer reckons "both are playing well enough to win this title".

Nevertheless, it is at this point in a major when cynics less well-versed in 
the art of tennis than Nadal and Federer cast doubt on Murray's psychological 
strength – and Lendl is quick to put in context the comparisons made between 
Murray (loser of his first three grand slam finals) and himself (loser of his 
first four).

"I totally disregard what was the perception of Andy – losing to Federer at 
the US Open, arguably the best player of all time, losing to him here and then 
losing to Novak. If instead of here, Andy had played that US Open against 
Novak, nobody would have criticised him because we couldn't know at that time 
just how good Novak would become and the year he would have. Andy lost that 
final in three sets. It happens.

"Look at the quality of the opponents in his finals. It's not as if he lost to 
someone ranked 10 in the world. Similar to me, I lost to [Bjorn] Borg on clay; 
he was winning his sixth French Open at that time and I was 21 years old. 
Actually, it was an upset I got to the finals. Then I played [Jimmy] Connors 
who had been in five Open finals, and here with Mats [Wilander] it was a little 
different because I didn't know how to handle it on the grass [the Australian 
Open was played on grass until 1988]. I was coming in, he was staying back and 
I couldn't hurt him and that was bad."

Lendl has told one interviewer after another here the qualities that most 
attracted him to Murray were the Scot's politeness and his work ethic. They 
might seem wildly unrelated but Lendl – like anyone who gets to know Murray – 
recognises in him a sincerity not always evident in elite athletes.

Murray's good manners come from his basic honesty; if he can cope with 
constructive criticism from Lendl and respond by fine-tuning his game, he will 
improve.

"I think Andy has a lot to give and is willing to give all that it takes. You 
are only going to get out of it what you desire. I wouldn't say I got 
everything I wanted out of my career but I wanted to win. You could always say, 
'I could have won that one and I could have won that one' but if you have put 
the hard work in then you can have no regrets. I see a desire – the same desire 
I had. If you are focusing on why he hasn't won, to my mind you are focusing on 
the wrong thing. There is a respect level that exists between us that is very 
special."

As for beating Djokovic, that is the immediate mountain. The Serb has played 
some irresistible tennis yet there have been moments of vulnerability. He was 
angry with himself for slipping up briefly against Lleyton Hewitt; he has 
become so used to dominating opponents since that crushing win over Murray here 
a year ago that dropping a set to a fired-up local on one good leg was not 
acceptable.

In putting away the stubborn David Ferrer, he felt a brief, sharp pain in his 
left hamstring, then fell to his knees struggling for breath during the 
second-set tie-break.

Sources close to the Djokovic camp insist there is nothing to worry about.

We will know soon enough. If Lendl spots any sign of weakness in Djokovic on 
Friday, it is a racing certainty he will let Murray know with a nod, a wink or 
grimace that he must go for the kill. As Richard Baerlein, once of this parish 
said, now is the time to bet like men.
 