
Andy Hornby <https://www.theguardian.com/business/andy-hornby>, the man at the 
helm of HBOS when it was bailed out during the financial crisis and who was too 
stressed to continue as the boss of Alliance Boots in March, has been appointed 
as the new chief executive of bookmaker Coral.

The move – which had been rumoured, despite doubts, in business circles for 
some time – comes after a year-long search for a replacement for Nick Rust, who 
left Coral to join Ladbrokes last year.

It has been suggested that Hornby is joining to launch a private equity buyout 
of the bookmaking company from the remainder of the Gala Coral group, which 
also runs bingo and casino businesses.

A spokesman for Coral said: "We are delighted that someone of [Hornby's] 
calibre is taking the reins and will be chief executive of retail and remote 
gambling. Any breakup of the group is not planned or on the horizon."

Coral admitted that Hornby started work in his new job on Monday and that the 
company had announced the appointment internally on Friday. However, it was 
still considering how it would break the news to the wider world.

Hornby resigned as the chief executive of healthcare retailer Alliance Boots 
less than four months ago citing a need to step back from the demands of 
corporate life. "After an intense last five years as CEO of two major 
companies, I have decided to take a few months' break and, having discussed it 
with the board of Alliance Boots, to stand down from my post as group chief 
executive," he said at the time.

Later Stefano Pessina, the executive chairman of Alliance Boots, provided his 
own explanation for the abrupt departure. He said: "Andy was stressed and 
decided to come back to a company where the workload is quite substantial, too 
early. Every day there are managers who are stressed and decide to take some 
time off."

Hornby ended up with a £2.4m pay-off, according to Alliance Boots annual 
report, which comprised of £842,000 in salary, £750,000 of bonuses, £41,000 of 
benefits and £337,000 of supplements for his pension.

The Boots job was supposed to be part of the former Asda high flyer's 
corporate rehabilitation after the credit crunch sawHBOS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/hbos>, the bank he led, being rescued by 
Lloyds TSB, which subsequently needed a bailout from the taxpayer. Hornby was 
called to a Treasury select committee to explain.
 