
Voicemails left by Andy Coulson for the aide to former Labour home secretary 
Charles Clarke are believed to be among those allegedly hacked while he was 
editor of theNews of the World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsoftheworld>.

Coulson is one of a number of journalists whose messages to Hannah Pawlby were 
allegedly targeted by the News of the World in 2006, when he was in charge of 
the now-closed Sunday tabloid.

Ian Kirby, former political editor of the News of the World, said the 
Metropolitan police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> 
believe that his voicemails to Pawlby were also allegedly intercepted when she 
was special adviser to the ex-Labour home secretary.

Scotland Yard has also told Jon Craig, chief political correspondent of Sky 
News, that his messages to Pawlby were allegedly targeted by Glenn Mulcaire, 
the former News of the World private investigator. It is understood that 
voicemails left by the BBC correspondent, Carole Walker, and the Times 
journalist, Francis Elliot, were also intercepted on behalf of the paper.

Pawlby is suing News International after police said her phone was hacked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/may/17/charles-clarke-former-aide-phone-hacking>
 while she was special adviser to Clarke in 2006.

Detectives from the Metropolitan police's Operation Weeting investigation into 
phone hacking are contacting those allegedly targeted by the News of the World.

Craig, a veteran politics correspondent for Sky News, said he has contacted 
lawyers over the saga and is actively exploring legal action against Rupert 
Murdoch's newspaper group.

Kirby, who was political editor of the now-closed Sunday tabloid at the time, 
said he was told by police that his messages were intercepted on behalf of his 
own newspaper.

He said: "My details, including private telephone numbers, were also uncovered 
in Glenn Mulcaire's notes. Our politics team was never involved in hacking in 
any way. I still do not now know who decided to intercept messages I left with 
a contact, or why."

Pawlby was an aide to Clarke throughout his time as a cabinet minister, from 
education secretary in 2002 to home secretary until 2006. She filed the legal 
claim at the high court in London last week.

A spokeswoman for Coulson's legal representatives declined to comment on 
client matters. The Met police said it would not provide a running commentary 
on Operation Weeting.

News International declined to comment.
 