
Andy Murray says he wants "a normal life". When he reflects on that ambition, 
away from the clamour that attended a second crushing disappointment in the 
final of theAustralian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>
, he will know it is a forlorn wish.

What celebrities – reluctant or nakedly ambitious – struggle to understand is 
that they are not "normal"; otherwise they would not have to explain in the 
middle of the night where it went wrong and where it might be put right.

It went wrong in the Rod Laver Arena today, over two hours and 39 minutes, as 
Novak Djokovic won his second Melbourne title and second major 6-4, 6-2, 6-3. 
And where it might be put right, Murray says, is in time away from the 
pressures of tennis. "Normal life? Exactly. [That] is what I enjoy. Normal life 
... not people bashing on your door at four in the morning."

The attentions of the sport's drug testers are among the minor inconveniences 
in his life compared with the nation's wish that he ease the lingering pain of 
75 years and deliver a major title. It is doubtful if Murray has wondered how 
abnormal his life might have been had he won. While he said beforehand he would 
not go on to the court accompanied by the ghosts of previous failure or the 
expectations of others, that burden did bear down on him.

In the aftermath of defeat, a time when words often fail to convey real 
intentions, he said he might walk away from tennis for three months or he might 
feel like playing next week. "I was just saying that it depends on how I feel. 
I don't have to play until Indian Wells [10 March] and Miami [23 March]. If I 
am enjoying myself back home, then I won't start training again, because last 
year I went through the motions a bit and that is not the way to move forward. 
I want to spend time with my girlfriend, chill out and get away from the court."

This time last year he was trying to piece together his fractured relationship 
with Kim Sears. They had split but were soon reconciled. She did not come to 
Melbourne but they spoke every day on the phone – like normal people. "Tennis 
is a lot of fun, I am very lucky to be playing it but I enjoy the other parts 
of life as well. Right now I am disappointed. I've been away since the week 
after the tour finals. It's a long time. I'm looking forward to getting back to 
seeing friends, family, my dog, doing all the normal stuff I like doing. That's 
what I need to do – everyone would, if they had been away for so long.

"I am sure guys like [Roger] Federer, he's got family and stuff at home, he 
doesn't want to think about tennis."

Probably not. But tennis wants to think about Federer and Murray and all the 
others who a long time ago gave up those comforts that normality provides.
 