
It was good to have Old Stoneface back. On a crisp, sunny evening at Queen’s, 
Ivan Lendl lifted the gloom as only he can, chin still stuck to his upturned 
palm, stare fixed and silent wisdom fairly pouring out of him, as Andy Murray 
resumed a winning partnership withthe coach he has trusted more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/07/andy-murray-wimbledon-2013-novak-djokovic>
 than any of the 10 he has had in 11 years on the Tour.

Murray has learned plenty from all of them but none brought the authority 
Lendl delivered in the two-and-a-bit years they shared when the Scot won two 
slams andan Olympic gold medal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/05/andy-murray-olympic-gold-great-britain>
. Theysplit in March 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/mar/19/andy-murray-splits-coach-ivan-lendl>
, and got back together again when Lendl texted Murray on Saturday from his 
home in Florida – or was he on the golf course? – to confirm he could spare up 
to 20 weeks a year for him.

Novak Djokovic beats Andy Murray to claim first French Open title
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/05/french-open-2016-final-novak-djokovic-beats-andy-murray>
On Tuesday at Queen’s the prize was not a major but a first-round win over 
Nicolas Mahut, not exactly Novak Djokovic in a slam final, and it was a mixed 
but encouraging resumption of business. It took the world No2 an hour and 50 
minutes to beat the 34-year-old world No51 7-6, 7-6.

“It’s great to have him back as part of the team,” Murray said later. “When we 
were chatting before the match, it didn’t feel strange. It felt like it did 
before.”

He cavilled slightly when asked if he could “hit the ground running” with 
Lendl after two years. “I expect Ivan to have a positive impact on me and my 
whole team. Whether that happens in three days or a few months, I have no idea. 
But I trust and believe in what he says, and that can obviously help 
immediately.

“But ultimately it’s up to me to perform on the court. That’s why I put a lot 
of time and effort into preparation for the major events, and I will practise 
hard next week with Jamie [Delgado] and Ivan, and hopefully that puts me in a 
good position for Wimbledon.

“But it’s not like I’m coming in having been garbage the last few months. I 
have been playing well. I expect to keep that going.”

Just as Lendl had resumed his familiar pose, so Murray carried on as of old. 
He said beforehand he did not recall his on-court demeanour being much 
different when with Lendl than what it was during his two years with Amélie 
Mauresmo,who quit in April, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/09/andy-murray-amelie-mauresmo-splits-coach>
 citing his temper as one of the factors in her decision. The memory can play a 
lot of tricks, on observers and participants.

Here, Murray nearly collected the umpire’s chair hunting down a drop shot in 
the first set, indulged in a bit of muttering then had a frank exchange of 
views with the umpire, Fergus Murphy, who refused to agree with him halfway 
through the second set, with the sun shining, that the court was too slippery 
for their safety – two weeks before Wimbledon. Both had a point.

Mahut was a good opponent, almost the perfect test, an accomplished, 
experienced grass-courter coming off an uplifting defence of his title in 
’s-Hertogenbosch against Gilles Müller. Dropping serve in the fifth game was a 
jolt for Murray against an opponent who beat him here in three tight sets in 
the first round four years ago – his only win now in six encounters.

Two double faults from 40-15 up in the next game interrupted Mahut’s excellent 
opening service barrage and, although it took him three break points to hit 
back, Murray levelled. In a tense tie-break, Mahut handed him the set when he 
netted a forehand.

Lendl tugged down his white baseball cap, fiddled with his sunglasses and 
retreated for … a cup of tea? There was a mildly surprising scene on his 
return: Lendl laughing volubly with Murray’s full-time coaching director, 
Delgado, who plainly has a good sense of humour. There was plenty to smile 
about, and a few moments of concern. Mahut went 3-1 up in the second. Would he 
crack again?

Yes, but not without a fight. Murray won three games in a row to get back to 
five-all and the Frenchman was visibly rattled. Murray hit an irresistible vein 
of minor genius then a string of howlers, and had to save three set points on 
his serve to force a second tie-break. It might have been an ugly finish, Mahut 
taking a nasty tumble at 0-3 when his right ankle collapsed under him as he 
tiptoed across the greasy grass, but he stuck it out to the end, Murray sealing 
it with a chip and a simple tapped volley into an open court.

It had appeared when the draw was made that Murray was set for a five-course 
French feast here, selected from Mahut, Benoît Paire, Paul-Henri Mathieu, 
Gilles Simon and Richard Gasquet – but the menu has changed a little.

In fading light, Aljaz Bedene beat Paire after an absorbing contest, 6-7 
(6-7), 7-6 (7-6), 6-4 that took two-and-a-half hours. So, for the first time 
since he lost to Tim Henman in Bangkok nearly 10 years ago, Murray will play a 
fellow British player in a Tour level match. As he said afterwards: “That’s 
amazing really. I don’t know what to say about that – but, yeah, it’s been a 
long time.”

Rain has forced Mathieu’s match against Dan Evans and Simon’s against Kyle 
Edmund into Wednesday’s schedule, as tournament organisers continue to eye the 
skies nervously.

Gasquet, who looked sensational for a set and a half against Murray in the 
quarter-finals of the French Open and was booked for a third-round encounter 
here with him, lost on Monday evening to the unseeded American Steve Johnson.

At the bottom end of the draw, second seed Stan Wawrinka – whom Murray drained 
to the point of exhaustion in the French Open semi-finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jun/03/french-open-2016-andy-murray-v-stan-wawrinka-live>
 – looked more resigned than shattered when Fernando Verdasco’s final forehand 
clipped the line in the second-set tie-break to give them both an early night, 
and the Swiss a chance for some extra rest before Wimbledon.

The Spanish left-hander played some inspired tennis towards the end to win 
6-2, 7-6 in just under an hour and a half.

“I think I played a pretty good match,” said Verdasco, who had to overcome six 
double faults but generally served well on the slick grass.

The heavy, wet air and soft ground underfoot could yet be a factor in the 
tournament, as Wawrinka testified. “The conditions are difficult for everybody 
after a few days of rain,” he said.

“I tried today with what I had, but I need more time to get my level there. 
I’m going to play doubles here, and will stay here all three weeks to practise 
with my team [which includes his new coaching assistant, Richard Krajicek].”
 