
12.56pm GMT 

Final thoughts. Murray stood toe-to-toe with Djokovic for the opening two 
sets. But then Djokovic showed why Murray still has much to do if he's to 
overtake the world No1. The Serb's defence, agility, ability and heart was 
relentless. Djokovic seized the initiative and never let up. He's imperious on 
the hard courts of Melbourne, a bit like Federer on grass or Nadal on clay. 
Murray was undone physically by the end. And that's not something we've said 
recently. The five sets against Federer perhaps proved decisive. Thanks for 
emailing/tweeting/reading, it's been a pleasure. Bye.

12.44pm GMT 

And here's Novak, who gets his hands on the trophy and a cheque for £1.6m. Not 
bad for a day's work. "I have to congratulate Andy for a great two weeks. We've 
played many thrilling matches and hopefully we will have many, many more. It's 
definitely my favourite grand slam, my most successful grand slam. I love this 
court. See you next year."
 The victor. Photograph: Mast Irham/EPA 
Updated at 1.12pm GMT

12.43pm GMT 

Djokovic's coronation. But before that some lengthy speeches from tournament 
suits and sponsors. And here's Andre Agassi to do the presentation. He offers 
some words of compassion to Murray, who steps up first to collect his 
runners-up trophy.

Murray then ticks all the boxes on the well done and thank you fronts. 
"Novak's a very well deserved champion, well done. His team have done a great 
job, well done again. I'd also like to thank my team. They help me all the 
time. I'd also like to thank the whole crowd, it's a great atmosphere to play 
in and you're extremely fair. And finally I'd like to thank the tournament 
director."

Updated at 12.43pm GMT

12.30pm GMT 

The stats. The second serve and net points won are the telling ones, along 
with Djokovic's greater aggression. Aces: Djokovic 8 Murray 7; Double faults: 
Djokovic 3 Murray 5;1st serve points won: Djokovic 75% Murray 81%; 2nd serve 
points won: Djokovic 66% Murray 46%; Winners: Djokovic 47 Murray 29; Errors: 
Djokovic 61 Murray 46;Net points won: Djokovic 35 Murray 9; Total points won: 
Djokovic 139 Murray 126.

Updated at 12.30pm GMT

12.28pm GMT 

Djokovic wins the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> title 6-7, 7-6, 6-3, 6-2 

For the first couple of points, it looks like Felix may get to enjoy the taste 
of his socks. 0-15. 0-30 after a darting backhand winner down the line from 
Murray. Djokovic then flaps at at overhead – a rare weakness in his game – it 
clips the net, but somehow trickles over! He waves his racket to apologise, but 
I doubt he's too sorry. He wants to get this over with. 15-30. Djokovic sends 
an ailing and flailing Murray from corner to corner, clever play, 30-all. Which 
becomes 40-30, match point. They go backhand to backhand to backhand, and 
Murray blinks, hitting tiredly into the net. Djokovic lets out a primal roar, 
but resists ripping off his shirt this time. He does a little jig, before going 
over to his team and then saluting the crowd. A familiar sight in Melbourne; 
it's the world No1's third successive Australian Open title, his fourth 
overall, and his sixth grand slam, as he joins the esteemed company of Boris 
Becker and Stefan Edberg. Murray, meanwhile, flops into his chair and airs his 
blistered feet. But after his US Open win last year, surely this defeat will 
sting a little less than his four previous losses in grand slam finals.

Updated at 12.38pm GMT

12.22pm GMT 

Fourth set: Murray 7-6, 6-7, 3-6, 2-5 Djokovic* (*denotes next server)

Simon McMahon is getting out his white flag – "Andy should not stay 
disappointed for too long should he lose here, which now looks likely. Three 
more slams this year, he is more than capable of winning one of them" – but 
Murray isn't quite ready to surrender. Despite a delicate drop shot from 
Djokovic, Murray digs in to hold to 30. But the match is now on Djokovic's 
racket. He'll serve for the championship. "Surely your MBM typing is up there 
with the Herculean effort these two are making," writes Mark Judd. Yep, I think 
I'll be signed off with Djokovic and Murray-induced RSI next week. "If Andy 
comes back from this I will eat my socks ..... And gladly," announces Felix 
Edwards.

Updated at 12.22pm GMT

12.18pm GMT 

Fourth set: *Murray 7-6, 6-7, 3-6, 1-5 Djokovic (*denotes next server)

Some Hawk-Eye drama on the second point. Hawk-Eye rules in Murray's favour. He 
could do with some extra help right now. They replay the point, which Murray 
wins. 0-30. He's got a glimmer. But then Djokovic does what Djokovic does. 
15-30. 30-all. 40-30. Game. Djokovic is potentially four points away from 
becoming the first man in the Open era to win three Australian Open titles in a 
row. It would also be his fourth overall.

12.12pm GMT 

Fourth set: Murray 7-6, 6-7, 3-6, 1-4 Djokovic* (*denotes next server)

Every point is a struggle for Murray now. 30-all. 40-30. Deuce, as Murray 
overcooks a forehand. Big first serve, he needed that, advantage Murray. 
They're stopped in their tracks on the next point, a ball flies out of Murray's 
pocket, they'll replay the point. Djokovic gets it back to deuce. And then 
comes up with some unbelievable defence, doing the splits at least three times 
on the backhand side, before unleashing. I'll give him 9/10 for artistic 
effort. Advantage Djokovic, a virtual match point. This would give Djokovic the 
double break. "Time to shout at my screen - "COME ON, ANDY!!!!! COME 
OOOOOONNNNNNNNNNNNN," screams Andrew Benton. But maybe the screaming puts 
Murray off because he double faults. The crowd sigh. They want a fifth set, but 
I don't think they're going to get it.

Updated at 12.14pm GMT

12.05pm GMT 

Fourth set: *Murray 7-6, 6-7, 3-6, 1-3 Djokovic (*denotes next server)

Djokovic, scenting the victory, holds with ease. He's a man who could walk 
through walls. And he is a wall. Murray can't get past him. "Never used to like 
Murray but his grit determination and positivity are awesome whatever happens!" 
chirps Jonathan Ratner.
 Another change of ends in a brutal battle. Photograph: Tim Wimborne/Reuters 
Updated at 12.21pm GMT

12.02pm GMT 

Fourth set: Murray 7-6, 6-7, 3-6, 1-2 Djokovic* (*denotes next server)

"I'm about as far removed from the pysche of a top level sportsman as it's 
possible to be, but do you think there is a little part of both of these great 
champions minds, sub-conscious or otherwise, that actually wants or expects 
this to get to 6-6 in the fifth just so they can take themselves to the 
absolute limit, rather than win, say 6-2 in the fourth?" asks Simon McMahon. 
With these two, possibly yes. As Murray said beforehand: “I hope it's a painful 
match because that means it will be a good one." But I'm not sure this one is 
going to go the distance. With Murray looking vulnerable (the five sets against 
Federer may be starting to take their toll), Djokovic is hustling, shoving his 
opponent all around the court. This is brutal stuff. 15-40, two break points. 
Murray saves the first but can't do anything about the second after a punishing 
point. Desperate times for Murray now. Djokovic, after struggling for the right 
balance between defence and attack during the first couple of hours, is now 
perfectly in sync.Hopefully this match gallery will lift your spirits. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/gallery/2013/jan/27/australian-open-novak-djokovic-andy-murray-gallery>

Updated at 12.02pm GMT

11.54am GMT 

Fourth set: *Murray 7-6, 6-7, 3-6, 1-1 Djokovic (*denotes next server)

Several nuances here. Murray bounds up 0-30. Djokovic charges back to 30-all. 
But Murray edges ahead once more, 30-40. He's clutching his left hamstring. A 
strong Djokovic serve, Murray chips at it. "Good serve," he acknowledges, 
before punching his racket. Sometimes he does that so hard he makes his 
knuckles bleed. Deuce. Advantage Djokovic. Game Djokovic. Lendl looks on 
impassively, as ever, chin in hand. Murray could be two sets to one up right 
now and Old Stoneface would still look the same.

11.48am GMT 

Fourth set: Murray 7-6, 6-7, 3-6, 1-0 Djokovic* (*denotes next server)

It was always going to be this way, wasn't it? No straightforward victory, 
please, we're British. Just remember, torture must come before victory 
(*desperately trying to convince herself*). And there's no doubt Murray is 
being tortured. Djokovic puts the pressure on Murray's serve, forging his way 
to deuce, before Murray pulls off a lovely half-volley pick-up at the net. 
Djokovic applauds. Nice touch. Murray squeezes through the game from there.

Updated at 11.50am GMT

11.41am GMT 

Djokovic wins the third set 6-3

15-0. 30-0. Unreturned serve, 40-0. Murray appeals to Hawk-Eye, perhaps to 
give himself a brief breather from the Djokovic assault. But Hawk-Eye shows the 
serve smacked the side line. 40-0 stands. Three set points. Djokovic needs only 
one. Murray loses his head as he gets back to his chair, screaming at the 
umpire. He says something about the "big moments," I think it might be to do 
with a heckler in the crowd, but I'm not sure. What is certain is that he's 
going to have to take the next set to stay in this.
 Djokovic goes two sets to one up. Photograph: Ken Hawkins/Zuma Press/Corbis 
Updated at 11.56am GMT

11.38am GMT 

Third set: Murray 7-6, 6-7, 3-5 Djokovic* (*denotes next server)

Wow. What an opening point. The longest exchange of this final, 36 shots of 
back and forth and forwards and backwards and toing and froing. Djokovic pulls 
the trigger with an inside-out forehand. Murray grimaces. Murray thinks he's 
got Djokovic's number on the next point with a passing shot, but Djokovic reads 
it. Inspired stuff. 0-30. Danger. More lights out tennis from Djokovic. 0-40. 
Three break points. Could we finally be about to see a break? They've shared 
nine break points between them so far, and nothing's been giving. And nothing 
appears to be giving here. 15-40. 30-40. But Murray then nets! After two hours 
and 52 minutes, we have a break. And, most importantly, Djokovic will serve for 
the third set.

Updated at 11.38am GMT

11.31am GMT 

Third set: *Murray 7-6, 6-7, 3-4 Djokovic (*denotes next server)

Murray suddenly springs into life with a lovely change-up on the third point, 
snapping his wrists over to send a backhand winner cross-court. But that's as 
good as it gets for him as Djokovic holds to 15. Murray perhaps should have won 
the final point, he has the chance to dispatch an overhead, but can't quite get 
enough power on it, Djokovic retrieves and Murray makes the error.

11.27am GMT 

Third set: Murray 7-6, 6-7, 3-3 Djokovic* (*denotes next server)

An ominous omen, if you believe in omens: Djokovic has a 5-0 record against 
Murray when they've split the first two sets. You do feel this third set is 
vital for Murray, especially after his exertions against Federer the other 
night. This set hasn't quite sprung into life yet, there's a lull. The 
fluctuations of five-set grand slam tennis. A scrappy game this one, but Murray 
comes through to 30 and gees himself up with a compulsory "C'MON."

Updated at 11.32am GMT

11.23am GMT 

Third set: *Murray 7-6, 6-7, 2-3 Djokovic (*denotes next server)

Murray is jammed by another body serve, 30-15, and then makes the error on the 
return to bring up game point for Djokovic, 40-15. And another 
blink-and-you'll-miss-it service game. 29/29 service holds. Murray looks to be 
in a bit of pain, he's wincing after most points. Perhaps the blisters are 
still causing him a bit of bother.

11.19am GMT 

Third set: Murray 7-6, 6-7, 2-2 Djokovic* (*denotes next server)

Anything Djokovic can do ... Murray comes through with ease. Ladies and 
gentlemen, move on, there's not much to see here. Maybe these two can turn into 
Sampras and Ivanisevic after all ...

And want some second set stats? Sure you do:

Aces: Djokovic 2 Murray 5; Double faults: Djokovic 1 Murray 3; 1st serve 
points won: Djokovic 79% Murray 96%; 2nd serve points won: Djokovic 60% Murray 
38%;Winners: Djokovic 12 Murray 13; Errors: Djokovic 15 Murray 11; Total points 
won: Djokovic 41 Murray 39.
 Frustration for Murray in the third set. Photograph: Andrew Brownbill/AP 
Updated at 11.26am GMT

11.17am GMT 

Third set: *Murray 7-6, 6-7, 1-2 Djokovic (*denotes next server)

Djokovic holds to 15, but admittedly I was still a little distracted by 
Murray's website. Sorry. "It was Sampras that Ivanisevic crumbled to in that 
Wimbledon final," helps John Cronin. "Similar five set breaker-fest between 
Stich and Becker in a 90s Wimbledon semi."

Updated at 11.17am GMT

11.15am GMT 

Third set: Murray 7-6, 6-7, 1-1 Djokovic* (*denotes next server)

Murray duly responds with a bamboozling body serve of his own, on his way to 
holding to 30. "Murray's own website is billing today's game as 'Muzzman v. The 
Djoker' alongside a mocked up Batman poster featuring costumes and tennis 
rackets," says Simon McMahon. "It looks more like Adam West v. Cesar Romero 
than Christian Bale v. Heath Ledger."That is quite alarming 
<http://www.andymurray.com/>. Especially the Djoker's Joker lips.

11.11am GMT 

Third set: *Murray 7-6, 6-7, 0-1 Djokovic (*denotes next server)

At least those two matches both featured a big server, with some short, sharp 
points. Not too many here. They're already reaching the two hour and 30 minute 
mark. This game-by-game reporting has become a full day's work these days. It's 
remarkable the way Djokovic and Murray (and Nadal before his injury) have taken 
tennis on in terms of endurance over the past couple of years. We marvelled at 
the length of the 2008 Wimbledon final between Federer and Nadal, but that's 
now become the norm. Djokovic holds to 15, by the way, throwing in a nice 
change of tack with a body serve.

Updated at 11.12am GMT

11.05am GMT 

Murray is getting some treatment for a nasty-looking blister. The crowd gasp 
when the big-screen director decides to cut to Murray's feet in all their 
g(l)ory. In the meantime, here's some tie-break trivia for you:

"In the 2001 quarter-finals at the US Open, Agassi lost a 3 hour, 33 minute 
epic match with Sampras, 7–6, 6–7, 6–7, 6–7, with no breaks of serve during the 
48-game match," says Amir Paz-Fuchs.

"I'm pretty sure there was a Wimbledon final where there were no breaks
 in the first two sets, writes Josh Robinson. "Ivanisevic crumbled in the 
third, though, losing 7-6, 7-6, 6-0 to Agassi, if I remember correctly."
 Murray gets treatment for his foot (there are worse images, but you probably 
don't want to see them before lunchtime). Photograph: Michael Dodge/Getty Images
Updated at 11.26am GMT

11.00am GMT 

Djokovic wins the second set tie-break 7-3

... which Djokovic promptly makes 2-5 ... back to Murray's serve, Murray gets 
to 3-5, a war of attrition follows (I've resisted using that phrase until now 
through fear of overuse, I could have used it about 693 times mind), and 
Djokovic prevails, cue an "I AM THE MAN" fist-pump as he laps up the applause, 
the showman ... 3-6,three set points for Djokovic, but he's in no mood to hang 
around and takes the first. That set played out much like the first, but in 
reverse; Djokovic was on top in the opening set but lost the tie-break, Murray 
was on top in the second set but lost the tie-break.
 Djokovic takes the second set. Photograph: Dita Alangkara/AP 
Updated at 11.23am GMT

10.55am GMT 

Second set tie-break: Murray 2-4 Djokovic*

Nothing giving on serve at the start of the breaker, Murray takes the opening 
point, 1-0 ... Djokovic replies with two holds of his own, 1-2 ... Murray 
restores parity at 2-2 ... but then gets distracted by a bird feather of all 
things (I thought they were supposed to be good luck?), so much so that he 
double faults, 2-3 ... a baseline duel ensues, Murray eventually pushes his 
forehand into the tramlines, an expletive or two follows, 2-4 at the change of 
ends ...

10.51am GMT 

Second set: *Murray 7-6, 6-6 Djokovic (*denotes next server)

"I'm sitting munching my leftover haggis from Friday night's Burns supper 
cheering on my fellow Scot and am wondering has there ever been a grand slam 
final without a single break of serve?" asks Greig Cook. I'd guess there may 
well have been a 7-6, 7-6, 7-6, say, in a serve-dominated Wimbledon final, 
possibly without any breaks, but I can't think of one off the top of my head. 
Anyone? Meanwhile on court, an easy put-away volley for Murray, 0-15. 30-15. 
Which becomes 30-all when Djokovic doubles. But the world No1 then regroups to 
send down a smash, which crashes into the service box and out of Murray's 
reach. 40-30. Game. Another tie-break it is, then.

Updated at 10.51am GMT

10.46am GMT 

Second set: Murray 7-6, 6-5 Djokovic* (*denotes next server)

Here's Anne Geraghty again: "No! Of course Talisker - I am way too excited to 
get my typing anywhere near as on as Andy is right now." Switched on he most 
definitely is. He holds to 30, but was never in any real danger from 40-15 up. 
Djokovic looks rattled, engaging in a monologue with himself at the changeover.

10.42am GMT 

Second set: *Murray 7-6, 5-5 Djokovic (*denotes next server)

"Quite agree about "Muzzard", comments Chris Eden. "I think we should be 
looking over the pond and go for Muzzmeister or maybe something more emphatic 
like The Muzz. I'll get me coat ..." A superb strike from Murray. 0-15. 
Djokovic sets up the next point with a serve bomb, before smashing down an 
overhead. 15-all. He's up to some more overhead tricks on the next point, 
30-15. Murray slices and dices, but Djokovic carves Murray open with a brute of 
a backhand down the line. Too good. 40-15. Nole liked that, he did. He 
fist-pumps, clenching his forearm which is almost as big as his legs. But not 
as big as Murray's tree trunk legs. He's such a physical beast these days. 
Game. Two nerveless holds. Back to you Mr Murray ...

Updated at 10.42am GMT

10.37am GMT 

Second set: Murray 7-6, 5-4 Djokovic* (*denotes next server)

Murray doesn't look to be suffering from his four hours and five sets against 
Roger Federer in the semi-finals. But it's still early days, we'll find out 
later. Though, of course, hopefully there won't be a later. Straight sets 
please. "Muzzard 35/40 on 1st serve points, 14/14 this set," reports Brad 
Gilbert. Though I wish he wouldn't call Murray "Muzzard." Anyway, I digress, 
Murray holds to 15 and Djokovic must now hold to avoid going two sets down.
 Murray prepares to do damage to the ball. Photograph: Tim Wimborne/Reuters 
Updated at 10.48am GMT

10.33am GMT 

Second set: *Murray 7-6, 4-4 Djokovic (*denotes next server)

Murray's got his game face on here. His Lendl face. Forehand down the line, 
bang. 0-15. He then goes to pull the trigger on another, he's got plenty of the 
court to aim into, but he misfires and nets. And chastises himself. 15-all. 
Some rat-a-tat, rat-a-tat on the next point, a poor overhead from Djokovic, 
Murray gets it back, Djokovic's volley is mis-timed but it lands on the 
baseline. Just. 40-15. Two points that could easily have gone Murray's way. And 
then it would have been 15-40. Djokovic then pulls off a classic one-two punch. 
Game.

10.29am GMT 

Second set: Murray 7-6, 4-3 Djokovic* (*denotes next server)

Murray, serving superbly (until he throws in his first double fault at 40-0 
up), holds to 15. And a pedant's email from Andrew Jackson: "Anne Geraghty's 
liver is evidently much too intact. *Halisker* = Talisker, made on the Isle of 
Skye. Or does she have a cheap Lidl copy?"

10.27am GMT 

Second set: *Murray 7-6, 3-3 Djokovic (*denotes next server)

"Two best returners in game but no breaks yet," notes Sports Illustrated's Jon 
Wertheim on Twitter. And there's little giving here. 15-0. 30-0. 30-15. 40-15. 
Game. And Simon McMahon's back: "Part of Murray's appeal (for me, anyway) is 
that, for a sportsman playing at an elite level, a grand slam winner and one of 
the best in any discipline this country has ever produced, he looks like he 
could just as easily be down at his local park walking his dogs and having a 
kickabout whilst eating a crisp roll and swigging from a bottle of Irn Bru." 
Even with a middle name as noble as Barron?

10.22am GMT 

Second set: Murray 7-6, 3-2 Djokovic* (*denotes next server)

After slipping 30-15 down on Murray's serve, Djokovic hits out in frustration. 
Or more accurately kicks out, hoofing the ball into the night sky. Great 
timing, but perhaps not the greatest reaction. Alessandro Del Piero, who's 
watching in the stands, probably applauds though. Murray holds to 15. The 
Aussies cheer. The Rod Laver Arena may be Djokovic's back yard having won the 
title the past two years and three times in total, but I think they want Murray 
to win this one. I've always liked the Aussies.
 Djokovic shows off his football skills (and frustration). Photograph: Andrew 
Brownbill/AP 
Updated at 11.09am GMT

10.18am GMT 

Second set: *Murray 7-6, 2-2 Djokovic (*denotes next server)

A game of ebbs and flows. Djokovic looks to be in control at 40-15. But that 
suddenly becomes deuce. Which then becomes game Djokovic. "I have a bottle of 
18-year-old Halisker Whiskey here to celebrate," reveals Anne Geraghty. "I am 
not going to open it until Andy either leaps up or falls to the ground or both 
in victory. I have now dared to get it out of its box!" Steady on Anne. This is 
Djokovic after all. The man who stares defeat in the face and laughs right back 
at it. "Djokovic always looks like this," notes Chris Monks. "Murray will be 
two sets up, 5-0 and 40-0, suddenly Novak has a popeye moment and before you 
know it, it's a fifth set."

Updated at 12.16pm GMT

10.13am GMT 

Second set: Murray 7-6, 2-1 Djokovic* (*denotes next server)

"Andy looking very composed," Tweets Murray's brother Jamie. "Djokovic looking 
strangely off balance. You seldom see that from him." Some powerful play sees 
Murray hold to 30. A slight hint of danger, but the new attacking Murray v2.0 
produces some heavy artillery. This new attacking Murray v2.0 is fun.Lendl 
stands up and claps.

And here are some first set stats for you to chew over:

Aces: Djokovic 3 Murray 2; Double faults: Djokovic 2 Murray 0;1st serve points 
won:Djokovic 63% Murray 81%; 2nd serve points won: Djokovic 67% Murray 65% 
Winners: Djokovic 14 Murray 9 Unforced errors: Djokovic 25 Murray 12 Total 
points won: Djokovic 38 Murray 45.

Updated at 10.13am GMT

10.08am GMT 

Second set: *Murray 7-6, 1-1 Djokovic (*denotes next server)

But he can't. He's over-pressing. The man who usually balances defence and 
attack to perfection is off-balance. 0-15. 0-30. 0-40. Three break points. 
Murray doesn't take the first, he doesn't take the second and he doesn't take 
the third, as Djokovic has Murray on a piece of string, sending Murray from one 
corner to the other to the other. Deuce. Now it's Murray's turn to get over the 
trauma of missing a handful of break points. Advantage Djokovic. Deuce, as 
Djokovic screws a backhand wide. Advantage Djokovic. High jinx from Djokovic on 
the next point, a prolonged exchange ending when he draws Murray into the net. 
And Murray nets. Djokovic smiles. The Djoker's back.

Updated at 10.13am GMT

10.00am GMT 

Second set: Murray 7-6, 1-0 Djokovic* (*denotes next server)

"Can you update a bit faster please?" requests an enthralled Martin Bowley. 
Happy to oblige Martin, I can report Murray has just won Wimbledon in 2014. 
Hope that helps. Meanwhile, back in 2013, Murray opens up the second set with a 
hold to love. Nada. Zilch to Djokovic. Murray has won 13 of the last 15 points. 
Djokovic needs to re-establish himself here.

Updated at 10.00am GMT

9.56am GMT 

Murray wins the first set tie-break 7-2!

"I'm calling it now," says Alec Cochrane. "That double fault in the first 
point of the tie-break was the point that Murray mentally broke Djokovic." It 
looks like you're right Alec, for this tie-break at least ... 6-1 Murray,no 
less than five set points... a nerveless Djokovic darts a backhand down the 
line, 6-2 ... but another errant forehand on the secondand Murray wins the 
first set tie-break 7-2! Murray loves his boxing, and what a body blow that is 
for Djokovic after seeing those five break points come and go. Not that we care 
one jot. That was a gruelling first set. An hour and eight minutes. But that's 
just the way they like it.
 Murray takes the first set. Photograph: Julian Finney/Getty Images 
Updated at 10.06am GMT

9.51am GMT 

First set tie-break: Murray 5-1 Djokovic

An inauspicious start from Djokovic as he throws in his second double fault of 
the day, 1-0 ... what a point from Murray, he gives Djokovic no time to 
breathe, before throttling the Serb with a forehand, 2-0 ... Djokovic's 
composure is gone, he pulls the trigger too soon, 3-0 ... again, Djokovic prods 
long, 4-0 (so Murray with two mini-breaks now) ... the pair go toe-to-toe on 
the baseline on the next, Djokovic settles things with a smash, but it was 
sloppy, it almost went wide, 4-1 ...again Djokovic hoiks long, they change ends 
with Murray 5-1 ahead as the daylight fades and the floodlights spring into 
action ...

9.45am GMT 

First set: Murray 6-6 Djokovic* (*denotes next server)

A punishing first point. Djokovic nets. And curses a little. Signs he's 
slightly frustrated by the break points he's seen come and go. 15-0. 15-all. 
Djokovic then hurtles forward to dispatch a drive volley, Murray chases it 
down, but his reply is so long it probably ended in the Yarra River. 15-30. A 
glimmer for Djokovic. Which looks like it could become a break point courtesy 
of the net, but after hitting the tape his backhand flops back on to his side 
of the court. 30-all. 40-30. Game. Gutsy. Judy Murray claps appreciatively. And 
just like their US Open final back in September, this one will be decided in a 
tie-break. Murray won that 12-10. It tookover 20 minutes.

Updated at 9.45am GMT

9.40am GMT 

First set: *Murray 5-6 Djokovic (*denotes next server)

Right, very much the business end of this set. And Djokovic means business. 
15-0. 30-0. 40-0. 40-15. Game. Murray must again hold serve to stay in this 
first set. The winner of the opening set in the grand slam matches between 
these two has always gone on to win, in the 2011 Australian Open final, 2012 
Australian Open semi-final and 2012 US Open final, if that's any kind of 
pointer. We shall see.

Updated at 9.41am GMT

9.36am GMT 

First set: Murray 5-5 Djokovic* (*denotes next server)

"Fifty free-to-air TV channels in Moscow, and none of them is showing the 
Australian Open, except via the post-modern conduit of 2009's The Boys Are 
Back," moans Marlon Cameron. Hopefully this commentary will help you out 
Marlon. From 30-15, the two have each other going left and right and left and 
right and centre and left and right. Djokovic is hitting the ball so true, but 
as I write that, he nets. 40-15. Again he has Murray on the backfoot, but 
Murray is refusing to relent. Top-class defence. Murray is doing to Djokovic 
what Djokovic does to everyone else. And Djokovic, then pushing a little too 
much, goes long. Murray holds to 15.

9.32am GMT 

First set: *Murray 4-5 Djokovic (*denotes next server)

There's no doubt Djokovic is the one doing the pushing and the probing in this 
set. He looks in control at 40-15, Murray has a sniff at 40-30, but Djokovic 
dismisses any danger. "Sensing a repeat of the US Open final first set," says 
the Times' Neil Harman on Twitter. "Remember that stonker of a tie break?" Sure 
we do. Meanwhile this from Murray's former coach Brad Gilbert: "The Djoker's 
serving # are great 75% 1st serves 67% winning on 2nd serve."

Updated at 9.32am GMT

9.28am GMT 

First set: Murray 4-4 Djokovic* (*denotes next server)

"A memorable rivalry is defined not only by the number of important matches 
played but also somewhat by the playing styles," says Aman Narang. "In my 
opinion, Murray and Djokovic's styles are too similar for it to truly go down 
as a great rivalry." Perhaps. Though if they continue to produce memorable 
five-set grand slam finals, surely they have to be up there? But sure, the 
juxtaposition of the brash and bratty McEnroe v the cool Borg, the machine-like 
Sampras v the flamboyance of Agassi and artistic Federer v the more 
defence-minded Nadal did add another dimension to their rivalries. Back on 
court, meanwhile, danger for Murray. 30-all quickly turns into 30-40 as he 
drags wide. Another break point to save, after the four in his previous service 
game. He's perhaps pinned a little too far behind the baseline, he needs to 
come at Djokovic a bit more. And that he does, taking on a forehand and taking 
over the rally. Deuce. Advantage Murray. Game. But he's holding on here.

9.20am GMT 

First set: *Murray 3-4 Djokovic (*denotes next server)

So six games played, 30 minutes. That's par for the course, isn't it? At 
15-all, a quite ridiculous point. Where to start. Djokovic dives on to the 
baseline like he's Boris Becker at Wimbledon, before picking himself back up 
and putting Murray straight back under pressure, before charging into the net 
kamikaze-style to finish off the point. See, he really is Superman. 30-15. 
40-15. Game.
 Djokovic does his best Boris Becker impression. Photograph: Ryan Pierse/Getty 
Images 
Updated at 9.51am GMT

9.15am GMT 

First set: Murray 3-3 Djokovic* (*denotes next server)

Djokovic and his elastic limbs do the splits in the left corner, then in the 
right corner, before producing a fizzing forehand pass. 0-15. 0-30. The pair go 
down the middle, down the middle on the next point, before Djokovic mixes 
things up by going wide. It's too wide. 15-30. Murray under so much pressure, 
then goes high and wide himself. 15-40. The first two break points of this 
final. The pair trade cross-court forehands, Djokovic blinks first, sending his 
into the tramlines. 30-40. But there's still another break point for Murray to 
save. And that he does. From 15-40 he's back to deuce. But Djokovic comes back 
at Murray, prevailing in the longest rally of the match so far, 24 shots. There 
was a lot of shoe squeaking there, which is providing an interesting soundtrack 
to this match. Squeak, squeak, squeak. Advantage Djokovic. Squeak, squeak, 
squeak. Deuce. Squeak, squeak, squeak. Advantage Djokovic. Squeak, squeak, 
squeak. Deuce. Squeak, squeak, squeak. Advantage Murray. Game, with a serve 
bomb down the middle. Djokovic looks furious with himself for not taking his 
chances. Murray fist-pumps and gurns.

Updated at 9.15am GMT

9.07am GMT 

First set: *Murray 2-3 Djokovic (*denotes next server)

But look, for the first time a little pressure on the server. A half-chance 
for Murray at 30-all. Djokovic has made seven unforced errors already, compared 
to Murray's one. But how do you determine an unforced error when these two are 
going at each other? The stats are pretty subjective. Djokovic ups the ante on 
the next point, before unwinding deep to Murray's backhand wing. Murray gets a 
racket to it, but that's all. 40-30. An absolute gimme of a drive volley for 
Djokovic to wrap up the game ... but he screws it way out! Deuce. Advantage 
Djokovic, despite a tepid drive volley, no doubt with the other one still on 
his mind. The two duke it out from the back of the court, sending each other 
hither and thither, no doubt the point of the match. Though I'm sure we'll see 
a few more of those today. Murray goes for a winning backhand volley, but 
Djokovic charges diagonally forward and somehow digs out a backhand down the 
line, which almost went round the net post. A sweet shot.

9.00am GMT 

First set: Murray 2-2 Djokovic* (*denotes next server)

Another quicker than quick service game for Murray, he's into his service 
groove already. 15-0. Then one of the more prolonged points so far, which ends 
when Djokovic's shot clips the net cord, before trickling into the net. A 
collective gasp. 30-0. 40-0. Ace, game. Four games, four easy holds and not too 
many rallies to speak of. Where's the attritional tennis we were all expecting?
 Murray's power becomes a blur. Photograph: David Gray/Reuters 
Updated at 9.47am GMT

8.57am GMT 

First set: *Murray 1-2 Djokovic (*denotes next server)

At 40-15, Murray's best point on Djokovic's serve so far, as he goes back 
behind Djokovic with a brutal backhand. Djokovic slips and slides but can't 
change direction in time. 40-30. Murray appeals to Hawk-Eye on the next point. 
But it's in vain. He scurries back to his chair. And this from Sasu Laaksonen:"
A cold yet warm greeting from the big-time snowy Finland. This is such a big 
game for Andy. If he gets this, the BBC Sports Personality of the Year gong 
will surely be his. And as we all - even in Finland - know, that's the prize 
they are all after." What about the knighthood?

8.53am GMT 

First set: Murray 1-1 Djokovic* (*denotes next server)

A comfortable hold for Murray too. 15-0. 30-0. 40-0. Game, as Djokovic goes 
wide after a cross-court exchange. Some early sparring at the moment, they're 
just feeling each other out. "I don't do predictions, I prefer predilections 
- and I do believe that Andy is going to make Murray mince of Djokovic. Murray 
mince, Murray mince, too good to hurry mince," sings Andrew Benton. And on a 
completely unrelated note, when I was doing some research last night I noticed 
Murray’s middle name is Barron. Which made me laugh. Unless it's one of those 
Wikipedia lies. If he ever becomes a Sir, he'd almost be Sir Barron Murray. How 
very noble.

8.48am GMT 

First set: *Murray 0-1 Djokovic (*denotes next server)

Ready? Let's play. Ladies and gentlemen, Mr Murray won the toss and has opted 
to receive. He broke Djokovic in the opening game of the US Open final, what 
can he do here? Djokovic goes long on his first serve, gets his second into 
play, but Murray has the initiative and a couple of shots later rattles a 
forehand down the line. Djokovic sees Murray's early aggression and raises it, 
ace down the T. 15-all. Another strong serve, Murray can only weakly prod the 
ball back, and Djokovic charges into the net to settle matters. 30-15. A 
slightly lengthier exchange, Murray then slaps into the net, 40-15. Another 
Djokovic serve down the middle, Murray loops long. We may be expecting a 
lengthy duel between these two, but Djokovic didn't hang around there.

8.42am GMT 

Anne Geraghty clears something up. "My father was from the Highlands so no 
need to say where my allegiance lies! Before a great match begins you always 
acknowledge the players equally and honour them. But as soon as that ball is 
thrown up for the first serve - away we go! No sitting on the fence then. Total 
partisanship. For every point."

8.41am GMT 

Tok! Tok! Tokity tok! They’re warming up. Both are clad in black and look like 
they mean business. Time for some last-minute tactics. There are no secrets 
between these two, they've played each other many times. They both play a 
similar game. They’re great defenders and returners. They know when to attack 
(credit Lendl for Murray’s improvement on that front). They’re serving well. 
It's just a matter of who's going to make less errors, who executes come the 
big moments.

8.36am GMT 

Here they are, deep in the bowels of Rod Laver (the arena. Not the Rod Laver). 
Both stare straight ahead. No pleasantries. Sometimes it would be refreshing if 
they engaged in a bit of banter, wouldn’t it? Or even shared some small talk 
about the weather. Talking about the weather, after a shower earlier in 
Melbourne, it's sunny, but breezy. The temperature is around 23C. I don't think 
the conditions will favour one or t'other; their games are too similar. They 
both arrive on court to a rocking ovation.
 The pre-match formalities. Photograph: Julian Finney/Getty Images 
Updated at 9.39am GMT

8.31am GMT 

Some words from the players themselves.

Murray: "For the last eight, nine months I feel I have performed to the 
highest levels that I could. Sometimes I haven't played my best in the big 
matches and I felt I had let myself down but you also feel like you have let 
the people who were watching down.

"I played a very good final at Wimbledon, then the Olympics, the US Open was 
very good and now here, so I need to make sure I maintain that form. But he's 
No1 in the world, he was in the US Open final, French Open final, Wimbledon 
semis, and he's in the final here. So he's playing extremely well."

Djokovic: “Andy played a five set match against Roger. But aside that, he 
hasn't been really tested the whole tournament. And also he's considered as one 
of the physically strongest and fittest guys around. So I'm sure he's going to 
be fit for the final.

"Considering the fact that every time we played in last probably six, seven 
encounters, it was always a long matches, physically very demanding, going 
three sets and five sets in grand slams. So I guess we have to expect something 
similar to happen, long rallies, and I'm ready for that. We pushed each other 
to the limit physically, mentally, emotionally, and that's why we have a great 
rivalry in this moment."

8.29am GMT 

Your predictions.

"Morning Katy," chirps positivity's Simon McMahon. "Well, it's showtime. 
Murray v Djokovic is fast becoming one of the great sporting rivalries. This 
could be the tennis equivalent of Hell in a Cell. The Undertaker v Mankind. 
Hulk Hogan v Andre the Giant. The Rock v Stone Cold. Triple H v Shawn Michaels. 
But who will be the man left standing at the end? Murray in five."

"Andy will do it for Hutchins," writes Krishnan Patel. "It will not be as 
close as many predict. I'm going for Murray in four sets"

"WIsh I was there!" says Anne Geraghty. "Thanks for sharing it with us though. 
That photo says it all. These two are not only tennis players, they are 
warriors. And neither the Scots nor the Serbs are known for lack of courage or 
fight on the battlefield! May the battle commence!" I think that's a sitting on 
the fence.

Updated at 8.37am GMT

8.26am GMT 

My humble opinion. I’d put it about 55:45 in Djokovic’s favour. He’s the No1, 
he was near-perfect in the semi-finals and he’s at a slight physical advantage 
having come through a quicker match and had an extra day off. He also will not 
have taken kindly to being outlasted by Murray over five sets in the US Open 
final. Superman doesn’t do losing in five sets. But Murray is playing the 
tennis of his life and having finally got over the line in New York, he'll know 
he can do it again.

8.24am GMT 

More predictions. The Guardian’s extremely scientific straw poll of experts 
(ie your game-by-game reporter scrambling around online) produced the following 
results:

Murray: Pat Rafter, Martina Hingis, John Newcombe

Djokovic: Ken Rosewall, Rod Laver, Jim Courier, Martina Navratilova, John 
Lloyd, Mats Wilander

Sitting on the fence: Brad Gilbert, Andrew Castle

8.21am GMT 

An audience with Andre Agassi. I’ve never seen a tennis player captivate a 
room of hacks quite like the great man did during his career, and he was at it 
again on Friday when he offered up his thoughts on the final. So how would he 
have beaten Djokovic? “Let's see … I would have probably gotten in a fight with 
him in the locker room before the match. I might have had a chance there." And 
who does he think will win today? "I'd probably favour Djokovic." The traitor. 
"Anybody who's had to beat two of the top three here has been at a 
disadvantage. I think Djokovic got a second life after the Wawrinka match and 
has now relaxed and found a comfort zone in his own mind. I also think he likes 
to play down here and he has had two days to get himself ready to go. I think 
it's those little things that can make a difference between two of the great 
players. A little can mean a lot."

8.14am GMT 

The vital stats. 

Murray-Djokovic
 25 Age 25
 3 World ranking 1
 25 Career titles 34
 1 Grand slam titles 5
 6 Grand slam finals 10
 7 Wins in past meetings 10

$24.9m Prize money $45.7m

8.04am GMT 

Play will commence at: around 8.45am GMT.

Play will finish: most likely sometime next week.

8.03am GMT 

Exhibit C: Murray’s pre-final words: “I hope it's a painful match because that 
means it will be a good one." The masochist.

8.03am GMT 

Exhibit B: the 2012 US Open final <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pLPVUxrLKok>
. Four hours, 54 minutes.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpLPVUxrLKok&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpLPVUxrLKok>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpLPVUxrLKok&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpLPVUxrLKok&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpLPVUxrLKok>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpLPVUxrLKok&media=>
close 
8.02am GMT 

Exhibit A: the 2012 Australian Open semi-final 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qpQ9v-0hUPM>. Four hours, 50 minutes.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqpQ9v-0hUPM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqpQ9v-0hUPM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqpQ9v-0hUPM&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqpQ9v-0hUPM&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqpQ9v-0hUPM>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqpQ9v-0hUPM&media=>
close 
7.59am GMT 

Preamble

Morning. In the 60s it was Rod Laver v Ken Rosewall, at the turn of the 70s to 
80s it was John McEnroe v Bjorn Borg, in the late 80s it was Stefan Edberg v 
Boris Becker, in the 90s it was Pete Sampras v Andre Agassi and in the last 
decade it was Roger Federer v Rafael Nadal.Tennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> has always been defined by great 
rivalries and now, it seems, we could be witnessing the start of another.

Andy Murray and Novak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic> have some way to go before 
they reach the 35 meetings between Edberg and Becker, or the 28 we’ve witnessed 
between Federer and Nadal (the Murray v Djokovic count will hit 18 today), but 
time is on their side. While Federer turns 32 this year and Nadal nurses his 
wounded knees ahead of a planned return next month, Murray and Djokovic, both 
at 25, are reaching what should be the height of their physical powers.

This is the second straight grand slam final they’ve contested and both are 
playing for a piece of history; Murray is trying to become the first man in the 
Open era to add a second major title immediately after winning his first, and 
Djokovic the first to win the Australian Open three years in a row. The 
statistics underline a new chapter in tennis.

But this is a story that started when these two friends first met as juniors 
when they were 11 or 12. Djokovic remembers this of Murray: "He had a lot of 
hair, a lot of curly hair. He was quite pale also.” Murray, ever the 
competitor, remembers the score: "I won 6-0, 6-1 maybe."

The great British nation would like more of the same from Murray today, 
please. Though the evidence suggests this may go on. And on. And on.
 