Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F01z0z1npx2q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F01z0z1npx2q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F01z0z1npx2q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
What started out as a tennis match descended into a street fight that skirted 
the boundaries of decorum as Andy Murray ground down Roger Federer to reach the 
final of theAustralian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>
. There he will meet Novak Djokovic on Sunday in a grand slam decider for the 
second time in four months but it is unlikely even their jungle instincts will 
produce anything quite as emotional as this one.

Federer, who had not lost to Murray in three matches at grand slam 
tournaments, never expected to see the old Murray across the net in Melbourne 
and the fired-up third seed did not disappoint him – or himself. Murray's 
younger legs and lungs pounded out the mileage, his heart pumped with feeling 
as well as blood, and the grit in his soul carried him over the line after an 
ugly exchange towards the end of the fourth set to win 6-4, 6-7, 6-3, 6-7, 6-2.

Serving for the match at 6-5 in the fourth, Murray stopped in mid-rally then 
passed Federer on his backhand side. Federer, irked at what he perceived to be 
gamesmanship, said something that provoked Murray into an ugly sneer in reply. 
From there until the end, it was no tea party.

When Federer forced a tie-break and took the match into a fifth set, the 
feelings did not subside. At 15-0 in the second game, Murray had the simple 
option of passing down the line with a backhand volley but drilled it at 
Federer, who celebrated when it went long. He was not so happy when he framed a 
backhand and again Murray broke, for 2-0. They went punch for punch to the 
final bell and indulged in the most rudimentary of pleasantries at the net 
after Federer had sent his final forehand long.

Federer smiled. Murray did not. Nobody present could remember such naked 
antagonism between them. This mattered hugely to both and Federer deserves 
credit for extending the semi-final after several times looking down and beaten.

"It's always tough against him," Murray said. "In the slams he plays the best 
tennis. When his back's against the wall, like at 6-5 in the fourth set, he 
played some unbelievable shots. I just had to dig in to win. I'm known for 
losing a lot of big matches and not beating Roger [in a five-set-match] until 
the Olympics. I didn't serve as well at the end as the start but I hit it 
pretty good from the back of the court. He hit the lines at that point, though, 
like he always does when he has to. I was pretty nervous but he played very 
well. I didn't play a very good tie-break.

"I didn't see much of Novak's semi [a three-set stroll of some brilliance 
against the outclassed David Ferrer on Thursday night] but I heard he played 
really well. I will have to play my best to win."

If Murray beats Djokovic, he will emulate Lew Hoad, the last player to follow 
his first major with another straight away, in 1956. Victory would also pull 
him ahead of Fred Perry on 106 wins in grand slam matches. Few of them will be 
as satisfying as this one, sweet yet sour revenge for losing the final to 
Federer here three years ago.

The ball flew so powerfully from Murray's racket that the Swiss was sometimes 
rendered an impotent onlooker. However, such is Federer's heart and class, he 
found enough good tennis to make a fight of it over exactly four hours.

Murray made mistakes but they were largely of his own invention. Federer had 
been introduced as Rodney (where did that one come from?) when they warmed up 
and, for worryingly long passages, he was not himself. This Federer was 
unrecognisable from the player who had cruised through his first four matches 
and the one who fought like a tiger to get out of trouble in five sets against 
Jo-Wilfried Tsonga in the quarter-finals.

Almost from the first exchange, Murray's body language was as loud and clear 
as the message on his T-shirt this week: prepare, attack, destroy.

Murray cruised through the first set, 6-4 in 46 absorbing minutes. Federer 
clearly was troubled by his serve, landing only half of them at the first 
attempt, and his second serve did not have enough pop to threaten even the 
ballboys.

Desperation seeped into his tennis in those relatively calm early stages. He 
had hit four of his five clean winners from the net, the one place he looked 
competitive, but could not tame his ground strokes from deep as the devilish 
wind gusted. A double fault at the start of the second set and Murray had a 
little look at deuce but Federer held with his best backhand in nearly an 
hour's tennis, sweet and crisp down the line.

Brad Gilbert, Murray's former coach, took time to observe: "The one thing 
Muzzard has been doing all tourney is serving better then I have ever seen: 
higher percentage and better placement."

However, Murray wobbled at the start of the first tie-break and Federer closed 
it out when Murray framed a backhand volley that sat up to be murdered and was. 
Federer served out. The crowd went crazy.

This was now tricky. The brio of the first set had dissipated. Parity had been 
ceded. It was time for struggle and, after Murray had regathered his composure, 
he hit a confident rhythm again, forcing the first break points in more than an 
hour to pull ahead 4-2, as Federer buckled under the weight of all the running 
his tormentor was making him do.

Murray pulled slowly away, even as Federer's level lifted, and he was in good 
shape and mood going into the fourth set. He went over awkwardly on his left 
ankle on break point in the first game but it did not unduly bother him and, 
with his serve grooved, he maintained the pressure on Federer, whose 
self-belief seemed to drain. Perhaps the Tsonga match – a relatively quick 
five-setter but intense – was taking its toll.

But Federer has not reached 25 grand slam semi-finals without giving his all 
and bared his teeth again in the fourth game, breaking for 3-1 when he forced 
an almost indolent Murray to swat weakly wide. When he held, the arena buzzed 
again. Their hero was on the march a second time.

But a rare mind-freeze and poor drop-shot (one of his favourite weapons) led 
to another lapse in his fightback – at 4-2 and 30-15 up in the fourth when down 
two sets to one.

Every point was loaded now, and Murray, after saving break point, thought he 
had the eighth game in the bag until he lost a challenge on a serve after an 
overrule, before toughing it out to hold. It was a big moment in the match.

There was another curious one to come: when Murray sent Federer scurrying to 
save a beautiful lob, the Swiss's desperate shot ended up in the stands – where 
it was caught by Shane Warne, who had backed him to win. He was relieved when 
his man held for 5-4.

Then they had their spat. It is one they will want to forget and no doubt they 
will gloss over it but it was real, all right.
 