
In the moments of his deepest frustration, not long after losing to Novak 
Djokovic in the semi-final of theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>, Andy Murray sounded his 
most bullish. "I want to get to No1," he said before disappearing into the 
labyrinth of the main stadium at Melbourne Park for a drugs test he could have 
done without at such a late hour. "That's one of my goals this year and I'll 
try my best to do it."

The incumbent, who had just beaten him in five sets, plays the No2, Rafael 
Nadal, in the final, while the No3, Roger Federer, left town without ceremony 
after losing to Nadal in the other semi-final. These are Murray's peers, where 
he belongs at 24, although he would like to mix up the order.

Although his committed struggle against Djokovic left him playing gooseberry 
again, to embrace the sunny days ahead did not seem such a bad journey for the 
Scot to contemplate. He survived with his spirit intact and talked later as if 
this were a starting point rather than a setback. It was not always so.

Defeat hits him in different ways. Against unranked players not really on his 
radar – such as Donald Young and Alex Bogomolov, both gasping for acceptance 
outside the top 100 when they shocked him in quick, sharp upsets after his 
Australian Open fiasco last year – losing is incomprehensible to Murray. It 
makes no sense. But failing to beat players he considers his equals is 
different. While he does not fear them, he envies them, because they have 
something he wants and, as yet, cannot have. They all have their grand slam 
trophies, proof of their pedigree. Murray has none.

But this time, he had things to be proud of. "You're always going to have 
people that doubt me and say: 'He's not that good,' 'He's not as good as 
them,'" he said. "I'm aware that I still need to prove some things and win the 
match like tonight. It was so close. But I need to make that last little jump 
and I'm much closer than I was at this stage last year.

"I don't know how much [Djokovic] can keep improving but he's played great 
tennis the whole of last year, made a big improvement, and I think now I've 
started to improve and I think it's because of those guys that I'm playing as 
well as I am."

And he is playing as well as ever – at this level. Last year, he hit heights 
of inspired stroke play of which few players are capable, certainly not Andy 
Roddick, who screamed in frustration when being embarrassed during the 
semi-final at Queen's: "Keep it social!" Jo-Wilfried Tsonga fared little better 
in the rain-delayed final. There were good wins, too, in a hat-trick in Asia 
before the ATP World Tour Finals in London, where he broke down. This, though, 
was a slam, one he reckoned he could win, whoever was on the other side of the 
net. He lost graciously, but it did hurt.

"In four or five days' time we [his training team, including new coach Ivan 
Lendl] will have a good chat about the match and the last few weeks and I'm 
sure I won't be as disappointed as I am just now," he said. "I've got to try as 
best as possible to take all the positives from it, see the things I need to 
work on. If I don't feel like I can improve that's when things are going to go 
badly and I think that I can still."

The one victory his detractors cannot take away from him is the one he had 
over himself. There was only the flicker of annoyance in the first set, when 
seagulls distracted him and, after he had used all his challenges in the fifth 
set, he was resigned to the eye of the line officials and the authority of the 
chair umpire. As it happens, they did not let him or Djokovic down. Murray 
praised them for their competence later, a rare compliment for the officials in 
this tournament.

All round, he looked and sounded more settled. He had at least shrugged the 
temper monkey off his back for the moment, and that could be put down to 
Lendl's influence. If he has brought anything to the Murray cause, it has been 
calm.

Would he return to his training base in Florida, the state in which Lendl 
lives? "I was going to go there 10 days before Dubai or something because 
there's no point practising in cold, indoors. I need to practise in the warm 
weather, I don't want to be practising indoors, so as soon as I can I'll go 
over to Miami and start working."
 