
We have been here before, standing on cusp of British tennis history, only to 
find the path ahead blocked byRoger Federer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer>. The venue was Flushing 
Meadows and the expectations for Andy Murray, who had secured his place in the 
final of the 2008 US Open with a stunning semi-final victory over Rafael Nadal, 
were as high then as they are today, as the Scot prepares to face the greatest 
player of the modern era in Melbourne.

Who knows what the eventual outcome of Sunday's match will be, though we can 
say with certainty it will not be any more decisive or, from a home 
perspective, more disappointing than that damp Monday afternoon in New York. 
Federer, who had endured what was by his regal standards a torrid 2008 season, 
losing his No1 world ranking to Nadal, summoned his very best form to win his 
fifth successive US Open title.

Murray, who was seeded sixth for the final major of the year, had beaten his 
opponent in their two previous meetings. But this was a grand slam final and 
the young Scot, betrayed by nerves and weakened by the exertions of a 
weather-interrupted semi-final that stretched over two days, was swept away in 
three straight sets, 6-2, 7-5, 6-2.

"I got the better of him the last two times we played but he definitely set 
the record straight today. The best man won," Murray said afterwards, which was 
undeniably true. But the best man also enjoyed a bit of luck, too.

The Scot's improvement as an all-round player can in part be attributed to the 
maturation, the solidification, of his champion's mentality. He never gives up; 
he never has. But the difference back then was he had a well-earned reputation 
for becoming quickly, even if only temporarily, discouraged in the face of 
adversity. Federer identified this weakness and exploited it early, stepping on 
to the court and hitting an array of shots that were as accurate as they were 
mentally destructive.

The first set was over in what seemed like a New York minute, leaving 
sympathetic on-lookers – of whom there were few in a half-filled arena that the 
Swiss had turned into his personal fiefdom over the years – fearing the worst 
for the young Scot.

Yet, like a boxer aroused by a corner man wielding an ice cold sponge, Murray 
was transformed at the start of the second set. He broke his opponent early and 
should have done so again, only to be denied on break point when a line judge's 
eyesight failed him on a Federer groundstroke that was at least six inches 
beyond the baseline.

There were several other poor calls, all of which went against the Scot, 
although there were no complaints about the forehand winner with which Federer 
won the second set. As the Swiss celebrated, more animated than he had ever 
been before, Murray shuffled back to his courtside seat, the condemned man on 
his way to an appointment with the undertaker.

For Federer, the victory brought him one grand slam title closer to Peter 
Sampras's record of 14 major titles (a mark he overtook last summer with his 
epic victory over Andy Roddick at Wimbledon). But more importantly it was a 
rebuke to those who had decreed his best days were behind him.

"For me, this sort of puts them to rest a little bit and calms down the phones 
at my parents' [home] a little bit,'' he said.

For Murray, it was a chance to reflect on his graduation into the ranks of the 
game's elite. He had arrived at Flushing Meadows as someone who might one day 
win a grand slam title and departed it as someone who would surely not be 
denied.

"I was effectively three sets away from winning a slam, which is much closer 
than this time last year," he said after his defeat. "I've worked very hard to 
get to this stage, so winning a slam is really the only goal I have left. I'm 
going to have to work even harder, improve my game and get physically stronger 
if I'm going to do that. I want to win one of these tournaments and I'm going 
to try my hardest to do it."

Reflecting back on those words, no one can accuse Murray of breaking his 
promise to himself. There have been setbacks – not least when he returned to 
Flushing Meadows last autumn as one of the favourites for the 2009 US Open only 
to lose in the last 16. But more significantly, there have been improvements: 
in conditioning, in attitude and, most tellingly, in attacking intent.

Suffice to say, the Andy Murray who will contest the final of the 2010 
Australian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> would 
easily overcome the Andy Murray who contested the final of 2008 US Open.

Can the same be said of Roger Federer? Probably not, although in the great 
man's defence it is hard to improve on perfection. And hard to defeat it, too.
 