
Andy Murray has spent years wrestling with his emotions but after what he 
agrees has been the most tumultuous week of his career, he reckons he is in 
good mental shape to make a grab for theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> title that has slipped 
through his fingers with varying degrees of despair in four finals.

When he plays Milos Raonic in the semi-finals , he will need a clear head if 
he is to reach a fifth title-decider. “Things have obviously happened with 
family at other stages,” he said, referring tothe collapse  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/24/nigel-sears-given-green-light-to-fly-home-after-australian-open-collapse>
and subsequent recovery of his father-in-law, Nigel Sears, in the stands last 
Saturday, “but not in the middle of a grand slam and with Kim obviously heavily 
pregnant, as well. I’ve never experienced anything like it before. The last few 
days were difficult, for sure.”

Friday’s match with Raonic will be his 18th grand slam semi-final – equal with 
Boris Becker and three more than Fred Perry – and he will find the Canadian a 
much-changed player from the injury-hindered one hebeat on clay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/08/madrid-open-andy-murray-milos-raonic>
 in Madrid last year.

Andy Murray downs David Ferrer to advance to Australian Open semi-final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/27/andy-murray-downs-david-ferrer-to-advance-to-australian-open-semi-final>
But that difficulty pales into insignificance alongside the anxiety that has 
invaded Murray’s world here. With his brother, Jamie, and his mother, Judy, 
here to support him, he has been able, in the main, to concentrate on his 
tennis – even though he admitted he would “definitely” have quit the tournament 
had Sears’s blackout proved to be more serious than it was, requiring him to 
stay overnight in a local hospital before he flew home on Monday.

How has he coped? “I’m not particularly proud of the way I’ve handled myself 
on the court and I don’t think that my behaviour on the court has been 
impeccable,” says Murray.

“I’ve showed a lot of emotion on court and getting upset from the beginning of 
matches. One thing I’ve done very well is fight for every single point, not 
given away games and stuff. Even when I’ve been broken, I’ve fought hard in the 
next game and made it very difficult for my opponents.

“Although I’m not exactly being very positive with myself, I’m still making it 
very difficult for my opponents and fighting hard for every point. So that’s 
good. I’m more proud of how I’ve handled myself away from the court. I think 
I’ve dealt with everything away from the court better than I have on it, 
probably.”

He admits his mind wandered during his win over Bernard Tomic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/25/andy-murray-bernard-tomic-australian-open>
, before he regathered his composure to advance in the draw. “The match against 
Tomic, definitely of the four matches in the evenings, for sure [his 
concentration levels did suffer]. I do think what it would be like to be home 
just now. Each day that passes I’m closer to that, which is positive. And with 
each day that passes, it’s also closer to the birth as well, and I get more 
anxious about that as well, so hopefully everything’s all right in the next few 
days.”

During Great Britain’s Davis Cup victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/29/andy-murray-davis-cup-great-britain>
 over Belgium in Ghent, Murray knew the load was right on him, and he had to 
strive for professional calm. Did he feel the same here, away from the team 
environment and responsible only for himself?

“I think it is possible to do it in a grand slam. I think in certain 
situations I have shown it.The Wimbledon final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/07/andy-murray-wimbledon-2013-novak-djokovic>
, the last game of that match, in terms of how I was, like, how it would have 
appeared to everyone else. I looked fairly calm on the outside – not 
necessarily how I felt on the inside.

“People also read into those things more. Like, if someone shouts, then they 
think, oh, that means they’re mentally weak or whatever, or getting really 
frustrated. But it’s not always the case. There are a lot of players who get 
extremely frustrated on court and won’t say a word – and it’s not always 
positive for them. People don’t know.

“Commentators like to speculate what someone is thinking about at different 
stages on the court. They have no idea what each individual is thinking.”

This is not to give the impression Murray is in a dark place. He was 
encouragingly upbeat and, when told that a pair of expatriate Scottish ladies 
called Linda and Agnes have become instant TV stars during the tournament and 
would like to meet him, he said: “I wasn’t aware of that. Nobody had told me 
about that. Yeah, I’d be more than happy to meet any of the fans, especially 
ones who’ve travelled to come and support me.”

Back to business. Murray and Raonic both went four sets in their 
quarter-finals, Murray accounting for the most stubborn man in his sport, David 
Ferrer, andRaonic recovering from a slow start 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/27/milos-raonic-gael-monfils-australian-open>
 to get the better of the ever-eccentric and dangerous Gaël Monfils, who was so 
determined to do well here he left his mobile phone at home in France.

“I think today was probably the best match I played,” Murray said, “especially 
in the second and third set. I started hitting the ball better from the back of 
the court. It was extremely hot in the second set.

“At the end of the set, especially, there were a lot of long rallies, long 
games, and physically it was tiring. Once I got through that initial fatigue, I 
started to feel a bit better.

“Raonic is a big server and tries to play short points. He has started this 
year extremely well. He was unfortunate last year with some injuries, had a few 
physical issues. I played him in Madrid and he was struggling a bit.

“Then I think he had the surgery on his foot and missed the French and 
Wimbledon. He’s obviously fit and healthy now and playing well.”

Raonic says of the challenge Murray poses: “Even before I went on court today 
I was paying attention to what he was doing. Because, far from where we were 14 
months ago, we’re both very different and I think improved players from then.

“I have certain aspects that I would like to manipulate and use in my game, 
and I’m sure he’s going to try to do a lot of different things, too. I think 
it’s going to be a race to who can get in their own comfort zone first.”

Murray doesn’t actually reside in a comfort zone. His is an agitated state, 
rarely more so than in this tournament. But the Canadian, a somewhat remote 
figure, strives for peace in his own way. One of his favourite art 
installations is Ai Weiwei’s Forever Bicycles. It is showing at the National 
Gallery of Victoria, where he was spotted wandering around in very non-tennis 
mode this week.

“I can be very obsessive when it comes to the process and what I need to do 
for the next match,” he says. “I am constantly considering things. That was a 
nice escape from myself, and I got to participate in something that I really 
enjoy, a passion that’s definitely grown for me over the last two years.”
 