
Andy Coulson <https://www.theguardian.com/media/andy-coulson>, David Cameron's 
former director of communications, has been detained by police investigating 
alleged perjury at the trial of the Scottish socialist politician Tommy 
Sheridan.

Strathclyde police said Coulson was detained in London on Wednesday morning 
for questioning in connection with evidence the former News of the World editor 
gave during Sheridan's own trial for perjury in December 2010.

It is understood that Coulson was visited unannounced at his home in London at 
6.30am by seven Strathclyde police officers before being driven toGlasgow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/glasgow> under escort. He was taken to Govan 
police station, the base for Operation Rubicon, the inquiry set up to 
investigate alleged perjury at the trial.

He arrived at 3.30pm, and can be questioned for up to 12 hours from his 
arrival. The police can then either release him, charge him or ask a senior 
officer for authority to hold and question him for another 12 hours.

Coulson, who was at the time serving as the prime minister's chief media 
adviser at 10 Downing Street, was called as a defence witness by Sheridan, who 
was on trial for lying in court when he won a £200,000 defamation action 
against the NoW.

The former NoW editor was questioned over two days at the high court in 
Glasgow by Sheridan, who conducted his own defence, about his knowledge of a 
hacking operation against Sheridan carried out by Glenn Mulcaire.

During the trial, Sheridan produced documentary evidence that he had been 
twice targeted by Mulcaire, a private detective hired by the NoW, in 2004.

It has since emerged that other close members of Sheridan's family and 
associates were also named and potentially targeted by Mulcaire, including the 
politician's mother, Alice Sheridan, and the Scottish politician Joan McAlpine, 
a former friend of his who co-wrote a book on Sheridan's anti-poll tax campaign 
in the early 1990s.

Strathclyde police, in tandem with senior prosecutors at the Crown Office, 
Scotland's prosecution authority, launched an inquiry into alleged perjury at 
Sheridan's trial and into hacking inScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> last autumn. The investigation, 
Operation Rubicon, involved at least 50 detectives.

Under Scottish police procedure, Coulson has not been formally arrested as he 
has not yet been charged. This is the second time he has been detained in 
connection with the wider hacking affair: he has already been arrested by the 
Metropolitan police as part of its investigations into NI.

In a brief statement, a Strathclyde police spokeswoman said: "I can confirm 
officers from Strathclyde police's Operation Rubicon team detained a 
44-year-old man in London this morning.

"It is under section 14 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1995/46/section/14> on suspicion of 
committing perjury before the high court in Glasgow."

Sheridan was convicted by a majority verdict at the high court in December 
2010 over his evidence relating to lying to former colleagues in the Scottish 
Socialist party about his private life when he sued the NoW in 2006 for libel 
over allegations about his sex life.

The jury at that libel hearing at the court of session in Edinburgh found in 
Sheridan's favour, and the then Scottish Socialist party leader was awarded 
£200,000 in damages.

Payment of those damages has been delayed after NI appealed against the 
verdict; that case has been suspended pending the outcome of Operation Rubicon 
investigation.
 