
Andy Murray's second grand slam final in four months against Novak Djokovic is 
unlikely to be a pleasant experience for either of them until the struggle for 
the Serb'sAustralian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> 
title is resolved, probably in the small hours of the Melbourne morning.

"I hope that's the case," Murray said. "That will mean it's a close match."

And Djokovic? "I'm ready for that," he said. Tennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> as the new boxing, a place of 
unquestioning sacrifice and egos stripped to the waist, has been a gathering 
mantra. It is and it isn't. What the racket-and-ball game has not yet taken on 
board is the fight game's swagger and yell.

It is impossible, for instance, to imagine Murray's hero, Muhammad Ali, ever 
being so unsure as the Scot about winning before a big fight, but modern tennis 
is no place for easy assumptions. Pain is the only certain collateral damage of 
success and, so close are the main players, that none of Murray, Djokovic, 
Federer or the absent Rafael Nadal would dare boast of victory before it had 
been consummated in an extended collision of wills.

Having shared the suffering of last year's semi-final, for four hours and 50 
minutes, then the US Open final that went four minutes longer, Murray and 
Djokovic, friends since they were 11, now the fiercest of rivals at the summit 
of their sport, know too well what is to come. Theirs is a sport of a thousand 
moments, all thrown together, with little to separate them at the end. That is 
what Murray means by "close", a literal, points-judged perspective, a 
mathematical equation to be unravelled over however long it takes.

On Saturday, they handled the build-up in their different ways. Murray went to 
ground, discussing tactics with Ivan Lendl, mapping out a journey.

Scarily relaxed away from the court, bordering on the animalistic when roused 
in a match, Djokovic also went through his routine of light hitting and 
stretching on a quiet afternoon, shaking free any residual stiffness after six 
matches in a fortnight (one of them that marathon against Stanislas Wawrinka), 
but then he unburdened himself in entertaining discussion of the fight to come.

Murray, meanwhile, had done the bulk of his talking way after midnight on 
Friday. A little too much, he thought, after what turned out to be an 
unexpectedly confrontational semi-final against Federer. He was almost downbeat 
after one of the best wins of his life, his first over the Swiss in a slam, his 
second in a five‑set match over the past seven months after his triumph in the 
Olympic final.

He said he was tired. He did not want to waste what precious time was left 
before the next examination of his spirit discussing the fallout from a 
four-hour contest that descended into tetchiness in the closing stages. He 
wanted to get out of there, go to bed, leave the arguments and speculation 
about Federer's expletives to others.

But, before returning to his hotel, he spoke briefly with a couple of us. He 
agreed that reaching three slam finals in a row – Wimbledon, the US and the 
Australian – was something to savour, an inspiration to do even better. "With 
the level of competition, it's one of my better achievements," he said.

Did he finally feel he belonged, then? He was taking nothing for granted. "You 
never know how you are going to feel on the day, but my results over the past 
year suggest I have played some of my best tennis in the bigger matches at the 
slams and the Olympics. That's all you can do. You're not going to win all of 
them but, more often than not, I'm now giving myself chances to win these 
events every time I play them."

He would not agree that he inhabited an exclusive, members-only club. "I 
wouldn't say we are a different level to the rest. You saw how close the match 
was tonight." Certainly. And we saw how easily the Big Three handled everyone 
outside the top flight here, as elsewhere. Even the world No4, David Ferrer, 
lost an embarrassingly one-sided quarter-final to Djokovic.

But, pressed, Murray did say: "Winning big matches, you get used to it and 
have that extra bit of belief each time you go on the court. What Novak did a 
couple of years ago set the bar and what Roger and Rafa were doing for five or 
six years always set the standard. It's been up to everyone else to catch up 
and I've done a good job for the last year or so."

What has always been Murray's strength on court, patience, is central to his 
overall strategy. He is as prepared to wait for the right moment in a match as 
he is in hunting down big wins and titles. There is no urgency, either in his 
shot, or his approach to tournaments. Lendl has encouraged him to be more 
aggressive, but not reckless. Similarly, he does not imagine he will become an 
all-conquering beast overnight. Rather, he will lurk dangerously, then hit hard.

"Last year when I played Novak here, that match was important for the rest of 
my career. But it could have been the match that changed things had I come 
through it. It just took a little bit longer because I lost. But that match was 
the start of my year and [gave me] the understanding how close I was if I just 
improved a few things. Having won in five sets against Roger and Novak in slams 
is something I hadn't done before.

"Our game styles mean we play a lot of long rallies and close points. Both of 
us return very well, and it's tough to get free points on serve. Every time we 
played last year they were really tough matches."

He gives the impression he would not have it any other way.

Perhaps as an antidote to his caution, Murray might have benefited on 
Australia Day mulling over the oft-quoted but undiminished integrity of the 
words of one of this country's finest sportsmen. Asked to define pressure, the 
Test all-rounder Keith Miller, a fighter pilot who flew missions over Germany 
during the second world war, said: "I'll tell you what pressure is. Pressure is 
a Messerschmitt up your arse. Playing sport is not."

I suspect the words of Ross Hutchins will be fresher in his mind when he walks 
on to the Rod Laver Arena on Sunday (about 8.30am UK time). Murray's tennis 
friend from childhood – who has spoken to him every day on the phone – observed 
after watching on television 12,000 miles away in snowbound Britain as Murray 
found another level in the fifth set against Federer: "It's what Federer used 
to do so well. It's what top players do. Andy's proving how good he is in 
adversity."

Coming from someone recently diagnosed with Hodgkin's lymphoma, that is praise 
that means more to Murray than any of the thousands of words expended on him 
this weekend.
 