
So now we know that not even a knock‑up with David Cameron in the drawing room 
of No10 could inspireAndy Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> 
to the ultimate victory. More seriously, the dominant conclusion to emerge from 
his defeat in Melbourne today was that if he is ever going to win a grand slam 
tournament, he will probably need better help than he is getting.

To put it harshly, Murray gave less reason for optimism in defeat against 
Novak Djokovic today than he did exactly 12 months ago, while losing the final 
of the 2010Australian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> 
to Roger Federer. Confronting the Swiss, he gave himself a glimpse of victory 
when he broke serve in the second set to go 4-2 up, capturing the break point 
with the shot of a lifetime. There were no such golden visions today, just a 
hard, sweaty struggle to retain a semblance of self‑respect against an opponent 
manifestly superior on the day.

The careers of Murray and Djokovic, born a week apart in 1987, have run on 
parallel lines since they first encountered each other on a tennis court at the 
age of 13. The Serb, however, has proved more adept at turning talent and 
promise into achievement. Two years ago, when Djokovic was winning his first 
grand slam tournament in Australia, it could be suggested that some players 
mature faster than others. Now, however, they are both 23-years-old in a young 
man's sport, and no further excuses can be made.

Today Djokovic surmounted an even more daunting hurdle, which is to win again. 
After winning in 2008, he fell back. But he has worked hard to strengthen his 
game, and his single-minded demolition of Federer on Thursday showed that he 
is worthy of his place among the world's top three.

Before the final Djokovic had enjoyed the advantage of an extra 24 hours' 
rest, thanks to a flaw in the Australian tournament's structure, and Murray was 
certainly looking frayed as the match went into its third set. However, these 
competitors know the conditions, and they have nothing to do but prepare for 
them. And although Murray had to work hard to get the better of David Ferrer in 
a four-set semi-final, Djokovic's task at the same stage was to eliminate the 
great Federer.

An even bleaker light is cast on Murray's failure by the statistical nature of 
the defeat: his three grand slam finals have all been surrendered in straight 
sets. Against Federer at Flushing Meadow in 2008 the score was 6-2, 7-5, 6-2.

In Melbourne against the same opponent last year it was 6-3, 6-4, 7-6. By 
comparison, today's 6-4 6-2 6-3 hardly suggests a man moving inexorably towards 
a rendezvous with destiny.

Like Tim Henman, the man from Dunblane has done wonderfully well to emerge 
from the slough of despond that is British professional tennis. In both cases, 
their success was achieved through bypassing a sclerotic system. Unlike the 
worthy but limited Henman, however, Murray has the talent to prevail at the 
very top. What he needs is the tactical preparation and the mental 
strengthening necessary to take the final step – and then not to be content 
with one victory but to go on and win again, as Djokovic has just done.

Coaches are clearly a problem for Murray. Since turning professional in 2005 
he has worked with Pato Alvarez, Mark Petchey, Brad Gilbert, Miles Maclagan and 
Alex Corretja. The Spaniard, who had coached Murray during the clay-court 
season in 2008, replaced Maclagan last summer, on the understanding that there 
would eventually be a permanent replacement, but not before Australia this 
month.

This left Murray in the care of his mother, Judy, who leads the rest of a team 
comprising his friend and hitting partner Dani Vallverdu, his physio Andy 
Ireland and fitness trainer Jez Green. A second regular fitness trainer, Matt 
Little, was not around.

Murray does not enjoy travelling with just a professional coach. He has said 
that he prefers the company of people of his own age, with whom he can relax. 
But as his battle to stay in today's match reached its anticlimax in the third 
set, what use were they in hard, practical, professional terms? None of them 
could affect his inability to put more than 53% of his first serves into play, 
against Djokovic's 67%: a fatal handicap.

As his play grew more erratic, he cursed himself with increasing vehemence. At 
a crucial point in a match that was there to be saved, such passionate 
self-laceration represented a terribly debilitating waste of mental energy.

On the point of losing his third grand slam final, he should have been 
concentrating his attention not on the disappointment of the last point but on 
the possibility of the next, and on what he could do about it.

The world is full of tennis coaches, and somewhere out there must be one 
capable of providing the combination of discipline and encouragement necessary 
to focus the unruly instincts that undid Murray once again today. If necessary, 
they could take breakfast in separate rooms.
 