
There are a lot of numbers in Andy Murray's life right now, most of them 
encouraging, some of them daunting, all of them relevant ahead of his 
semi-final withRoger Federer <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer> 
on Friday.

He is 25 – with probably a good five or six years elite level tennis ahead of 
him – and six years younger than the Swiss. He has one grand slam to his name, 
only 16 behind Federer. He is appearing in his fourth straightAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> semi-final and he leads his 
venerable opponent 10-9 in career meetings, but is 0-3 in grand slams. They 
paint one picture of the relationship between them, but, like all numbers, they 
can be bent, misrepresented or rendered meaningless by events. Murray, as 
analytical as anyone on the tour, does not dismiss them. Nor, though, does he 
cower in front of them.

For as long as he can remember, he has been burdened by the statistics of 
another great player, Fred Perry, and, having banished that ghost by winning 
the US Open last year to launch what he and many others hope will be a new era 
in British tennis, he arrives at this juncture of the tournament and is 
presented with one more number. If he beats Federer, he will equal Perry's 
tally of 105 match wins in grand slams. And if he wins the final, of course …

"It [equalling Perry] would be great," he concedes, before adding, "I think he 
missed quite a lot of years of playing when he went professional. That kind of 
changed things a little bit. But, yeah, winning matches in grand slams isn't 
easy and I'm surprised that it's that many."

He pauses, and goes on: "I think Roger just got to 250 the other night. A lot 
of the guys now have got some unbelievable records, so I'll try to keep 
winning. It would be nice at the end of my career if I could get to the 200 
mark. I think that's a good target."

To get the numbers, he has to get the timing right. He has spoken a lot lately 
about the impossibility of peaking for every match. Here, he has had five 
fairly soft ones.

"I think that's why I got a bit frustrated on the court in my last couple of 
matches," he says, "because I didn't feel I was playing my best. The week 
before the tournament, I was playing really, really well in practice. I 
practised with a lot of really good tough players and I prepared really well. I 
was hitting the ball very well in Brisbane [where he beat Grigor Dimitrov in 
the final to keep his title] and I was starting to play better towards the end 
of that tournament.

"Then in a couple of matches here, I wasn't quite feeling right and wasn't 
quite in the zone I would have liked to have been in. You just have to trust 
that when you are really pushed and tested in matches, that your best game is 
going to come out."

That is an odd concept for mere mortals to comprehend: waiting for some kind 
of genius to arrive at just the right moment. But they are all afflicted by it.

What about those Federer numbers, then: 10 times, but three defeats in slams. 
How different a player is he in a big tournament?

"Again," says Murray, "playing over five sets is different to playing over 
three sets. For him, I'm sure that at this stage of his career he wants to play 
his best tennis at the slams. The first time I played him at the US Open, I 
didn't feel ready.

"The Wimbledon final was a good one – it was a very close match and it could 
have gone the other way. And the final here [in 2010], again I had quite a few 
chances in that match, too. Maybe I've just not converted as many chances as I 
needed to against him in the slams and that's where his experience has probably 
told.

"But I think the match at the Olympics was good for me, mentally. To have 
played him over five sets and to have won quickly and convincingly was good for 
me to realise that once you get ahead of these guys, you really need to stay on 
top of them – and that's the difference between winning and losing against the 
best players over five sets."

Murray agrees with his coach, Ivan Lendl, that the Wimbledon final changed 
everything for him.

"Yes, I think so. I learned a lot. I went through some things in that match 
that I really hadn't been through before – I won my first set in a slam 
[final]. I had my chances in the second set and then there was the delay with 
the roof. Regardless of what I said at the time, there was pretty significant 
pressure on me on that day as well, so it is very unlikely I will play another 
match in my career where I was under as much pressure as that.

"I was very emotional at the end, but I felt like I handled the match well and 
I think I handled the situation pretty well and obviously played some of my 
best tennis just a few weeks after that at the Olympics."

And he surely won't want the roof to play a part again, will he?

"I think on the grass when the roof is open, that is definitely better for 
him. On hard courts, I have played him quite a few times indoors and actually 
had decent success against him early on – the last couple of times, not so 
much. Here the court definitely plays different. I am not sure whether it would 
be an advantage for him or me if the roof closed.

"When we played the final here, the roof was closed until literally five 
minutes before we went out there and I was actually hoping it would be closed 
that day. I think it depends a bit on the surface. The court plays slower here 
when the roof is closed."

Across the draw stands Novak Djokovic, through to the final to defend his 
title after an almost perfunctory dismissal on Thursday of David Ferrer, whose 
meek fold was so at odds with his fighting comeback against Nicolas Almagro. 
That, of course, was because he was playing the No 1 in the world.

The champion looks ultra-relaxed. After finishing off Ferrer in less than an 
hour and a half, he was late for his press conference because he was still 
fooling about on court, dressed up as a medic and pretending to tend to Henri 
LeConte, Guy Forget's doubles partner in a light-hearted doubles giggle with 
Pat Cash and Goran Ivanisevic. Still, on a day of heat and drama, the comic 
interlude was welcome relief. Now it gets real. Now the numbers kick in.
 