
Andy Murray left Melbourne beaten but not bowed. He did not add a second grand 
slam title to his portfolio after his triumph in New York four months ago but, 
after analysing his defeat byNovak Djokovic in the Australian Open final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jan/27/novak-djokovic-beats-andy-murray-australian-open>
, he knows what he needs to do to keep pace with the world No1, and to see off 
the challenge of Roger Federer,whom he beat in the semi-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jan/25/andy-murray-roger-federer-australian-open>
, and Rafael Nadal, who returns from seven months out through injury in Chile 
this week.

Nevertheless Murray, still third in the world, reckons it will be harder than 
ever to get to No1 – a goal many good judges reckon is within his grasp in 
2013, including Andre Agassi and Boris Becker.

"It's tough," Murray said. "If I had won here I would have two slams, a 
Wimbledon final and Olympic gold and still been well behind Novak."

"The argument a few years ago was with [Caroline] Wozniacki being No1 without 
a slam – but Novak [who won one slam last year, the Australian] still would 
have been significantly ahead of me even if I'd won. With his consistency just 
now, Rafa [Nadal] coming back, it's going to get tougher.

"I'll need to do well the next few months and not play badly – especially in 
the Masters series, I will need to do well there. My next goal is to try and 
play good tennis in Indian Wells and Miami.

"I've realised in the last year or so that when I set myself short-term goals 
I tend to play better tennis that way. Previously after every slam I would look 
way ahead to the next one and kind of take my eye off the ball with the other 
events so that's the immediate goal and also slightly think about the French 
Open. It's a tournament I'm capable of doing well in but for me it takes a lot 
of practice, a lot of hours on clay to get used to it. So that's a major goal 
for me but I've got to do well in the next few months.

"I obviously didn't do particularly well on the clay until the French last 
year. Indian Wells wasn't good so there's obviously potential to pick up points 
and improve my ranking. The way the rankings are, I think these should be the 
events that dictate the majority of the rankings but that's not always the way 
it works."

He has some fine-tuning to do and is slightly disappointed that he did not 
build on his first-set lead against Djokovic in Sunday's final.

"Maybe not so much with tactics," he said. "I will have a think about why I 
maybe didn't create as many chances on the return as I've done in the past, but 
the way I was striking the ball was fine. My tactics were right, I just didn't 
give myself enough opportunities on his serve. I have to try and improve my 
return."

As for Davis Cup commitments in 2013, Murray said, "I'm going to discuss it 
with [Great Britain's captain, Leon Smith] once I get back from here. I spoke 
to him in Miami, so we will talk about it again."
 