
It is totally in keeping with Andy Flower's character that he has chosen to 
weigh up all the issues surrounding theEngland cricket team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/england-cricket-team>, and, without 
prompting or pushing, come to the pragmatic decision to walk away from the post 
he has occupied with such distinction for the past five years. In so doing he 
has saved Paul Downton, the new managing director, the job of having to reach 
his own conclusion on the way ahead in the wake of arguably the most disastrous 
winter England have ever endured.

That there is a post of some sort being negotiated for Flower within the ECB 
is right and proper: such credentials should not go to waste and he will 
probably work from the high performance centre at Loughborough, where he will 
be able to bring his experience to helping produce the next generation of 
high-quality coaches, something that can only be for the benefit of England 
cricket. Flower had hitherto received the backing of those in charge of the 
ECB, and there is no reason to believe that this view has changed.

However the split roles between Test and one-day cricket – which had been 
created principally to give Flower more time to concentrate on preparing for 
future series, not least the last home Ashes, without other distractions, but 
also to free him somewhat from the treadmill that is modern international 
cricket scheduling – were not working. In the opinion of Flower, and probably 
Downton as well, they needed returning to the original form if the team 
director was really to keep his finger on the pulse. Flower has said he is 
unwilling to take that on.

The task now begins to find his successor. The common perception is that 
Ashley Giles, who was appointed by Flower and Hugh Morris, Downton's 
predecessor, as head coach of the one-day sides, will simply step up to take on 
the full role. If this happens it will surely be premature: Giles, while a good 
man of real integrity, is part of the general malaise as evidenced by the 
performances of both short-form teams in Australia these past few weeks.

The job is to be advertised and a more sensible approach would be for Giles to 
continue pro tem in his current role, taking the team to the Caribbean in three 
weeks' time and thence the World T20, with the new director taking charge at 
the start of a summer that, aside from everything else, brings a five-Test 
series against India.

Flower leaves with a huge amount of credit in the bank having been 
instrumental in three successive Ashes wins, including the memorable one in 
Australia three years ago, taking England to the top of the rankings in all 
three formats and winning the World T20 in the Caribbean in 2010. That was 
then, though, and this is now. Past glories count for something but in the 
great scheme of things no one is better than their most recent efforts.

From start to finish, this excursion to Australia has been an embarrassment, 
much of it self-inflicted but some through force of circumstance. Of course 
there would be repercussions. By any stretch of the imagination, the overall 
performance has been beyond unacceptable.

The signs have been there for the past year. England's win in India at the end 
of 2012 was a triumph, one of the finest performances by an England side 
abroad. But then came a slothful Test series in New Zealand, which they would 
have been unlucky to lose but did not deserve to win either, followed by a 
moderate early-season win at home against the same opponents, and a 3-0 win 
against Australia, achieved with another average performance against a team 
emerging from total disarray. That England chose to go to Australia for the 
return bout with largely the same squad of players was a natural consequence; 
it would have been hard to tear up the blueprint and start again at that point, 
and it was not unreasonable to expect players with such proven credential to 
raise their games back to the highest levels. Instead, they were utterly taken 
aback by the ferocity of the opposition on and off the field, and by the 
quality of the bowling. Had they played at their best, it would still have been 
a series too close to call.

It is the stories of disharmony that are most telling, however. As ever, for 
public consumption, there are declarations of unity but internally there is 
always a blame game when a side undergo such bad times as these.

Bowlers who are forced out on to the field again without a chance to put their 
feet up because of inept batting, are resentful and close ranks. Batsmen see 
the opposition strangle the life out of them with the ball and wonder why their 
own bowlers cannot reciprocate. Fielding almost inevitably suffers. The tales 
of backbiting and acrimony are rarely without foundation. Team spirit is a most 
transient thing. Flower, together with Alastair Cook as captain, has had to try 
to hold things together and it becomes a totally wearying and ultimately futile 
task.

The uncertainty surrounding the England future of Kevin Pietersen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kevin-pietersen> has not been helpful. 
Flower's personal feelings regarding Pietersen had become an issue, not least 
because of some misinterpretation which led to the future of both predicated on 
some sort of 'me-or-him' ultimatum. Flower is adamant that whatever he might 
think of Pietersen, he has kept those feelings to one side, as he has with 
every other player, and has only ever done what he considers to be in the best 
interest of the England side.

It would only have become an issue had Flower, in a position to do so, decided 
that England had seen the best of Pietersen and the future of the side was 
elsewhere. This did not preclude him taking the opposite view. But had Downton, 
in the course of his review of the winter, and indeed the majority of selectors 
(of whom Flower remains one) deemed that Pietersen should not be jettisoned, 
while Flower thought he should, his position would have been untenable.

This being so, Flower's departure now does not in any way preclude debate 
regarding Pietersen, something that is most likely to become an issue once the 
terms of his new IPL contract become clear following the auction in a couple of 
weeks' time. Irrespective of that, though, his future may already have been 
decided.
 