
Andy Flower has confirmed that he intends to carry on as the England team 
manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/06/andy-flower-stays-england-coach-pain>
, promising significant but as yet unspecified changes in methodology and 
personnel in the wake ofEngland's humiliation in the Ashes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/jan/05/england-ashes-defeat-australia-johnson-harris>
.

Speaking at the Sydney Cricket Ground the morning after England's final 
eviscerating defeat of the Australian summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/05/ashes-2013-14-australia-england--whitewash>
, Flower confirmed that his role will not change, that he believes Alastair 
Cook can develop his captaincy skills significantly, and that he has at no 
stage considered seriously his own position. "I've been very proud to be part 
of English cricket," he said. "I was not proud of the way we performed in this 
Test."

None of which is necessarily news. Indeed the manner and tone of what was, in 
the extraordinary circumstances of a post-whitewash debrief, a masterfully 
opaque public appearance, are perhaps the wider story. If only England's 
batsmen had been able to summon even a fraction of the coiled and sure-footed 
defensiveness Flower mustered the series might have been a different affair. 
Not that Flower played any shots. This was instead a fine and almost chillingly 
brilliant example of a man with a great deal to talk about – a horror story to 
tell, in fact – managing to articulate not just words but entire sentences 
while continuing to say pretty much nothing at all.

Has he ever thought his time might be up? "I'm focused on making the right 
decisions for English cricket." Is Alastair Cook a good captain? "There are 
different levels of what good is." Would Kevin Pietersen benefit from a 
leadership role? "I don't really want to discuss our thoughts on leadership." 
Has the split coaching role worked over the last year? "It's too early to say." 
What would he have changed with hindsight post-whitewash? "I wouldn't like to 
sit here the day after the Test finishes and trot out a little list of lessons 
that we have learned." Which is a shame because this is what everyone else is 
doing right now – and Flower's list is the only one that actually counts.

There is, of course, an important distinction to be made here. For all the 
stagnation into catastrophe of the England Test team over the past year, Flower 
is still surely the best man to rebuild it. He has shown himself to be a 
brilliant coach and an honest, fiercely committed operator. He knows the 
players and the system. If anybody can adapt and rebuild from such trauma it is 
probably the man in charge. Plus, at the same time, this is not a moment for 
loose talk.

Flower is unable, out of professional duty, to name names, to give vent to his 
genuine frustrations. His own job is still notionally on the line as are those 
of others. There has been no formal debrief. Team omerta must, for a man this 
rigorously professional, be observed. But it is still a mistake to play dumb. 
To those not privy to Flower's more passionate professional self, this kind of 
posturing makes it look as though he is not hurting right now. He does, of 
course, care, but other people who also care need to be able to see this. Not 
all of the time. We don't want a cry baby or a kind of quavering Ancient 
Mariner.

But Flower will perhaps not speak in public again until the next England Test 
series in June. This was the moment to let it out. Just the once. Then on we go.

Flower has no doubt been instructed by his ECB aides to prevaricate and dodge. 
He had presumably rehearsed his answers, repeating key phrases in successive 
interviews. If only somebody close to him had the nous to suggest that perhaps 
this was not actually the moment to raise the blast shields. If only his 
professional intelligence had nudged him toward opening up rather than closing 
down. If only because there are so many unanswered questions of selection, 
tactics and morale in need of, if not amea culpa, then at least an 
acknowledgement .

There was some seasoned good sense on Cook's struggles: "His career was never 
going to go upwards continually. No- one's career does. It is a tough time for 
him, but he'll be learning a lot about himself and he'll be learning a lot 
about the game. He'll be learning a lot about leadership at this time and I'm 
sure his batting will come good." There was an acceptance of the need for 
change – "I think our methods, our environment and our personnel all need to be 
looked at" – and of the need for an evolution in personnel. There was the 
promise of immediate meetings with Paul Downton, praise for Gary Ballance, and 
a suggestion for the first time that Cook might benefit from speaking to 
ex-former England captains outside the current set-up.

Overall, though, it was masterfully dead-bat stuff, a denial of doubt where 
doubts are surely a natural human response to losing 5–0 to Australia. And this 
is perhaps the nub of Flower's perception-management issue right now. There are 
some who might suggest a refusal to show emotion or doubt in defeat is of a 
piece with England's desiccated unresponsiveness in the series just past, the 
sense of methods didactically applied, the lack of broader emotional palette: 
fair enough in victory, but in unremitting defeat something that starts to look 
not like a strength but like a weakness.

Flower also said that what he admired about Australia's Ashes cricket was its 
aggression and this may be more significant. It is perhaps the tempo and 
texture of England's cricket in the last two years that has exacerbated the 
broader dismay at this Ashes loss. England under Flower have subjugated any 
sense of cavalier intent – or even, whisper it, gratuitous entertainment – in 
favour of a brilliantly calculated austerity cricket. They haven't just bowled 
dry. They've batted, fielded and captained dry. Fair enough when it represents 
the best way to win, but a method that in failure looks like passivity and 
stultified ambition.

There is a suggestion that Flower is in fact cautiously optimistic about 
England's prospects of rising from been beneath the current train-wreck. And in 
a sense he is caught: unable for reasons of protocol to talk in detail about 
what he wants to do from here. But perhaps feeling, beneath it all, a sense of 
mangled and weary optimism that, if expressed, would go down like a lead 
balloon in the aftermath of a horrifying 5-0 whitewash.

And yet if he has, in his caginess, played this one wrong, it is because there 
are wider needs to be addressed. Whatever the corporate structure might suggest 
the England cricket team does not belong to theEngland cricket team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/england-cricket-team>. It belongs to the 
people who care about it, who pay on television or in person to watch. 
International sport is not a self-contained matrix of win and lose, but an 
emotional business, a collision of physical cultures, a business of dreams and 
glory and transport beyond the everyday. It is this that Flower, in extremis, 
needs to speak to.

If not for reasons of fellow-feeling and goodwill, then for more hard-nosed 
reasons. The England cricket team is also a successful sporting brand, a thing 
to be retailed even by its chief operating officers.

The dwindling away of goodwill among some supporters, the sense that this is 
an unaccountable corporate machine walled up within its tracksuited 
hierarchies, may not matter now. Grounds will continue to be filled this 
summer, not least in the hospitality-happy south. But there is still a need to 
foster a sense of shared hopes. It isn't enough simply to lower the shutters 
and butch this out. Flower is a charismatic and inspiring leader. For his 
team's sake he needs to show a little of this, to manage defeat as well as he 
has in the past managed victory.
 