
If Andy Hornby's public reception as he heads into his new role is anything to 
go by, you cannot help but have sympathy for other chief executives planning 
substantial career moves. The reputational legacy of great bosses is made up of 
the highs and lows, obstacles and challenges they faced throughout their 
­career and, at the age of 42, Andy will be no exception.

The challenge for the "newsworthy" boss is twofold. First, he or she needs to 
quickly earn the trust of the team and establish a reputation as a rounded 
business leader – well beyond the stuff of the headlines.

Second, they will need to understand that reputation is crucial for the 
business. Though they are an important part of the story, they need to make 
sure to get the company's story out in front of their own. At every 
opportunity, they must let the results do the talking. Where there is talking 
to be done, focus on how the foundations are being built, how the people are on 
board, and why the investments are the right ones to grow long term.

The dynamics of a corporate and personal reputation are very similar. What 
counts most for business leaders is building the "future legacy", not troubling 
with the past.

If there are past matters that actually need fixing, like an outstanding 
lawsuit or a breakdown with a significant stakeholder, fix them, quickly, 
without fanfare. Take them off the table and move on.

In a recent survey conducted by ReputationInc among chief executives, they 
rated themselves as the most important factor in determining corporate 
reputation. We believe they are right if that means making the tough defining 
decisions that will shape the company's prevailing reputation, such as 
balancing profit with the ever increasing demands of society. But they are 
wrong if they think the company's reputation rests solely on them.

Every decision they make will have a legacy, large or small. When our chief 
executives look back on their tenures, it should be the blossoming fruits of 
their visionary investment not the fading Fortune cover shots that define their 
moment.John Mahony

The author is the chief executive of ReputationInc, a specialist reputation 
management consultancy with offices in London, ­Dublin and Dubai
 