
Andy Flower's future as director of the England team may hinge on whether the 
selectors and the new managing director see an international future forKevin 
Pietersen <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kevin-pietersen> as the side looks 
to regenerate after the 5-0 whitewash in the Ashes series.

Although Paul Downton, who only took over at the start of the month following 
the retirement of Hugh Morris, has yet to begin his own assessment of the 
situation Flower, who has to take ultimate responsibility for the overwhelming 
defeat, has notionally already been given the backing of his employer, the 
England and WalesCricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board. It 
is believed, moreover, that both Flower and the captain Alastair Cook are 
likely to get Downton's official backing.

However, so adamant is Flower that the presence of Pietersen in the dressing 
room is detrimental to the future development of the side that he is believed 
to be prepared to resign his position should Downton, James Whitaker, the new 
national selector, and Cook – if he retains the captaincy – insist that 
Pietersen should be a part of that process.

Pietersen and Flower have issues that go back at least to early summer 2012 
when, without warning, the batsman declared himself unavailable for one-day 
international matches. Following what were considered inappropriate text 
messages to the South Africa team regarding the then England captain Andrew 
Strauss, which subsequently contributed to his retirement, Pietersen was 
omitted from the final Test of the summer. It was not until the tour of India 
that winter that he was reintegrated into the side.

In Mumbai on that tour he played one of the great Test innings to help 
kickstart a revival that led to a memorable series win for Cook and England.

However, it has always seemed an uneasy truce and on this tour, despite his 
assurances before his 100th Test in Brisbane that he was committed to England 
to 2015 and beyond, it is thought that Pietersen's influence in the dressing 
room has been divisive.

He is one of many who failed to score big runs during the Ashes series, top 
scoring although with only 294 runs at an average of 29.4 but, as a senior 
player, the nature of a number of his dismissals when apparently batting 
comfortably has led to some strong exchanges. Flower is thought to believe that 
the future development of the team can only happen without Pietersen.

In the wake of speculation that he might retire from Test cricket after the 
Ashes Pietersen, who is very media-savvy, has already tweeted a reiteration of 
his desire to continue at least until the end of the next Ashes series, and 
perhaps into the series in South Africa, the only country in which he has yet 
to score a Test hundred. He also wants to be the first England batsman to score 
10,000 Test runs. It will not be a function of whether he wants to retire, 
though, but of whether England want him.

It could be that things come to a head earlier following this year's auction 
for the Indian Premier League, which is due to take place on 12 February. 
Pietersen is a marquee player who has performed for the Bangalore Royal 
Challengers and, in 2012, Delhi Daredevils. He missed the sixth edition of IPL 
in 2013 because of a knee injury and is now out of contract.

The latest contracts are expected to be offered for three years and Pietersen, 
a brilliant player and immensely popular in India, would be expected to fetch a 
price at the highest end of the scale and as such would be extremely lucrative.

But it is thought that the contracts will be contingent on full availability 
for all three seasons, something that would not tie in with the potential 
demands of England cricket.

Flower, should he retain his position, will probably insist that with most 
places up for grabs in the team to play Sri Lanka in June, potential batsmen 
play a significant number of the eight county championship matches that precede 
the series.

It is hard to see how Pietersen would be willing to compromise on this over 
three years given the rewards on offer and the fact that he will be 34 in June, 
with a history of injury, and as such understandably keen to maximise his 
earnings.

In that circumstance his retirement from international cricket, rather than 
Flower's resignation, would seem the likeliest outcome.
 