
Damon Runyon would have loved modern tennis, with all its seductive – some 
would say corrupting – betting options but, if he were allowed on the premises, 
even he would struggle to frame an attractive price for either combatant in the 
final of the 2016Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> on Sunday.

For all that the old rascal reckoned “the race is not always to the swift nor 
the battle to the strong, but that’s the way to bet”, there is not enough 
between Novak Djokovic andAndy Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/29/andy-murray-beats-milos-raonic-australian-open-semi-final>
 to suggest the Serb will enjoy an easy time of it on Rod Laver Arena, where he 
has beaten the Scot three times in finals.

The world No1, who is in awesome form but has shown vulnerability too, will be 
a slight favourite, and it might be that Murray embraces Runyon’s other dictum: 
“Life is mainly 6-5 against.”

Andy Murray battles back to beat Milos Raonic in five-set Australian Open semi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/29/andy-murray-beats-milos-raonic-australian-open-semi-final>
Would this be more mental than physical? Murray was asked on his way back from 
practice on Saturday. “Both are obviously important,” Murray said. “They kind 
of go hand in hand. If you want to win against Novak, it’s going to be 
physical. He returns very well, he is solid off both sides, moves great. You 
don’t get lots of free points. Pretty much all of the matches I have played 
against him in slams have been very tough physically.”

Murray, just slightly impatient, was less prepared to elaborate on the other 
pressure in his life – a much nicer one as it happens: the imminent arrival of 
his first child. But he did confirm he would rush straight from the tennis, 
regardless of the result, to Sydney airport for the quickest possible flight 
back to London, where his heavily pregnant wife, Kim, is waiting for him at 
their home in Oxshott in Surrey. His father-in-law, Nigel Sears, who collapsed 
in the stands last Saturday and flew back to the UK on Monday after being kept 
overnight for tests in a Melbourne hospital, will also be there to greet him.

There is a 3.30am flight due to land at Heathrow at 6.15pm Monday, and Murray 
will do his best to be on it. Meanwhile, there is business to take care of.

“I’m expecting a battle with Andy,” Djokovic said. “It always is a very 
physically demanding match, lots of rallies, exchanges. We have games that are 
very much alike. It’s basically who’s going to outplay who from the baseline. 
Serve is an important factor, too. Both of us will try to serve a high 
percentage of first serves and not allow the other player to attack the second 
serve too many times.”

In that regard, the champion has had a better tournament than Murray. Djokovic 
has tied for third on the tournament list with 134 points from 217 second 
serves, at 62%, to Murray’s 138 from 243 at 57%, which places him equal 17th. 
That will not encourage much investment on the world No2.

“There has been a lot of talks about his second serve,” Djokovic continued, 
“and I’m sure he and his team are very much aware of that. He’s known around 
the tour as one of the hardest working guys and somebody who really puts in the 
hours on the tennis court, and off the court, trying to perfect his game.

“I’m not surprised that he’s trying to get his game to a higher level. That’s 
expected. If it wasn’t so, he wouldn’t be in the finals. On the other hand, I’m 
also working on things to improve, and I’m sure that we will try to explore 
each other’s weaknesses.”

Djokovic’s contention that they will play mostly from the baseline is hardly a 
blinding revelation – although if either player is in a hole, desperation will 
kick in. For the most part, they will stand, deliver then grind. The Serb has 
not followed his serve to the net once in 597 opportunities the past fortnight. 
Murray has tried it five times in 601 serves, for a 3-2 success. Both have 
sharpened their short game once the ball is in play, Murray winning 97 points 
in 122 visits to the net, a slightly better return for his daring than 
Djokovic’s 93 from 124.

So, who is king of the baseline at this Australian opponent? David Ferrer, 
whom Murray ground down in the quarter-finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/27/andy-murray-downs-david-ferrer-to-advance-to-australian-open-semi-final>
, leads everyone with 309 points from 560 back-of-the-court exchanges (55 per 
cent). Djokovic is a percentage point behind the Spaniard (with 407/578), two 
ahead of Murray (392/750).

These are fine distinctions, which will blur in the heat of the contest, and, 
as Murray’s coach, Amélie Mauresmo, pointed out to journalists on Saturday: 
“The margins between the two players aren’t enormous. It is feasible [to beat 
him]. You have to enter the court with very precise ideas about what to do.”

Mauresmo, reminded she had won the title here a decade ago, said: “I don’t 
really care about the 10-year anniversary. It’s past and it’s a different life. 
For me now there are different things. I will be very happy for Andy if he can 
get this one.” She said of Djokovic’s consistency: “When you see the quality of 
the players he faces throughout the season, it’s very impressive. He doesn’t 
always play really well, but he usually comes out on top. Generally, at the end 
of grand slam tournaments, he plays really well. He is a difficult question to 
resolve.”

Murray knows that. He has suffered through 21 defeats in 30 contests against 
Djokovic, some of them brutal.Last year’s match was particularly stormy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/01/australian-open-final-2015-novak-djokovic-andy-murray>
.

Murray reckoned his nemesis made much of little when appearing to wobble on 
the edge of collapse, only to recover and blow him off the court. Looking back 
on one of his most tormented nights, he said: “If I do get ahead in the match, 
I need to keep doing what I’m doing, and not get away from that. I need to 
maintain my concentration for long enough.”

That is history. What they have here is contemporary form, matching ambition 
and, well, a bit more history to make. Murray is striving to become the first 
player in the Open era to win a slam after losing in the final of that event 
four times; in front of Djokovic is the prospect of drawing clear of Stefan 
Edberg andRoger Federer (whom he beat in the semi-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/28/novak-djokovic-roger-federer-australian-open>
, their 45th contest) with six Australian titles in the Open era – and from as 
many attempts.

He was generous in his praise of Murray, and there seemed no hidden animus. 
Djokovic watched – and admired – the last set ofMurray’s ruthless finishing of 
a wounded, fight-to-the-last Milos Raonic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/29/andy-murray-beats-milos-raonic-australian-open-semi-final>
 on Friday night, observing: “That’s why Andy is a top player for so many 
years, a grand slam champion, because he always makes players give their best 
and at times kind of go over their own physical limits.”

If injury or exhaustion kicks in on Sunday night, neither will spare much 
sympathy for his stricken foe. But Murray, in a way, is hurt before he steps on 
court: by three defeats against Djokovic, and one against Federer in Australian 
finals. While he says reaching five finals here is a great achievement, he 
desperately wants to beat the champion. He has had enough of picking up silver 
plates, while his old rival holds aloft the winner’s cup.

Djokovic knows how that he feels too. He was visibly upset after losing to 
Stan Wawrinka when the one slam title he has yet to win was supposedly in his 
gift: the French Open last summer. On top of that, he had to get used to losing 
to Rafael Nadal there on a regular basis when the Spaniard was invincible.

As Djokovic remarked: “I’ve played him many times – and been in the situation 
before where I haven’t won specific tournaments, like Roland Garros for 
example, against players like Nadal who were dominating there.

“So I understand the kind of desire and will to win that is present. Of course 
I don’t underestimate him. No question about it. I have a tremendous respect 
and admiration for everything he’s achieved in his career. We grew up together. 
It’s nice to see that our rivalry keeps on going and we keep playing for the 
biggest titles.”

“Nice” might not be the first word that occurs to either player at the end of 
their 31st contest.
 