
Gone midnight and Angelique Kerber was conducting yet another interview after 
the biggest win of her career. She looked and sounded like a champion and she 
revealed she now has one player firmly in her sights:Serena Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/serena-williams>.

Williams had long left Melbourne Park, a gracious loser of the Australian Open 
final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/30/serena-williams-angelque-kerber-australian-open-final-tennis>
 in three high-quality sets when, for the second time in five months, she was 
tantalisingly in reach of drawing alongside Kerber’s compatriot and 
long-distance supporter, Steffi Graf, whose 22 majors in the open era are two 
short of Margaret Court’s record of 24.

Andy Murray: I’ll be on next flight home after defeat to Novak Djokovic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/31/andy-murray-novak-djokovic-australian-open-wife-kim>
This is rarefied company for the latest major champion – at 28 in her first 
final and coming to the winner’s podium a fortnight after having to save match 
point in the first round against the world No64, Misaki Doi.

If that is to be Doi’s only line in tennis history, Kerber has the potential 
to write a few more. She played superbly for her victory and she is hungry for 
more at the highest level.

“To play against Serena in a final is something special,” Kerber said. “You 
know you must play your best tennis. She will challenge you to play the best 
and this is what you, as an athlete, would like to show the people. We played a 
great match, I think. The fans were happy and this is why we practise – for 
this moment – and to play against Serena is always a challenge. But, yes, of 
course I would like to play her again in a final.

“I think the message from me is that you can work very hard and some day the 
work will pay off,” said the lean left-hander, who has risen from 92 in the 
world in 2011 – when she took a set off Sam Stosur in the semi-finals of the US 
Open just before the Australian beat Williams for her only major title – to No2 
behind Williams when the WTA rankings are revised on Monday.

Jamie Murray set to beat Andy to world No1 spot after long road to top
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/31/jamie-murray-andy-world-no1-doubles-australia-open>
“Just follow your dreams and be patient. You will always have ups and downs in 
your life and your career but just stay positive and go for it. Just do what 
you love. “My dream was always to win a grand slam and my second dream was to 
be No1. My first dream I have done already and the next one will be No1. Serena 
is still the best player in the world. She wins most every tournament she is 
playing in. This is so far away for me. I will try not to think about it but, 
if the day came – some day – when I am No1, then great.”

Kerber, self-effacing and often down on herself for no logical reason, 
appreciated a post-match chat with the player she had just dethroned.

“You can see from [the way she reacted] she is a real champion and she can 
also lose matches and grand slam finals. Of course she was going for her next 
grand slam title to make history. She just told me she was happy for me and 
that I really deserved it. It means a lot to me to hear this from the world 
No1.”

Kerber was inspired by another world No1 and described meeting Graf in Las 
Vegas last year as “a special moment”.

She added: “Growing up in Germany, we had Steffi there, we had Boris [Becker] 
there. They won Wimbledon when they were 17 or 18 and they won everything. So 
it was not so easy to make tennis so big again. Right now the Germans are on 
the right path to make tennis more popular again – with the grand slam title 
from me and we have so many good players. We played the Fed Cup final a few 
years ago. I think it’s going in the right direction.

“I got so many messages from home [although she is resident in Poland]. I know 
I will make a lot of media and press when I get back. But I think I deserve it. 
Right now I will just be focusing on the moment and enjoying everything. Then 
let’s see what will happen, I have no idea. I was never in this situation.”

Graf is always on the end of a phone, if she wants advice – and thanks for 
stopping Williams’s charge at her record.
 