
Born:  8.45pm, 2 June 2005
Place of birth: Michael Mapongwana clinic, Khayelitsha
Birth weight: 3kg
Mother: Nonzuzo Swartbooi, 18
Father: Benson Ntsimango, 22

It was at 8.45pm on Thursday 2 June that Angel Siyavuya Swartbooi arrived, his 
head, already crowned with a crop of curly hair, slithering out between his 
mother's legs.

"Siyavuya" means "we are happy" in Xhosa.

"Welcome to a hard world," said one of the midwives in attendance, sceptical 
of the chances of happiness in the South African township of Khayelitsha.

The two midwives, Joka Ravin and Rosemarie Williams, were, perhaps 
understandably, lacking in sentimentality where a schoolgirl's emergence into 
motherhood was concerned. They deliver about five babies each day. As often as 
not, the mothers have Aids and face little more than death when they return 
home from the maternity unit of the Michael Mapongwana clinic.

As one of the country's biggest, poorest and most visible townships, 
Khayelitsha offers something of a touchstone to post-apartheid South Africa. It 
has long been said that the country is a curious mixture of first and third 
world and Khayelitsha is a striking example of this. The maternity clinic where 
Angel was born is well-equipped and the staff are efficient. And yet it is 
surrounded by the most appalling poverty.

In the same way, South Africa is probably the country best equipped to fight 
illness in Africa, and yet the incidence of HIV/ Aids here is almost the worst 
on the continent.

In that respect, at least, Angel's mother, Nonzuzo Swartbooi, is fortunate. 
She and her boyfriend had used a condom "the first time", in June 2004, and had 
tested negative at the clinic for HIV.

Khayelitsha township, about 30 miles from Cape Town, was created in 1983. 
Estimates of its population fluctuate wildly, from about 365,000 to 1 million 
people.

Nonzuzo was born there in 1987, in the "bad old days" when the witdoeke 
(white-scarved gangs) went on murderous rampages through Khayelitsha, in search 
of ANC members.

The shacklands of Khayelitsha have not changed much since then, sprawling 
across the sand and ancient dunes of the Cape Flats. Abandoned army look-out 
posts gaze blindly through the heavily polluted air; the pedestrian bridges 
caged in an attempt to control the children who used to give expression to 
their political views by hurling boulders down at convoys of mainly white 
motorists being escorted along the motorway.

The roadside barriers built to keep the anti-apartheid struggle away from the 
road, are today well-maintained, to prevent the shacks - and the drunks - from 
encroaching on the high-speed highway.

Nonzuzo's father is a retired builder and their home is built out of 
breeze-blocks, rather than being a shack. But it is still quite a crush, a 
square, three-roomed affair, sitting on the side of a paved road in a 
neighbourhood of similar houses.

The entrance is via an untended, sandy front yard. A front room has a small 
bench in it - the only furniture other than the beds and a single chair. Piles 
of clothes are everywhere on the floor. There are two bedrooms, a kitchen and 
what was meant to be the bathroom and toilet, but has become a storage and junk 
room.

Nine people will be living in this house when Angel comes home with his 
mother, including Nonzuzo's parents, three of her four sisters, and the two 
children of the absent eldest sister, Yolande.

Nonzuzo's elder sister, Thulase, 22, who is unemployed, does most of the 
housework. She dropped out of school at standard 8 because there was no money 
for her fees. It costs R200 (£16.30) a term at senior school in Khayelitsha and 
R50 at the junior.

Everybody learns to clean and help in the house from the age of four or five. 
Water is fetched from the tap in the front yard, then boiled and put in a tin 
bath which hangs on the wall of the parents' bedroom. They all bathe in the 
morning, older girls first, father last. They grow some vegetables: spinach, 
mielies (corn) and peas.

There is a much livelier social life in the street and with neighbours than in 
the white suburbs of South Africa. Netball is a particular favourite for the 
children.

Nonzuzo's mother receives R520 a month pension, her father R780. Although 
Nonzuzo's eldest sister, Yolande, has moved out, her two children remain. 
Yolande gives R200 of her salary to the family each month. She completed her 
matriculation exam at school and works at a local chain store.

A funky and pretty girl, Nonzuzo is still at the Qkwamfundo Senior Secondary 
school in the township and should have been writing mid-year exams. She nurses 
ambitions to be a travel guide, taking "travel and tourism" as a special 
subject available at the school.

She explains that she wants to "take care of people of another culture", and 
hopes to learn foreign languages, particularly French. She wants Angel to be a 
lawyer.

She was hoping for a boy, because her four siblings are all female. During her 
pregnancy, she was encouraged by the fact that her stomach stuck out like a 
football, which was believed to be an indication that the child would be a boy.

Her boyfriend, Benson, insisted that she had the baby when she belatedly 
discovered she was pregnant at six months. Benson earns R350 per week, grilling 
at a steak house six days a week from 10.30am to 10.30pm, with a two-hour break.

His dream is to become a security guard - he dislikes what he describes as the 
unhealthy atmosphere at the grill. He does not live with the Swartbooi family, 
but with his father, who is paralysed after a car hit him.

Benson glows when he talks of his child. "I am so proud of my baby. When I 
look at him I see him still young, but he is going to become something, I 
hope," he says. "I am confident my country will look after him. He is my baby 
and I like him so much."

Just before 7pm a check with ultrasound gave the schoolgirl her first sound of 
her baby's heart beat.

Shortly afterwards a midwife announced that the teenager was fully dilated and 
would soon give birth.

A flurry of preparation ensued, with Nonzuzo climbing on to the high bed while 
gloves were pulled on, scissors were laid out to cut the umbilical cord, 
disposable sheets were pulled under her and the teenager was told to strip off 
her T-shirt.

There was much joking by the midwives, both rude and funny, as baby Angel 
emerged. Nonzuzo was ecstatic. Afterwards they gave her injections for possible 
infections and a three-month birth control jab.

The shots were a reminder that Angel was one more life in the day of a 
township called Khayelitsha.

Factfile: South Africa

Under-5s mortality (per 1,000 births):  52
Population on under $2 a day:  23.8%
Debt per capita:  $624
Life expectancy:  47.7
% children in education (F/M):  77/78
 