
Boa is 19, the sixth of 11 children. With all of his family, he lives in a 
small thatched two-room house on the outskirts of Siem Reap.

Three mornings a week, he and his siblings, along with a gaggle of children 
from his ramshackle suburb, walk the two kilometres to the neighbouring forest 
carrying makeshift nets fashioned from long branches, wire and plastic bags. 
They go to catch butterflies.

"We have to catch butterflies to sell because we are a poor family. We have no 
money. The money we make is to help the family, for food and to go to school. 
Without this, we cannot go to school," Boa said through an interpreter.

The butterflies they catch – usually between 60 and 100 between them – they 
bring to the Butterflies Garden Restaurant in Siem Reap town. They are released 
inside the restaurant's massive net, to flutter around the diners sitting in 
the garden café. For their toil, the children are paid about 5,000 riel (80p) 
each.

"But still, we don't all go to school," Boa says. "Some have to stay home to 
help the family. But everyone has to help catch butterflies."Despite the annual 
flood of international tourists to the Angkor temples and the estimated £380m 
they are predicted to bring this year, Siem Reap remains one of the poorest 
parts ofCambodia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/cambodia>.

More than half of all families live below the poverty line, surviving on less 
than 80p a day. Four villages in 10 have no access to safe drinking water and 
53% of all children are malnourished. Literacy rates are some of the lowest in 
the country, at 64%, and just 10% of children finish high school. "Siem Reap is 
one of the poorest provinces of Cambodia, which is a bit weird seeing the 
number of tourists going there," said Philippe Delanghe, the head of the UN's 
culture unit in Cambodia. "I only hope that in the future we might be able to 
help people living around Angkor Wat to improve their livelihoods, which hasn't 
really been the case until now."

The majority of tourists' money is spent with foreign-owned hotels, tour 
companies and restaurants. Many package tourists spend a week in Siem Reap 
without visiting a local business.

Ticket sales from the Angkor temples, worth about £19m a year, are split 
between government coffers in Phnom Penh (some of which is redirected back to 
the Angkor management authority) and a petrol company called Sokimex.

The anomaly of such out-of-town wealth surrounded by so much local poverty 
grows more stark every tourist season.

Suko Om, the manager of the Butterflies Garden Restaurant, says it spends 
between £250 and £315 a month buying butterflies from about 25 local children.

The business also offers jobs to older children, as well as access to a local 
school, food and even a place to sleep. But he still feels the restaurant is 
working at the edges of a larger, systemic problem.

"There is revenue coming into Siem Reap because of the tourists, but most of 
the businesses are foreign-owned. Almost all of the money just goes straight 
back out."
 