
Though India is the homeland of Hindus, their grandest temple stands thousands 
of miles away inCambodia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/cambodia>. Now the 
trustee of a temple in Bihar has decided to do something about it – he is 
building a full-scale replica of the 12th century temple of Angkor Wat on the 
banks of the Ganges river, near the state capital Patna.

"The Angkor Wat temple in Bihar will be as majestic as the original, and 
slightly larger – it will be 222ft by 222ft, and its five shikharas [towers] 
will also be 222ft high," said Kishore Kunal, who runs the Mahavir Mandir 
temple trust in Patna. "And when it's ready in 10 years time, it will be a 
functioning temple, employing at least a dozen priests."

The project, Kunal estimates, will cost at least 600m rupees (£7.5m) – half to 
create the basic structure, the rest for the embellishments, including 
sculptures of gods and goddesses. The replica, though, will not be ringed by a 
moat nor have a palace on its campus.

But the main difference will be in the temple's presiding deity. The original 
Khmer temple at Angkor, built in the 12th century by a Hindu king from a 
dynasty linked to southern India and now aUnesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unesco> world heritage site, was dedicated 
to Vishnu. Bihar's replica will be called the Virat Angkor Wat Ram Mandir, and 
will have Ram as the main deity, flanked by his consort Sita, who is said to 
have been a native of the state.
 Groundbreaking ceremony for Bihar's replica Angkor Wat temple. 
Ram, though, is an avatar of Vishnu and, according to legend, the Hindu god 
once crossed the Ganges at the very spot where the temple dedicated to him will 
be constructed.

Kunal, a 61-year-old retired police officer, has never visited the original 
temple complex in Cambodia, which moved from Hindu to Buddhist use in the 13th 
century. He is planning his first visit soon but hopes that thousands of 
Indians who cannot afford to visit Angkor Wat will be able to experience its 
grandeur by visiting the replica nearer home.

Under Kunal's management, the Mahavir Mandir temple trust has built three 
hospitals in Patna, while as head of the state religious trust board, he has 
restored 12 historical temples in Bihar. The trust will finance half the cost 
of the replica temple. "Those who know me know I complete my projects," he said.

Kunal conducted the temple's groundbreaking ceremony on Monday. Since the 
style of the original Angkor Wat was influenced by Dravidian architecture, with 
its typical storeyed towers, traditional South Indian temple builders are being 
hired for the project in Bihar. The basic structure will be in concrete clad in 
granite, since using stone, as in the original, will double the cost and take 
twice as long to complete. The towers will be fashioned from stone fragments 
using an ancient technique.

"Someone told me the Cambodians are upset that I'm creating a replica of 
Angkor Wat," he said. "But why should they? If the Taj Mahal is recreated in 
the UK, we won't mind. We'll feel happy."
 