
Anglian Water operates in the driest, flattest and fastest-growing region in 
Britain.

Yet it has avoided a hosepipe ban for nearly 20 years and supplies the same 
amount of water it did two decades ago, despite a 20% increase in the region's 
population.

It's a success story the company aims to maintain by encouraging stakeholders 
– including customers, businesses, councils, neighbourhoods and communities – 
to think about water differently.

Claiming to be the first water company to launch a sustainability strategy on 
such a scale, the company unveiled the love every drop campaign in 2010.

Managing director Peter Simpson said: "We want to get people thinking as 
responsibly about water as millions already do about recycling."

Built into the company's business plan, with 10 sustainability goals and 100 
commitments, Anglian Water's aim is to become "the most water efficient region 
in the country".

There are three pillars to the strategy: sustainable business, sustainable 
living and sustainable region.

Water is precious. But it's not only the water we use in a cup of tea or a 
quick shower that we should be concerned about, points out Anglian, but how 
much is used behind the scenes.

While UK individuals use about 160 litres of water each day, everyone is 
actually responsible for 4,600 litres a day.

It takes, for example, a massive 440 litres throughout the supply chain to 
produce a locally-baked loaf of bread.

At the same time, climate change, more extreme weather and regional growth 
pose future risks. If engineering 'fixes' were enough to maintain the water 
supply in the past, they will not meet the challenges of tomorrow, says the 
company.

It is too early to demonstrate progress against targets, but some recent 
achievements suggest the programme could have a wide social impact.

In 2010, the company met leakage targets for the ninth successive year; 
completed its first 10-year biodiversity plan; achieved 100% compliance at 
wastewater treatment sites; and 85% of customers were satisfied or very 
satisfied with their service.

Anglian's campaign aims to lead by example, it says. That requires working 
collaboratively with stakeholders as well as achieving operational targets, 
such as no pollutants and a 10% cut in carbon by 2015.

Other projects include the watertight promise, which offers customers one free 
leak repair or replacement of 25 metres of underground street piping, and a 
bits and bob's free water-saving kit.

Rivercare is a public volunteering programme to help keep riversides litter 
free and protect biodiversity.

The company also works with schools to provide materials, games and even a 
superhero, Captain Splosh, to help children understand the water industry and 
the use of resources.

At a national level, Simpson has committed himself to being an advocate on 
climate change and the company is helping to drive the new sustainable water 
stewardship initiative.

It started in November 2010 when Lord Selborne, chair of the House of Lords' 
committee on science and technology into water management, chaired a workshop 
sponsored by Anglian Water.

The event brought together politicians, regulators, business leaders and 
scientists to discuss sustainable water initiatives for the 21st century.

Lynn Beavis is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 