
After the long-running slump in commodity prices and mining companies, 
investors are seeing a revival of interest in the sector.

Anglo American has jumped 10.5% or 34p to 3623p, after a near 20% surge on 
Thursday.

The mining group is benefiting from recent dollar weakness which has lifted 
commodity prices by making them more affordable to holders of other currencies. 
The US currency has been on the slide after recent weak data suggested that the 
Federal Reserve’s proposal to hike interest rates further this year could be in 
doubt.

Sentiment could change with a strong non-farm payroll number later but for the 
moment mining groups are seeing the benefit.

Traders said miners were also moving higher after short sellers who had been 
betting on a continuing fall in the shares were forced to cover their positions 
as the sector rallied.

Anglo was also lifted by news that investment group Blackrock had taken its 
stake above 5%. Analysts at SP Angel said:

Stories that Anglo American 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/anglo-american> might fall out of the 
FTSE 100 index may have encouraged hedge funds and other investors to short the 
stock.

An unexpected and sudden weakening in the US dollar on expectations for 
ongoing low interest rates helped oil prices, gold and other metals to jump. 
The recovery in gold and other commodity prices yesterday prompted a rally 
causing a likely rapid unwinding of short position and a rush to contain losses 
by short sellers.

We suspect that Chinese hedge funds and CTAs which had been shorting 
commodities have been limiting positions ahead of the new year break.

Anglo American is seen as more sensitive to precious and base metals than the 
other majors which tend to derive more of their earnings from iron ore and 
other bulk commodities.

Anglo shares are up 31% on the week so far after a 22% gain last week.

In the rest of the sector Glencore has jumped nearly 5% to 104.4p while 
Antofagasta is up 2.8p to 433.1p. BHP Billiton is 1.3p better at 713.9p but Rio 
Tinto is down 16p at £18.42.
 