
The check-in hall at Luanda's domestic airport is some kind of vision of hell. 
It is hot, dirty and crowded, full of touts flogging tickets for flights that 
may or may not be on the timetable, which is an aspiration rather than a 
schedule in any case.Angola <https://www.theguardian.com/football/angola> may 
be the only country in the world where it is quicker to drive than to fly.

Last Friday, trying to negotiate a passage to Cabinda, I spent two hours 
arguing and haggling before finally securing a ticket for a flight that, I was 
assured, was about to leave (as it was, the plane was still on the ground six 
hours later, delayed, we were told, first because the pilot was having his 
lunch and then because air traffic control were having their lunch, before 
finally being cancelled because the runway at Cabinda was busy).

Anxiously, I rushed through security, before joining a seemingly interminable 
queue to have my passport checked. By the time I got to the front, I was sure I 
was about to miss the flight and was more than a little stressed as the 
official began painstakingly reading through the various stamps in my passport. 
"Força Palancas Negras!" I muttered, half-ironically, at which he looked up, 
grinned, stamped every piece of paper in reach, and waved me through to the 
paradise that is the air-conditioned, mosquito-free departure lounge where you 
can eat toasties, drink coffee and wait for your flight not to leave.

What that says I'm not quite sure, other than that Angolan bureaucracy is a 
facade, designed to give the impression of order where little if any exists, 
but his reaction was typical. Whatever the gripes about this tournament – 
which, aside from usual journalist moans about access to players (so limited 
that the Algerian press last week went on strike in protest), can be distilled 
to the fact that the cost of travel and hotels has put off all but a couple of 
thousand travelling fans – it has been a clear success in the reaction of 
locals.

In Luanda at least, the Angolan flag is everywhere, while a reference to the 
national team – the Palancas Negras, or Black-faced Antelopes – is almost 
guaranteed to provoke a smile and, until Thursday's win over Malawi, a rueful 
shake of the head. That victory, allied to the stuttering form of many of the 
favourites, has raised expectations; suddenly the focus has shifted from trying 
to avoid being the first hosts since Tunisia in 1994 to fail to make it through 
the group stage to wondering just what might be possible.

The noise when Flávio and Manucho struck in the space of six minutes against 
Malawi was ear-splitting, and as in Mali in 2002, you begin to wonder just how 
far home advantage might carry them. Beyond the crowds, Malawi's coach Kinnah 
Phiri made an official protest to the Confederation of African Football on 
Friday, claiming his side were unable to practice before the game, three times 
being prevented from accessing their training ground by police. CAF, who have 
two responses to any issue — impose disproportionate and arbitrary bans, or 
ignore it — opted for the latter, placing the matter in the hands of the local 
organising committee which is, of course, run by Angolans.

With both Gilberto and Flávio doubtful for today's game against Algeria, 
though, Angola's passage to the last eight is far from assured. The two were 
both key members of the Al-Ahly side which Manuel José, now the Angola national 
team manager, took to continental dominance, and they have both excelled in 
this tournament. Gilberto, surging forward from left-back, set up Angola's 
second and won two penalties, one of which he converted, against Mali, while 
Flávio has scored three headers.

The theory is that a tournament needs a good performance from the home side to 
maintain local interest, particularly so in Africa where travelling support 
tends to be limited, but this competition has been exceptional in the number of 
fans turning up at games not involving the hosts. With the exception of 
Malawi's 3-0 win over Algeria, the only game played at 2.45pm, which perhaps 
kept away fans who work, every stadium has been at least 80% full.

"There's just not that much to do in Benguela," said Marco, a Portuguese 
citizen who was born in Angola and is battling the bureaucracy to try to secure 
Angolan citizenship. "The whole city's excited by the CAN. Our only problem has 
been the security to get into the ground. We queued for an hour and a half to 
get into the first game, so we missed most of the first half."

It is indicative of the importance placed on the tournament that Saturday's 
television news led with Ivory Coast's victory over Ghana, moved on to Flávio's 
knee injury, and only then went to the earthquake in Haiti. It is easy to 
imagine the government, which saw the tournament as a way of both showcasing 
Angola and fostering a sense of national togetherness, being delighted by the 
footage of delirious fans taking to the streets in cities across the country – 
Cabinda, Luanda, Benguela, Huambo, Soyo, Sumbe, Namibe, Lubango.

The big question, though, is what will happen should Angola lose today. With 
the novelty worn off, and the hosts out, would the tournament still hold its 
allure? Again, the answer probably lies in Mali in 2002: this is the most 
exciting and positive thing to happen in Angola since independence in 1975 
(although even that was clouded by the imminence of civil war). At the moment, 
people seem happy just to be part of it.
 