
I once lost a debate with an animal rights activist. As a medical researcher 
who has been actively involved in experiments on rodents, this may come as a 
surprise to some. I lost the debate because once debates about the use of 
animals in medical research pass the facts, the stringent Home Office protocols 
in place to "Replace, Reduce and Refine" and the genuine care and respect for 
animals that animal researchers tend to have, they inevitably reach the point 
of the intrinsic worth of one creature over another.

This is when my armamentarium of facts about animal research become null and 
void. By this point, any hypothetical questions such as "if you had to choose 
one creature to die, a mouse or a little girl, which would you choose?" become 
incredibly arrogant. After all, some of the greatest thinkers in history have 
asserted the sanctity of all sentient creatures. It was Gandhi who said “the 
greatness of a nation and its moral progress can be judged by the way its 
animals are treated.”

The endless philosophical debate about the sacredness of all sentient 
creatures is one that must not be taken lightly. After all, on a Sunday 
afternoon, thousands of us choose the deliciousness over the cuteness of a 
lamb. Oh no. I just took it lightly. Nonetheless, the approach taken by the 
recentDaily Mail article 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2646004/Kittens-skulls-cracked-opens-electrodes-inserted-brains-shocking-series-experiments-University-College-London.html>
 about the use of kittens in nine UK universities was not just ignorant, it was 
blatantly irresponsible.

The fact that the pictures used in the article were taken in Wisconsin is 
irrelevant. Its cluster-bomb approach providing honest descriptions of the 
various types of experiments that have taken place is effective, but also 
irrelevant to my argument. They even balance the article by providing honest 
quotes from some of the institutions in question. In University College London, 
Bristol University and Cardiff University, this research has not been carried 
out in years and a spokesperson for Cambridge University explained the 
importance of their research on “a small number of cats” in the development of 
a potential new treatment for amblyopia. Not to mention that any British 
universities carrying out any such research on any creatures without stringent 
rules in place and prior Home Office approval would be breaking the law.

All of this is still irrelevant. What matters is that it is kittens! The 
epitome of infinite cuteness. The cornerstone of the whole internet.


The benefits of the use of animals in medical research are obvious and 
quantifiable. From heart transplants, scans for improved prenatal diagnostic 
techniques, blood transfusions and anticoagulants to medication for high blood 
pressure, asthma and major depressive disease – most of us have benefited from 
the use of animals in some form.

To combine this simple fact with the importance of a moral compass, the 
logical conclusion to reach <http://www.understandinganimalresearch.org.uk/> is 
to 1)Replace the use of animals with alternative techniques or avoid the use of 
animals altogether when possible (my gut reaction to the use of cats in medical 
research is "If you have an idea that needs cats, get another idea") 2)Reduce 
the number of animals used to a minimum (modern techniques have reduced the 
number of animals used to obtain the same information by factors of hundreds in 
some cases) and 3)Refine the way experiments are carried out in order to 
minimise suffering (hence the ample training required for anaesthetic 
administration).

The reality of the use of animals in scientific research is one that when we 
dare to confront, we must do so with as much objectivity and open-mindedness as 
we can muster and as little emotive use of language as possible.

Yes, animals are put under anaesthetic before plates are inserted into their 
skulls, just like many surgeons do to anaesthetised humans on a daily basis. 
And one cannot reach the skull without incising the skin. So if we trust the 
scientists and experts who dedicate their lives to deciphering the intricacies 
and complexities of mammalian biology in order to provide us with the 
treatments and knowledge that we benefit from, those of us for whom the 
aforementioned hypothetical question has an easy answer need to accept the 
whole weight of the moral dilemma that animal research bestows. And those of 
you who would agonise over that decision, hats off to you. Seriously.

Dr Obaro Evuarherhe is a postdoctoral behavioural neuroscientist interested in 
understanding episodic memory. He also plays the drums in a band,Glis Glis 
<https://www.facebook.com/GlisGlisBand>, with Suzi
 