
Anita Brookner <https://www.theguardian.com/books/anita-brookner>, who has 
died aged 87, observed of Emile Zola, “One marvels at his ability to start 
another book almost as soon as one was finished.” Much the same could be said 
of Brookner herself, since from 1981, when she turned to fiction with A Start 
in Life, she published at the rate of a novel a year, easing up only at the end 
of the century.

Her feelings about being so prolific were mixed: “I don’t like writing fiction 
much; it’s like being on the end of a bad telephone line – but it’s addictive.” 
All the same, and although she wrote much else, it was for her fiction that 
Brookner was best known.

One of her earliest novels, and still the bestselling one, is Hotel du Lac 
(1984),which won the Booker prize from under the nose of JG Ballard, whose 
Empire of the Sun had been tipped as the winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2011/oct/19/archive-booker-prize-awarded-1984>
. A television version came in 1986.

Its central character is an author of romantic women’s fiction, Edith Hope, 
who turns down an offer of marriage in the Swiss hotel to which she has escaped 
from a disastrous affair. Brookner’s narrative device of events punctuated by 
letters home from Edith is not new; indeed, it is as old as the Greek chorus, 
but Brookner deploys it with pointed originality. Like the Greek chorus it 
comments on the action; like an on-stage telephone conversation in a Noël 
Coward comedy it pushes the action unpredictably forward. However, the outcome 
is neither tragedy nor romantic resolution, but quiet resignation.

Until the novels started, Brookner had practised purely as an art historian. 
She was the first woman to hold the Slade chair of fine art at Cambridge 
University (1967-68), and was based principally at theCourtauld Institute of Art
 <http://courtauld.ac.uk/> in London.

Like Kitty Maule, the central character of her second novel, Providence 
<http://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/18906/providence-by-anita-brookner/9780679738145/>
 (1982), who sets off for adventures in France, she pitched her tent among the 
romantics, in her own case moving effortlessly between the writers Stendhal, 
Baudelaire and the Goncourt brothers, and the painters Delacroix, Ingres and 
Antoine-Jean Gros. She had started her career as an expert on French 
18th-century art, but having heard Isaiah Berlin say that romanticism was at 
the root of all our problems, she decided to broaden her expertise.

She thought of her talent as a novelist as middle-class and middlebrow. 
Middlebrow is a harsh judgment: her stories of disillusion, personal betrayal, 
minor failure, and loneliness declining into death are too uncomfortable to 
have had a wide readership, but though their scope is narrow, beneath an 
immaculate mirror surface there are great depths.

Middle-class she certainly was. She did not at first appear to be cut out 
either for an academic career or to be a novelist. Anita was born in London, 
the only child of an unhappy Polish couple who had arrived with the name of 
Bruckner, tweaked into Englishness to escape the ignominy of bearing a Germanic 
name during the first world war. Her mother, Maude (nee Schiska), had been a 
professional singer; her father, Newson Brookner, was a gently failing 
businessman who at one point owned a lending library. They lived with her 
grandmother, and were surrounded by uncles, aunts and cousins.

As Brookner said in an interview with the Paris Review, “They were 
transplanted and fragile people, an unhappy brood, and I felt that I had to 
protect them. Indeed that is what they expected. As a result I became an adult 
too soon and paradoxically never grew up.” Still, Newson provided her with a 
diet of Dickens and HG Wells.

She was educated at James Allen’s girls’ school in Dulwich, south-east London, 
before going on to King’s College London, which she disliked as much as she 
disliked her general degree course in French, history, and a third subject 
which she was so unenthusiastic about that she later professed to have 
forgotten what it was. Whatever it was, she would always neglect it in favour 
of a stroll down the Strand to listen to a public lecture at the National 
Gallery.

She knew nothing about art but she knew that she liked it. One of the 
lunchtime lecturers noticed her interest and suggested that she should switch 
to reading art history as her third option. She followed his advice and took a 
first in finals.

Anthony Blunt was professor of art history at London University as well as 
director of the Courtauld Institute of Art, and appears to have been rather 
better at talent-spotting aspiring art historians than he was at recruiting for 
the KGB. He persuaded Brookner to move on to an MA in art history at the 
Courtauld, and she did so well under his genial and sympathetic tuition that 
her thesis on the French genre artist Jean Baptiste Greuze (1725-1805) was 
upgraded to a doctorate.

Her teaching career, beginning in 1959 as a visiting lecturer at Reading 
University, where she remained until gaining a lectureship at the Courtauld in 
1964, was distinguished by the lucidity and command of ideas that marked her 
writing as well. Nicholas Serota, the Tate director and another late convert to 
the study of art, did his MA at the Courtauld under her tutelage and remembered 
her as “an incredible teacher, really brilliant”.

By 1977 she was reader in art history, which she remained until she retired in 
1988. A couple of years later she was appointed CBE.

Her first book, in 1968, was a slender monograph on the great and most 
mysterious of rococo artists, Jean-Antoine Watteau (1684-1721), a brilliant 
coup in which the first couple of hundred words encapsulate Watteau’s elusive 
style and subject matter better than most writers could do in a volume.

In 1972 came Greuze: The Rise and Fall of an 18th-Century Phenomenon. He was, 
she said in an off the cuff verdict, “extremely bad, sentimental and 
melodramatic, but a marvellous draughtsman with a gift for unexpectedly good 
portraits”. It was based on her thesis: she chose him because, she argued in 
the book, he was the bridge between the age of Louis XIV’s Versailles court 
culture and the severity of Jacques-Louis David’s stripped-down neoclassicism 
during the revolution and Napoleon’s days of imperial glory.

On David (1748-1825), Brookner wrote her magnum opus, Jacques-Louis David 
(1980), slogging through what sports writers call the hard yards, the kind of 
grafting research of primary documentation aimed at placing the subject in the 
canon and, of course, winning the professional regard of other historians that 
is often only grudgingly handed out to beautiful-phrase makers and wide-ranging 
themes.

Valuable though the David monograph remains, Brookner’s outstanding gift was 
for swift and penetrating synthesis – still with beautiful phrase-making. Her 
two books on the romantic movement in France, The Genius of the Future (1971), 
which was based on her Slade lectures at Cambridge, and Romanticism and Its 
Discontents (2000), will both continue to be read by a wider public, many of 
them precisely the kind of readers who enjoy her fiction.

Curiously enough, though Brookner’s art histories bubble with the delight of 
discovery and joyful exposition, her novels tend to describe a grey milieu of 
enervated, stranded and tentatively hopeless women. Her typical fictional 
character would be prone to headaches, especially after imbibing a glass or two 
of champagne, or, like the narrator’s mother in The Bay of Angels (2001), have 
retained her composure and dignity “by dint of suppressing almost every healthy 
impulse”. Even the optimism of that novel’s ending is strictly qualified by its 
guarded last words: “I realise, with a lifting of the heart, that it is not yet 
time to close the book.”

Not surprisingly, though Brookner kept a special place in her heart for 
Dickens, her favourite novel was Ivan Goncharov’s masterpiece Oblomov, a story, 
as she put it, “about a man who fails at everything”.

On the face of it we must accept Brookner’s assertion that there was no 
connection between her fiction and her non-fiction, but it is not that simple. 
In her art history she sometimes tosses a pebble into the pond and watches the 
ripples quietly spread: of Delacroix, for instance, she writes, “none of the 
struggle to achieve [the painting] need be effaced: the picture would be an 
event, a manifestation of the artist’s engagement with his art”.

This is to deploy the critical vocabulary developed to describe the work of 
Jackson Pollock: firstly the stress on the artist’s actions and the marks it 
leaves on the surface of the canvas rather than the subject; secondly the use 
of the word “event” to describe a canvas - a nodal point in 20th-century 
criticism after the American critic Harold Rosenberg used it to signify 
so-called action painting. Brookner feels it too much of an historical solecism 
to make the explicit link between the way Delacroix handles paint and the way 
Pollock drips it, so she merely implies it – which is the method of fiction, 
not of art history, and the better for it.

Her frequent witticisms, too, are barbs aimed across the centuries. Diderot, 
she writes, “is beginning to succumb to the art critic’s syndrome: a need to 
dismiss paint and canvas as vanity of vanities and a corresponding hunger for 
something great and unchanging”. And certain pupils of David, she remarks with 
feeling, “criticised their master’s works and went on to emulate the lilies of 
the field by producing practically nothing of their own: recognisable student 
behaviour, but unusual in that place at that time”.

Brookner guarded her privacy, if necessary laying down a smoke screen to do 
so. She did not marry but insisted that her books were not her children.

After her retirement, she would reiterate that, so far as visiting art 
galleries was concerned, she was now just another member of the public. Anyone 
who swallowed this would have been taken aback by the publication a dozen years 
later of Romanticism and Its Discontents (though she had kept in touch with 
articles in specialist journals).

True, she recycled large parts of it from The Genius of the Future, the title 
of which was lifted from a messianic phrase of Zola’s. The book itself, 
incidentally, contained a judgment on Zola which could apply almost in its 
entirety to her own practice: “He performed an immense service to the public 
which, if it cared to, could read an article on controversial contemporary 
painting which dispensed with the jargon of criticism.”

The Genius of the Future was an examination of the influence on their times 
of, apart from Zola, the critics Diderot, Stendhal, Baudelaire, the brothers 
Goncourt, and Joris-Karl Huysmans; the theme had been anticipated by Oscar 
Wilde in his brilliantly paradoxical essay The Critic As Artist. Romanticism 
and Its Discontents reintroduced that theme, but intermeshed with the work of 
the Romantic artists who had meant so much to the critics.

The flow of fiction came to an end with Leaving Home (2005), Strangers (2009) 
and an ebook novella, At the Hairdresser’s (2011). Her later, sparer novels 
were summed up by one reviewer as Beckett crossed with Mills and Boon. Mostly 
they were consummately crafted, though the occasional critic would complain 
about improbabilities. Brookner’s male characters tend to be charming 
cold-hearted cynics on the make; her women, gloomy though their lot is, are 
studies in depth, emotions flowing deep underground, and self-control; the 
shock of her drama, although domestic, nevertheless registers high on the 
Richter scale.

• Anita Brookner, novelist and art historian, born 16 July 1928; died 10 March 
2016
 