
It’s easy to mock Anita Brookner’s novels, populated as they are by 
self-effacing spinsters, unreturned library books and solitary omelettes. The 
day after I heard thenews of her death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/14/booker-prize-art-historian-anita-brookner-dies-age-87>
, a friend and I sniggered online at the coincidentally Brookner-esque fact 
that I was about to head to John Lewis, where I hoped to return two unwanted 
vests. “I expect to flinch inwardly at the shop assistant’s voice, experiencing 
his helpfulness only as a commentary on my dusty, liminal life,” I wrote in an 
email. “But I will be wearing my ‘good’ coat, and I hope this will see me 
through.”

Booker Prize awarded to a 6-1 outsider: from the archive, 19 October 1984
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2011/oct/19/archive-booker-prize-awarded-1984>
All I can tell you is that, in my case, such teasing is born of deep 
admiration. Brookner would, I’m guessing, have been slightly amazed at the 
teenage me who adored beyond words her first three novels (A Start in Life, 
Look at Me and Providence), slim stories that I devoured in quick succession. 
Soon after, she won the Booker prize forHotel du Lac in 1984 (I read that too, 
and thought it vastly inferior, after which I gave her up for a little while). 
Then again, she might have taken it in her (careful, reserved) stride. The 
teenage girl is full of yearning, but she also feels misunderstood, invisible, 
at an awkward angle to the world: in this, little separates her from such 
characters as Ruth Weiss, Kitty Maule and Frances Hinton.

The wonderfully named Maule is the heroine of Providence, which I pulled from 
the shelf last week, and re-read in 24 hours. Maule is a university academic 
who is in love with her colleague, the dashing but unreliable Maurice. She 
longs to reel him in, but her technique is too diffident, and his heart too 
ruthlessly pragmatic. Soon, her curdled hope will come to be symbolised rather 
horribly by a soup tureen, a workaday, bourgeois object only a writer as good 
as Brookner could imbue with such agonising pathos. Elegant and wry (people 
forget how witty Brookner can be), it was every bit as good as I remembered, 
and possibly a little better. Or perhaps it’s only that in this, the age of the 
selfie, her characters’ dignity and stoicism feel like a life raft into which 
this reader, at least, is happy to leap.
 