
Tens of thousands of people took to the streets across India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> on Tuesday to protest against the 
arrest of country's most prominent anti-corruption campaigner and more than 
1,000 of his followers.

Anna Hazare <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anna-hazare>, a 74-year-old 
activist and one of India's most respected campaigners, was detained by police 
on Tuesday morning, hours before he was due to begin an indefinite hunger 
strike to demand tough new laws against graft. By evening about 1,300 of his 
supporters had been arrested in Delhi, local media said, and hastily organised 
demonstrations were underway across the country.

Opposition politicians accused Prime Minister Manmohan Singh's beleaguered 
administration, currently in the middle of its second term, of repeating 
draconian crackdowns of the 1970s or the actions of British former imperial 
rulers. "This is murder of democracy," said Arun Jaitley, a senior leader of 
the opposition Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP).

Singh's government has been on the defensive in recent months following a 
series of huge corruption scandals which, combined with rampant food inflation, 
have sparked public anger and sent poll ratings plummeting as well as rattling 
markets and foreign investors. The prime minister, 78, has been accused of 
being out of touch with public opinion.

Hazare's arrest caused public outrage, with protesters – some wearing masks of 
Hazare or carrying banners bearing anti-corruption slogans – demonstrating in 
western Punjab, eastern Orissa, the far south, northern Himachal Pradesh and 
elsewhere. In Ralegan Siddhi, Hazare's home village in central Maharashtra 
state, cattle were used to block traffic.

Sonia Nair, a 35-year-old housewife in the commercial capital of Mumbai said 
she had demonstrated by singing the national anthem in the centre of the city 
with hundreds of others. "It was much better than sitting in front of my TV 
being concerned and angry. I wanted to act. It is time to stand up in support 
of Anna rather than sit at home," Nair said.

In Hyderabad, Abdul Aziz Sheikh, a 26-year-old information technology engineer 
and activist, said he had been protesting all day and was organising a 
candle-lit vigil. "There has been no debate, no attempt to bring a consensus. 
This is totally unconstitutional," he said.

Santosh Hegde, the former ombudsman for the southern state of Karnataka who 
made headlines last month by forcing the local chief minister to resign 
following corruption allegations, told local television channels that the 
government "wants to crush this movement".

Anger has been heightened by the detention of many other respected senior 
activists alongside Hazare. These include Kiran Bedi, one of India's first 
female police officers, widely respected for her own anti-corruption efforts. 
She tweeted from detention that she had refused an offer of bail.

Hazare's first hunger strike in April successfully forced the government to 
promise a parliamentary bill creating a special ombudsman with power to 
investigate and punish corrupt politicians, bureaucrats and judges. But the 
changes proposed by the legislation presented in early August were criticised 
by activists as insufficient. They accused the government of backtracking. 
Negotiations had been continuing over the activist's planned public "fast unto 
death" for several weeks.

Hazare had recorded a video to be released if he was arrested in which he 
called for a "second freedom struggle" in India, which threw off British rule 
in 1947. "Unless there is change, there is no freedom, there is no actual 
democracy, there is no true republic, there is no true people's rule. The 
protests should not stop. The time has come for no jail in the country to have 
a free space," he said in a message broadcast on YouTube following his 
detention. Both houses of parliament were adjourned after the opposition 
protested at the arrests.

Though politicians from all parties have been implicated in corruption scams, 
many figures associated with the biggest and most high profile cases of graft 
are from the ruling Congress party.

The biggest, which investigators believed involved senior figures from a main 
coalition ally of Congress, may have cost the country up to £25bn. Other 
charges focus on the high-profile Commonwealth Games in Delhi last year.

Opposition figures likened the crackdown on the campaigners to the 1975 
"Emergency" when then-prime minister Indira Gandhi arrested thousands of 
opposition members to stay in power. Congress party officials and minister have 
stressed their duty to "uphold law and order".

Manish Tewari, a Congress party spokesman, said Hazare was surrounded by 
"armchair fascists, overground Maoists, closet anarchists". A crackdown earlier 
this year successfully broke up demonstrations by tens of thousands of 
followers of a fasting yoga guru protesting graft. Ritika Dutta, a 20-year-old 
political science studentat at Delhi University said she was shocked by the 
arrests. "This can only happen in India. People who are fighting against 
corruption are today behind bars with corrupt ministers.

Additional reporting by Kakoli Bhattacharya

An old-school social activist

Anna Hazare, whose real name is Kisan Baburao, is a former soldier with a long 
history of campaigning. He is an old-style Indian social activist – evidenced 
by his spotless white clothes, the white cap, or topi, popularised by activists 
including Mohandas "Mahatma" Gandhi, and the pen in his top pocket as a marker 
of literacy. Hazare's vision of India is both deeply conservative and reforming.

A strictly teetotal Hindu, he has banned tobacco, meat and cable TV from the 
village where he lives and has campaigned against caste prejudice. Hazare also 
played a part in setting up India's revolutionary right to information laws. He 
does not have a mobile phone.

Earlier this year, his topi briefly became a sartorial icon with supporters 
wearing similar caps bearing the slogan "I am Anna Hazare" in English and 
Hindi. He is popular among the middle classes, the liberal elite and in the 
bigger cities.
 