
Indian officials are locked in negotiations with the country's best-known 
anti-corruption campaigner as the government of Manmohan Singh frantically 
tries to roll back a growing wave of popular anger over his arrest.

Protests in support of Anna Hazare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/anna-hazare>, the 74-year-old activist whose 
detention on Tuesday sparked the crisis, have showed no signs of dying down and 
tens of thousands are continuing to demonstrate across India.

Despite a hastily arranged release warrant, Hazare is refusing to leave the 
high-security Tihar prison in Delhi until the government allows him to mount a 
public hunger strike.

The crisis is one of the most serious to strike the beleaguered coalition 
government so far.

Singh attempted to take the initiative in a speech to parliament on Wednesday, 
explaining that the government was not against the anti-corruption campaigner's 
motivations andobjected only to his methods and immediate goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/aug/17/anna-hazare-fast-india-singh>.

"I acknowledge that Anna Hazare may be inspired by high ideals," Singh said, 
over shouts and catcalls from the opposition. "However, the path that he has 
chosen to impose a draft of the bill on parliament is totally misconceived."

Government officials accuse Hazare of being anti-democratic and trying to 
"blackmail" elected representatives.

Hazare is refusing to leave jail, where he has started a hunger strike, unless 
the government allows his protest against corruption to go ahead as originally 
intended. Thousands of supporters gathered outside the jail on Tuesday, some 
spending the night outside.

Prashant Bhushan, a lawyer and key aide of Hazare, said the campaigner would 
"come out of Tihar jail only if the government agrees to his demands and 
releases him unconditionally".

The arrests of Hazare and more than a thousand followers, which the government 
says were necessary on public order grounds, has sparked deep indignation across
India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> and allowed a weak and 
fragmented opposition to score points against the ruling Congress party.

"It is a wake-up call for all of us unless we put our house in order. The 
people of this country are becoming restless," said Arun Jaitley, a senior 
leader of the opposition Bharatiya Janata Party.

Hazare, a controversial figure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/apr/12/india-fast-activist-poor-comments-corruption>
 whom opponents accuse of having links to Hindu nationalist fringe groups, has 
successfully invoked the memory of Mahatma Gandhi to mobilise vast reservoirs 
of anger within Indian society at endemic corruption, poor services and patchy 
governance.

The administration has been weakened by a series of corruption scandals 
involving party officials, appointees or allies.

Hazare, who is demanding tougher laws against graft, insists that before he 
leaves jail he wants the right to return to the city park where he had planned 
to fast publicly. Officials said they were hopeful of reaching a compromise by 
Wednesday night.

Whatever the outcome, the episode will reinforce the impression among people 
from right and left that the elderly Singh is out of touch and that his 
government is too clumsy to govern Asia's third-largest economy effectively.

"Corrupt, repressive and stupid," was the verdict of the leftwing Hindu 
newspaper. "Anna has the government fumbling," ran a headline in the Mail 
Today, which follows a centre-right editorial line.

Though some of the protests across India have been organised by political 
opponents of the Congress party, most seem to be independent. Calls have been 
made for civil servants to take leave and rickshaw drivers to strike.

Hazare has carefully built his image, stressing links to Gandhi at every 
opportunity. In a pre-recorded video, released after his arrest, he called for 
a "second freedom struggle" against corruption. Gandhi led the first against 
British imperial rulers.

Shops selling the type of hat linked to Gandhi and habitually worn by Hazare 
have sold out.
 