
With his air of Gandhian austerity and his simple anti-corruption message, 
Anna Hazare has tapped into long-simmering grievances held by India's 
burgeoning middle class and its young. While major scams such as those over the
Commonwealth Games in 2010 
<http://www.ndtv.com/article/india/commonwealth-games-scam-may-be-to-the-tune-of-rs-8-000-crore-cvc-60984>
 grab the headlines, it is endemic,low-level corruption of the kind described 
by Jason Burke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/aug/19/corruption-india-anna-hazare?INTCMP=SRCH>
 that affects the ordinary Indian citizen more pressingly. What should be 
entitlements turn into favours granted by a petty official whose palms have to 
be greased: claiming a pension, acquiring a telephone connection, getting your 
child into school. For too long, Indians have tolerated the situation by saying
chalta hai(a Hindi phrase meaning "it goes" – the equivalent of a shrug of the 
shoulders, or "that's just the way it is").

But beneath the surface, there are potentially troubling sides to Hazare's 
movement: a developing personality cult, an authoritarian tendency and the 
essentially urban, middle-class nature of the phenomenon. "Anna is India and 
India is Anna," proclaimed one of his leading followers recently, a disturbing 
echo of Indira Gandhi's dictatorial "emergency" during the mid 1970s, when a 
sycophantic politician came up with the slogan "Indira is India andIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> is Indira".

Some members of "Team Anna", as the Indian press has taken to calling it, are 
showing symptoms of the same sense of arrogance and self-righteousness – the 
belief that their man and their methods have the answers. They would do well to 
remember that theirs is only one set of voices among many who share the same 
general goal of extirpating corruption. An unelected, self-appointed group 
can't represent all India.

A largely middle-class movement such as Hazare's cannot claim to speak for the 
vast majority of Indians – the rural poor, Dalits and tribals, among others. In 
a functioning democracy with a free press – which India, for all its faults, is 
– governments need to listen to all these voices. As a former chief justice of 
the Delhi high court said recently: "Anna is not civil society and civil 
society is not Anna." Nevertheless, in the current mood of disillusionment with 
politicians, Hazare's air of purity, his straightforward message and his 
methods evoke a ready response.

If there are problems with the movement's methods and attitude, there are also 
troubling implications for representative democracy in India. The solution to 
corruption being proposed both by the government and the Hazare side is to 
establish a "lokpal" (literally "guardian of the people"). The details of this 
institution <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jan_Lokpal_Bill> are complex, and 
there are many points of disagreement between the Hazare side, the Indian 
government and other groups over its scope and powers. In the version put 
forward by Team Anna, particularly, immense power – including power over the 
judiciary – will be concentrated in a single unelected institution requiring an 
army of inspectors who will probably be swallowed up by an impossible workload 
as they investigate allegations of corruption.

Blinkered by its feeling that it knows how to deal with the issue, the Hazare 
crusade ignores the multidimensionality of the problem and its solutions. The 
software entrepreneur Nandan Nilekani, now in charge of setting up a unique 
identification system for all Indian citizens, has been avocal critic 
<http://www.moneycontrol.com/news/current-affairs/annas-protest-is-naive-simplistic-nandan-nilekani_578245.html>
 of the simplistic nature of Hazare's campaign, arguing that one law and one 
institution alone can't eliminate corruption. A multifaceted approach will be 
necessary. The very poorest, in particular, he argues, need to be given more 
choice so that they aren't dependent on just one or two potentially corrupt 
low-ranking functionaries for their dealings with the state – for instance the 
distribution system, which channels food at controlled prices to the poor and 
which, as it stands, is open to subversion on various levels. Alokpal – or an 
army of them – won't come anywhere near dealing with this kind of corruption.

It is one thing to tap into a public mood; it is quite another thing to devise 
viable anti-corruption systems. Whatever the solutions may be, they need to be 
worked out through public and parliamentary debate. Glib comparisons of Hazare 
with Gandhi are beside the point. Gandhi was not operating within a democratic 
environment.Anna Hazare <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anna-hazare> is. He 
and his followers sometimes seem to be in danger of forgetting this.
 