
India's most prominent anti-corruption crusader has emerged from a New Delhi 
jail to cheers of "Long live Mother India" and a shower of rose petals as he 
prepares to begin a 15-day public hunger strike.

Anna Hazare's standoff with authorities has stoked anger at official 
corruption and put the prime minister, Manmohan Singh, on the defensive as the 
government fights off a series of scandals.

Nearly 2,000 men, women and schoolchildren gathered outside Tihar jail on 
Friday morning to catch a glimpse of the 73-year-old activist who has used the 
tactics of Mahatma Gandhi in his fight to force the government to adopt his 
proposals for an anti-corruption law.

The crowd, some standing on top of parked cars, erupted in applause as he 
walked out of jail.

"Long live the revolution," Hazare said before climbing into the back of a 
truck that led a slow-moving procession to the parade ground in the centre of 
Delhi where he plans to fast. Hundreds followed on foot.

"The government will have to bend in front of this movement," said one of 
Hazare's supporters, Prakash Khattar, a bank employee. "This is just the 
trailer, the film is yet to start."

Police briefly arrested Hazare on Tuesday after he declared his intention to 
hold a public hunger strike in defiance of restrictions placed on the 
demonstration. He began his fast in jail and refused to leave when a release 
warrant was granted, demanding the right to hold a long public hunger strike. A 
compromise was reached on Thursday, but Hazare opted to stay in jail for 
another day while the protest venue was prepared.

Hazare wants the government to pass his version of a proposed bill and create 
a powerful ombudsman to police top officials. Activists have criticised the 
version of the bill tabled in parliament as too weak.

Government officials have accused Hazare of twisting time-honoured protest 
tactics to subvert the legislative process and force elected officials to bow 
to his own agenda.

One poster held aloft outside the jail showed cartoons of government ministers 
looking like donkeys with fangs and with dollar signs emblazoned on them.

"I am Anna, you are Anna. Now the whole country is Anna," read another poster.

One of the crowd, Asha Bansal, said Hazare had "come like a god to save this 
country. Everyone is so sick of these politicians who are only out to make 
money".

Hazare, a retired army driver, has transformed himself into the most prominent 
social activist in his home state of Maharashtra in recent decades. He has held 
a series of hunger strikes to force the state government to enact reforms and 
on at least one occasion forced it to capitulate by taking a vow of silence.

He came to national prominence in April when he held a four-day hunger strike 
to demand that the government draft legislation for an anti-corruption 
watchdog. This week, despite being inside a jail and seen only in a brief 
YouTube video, he has become a symbol of national anger about corruption.

After his arrest on Tuesday, thousands of mainly middle-class people marched 
in cities acrossIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> in support of 
him. As hundreds of demonstrators gathered outside the jail, authorities 
capitulated to many of his demands and granted him permission for a 15-day 
public protest.

"I have full trust in his ability to bring change," said Khattar.

Others were less optimistic. The business daily Mint said in a front-page 
commentary on Friday that the protests were unlikely to spark major change in 
Indian governance.

"Business as usual is right around the corner," it said.
 