
The anti-corruption campaigner Anna Hazare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/anna-hazare> has ended his 12-day, 
nationally televised, hunger strike in India with a glass of honeyed coconut 
water and a stern warning that he will resume his fast if an effective law is 
not instituted to deal with corruption and misgovernance.

After forcing India's parliament to pass an unprecedented resolution in 
support of his demands, Hazare told a huge crowd of supporters: "I haven't 
given up the fast, I have only suspended it. My fast will really end when all 
our demands are met, when parliament passes the bill [to establish a nationwide 
ombudsman system] and there is genuine reform in the country."

Tens of thousands of Indians poured on to the streets to celebrate what is 
being hailed as a "people's victory". The beleaguered government of Manmohan 
Singh, which seriously misjudged the support for Hazare's anti-graft movement 
after its launch in January, fielded the law minister, Salman Khurshid, to try 
to make the best of a bad job.

In a combative interview with the minister, one TV host, Karan Thapar, accused 
Singh's government of "looking like British imperialists and colonialists" in 
its treatment of Hazare.

Thapar recalled how the 74-year-old crusader, known as much for his simple 
lifestyle as for his dogged pursuit of public causes, had been accused himself 
of being corrupt by a Congress party spokesperson and then thrown into Delhi's 
notorious Tihar jail as he was about to begin his fast on 16 August.

But a defiant Khurshid refused to accept any responsibility on behalf of the 
government. "We might have made errors of judgment, but errors are not 
mistakes," he said. "Whatever we did, the consequences may not have been what 
we desired."

The government finally relented on Saturday and, in an historic gesture, 
parliament "agreed in principle" to three of Hazare's key demands: that 
anti-corruption ombudsmen should be appointed in all regional states, not just 
at the centre; that the entire bureaucracy should be covered by the new 
anti-corruption law, and not just senior officials; and that there should be a 
citizens' charter for redressing public grievances against the administration.

The government's proposed draft for the bill, already tabled in parliament, 
had ignored both the first and the third demands of anti-corruption 
campaigners, and had only partially agreed to the second demand. Though much 
discussion lies ahead in parliament before the bill is passed, Hazare has 
already forced Singh's government to work towards devising an effective 
anti-corruption law.

"Until today, Indians believed that corruption cannot be eradicated, that it's 
a fact of nature, that it has entered our DNA," said Dipankar Gupta, a 
sociologist. "But a beginning has been made. This will lessen corruption to a 
huge extent."
 