
By four o'clock, it was raining and the ochre dust had turned to mud. The 
plastic sheets that had been stretched in front of the stage at Delhi's Ram 
Lila parade ground did little to keep out the monsoon downpour. On the stage 
itself, looking out over thousands of followers sat a diminutive, bespectacled 
74-year-old man wearing white and a distant, enigmatic smile.

If Anna Hazare, the veteran social activist, was bothered by the rain falling 
on this particular parade he did not show it. Hazare shows little and says 
little at the best of times, his associates say. His only lengthy intervention 
during the last turbulent week in India came in a video, recorded before his 
arrest at 7am in the morning by Delhi police on Tuesday and released the moment 
he and a thousand or so of his followers were rounded up. In the video, 
broadcast onYouTube <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yOuF9s7-h7o>, Hazare called 
for a "second freedom struggle". The first had been against the British. Now it 
was time to fight corruption, he said.

Those standing under the warm downpour fervently agreed. "I am Anna Hazare," 
said Lalita Kapoor, a 22-year-old student, repeating the slogan on tens of 
thousands of T-shirts, banners, caps and newspaper front pages last week. "We 
are allAnna Hazare <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anna-hazare>."

Hazare knows something about rain. It was by managing water –rainwater 
specifically – in the small village in India's central western state of 
Maharashtra, where his labourer father lived, that he began his career as a 
social activist.

His real name is Kisan Baburao Hazare (Anna is a local honorific for an older 
brother). One of seven children, Hazare's childhood was hard. In his early 
teens, he left Ralegan Siddhi, the remote village where the family was living, 
for Mumbai, 200 miles away, where he sold flowers. In 1963, Hazare joined the 
army and served for 15 years.

Either after seeing comrades killed in the 1965 war between India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> and Pakistan or after a serious 
depression which led him to contemplate suicide, Hazare decided that his 
purpose in life was to "serve his fellow men". He returned to Ralegan Siddhi 
and set about transforming the community.

Villages in India today, let alone when Hazare began work in Ralegan Siddhi, 
suffer complex and profound social problems: alcoholism, domestic violence, 
illiteracy and malnutrition. Most are without proper, indeed any, sanitation or 
reliable power supplies. For many, water remains a serious problem. First 
Hazare, working through the village priest, rallied all those worried about 
drinking in the community. Anyone selling liquor – local hooch– or beer was 
told to stop or leave. Severe punishments were imposed.

"There is a telegraph pole in front of the temple and anyone who was drinking 
or drunk or making alcohol or stealing was tied to it and beaten," said Jay 
Singh Bhabuje Mapari, a 39-year-old from the village who travelled with Hazare 
to Delhi last week. "I remember watching when I was a kid. It was frightening."

The regime, harsh though it might have been, worked. "No one drinks or steals 
now," said Mapari.

After alcohol, tobacco was banished too. "It is just not part of our culture," 
said Vijay Kasi Ram Hazare, 26-year-old nephew of the social activist. "I've 
never known it so I don't want it."

Much of Mahrashtra is prone to drought. Only a fifth of Ralegan Siddhi's land 
was cultivable when he was a child, Vijay Hazare said, but now almost all land 
has valuable crops grown on it. Again, Hazare achieved simple but radical 
progress through filling the space left by the state. He organised the 
construction of a system of small dams to hold rainwater. He got the villagers 
to plant trees to retain topsoil, his nephew said, working alongside them as 
they laboured.

Productivity soared, allowing Hazare to tackle other problems such as 
illiteracy and discrimination based in India's millenniums-old hierarchy of 
social castes. Using the system in a way illiterate villagers never could, 
Hazare tapped the rich vein of subsidies available to communities but often 
stolen by officials. The intermittent electricity supply was solved by the 
introduction of solar power.

His campaigns against fraud and theft took him to the next level of activism. 
In 1991, the same year that liberalisation unleashed India's economic growth, 
Hazare took on the officials and politicians of the state of Maharashtra. 
Hazare employed a new tactic – the hunger strike.

The "fast unto death" has antecedents that predate Mohandas Gandhi 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/historic_figures/gandhi_mohandas.shtml>. But it 
was India's best-known independence leader who used it to significant effect in 
his battle first against India's imperial British rulers and against communal 
violence in newly free India. With his new moral authority, Hazare used the 
fast to circumvent the rotten institutions of power to force the departure of 
corrupt officials or politicians. His efforts gained him powerful enemies and a 
new profile as one of the country's foremost moral voices.

The last two years have seen an extraordinary series of corruption scandals in 
India. These have included the apparently deliberate underselling of telecoms 
licences – which cost the country up to £26bn – and fraud which almost turned 
last year's Delhi Commonwealth Games into a fiasco. More than the 
headline-grabbing scams, however, it is the endemic low-level corruption that 
is angering India's new urban middle classes more than ever before. They may 
have a car – but they have to pay officials bribes to have it registered and to 
get a licence. They also have to pay off traffic police continually when they 
drive it. To get a school place, "donations" to the headmaster are required. 
Anyone doing business is faced with a multitude of demands. As is anyone going 
to court, seeking a passport, buying or selling property.

So when last April Hazare headed a new agitation for legislation that would 
create a powerful new national anti-graft ombudsman, it was inevitable that he 
would attract support. Through the late spring and summer, helped by the clumsy 
counter-efforts of the government, the movement has gathered momentum. Hazare's 
arrival at the parade ground on Friday signalled a new peak of intensity.

It also signalled a new examination of the old man who, with rhetoric, his 
white cap and the huge poster of Gandhi on the stage behind him, has claimed 
the legacy of the independence struggle and its most famous leader as his own. 
For if there is much that is attractive about Hazare, there is much that 
worries many onlookers too. Some have been concerned by his populist contempt 
for institutions, such as Parliament, which, whatever their evident flaws, are 
none the less elected. Others argue that the creation of an ombudsman would do 
little to fight graft as wholesale change is needed and that is best done 
through myriad, less spectacular, lower-level measures which together would 
have a much greater cumulative effect.

Then there are those who are concerned by Hazare's apparent authoritarianism – 
he has called for corrupt officials to be hanged, for example. If Hazare 
himself has studiously avoided any political statements, his vision of an India 
of teetotal, vegetarian rural communities is, despite its roots in Gandhi's 
vision of rural-based development, a conservative one that appeals to India's 
right wing. So too does his faith.

But Hazare's asceticism – he eats yoghurt for breakfast, chapatis and a single 
portion of vegetables for lunch and has just a glass of lemon juice for dinner 
– has a deep resonance in a time when unbridled materialism is the dominant 
social ethic. He is also, as the display of flags at his rallies shows, a 
patriot in an era of a newly powerful Indian nationalism.

Villagers from Ralegan Siddhi talk of the other changes that have come to 
their small community in recent years. Along with the now ubiquitous mobile 
phones, there is satellite TV and an internet cafe. The village is prosperous 
and many farmers are investing their surplus income in the transport business, 
running trucks and buses. Vijay works in a hotel in Pune, the city 50 miles 
away. The days of drought and back-breaking labour in the fields are passing. 
New challenges are coming with this transition. On a small scale, therefore, 
the village is an example of the stresses and the strains of the astonishing 
transformation of India itself.

Last week, the flags, the reference to the independence struggle and the 
protest in the rain were all components of a greater question: what is this new 
India that is being created with its 8% year-on-year economic growth rates? 
Hazare does not, it is fairly clear, have the answer. But he is forcing 
powerful people to think about the question.
 