
The scion of India's most powerful political family has praised a reform 
activist for galvanising anger against corruption, but condemned his hunger 
strike as "a dangerous precedent for a democracy".

The comments, by Rahul Gandhi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/rahul-gandhi>
, a ruling Congress party MP, were his first foray into the government's 
standoff with Anna Hazare since the 74-year-old activist began a fast 10 days 
ago.

Hazare's action has brought tens of thousands of supporters, angry about 
endemic corruption, onto the streets.

Gandhi's speech came a day after an emotional appeal by the prime minister, 
Manmohan Singh, for Hazare to end his hunger strike, signalling a government 
attempt to take control of the corruption debate.

Hazare had demanded that parliament pass his stringent version of a bill 
creating a government watchdog. He appeared to slightly soften his stance on 
Thursday after Singh offered MPs a debate on several proposed drafts of the 
bill, including Hazare's.

He said that if MPs passed a resolution backing some of his demands, pledging 
greater transparency and including low-level bureaucrats and state officials 
under the watchdog's oversight, he would begin eating again.

"My inner conscience tells me that if there is a consensus on these proposals, 
then I will break my fast," he wrote in a letter to Singh on Friday.

The activist, who has lost 15.5lbs (7kg) so far, said he would continue 
protesting even if he ended his fast, to push for other demands including 
giving the watchdog power to investigate the prime minister and judges.

On Friday, parliamentary officials were trying to work out procedures for 
introducing the competing bills.

Gandhi thanked Hazare for articulating Indians' anger over corruption, but 
called his hunger strike a "tactical incursion" into government functioning 
aimed at undoing the checks and balances of parliament. "Today, the proposed 
law is against corruption. Tomorrow, the target may be something less 
universally heralded. It may attack the plurality of our society and 
democracy," he said.

Gandhi said Hazare's protest gave the false impression that the creation of a 
strong watchdog would end graft in the country. "There are no simple solutions 
to eradicate corruption," he said, proposing policies including government 
funding of elections and parties.

"To eradicate corruption demands a far deeper engagement and sustained 
commitment from each one of us," he said.

Meanwhile, some of Hazare's allies began raising concerns. Swami Agnivesh, a 
respected peace activist, divorced himself from the protest, saying he was 
puzzled that Hazare was still fasting after Singh had agreed to debate his 
proposal.

"That was a great moment in our history, where the representatives of our 
nation got up to salute [Hazare] and appeal to him to give up his fast," 
Agnivesh said. "To carry on, carry on with his fast, even after that is not 
something I am able to understand at all."

Retired judge Santosh Hegde, a Hazare associate who uncovered a multibillion 
dollar bribery scandal in the mining industry, said he also was disturbed by 
the demands being made on parliament.

"I have been a judge and I believe in certain democratic principles. And to 
me, it's very difficult to digest," he said, according to the Press Trust of
India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>.

The tone of India's media coverage, which had been strongly supportive of 
Hazare, also appeared to be shifting following Singh's speech. "We believe Anna 
should acknowledge the PM's gesture and call off his fast," the Times of India 
wrote in a frontpage editorial.

Rajdeep Sardesai, the editor-in-chief of the IBN 18 television news network, 
called Hazare a hero but also said he needed to abandon the hunger strike.

"You are now an icon for millions. Please don't allow a personality cult to 
shadow your ultimate gift of common sense," he wrote in the Hindustan Times.

But Medha Patkar, one of the protest leaders, said the government had not yet 
given protesters the concrete victory they wanted. "It is not enough to have 
made a point," she said. "What is needed is a result."
 