
An Indian activist has begun his fifth hunger strike in 16 months to push for 
anti-corruption legislation, but failed to draw the huge crowds that marked the 
start of his campaign.

A year ago, tens of thousands of middle-class Indians crowded into a New Delhi 
fairground – enduring both pouring rain and sweltering heat. They were there to 
pledge support forAnna Hazare <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anna-hazare> 
as he went without food and water for 12 days to press the government to create 
a wide-ranging anti-corruption watchdog.

On Sunday afternoon, the frail 75-year-old managed to attract only a few 
thousand people. Three of his supporters have been fasting at the site since 
last Wednesday.

The activists are trying to force the government to take up an anti-corruption 
bill when parliament resumes on 8 August. Hazare and his backers are also 
demanding an investigation into corruption allegations against 14 cabinet 
ministers.

Hazare, a former army truck driver and social activist from western India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, touched a nerve in a country where 
nearly everyone has paid bribes when he began battling for a powerful 
ombudsman, newspaper columnist and political commentator Inder Malhotra said. 
"But he didn't know how to mobilise that momentum and the protest lost its 
edge," Malhotra added.

Hazare began with a five-day fast in April last year, which ended when the 
government invited members of his group to help draft anti-corruption 
legislation. In August, he fasted for 12 days to press parliament to pass a 
proposal to create a powerful watchdog that would police everyone from the 
prime minister, Manmohan Singh, to the lowest village bureaucrat.

Government-proposed legislation to create a corruption ombudsman – which 
Hazare has called weak and ineffective – passed the lower house of parliament 
last year but has stalled in the upper house.

Hazare tapped into public anger over a series of corruption scandals, 
including $4bn (£2.7bn) that disappeared during the 2010 Commonwealth Games, 
and a mobile phone-spectrum licensing scandal that is estimated to have cost 
the government up to $36bn in lost revenue.

There was round-the-clock television coverage of his campaign last year, but 
the media coverage has become muted. Several factors played a part in Hazare's 
movement losing its sheen, according to Malhotra.

• Charges of impropriety and corruption tainted some members of his group, 
often referred to "Team Anna".

• Hazare also began to appear with the leaders of the Hindu nationalist 
opposition party while severely criticising the governing Congress party. The 
move dented his image as an impartial activist above partisan politics.

• The movement lost much of its steam last December when Hazare planned an 
enormous rally in Mumbai and a hunger strike. Supporters pledged to fill jails 
by courting arrest. The demonstration flopped and the fast was called off.

• Hazare's repeated use of hunger strikes as a form of political protest has 
worn thin. "You can't use the same weapon so many times," Malhotra said.
 