
India's prime minister has asked parliament to debate the anti-corruption 
activist Anna Hazare's reform proposals and appealed to the weakening 
74-year-old to end his nine-day hunger strike.

Manmohan Singh's address to lawmakers was his most direct attempt at ending 
the deadlock between the government and Hazare over competing plans to root out 
the corruption infesting the country.

However, it fell well short of protesters' demands that parliament swiftly 
pass their sweeping proposal to create a powerful government ombudsman with 
little debate or amendment.

Protest leaders did not immediately respond, but a defiant Hazare briefly 
addressed a few thousands supporters at his protest site in the capital before 
Singh's speech, saying he was not yet prepared to give up: "I believe I will 
not die until the ombudsman bill is passed."

The government, which has tabled its own watchdog bill, has dismissed elements 
of Hazare's more stringent and sweeping proposals as unworkable and 
unconstitutional.

Singh told parliament it should hold a full debate on all versions of the bill 
– including at least two others proposed by civic groups.

"All ideas should be discussed and debated so we will have the bill which is 
the best possible bill that will help us deal with government corruption," he 
said to rare applause in a parliament that has broken down repeatedly in 
chaotic protest in recent weeks.

Saying Hazare's message had been heard, the usually staid Singh made an 
emotional appeal to him to call off his hunger strike.

"He has made his point. It has been registered with us. I respect his 
idealism. I respect him as an individual. He has become the embodiment of our 
people's disgust and concern about tackling corruption. I applaud you, I salute 
you, and his life is much too precious. And therefore I would urge SriAnna 
Hazare <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anna-hazare> to end his fast," Singh 
said.

In an unusual show of unity, the opposition endorsed Singh's appeal.

"This house appeals to Anna Hazare that his life is precious, so please end 
your fast," said Sushma Swaraj, leader of the opposition in the lower house of 
parliament.

Hazare's fast has struck a chord with Indians frustrated at the country's 
endemic corruption and the seemingly neverending scandals. On Wednesday, police 
charged four lawmakers over their alleged roles in buying and selling votes in 
parliament.

The protest has left Singh's government flailing for more than a week, as 
Hazare's aides harnessed Twitter, Facebook and 24-hour news channels to rally 
support for their cause.

But the government appeared to gain momentum in recent days, as other 
activists, including novelist Arundhati Roy, began to criticise Hazare's 
protest as misguided and anti-democratic.

On Wednesday, the government held a meeting of all parliamentary parties, 
which agreed only to give the protesters' draft "due consideration", not the 
guaranteed passage that Hazare had sought. Both sides dug in their heels and 
talks broke down on Wednesday night.

Singh's address in parliament sent a signal that despite their strong 
differences, the lawmakers were united in their belief that the legislature not 
be dictated to by the protesters.

"Parliament must have a chance to give its views on their bill," he said.

And Singh – who has been heavily criticised for presiding over a cabinet 
dogged by scandal – spoke with unusual emotion, saying he was sickened by 
attacks on his personal integrity.

"When wild charges are levied against me, it hurts," he said. He admitted he 
may have made mistakes in his seven years as prime minister, but insisted he 
maintained his personal integrity.

"To err is human, but to accuse me of evil intentions, of conniving with 
corruption is a charge I firmly refute," he said.

Meanwhile, businesses and wholesale markets shut down across the capital as 
the Delhi Traders Association called a strike in support of Hazare's fast.

At the protest site, crowds that numbered in the tens of thousands over the 
weekend had dwindled to just a few thousand.

Protest organisers had been raising concerns that authorities might detain 
Hazare and force feed him. Hazare asked his supporters to block the exits if 
police tried to take him away.
 