
Anne Keothavong crashed out of the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> qualifying rounds at the 
first hurdle after she was beaten 7-5, 7-5 by the American Grace Min.

Keothavong, who produced seven unforced errors in the encounter, was 5-2 ahead 
in the second set and on course to level the match. However the Briton fell 
apart as her opponent, ranked 178th in the world, won five straight games to 
progress to the second round.

Fellow Briton Johanna Konta <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/johanna-konta> 
is through to the second round, though she had to survive a tough encounter 
against Anastasia Sevastova. Konta – ranked 153 – progressed after winning 6-3, 
6-7, 6-4 to beat the world No179 in a draining encounter which lasted over two 
and a half hours.

Konta will face Zhou Yimiao of China who beat the 11th seed Eva Birnerova.

In the Sydney International, Agnieszka Radwanska needed eight match points to 
finish off Li Na on Thursday but confirmed her fine pre-Australian Open form by 
reaching the final.

The Polish top seed was well worth the 6-3, 6-4 win over her Chinese opponent 
and will face Dominika Cibulkova in Friday's final after the Slovakian stunned 
the German second seed Angelique Kerber 6-2, 4-6, 6-3.

Although Radwanska has had a busy schedule, Li was clearly tired after playing 
nine times in 10 days as well as managing to fit in a flight from China to 
Australia after winning the Shenzhen Open.

In the Hobart International, the eighth-seeded Sloane Stephens advanced to the 
semi-finals with a 6-3, 4-6, 7-5 win over her fellow American and qualifier 
Lauren Davis.

Stephens will play Elena Vesnina in one of Friday's semi-finals after the 
Russian played better in windy conditions to beat the wild-card entry Jarmila 
Gajdosova of Australia 6-3, 6-2.

The ninth-seeded Mona Barthel of Germany beat Tsvetana Pironkova of Bulgaria 
6-3, 6-3 and will face the winner of Thursday's night quarter-final between 
Monica Niculescu of Romania and Kirsten Flipkens of Belgium.
 