
Probably the first time you noticed Annette Bening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/annette-bening> was her saucily provocative 
Myra Langtry in Stephen Frears's The Grifters. How could anyone miss her? There 
is a moment when, stark naked, she saunters across the screen with a knowing 
and comical look on her face. No, she's not a good girl in The Grifters, but 
she seems happy with that fate. It is a film noir in which humour turns 
poisonous, and Myra is going to end badly. But first she has fun.

This is hard to believe, but Bening was 32 at the time. She looks 22, even if 
the knowledge she lends to Myra comes from more complicated experiences. 
I might add her Mme de Merteuil in Milos Forman's Valmont the year before, but 
the chances are that you didn't see that: the film was pre-empted and 
marginalised by Frears's Dangerous Liaisons (in which Glenn Close got a 
nomination in the same part). So be it, but Bening and Colin Firth in the 
Forman version get closer to Laclos and the lethal romantic cynicism of his 
epistolary novel.

Where does that leave Bening? In limbo? Out of her time? Or as someone with an 
unresolved career? Where had she been before The Grifters? Well, she was 
trained as a stage actress, she was nominated for a Tony in Tina Howe's Coastal 
Disturbances, and she had a failed marriage. Was she uninterested in movies? 
Was she judged not quite striking enough, or insufficiently young? She would 
soon become the wife of Warren Beatty and then the mother of their four 
children (now aged between 10 and 18). That once seemed a passport to success 
but, after Bugsy, she and Beatty did only Love Affair together – the kind of 
venture that might kill a marriage.

So she has not worked a lot, but she gave a committed performance as an 
unpleasant neurotic in American Beauty – impressive proof of how little vanity 
she has. She was warm, smart and charming in The American President, yet 
prepared to defer to Michael Douglas and the film's assumption that he was more 
important. She was very good and inventive as the woman in Kevin Costner's 
western Open Range (a neglected film). She showed high ambition in Being Julia, 
In Dreams and Mrs Harris, and it was not her fault that those films never 
worked properly. It was also a measure of her temperament that none of them 
were likely to endear her to the public. She does not beg or simper. Maybe 
audiences think she does not need love.

She has had three Oscar nominations, a supporting nod for The Grifters and 
lead nominations for American Beauty and Being Julia. Bugsy might have been her 
best chance. It was a big picture, with acting nominations for Beatty, Ben 
Kingsley and Harvey Keitel, but nothing for Bening. In hindsight, that's 
perverse, yet it could be because her role was not fully defined in the story. 
We never know whether Virginia Hill is a selfish opportunist or someone in love 
with Ben Siegel. Was it that Beatty couldn't make up his mind?

Of course, Bening has made some poor films, but who hasn't in their time? They 
include Love Affair, The Women, Regarding Henry, Guilty By Suspicion and 
Running With Scissors. But recall how impressive she was in Ed Zwick's The 
Siege, as an intelligence agent with Islamic sympathies – again, not a part 
that courted audience affection. And now, past 50, she seems willing to take on 
the challenge of interesting parts in independent pictures – thus her present 
role, as Julianne Moore's lover, in Lisa Cholodenko's The Kids Are All Right.

Pictures like that can build a worthy career and make her children proud. 
Still, the thought lingers that Bening could have been a grander actress. Had 
she been at her peak in the 1930s and 40s, it's easy to see her playing many of 
Barbara Stanwyck's roles. She's that good. Now, she is close to the tricky 
ground dominated by Meryl Streep – the mature woman in American films. She 
might go back to the stage. In fact, on screen, she is playing Hemingway's last 
wife, with Anthony Hopkins as the great man. That sounds like more deferring – 
whereas Annette Bening deserves to be the monster or the god herself.

• This article was amended on 1 November 2010. The original referred to two 
Oscar nominations. This has been corrected.
 