
Anne Keothavong <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anne-keothavong> is 
retiring from tennis at 29, she announced on Wednesday. She will join Martina 
Navratilova and her fellow former British No1 Sam Smith covering 21 women's 
tournaments – including the five Premier WTA tournaments in Indian Wells, 
Miami, Madrid, Beijing and Istanbul – for the new BT Sport channel.

Keothavong, who battled serious knee injuries, won 20 International Tennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Federation singles titles, eight 
doubles titles and made seven WTA semi-final appearances. She reached a 
career-high singles ranking of No48 in 2009, the first British woman in 16 
years to crack the world's top 50. The high point of her grand slam career was 
reaching the third round of the US Open in 2008.

"I have given my decision a lot of thought and I believe this is the right 
time to move on to the next stage of my career," she said. "I have had some 
magical moments along the way. I think I am leaving tennis in excellent shape 
with both Laura Robson and Heather Watson leading the way for Britain in the 
women's game."

Britain's Federation Cup captain, Judy Murray, said: "It's been a real 
pleasure for me to work with Anne as part of the Fed Cup team. You couldn't ask 
for a better, more committed team member – [or] a great professional who 
represented her country with huge pride and passion. She's a fabulous role 
model for the young players and a lot of fun too. I'll miss her fashion advice 
as well as her presence but I'm sure she has a very bright future ahead of her."

The Lawn Tennis Association's chief executive, Roger Draper, said: "Anne has 
been a true ambassador for British tennis, both on and off the court during her 
entire career. Always proud to represent Great Britain internationally, her 
determination shone through in 2008 and 2009 when she broke into the top 50, 
becoming our best player since Jo Durie in the process.

"Anne's courage was evident in coming back from not one but two challenging 
knee surgeries. A journey that began on the park courts of Hackney led to her 
being an inspirational role model for young girls everywhere, as well as to our 
current generation of players. We wish her well in the next chapter of her 
life."

Simon Green, director of BT Sport, said: "She's straight off the court and I 
am sure that will give her fantastic insight into the mentality and performance 
of her fellow professionals on the tour."

Keothavong is the latest British player to hang up her racket, with Jamie 
Baker calling time on his career during Wimbledon and Josh Goodall announcing 
his intention to retire and take up a job in coaching.
 