
There's a new international class of jet-setting super-rich party boys. Unlike 
the bankers, these men have been unfazed by the recession. They work for 
themselves, living lives of excess and getting up when they want. They garner 
little attention but have an army of disciples under their command.

"People have no idea," says Annie Mac 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/annie-mac>, who believes DJ culture is 
more than just a musical phenomenon, "because DJs don't really do press; they 
don't go around telling people how mental they are. And no one understands the 
level of money DJs earn. They're just people who love music and have managed to 
make a fucking fortune out of it."

We're sitting with Mac – real name Annie MacManus, 34 – in a posh restaurant 
near Radio 1. She's ordered sticky chicken wings and is diving in, fingers 
first. "It's crazy,Skream 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2011/dec/03/skream-magnetic-man-dubstep-global>
 and Benga are like the Sex Pistols!" she exclaims. "They are everything that's 
wild and anarchic about underground music. You know bands like the Who or Led 
Zeppelin were famous for their excess? It's spoken about, revered. But that's 
happening every day in DJ world. Even compared to Oasis and what went on at 
[Noel's famous 90s home] Supernova Heights ... Mate. Go to Croydon on a Friday 
night. Skream and Benga are gonna make Noel and Liam look like pussies."

A lot has changed since the first generation of DJ playboys. Oakenfold, Tong 
et al transformed dance music from a communal to a theatrical pursuit, a 
lucrative ego trip for the men behind the decks. But DJs had a glass ceiling. 
Even the biggest DJ in the world could only play at the biggest club in Ibiza.

"I think Norman Cook <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/fatboy-slim> was the 
first one who made the transition from the club to the stadium," says Mac. "He 
was more of an entertainer than a DJ. Now it's regular for quite underground 
DJs to be playing massive shows."

DJs are among the few arts professionals in Britain still in high demand. 
While record companies cough up blood and most bands can scarcely afford to pay 
their rent, DJs are living through a boom. Teenagers who would balk at the idea 
of paying a tenner for a record will happily pay £25 to see some bloke play 
them.

Mac is part of the top flight of international DJs, with her own club night, 
mixtape series and huge shows in Ibiza. But she's also one of the unsung stars 
of British broadcasting, a presenter who's as adept at hyping a new style of 
underground dance music as she is listening to schoolchildren's worries about 
homework in her agony aunt feature Peaceful Ponderings.

While working as an assistant producer for Zane Lowe <http://www.zanelowe.com/>
, she was spotted by Radio 1 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/radio1/> and offered a 
specialist dance show. Big club bookings quickly followed, but at that point 
she'd only ever DJed at house parties.

"The first few times I played out," she recalls, "I had to write a list of 
exactly what songs I was gonna play and leave it in front of the mixer." She 
went from novice to the biggest female DJ in Europe in just a few years.

Lately, Mac's been following some of the top names in dance around the world 
for an upcoming Channel 4 documentary about DJ culture, and wants to tell the 
story of the lifestyle she discovered along the way. Here are her essential 
tips for the modern bedroom backspinner …
 Annie Mac 
SO YOU CAN DJ. NOW LEARN TO BACKFLIP

If you want to be an underground house DJ, you can still play in dark rooms 
without looking up. But in mainstream dance music, it's not OK for you to just 
look down at the mixer and select records any more. You're expected to do more. 
When you seeDiplo 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/apr/21/diplo-usher-climax>, there's 
confetti cannons and people spinning around. It's as much acrobatics as DJing. 
I played a gig last week. It went really well, but one guy tweeted me saying, 
"It was awful, I wish I didn't go see it." So, just out of interest, I asked 
what I did wrong, and he was like, "There wasn't enough crowd interaction." 
Seriously, what do you want me to do? A Q&A?

FIX YOUR HAIR 

People like Calvin Harris <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/calvin-harris> have 
been Vegas-ed: he's got a classy tan, his hair is a little bit blonder and cut 
into a good shape. All of my friends fancy him now.

CHROME-PLATE YOUR LIVER 

Skream is some sort of weird bionic man. No matter what he puts inside himself 
he's always fine and at the studio at 8am the next day making bangers. He often 
goes four days without sleeping. It's hard for him, too, because everywhere he 
goes, people are like, "Shit we have to get ready, Skream and Benga are coming 
to town." They're expected to fulfil that role of rock'n'roll party boys. From 
our perspective, we have one crazy night with them; for them, it's crazy every 
night of their lives. Benga has stopped partying so hard these days but we 
always say that Skream's just gonna get really fat overnight. Everything's 
going to crack. He'll age 70 years because he's put so much alcohol into his 
system.

SELL YOUR FLAT 

Tiësto 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/aug/03/tiesto-tops-forbes-dance-music-rich-list>
 is the richest man in dance music, but he doesn't have a home. He told me this 
on his private plane. He's genuinely a nomad. He's 43 but he doesn't seem 43, 
and maybe that's a product of the world he lives in, because he's playing to 
college kids and lives in this world where it's always a party. You don't 
really have to worry about mortgages or cutting the grass. You don't have to do 
any mundane things that make you feel old.

GET A RESIDENCY IN VEGAS 

Vegas is massive now in terms of dance music. They use to have billboards for 
magicians and Celine Dion, now they're for Avicii and Tiësto. But the clubs are 
way more hip-hop: $10,000 to sit on that table, $5,000 for a bottle of Grey 
Goose and every woman dresses exactly the same. They're like clones: all 
wearing crotch-skimming bodycon, so short that their buttocks are nearly 
hanging out. You're so used to England where people are … fashionable, or just 
a bit edgy. Edgy is cool, whereas over there it's like edgy is weird.

NO HEAVY PETTING 

When you get to that big level of proper superstar DJs, it just makes me sad. 
So much of that world is just about women in cages with no clothes on. I think 
that whole format is so tired, and it automatically puts women in the position 
where they're there to dance to the DJs, rather than being the people who 
create music. Touring with Tiësto for the documentary, it was just a bit 
depressing. It's not his fault: he likes girls just as much as they like him, 
it's just the way it is. I always want to be surrounded by fat, hairy men when 
I play Ibiza as an antidote to what's become an accepted format. Sometimes I 
see groupies with DJs and I just want to be like, "Nooo! Please have some 
self-respect! Come and talk to me!" The big sister in me comes out and it's 
hard. But I can't say anything. I just have to be quiet and let it happen.

DON'T DISS GUETTA 

I asked Calvin, who has obviously made a massive transition to the mainstream, 
whether he looks toDavid Guetta <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/david-guetta> 
for inspiration. He said, no matter how bad you think David Guetta's music 
might be, he's opened so many doors for dance music. He's turned small labels 
into massive industries. He's turned kids on to DJing. He's changed everything.

ONCE YOU'VE REACHED THE TOP, AVOID DUBSTEP DJS 

We were filming for the documentary in the Balearics and it ended with both 
Skream and Benga picking me up and trying to throw me over a balcony in 
[massive superclub] BCM in Majorca. They put my legs over it and were holding 
me by my arms. We were about two floors up. I was fearing for my life.

DO AS I SAY, NOT AS I DO 

The more it moves towards dance music as entertainment, with people filming 
DJs on their phones, the more I rail against it. I want to start a night where 
you hand your phone in at the door. You're there to enjoy it, not to make 
shitty clips for YouTube. I just want to play tunes in a corner where no one 
can see me. I'm well known for having the worst hair in Britain. I look like a 
hedge. But I feel like I'm flying the flag for curly, dense, bush-like hair. 
I've also got to a point where I've become a bit sensible. I've stopped 
drinking and partying. Normally I get a bottle of champagne on my rider and it 
goes in my bag and straight into the fridge at home. I've got really good at 
just going in there and being focused and doing it and coming home, and I'm 
really proud of that. If I don't, I turn into a hateful lunatic, and that's not 
nice for anyone.
 