
Radio 1 DJ Annie Mac <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/annie-mac> has 
landed her first daytime slot on the station, taking over Sara Cox's weekend 
afternoon show while Cox is on maternity leave.

Mac, who debuted on Radio 1 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-1> in 
2004 after working as a broadcast assistant and assistant producer for Zane 
Lowe, currently presents programmes on Friday and Sunday nights.
 Annie Mac: will continue to present her Friday night show. Photograph: BBC  
She will continue to present her Friday night show, Annie Mac's Mash Up, 
showcasing the best of house, hip-hop, bass and beats - but her Sunday night 
teen show Switch will be taken over by Radio 1 newcomer Nick Grimshaw.
Grimshaw already makes regular guest appearances on the show and co-hosts BBC2 
music show Sound, alongside Mac.

"I think Sara is an exceptional presenter, and I just hope I do her show 
justice for her when she's away," said Mac.

"I know that Switch is in safe hands with my mate Grimmy looking after it. 
He's so funny on the radio and is properly passionate about new music. He'll do 
a super job."

Mac will present the weekend show for around seven months, beginning on 
February 23. Cox, who is having her second child, is due to return in September.

Ben Cooper, the head of programmes at Radio 1, said: "Everyone at Radio 1 
wishes Sara all the best and we look forward to welcoming her back after her 
maternity leave.

"I'm very pleased that Annie is going to look after the show while Sara is 
away.

"She's a great broadcaster and I know she'll do a brilliant job. Nick has 
proven himself as part of the Radio 1 family and it's very exciting that he'll 
be hosting his own show during this period."

The Sunday night Switch slot began on Radio 1 last autumn as part of a new 
effort to attract younger listeners to the network. Aimed at 12- to 
16-year-olds across radio, TV and online, it features music, gossip and 
behind-the-scenes news and live tracks from BBC2's Sound.

Grimshaw said: "I've wanted to do a Radio 1 show since I was about 12. After 
realising I was musically talentless, it's kind of the next best thing.

"Switch is one of the most exciting shows on the station so it's an honour to 
be hosting it."

· To contact the MediaGuardian newsdesk email editor@mediaguardian.co.uk 
<mailto:editor@mediaguardian.co.uk> or phone 020 7239 9857. For all other 
inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 7278 2332.

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 