
Britain in July. Ah, yes. It is chucking it down. DJ Annie Mac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/annie-mac> – curly-topped, 
saucer-eyed – sits in the corner of a Soho pub in cosy black tights and 
conjures up sunnier climes. Ibiza, here she comes…

"The first time I went to Ibiza was with Radio 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-1>," she says. "When you're a DJ, it's 
a given that you do a residency there, it's like youhave to do it. And I 
questioned that, I didn't know whether Ibiza was still relevant. But every year 
it surprises me. It's still this mad rite of passage for young people to go to 
Ibiza."

Two years ago, Mac (it's short for MacManus) was given her first Ibiza DJ-ing 
residency, for Cream. She'd catch a flight from London at 10pm every Thursday, 
arrive on the island at 1am, go on the decks from 2-4am, then catch a 10am 
flight home and do her Friday-nightRadio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 1 show, Annie Mac's Mash Up, in 
what she still calls "the Pete Tong slot" (7-9pm: when she took it over, Tong 
moved to play from 9-11pm). "I was shit," she says with a grimace. "I was so 
knackered I couldn't even speak properly."

This isn't quite true: Mac, 33, has the gift of the gab. On radio, as in real 
life, she is never at a loss for words. She's not overbearing, like some 
presenters; she just listens properly, gets enthusiastic about tunes and likes 
a chat. "That's why I wanted to get into radio," she confesses. "I loved music, 
and I love to talk!".

Growing up in Dublin, she had very little access to decent youth radio (she 
listened to pirate stations and her older sister's techno CDs). When she moved 
to Belfast, aged 17, to study English literature at Queen's University, she 
discovered Radio 1. "I was obsessed: I loved Mary Anne Hobbs'sBreezeblock show, 
bought all the records she played."

So Mac did a postgrad in radio (in Farnborough: full of squaddies. She didn't 
go out, just studied and bought records from local car-boot sales). From there, 
she bashed on many doors before making it to Radio 1 as an assistant producer, 
first on Steve Lamacq's programme, then Colin Murray's, then Zane Lowe's.

Now Mac divides her time between her two shows – Friday night and her 
10-to-midnight slot with Nick Grimshaw on Sundays – and her successful Annie 
Mac Presents club nights. So this year, as well as being a central part ofRadio 
1 in Ibiza's weekend, she'll be hosting her AMP night every other Tuesday on 
the terrace at Ibiza's Amnesia. She DJs and curates the line-up.

"My tips for Ibiza? Take sunglasses – you'll need them for when you leave the 
club. Get a villa, so you can get away from the madness. Bring lots of money – 
it's €40 into a club, and €10 for a bottle of water. Learn some Spanish – the 
bouncers don't speak English. Stay no less than a week… And," she smiles, 
picking up her umbrella, "no longer than a summer…"

Annie Mac is part of BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Radio 1 in 
Ibiza from 5 August at 7pm
 