
Savers’ hopes of securing a comfortable retirement have been dealt a blow as 
standard annuity rates have collapsed to all-time lows just weeks after new 
pension freedoms have come into force, according to a financial website.

The average annual income on offer from a standard annuity for a 65-year-old 
with a £10,000 pension pot has plunged by 5.9% since the start of the year and 
for someone with a £50,000 pension pot it has fallen even more sharply, by 
6.4%, research from Moneyfacts has found.

Researchers, who looked back to when the modern annuity market started around 
30 years ago, said the latest rate falls mean that the average standard annuity 
pension income has reached its lowest ever level.

The fall comes just weeks after the launch of new flexibilities for the 
320,000 people retiring every year with a defined contribution (DC) pension.

The changes mean that pension savers are no longer required to buy an annuity, 
which gives a guaranteed retirement income, with their pot, although some 
people will still want to in order to help ensure that they do not out-live 
their savings.

People can now take money out of their pots as they wish, subject to their 
marginal rate of income tax.

Moneyfacts’ findings will be a particular disappointment to people who put 
their retirement plans on hold in order to wait for the pension freedoms, which 
came into force on 6 April, but who may still end up deciding that an annuity 
would be the best option for them.

In January, for example, a 65-year-old with a £50,000 pension pot would have 
received an average annual payout of £2,727 if they had bought a standard 
annuity at that time.

But the same person buying an annuity now would typically get a yearly payout 
of £177 less, at £2,550. A 65-year-old with a £10,000 pot could have received 
£506 a year if they had bought their standard annuity in January. Now, they 
would get a payment of just £476 a year on average.

People considering buying an annuity may want to think about whether they 
would be eligible for an enhanced annuity. These are offered to people who are 
in ill-health, such as smokers, and often have better rates as the people who 
buy them tend to have lower life expectancies.

Moneyfacts said that enhanced annuity rates have been “slightly more 
resilient” than standard annuities in 2015 so far.

A 65-year-old with a £50,000 pot could get an average yearly payout of £3,055 
with an enhanced annuity and someone with a £10,000 pot could receive a yearly 
sum of £579 typically, Moneyfacts said.

The new all-time low for standard annuity incomes surpasses a previous rock 
bottom level for annuities which was recorded in late 2012, just before firms 
were banned from taking gender into account when pricing products such as car 
insurance, life insurance and retirement products such as annuities.

Moneyfacts said that lower demand for annuities in the wake of the pension 
freedoms and a sharp fall in gilt yields, which are a major influence on 
annuity rates, were factors behind the latest downturn.

Richard Eagling, head of pensions at Moneyfacts.co.uk, said: “The prospects of 
securing a comfortable retirement have taken a further blow with news that 
standard pension annuity rates have hit an all-time low.

“In many cases, retirees looking for a secure income now face the unenviable 
position of annuitising at the lowest point in the product’s history.

“This is particularly unfortunate for those individuals who may have deferred 
making a choice until the introduction of the pension freedoms but have since 
decided that an annuity is still the most suitable product for them.”
 