
Director: Roland Emmerich
Entertainment grade: E
History grade: Fail

This article contains a spoiler in the paragraph headed Family

William Shakespeare's plays were written by William Shakespeare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/shakespeare>, a well-documented historical 
figure who lived between 1564 and 1616.

In 1920, a schoolmaster with the apt name of John Thomas Looney invented a 
conspiracy theory suggesting that Shakespeare's plays were written by Edward de 
Vere, 17th Earl of Oxford.

Class
 Anonymous, starring Rhys Ifans, suggests that Shakespeare's plays were 
written by the Earl of Oxford 
Director Roland Emmerich (who made 2012, Godzilla and Independence Day, all 
more realistic than this movie) is an Oxfordian. This is the designation 
preferred by supporters of the Looney theory, who think Shakespeare's plays 
were secretly penned by Oxford. The reason they think that is simple: they're 
snobs. Their root belief is that Shakespeare was just not posh enough to be a 
good writer. Shakespeare, the screenplay sneers, was the mere "son of a glove 
maker … armed only with a grammar school education." Derek Jacobi speaks these 
lines on an empty stage at the beginning of the film, in a shameful pastiche of 
his own role in the opening ofKenneth Branagh's production of Henry V. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2011/jul/28/henry-v-kenneth-branagh> Who thinks 
Shakespeare couldn't have been a good writer because his father was a 
tradesman? Snobs, that's who. And who thinks he couldn't have had the breadth 
of cultural knowledge his plays reveal with "only" a grammar school education? 
Ignorant snobs. A grammar school education in sixteenth-century England would 
have equipped Shakespeare with Latin, some Greek, classical history, mythology, 
rhetoric and drama – a fine start for a playwright.

Romance
 Anonymous Photograph: Columbia Pictures/LMK 
Not only does Anonymous credit Shakespeare's plays to the Earl of Oxford (an 
aged-up Rhys Ifans, wearing so much powder and eyeshadow that you might start 
wondering whatever happened to Baby Jane). It must also fabricate a reason for 
Oxford to hide his real identity. The film goes for broke on this, claiming he 
had a passionate affair with Elizabeth I (played young by Joely Richardson, and 
old by Vanessa Redgrave). The real Elizabeth was probably a virgin, and 
certainly one of the most intellectually distinguished women of her age. The 
Elizabeth ofAnonymous <https://www.theguardian.com/film/anonymous> is a 
dimwitted nymphomaniac who has been wandering around since the age of 16 
getting herself up the duff by various boyfriends.

People
 Anonymous 
William Cecil (David Thewlis) hides Elizabeth's resulting stream of babies in 
well-to-do households, with the apparent result that her majesty has spawned 
the entire English aristocracy. Anonymous imagines a flotilla of bastards, 
specifying that the Earl of Southampton is her son by Oxford, and the Earl of 
Essex her son by some unnamed hook-up. In reality, Southampton may have been 
the "Fair Youth" of Shakespeare's sonnets (which, again, were written by 
Shakespeare); Essex may have been a romantic figure in Elizabeth's later life. 
But they were not the Queen's kids. Really not.

Entertainment
 Anonymous Photograph: Reiner Bajo/AP 
All this might be enjoyably silly if Anonymous were as witty or clever as, say,
Shakespeare in Love 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/filmblog/2011/sep/08/shakespeare-in-love-reel-history>
, which also takes liberties with this history. Unfortunately, Anonymous is 
written with no trace of humour or intelligence. It stumbles around like a bad 
drunk, deluded with a sense of its own importance, crashing into walls, 
repeating itself and losing its plots. If I ran the Mermaid Tavern, this film 
would be Bard. Ahem. Sorry.

Arts
 Entertainingly bizarre … Anonymous. 
Oxford tries to bestow authorship of "his" plays on Ben Jonson (Sebastian 
Armesto), but Jonson's a gibbering idiot. Instead, illiterate actor Will 
Shakespeare (Rafe Spall) gets them. Bearing in mind he went to grammar school, 
as the film itself points out, how come he's illiterate? Everybody good in 
Anonymous is a tall, fair-haired aristocrat, and everybody bad is a short, 
dark, greasy commoner, probably with a hunchback (this is the only vaguely 
Shakespearean thing about the movie). Shakespeare and Jonson, one incomparable 
and one great English writer, are played here as the Chuckle Brothers. Only way 
less funny.

Family
 Anonymous Photograph: Reiner Bajo/AP 
Wait! It gets worse! In a supposedly dramatic but actually farcical scene, it 
is revealed that Oxford is actually Elizabeth's secret son as well as her 
lover. With the addition of mother-son incest, the plot that was previously 
just deranged becomes actively repulsive. Also, that was a major spoiler. Now 
you've got no excuse for going to see it. Feel free to thank me.

Verdict
 Anonymous Photograph: Reiner Bajo/AP 
Historians and literary scholars must assemble themselves into a colossal 
Godzilla formation, rise towering from the Pacific Ocean, rampage around 
Hollywood breathing fire, and stomp the hell out of Roland Emmerich's 
production company.
 