
More than 1,000 pupils and staff at a school in south London will be given 
Tamiflu as public health officials confirmed nine additional cases of swine flu 
across the UK, taking the national total to 27.

Five pupils in year 7 at Alleyn's school in Dulwich, south-east London, tested 
positive for the virus and, after advice from the Health Protection Agency 
(HPA), the school will close for a week. The new cases had come into contact 
with a pupil, already diagnosed with H1N1 at the weekend, who had recently 
returned from the United States. All the new cases are recovering well at home.

"Our advice is please don't panic," said Antony Faccinello, senior deputy head 
at Alleyn's school. "Parents should keep reading our website for advice and 
stick to that advice. We want them to come into the school to collect their 
child's preventative dose of Tamiflu."

They would be in touch with other local schools about the situation to help 
prevent further spread of the disease. Alleyn's shares facilities, including 
buses, with at least two other schools, James Allen's girls' school and Dulwich 
College.

The HPA said about 1,200 people, including pupils and staff at Alleyn's, would 
be offered the antiviral treatment. A course of Tamiflu involves a pill a day 
for 10 days; younger children will be given smaller amounts.

Alleyn's school is also rushing to reschedule some exams which were due to 
take place this week, including the GCSE art final and Year 12 modern language 
oral tests. The exams watchdog, Ofqual, and the Qualification and Curriculum 
Authority will meet on Thursday with exam boards and representatives from the 
Department for Children,Schools <https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> 
and Families (DCSF) and the Scottish parliament and Welsh assembly to discuss 
this year's exams. Next week's Sats tests are expected to go ahead as planned 
in primary schools. A-level and GCSE exams are scheduled from now into June.

In addition to the five Alleyn's cases, two further children newly in London 
were confirmed as being infected with H1N1 – siblings who came into contact 
with a separate confirmed case in the city. Last night their school, the 
Dolphin school in Battersea, said it was to close for a few days as a 
precautionary measure. The Department of Health yesterday said there were 23 
confirmed cases in England and four in Scotland. More than 330 cases are still 
being investigated by the HPA.

Independent schools were issued with advice over the weekend of what to do in 
the case of a pandemic, mirroring that already supplied by the DCSF to state 
schools. They are advised to set up text systems to inform parents of school 
closures, and web access for pupils to work from home if necessary. The advice, 
drawn up by lawyers for the Independent Schools Council, says: "Consider 
whether extra space will be required for effective quarantine of suspected 
victims."

Melvyn Roffe, chairman of the Boarding Schools' Association, said they had 
been in daily contact with government officials monitoring the potential for an 
outbreak among boarding pupils. "We are stocking up on cleaning equipment and 
making contingency plans."

Another suspected case of H1N1 came to light in Scotland – the fifth in eight 
days. A traveller from Fife thought to have contracted the virus in Las Vegas 
is under voluntary quarantine.

Health authorities issued an alert at the weekend for passengers on board a 
FlyBe short haul flight from Birmingham to Glasgow on 30 April after a man from 
Ayrshire and Arran fell ill. He tested positive for swine flu and is being 
treated at home.

Meanwhile, a relative of the first Britons to catch the virus, Iain and Dawn 
Askham, from Polmont near Edinburgh, has been flown home from a North Sea oil 
rig as a precaution. But he is not showing any symptoms, and is not among the 
19 other "possible" cases in Scotland. According to the WHO, 21 countries had 
officially reported 1,085 cases of H1N1 infection.
 