
It's an antique collector's dream: buying an old box at a garage sale and 
discovering it contains famous lost works worth a fortune.

That's what Rick Norsigian said happened to him. Ten years ago the Fresno 
painter paid $45 (£29) for a trove of 65 old glass negatives that he says have 
been authenticated as the work of famed nature photographerAnsel Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ansel-adams>, possibly worth $200m 
(£128m).

"This is absolutely beyond what I thought," the 64-year-old said at a news 
conference held at a Beverly Hills art gallery yesterday. "I'm very lucky."

Norsigian's lawyer, Arnold Peter, said a team of experts who studied the 
negatives over the past six months concluded "beyond a reasonable doubt" that 
the photos were Adams's early work. They had been thought destroyed in a 1937 
fire at his Yosemite national park studio.

"These photographs are really the missing link," Peter said. "They really fill 
the void in Ansel Adams's early career."

Adams is renown for his timeless black-and-white photographs of the American 
west, which were produced with darkroom techniques that heightened shadows and 
contrasts to create mood-filled landscape portraits. He died in 1984 aged 82.

His photographs today are widely reproduced on calendars, posters and in 
coffee table books. His prints are coveted by collectors.

Yosemite national park fetched $722,500 for the Ansel print Clearing Winter 
Storm at an auction last month in New York, a record for 20th century 
photography.

Norsigian, who works for the Fresno school district, is planning to capitalise 
on his discovery. He's set up a website to sell prints made from 17 negatives 
from $45 for a poster to $7,500 for a darkroom print with a certificate of 
authenticity. A documentary on his quest to have the negatives authenticated is 
in the works, as well as a touring exhibition that will debut at Fresno State 
University in October.

Representatives of Adams, however, say they are not buying Norsigian's claims.

"It's an unfortunate fraud," said Bill Turnage, managing director of the Ansel 
Adams Publishing Rights Trust. "It's very distressing."

Turnage said he was consulting lawyers about possibly suing Norsigian for 
using a copyrighted name for commercial purposes. He said Norsigian was on an 
"obsessive quest". "We've been dealing with him for a decade," he said. "I 
can't tell you how many times he's called me."

Adams's grandson, Matthew Adams, who heads the Ansel Adams Gallery in San 
Francisco, said he had reviewed Norsigian's authentications last fall. "There 
is no real hard evidence," he said. "I'm sceptical." Many photographers took 
pictures of the same places as Adams in that era, he said.

Norsigian bought the negatives from a man who said he had purchased the box 
from a Los Angeles salvage warehouse in the 1940s, bargaining the price down 
from $70 to $45. He saw they were of views of Yosemite but never suspected they 
might be Adams's works until someone mentioned they resembled the famed 
photographer's shots. "We got a laugh out of that," Norsigian said.

But the idea stuck with Norsigian and he started researching the photographer, 
eventually concluding they were Adams's works.

The shots are of places Adams frequented and photographed. Several shots 
contain people identified as Adams associates. Adams taught at the Pasadena Art 
Centre in the early 1940s, which would account for the negatives being in Los 
Angeles. The negatives are the size Adams used in the 1920s and 30s and several 
have charred edges, possibly indicating the 1937 fire.

For years, he tried to get them officially verified, taking them to experts at 
the Smithsonian Institution, the Getty Centre and others, but no one would 
venture to authenticate them.

Three years ago he met Beverly Hills entertainment lawyer Peter, who assembled 
a team of experts to review the negatives. The key evidence came from two 
handwriting experts, who identified the writing on the negative sleeves as that 
of Adams's wife, Virginia.

But Matthew Adams said there were inconsistencies in the handwriting and a lot 
of misspelled Yosemite place names. "She grew up in Yosemite. She was an 
intelligent, well read woman. I find it hard to believe she would misspell 
those names," he said.

Matthew Adams said it was unlikely his grandfather would have misplaced the 
negatives, especially after the devastating fire that destroyed 5,000 negatives 
– a third of his portfolio. "Ansel was very meticulous about his negatives," he 
said. "He kept them in a bank vault in San Francisco after the fire."

Beverly Hills art appraiser David W Streets said he conservatively estimated 
the negatives' value at $200 million, based on current sales of Adams's prints 
and the potential for selling never-seen-before prints. Turnage called that 
figure ridiculous because the value of Adams's work was in his darkroom 
handcrafting of the prints – the negatives were next to worthless.

"Ansel interpreted the negative very heavily," he said. "He believed the 
negative was like a musical score. No two composers will interpret it the same 
way. Each print is a work of art."

Norsigian is not fazed by naysayers. "Prove me wrong," he said. "This has been 
such a long journey. I thought I'd never get to the end. It kind of proves a 
construction worker-painter can be right."
 