
Contaminated heroin is being investigated as the possible source of an 
outbreak of anthrax which has killed one drug user and left another seriously 
ill in hospital.

Police and public health officials in Glasgow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/glasgow> are checking to see if the rare but 
deadly infection has emerged either from a batch of the drug or a cutting agent 
mixed with it.

Blood tests have shown that male heroin user who died at the city's Victoria 
Infirmary on Wednesday had anthrax in his system, while a second man has also 
tested positive. A third, a woman being treated at Glasgow's Royal Infirmary, 
is also undergoing tests. Their names and ages have not been released.

"It's highly conceivable that it could have been contaminated either from the 
source in the [heroin's] origin country or it could have been contaminated as a 
consequence of subsequent cutting when it arrived in this country," said Dr 
Colin Ramsay, of Health ProtectionScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>.

Another line of inquiry was that the anthrax could come from heroin being cut 
with bonemeal, but that was just speculation, he said. "We have no way of 
knowing how it might have got contaminated," he said.

"All three potentially linked cases presented at hospital with serious soft 
tissue infections of areas of the body injected with heroin," said NHS Greater 
Glasgow and Clyde, whose public health protection unit is investigating the 
outbreak.

Dr Syed Ahmed, a consultant in public health medicine with the organisation, 
urged local heroin injectors to be "extremely alert" and seek urgent medical 
advice if they experienced an infection. However, while heroin users should be 
on their guard, the risk of anthrax spreading to the general population, 
including their relatives, was "negligible", he said. "It is extremely rare for 
anthrax to be spread from person to person and there is no significant risk or 
airborne transmission from one person to another."

Anthrax <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anthrax> is usually found in 
animals abroad, especially herbivaceous mammals such as cattle, sheep and 
goats, and also some carrion birds. It is highly unusual for people to be 
infected. There were only 19 confirmed cases of it in humans in England between 
1981 and October 2008, said the Health Protection Agency. Most of those caught 
so-called "wool sorters' disease" from animal hides in their jobs as 
slaughtermen, butchers or factory workers.

But the last three known anthrax deaths – one in Scotland in 2006 and two in 
England in 2008 – are all believed to have involved musical instrument makers 
and musicians who contracted it from handling animal hides while making drums.

Anthrax is a bacterial infection. It poses a serious health problem because 
spores of it can survive in the environment for decades. About 95% of cases in 
humans involve cutaneous infection – that is, the anthrax entering the body 
through the skin, as with the three drug users in Glasgow.
 