
Anthony Howard <https://www.theguardian.com/media/anthony-howard>, who has 
died aged 76 following heart surgery, was among the most acute political 
commentators of his generation, a familiar face and voice on television and 
radio, and a distinguished editor of the New Statesman. But, in the view of 
many contemporaries, and perhaps his own, he never quite achieved the heights 
of which he was capable.

In his writing and broadcasting, as in his editing, he delivered sharp and 
definite judgments. His assessments of a politician's chances of high office or 
party leadership were instantaneous and nearly always right. Once Margaret 
Thatcher resigned, he declared, Michael Heseltine's hopes of becoming Tory 
leader were finished. Denis Healey, he predicted, would not becomeLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leader. The SDP's success would 
be fleeting, he said. His interest was in politicians, and the political 
process, not in policy or political philosophy. His books were about people – 
he wrote biographies of RA Butler, Richard Crossman and, finally, the Roman 
Catholic Archbishop of Westminster Basil Hume – and his last full-time job, as 
obituaries editor of the Times, was one that he requested, and which gave him 
special pleasure.

From university, where he chaired the Labour Club before being elected (at the 
second attempt) president of the Oxford Union, he was a firm Labour supporter 
who in the 1950s was briefly a prospective parliamentary candidate. As a young 
reporter on the Guardian, he was reprimanded by the then editor, Alastair 
Hetherington, for turning in copy that "reeked of anti-Tory prejudice". Yet he 
became respected by and friendly with many Tory politicians – he "helped" 
Heseltine write his memoirs – and a presenter, reporter and political pundit on
BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> news and current affairs programmes.

Howard was the son of an Anglican clergyman, and remained engaged with the 
Church of England all his life, nearly always attending Sunday services and 
taking a close interest in the church's elaborate internal politics, both past 
and present. But he was too instinctively sceptical ever to become devoutly 
religious, and was probably at heart an agnostic. He was educated at 
Westminster school and Christ Church, Oxford, and intended to become a 
barrister, after being called to bar at the Inner Temple in 1956. But he had 
been features editor of the Oxford students' magazine Isis and, when he began 
his delayed national service as a second lieutenant in the Royal Fusiliers, he 
indulged his passion for writing by keeping a diary of his training, parts of 
which found their way to a small-circulation magazine.

His battalion was involved in Anthony Eden's ill-fated Suez adventure and 
Howard recalled that, during the invasion of Egypt, he fired two shots which, 
he ensured, didn't hit anybody. He made little secret of his opposition to the 
Suez campaign and, at one stage, his officers feared he might desert. He was 
threatened with a court martial. When his Suez diary was later published in the
New Statesman <https://www.theguardian.com/media/new-statesman>, in flagrant 
breach of regulations, a prosecution seemed likely until the War Office decided 
that it was wiser not to create a martyr.

Success with his diaries led him to switch from law to journalism. He first 
joined Reynolds News, the Co-op movement's paper, and then, in 1959, the 
Guardian, with a brief to cover politics outside London, a job that required 
him to give up political ambitions. In 1961, he moved to the New Statesman as 
its first weekly political columnist in the modern style, mixing reportage, 
observation and judicious comment.

In 1965, there came the first significant failure of his career and it was one 
that rankled. The Sunday Times appointed him Whitehall correspondent, working 
outside the parliamentary lobby, which Howard regarded as docile and even 
corrupt, and rooting out true stories of what ministers and civil servants got 
up to. It was regarded as a groundbreaking innovation, launched with some 
fanfare in aSunday Times <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sundaytimes> leader.

Harold Wilson, then prime minister, instructed that "ministers should refuse 
him any facilities for the fulfilment of his task" and the head of the civil 
service sent out a similar memo. After what he later described as "the most 
frustrating and miserable summer", Howard accepted that the job was impossible. 
He did not, in any case, care for the Sunday Times style of editing which, he 
complained, turned "the idiosyncratic loaves that reporters delivered into 
processed bread".

He was rescued by the Observer, which made him Washington correspondent in 
time for some of the most dramatic episodes of the 20th century, including the 
Vietnam war and the unravelling of Lyndon Johnson's presidency. These events 
gave Howard full rein to indulge his taste for political drama and also to 
begin his broadcasting career, making regular contributions on America to Radio 
4's The World at One. He then returned to the New Statesman as assistant editor 
to the former Labour cabinet minister Crossman. When Crossman's brief, 
undistinguished editorship ended in 1972, Howard was the natural successor. As 
an insider, his cause was helped by the staff, who had half the votes on the 
selection committee, but the majority of the board favoured him, too.

His editorship, lasting six years, was acclaimed – albeit more in retrospect 
than at the time – as a golden age. He recruited an extraordinary array of 
young talent, including Martin Amis, Christopher Hitchens, Julian Barnes, James 
Fenton and Patrick Wintour (now the Guardian's political editor). He watched 
over their later progress with pride and occasional anxiety, always sending 
handwritten notes to mark a career advancement or an outstanding article. He 
valued, above all, good, vivid, witty writing – "do me a flashy piece," he 
would instruct contributors – and he was a meticulous and courteous editor, 
always phoning to acknowledge delivery of copy and adding an immediate, concise 
judgment as to its quality.

Unlike many editors, his decisions were quick, even brusque, and, once made, 
very hard to shift. He could be cold and dismissive to those he judged to be 
pedestrian. He regarded writing for the New Statesman – –which, he insisted, 
should be called "the paper", not "the magazine" – as an honour, not to be 
granted lightly. Neither staff nor contributors were paid well, and it was said 
that he treated the paper's money, which then, as always, was in short supply, 
as though it were his own. But his notoriously parsimonious regime did not 
extend to his personal life, where he was generous to friends, former employees 
and numerous godchildren.

He took the NS, which he thought had gone astray under Crossman, back to its 
traditional format, restoring words to the front page. He promised from the 
start that it would not be the Socialist Worker, but he wanted the paper to be 
Labour's "candid friend", informed by old-fashioned social democratic values 
and slightly inclined towards the "soft left". For some tastes, the NS could be 
too candid; in one memorable leader, it denounced Wilson's conduct as Labour's 
opposition leader for polluting the very atmosphere of politics.

Howard was addicted to gossip and he took great pleasure in mischief of all 
sorts, particularly a series of articles by the former NS editor Paul Johnson, 
detailing his growing disillusion with Labour, the unions and all things 
socialist. He also enjoyed publishing rightwing mavericks such as Auberon 
Waugh. Though he made the NS more respected, influential and loved, especially 
in metropolitan media circles, Howard saw circulation continue its decline from 
the peaks of the 1950s. He left the NS in 1978 and regarded the magazine for 
the next 20 years with a somewhat jaundiced eye as it periodically flirted with 
the extra-parliamentary left, tried Sunday Times-style investigative journalism 
and let slip, as he saw it, the high standards of prose that were once its 
hallmark.

After briefly considering a renewed attempt at a political career, he edited 
the BBC-owned Listener magazine which he tried to turn, with mixed results, 
into something more than radio talks in print. In 1981, he returned to the 
Observer as deputy editor, where his achievement was to create a Sunday page so 
absorbing and elegantly presented that many readers still recall it. It 
comprised a weekly profile, illustrated by a Mark Boxer caricature, a political 
column byAlan Watkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/may/09/alan-watkins-obituary> and, 
across the top of the page, an erudite and often unpredictable column byConor 
Cruise O'Brien 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/dec/19/conor-cruise-brien> and, later, 
Neal Ascherson.

He was never a great admirer of the then Observer editor Donald Trelford, whom 
he thought intellectually lightweight, incomprehensibly obsessed with sport and 
too often absent. In 1988, he attempted a coup, persuading most of the Observer 
board that Trelford was ruining the paper and that he, Howard, should succeed. 
However, the proprietor, then "Tiny" Rowland, backed Trelford and Howard was 
soon out of a job. His last hope of becoming a national newspaper editor – he 
had set out, he said, with the ambition of editing the Guardian – was thus 
frustrated.

By then, however, he was a nationally recognised media and political pundit, 
appearing regularly on programmes such as Granada's What the Papers Say and 
Channel 4's Face the Press, and therefore had no difficulty sustaining a 
healthy freelance career, with weekly columns in the Independent and, later, 
the Times. He became the elder statesman of political commentators, with a 
remarkable memory for dates, names and incidents of 30 or more years previously 
and a knack of putting contemporary political events into a long perspective 
without seeming cynical about the present or tediously nostalgic about the 
past. He became the Times obituaries editor in 1993. After retirement in 1999, 
he continued his broadcasting and freelance writing career. He also continued 
to seek out the best restaurants, to frequent the Garrick and Beefsteak clubs 
and to attend parties assiduously, eagerly receiving and dispensing the latest 
gossip.

He is survived by his wife, Carol, whom he married in 1965.

Simon Hoggart writes: Unlike many political writers and commentators, Tony 
Howard knew that history did not begin in 1997, or even 1979. His memory 
stretched back far further; he knew the Macmillans, the Butlers, the Gaitskells 
and the Wilsons, and he also knew that their experience had just as much to 
teach us as that of the Blairs and Camerons. Which is why he was in such demand 
for radio and TV even after he had retired. Though he did not know the current 
crop of leading politicians, his antennae were as finely tuned as ever. Or 
perhaps he had just seen it all before.

Tony adored the competition of the office as much as Westminster politics, and 
was delighted to see his colleagues at each other's throats. But at the same 
time he was one of the kindest people I've met. Everyone who knew him well 
could quote acts of generosity, some small, others much greater, nearly always 
unnoticed except by the grateful recipients. (I know he saved my job at least 
once, after some act of indiscipline.)

He was something of a workaholic, writing several biographies as well as 
holding down his job. And he was always the first to leave the Observer 
drinking school at the new El Vino's. "Some of us have work to do," he would 
say after a brisk lunch, while his best friend and brother-in-law Alan Watkins 
would reply: "There is no need to rush, Master Howard. We shall finish our wine 
without undue haste," as Tony bustled off.

Robin Lustig writes: I first met Tony Howard in the summer of 1968, when he 
was Washington correspondent of the Observer and I was an undergraduate with a 
passionate interest in American politics. Armed only with a letter of 
introduction from my tutor, I contacted Tony to seek his advice and assistance 
as I researched a final-year dissertation on the doomed presidential campaign 
of Senator Eugene McCarthy. He was charming, generous with his time and 
knowledgable. It was the start of a friendship that lasted for more than 40 
years.

"Don't bother with newspapers," he advised me when I told him I intended to be 
a journalist. "Go straight into broadcasting – that's where the future is." I 
didn't follow his advice, but when he took over as editor of the New Statesman, 
and I was a young Reuters correspondent, he printed my stuff from time to time 
(under a nom de plume as it was strictly against the rules). Later, when he 
rejoined the Observer as deputy editor, I was already installed there, and he 
was soon giving me space on the leader pages.

When he left the Observer, I asked him if he intended to return to The World 
Tonight, for which he had earlier been an occasional presenter. "No," he said. 
"I don't believe in going back – but why don't you have a go?" There was only 
one big disadvantage, he said. You had to stay sober until 11pm.

• Anthony Michell Howard, journalist and broadcaster, born 12 February 1934; 
died 19 December 2010
 