
Sir Anthony Caro <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/caro> once famously 
said that he preferred his sculptures to be viewed in an enclosed space. Yet on 
Wednesday, Caro, commonly regarded as Britain's greatest living sculptor, put 
15 works on show in blazing sunshine in the spectacular grounds of Chatsworth 
House in Derbyshire.

At the opening of the exhibition, Caro said there was "a strictness" about the 
setting that had made him reconsider his view. "I'm trying to stand up against 
the Romantic, pastoral thing. What I really mean is that one should really look 
at the work and not see it as part of the garden or something, and that's 
happened here because there's enough space to do it."

The enormous steel sculptures at Chatsworth, which was built between 1687 and 
1702, rest on the grass around the 287-metre-long Canal Pond – Caro made art 
history in the early 1960s by abandoning the plinth. The exhibition includes 
two of Caro's early, brightly painted sculptures, but much of the work dates 
from the 1970s, when the artist was experimenting with rusted metal. The most 
imposing work is Goodwood Steps, which is 6.5 metres high and 33.5 metres 
across, almost blocking the view of the house.

"I don't think [ … the sculptures are] a challenge to the house but they're 
more like architectural things than pastoral things," said Caro. "The big one 
works with the house and I'm surprised it does."

Speaking at the launch, the Tate director, Sir Nicholas Serota, said that the 
work had "never looked better" than juxtaposed with Chatsworth's baroque 
splendour. He added that Caro was "in a certain sense a living legend … he took 
sculpture to a totally new place."

Peregrine Cavendish, the 12th Duke of Devonshire, who lives at Chatsworth, 
said that it was "a dream come true that this great artist should spread his 
work around our pond". Though Chatsworth has exhibited contemporary sculpture 
in its grounds for the past six years, and has a collection including pieces by 
Richard Long and Lucian Freud, this is the first show by a single artist.

The works were all loaned by Caro, who said they had been retrieved from a 
barn in Yorkshire where they were "covered in goo – this is the first time I've 
seen them pristine for years". He said that Goodwood Steps, which was 
originally commissioned for the Henry Moore Studio in Halifax, had to be fitted 
together like a jigsaw puzzle after the marks instructing how to do it had been 
lost.

"There was two foot of snow when they were installing it – hard to think of 
that today," said the duke. "The sculptures without any plinths, just growing 
out of the grass, look wonderful. We've had to cut the grass with nail scissors 
round it because obviously we can't use the strimmer but we'll deal with that."

Though admission to the house and grounds costs £20 per adult, the duke said 
he thought this was "very good value". The house has recently undergone an 
extensive restoration programme, including the re-gilding in gold leaf of 42 
large windows.

Though the duke said he expected visitors to come from all over the world to 
see both the exhibition and Chatsworth House itself, he added that he enjoyed 
looking at the sculptures on his own – "at least once a day".
 