
A spate of deaths among heroin users whose drugs were contaminated with 
anthrax has highlighted how addicts are "demonised" and struggle to get 
treatment, according to experts.

Since the contaminated batch was first detected in the UK last Christmas, 
almost 50 addicts have been admitted to hospital, while 13 have died.

Anthrax-related heroin deaths are extremely rare, and in the past were unheard 
of in the UK. There has been only one known previous outbreak among heroin 
users, and that took place in Norway in 2000.

The vast majority of the deaths in this new outbreak have occurred in 
Scotland, predominantly in Glasgow. Several heroin users have also contracted 
anthrax poisoning in England, and so far one person has died. There has also 
been one fatality in Germany and nine in Portugal, although the cause of these 
deaths is disputed.Drugs <https://www.theguardian.com/society/drugs> 
counsellors have told theObserver of their frustration that, as the crisis 
mounted, they were unable to help worried addicts switch to alternative drugs, 
such as methadone, because of lengthy waiting lists.

"Often, if we have a health scare among drug users, the advice we give is to 
use drugs in safer ways. For instance with HIV, we encouraged people to use 
needle exchanges," said Gareth Balmer, project manager of Addaction Dundee, a 
support centre. "But this time around, the message we were getting from 
government was to tell people to stop using heroin, which was as much use as a 
chocolate teapot.

"If we could have got people access to methadone or Subutex [another heroin 
substitute] very quickly, it wouldn't have been a ridiculous message, but we 
were looking at six-month waiting lists and, in some parts of Scotland, a 
year." Balmer said the situation had "brought home how behind we are in helping 
people access that treatment".

"Heroin users don't use heroin for fun; it's a physical and psychological 
dependency. We have a constant supply of people who would like to access 
methadone, but we felt as drug workers it was insulting people to say: 'There's 
possibly anthrax in your heroin; my advice is to stop using.' I was surprised I 
didn't get punched in the face."

Since May there has been only one new reported case of anthrax related to 
heroin use, leading to a belief among health professionals that the outbreak is 
coming to an end. However, a spokeswoman for Health Protection Scotland said: 
"There's still a risk and it's something drug users need to be aware of. If 
they show any symptoms, they should seek help as soon as possible."

Anthrax <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anthrax> infection can be cured if 
treated early enough. Common signs of infection are redness and swelling around 
the injection area. The scale of the outbreak is still being assessed, with 
checks being conducted at the top-secret Porton Down laboratory in Wiltshire, 
where biological and chemical weapons are tested.

How the anthrax found its way into the heroin is still open to question. Some 
addicts claimed it was part of a plot by shadowy government agencies to rid the 
country of drug users. Others speculated that it was the work of the Taliban, 
who control opium production in Afghanistan, where more than 90% of the UK's 
heroin comes from.

However, guidance issued to investigating police officers, seen by the Observer
, states that there are two likely causes: "Heroin could be naturally 
contaminated after harvesting from contact with soil in an area where an animal 
had died from anthrax at some point, or by being stored or transported in 
contact with animal products, especially skins, from an animal that had died 
from anthrax," the guidance states.

"The second option is that the heroin was contaminated at some stage during 
the cutting process… Of feasible agents, animal products are the most likely, 
and of these, bone meal would be suitable for cutting and has been associated 
with cases of cutaneous anthrax in people handling it in the past."

But despite the unprecedented number of deaths, the issue has been largely 
ignored. "Media indifference on this issue, considering the number of 
fatalities that have occurred, has been disappointing, but not surprising," 
said Martin Barnes, chief executive of DrugScope, an organisation that tracks 
trends in drug use. "These people are stigmatised and demonised. There is a 
feeling they are blameworthy and less deserving of public concern and 
attention."

The deaths have refocused attention on the 300,000 heroin users in the UK, 
around 2% of whom will die this year as a result of their drug use. They have 
drawn comparisons with an earlier health crisis that plagued the addict 
community when a batch of heroin was infected with botulism.

Experts note that the price of heroin has fallen significantly in the past 
year, possibly as a result of bumper harvests in Afghanistan. Currently a £10 
bag sold on the streets of Glasgow will contain 0.2g of heroin, compared with 
0.1g a year ago – although prices have started to rise again as larger 
quantities of the drug are diverted to China and eastern Europe.

Balmer warned that the crisis could yet reignite. "Our worry is that the 
infected heroin will be buried somewhere until the heat dies down. It happened 
with the botulism scare. Somebody could still be holding on to it until we've 
all forgotten about it."
 