
The prime minister and the leader of the opposition last night paid tribute to 
the political journalist and broadcasterAnthony Howard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/anthony-howard>, who died yesterday after a 
short illness following surgery for a ruptured aneurysm.

The 76-year-old former editor of the New Statesman worked for newspapers 
including the Guardian and the Times, and appeared on TV as a Westminster 
pundit. In the 1980s, he was the deputy editor of the Observer.

David Cameron said: "British politics has lost one of its best informed and 
talented commentators." Ed Miliband, the Labour leader, described Howard as "a 
distinguished political commentator" who had a talent for seeing "round the 
next political corner".

Although Howard had retired from full-time journalism, he was a regular guest 
on political television programmes, with broadcasters often calling on his 
knowledge during the general election campaign of 2010.

He became well known to viewers of the BBC's Panorama and Newsnight, and 
presented Face the Press on Channel 4, the Editors on Sky News, as well as many 
political programmes for BBC radio.

He was also keen to nurture new talent. Martin Amis, James Fenton, Robert 
Harris and Julian Barnes all began in journalism under his guidance.

Reflecting on his career in an interview 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/media/the-indestructible-journos-482007.html>
 two years ago, Howard said: "It's jolly nearly 50 years, which is a terribly 
long time. I started off in journalism in 1958. I still wake up wanting to know 
what happened next. It's the curiosity that keeps you going. There's never a 
morning I don't get up intrigued by turning on the radio or padding downstairs 
to pick up the papers.

"As you get old, you become less news-conscious and more commentary-conscious. 
I look back with pride on a piece I wrote for the Observer in 1983 warning 
readers of the self-indulgence of voting for the SDP, which would divert the 
cause of the underprivileged."

The former prime minister Gordon Brown described Howard as "a unique 
commentator and historian whose eloquence, wit and beliefs straddled 50 years 
of our history".

Miliband said: "Anthony Howard was ... someone who conveyed the excitement and 
importance of the events on which he was commenting.

"He knew the trivial from the important, the dramatic from the humdrum and 
could see round the next political corner.

"His raised eyebrow at the twists and turns of politics and the depth and 
rigour of his analysis will be sorely missed."

Labour MP John McDonnell lamented the loss of a "vastly knowledgeable, gifted 
journalist, who provided an objective critique of New Labour".

Despite being an expert in Labour politics, Howard had many friends from the 
other side of the House.

He had been close to the former Conserative deputy prime minister Lord 
Heseltine since they attended Oxford University together in the 1950s.

Last night Heseltine said: "It is a terrible shock. Tony was one of my oldest 
friends. He was a very kind and warm-hearted person with a deep, deep 
compassion.

"He had an encyclopaedic knowledge of contemporary British politics and the 
personalities that made it up and he had a very distinguished journalistic 
career."

Donald Trelford, the former Observer editor, who worked with Howard in the 
1980s, said: "Tony had a prodigious memory for political anecdotes, which stood 
him in good stead in later years as a book reviewer.

"He was an excellent editor of the New Statesman and the Listener and, if the 
timing of his career had been more fortunate, he should have edited a national 
newspaper."

Howard started his media career as a political journalist after training as a 
barrister. He worked for a variety of newspapers, serving as the Observer's 
chief American correspondent during the 1960s.

He returned to London to edit the New Statesman, from 1972 to 1978.

He edited the diaries of Richard Crossman, the former Labour cabinet minister, 
which were regarded as a departure in political memoirs in terms of sheer 
candour.

He ended his full-time career in newspaper journalism as the obituaries editor 
on the Times during the 1990s.

His own obituary in today's Times described him as "one of the most 
professional journalists of his generation... no one in journalism was less 
likely to back away from the truth".
 