
A national press campaign for the controversial film Antichrist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/antichrist> has escaped a ban from the 
advertising watchdog after complaints that it was offensive and even 
pornographic.

The campaign, which ran in the Times, the Guardian and the Independent, showed 
a man and a woman having sex. It carried a warning that the film "contains 
strong real sex, bloody violence and self-mutilation".

Seven complaints were received by the Advertising Standards Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/asa> claiming that the imagery in the ad was 
pornographic, offensive and inappropriate to be shown in a newspaper where it 
might be seen by children.

The company responsible for the campaign, Artificial Eye, said the image was 
the "international key art design" for the film, and had been supplied by the 
sales agent for the movie.

Antichrist, directed by Lars von Trier and starring Willem Dafoe and Charlotte 
Gainsbourg, has been dubbed the"most shocking movie ever to be shown at Cannes" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jul/26/lars-von-trier-horror>.

Artificial Eye admitted that it had developed an alternative ad, with quotes 
from reviews but no explicit images, for publishers and outdoor venues to use 
"if they found the original design unsuitable". As a result of the complaints, 
the company promised not to use the image of the naked couple in marketing the 
DVD release.

The three newspapers all said there had been no direct complaints and that the 
content was targeted at adults, not children.

In its ruling, the ASA said that the "dark tone" of the ad was "unlikely to 
cause sexual excitement" and was therefore not pornographic.

"We considered that the ad did not go too far in its depiction of the film's 
content, and was unlikely to be seen as irresponsible or cause serious or 
widespread offence to readers of Times, Guardian and Independent," the 
regulator added.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 