
It has been a fertile financial week for bigots. The astonishing scale of 
corruption allegedly unmasked at the offices of Wall Street fund manager Bernie 
Madoff has caused disproportionate pain in the Jewish community, prompting 
unedifying sneers on the blogosphere.

Madoff, who is thought to have lost $50bn of assets, recruited many of his 
private clients through informal social networks in New York, Florida and Los 
Angeles.

The sense of disappointment and betrayal is palpable – particularly among 
Jewish philanthropic organisations. Several charities have had to shut their 
doors overnight, including the Lappin foundation, which funded trips to Israel 
for children, and the Chais Family Foundation, which supports educational and 
health-related projects.

The Los Angeles-based Jewish Journal noted that the saga gave "ammo to 
antisemites everywhere" and highlighted mocking comments posted on a popular 
financial website, Dealbreaker. Another Jewish blogger, Tvzee's Talmudic Blog, 
complained that he had had to "moderate out many racist comments" after writing 
about Madoff.

The wrecking impact of Madoff's fraud on Jewish philanthropy has a broad 
impact which extends far beyond any single religious community. Gary Tobin, 
president of the Institute for Jewish and Community Research in San Francisco, 
reckons Jewish philanthropy in the US is worth about $5bn annually.

The money is spent on everything from poverty relief to educational 
initiatives, bridge-building between religions and community centres – which 
are open to people from any faith.

"I know the antisemitic websites are picking this up – they love Jewish cabals 
and conspiracies," says Tobin. "But for most of the world, the antisemitic 
reaction will be minimal. This is a philanthropic and charitable tragedy – it's 
more sad than anything else."

The Wall Street Journal noted that older Jewish investors put so much faith in 
Madoff that they jokily nicknamed him "the Jewish bond". Lawyers for Madoff's 
victims say that in a close-knit community, people put a disproportionate 
amount of trust in a small number of individuals. Ross Intelisano, a 
class-action lawyer based in New York, says: "We've been talking to a lot of 
direct investors. This is a rare case in which a lot of investors we've spoken 
to had all their money with one firm."

Many have lost everything overnight. Arnold Sinkin, a retired carpet-fitter in 
Florida, lost the nest egg of nearly $1m he built up with his wife, Joan.

"We started out by giving $5,000 to him [Madoff] in the 1970s," said Joan 
Sinkin. "At the time, $5,000 for us was really a huge amount. I think we 
probably had about $1.75 left in the bank once we'd given it to him."

The septuagenarian couple's retirement planning crashed to earth when Madoff's 
alleged fraud materialised last week. They will be selling their apartment in 
New York City and relying on their children for financial help.

On an institutional level, the impact goes far beyond any single community. 
Banks as far afield as Japan, Switzerland and Spain are suffering 
Madoff-related losses, not to mention Britain's HSBC and Royal Bank of 
Scotland. Even Hampshire County Council somehow managed to stick part of its 
pension fund in Madoff's business (although everybody says he was choosy about 
whose money he accepted).

In New York, one secular charity destroyed by Madoff's apparent corruption is 
the JEHT Foundation, which stands for "justice, equality, human dignity and 
tolerance". Since 2000, the charity has promoted reform of the criminal justice 
system to try to reduce the rate of incarceration in the US, handing out $25m 
to $30m annually.

The funds of JEHT's donors, Jeanne and Kenneth Levy-Church, were managed by 
Madoff and have evaporated overnight. The foundation's director, Robert Crane, 
has the shattering task of shutting down the charity.

"We're going to cease existence at the end of January," Crane told me. "All of 
our 24 people will lose their jobs."

It's a pretty dismal situation – and Madoff ought to be ashamed.

"It's devastating not only for us but for the people we support," says Crane. 
"In the areas we operate, there aren't a huge number of other funds, which 
makes the impact even worse."
 