
An anti-airport protester was jailed for three-and-a-half years today for 
sending a series of bomb hoaxes and threats to Gatwick over a five-year period.

Gary Collins, 57, took action against the Sussex airport because he had 
suffered noise disturbance since he was a young child. Collins, of Crawley, was 
an "archetypal loner" who suffered from a personality disorder, Lewes Crown 
Court heard.

He pleaded guilty to 34 counts of communicating false information and three 
counts of sending hoax noxious substances from October 2003 to October last 
year. Prosecutor Dale Sullivan said Collins sent letters or packages to the 
airport, including one with a note stating: "You started the war, we will 
finish it." Some others were sent marked as anthrax or biological material, and 
one package carried a note saying: "Die you evil pigs."

Detailing examples of Collins' threats, Sullivan said one letter told staff 
there was a bomb in an aircraft toilet, another said a bomb was imminent and a 
further one referred to stopping aircraft noise.

Others said "Explosive device on aircraft" and another stated "Bomb in main 
building". Sullivan told the court: "The impact on BAA was a serious one as 
they were not threats they could simply brush off."

He added that the airport was not shut at any time but a substantial amount of 
time was invested into investigating the series of threats and hoaxes made by 
Collins.

Collins was eventually arrested as a result of "old-fashioned" techniques by 
Sussex Police but he offered no comment in interviews, even when presented with 
forensic evidence.

Defence counsel Andrew Stephens said in mitigation that although Collins does 
not suffer from a clear mental illness, experts believe he has a personality 
disorder.

Stephens described Collins, who had no previous convictions, as an "archetypal 
loner" who has little to do with his family and has only ever had sporadic 
periods of employment.

Explaining the motive behind his actions, Stephens said: "He fixated upon 
Gatwick Airport. He suffers from noise, noise at Gatwick in particular became 
too much for him to bear.

"He should have sought other avenues, like petitioning his MP. He chose to 
take a direct stance. Although an extremely long-standing campaign, it was a 
naive and unsophisticated campaign."

Stephens said letters were often sent second class, showing a lack of thought 
behind his campaign and other threats contained what at first glance was 
clearly pepper.

The court also heard that Collins said he decided to reduce the number of 
threatening letters and packages he sent when the cost of postage became too 
expensive for him.

Stephens went on: "This is a 57-year-old man who has led a difficult life, a 
life which from the very outset has gone against him ... a man who makes a 
campaign, I accept, but was unsophisticated and fruitless in that no disruption 
was caused."
 