
My first memory is of my mamma cooking. We were living above the railway 
station in Castelnuovo Belbo [in northern Italy] where papa was station master, 
and mamma would send me downstairs to see when the last train before lunch was 
coming, then within five minutes – just before papa sat down – she'd cook fresh 
pasta.

I have scarring up my left arm from pulling a pot of coffee off the stove at 
three years old. I don't remember it, but they say I was very courageous – or 
traumatised – as the doctor pulled off the burnt skin.

In 1944 we were caught between fascist soldiers and partisan soldiers and 
mamma would cook for both – the wehrmacht came for lunch and the resistance for 
dinner. I was a mascot to both and they'd give me chocolate.

The partisans said anyone with two pigs would have to hand one over. That 
night, my father had one of our two secretly killed, with its blood drained for 
black pudding. I'll never forget the terrible squealing below my bedroom.  

After the war - without the booby traps - it was safer to go foraging, which I 
loved. The only thing mamma discouraged was mulberries, because she couldn't 
wash the juice stains from our clothes. I still often go foraging today. 
There's so much available and I just can't understand why the British only pick 
blackberries.

I was called home to discover my 10-year-old brother Enrico had died – which 
was probably the start of my depressions. I'd taught him to forage for 
mushrooms and to kill and gut a rabbit and he'd felt like a son to me [Antonio 
was 23 when Enrico died]. The day after he died I bought a kilo of anchovies 
and washed and prepared them and made a green sauce with parsley. This took all 
day and I think was the start of me using cooking to relieve sadness and to 
bring meaning and purpose.

In west Berlin in the 1960s I went through Checkpoint Charlie to visit a 
relation of my girlfriend in east Berlin and I took two big bags of oranges, 
bananas and other things people didn't have there. But when I got there it was 
embarrassing – he had everything already because he was secretary of the 
Communist party.

In Italy teenagers go home for dinner – it's where they can discuss their 
problems.This is something often missing in Britain. Most of my happiest 
memories are at table. Although I tipped the table on to the floor when one 
lover said she wanted everything when we split up. 

When I was in Hamburg, working in wine importing, the owner of the house I 
lived in wanted a party. I prepared a whole table of wonderful food, but while 
I was out of the room my dog, Yan, jumped on the table and ate or ruined 
everything. After that he hid under the bed for three days. 

My worst customer was a pain in the arse. Knowing alcohol couldn't be served 
after 11pm, he would order a bottle of port at one minute to 11 and then take 
until 3am to drink it. One night I sent the staff home and then exclaimed: 'No! 
I'm fed up! Go. Go!' The best was Alec Guinness, who would come in, wanting to 
sit alone quietly at a table with a book and a bottle of wine, and then leave a 
£20 tip. OFM

Antonio Carluccio: A Recipe for Life 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781742703923>
 (Hardie Grant, £20) is out now
 