
Traffic had stopped, shops were shut and paving stones were being uprooted to 
build barricades. Up on a roof a British volunteer soldier, gun to hand, waited 
for what looked like an inevitable battle in the street below between the 
communists and his own leftist group, the Poum militia. At least George Orwell 
had a great view of Barcelona. He could see "vista after vista of tall, slender 
buildings, glass domes and fantastic curly roofs with brilliant green and 
copper tiles; over to eastward the glittering pale blue sea."

Orwell was not in Barcelona as a tourist, and this is the one lyrical 
description of the city in Homage To Catalonia, his memoir of fighting in the 
Spanish civil war. He had more urgent things on his mind than identifying the 
architect of those "fantastic curly roofs". And in fact even today, when the 
fame ofAntoni Gaudí <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/antoni-gaudi> is 
probably unmatched by any other architect, you can still encounter in the 
streets of Barcelona a Gaudí building you hadn't known about. It happened to me 
recently. I came out of the Passeig de Gràcia station on to a dusty, 
traffic-roaring city street and there, among the dense facades, was a house 
that bulged and warped, reaching up to a turquoise, green and violet elfish 
cap, like a fairyland roof in a children's book. The entire front was dappled 
with shards of technicolour tiles, bent into balconies, supported by massive 
stone limbs. At the summit was a tower topped by a bulbous cross.

Was it a Gaudí? For a moment I wasn't sure, but one thing I knew - I was 
uplifted by this building as by almost no other I have seen.

In his book about the architecture of another great seaside city, The Stones 
Of Venice, the Victorian critic John Ruskin makes some claims about 
architecture that can seem pretty romantic - until you encounter Casa Batlló. 
Human beings, Ruskin insists, by nature want to do good, not bad - and that is 
why we respond to the sight of true goodness when it is fixed in stone. Can 
architecture be morally as well as aesthetically beautiful? I can only say that 
on my first view of Casa Batlló, I felt the same sense of goodness and virtue 
that moved Ruskin in the religious architecture of the middle ages. And I 
realised it had to be a Gaudí.

I'm sure it was Casa Batlló that caught Orwell's eye as he stood at his sentry 
post in May 1937. He was stationed near Plaça de Catalunya, where anarchists 
had seized the telephone exchange, and the Passeig de Gràcia, on which stands 
Gaudí's unreal house, runs from there. What I noticed first was how magically 
it enriches the Barcelona of now. Cars rush past, pedestrians rush past, it's a 
fast city, not some toytown, yet here is this building that seems worthy of 
heaven itself, right on the street.

When you look closer, it is not such an ordinary street. Gaudí's masterpiece 
is flanked by other extravagant fin-de-siècle creations. One is a quixotic 
blend of Moorish fantasy and Venetian gothic, another has a stepped roof 
covered in tiles, like a Dutch merchant's house intoxicated by fiesta. These 
are the houses of rich businessmen determined to flaunt their wealth. They were 
built in explicit rivalry and in the glare of publicity in the early 1900s - 
the row of rivals was dubbed "the apple of discord" and the houses, too, had 
nicknames: Gaudí's was La Casa dels Ossos (House of Bones) because its columns 
look a bit like femurs. Critics and cartoonists mocked the intense ambition of 
the architects Domènech i Montaner, Puig i Cadafalch - and Antoni Gaudí.

A stylistic explosion was convulsing Barcelona 100 years ago. Gaudí is the 
genius of modernisme - not "modernism" as we now understand the word but a very 
different aesthetic, a distinctive Catalan version of art nouveau's florid 
response to the challenge of turn-of-the-century life.

As is shown by Barcelona 1900, a major exhibition of this modernisme before 
modernism now on at the Van Gogh Museum in Amsterdam, it didn't spring from 
nowhere. Hundreds of years earlier, Barcelona had been the great sea port of 
the medieval land of Aragon, with its own language and a Catalan cultural 
identity that spilled over into France. Castile and Aragon were unified in the 
Renaissance, with the new state dominated by Castile. By the 19th century, 
Spain was a sad, ruinous place where Catholicism was violently enforced in an 
impoverished society left behind by the Industrial Revolution. Barcelona was 
different - it was dynamic, locked into European markets, and saw itself as a 
cultural leader of a Catalonia that had more in common with Paris than Madrid. 
Artists such as the young Picasso - who first made his name as part of a group 
of modernista dandies who hung out at the "artistic" cafe Els Quatre Gats - 
moved easily between Gaudí's Barcelona and the Montmartre of Toulouse-Lautrec. 
The "modern" style was deeply romantic, a smoky dream of city life. Perhaps the 
closest thing to Gaudí's flowing architecture outside Barcelona are the sinuous 
art nouveau bronze tendrils of Paris metro station entrances - one of which can 
be seen now in the Salvador Dalí museum in his birthplace, Figueras, near 
Barcelona. Dalí, proudly Catalan, claimed Gaudí as his true inspiration, and 
adored the "terrifying and edible" modernista style.

So Barcelona modern was about finding a poetry for the new, turbulent world of 
the 20th-century city - and none was more turbulent than this. On the one hand, 
it was home to the nouveaux riches in palaces comparable to those of the Medici 
and Strozzi in Renaissance Italy, yet it was also a place of extreme 
working-class poverty. In 1909 the city was torn apart by riots - a foretaste 
of the civil war that would come in 1936 when Franco's army rebelled against a 
democratic republic in the name of Catholic Spain. This was what brought to 
Barcelona, centre of the people's resistance, volunteers such as Orwell.

Looking at the buildings on Passeig de Gràcia, it is all too easy to see how 
the modernista style fits into this city's story. In the end the great palaces 
of Domènech i Montaner and Puig i Cadafalch are no more moving than any overt 
display of money. Yet that is not what Gaudí's Casa Batlló feels like at all. 
It, too, was commissioned by a rich bourgeoisie, but it projects this 
extraordinary communal ethos.

Some sense of inner coherence tells you even from the street that there are 
wonders within the Casa Batlló. In the hall, every wall and fitting curves, in 
spiralling, sea-like movements: you feel as if you are inside a deep cave. 
Books are filled with his technicolour ornament, yet the invisible is what 
matters most in Gaudí's architecture - the oceanic and subterranean sense of 
space it generates. He embraces you in an inner world whose contours are 
defined by construction so softly yielding that, walking up the broadly 
circling staircase, you feel as if you're being carried into the house on a 
gentle updraught. In an upstairs alcove, a tiled fireplace with fitted seats is 
sunk into a wall, a homely architectural fitting, emanating kindness and love.

Gaudí, you might conclude, must have been a settled family man. In fact, he 
never married (though he had a couple of unrequited passions) and his life was 
one of fervent Catholic asceticism. He was born in 1852, the son of a 
coppersmith. His parents made big sacrifices so he could study architecture at 
the University of Barcelona. In a city obsessed with building, it wasn't hard 
to get work as an architect and he soon secured a network of rich, religious 
patrons, above all the industrialist Don Eusebi Güell. Catholic piety bound his 
little social world: once during Lent, Gaudí fasted so extremely it endangered 
his health.

In other words, Gaudí is one of those whose biography tells you almost nothing 
about his work. That he was intense and disciplined is obvious from his 
achievement, and on top of the Casa Batlló a white flower-like cross proclaims 
the architect's faith. But where do the dreamlike freedom and grave hedonism of 
this house come from? To enter its great front room is to be amazed that anyone 
actually lived in this heavenly salon. The ceiling is liquid, the swirling 
vortex sculpted into it making it seem to be revolving and billowing. The 
windows look out not simply on the city but on the city transfigured by massive 
stonework. The solid dissolves and space is given form.

There's not a sightline that does not afford some new surprise, some subtle or 
bold pleasure. You pass through rooms that curve and wobble, up the blue-tiled 
stairwell of tenants' flats, to a white, ethereal attic and finally on to that 
fairyland roof.

Architecture <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture> is the 
art we all encounter most often, most intimately, yet precisely because it is 
functional and necessary to life, it's hard to be clear about where the "art" 
in a building begins. Architectural genius is not about conforming to a certain 
set of rules. The architect's greatest achievement is to make a building 
contain a thought. For me, there is something incomparably mysterious about 
entering a building that is the self-expression of a passionate mind.

I've lingered in the Casa Batlló because for me it is Gaudí's masterpiece, 
where he perfectly achieves this sense of expression and poetry, yet it is a 
functioning house and apartment block. A poet doesn't have to include light 
fittings or doors. A painter doesn't have to put in a toilet. But an architect 
has to. The house has to work. To achieve that and to transform everything 
about the place into a unified work of art... how do you do it?

You have to have an exceptionally strong vision, an almost mystical sense of 
purpose. This is why so many of the greatest architects - Michelangelo, Bernini 
and Borromini, Gaudí - have been deeply religious. You could say architecture 
is the best reply to militant atheists such as Richard Dawkins because almost 
all the world's finest buildings are religious. But Gaudí was not working in a 
straightforward Christian tradition. Far from it.

Casa Batlló is a place to live in, yet it tantalises the mind with the idea of 
paradise. Has anyone ever built anything as dreamlike? The answer is yes. The 
first time I visited Barcelona, I'd just got off a train from Andalucía and my 
head was full of Moorish mosques and palaces. I remember wandering in the 
Alhambra in the evening light, under its stalactite-like stucco ceilings, with 
the view of Granada and the blue sky seeming to float in the windows, and 
actually raving loudly, "I'm in heaven!" I haven't been back in years, but I 
had exactly that sensation in Casa Batlló - and not accidentally. Spain's 
heritage of Islamic architecture, unique in Europe, includes some of Islam's 
highest artistic achievements.

Gaudí's architecture is inspired by Al-Andalus not just in its flashes of 
orientalism - his first major house, Casa Vicens in Barcelona, is a Moorish 
pastiche - and his use of coloured tiles, but above all in his shaping of 
space. You do not look at the Alhambra as you would, say, at the dome of St 
Peter's - you move through it, inhabit it. Gaudí's walls and ceilings are as 
oscillating and unreal as the walls of Islam and create the same rich sense of 
a reality on the verge of vanishing into pure spirit. Yet he's undeniably a 
Christian architect.

The crowds spill out of the metro and press against the railings to look up at 
the cascading waterfalls and stalactites, the angels, boats, caves and trumpets 
that spill down from above, all sculpted in stone, much of it nearly a century 
ago, some of it more recently. Some English blokes sit on the steps talking 
about a boozy night. You don't have to care about the place to come here - the 
Sagrada Família is the necessary destination for every visitor to Barcelona.

Inside people are queueing to go up the tapering towers and the shop is full 
of model Sagrada Famílias, plastic forests of cones. But stand in the cavernous 
interior, where men are patiently piecing together massive white stone vaulting 
to Gaudí's design, and it is as if you were in one of the great and enigmatic 
cathedrals of 13th- and 14th-century Europe when they were still being built. 
In the Sagrada Família, he created not a building, but an experience of 
building. He started a process that has gone on ever since and will go on much 
longer yet - and it is a sort of ethical and imaginative education. I've never 
been at a building site like this before, where the laying of every stone, the 
carving of every detail by modern artisans following Gaudí's plans, is a 
sacred, reverent act.

Gaudí took on the commission in 1883, when he was just starting his career. In 
his lifetime he saw much of the facade finished and began the towers. It's a 
slow build, but not yet as slow as the gothic cathedrals of Cologne and Milan, 
each of which took centuries. When Gaudí started work on his sacred building, 
it was not necessarily the act of a mystic: religious architecture was very 
much in the mainstream of 19th-century culture. The wonder of the Sagrada 
Família is that it does more than echo gothic style; it goes to the heart of 
medieval building, shared by the Moors in Andalucía and the master masons of 
Salisbury or Notre Dame: that mystical belief in the nobility and grace of 
reverently assembled stone, that desire to build a temple worthy of the divine, 
to give the earthbound a glimpse of heaven's majesty.

The Sagrada Família instantly won over the city - but not Orwell. After the 
May days in 1937 when the Poum was outlawed, he had to go underground. By night 
he slept in gutted churches - destroyed by workers who believed Catholicism 
colluded in oppressing the poor - and by day he pretended to be a tourist. "For 
the first time since I had been in Barcelona, I went to have a look at the 
cathedral... one of the most hideous buildings in the world. It had four 
crenellated spires the same shape as hock bottles. Unlike most churches in 
Barcelona it was not damaged during the revolution - it was spared because of 
its 'artistic value' people said."

Gaudí died in 1926, 10 years before the civil war began. He was hit by a tram 
and looked so poor and dishevelled, people thought he was a homeless indigent. 
But his building was already more than a work of art in the city's imagination: 
it was seen, rightly, as being somehow on the side of the people, rather than 
flaunting the church's power and wealth. An 1898 painting by Joaquim Mir shows 
starving, ragged people sitting around the building site of the unfinished 
Sagrada Família; the painting is called The Cathedral Of The Poor. It seems 
Orwell was being politically as well as aesthetically tone deaf. Mir's scene of 
urban poverty resembles the depiction of the marginalised in Picasso's Blue 
Period paintings - his homages to the poor of Barcelona. Like him, Gaudí 
captured the tragedy as well as the pride of this city.

He is the greatest urban architect of modern times, not just giving Barcelona 
its look but actively reforming the life of the city. He didn't only design 
places to live and pray, but sought to influence the life of an entire 
community - and succeeded. The only place that offers more fantastic modernist 
thrills is New York - but you can't call the greatest American architects 
"urban" designers. Frank Lloyd Wright's Guggenheim Museum is a beautiful 
artefact that does nothing for the city around it. Even the most amazing 
skyscrapers stand alone. Here's an amazing fact: in 1908 Gaudí was asked to 
design a hotel in New York. His drawings imagine a conical skyscraper 
reminiscent of the Sagrada Família's towers, but twice as high. It was never to 
be - but what would Gaudí have done for Manhattan? Would it have compared to 
what he did for Barcelona?

To see a Gaudí building elsewhere - the Casa de los Botines in Leon, say - is 
to see a fish out of water. His buildings grow out of Barcelona and back into 
it. But what makes them masterpieces of urbanity is their unshakable, magical 
sense of giving. They give to the city, to the people. This is why a Gaudí 
odyssey has to culminate among the mosaic lizards, skewed Doric columns, 
intestinal passages, strung-out stones and wide, kidney-like terraces of Park 
Güell, the landscaped park he created on a hill above the city. It was planned 
as a private park for residents of a posh development, and inspired by English 
aristocratic estates - but it's impossible to detect an elitist iota in this 
most admirable of shared spaces.

People glory in this place. Walking under the terraces, hiding in a watery 
grotto or hanging out on the great belvedere, you feel a freedom. From the 
terrace you look over the city that stretches to the blue sea. As it says on 
the Sagrada Família - Sanctus. Sanctus.

·Barcelona 1900 is at the Van Gogh Museum in Amsterdam (vangoghmuseum.nl 
<http://www.vangoghmuseum.nl>) until January 20.
 