
The Little Prince's departure from Earth was as sad as it was mysterious: 
allowing himself to be bitten by a poisonous snake in an effort to leave the 
human world and return to the tiny asteroid-home from whence he came.

Beginning next year, however, Antoine de Saint-Exupéry's blond hero, whose 
adventures have sold 80m copies sinceLe Petit Prince was first published in 
1943, is set for a spectacular return to the planet that sometimes depressed 
him.

Up first will be an ambitious 52-part animated series following the new 
adventures of the Little Prince. A video game is also being developed, as is an 
exhibition associated with the book. In addition, the French publishing house 
Gallimard plans to publish 100 titles associated with Saint-Exupéry's book.

Finally, and most significantly, a major new animated 3D film is in production 
retelling the original story and produced by Aton Soumache and Dimitri Rassam.

Olivier d'Agay, president of the Succession Saint-Exupéry d'Agay estate, which 
looks after the author's intellectual rights, and who runs a youth foundation 
dedicated to his memory, has been instrumental in the reinvention of the Little 
Prince to make the character relevant to the 21st century.

Once again, the Little Prince sets off to visit neighbouring planets, but this 
time it is a more conventional adventure.

"He is back on asteroid B612, and the Little Prince is once again confronted 
by the snake, who has decided to put out, one after the other, the planets of 
the Milky Way," explains director Pierre-Alain Chartier, the series director.

D'Agay told the Observer: "We wanted to rededicate the Little Prince to the 
children of the 21st century. OriginallyAntoine de Saint-Exupéry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/antoine-de-saint-exupery> wrote The Little 
Prince as an adult book. We wanted to touch children today with the Little 
Prince via new medias."

D'Agay, who has been advising the producers of the TV series, admits there was 
considerable trepidation when the project was mooted. "It was a headache. The 
most difficult thing was making up our minds how to adapt the character. "

The eventual decision was to confront the Little Prince with issues familiar 
to a young audience, including the protection of the planet and sustainability.

"He will help save the new planets that he visits. Not on his own. But he'll 
help fix the problems."

The original story of the Little Prince is about acquiring wisdom, as the boy 
leaves home and his friend, the rose, to visit other asteroids inhabited by a 
series of flawed figures before arriving on Earth. There, his assumptions are 
challenged before his pathos-filled decision to abandon his body and return 
home.

The Little Prince's lasting appeal has been guaranteed by its sometimes 
complex philosophical themes: about the nature of friendship, the search for 
knowledge, and social criticism which draws on some of Saint-Exupéry's own 
experiences – in the desert following a plane crash, and during childhood, when 
he lost a younger brother, François.

The popularity and singularity of the book, as well as transforming the 
character into a cultural icon, has led to many previous attempts to imagine 
what happened next to B612's most famous inhabitant. In the last decade and a 
half alone, three sequels have been written, including one by a niece of 
Saint-Exupéry's wife, Consuelo.

The author never had the opportunity to enjoy the original book's success. It 
was published while Saint-Exupéry was in the US after fleeingFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> following the 1940 armistice 
agreement with Germany, coming out barely a year before his disappearance in 
1944 while flying a reconnaissance mission for the Free French Forces over the 
Mediterranean.

Before penning the poetic novella, which he also illustrated, the aristocratic 
Saint-Exupéry had been best known for his writing on aviation:Southern Mail, 
Night Flight and Wind, Sand and Stars – the latter describing how he survived a 
crash in the Libyan desert.

But interest in The Little Prince, far from diminishing over the years, has 
exploded. Some of it has been prompted by interest in Saint-Exupéry himself. 
Two years ago his crashed plane was discovered along with a bracelet belonging 
to the author. But the chief explanation is the enduring charm of the tale.

The book has also proved inspirational in other media. It was used as the 
basis for a Super Mario game as well as an episode ofLost. The Little Prince 
has also been used as a virtual ambassador for an anti-smoking campaign, by the 
energy services group Veolia, and by the computer group Toshiba as a symbol of 
environmental protection.

And while many admirers will be delighted, for some purists the television 
series to be screened next year may prove challenging.

The Little Prince in the television serial is encountered back on his asteroid 
with his rose and the wise fox who appeared later in the original work.

What would Saint-Exupéry have made of the latest sequel?

"It's going to be beautiful," says Olivier d'Agay. "He would have been 
delighted. He loved children."
 