
In the years since he used his dad's camera to snap an obscure prog-rock band 
called Solution,Anton Corbijn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/anton-corbijn> has remained besotted with 
photography. He's been such an exhaustive chronicler of U2 and Depeche Mode 
that he's known as both bands' invisible member. You may not know his picture 
byline, but you will know his images of Nirvana, Leonard Cohen, Tom Waits, and 
Brian Eno. Then, three years ago, he became a film director, making the 
award-winning Control about troubled Mancunian glum rockers Joy Division.

Corbijn giggles. "I didn't really know how to make a film when I made Control. 
I had to create my own language, just as I did when I started taking 
photographs. I never studied either one." But surely clueless film directors 
don't win prizes at Cannes? "True, but film-making is extreme for me. I can't 
use lights. I need others to help me to put shots together. Directing film is 
the hardest thing I have ever done." Even though you directed more than 100 
rock videos? "I know just enough not to look stupid. Mostly that means I know 
who to ask."

That is too modest. In fact, Corbijn has won several awards for his videos, 
including one for Nirvana's Heart-Shaped Box. When Kurt Cobain asked Corbijn to 
direct the video for Nirvana's next single, Pennyroyal Tea, Corbijn said he 
couldn't do better than his previous video, so declined. Cobain said if Corbijn 
wouldn't direct it, Nirvana would never make another video. They didn't.

Now Corbijn has stepped even further from his comfort zone. Aged 55, he has 
directed his second feature, and it has nothing to do with music. Instead, The 
American is a hard-boiled, Hollywood-funded thriller starringGeorge Clooney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/georgeclooney> as a hitman holed up in an 
Italian hill village. It's already been talked of as an Oscar contender and 
went straight to No 1 in the US box office over the commercially important 
Labor Day weekend – even though the critical reaction was mixed. "A lot of 
critics were angry," laughs Corbijn. "The trailer made it look like it was one 
thing – a fast-paced, popcorn, Hollywood thriller – when it was something else 
entirely. So when they got into the screenings and found that it was a European 
take on a western, they were furious."

That makes The American sound funless, which it isn't, but Corbijn certainly 
relishes stillness and silence. The gunshots that punctuate the film are 
startling, and the film's considerable tension comes from the fact that the 
audience knows so little about the hitman's motivations – except that the 
hunter has turned hunted and he ain't gonna stand for it.

What U2's Bono said of Corbijn's photography applies to his cinema, too: "He 
sees pleasure through guilty eyes and he sees good and evil in very dramatic 
ways."

"I gave them Sergio Leone when some critics probably wanted Spider-Man 13," 
says Corbijn. His debt to the Italian maker of spaghetti westerns is overt: in 
one scene, when Clooney sips an espresso in an Italian cafe, the rest of the 
clientele is absorbed in a Leone classic on the TV. And, while Clooney's 
assassin is not quite a Man with No Name, he plays Jack in the manner Clint 
Eastwood neglected to patent, as an efficient, hard-faced killer unburdened by 
backstory or ethical code.

Corbijn says he got the idea for the film from one of many scripts he was sent 
after Control. It was an adaptation of the novel A Very Private Gentleman by 
Martin Booth, in which a British assassin holes up in Abruzzo. "I read the 
novel and thought there was a better script in it." More importantly, he 
thought it would be better if the antihero were American, and Rowan Joffe's new 
script adhered to that stricture. "I had worked with English actors on Control 
which was amazing, but I wanted to experience European and American actors. So 
I made the protagonist American and put him in Italy.

"I wanted to make a thriller in which you see people walk a lot. I like to 
watch people walk. I love body language. I don't like fast editing."

So how did Corbijn lure one of Hollywood's biggest stars to play in this 
outré-sounding project? "George was into it, which surprised me. Maybe it's 
because he's never played such a dark character. Perhaps in Michael Clayton or 
Syriana he was unsympathetic, but he's never been this harsh or unappealing. It 
was fabulous for me that he was able to go that dark. He does so much with so 
little. He was ideal."

Making The American allowed Corbijn to revisit his childhood. He grew up in a 
small village on a small island off Rotterdam. "There was nothing there. I was 
very shy and spent a lot of time on my own." His father, also called Anton, was 
a Dutch Reformed Church minister. "It was such a religious family that we 
didn't have a TV or a record player for a long time.

"Before we had a TV, I would go to the neighbours to watch Saturday morning 
TV. There was either Comedy Capers with Buster Keaton or western stuff like 
Rawhide. I always preferred the westerns, and this film is a tribute to those 
westerns. That was my heritage: American not Dutch." Plus, I suggest to 
Corbijn, the film is about a loner as you once were and, perhaps, remain. "I 
was certainly very shy, but I became something else because of photography."

As the credits roll on The American, we hear two Dutch rock songs on the 
soundtrack, She Was Naked by Supersister and Windows of My Eyes by Cuby and the 
Blizzards. "Nobody outside Holland will have heard of them, but I photographed 
these bands when I was young, and they meant a great deal to me. Putting the 
songs in the film is my way of thanking those bands for giving me a life."

Corbijn became a professional photographer for Dutch pop mags after shooting 
Solution in Groningen. "When those pictures – which weren't very good – got 
published, I thought: 'Bingo! I'm in!'" Aged 24, he decided to try his luck as 
a photographer across the North sea.

He didn't get a warm welcome. "Within two weeks of arriving, I was 
photographing Joy Division. I tried to shake hands with them, but they 
refused." That was November 1979. "I met Ian [Curtis, the band's lead singer] 
once more and then he was dead." And yet one of the most memorable images of 
Curtis is by Corbijn, depicting the singer sitting cross-legged and 
angst-ridden on an amp.

Not long afterwards, he was made chief photographer at the New Musical 
Express. "I remember the then editor Neil Spencer showing me the office. The 
journalists were hunched over their typewriters. I remember one singing: ' I 
hate the fucking Dutch. They live in windmills and wear clogs.' And the last 
line of the song went: 'Worst of all, I hate the fucking Danes.' At least, I 
thought, I wasn't Danish."

Did being a foreigner help you establish an intimacy with your subjects? "I 
suppose so – I wasn't seen as very threatening even though I'm very tall. 
Perhaps it's my gangliness rather than my foreignness that makes me less 
threatening."

Corbijn detects five periods in his oeuvre. "First came the documentary period 
– I was outside looking in. Then there was the portrait period – when a lot of 
doors opened and I was looking from the inside. Then I had a third period in 
which fame became interesting – I was inside looking out."

The fourth period was the most unexpected for this shy Dutch boy. He became a 
performer, emulating the great photographic artist Cindy Sherman. He got made 
up, put himself on the other side of the camera and shot himself in bleak Dutch 
settings disguised as a series of dead musicians – John Lennon, Jimi Hendrix, 
Sid Vicious, Elvis, Frank Zappa. The resulting book was a revealing document 
about his obsessions. "I guess I always wanted to be 'a somebody', and I only 
admitted this to myself in my 40s," he said. One of the happiest moments in his 
professional life, he says, was when Depeche Mode's drummer couldn't make it to 
the Top of the Pops studio so Corbijn (an amateur drummer) stepped in and was 
paid by the BBC for his performance.

"Now I'm on my fifth period. I take a lot of photographs of painters like 
Lucian Freud and Richard Prince." Why? "I'm a frustrated painter. You're 
totally your own boss. You don't have to travel."

Corbijn does have to travel for his work. "I'm always on the road. That's 
why I haven't got kids – it would be hopeless for them and for me," he says. He 
is divorced and now lives, at least notionally, in the Hague.

At this point, Corbijn stands up and asks to be excused for a moment. His eyes 
are hurting, and he needs to bathe them in the bathroom. Sore eyes, I can't 
help thinking, are the result of a life spent looking. When he comes back, I 
remind him of what he wrote in the introduction to one of his photography 
books: "It feels to me like I just hacked my way out of the eggshell and just 
started looking around me with all the undirected eagerness and curiosity of a 
young chicken." After 55 years, that chicken is still curious, though his eager 
gaze is more directed.

Do you not want to settle down? "Not really. I still love my job, and my 
friends are all on the road, or scattered around the globe. You have a simple 
camera and you meet interesting people and have a cup of tea and go home. 
There's nothing not to like about that." But surely photography and film-making 
are about more than that for you? "Of course they are. They're about playing 
with my friends. When I was little boy I didn't have many. Now I have a few."

 The American is reviewed on page 10. Anton Corbijn appears at the National 
Portrait Gallery on 3 December to discuss his work as a photographer.
 