
Aphex Twin <https://www.theguardian.com/music/aphex-twin> has returned to the 
theme of 9/11 in a new interview, saying those who believe the official story 
about the attacks on the twin towers are “absolutely gullible”.

In a recent interview with Q, Richard James had said he believed in conspiracy 
theories because they are more fun. Speaking to his friendDave Noyze at Noyzelab
 <http://noyzelab.blogspot.co.uk/2014/11/syrobonkers-part1.html>, he went 
further when asked if there was anything he wanted to say that he hadn’t said 
in other interviews. “I keep forgetting that most people are totally friggin’ 
oblivious to how they are being programmed and controlled from birth upwards 
from your name, being a ‘citizen’, which basically enters you into a contract, 
it goes on from there.”

He continued: “Recently, when some journos were saying, ‘So you actually 
believe 9/11 was an inside job?’ attempting to paint picture of me bein’ a 
crackpot, I was totally shocked – they were intelligent people but still they 
didn’t get it … I’m really, really sorry to all folks who might be reading this 
but if you believe the ridiculous story that is being peddled about 9/11 from 
the mainstream media then you are absolutely gullible … Not believing the 
mainstream media is very hard for some folk who have put their trust and faith 
in the state and press, breaking that faith will not be an easy process for 
many.”

James added that 9/11 was “just the tip of the iceberg … but how do you break 
this stranglehold on humanity? You have to start somewhere to break the 
illusion and 9/11 is a pretty big weak point in the illusion, but still so many 
are fooled.”

James also said his six-year-old son had made an album and posted it on 
Bandcamp. The album has since, apparently, been removed, but snippets from four 
tracks were posted along with the interview, and sound distinctly Aphex-like.

As well as his son’s music, James posted two tracks he had made when he was 15 
or 16. “Even from my very first tracks I had a desire to get really into the 
machines, to make a different world inside one of the boxes, live inside there 
instead,” he said.

• This article was amended on 10 November 2014 to correct the homophone 
pedalled/peddled.

 