
When it comes to applying for jobs, particularly in the creative services 
industry, graduates can lose sight of what companies are looking for. Yes it is 
important to stand out, but only for the right reasons. There are a number of 
sins that candidates seem determined to continue to commit: here are the top 
ones to avoid.

Targeting the wrong people

One of the first hurdles graduates fall at is contacting the wrong person in 
the organisation – or contacting them in the wrong order. Always aim for the 
highest ranking person you can find, be that the chief executive, creative 
director, client services director or HR director.

Not only will this show that you are not intimidated to speak with senior 
people, it will also help the progress of your application. When someone else 
in the agency receives a request from the chief executive to follow something 
up, it generally gets done.

Forgetting who you are looking to work for

Applicants need to show that they understand the creative services business, 
clients and industry as a whole. The quickest way to get an interview with an 
organisation is to demonstrate how easily you will fit into the team. You must 
prove that you understand what is expected of you in the role and that you can 
already do the basics.

A simple way to do this is to refer to a recent article or campaign that the 
company did for a client. If you can explain what you like about that brand, 
what it is about them that makes you want to work for them or even what you 
would have done differently, you are likely to stand out from the crowd. If you 
don't have a point of view on a client then it is likely you're looking to work 
for the wrong company.

Going through the wrong channels

Of course, if you are approaching senior members within an organisation, it is 
important to think carefully about how you will approach them. Remember, they 
will not necessarily be a social media lover. Although they work in a creative 
sector, that doesn't mean they use social networking channels across all 
aspects of their work.

Stick to the more traditional routes – email, professional networks such as 
LinkedIn, or even that archaic form of communication known as a letter all work 
well.

Not paying attention to detail

Not understanding the business you are applying to is possibly the biggest sin 
committed by applicants. However, there is an error that can still scupper your 
application even if you have this knowledge – that is not paying attention to 
detail.

Failing to address your letters correctly or using text speak in your 
application will be frowned upon. Grammatical errors in any of your 
correspondences are, quite simply, unacceptable. No matter how well you appear 
to meet the criteria for a role, if you cannot keep your communications 
error-free you will struggle to convince an agency to meet you.

Over-stepping the mark

Having a creative spark, and demonstrating this to the agency you are looking 
to join is obviously important. It is also important to remember, howver, that 
creative agencies are stillcommercial entities – they want to know that you are 
a safe pair of hands. For example, having a QR code on your covering letter to 
link to your CV, portfolio or blog is a nice way to show you think in the terms 
of innovation and understand multiple channels. Registering an official Twitter 
account for the company you're applying to before you've even been invited to 
interview, on the other hand – as one of our applicants did recently – is a 
step too far.

It is also important that in your quest to show your creative streak you don't 
stray into cliché. For example, sending a shoe to an agency with a note saying, 
"I'd like to get my foot in the door", is not original and is likely to elicit 
scorn rather than appeal.

Being too pushy

Since the world went social, the application process has become a lot more 
difficult to navigate. Just because organisations can be contacted 24/7 it 
doesn't mean you should take advantage of this. Similarly, just because social 
media now makes it easier to identify more people in the organisation, don't be 
tempted to try and contact them – stick to the key contacts you've identified 
and you will improve your chances of making a positive impact.

Not being pushy enough

On the flip-side, it is important not to fear contacting an agency once you've 
made the initial approach. If you go to the senior team they are likely to be 
exceptionally busy – if they don't come back to you that doesn't necessarily 
mean they are ignoring you. It most likely means they have another item that 
they need to focus on at that moment.

Keeping in contact with a company once you've started the application process 
is not rude, as long as you don't badger incessantly. As long as you use common 
sense when deciding on when and how to contact me and keep the correspondence 
polite, it is often a helpful reminder to get back in touch.

Creative services agencies are always keen to get fresh, bright talent through 
their doors and want you to succeed when you make contact. If you remember just 
one thing from this article, remember this – if you chose an agency with whom 
you have a genuine interest and passion, you can be yourself and be successful.

Helen Brown is the chief HR and talent officer at MediaCom 
<http://www.mediacom.com/en/home>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 