
Picking a university and course you like
 Photograph: Zak Waters 
The admissions officer
Chris Lane, London Metropolitan university

"We are looking for motivated students who are interested in their subject and 
prepared to put in a lot of hard work. It is not just about grades. GCSEs, 
access courses and A-levels are important indications but we look more broadly, 
too, at evidence of commitment in school and outside – voluntary work, 
societies, personal achievements.

Students <https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> need to look at 
websites and prospectuses: it is not a "one-size-fits-all" in qualifications. 
You have to tailor your application to the institution. And apply early if you 
want to be in halls.

Visit the institutions that interest you. Come and see us, get a feel for what 
we do. It may be that the university asking for the higher A-levels will not 
offer what you want.

In your personal statement, think of the reader. Don't use the same tired old 
quotes. Take time to check spelling, grammar and punctuation. No one relishes 
rejecting an applicant, but no one wants to wade through a cliche-ridden mass 
of vague aspirations either."
 Photograph: Joel redman 
The student
Lillie Grimshaw, 18, BA anthropology, UCL

"The big choice was what to study with my chosen A-levels. I knew I wanted to 
go abroad. I knew I wanted to do a science-based course. I looked at the top 10 
in all the league tables and compared what they wanted with the grades I was 
predicted. And I listened to which unis my older friends were impressed by.

I wrote my personal statement loads of times. I really tried to avoid clichés 
like "ever since I was little…" and link my interests in society and physiology.

I was so happy when I got an offer from the University of Durham – but then I 
got the most stressed I've been in my whole life when UCL asked for a 
1,000-word essay within three weeks, linking four journal articles to a 
scientific topic.

Those were also the weeks in which I had to finish my extended project, my 
English literature coursework and do my exams, while I was in and out of 
hospital as well. My mum was brilliant, mostly because she had faith in me – 
and let me off all my chores!"

Living on a budget
 Photograph: Fabio De Paola 
Rosie Rossington, 21, BA in fashion, Nottingham Trent university

"I've no grant and only qualify for the minimum maintenance loan, but my 
parents cover my £85-a-week rent for me. I end up with just £1,100 to live on 
for each term, which works out at around £100 a week – and I have had to make 
use of the £750 overdraft facility.

Applying for the fee and maintenance loans is relatively easy because I just 
have to give proof of my parents' income details. But signing up for your loans 
in good time each year is important or you risk not having the money in place 
when you start – and that makes it hard to plan.

It still amazes me how unaware some people can be about money: not realising 
that utility bills are paid quarterly, for example. I have become better with 
money but there was a big reality check at first – and there are times when I 
have lived off porridge and pea soup!"

Careers
How I got my job
 Photograph: Christopher Thomond 
Jaisal Patel, 22, BA modern languages and business, University of Liverpool

"I graduated this summer and am starting a job as a wetstock data analyst at a 
petroleum management company, helping to minimise leaks and theft at garage 
forecourts. I always wanted to go down an accountancy or finance route, so I 
chose to do business studies with French because I thought French would give me 
an more competitive edge in the graduate jobs market.

I took mainly management modules, to give me the widest job opportunities, and 
I had a year in Paris as an English language teaching assistant. In the 
vacations I got an internship at PricewaterhouseCoopers, and I volunteered for 
the Red Cross.

I had been a bit worried about the jobs market being so competitive, so I was 
really pleased to get the job.

The company was accepting candidates with any degree, but I think the degree I 
did played a part in my getting the job, as did my work experience and 
involvement in university life.

The company's partners are based in Paris, so the French might come in useful 
too."

Accommodation
Living in halls
 Photograph: Zak Waters 
Georgina Strapp, 20, BA English and Politics, University of York

"When I arrived at university I was greeted by second-year students, who 
helped me move in and get settled, so my first impression was of how friendly 
everyone was, rather than the building itself (probably a good thing, 
considering its more-than-passing resemblance to a prison). Inside, my room was 
small and basic, but recently refurbished. I met my first neighbour, who set up 
my internet connection – now we're moving in together!

The best thing about halls is having your friends nearby. It's great to have 
someone around to cook with, or just chat to when you need a bit of company. 
There really isn't an opportunity to feel lonely. The worst thing was wasting 
hours trying to get a space in the laundry room – we had four washing machines 
for a college of hundreds.

But I'll definitely miss halls next year – especially on those summer days 
after exams where everyone would drift out on to the grassy quad for a barbeque 
and a beer and enjoy the sun."

Studying independently
 Photograph: Anna Gordon 
Gabriel Mallows, 19, BA politics, UCL

"Many subjects – especially the humanities – put an emphasis on independent 
study, which means you don't have as much contact time with tutors. This can 
make organising your time and focusing on work a struggle, especially if your 
academic reading is dense and full of jargon.

But even when work gets difficult, if you're patient and persevere, you'll 
keep up.

If ever I struggled with concepts in the set reading, I'd just go along to 
seminars and ask – hearing a tutor explain your subject is a big help when 
you're trying to grasp new concepts.

For me, the workload wasn't too bad – in first term I was set five 2,000-word 
essays. I survived the year without missing any deadlines, though there were a 
few late nights along the way.

The best advice for getting written work in on time is to set yourself pretend 
early deadlines – and always allow extra time for small tasks such as filling 
out cover sheets and writing bibliographies."
 