
The UK government is sticking to plans for a levy on employers to help fund 
apprenticeships, ignoring business groups’ calls for the charge to be delayed 
because of the economic uncertainty sparked by the Brexit vote.

Some business lobbyists reacted with dismay at the confirmation on Friday that 
the levy on larger companies in England will be launched as planned in April 
2017 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/views-sought-on-plans-to-boost-apprenticeships>
. They were already critical of the plan before the referendum result,claiming 
it was poorly designed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/26/fury-over-osbornes-116bn-business-payroll-tax>
 and risked reducing rather than raising the quality of training.

Other groups, however, have welcomed the scheme as an important step in 
addressing skills shortages and a way of broadening young people’s routes into 
decent careers.

Theresa May has made tackling inequality a key theme of her new government, 
and this marks the second time in a week the prime minister has stood up to big 
business groups concerned about rising salary bills. On Monday,Downing Street 
dismissed pressure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/08/no-10-resists-pressure-to-hold-off-launching-national-living-wage>
 to slow the implementation of the “national living wage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/01/the-national-living-wage-and-what-it-means>
”.

 Robert Halfon, the apprenticeships and skills minister, said the levy would 
help to ensure “people of all ages and backgrounds have a chance to get on in 
life”.

“Apprenticeships give young people, especially those from disadvantaged 
backgrounds, a ladder of ‎opportunity. That’s why we continue to work 
tirelessly to deliver the skills our country needs. The apprenticeship levy is 
absolutely crucial to this,” he said.

The levy is designed to fund 3m places for apprentices. It will be paid by 
employers in England with a payroll of more than £3m and charged at a rate of 
0.5% of their annual pay bill. When George Osborne unveiled the levy last year, 
the former chancellor said those paying it would “get out more than they put 
in”.

The government has also said employers that are too small to pay it – around 
98% of those in England – will have 90% of the costs of training paid for by 
the state. Extra support, worth £2,000 per trainee, will also be available for 
employers and training providers who take on 16 to 18-year-old apprentices or 
young care leavers.

One body for the construction industry described the levy as a “fair 
settlement for small employers”. The Federation of Master Builders (FMB) said 
the only cure for the industry’s skills shortages was to recruit and train more 
people.

The FMB’s chief executive, Brian Berry, said: “Small and medium-sized firms do 
the majority of training in our industry. Micro businesses [those employing 
fewer than 10 people] alone train around half of all construction apprentices. 
It is therefore crucial that new apprenticeship funding arrangements work for 
these firms and do not impose higher costs on them.”

The CBI, which represents companies that employ nearly 7 million people, has 
criticsed the levy and called on the government to push back the April 2017 
start date.


Carolyn Fairbairn, the CBI’s director general, said: “We welcome the 
government’s focus on growing investment in apprenticeships, and business 
stands ready to step up and increase its own commitment. However, the 
apprenticeship levy in its current form risks turning the clock back on recent 
progress through poor design and rushed timescales.”

“The levy is too narrowly defined. It covers only one type of training and 
employers can only reclaim off-the-job costs. As a result, valuable forms of 
training risk being cut back, with quantity put ahead of quality.”

The trade group for the human resources sector, the Chartered Institute of 
Personnel and Development (CIPD), said the levy in its current form risked 
devaluing apprenticeships by putting the number of beneficiaries ahead of the 
quality of training they receive.

Ben Willmott, the CIPD’s head of public policy, said: “It is irresponsible for 
the government, particularly in a time of economic uncertainty in the aftermath 
of the referendum, to simply press ahead with a policy that is not fit for 
purpose.”

Employer groups have also said the levy could prompt some firms to rebadge 
existing jobs as apprenticeships 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/02/uk-apprenticeships-plan-attacked-employer-groups>
 to meet training targets and recoup the costs of the charge.

The British Retail Consortium also called for a delay. “The government should 
delay its introduction to 2018, allowing more time to design a truly viable 
system that delivers high-quality training,” said Helen Dickinson,its chief 
executive.

The British Chambers of Commerce welcomed the support for those taking on 16 
to 18-year-old apprentices, but also urged the government to focus on quality. 
The manufacturers’ organisation EEF welcomed plans to increase funding for 
apprenticeships in science, technology, engineering and mathematics, but it too 
said questions remained over the levy’s design and it pushed for a later start 
date.

The Institute for Public Policy Research (IPPR), however, said the government 
was right to launch the levy in April.

“Following Brexit, British employers may not be able to rely on recruiting 
migrant workers to fill skills gaps, so we’ll need more apprenticeships to 
train up our domestic workforce,” said Jonathan Clifton, IPPR’s associate 
director for public services.
 