
The latest Apps Pitch comes from Ukrainian publisher Readdle, for its Scanner 
Pro <http://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/scanner-pro-scan-multipage/id333710667?mt=8>
 app for iOS. Originally released for iPhone in 2009, it was recently updated 
with a native iPad version too.

What does your app do?

Scanner Pro transforms your iPhone or iPad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ipad> into a portable scanner. The app 
allows you to scan any document, receipt, whiteboard or paper note and converts 
it into a good-looking PDF file.

The special algorithm improves the quality of a scan by detecting the borders, 
fixing geometry and removing the shades. The documents can be e-mailed or 
shared instantly via Dropbox and Google Docs, or faxed.

What platform(s) is it on, and what plans do you have for any others?

Scanner Pro is a universal application, available both for iPhone and iPad. 
Please note, only the new iPad has a decent camera to produce good results, 
whereas the iPad 2 has only 0.7 MP camera.

At Readdle, we primarily focus on the iOS platform. At the same time we keep 
an eye on other platforms like Android and Windows Phone.

What's the business model and why did you choose it?

The business model is pretty straightforward: Scanner Pro is a paid 
application, which does one great thing – scans documents and converts them 
into PDFs. And the app does it well. We have created a value-based product, 
rather than a pack of nice features. When you think about the amount of time 
you can save with Scanner Pro, the price of £4.99 is already a bargain.

We believe that such straightforward model works best for productivity apps. 
Focusing on the main task is vital for a business tool, this is why we want to 
keep our users free from various distractions (which are usually present in 
free apps).

Why is the app innovative - what are the key features that you think set it 
apart and/or make best use of the platform?

Looking back into 2009, it is clear that Scanner Pro had defined the whole 
concept of scanning apps in the App Store. The idea of scanning with the iPhone 
camera was great, because people always have their iPhones with them. Scanner 
Pro took this technology to a whole new level, making really complex image 
processing easy and fun.

In less than a minute, you can scan and e-mail a 7-page agreement right from 
your iPhone. The files can easily be shared via Dropbox or Google Drive. For 
those who worry about privacy, password protection makes your app safe and 
reliable.

What's the competition like - what else is out there in this area?

With 350,000 downloads and 80,000 monthly active users, Scanner Pro is one of 
the most successful business apps out there. The competition is inevitable from 
both hardware and software sides. However, the market is not saturated and we 
want to help people discover the great things they can do with their iOS 
devices.

The main competitor for us is a traditional approach of using hardware 
scanners by the majority of people. Of course, there are a few scanning apps in 
the App Store. Each time we add something new to Scanner Pro, other apps add 
similar features within several weeks. But until we are ahead of the 
competition, copycats do not worry us that much.

What are your future plans?

We received a tremendous amount of feedback and knowledge from thousands of 
our users by now, this is why Scanner Pro evolves. Finally, it is possible to 
develop and implement this technology on a massive scale.

Scanner Pro is being continuously improved. We are adding new use cases, 
scenarios and features. For instance, an automatic sync between an iPhone and 
iPad versions will be added soon. Once you scan something with your iPad, the 
document will automatically appear on the iPhone (and vice-versa).

At the same time, we are researching the way to do OCR properly. The new 
version of Scanner Pro is coming out in two weeks with tons of UI improvements.

Tell me about yourself and your company

Readdle is a Ukrainian based company founded in 2007. We focus on creating 
innovative business and productivity apps for iOS, which give great value for 
those who use them.

Over 4m users worldwide, top positions in the App Store, numerous awards and 
most importantly great feedback from our users who are thankful are the things 
that keep us going. A team of almost 30 people is currently located in Ukraine, 
and we plan to open an office in the US this year.

There are a few other popular apps from Readdle such as ReaddleDocs, PDF 
Expert, Calendars and Printer Pro. The main goal for us is to create a new era 
of mobile productivity.

Imagine a scenario where you are away from the office scanning an agreement 
with Scanner Pro, signing it with PDF Expert and e-mailing right away. Later 
on, you are able to print it out with Printer Pro directly from your iOS device 
(wirelessly).

This is just one of many use cases our teams is working on. So an ultimate 
goal for us is to lead the innovation and simplification of mobile technology 
in business and personal productivity.
 