
Having run the Parachute Regiment, Major Sam McGrath knows a thing or two 
about fitness. He's the star ofPara Fitness 
<http://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/para-fitness/id416550264?mt=8>, a collaboration 
between Osprey Publishing and Aimer Media. Here, they pitch its wares:

What does your app do?

The Para Fitness app gives you your own military fitness trainer; Major Sam 
McGrath. Sam, who was in charge of the exhausting selection process for the 
legendary Parachute Regiment, drives you to get fighting fit.

Helping you decide your target level of fitness, and giving easy to follow 
instructions for a programme of exercises tailored to your ability, he provides 
you with the structure needed to achieve your goals.

The newly added Emperor Programme adds weight exercises to your regimen, 
pushing your mission to get fit even further.

What platform(s) is it on, and what plans do you have for any others?

The app works across the Apple range; on the iPad, iPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> and iPod Touch. We are looking 
at supporting other devices but have to make sure we can properly support them.

What's the business model and why did you choose it?

It is a paid app with an in-app purchase. One of the great features of the 
original 'core' app was that it could be performed simply with running shoes, 
so for £1.99 users could have a comprehensive work out without the need for 
further equipment.

We felt the in-app purchase format then gave users the freedom to progress 
their programme into a gym with the equipment based exercise of the Emperor 
Programme, whilst still offering excellent value by providing them with the 
cheapest (and best qualified) personal trainer around.

Why is the app innovative - what are the key features that you think set it 
apart?

The military focus of the app is key – despite the elite arms of the armed 
forces being renowned for their superhuman levels of fitness, few exercise 
programmes harness this knowledge for the benefit of 'civilians'.

Our app not only employs the exercises of military fitness, it also employs 
its ethos; the app is clear, straight to the point and makes no unrealistic 
promises. Instead, it helps users understand and embrace the mental challenges 
of getting fit as much as the physical; sustained motivation and realistic 
objectives tailored to your ability.

The app's platform makes this a reality; from an inspirational video from the 
author at the start, to the running count of exercises completed (so there's no 
kidding yourself about how much work you've done) this app pushes you forward 
and helps you achieve your goals, in the best tradition of the military elite.

What's the competition like - what else is out there in this area?

While there are plently of generic fitness apps available in the app store, 
there are none that offer the combination of military expertise, 
interactivitiy, high customer ratings and value.

What are your future plans for the app?

There are no specific development plans at this stage but that we'll be 
reviewing customer feedback and suggestions with a view to future development.

Tell me about yourselves and your companies

Brighton-based Aimer Media has been making apps since 2010. With a core team 
of five, plus project-based specialists, Aimer has been involved in producing 
and supporting many top-ranking apps, across a variety of markets including: 
Fragile Earth, Tate Guide to Modern Art Terms and UNESCO World Heritage.

Osprey Publishing from its offices in Oxford, Nottingham and New York, has 
been providing books for military enthusiasts since 1968. Since then it has 
continually grown, evolved and taken on new challenges; branching into the 
digital market with our eBooks and apps, as well as traditional 'physical' 
books.
 