
Our second Apps Pitch comes from Swedish developer David Sjölander, explaining 
hisBuild Cars with Edward and Arthur 
<http://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/build-cars-edward-arthur/id494392857?mt=8> 
children's app.

What's your app called and what does it do?

Build Cars with Edward and Arthur is a creative game where kids can create 
thousands of fun cars and then test-drive them on the race track. Depending on 
what parts you use the car will behave different when driving, you'll need 
better tires to splash through mud, bigger engine to go faster etc.

While playing you'll collects stars that unlocks more car parts, and even 
additional race tracks with new challenges! You can also gain stars by building 
certain complete cars, or by building a very light car that can cross an old 
wooden bridge.

This game is for children 3-7 years old. While the app does contain some text, 
it is designed to be played by non-readers. The goal for me was to create a 
game that parents will enjoy playing together with their children.

What devices is it on, and what are your plans?

It's currently available for both iPads and iPhones. I'd be happy to create 
versions for other platforms but those platforms are a lot more complicated 
with lots of different marketplaces and screen sizes.

What's the business model and why have you chosen it?

The game cost $2, and has no advertising links, social media connections or 
in-app-purchases. I would probably get more money if I used in-app-purchases to 
unlock more car parts, but as a parent I don't like that model in games 
targeted at children.

What's innovative about the app – what sets it apart?

I've put a lot of work in creating a game that is both creative and fun with 
quite advanced car-building, while still being intuitive for small children.

I also hope that both children and parents see all the work and love I've put 
into the graphics. I tried to create something feels different from mostiPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> games, and I'm very happy with 
how the game turned out graphically.

What's the competition – who else is out there in this area?

There are lots of apps for children on the App Store but, only a few good 
ones. I've got very positive reviews so far so I'm confident that the game is 
good, but it's still a major challenge to break through the noise in the App 
Store.

As a Swedish game developer you may get great reviews and sales in Sweden, but 
it's extremely hard to reach parents in other countries.

Tell us more about the company behind it

While I've been building games for a long time, this is my first app of my 
own. I recently moved to the countryside on the Swedish island Gotland, and I 
guess the team consists of me and my two children.

The developent basically worked like this: in the morning my four-year-old 
gave me assigments, like which new parts he wanted etc. When coming back from 
kindergarten he tested the game and hopefully gave it thumbs-up. He was a very 
strict project manager...

What are your future plans?

If there is big demand I'm open to create more car parts for the game. In the 
future I'd like to create more games with Edward and Arthur and develop their 
personalities a bit more than I did in this game.

I originally created the characters for a children's book and would still love 
to see that printed. Both me and my children have lots of ideas of other games 
that we want to create!
 