
We're kicking off a new regular post on the Apps Blog called Apps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apps> Pitch: a Q&A interview where an 
individual developer, publisher, startup or brand will be explaining more about 
their app.

First up is MyCityWay London24 
<http://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/mycityway-london24/id356709507?mt=8>, with Paul 
Hood, digital director of Archant London.

What is your app called and what does it do?

Our new app is called MyCityWay London24. It's a comprehensive city guide that 
helps people discover London, based on what they want to do.

Whether a user simply wants to find a list of the nearest coffee shops to 
where they are, or discover popular tourist attractions nearby and how to get 
there, this information is only ever 3 clicks away with our new app.

There are more than 30 'mini-apps' within the main app, making it quick and 
simple to find a huge array of things to do and see in London as well as 
helping users make travel arrangements and even make event and hotel bookings 
through the app.

What devices is it on, and what are your plans?

Right now, the app is available for iPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> and iPad. We already have a 
version for Android in an advanced stage of development - this will be ready 
for launch within weeks. We'll look to develop for Windows-based smartphones 
and BlackBerry in the coming months.

What's the business model and why have you chosen it?

The app is free to download and use; the plan is to generate revenue through 
advertising and by taking a commission from in-app purchasing.

We're very confident and excited about the revenue potential for the MyCityWay 
London24 app from advertising in particular, because the advertising 
proposition is powerful and compelling. For the first time, we can offer 
advertisers the chance to reach prospective customers in a 1:1 environment with 
the ability to target messages by location and intention, in real time.

Take the lucrative tourist market in London for example; tradionally difficult 
to reach and influence through advertising. Our app offers advertisers a new 
solution. Lets take the example of a tourist arriving at, say - Stratford 
International train station for the summer Olympic games.

If that user then presses the coffee app, Starbucks or Costa coffee could 
immediately send a push notification with a time-limited coupon offer. That 
tourists' first experience of the Olympic games is a free coffee from 
Starbucks. That's powerful.

What's innovative about the app – what sets it apart?

We think the innovation lies in the usability of the app and its ability to 
surprise and delight. It's truly useful on so many practical levels, from 
helping users discover what's around them in London to assisting them with 
planning their time in the capital and getting the best out of it.

What's the competition – who else is out there in this area?

There are a few others in this space – we spent a lot of time researching the 
category. The MyCityWay platform stood out head and shoulders above the others, 
and that's why we were so delighted that we were able to partner with them to 
bring this app to market for London – one of the world' most vibrant and 
interesting cities with such a rich selection of things to do .

What are your future plans for the app?

We'd like to add new levels mini-apps regularly to continue to help people 
discover new elements of London. For example, the next iteration of the app 
will contain a 'Jobs' mini-app that will help users find jobs available by 
sector, salary bracket and location.

We're well positioned to incorporate this as we already have a comprehensive 
jobs board within our stable: Jobs24. We're also working on integrating daily 
deals in to our offering, discoverable by location and relevance. We're in the 
fotunate position to be able to do this quickly via our existing daily deals 
brand, Tickles.

Tell us more about the company behind it

Archant <https://www.theguardian.com/media/archant> is an independently-owned 
regional media business, active in the fields of regional newspaper and 
magazine publishing, contract printing and of course digital/mobile publishing. 
Our products serve clearly defined communities, based around locations or 
interest groups.

Archant can trace its roots back over 160 years; today we produce four daily 
regional newspapers and around 60 weekly titles with a combined weekly 
circulation of around 2.25m copies. We employ 1,850 people right across 
England. Our head office is in Norwich. Archant has an annual turnover of £142m.

We've been developing apps for a while now, but this is our first step into a 
utility-based app that has broad appeal to an audience beyond our traditional 
content-based products.
 