
Third up in our Apps Pitch series is finance app CoinKeeper 
<http://coinkeeper.me/>, which was recently released for iPhone and Android. 
Ilya Chernetskiy, head of product group at developeriFree Innovations 
<http://www.i-free.com/en>, explains all:

What is your app called and what does it do?

The app is called CoinKeeper and it's a personal finance management tool.
Lots of people feel the need for being financially sustainable, spending less 
and saving more, but to do that you need to record your transactions, how much 
we spend and what for.

We know how boring that can be, even if you rely on the services that track 
your credit card spendings you still have cash and other types of different 
accounts. So the problem that we address is making recording transactions fast 
and sort of fun. We also make the overall view of your money and budget very 
visual and simple.

What devices is it on, and what are your plans?

Right now there are iPhone and Android apps, and we plan to launch an iPad 
version soon. Windows Phone 7,Android 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> tablet and web interface will 
follow later.

What is the business model and why have you chosen it?

We released a paid iPhone <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> app 
first, and this is still on a paid business model (cost £1.87), but to give 
more people an opportunity to try our approach to financial management we 
decided to move towards a try-and-buy and freemium models.

So, the Android app is free of charge with 15 days trial and three 
subscription plans after it: 62p for 1 month, £1.87 for 6 months or £6.20 for a 
lifetime subscription.

What's innovative about the app - what sets it apart?

It's amazing how little financial management tools have changed over the 
years. Games are changing much faster and with the beginning of the iPhone era 
they have rapidly evolved from button-controlled to touch-based, but finance 
apps are still mostly "tables and charts" with lots of fields to fill about 
transactions.

So we took a different approach - the main screen of the app represents all 
your income sources, accounts and expense categories in a form of coin icons.
To make the transactions simple you drag an account icon (i.e. Cash) and move 
it to expense category (i.e. Street food), type an amount and press "Today" (or 
"Yesterday" or choose another date) to finish.

Very fast, intuitive and a little game-like. Some people even told us they 
tend to spend more often at first because they loved this gesture and 
animation, of course we didn't want that to happen but still we were very happy 
we managed to create a product which is not only useful, but also beautiful and 
engaging.

What's the competition - who else is out there in this area?

There are hundreds, maybe even thousands of personal management apps on the 
market, but none of them has the same approach as ours.

There is strong competition from services which access and parse your bank 
account, making it unnessesary to record some transactions manually, but they 
need to make relationships with the banks, and it is almost impossible to 
ensure coverage for all the countries and all the banks. But we certainly will 
move in that direction too.

What are your future plans for the app?

We have lots of plans: most of them are in two areas. One is how to make 
transaction recording even faster and nonintrusive – apart from parsing bank 
accounts we are thinking of check scans, voice input and some other very 
innovative ideas.

The second issue is helping people understand what is happening with their 
money. What's the forecast, how will their life change with current incomes and 
spendings, and give a piece of advice on that. We don't want to overload the 
app with dozens of charts: we want to give people clear answers.

Tell us more about the company behind it?

I-Free Innovations, a subsidiary of i-Free Ltd., features a unique team of 
professionals dedicated to the development and publishing of applications and 
games for smartphones and new network devices.

We are constantly engaged in the research of new prospective technologies and 
approaches to application development. For example, we have a large trending 
project "Everfriends" – a virtual assistant app with fun and helpful 3D 
characters powered by voice recognition, voice synthesis and nature language 
processing.

We also have several utility apps like Grocery Mate, a simple but handy 
shopping list app, or Shoptimus - a mobile shopping mall. We also act as 
publisher for games: recently we launched an addictive puzzle game Zombie 
Granny on Android, and soon we shall be launching two beautiful Playstation 
Network games that were adapted, or better said, re-invented for iOS: Cuboid 
and Magic Orbz.
 