
Fourth up in our Apps Pitch series is Koubachi <http://www.koubachi.com/>, one 
of the latest apps designed to work with a hardware accessory.

What does your app do?

Koubachi gives your plant a voice and yourself a green thumb! For every plant 
in our plant library, we have developed an individual care model that considers 
the species (a ficus has different needs than an orchid), the annual season and 
your location (climate zone).

You only need to calibrate your plant once and Koubachi will provide you with 
detailed care instructions in regards to when and how to care for your plant. 
Koubachi tells you when you need to water, fertilize or mist your beloved 
plants.

What platform(s) is it on, and what plans do you have for any others?

Koubachi is currently available as an iPhone app and as a web app (
my.koubachi.com <http://my.koubachi.com/>). A native Android version is 
currently in development and will be released in late summer. You can also use 
Koubachi in Facebook as a Facebook app. We started with iOS because it had a 
big momentum when we started with the app.

What's the business model and why did you choose it?

Great news - the app is actually free - and no ads or in-app purchases to 
bother users at the moment either. We are a startup active in the field of 
Internet of Things/Smart Objects and just launched the complementary Koubachi 
Wi-Fi Plant Sensor that seamlessly integrates into the system.

With the sensor, you will get even more precise care instructions and specific 
alerts measuring soil moisture, light intensity and temperature. Unfortunately, 
we can not give away the sensor for free - it retails for £99.

But don't get us wrong, you can still use the app without a sensor – but only 
with the sensor do you get real time information on the plant's vitality, the 
most precise water instructions, light and temperature alerts.

Why is the app innovative - what are the key features that you think set it 
apart and/or make best use of the platform?

Koubachi really makes plant care easy and fun. If you don't have green 
fingers, just rely on Koubachi for your plants and enjoy healthy and blossoming 
plants in no time.

The plant care models were developed and verified in cooperation with plant 
physiologists from the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology - drawing on this 
model, our Plant Care Engine will calculate a care model tailored to your 
individual plant and tell you how and when to care for it.

At the moment, we have more than 400 plants in the library and we are 
upgrading it on a continuous basis – the goal being 800-1,000 plants by the end 
of the year.

We also put a lot of emphasis on a nice and clean user interface. Device-wise, 
we will further experiment with our ultra-low power Wi-Fi model (runs over 1 
year with 2x AA batteries) and may think of a satellite version.

What's the competition like - what else is out there in this area?

There are very few plant care apps out there. However, most of them are based 
on a simple calendar and made in quite a technical way, which might work if you 
are already a garden aficionado. We want to give green fingers to everybody and 
make plant care a simpler, yet more powerful and a fun user experience.

What are your future plans?

We'd like to integrate a plant doctor into the app as well, so that we can 
also provide the users with alerts and information on possible diseases of your 
plant.

We also learnt that quite a few people don't know the name of the plant as 
they may have received it as a gift. So we work on building a easy and fun game 
into the app that provides you with the name of the plant, drawing on vast 
community knowledge.

Tell me about yourself and your company

We are a startup company based in Switzerland and the team consists of 10 
dedicated people. Koubachi was founded during the dissertation project of the 
two founders. They furnished their office with a nice plant but did not have an 
idea how to take care of it or forgot to care for it.

As the founders were studying computer science, they thought there must be a 
better solution for this problem and voila: Koubachi was born.

Koubachi started out in 2009 and the app was then launched in Fall 2010. Our 
newest baby, the Koubachi Wi-Fi Plant Sensor was only born, i.e. launched 
recently.
 