
Mobilize launched its mobile shopping app Shop Scan Save 
<http://www.shopscansave.co.uk/> earlier in May. In our fourth Apps Pitch, the 
company says why it hopes the app will be a winner.

What is your app called and what does it do?

Our new app is called Shop Scan Save. The app is free, and it enables members 
to earn and redeem rewards and offers from 22,500 stores nationwide that have 
the PayPoint system. This includes retailers such as Spar, Co-op, Costcutter, 
Londis, Nisa as well as thousands of independent convenience stores. The 
nearest PayPoint-supporting shops can be located using the app's Store Finder 
feature.

Through the app, customers will be able to save up to £250 per year on their 
convenience store shopping. Right now there are deals on KitKat, Lenor, Ariel, 
Lurpak, Cravendale, Jack Daniels, Southern Comfort, and Bacardi Breezer, with 
hundreds more products being added.

What devices is it on, and what are your plans?

Right now, the free Shop Scan Save app is available for iPhone, iPad, iPod 
touch and Android. We may look to develop it for Windows-based smartphones and 
BlackBerry in the near future.

What's the business model and why have you chosen it?

The app is free to download from Google Play and Apple's App Store and our 
business model is to charge brands for using the app to send offers to members.

Our technology will help develop the way loyalty and vouchering schemes work 
in the convenience sector and in the wider retail sector.Smartphones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/smartphones> are now owned by more than 
50% of the UK population, and the mobile phone has joined keys and wallet as 
the third thing that everyone takes with them when they leave home.

There are three main benefits to using Shop Scan Save. Shoppers get simple 
access to a discount and loyalty scheme without having to carry coupons or 
cards - just look at the number of loyalty cards bulging in your wallet to see 
how convenient this is.

Secondly, brands wishing to engage with customers via mobile can communicate 
personalised offers based on previous purchasing patterns, or even location.

Finally, retailers no longer need to collect coupons, post them to a 
redemption house and wait for a cheque to arrive sometime in the future. Brands 
and retailers save the physical cost of printing cards and coupons.

What's innovative about the app – what sets it apart?

Shop Scan Save is the first national smartphone-based savings scheme for the 
convenience sector. It is a free app which can save substantial amounts of 
money for users in a hassle-free way.

What sets it apart from other mobile vouchering schemes on the market is that 
only a single ID scan is needed to redeem multiple offers at the point of sale. 
Data capture on redemptions means Shop Scan Save can deliver personalised and 
relevant offers. Also store owners are reimbursed automatically for the 
discounts – normally within six working days.

What's the competition – who else is out there in this area?

No one else offers a scheme with the simplicity of a single ID scan on the 
phone to redeem offers and benefits. Others require multiple scans – one for 
each offer – which can be very tedious for the consumer while most voucher code 
sites fail to provide this level of data capture and personalisation that 
mobile can deliver.

What are your future plans for the app?

We are getting more and more attractive offers from leading brands in the app 
– this will increase the savings that members will earn. We are also exploring 
the addition of brand content into the app with some of our key partners. 
Finally, we are also planning a unique series of offers which use location and 
redemption of vouchers to generate additional rewards.

Tell us more about the company behind it

Mobilize works with leading retailers and brands to help them engage with 
their customers via mobile, and drive loyalty. Our head office is in the UK, 
and we have offices in Miami and Stockholm. We have also recently launched a 
mobile loyalty & vouchering scheme for the outdoor retailer, GO Outdoors.
 