
Even in an age in which, as Hollywood has it, no one knows anything, the AQA 
list of set texts for English GCSE plumbs new depths of cultural incoherence. 
Rarely have the words of Alexander Pope – a writer who must be a stranger to 
this board – been better illustrated: "A little learning is a dangerous thing." 
Striving for educational relevance, AQA has dived into the shallow end, and 
sustained severe concussion.

Where to start? With a Conservative-led coalition running scared of Ukip, 
perhaps it was inevitable that this should be a Little England list in which 
Meera Syal andKazuo Ishiguro <https://www.theguardian.com/books/kazuoishiguro> 
stand as the sole representatives of a rich, multi-cultural alternative.

Dickens makes it, twice, with Great Expectations and A Christmas Carol, but 
the rest of AQA's 19th century list reeks of compromise. Sober Charlotte (Jane 
Eyre) Bronte not crazy Emily (Wuthering Heights) Bronte. Frankenstein (why not 
Dracula? <https://www.theguardian.com/books/series/1000novels>) but no 
Middlemarch. Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde (RL Stevenson) but not The Way We Live Now 
(Trollope).

AQA's apologists, staggering out of the committee rooms in which these bizarre 
choices have been hatched, will no doubt contest that one criterion for their 
selection is that the works should be eminently "teachable" i.e. that they 
should inspire debate, open imaginative doors, and stimulate classroom 
discussion. Hence, presumably, Animal Farm (but inexplicably not 
Nineteen-Eighty-Four), and Conan Doyle's The Sign of Four (but not The Hound of 
the Baskervilles). Thomas Hardy gets in as a poet not as a novelist. Discuss.

With poetry, AQA's selection includes the Romantics, naturally, and later has 
a predictable bias towards Heaney, Hughes and Wilfred Owen. But there's no 
Edward Thomas, no Larkin and, astoundingly, no Auden. For plays, AQA give us 
Priestley but no Pinter or Beckett. A botched job, on its own, narrow terms, 
AQA's list – launched in the week in which British readers and the national 
press has been mourning the death ofMaya Angelou 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/mayaangelou> – is even more ludicrous and 
ill-conceived when placed in a wider context.

If one thing is certain about the world in which our children are growing up , 
it is that it not only speaks English in many voices, but often does so with an 
American accent, often in a uniquely global way. To exclude American fiction 
and drama (no Twain, Steinbeck, or Miller, no Faulkner, no Fitzgerald, or TS 
Eliot) is – to deploy a literary critical term – plain bonkers.

Leaving aside the reality of global culture, British and American writing are 
intimately braided together. Hawthorne, Henry James, TS Eliot, Stephen Crane 
and Sylvia Plath not only lived in England, they were steeped in the English 
literary tradition. Many other less well-known American writers have made their 
homes here. Their books are in a constant dialogue with ours. And vice versa: 
Dickens, Wilde, Stevenson, Wodehouse, and Chandler, all celebrated the US.Dylan 
Thomas <https://www.theguardian.com/books/dylanthomas>, whose centenary we 
honour this year, actually died there. It makes no literary (but loads of 
political) sense to divide our cultures thus.

And that's before we have even begun to address the poor old Commonwealth. 
Never mind the Americans. Michael Gove is quite entitled to dislike Of Mice and 
Men. But how can AQA expect to be taken seriously for a list of poetry, plays 
and fiction that fails to mention VS Naipaul, widely considered the greatest 
living writer of English, Patrick White, Nadine Gordimer, JM Coetzee,Michael 
Ondaatje <https://www.theguardian.com/books/michael-ondaatje>, Doris Lessing, 
Peter Carey, Arundhati Roy and Vikram Seth?

Andrew Hall, who has the thankless task of being AQA chief executive, and 
apologist, says "we can't please everyone". True. But at least he might have 
done some basic homework before sitting the exam.
 