 Archant's newspaper portfolio, built around the Norwich-based East Anglian 
Daily News 
The "proposal" by the Norwich-based newspaper publisher, Archant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/archant>, to move production of its London, 
Kent and Hertfordshire titles to headquarters is unsurprising.

Other regional publishers - Newsquest/Gannett, Trinity Mirror and Johnston 
Press <https://www.theguardian.com/media/johnston-press> - have created 
so-called subbing hubs. And they were not the first to pioneer "remote 
subbing", which was set up years ago in Australia.

Archant executive Miller Hogg justified the proposal (aka decision) by saying 
it is aimed at improving efficiency and reducing production costs.

The press release mentions that 24 jobs are at risk while 10 new roles could 
be created inNorwich <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/norwich> plus one in 
London.

The National Union of Journalists, again unsurprisingly, views the move as a 
further attack on their members. 
<http://www.nuj.org.uk/news/jobs-to-go-as-hamandhigh-publisher-moves-production-to-norwich/>
 National organiser Laura Davison spoke of Archant's "low-paid journalists... 
who have already borne pay cuts and pay freezes, now face losing their jobs in 
the name of efficiency."

She continued: "Uprooting more than 100 miles to work in Norwich is simply not 
realistic for those affected." Indeed, it isn't.

Two Archant staffers affected by the proposal/decision have emailed me in much 
the same terms as Davison requesting, naturally enough, anonymity. They both 
emphasise the life-changing effect they face in losing their jobs.

They and their colleagues are among the hundreds of thousands of victims of 
digital disruption, a somewhat euphemistic description of a revolutionary 
process.

Old media cannot survive because its business model is wrecked. So, in order 
to survive, it has to cut costs and must go on cutting costs. But there is, of 
course, a human cost.

So, while we understand the reasoning, we shouldn't overlook the hurt caused 
to those who pay the price. But what shines through both emails is the concern 
expressed about journalism.

Both worry about the way in which quality may suffer. Here is one message, 
which has been edited only slightly to protect the writer's identity...

We were informed on Tuesday morning that the production teams - 15 in Archant 
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, and others in Herts and Cambs 
and Kent - will all be made redundant. That constitutes the production editors, 
every sub-editor and every designer.

Instead, the company plans to produce all the newspapers in Norwich. They 
include the Romford and Ilford Recorders, the Ham & High and the Islington and 
Hackney Gazettes.

Except that papers won't really be produced as they are now. Although Archant 
is creating 10 lower-paid "design" jobs at Norwich, reporters - most of whom 
are newly-qualified with little experience - will write their articles direct 
to the page.

We are expected to write our own headlines and make sure articles are legally 
sound.

The decision is a terrible one for the production teams themselves, and for 
the reporters who will no longer get the support of experienced subs. As for 
the readers, they will be left with vastly inferior newspapers.

It could also be bad for the industry if sub-editors do get sidelined like 
this.

I don't want to make matters worse for the production team, as if it could get 
any worse for them, but I just feel this needs to be aired.

It most certainly should be aired. Digital technology offers publishers not 
only the chance to innovate but a whole range of production short cuts. These 
are undeniably useful and we should welcome them.

Too often, however, I note they are being abused by generating editorial 
content as if it is no different from a mechanical product. Worse still, the 
product is appealing to fewer and fewer consumers because they can detect that 
the quality is declining.

The only winners out of this are the owners and their bean-counters. As the 
NUj points out, Archant's chief executive, Adrian Jeakings, was paid £284,000 
plus a cash supplement of £82,000 last year.

The same situation exists among the managements at all the major corporate 
publishers. They are growing wealthy by making others poor. Ain't capitalism 
wonderful?
 