
Sorry, I've been a bit busy elsewhere today and will be again shortly, but I 
just wanted to pass on the latest good idea from that great NorthernerDr John 
Sentamu <http://www.archbishopofyork.org>, the Archbishop of York.

He organises as much public use of his lovely grounds at Bishopthorpe Palace  
<http://www.archbishopofyork.org/pages/about-bishopthorpe-palace-.html>on the 
edge of York as insurance, safety and other considerations will allow; they are 
regularlyused for functions, 
<http://www.archbishopofyork.org/articles.php/2133/archbishop-hosts-music-festival-at-bishopthorpe-palace>
 although not open on a day to day basis.

Except online. Dr Sentamu is inviting everyone along in a virtual way via 
regular updates on Bishopthorpe's website from the head gardener, Gerry 
O'Reagan.

Here's the latest one:

Autumn <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/autumn> – my favourite season
 
Autumn is here and the garden is on the verge of producing its annual display 
of stunning colours. Trees such as 'Sweet Gum' (Liquidamber Styraciflua) and 
'Hungarian Oak' (Quercus Frainetto) are just a couple of the many trees and 
shrubs which contribute to this spectacular display.
 
Autumn is an important time in the garden and a favourite season of mine 
(apart from the leaf raking!) with new plants and trees being introduced and 
borders to change.  All of the thought and effort we put in now will be 
rewarded by next spring and summer.
 
Part of the new plantings include a tree to be planted by the Archbishop of 
York to celebrate the Diocese of York 2011 Year of the Environment.  We have 
chosen an ornamental tree 'Virginian Maple' (Acer Virginicum Rubrum).  In the 
summer the leaves are large and deep green, turning brilliant shades of red in 
the autumn which should blend in nicely with the rest of the garden. 
 
Another task to be undertaken before the end of October will be the 
introduction of spring bulbs. We are planting 2000 mixed daffodils and around 
6000 crocus bulbs to give the pedestrian entrance to the west of the Palace a 
lift.
 
Spring bedding also goes in this month. Along with dwarf wallflowers, violas, 
pansies, we will also be planting bedding tulips including 'Yokohama'- a yellow 
single early, 'Queen of the Night' – a tall dark single tulip and for our 
Princess Diana Memorial Bed – a white short stemmed early tulip appropriately 
called 'Diana'.
 
Elsewhere in the garden the conservation work is still ongoing and will 
continue long after the Year of the Environment celebrations come to a close.
 
The bird boxes which were put up in early spring have been a great success, 
with blue tits, great tits and robins all producing one and in some boxes two 
clutches of eggs this year.
 
I am also pleased that it looks like our tawny owl box has been used, with a 
few adult owls being regular visitors to the grounds all the year round.
 
Other visitors we have seen in the last couple of weeks include a green 
woodpecker – a rare sight in the grounds, along with groups of finches, siskin, 
long tailed tits and nuthatch. 
 
Redwing and fieldfares won't be far behind them, all feasting on the insects 
and berries the hollies have produced in abundance this year.
 
A family of foxes who we see occasionally are helping to keep the rabbit 
population down and roe deer still make a welcome appearance from time to time.
 
Squirrels have caused some damage this year, especially to the Yew Trees and 
are busy burying conkers and other treats in the grass for the winter months 
ahead.  Four acres of woodland and they always choose our lawns for some 
reason!  Pity the foxes can't climb trees really – that would keep the 
squirrels in check! 
 


Sentamu himself says:

Autumn is a wonderful season, a time of harvest and a time of thanksgiving for 
what nature gives us.

He's at one with the Guardian there. Check out our growing series of Autumn 
photographs by readers and staff here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/blog/2011/sep/30/autumn-colours-green-shoots-photographs>
, andfilm clips here 
<http:/www.guardian.co.uk/environment/interactive/2011/oct/21/send-us-a-video-signs-of-autumn>
. I hope to add a contribution this weekend showing the beautiful Leeds office, 
currently surrounded by dying leaves in a blaze of scarlet, green and gold.
 
 