
Adrian Jeakings, the chief executive of the regional newspaper publisher, 
Archant <https://www.theguardian.com/media/archant>, has resigned.

In what many of the company's journalistic staff view as an unexpected turn of 
events, he is to depart at the end of the month. He is also to step down from 
the board.

Jeakings took over as CEO of the Norwich-based publisher in 2008, six years 
after joining the group as its finance director. He was confronted by the 
problems that struck the whole industry - a severe recession, a technological 
revolution and falling newsprint sales.

He then set about trying to transform the company from a traditional print 
business into a digital one while instituting cost-savings and the 
centralisation of production facilities.

The result has been an improvement to the balance sheet and, according to a 
press release issued today by Archant, "the company expects to be debt free by 
the end of the year."

Jeakings is to remain as Archant's representative on the regional trade body, 
the Newspaper Society, of which he is president. He is also to remain as a 
non-executive director of thePress Association 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/press-association>.

Jeakings explained in his leaving statement that he had been considering "for 
some time whether or not it is time for me to move on."

He decided that with Archant's new chairman, Simon Bax, having "his feet under 
the table... now is the right time for me to step down."

He added: "I am honoured to have led this great company and I will miss 
working with Archant people. I wish Simon and Archant all the best for the 
future."

Bax spoke of Jeakings's "major contribution to the group" and his "careful 
stewardship of the business over an extremely difficult period for the 
industry."

I understand that moves are "under way" to appoint a replacement for Jeakings 
and an announcement about that will be made "in due course."

Archant's main title is the Eastern Daily Press. It publishes three other 
dailies plus a string of weeklies in Norfolk, Suffolk, Devon and London.
 