
A regional publisher is to launch a “pop-up” newspaper this week aimed at 
people dismayed by the Brexit vote in the EU referendum.

The Norfolk-based Archant is planning to publish four issues of a weekly title 
calledThe New European <https://www.theguardian.com/media/the-new-european> to 
cater for the 48% who voted to remain in the European Union.

Reader interest will decide whether it lasts beyond a month. Priced at £2, the 
first issue will be available in shops across Britain on Friday (8 July), but 
distribution will be focused on areas that voted strongly for remain, such as 
London and the south-east, Liverpool and Manchester.

The company said in a press release: “The paper will offer those feeling 
dismayed and disenfranchised by Brexit a non-political focal point, bringing 
together the extraordinarily broad spectrum of people who feel a real sense of 
loss after the leave vote victory.”

Matt Kelly, Archant’s chief content officer will be launch editor. He said: “I 
believe the 48% who voted to Remain are not well served by the traditional 
press and that there is a clear opportunity for a newspaper like The New 
European.”

Kelly, a former Mirror group executive, believes people will want to “read and 
carry” The New European “like a badge of honour.”

He said: “It will be an eclectic and energetic mix of content – not just about 
the Brexit issue, but a celebration of why we lovedEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> so much in the first place.”

A nationwide launch will be a departure for Archant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/archant>, which publishes four regional 
dailies, including the Eastern Daily Press.

Contributors to the first issue of the new paper will include James Brown, the 
former Loaded and GQ editor; Tanit Koch, editor of Bild; and Wolfgang Blau, 
ex-editor of Zeit online and the Guardian’s former digital director.

There will also be contributions by Peter Bale, chief executive of the Centre 
for Public Integrity; Simon Calver, a former chief executive of Mothercare and 
LoveFilm; and Annabelle Dickson, leader of the Westminster political lobby for 
regional newspapers.
 