
Melbourne Victory head to Korea with their Asian Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/asian-champions-league> fate evenly 
poised after a 1-1 draw with Jeonbuk Motors on Tuesday night. After Besart 
Berisha’s headed opener, the A-League side were pegged back by their Korean 
opponents, conceding an equaliser from a free-kick.

While Berisha ran Jeonbuk ragged all night and was unlucky not to add to his 
fifth minute goal, the Victory faithful came to celebrate another forward. The 
11,542-strong crowd chanted Archie Thompson’s name all night on his farewell 
appearance after 11 seasons at the club.

No reason why A-League duo cannot dare to dream of Asian glory | John Duerden
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/17/no-reason-why-a-league-duo-cannot-dare-to-dream-of-asian-glory>
The tributes continued well after his substitution as the 37-year-old shed a 
tear on bench. Thompson has one more appearance to come in navy blue - the away 
leg in Jeonju next week – and on his evidence Victory will have every reason to 
be positive of progression.

The first leg was a tense affair, beginning at a cracking pace and packed with 
chances. Fine work from Leigh Broxham brought the opener. The diminutive 
utility showed his athleticism, rising high at a half-cleared corner to dink 
the ball in front of Jeonbuk goalkeeper Kwon Sun-tae. Berisha swooped in, 
heading home from close range.

Victory’s lead didn’t last long. The lightest of touches from Matthieu 
Delpierre, who joined Thompson and Kosta Barbarouses in making farewell AAMI 
Park appearances, brought down impressive midfielder Han Kyo-won just outside 
the box. Leonardo took the resulting free-kick with such precision that Victory 
keeper Lawrence Thomas moved only to pick the ball out of his net.

After Leonardo’s equaliser, the Koreans sat back and soaked up the pressure. 
Victory dominated possession but were thwarted by Jeonbuk’s well-drilled 
defence. To continue on into the last eight of the Asian Champions League, 
Kevin Muscat’s side will need a win or goal-laden draw next Tuesday night.
 