
A group of 30 Greenpeace <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/greenpeace> 
activists and journalists detained in Russia since September should be home 
shortly after Christmas after authorities began on Tuesday to formally process 
their criminal amnesties and grant them exit visas.

A Greenpeace spokesman said members of the group, who were arrested aboard the 
Greenpeace ship Arctic Sunrise during a protest against oil drilling in the 
Arctic, were beginning to go through the administrative process clearing them 
of criminal charges, before being given exit visas to leave the country. This 
was likely to take some time, he said, and none of the group were expected to 
leaveRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> before Thursday at the 
earliest.

The group said Anthony Perrett, a Greenpeace activist who is one of six 
Britons to be detained, was the first to have the criminal case against him 
formally dropped. He is now awaiting the exit visa needed to leave Russia and 
has been told he can collect it on Thursday.

In a statement released by Greenpeace, Perrett said: "It's time to go home, 
it's time to get back to Wales, and I just got one big step closer." He said 
the group took peaceful action and he remained proud of his actions.

The 28 activists and two journalists were charged with piracy, later reduced 
to hooliganism, after Russian authorities boarded their ship. After they were 
held in St Petersburg for months, initially in prison and then on bail, they 
were given amnestyunder a law passed by Russia's parliament last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/dec/18/jailed-pussy-riot-russian-amnesty>
, which also granted clemency to the two jailed members of the punk group Pussy 
Riot.

Kieron Bryan, a British freelance video journalist who is among the so-called 
Arctic 30, said from St Petersburg: "Only a few weeks ago it looked like we 
were going to be here well into February and probably beyond. To be getting our 
amnesty for Christmas Day is pleasing."

Bryan's fiancee was arriving in St Petersburg later on Tuesday to spend 
Christmas with him, he added, and they would return to the UK together: 
"Christmas will be whenever we're all together as a family, as far as I'm 
concerned. It'll be strange tomorrow. Talking to my mum and dad on Skype will 
be a bit bizarre, but we'll be together before the New Year and we'll start 
2014 in the right place, which is good."

Once he returned to his home village in Devon, Bryan said, he would begin 
trying to put his life back together. "I've got a lot of people to go and say 
thank you to in person, and do a lot of things I've been missing."

Cliff Harris, the father of another Briton among the group, Alex Harris, said 
the family were expecting her imminently. He said: "We've been told it might be 
Boxing Day, but it might not be. I think two have gone through and been told 
they can leave, but they've got to go before the investigating committee and 
get the final stamp. It would have been nice to see her for Christmas, but any 
time is great."

Greenpeace has said Russia was acting contrary to international law in laying 
criminal charges against people taking part in a legitimate and peaceful 
protest. The organisation strongly argued firstly for the 30 to be granted 
bail, and then for them to be allowed to leave the country.
 