
British Greenpeace activist Alex Harris has described how she and fellow 
Arctic 30 protesters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/arctic-30-protesters> held in a 
Russian prison managed to communicate with each other by tapping out messages 
on a pipe.

Harris, from Exeter, said she was terrified during her time in the Murmansk 
jail. "I didn't know where my friends were, what was going on, no one could 
speak English and I couldn't communicate with anyone. I couldn't sleep, it was 
horrible," she said.

But the 27-year-old said the group of 28 Greenpeace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/greenpeace> activists and two 
journalists devised coded messages that "kept her going" during the 23 hours a 
day she spent alone in her cell.

She said: "There was a radiator pipe that ran all the way through the prison. 
So we got out a pen or a spoon and tapped on it.

"One tap was A, two taps was B, and three taps was C. Sometimes it would take 
10 minutes to say something and someone would go, 'Please repeat' and you'd go, 
'Oh no!'."

Harris was among 30 people onboard the Greenpeace ship Arctic Sunrise arrested 
in September when activists tried to scale an offshore oil rig in the Russian 
Arctic owned by the energy giant Gazprom.

Russian authorities initially charged the group with piracy, which carries a 
maximum sentence of 15 years' imprisonment.

Harris told the BBC: "The girls and I were chatting one day and saying we 
can't even have children any more."

Harris said she experienced moments of panic, especially when the detainees 
were moved to a jail in St Petersburg because she was scared of "the unknown".

All the protesters have been released on bail, but all face possible trial on 
charges of hooliganism, which has a maximum penalty of seven years.

Harris said she did not regret her decision to join Arctic Sunrise. She did 
not blame Greenpeace because, she said, no one could have predicted what 
happened.

She rejected the suggestion that the Greenpeace protesters should have taken 
greater care following the imprisonment of the Pussy Riot activists.

She said: "I never compared myself to Pussy Riot because they were protesting 
against the Russian regime and we were protesting about oil."
 