
On Thursday night, Cliff Harris, a man growing increasingly accustomed to 
bizarre and frightening occurrences, was sitting at home in Devon watching his 
daughter Alex tell the 10 o'clock news how she used a radiator pipe, a spoon 
and an alphabet code to communicate with her friends and keep herself going in 
a freezing Murmansk jail.

It was not, he says with a degree of bemused understatement, something he ever 
expected to see. But then again, there is not much about the past nine weeks 
that either the 63-year-old agronomist or his 27-year-old daughter could have 
predicted in a trip that saw a "real Devon country girl" turned into the public 
face of Greenpeace's Arctic 30 campaign.

When the family said goodbye to Harris in Norway in early September, all they 
were expecting was for theGreenpeace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/greenpeace> digital communications 
officer to have a little adventure and see the beauty of the Arctic for 
herself. "They were just going to highlight the dangers of oil drilling in the 
Arctic," her father told the Guardian. "It was quite a shock when we saw the 
footage of the Russians boarding the ship."

Just before she left, she had sent an email to Becky Mercer and some of her 
other university friends. "It's possible that we could be arrested," it said. 
"But it's a pretty low possibility. If you hear protesters have been arrested, 
that's not me. But if you hear that the crew have been arrested, then panic. 
LOL."

But news of her arrest in mid-September and the Russian authorities' 
subsequent decision to charge the 28 activists and two freelance journalists 
with piracy, and then with hooliganism, did not prompt much laughter.

According to her father, although Harris cares deeply about the environment, 
she could hardly be described as a direct activist. "When she was a young 
child, if ever there was a documentary or any news items about animals losing 
their habitat or facing extinction, she would watch it and you could see she 
was concerned about what she was hearing and seeing," he said.

Graduating with a marketing degree from Bournemouth university, Harris worked 
in Abu Dhabi for a year before taking a few months off to travel. On a visit to 
the Amazon she saw what oil spillages could do to an ecosystem. She has lived 
in Australia for the past four years and worked for Greenpeace for the last two.

Despite the fact that six Britons – including video journalist Kieron Bryan – 
remain in St Petersburg on bail, much of the attention has focused on Harris. In
a letter her parents shared with the Guardian in October she detailed her 
struggle to deal with life in an Arctic jail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/oct/18/letter-greenpeace-protester-russia-cell>
. "Being in prison is like slowly dying," she wrote, in a letter that put her 
at the heart of the campaign to free those held. "You literally wish your life 
away and mark off the days."

Appearing in court for appeals first in Murmansk, and then St Petersburg, the 
Greenpeace activists could be divided into two groups: those who put a brave 
face on it – and in some cases even seemed to believe that if their 
incarceration was raising awareness about Arctic drilling, it was perhaps even 
worth it – and those who looked completely shocked and overwhelmed by the 
experience.

Harris fitted into the latter category. During her first hearing in Murmansk, 
her voice was choked with emotion as she recalled how she had asked for doctors 
to attend to her stomach pains but been ignored. At the second hearing, the 
stern judge who had been doing a passable impression of Anne Robinson for much 
of the hearing appeared visibly troubled by Harris's emotional plea to be set 
free.She told the translator to tell Harris to "be calm", and asked if she 
would like a break in proceedings to compose herself.

But those who know Harris insist the appearances do not quite give the full 
measure of her. Ben Stewart, who is co-ordinating Greenpeace's campaign to get 
the Arctic 30 home, said: "She said she never realised herself how strong she 
was and she had got a lot – in her words – 'stronger and wiser' in jail because 
of the level of adversity that she was facing."

Kieron Bryan, who met Harris for the first time as they boarded the Arctic 
Sunrise only to discover that they had grown up a few miles from each other in 
North Devon, says she was obviously delighted to be part of the Greenpeace 
campaign. "I saw a picture of her in court looking so upset and that was really 
moving and really hard to take," he says, "but I kind of expected her to stay 
strong."

Bryan knows that the Arctic 30 episode raises questions about the dangers of 
protesting inRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>. Although there 
are serious discussions to be had when everyone is safely home, he believes no 
one could have predicted the overwhelming scale of the Russian response. "I 
wouldn't have joined the ship if I didn't feel safe with the organisation 
because they're an internationally recognised environmental group," he says. 
"This is not some fly-by-night organisation who haven't done these things 
before," he says.

Stewart says Greenpeace is satisfied that it carried out the correct risk 
assessments based on the evidence it had but stresses that the group is going 
to hold "a really, really thorough debrief" when it's all over, adding: "It 
would be utterly negligent if we didn't."

For as long as the Arctic 30 remain on bail in Russia, though, Alex Harris 
seems destined to remain the enduring face of a situation she had previously 
only dared joke about. "She's not one of those people that wants to be the 
centre of attention," says Becky Mercer. "But if it keeps their plight and the 
plight of the Arctic in the press, I think she would be happy to do it."
 