
The Greenpeace <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/greenpeace> "Arctic 
30" could be home by Christmas, and the two jailed members of the punk group 
Pussy Riot should be released from jail in the coming days, after a 
wide-ranging amnesty law was passed by the Russian parliamenton Wednesday .

The Pussy Riot <https://www.theguardian.com/music/pussy-riot> pair are serving 
a two-year sentence for hooliganism motivated by religious hatred, while the 
Greenpeace activists are charged with hooliganism and are currently on bail 
awaiting trial in St Petersburg.

The amnesty, backed by Russia's president, Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin>, is timed to coincide with 
the 20th anniversary of Russia's constitution. It mainly concerns first-time 
offenders, minors and women with small children.

An amendment on Wednesday extended the amnesty to suspects in cases of 
hooliganism, which includes the Arctic 30, who were arrested aboard the 
Greenpeace ship Arctic Sunrise in September.

They were bailed by courts in St Petersburg last month but still faced trial 
and potential jail sentences of up to seven years.
 Iain Rogers, one of the Greenpeace activists, in a cage at a bail hearing in 
Murmansk in October. Photograph: Igor Podgorny/Greenpeace/SWNS.com 
The Greenpeace activists expressed relief, though Arctic Sunrise captain Peter 
Willcox said: "There is no amnesty for the Arctic."

He added: "I might soon be going home to my family, but I should never have 
been charged and jailed in the first place."

Kieron Bryan, a freelance journalist and one of six Britons among the 30 
Greenpeace detainees, said that with all the uncertainty about whether or not 
they would be included in the amnesty, the past week had been hard to cope 
with: "We've all been feeling the emotional strain this week," he said from St 
Petersburg.

"We'd heard rumours about the possibility of this at every stage of the 
process, but there have been so many rumours and false hopes that I never 
really believed it. For every positive thing that's happened there has been a 
setback, and a feeling that we might be here for a very long time and go to 
jail."

Greenpeace communications officer Alexandra Harris said: "We are relieved we 
are coming home but we don't know when. It is quite a strange feeling.

"Our amnesty will be signed off tomorrow and then the investigators [in the 
case] will have to approve it and then we have to wait for visas. It could take 
weeks or we could be home for the weekend. That would be amazing if we could be 
home for Christmas."

Harris, who works for Greenpeace in Australia, said she was looking forward to 
spending time with her family in Devon and a long walk on Dartmoor.
 Mikhail Khodorkovsky reads documents behind a glass wall during a court 
session in Moscow in June 2010. Photograph: Sergei Karpukhin/Reuters 
She added: "It's strange that we are being forgiven for a crime we didn't 
commit, and I keep thinking about my Russian friends. I always imagined we'd 
all be together in this moment and let go under the same circumstances. We've 
been a group this whole time and I thought we would be sharing this moment – 
but the amnesty doesn't mean the same for all of us."

The Duma, Russia's parliament, voted 446-0 in favour of the bill in its third 
and final reading on Wednesday . Once it is printed in the state newspaper, 
Rossiiskaya Gazeta, probably on Thursday , it will then become law.

The amnesty does not contain names so there is still uncertainly about how 
exactly it will be applied, but it appears that the decision has been taken on 
high to improve Russia's image ahead of the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi, 
which begin in less than two months.

Theoretically, once the law is published, the next step for the Greenpeace 
activists will be to apply to Russian investigators to end the case against 
them, and then they will need to apply for exit visas. As they were brought to
Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> forcefully, they do not have 
proper entrance visas. It is a bureaucratic hurdle that could take some weeks 
to sort out, but it is also possible that now a decision has been taken, 
efforts will be made to arrange the paperwork quickly.

Bryan said it was unclear whether or not their visas could be ready in the 
next week: "It could be in time for Christmas, but whatever happens it's a 
massive weight off my shoulders, and for my parents to know that their son is 
coming home. That's the main thing, even if I end up missing Christmas."

Sue Turner, the mother of Iain Rogers, one of the six British nationals among 
the Arctic 30, said: "Until I have heard it officially, I can't quite believe 
it.

"I am waiting to know whether they have to wait for exit visas or if they are 
put on a plane straight away. I am so excited, I just can't take it in. It is a 
great Christmas present for me and the family and all Iain's friends."

The other high-profile beneficiaries of the amnesty are Nadezhda Tolokonnikova 
and Maria Alyokhina of the punk group Pussy Riot, who are serving two-year 
sentences for staging an impromptu punk performance in Moscow's main cathedral 
early last year.

Petya Verzilov, Tolokonnikova's husband, said he believed an order had been 
given to speed up the process. Although technically releases could take up to 
six months to be processed from the day the law is published, officials at both 
prisons have indicated they are ready to release the Pussy Riot duo as soon as 
soon as the law is passed, he said.

Alyokhina is serving her time in a prison in the city of Nizhny Novgorod, 
while Tolokonnikova was recently moved from Mordovia, a region known for its 
Soviet-era gulags, to the Siberian city of Krasnoyarsk.

She has said that the conditions are incomparably better than in Mordovia, 
from where she published a long open letter detailing slave-like conditions of 
forced labour and cruel punishments.

Verzilov indicated he expected them to be released as soon as Thursday , and 
was planning to fly to Krasnoyarsk late night.

"They are slightly sceptical of course," Verzilov told the Guardian. "When 
you're living in these conditions it's hard to think about the Duma passing 
some bill, and it seems like it could never happen, so it's a big surprise for 
them that it does actually seem to be happening."

Tolokonnikova and Alyokhina, who were both sentenced to two years in jail last 
summer, were due to be released in early March, as their sentence included time 
served since their arrest. A third member of the group, Ekaterina Samutsevich, 
was freed on appeal shortly after the trial concluded.

Verzilov said that on their release, the pair plan to launch a major new 
project related to the Russian prison system, though he declined to give 
details.

While Greenpeace and Pussy Riot are celebrating, there are notable exceptions 
to the amnesty. It does not cover Russia's former richest man, Mikhail 
Khodorkovsky, who has been found guilty of economic crimes at two separate 
trials, and neither does it include many of the people on trial for 
disturbances at a rally the day before Putin was inaugurated last year.

Some of those accused will receive an amnesty, but more than half of the 26 
involved will not, including Mikhail Kosenko, who was sentenced to indefinite 
psychiatric treatment in October, despite the court hearing he was not involved 
in the violence and his lawyers saying he was of sound mind.

"Theoretically I can apply tomorrow to be released from court proceedings and 
go abroad for New Year," said Maria Baronova, one of those on trial who does 
fall under the amnesty. "But this is Russia after all. Maybe the prosecutors 
will think something up overnight and it won't happen."
 