
There seems to be an awful lot of interest in the world's cultural monuments. 
If it's not Dan Cruickshank's Round The World In 80 Treasures, then it's the 
BBC's 50 Things To Do Before You Die, or the current search for the seven 
modern wonders of the world. At some point in our lives, we've all got to see 
Machu Picchu and the Pyramids, haven't we?

Well, an increasingly vocal group of conservationists, consultants and 
non-governmental agencies want tourists and tour operators alike to think more 
carefully; even to consider alternatives. Because tourist congestion can prove 
dangerous to the health of the world's must-see monuments, and working out how 
to manage the "carrying capacity" of sites (to use the jargon) is becoming an 
urgent priority.

Machu Picchu, the Peruvian site where 2,500 visitors a day arrive in high 
season, is a case in point. John Hemming, who wrote the article opposite, has 
seen tourism escalate since he first visited in 1960. "It's the most important 
site in Latin America and if you're over there you have to go," he says. But he 
believes it's right that visitor numbers be restricted to combat erosion (see 
box below).

Wear and tear is even a concern for British day trippers. When Hadrian's Wall 
Path Trail opened last year, many rejoiced, but since then an unexpected 
400,000 walkers have trodden the path and archaeologists are now concerned for 
its welfare.

Such is the paradox of modern tourism: that sites have to be protected and 
promoted at the same time. "Some of the world's most important architectural 
landscapes have become victims of their own success," says Colin Amery of the 
World Monuments Fund (WMF), which produces a Watch List of the 100 Most 
Endangered Sites every two years. "Publicity is often used to attract funds for 
conservation work, but it can be a double-edged sword. From the Great Wall of 
China to the temples of Angkor in Cambodia, drastic compromises are being made 
to accommodate swelling visitor numbers." A few, he argues, shouldn't be 
visited at all. "As far as Easter Island and Shackleton's Hut in Antarctica are 
concerned, it is better these places exist unvisited than are destroyed by 
development to accommodate tourists."

There are now 611 cultural sites on the Unesco World Heritage List, 29 of 
which are considered at serious risk (seewhc.unesco.org 
<http://www.whc.unesco.org>), and each listing potentially stimulates tourism. 
"The level of tourism is much higher than it was 20 years ago and management 
issues should have been forecast," says Susan Denyer of the International 
Council on Monuments and Sites (Icomos), a non-governmental body that advises 
Unesco. "It's a major problem. Given cheaper air travel and greater mobility, 
people can now see these sites. One can't blame them for it."

Dr Nicholas Stanley-Price, director-general of the International Centre for 
the Study of the Preservation and Restoration of Cultural Property (Iccrom), 
thinks the onus lies with site management rather than the tourists. "We'd like 
to maximise people's ability to visit these places and to encourage local 
economies as well as help develop a sense of place. But we don't want to kill 
the goose that laid the golden egg." Which is why the running of such places is 
critical.

There are several methods currently used to limit damage. Timed tickets are 
increasingly popular to reduce footfall. Then there's the growing practice of 
charging higher entrance fees to drive mass tourism out of the market: a method 
that, among others, the Taj Mahal and the tomb of Queen Nefertari in Egypt have 
adopted. "The trouble with this approach is that some find it elitist," says Dr 
Stanley-Price. Two-tier pricing policies can help with local access, as happens 
at the Taj Mahal and the desert city of Petra in Jordan.

Indeed, perhaps rich international tourists should always expect to pay more. 
After all, if you can go around the world to see a monument, then you can 
afford to pay an entrance fee.

'Sustainable tourism means making the richer countries of the world pay to 
help protect humanity's shared heritage," says Amery. "Hence, hotel and tourist 
taxes are essential to pay conservation and management bills, and the high-end 
should pay when access is an issue." In which case it's important to make sure 
the fees and taxes go to the right place.

Additionally, some monuments limit physical access, as English Heritage did 
when it roped off the stone circle atStonehenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/stonehenge>.

Another growing policy is to try to steer people away from the iconic sites: 
for instance, English Heritage now hopes to relieve pressure on Stonehenge by 
guiding visitors towards the area's wider neolithic landscape. This is 
difficult as tourists will always want to see the Big One, which is why 
conservationists are appealing to tourists, to make them understand that their 
gratification can contribute to a monument's degradation.

"We've got to get tourists to take on their responsibilities as well as 
rights," says Denyer. "One of the ways to do this is through guidebooks." 
Icomos and Iccrom have been working with publishers, including Lonely Planet 
and the Tourist Club Of Italy, to try and raise awareness of the perils of 
congestion. Some may opt to under-publicise key sights.

To which some tourists might say: what possible harm am I doing? Well, a 
recent paper at the University Libre de Brussels suggested that even walking 
and body heat play a deleterious part. "An individual walking slowly (3.2 km/h) 
in an environment of 15°C develops a heat power around 200W, freeing 100g of 
water vapour and 100g of CO2," it reported.

But there is a last resort that will assuage tourists and conservationists. "I 
believe that one of the greatest hopes for monuments is the use of facsimiles," 
says Simon Beeching, spokesman for the Travelwatch environmental consultancy. 
Fakes, in other words – which are already more widespread than many would 
imagine, including replica sculptures in Florence and on Mayan sites, and 
reproduction caves at Lascaux in France and Altimira in Spain.

"It's extraordinary how popular the replica cave art at Lascaux is," says Dr 
Stanley-Price. "Somehow, people don't feel they're being cheated. It's a 
totally acceptable solution and provided it's done well, there's no loss of 
atmosphere."

It could yet be the best insurance against our loving the wonders of the world 
to death.

Machu Picchu
 500,000 visitors a year

The Inca citadel has long grappled with problems of tourist congestion and 
access, and numbers are growing at 6% a year. Last year, a landslip occurred in 
the valley below and Unesco has threatened to put it on its endangered list. 
Visitors are already subject to restrictions. 'The Inca Trail [which leads to 
the citadel] is now closed to casual travellers,' says John Hemming. 'You have 
to go in a tour, which is not altogether bad.' A long-running saga has been the 
proposal of a cable car.

Angkor
 1 million visitors

Cambodia's Angkor Archaeological Park - the 12th-century complex that includes 
Angkor Wat - is experiencing pressure from increasing visitor numbers. The 
World Monuments Fund and Cambodian authorities are examining ways to address 
visitor impact, particularly on Phnom Bakheng (famed for its sunset watching) 
and create a 'conservation management plan'. It has a two-tier pricing system: 
Cambo-dians go free; foreigners pay £12 for a day pass.

Forbidden City
 7m visitors

Most of the visitors that cross the ancient stone floors of the Imperial City 
are Chinese, so the government is reluctant to limit access, but the WMF 
believes some kind of limits must soon be set or the city will risk 
irreversible damage. A restoration plan is now in place and due to be completed 
in 2020. The aim of the plan is to 'restore the solemnity, sublimity and glory 
of the Imperial Palace' and use timed tickets only.

Pompeii
 2m visitors

The Roman town is one of the best known sites in the world - and also one of 
the most threatened. Visitor numbers have shot up from 863,000 in 1981 to 
around two million today. But many of the houses that were open in the 50s are 
now closed and Pompeii was included on the World Monuments Watch List of 100 
Most Endangered Sites in 1996, 1998 and 2000. A 'conservation master plan' has 
ensued.

Taj Mahal
 3m visitors

The Taj Mahal is the single-most visited monument in India - in 2003 it lured 
three million people. All well and good, but it has been through various 
crises: pollution, fear of terrorism and congestion, which was barely dented 
when the admission fee for foreign visitors shot up in 2001 from 22p to £14. 
'Unless you are the late Princess of Wales, you are never alone at the Taj 
Mahal,' says Colin Amery of the WMF. 'Timed tickets and strict rationing of 
numbers is beginning to make the Taj a more magical experience.' One plan 
proposes to close the Taj Mahal off altogether, so visitors could only view it 
from afar.

Acropolis
 500,000 visitors

The Acropolis, a compulsory visit for all who visit Athens, hosts around half 
a million tourists a year, paying €12 each, and it is constantly being 
monitored for overcrowding. As with Stonehenge, visitors are encouraged to see 
it in the wider context, although the much-vaunted Acropolis Museum is still 
awaited.

Alhambra
2.2m visitors

The Alhambra was visited by 2.2m last year and the management decided to limit 
visitor numbers this season by offering timed visits. A total of 7,700 tourists 
a day will be allowed: 4,200 in the morning, 3,500 in the afternoon, thus 
avoiding 'crushes of up to 5,000 people'.
 