
Q I recently sold a house in Spain and have placed the proceeds in a Euro 
account with a leading UK high street bank. I am paying a small charge for the 
account and getting no interest. I would like to make this money work, but not 
in overseas property. I saw an advertisement in the Guardian recently for a 
specialist currency broker offering the best rates of exchange. Is it safe to 
approach these people?

A The number of offshore specialist currency brokers offering their services 
to private individuals and businesses has mushroomed in the past few years. 
There are several reasons for this, but one is the tremendous growth in the 
number of overseas investments, and especially property, by UK residents. When 
large sums of money are involved, obtaining a decent rate of exchange will 
provide very significant savings.

At the same time, the upsurge in foreign travel has brought a much greater 
awareness that British high street banks and other UK-based financial 
institutions are more interested in making profits than serving customers. And 
individuals are treated particularly badly.

They are forced to accept the tourist exchange rate, which is very different 
from the wholesale market rates quoted in newspapers. It has a much larger 
spread between the buying and selling price, providing a bigger profit margin 
for the dealers.

Many of the outlets selling currency to individuals, including the Post 
Office, no longer charge commission as they did in the past, but widening the 
buy-sell spread often makes up for this. There is no doubt that offshore 
specialist currency brokers who offer fairer exchange rates more closely 
related to the wholesale market are a much better deal.

Significant savings
 The brokers are prepared to accept reduced profit margins, especially on 
large sums, and for customers the subsequent savings can be considerable. I 
used an offshore currency broker last year and estimate I saved around 4% on a 
medium-sized amount.

So why don't those interested in transferring currencies go to the specialist 
currency brokers, who are easily accessible via the internet or advertisements 
in newspapers and magazines?

The first point is that most specialist currency brokers are not normally 
interested in dealing with sums worth less than £5,000, because the profit 
margin is not sufficient to cover fixed administrative costs and transfer 
charges. Even above the minimum of £5,000, the savings on relatively small 
amounts aren't that brilliant since the exchange rates on offer are based to a 
large extent on the sum involved. Therefore, the larger the amount, the better 
the deal.

Assuming you are dealing in relatively large sums, the main problem in using 
offshore currency brokers is the perceived risk of dealing with an unknown 
organisation rather than a recognisable company, such as your bank, where you 
have a comeback if something goes wrong. I must admit I had these doubts last 
year, but concluded the savings outweighed the risk.

Regulating your transfer
 Bizarrely, bearing in mind the potential risks currency dealing is a 
non-regulated industry. The Financial Services Authority (FSA) can offer no 
protection or compensation since it has no regulatory power in the sector. 
Firms can register with the FSA, and one or two have done so, but this doesn't 
provide any protection and is of little significance.

However, currency brokers do have to apply for a money service business 
licence from HM Revenue & Customs, but these are not hard to get and do not 
involve any regulation - the government is concerned with tax and money 
laundering, not they way brokers deal with consumers. The brokers do not even 
have an "umbrella" organisation with a code of conduct, so to a large extent 
you have to rely on your own judgement.

There are various checks you can make, however. The most important one is to 
find out how long the broker has been in business. Obviously, if the company 
has just jumped on the bandwagon to capitalise on the growth in the market 
there is more risk involved than with a company with an established track 
record.

You can try checking a company's accounts and balance sheet with Companies 
House, but this is a lengthy and difficult procedure and may not reveal much 
since the brokers are essentially middlemen. You can also ask the brokers what 
protective measures they have to ensure your money doesn't disappear into the 
ether. For example, you can ask for a bank reference.

Steps to completion
 The first step in the transfer process is for your money to be deposited in a 
client account with a bank, which should be able to provide you with a 
reference if required. The transfer of this money into a different currency 
with the bank of your choice is then made at an agreed exchange rate on a 
specified date.

This negotiation should be based on the current state of the market and the 
amount involved. It is best to shop around with several brokers to make sure 
you are getting a good deal - watch out for any transfer charges and make sure 
you are comparing like with like.

Currency brokers are not able to give you advice on what to do. However, 
unlike UK banks they do have trained staff who can give you a "house view" on 
what they think is likely to happen to the currencies, while leaving you to 
make the final decision.

You will have to provide a copy of your passport to prove your identity and a 
utility bill to confirm your address. Otherwise, the transaction is 
surprisingly uncomplicated. In my experience, specialist currency brokers are 
generally keen to help, like any good salespeople, and know all about currency, 
unlike many of their UK counterparts.

Unless you have exceptional UK bank contacts there are considerable savings to 
be made using a specialist broker. However, there is the additional element of 
risk when dealing with an offshore currency broking organisation that is not 
subject to regulation. It comes down to balancing the risk against the 
potential saving - that decision depends on you and what you plan to do with 
the money.
 