
Aretha Franklin <https://www.theguardian.com/music/aretha-franklin> has said 
that she "cracked up" laughing at reports that Beyoncé lip-synched through The 
Star Spangled-Banner at president Obama's inauguration ceremony.

The 70-year-old singer performed My Country, 'Tis of Thee at Obama's first 
inauguration ceremony in Washington DC four years ago.

Franklin told ABC News 
<http://abcnews.go.com/Entertainment/beyonce-lip-sync-controversy-aretha-franklin-laughed/story?id=18289912>
 she still thinks Beyoncé "did a beautiful job" at Monday's event but added: 
"When I heard the news this evening that she was pre-recorded I really laughed. 
I thought it was funny because the weather down there was about 46 or 44 
degrees and for most singers that is just not good singing weather." In fact, 
temperatures were as low as 40 degrees.

"When I heard that I just really cracked up," Franklin added. "I thought it 
was really funny, but she did a beautiful job with the pre-record … next time 
I'll probably do the same."

The soul legend said that she had sung live for her inauguration performance 
in 2009, because "I wanted to give people the real thing" and that 
"pre-recording never crossed my mind".

She did admit to lip-synching once previously when she performed The 
Star-Spangled Banner at a NBA final in 2004.

"I think it's optional really, it's up to the artist," she added.

The ceremony on Monday was held on Martin Luther King Jr Day, which had 
particularly poignancy for Franklin, who knew the late civil rights leader.

"From the beginning to the end, I was crying throughout the ceremony at 
different times," she said. "Looking at the history of the president coming to 
the point he came to, looking to where it came from the civil rights movement 
to yesterday and I think most of the country was crying."

Beyoncé <https://www.theguardian.com/music/beyonce> has not yet commented on 
the controversy over her performance. A member of the US Marine Corps band 
initially claimed that the 31-year-old star lip-synched through her performance 
but a spokesman later issued a statement saying: "Regarding Ms Knowles-Carter's 
vocal performance, no one in the Marine Band is in a position to assess whether 
it was live or pre-recorded."
 