
Amazing Grace, the highly-anticipated documentary about singing legend Aretha 
Franklin, has been pulled from the programme at theTelluride film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/telluridefilmfestival> following legal action 
by its subject.

On Friday – the day of its screening – Franklin filed a complaint against 
Telluride claiming that the footage “was taken with the express understanding 
that it would not be used commercially without agreement and consent by Ms 
Franklin”.

US District Judge John Kane, who serves in Colorado, imposed a temporary 
restraining order on the movie, meaning that its producers are blocked from 
showing it for a fortnight. A court spokesperson said there would then be 
another hearing as the litigation proceeds.

Earlier in the day, Telluride’s executive director, Julie Huntsinger, told 
press that the screening would proceed as planned. “[Franklin’s] lawyers are 
trying to stop us from showing the film,” she said. “Let’s just hope the 
paperwork that is filed has us covered. But [Franklin] should be proud.”

Joe Boyd, one of the movie’s producers, told the Detroit Free-Press on 
Thursday: “We are operating under the existing contract betweenAretha Franklin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/aretha-franklin> and Warner Bros, which has 
governed the use of footage from this session in the past.”

The film, which uses footage from a 1972 concert by Franklin and was 
originally part of an unfinished film by the late Sydney Pollack, is also 
scheduled to show in six days time at the Toronto film festivals. Its 
documentary programmer, Thom Powers,told Deadline  
<http://deadline.com/2015/09/aretha-franklin-telluride-amazing-grace-toronto-film-festival-injunction-1201514831/>
that they were still intending to screen and said they “haven’t heard of any 
legal procedures regarding the film in Toronto”.

Franklin’s complaint says that “allowing the film to be shown violates Ms 
Franklin’s contractual rights, her intellectual property rights, her rights to 
use and control her name and likeness, and represents an invasion of her 
privacy. It is also in direct and specific violation of the quitclaim agreement 
by which the footage was obtained from the Warner Brothers organisation by Mr. 
Alan Elliott, the purported producer of Amazing Grace.”

It goes on to note that four years ago Franklin sued Elliott over the same 
issue, and “the lawsuit was resolved after Elliott agreed not to release the 
film”.

The singer is also seeking at least $75,000 in damages, as well as further 
financial penalties to “deter similar future misconduct by others”.
 