
An execution drug obtained by the Arkansas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arkansas> prison system earlier this month 
appears to have been made by a subsidiary of Pfizer, even though the 
pharmaceutical giant has said it does not want its drugs to be used in 
executions.


 The sale of the vecuronium bromide by an unknown third party may show how 
difficult it could be for manufacturers to prevent such sales in states like 
Arkansas that have execution secrecy laws.

The Associated Press on Monday obtained redacted photos of the vecuronium 
bromide label from the Arkansas department of correction. It matches labels 
submitted to the National Institutes of Health by Hospira Inc, whichPfizer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/pfizer> bought last year. The AP also 
obtained the purchase orders for the drug, but the name of the third party that 
sold the drug to the department was redacted, in compliance with the state’s 
execution secrecy law.

Pfizer announced in May that it had put in place sweeping controls to make 
sure its distributors would not sell its drugs for use in executions. In an 
email on Monday, a company spokeswoman, Rachel Hooper, reiterated that position.

Pfizer’s lethal injection drug ban raises fears of alternative execution 
methods in US
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/14/pfizer-us-state-executions-lethal-drug-ban-fears>
“We have implemented a comprehensive strategy and enhanced restricted 
distribution protocols for a select group of products to help combat their 
unauthorized use for capital punishment. Pfizer is currently communicating with 
states to remind them of our policy,” Hooper wrote. She did not address whether 
the company was aware of the sale of its subsidiary’s drug to the Arkansas 
department of correction.

Maya Foa, who tracks pharmaceutical companies for the London-based human 
rights advocacy group Reprieve, defended Pfizer and Hospira, saying no 
pharmaceutical company wants its drugs used in executions.

 “It is possible that Arkansas department of correction was able to access a 
left-over supply of Hospira inventory that was sitting in old distribution 
channels. This is, of course, a finite supply. Pfizer’s new distribution system 
is extremely robust, and the company is committed to preventing the misuse of 
its medicines in executions,” Foa said by email.

Records obtained by the AP show the state agreed to pay $1,849.33 for 100 
vials of vecuronium bromide on 11 July and $2,982 for a purity analysis of the 
drug. That is almost 10 times less than the $18,478 the state paid in June 2015 
for fewer doses of the drug.

Solomon Graves, a department of correction spokesman, said he could not 
comment on the price difference. He confirmed by email that the new supply of 
vecuronium bromide was not bought at a pharmacy outside the US and was not made 
by or obtained from a compounding pharmacy.

Asked whether the department knew or cared that the drug manufacturer said it 
did not want its products used in executions, Graves responded: “Under the law, 
we cannot identify the company that made or sold the drugs, and I will not 
engage in hypotheticals.”

The department already had a little more than 15 doses of midazolam, which 
expire in April 2017, and 16 doses of potassium chloride, which expire in 
January 2017.

In September, the AP identified the likely makers of the drugs the state 
purchased last year by comparing redacted department of correction photos of 
their labels with labels archived at the NIH and US Food and Drug 
Administration. It appeared that an India-based company, Sun Pharma, made the 
expired supply of vecuronium bromide. A subsidiary of the England-based company 
Hikma appeared to make the midazolam, and Hospira appeared to make the 
potassium chloride.

At the time, neither Hospira nor Sun Pharma would say whether they would try 
to recall the drugs. Both issued statements saying they opposed the use of 
their drugs in executions, and their internal policies and controls were put in 
place to prevent the use of the drugs in lethal injections.

Hikma in 2013 recalled different drugs that the Arkansas department of 
correction obtained from a third-party seller for executions. The company 
attempted to verify that its drugs had been obtained last year, but the 
department declined to answer the company’s questions, citing the secrecy law.

 Executions in Arkansas had been largely halted since 2005 because of legal 
challenges and trouble obtaining execution drugs. In an attempt to resume 
executions, the Republican-led legislature passed the execution secrecy law 
last year. It requires the state to keep the details about its execution drugs 
secret, including the names of the drugs’ makers and sellers.

Nine inmates challenged the law, saying it could put them at risk of being 
subjected to unconstitutional cruel or unusual punishment and that it reneged 
on a previous agreement by the state to share information about the sources of 
its execution drugs.

The state supreme court upheld the law in a split decision last month. The 
inmates indicated they planned to appeal to the US supreme court. Eight of 
their execution dates had already been set, but their executions were on hold 
pending the outcome of that appeal.

 