 The last of the hilltop observation towers which overlooked the border country 
of South Armagh, where more than 100 British soldiers were killed, were being 
dismantled by the army yesterday.
For republicans, the towers were the visible symbol of British military 
occupation in what they called "God's country" and what the British government 
called "bandit country".

The towers dominated the landscape and became the focus of attacks by the 
local population. For British soldiers they were isolated fortresses surrounded 
by hostile territory.

Five towers are being dismantled on three hilltop sites - Camlough Mountain, 
Jonesborough Hill, and Croslieve Hill - which will be returned to greenfield 
status as soon as possible, the Ministry of Defence said yesterday.

A "blue light" emergency services radio mast will remain on Croslieve Hill.

The MoD said the towers ceased to be operational on April 1. The first of the 
remaining sangars - the fortified top of the towers - was being removed by an 
RAF Chinook helicopter yesterday at Jonesborough.

The move is the second phase of "normalisation measures" launched by the 
government last summer after the IRA announced it had abandoned its armed 
struggle.

Eight watchtowers - used for electronic, as well as human, surveillance - have 
been dismantled since December 1999, on Sturgan Mountain, Camlough, 
Glassdrumman, Cloghoge, Tievecrom, Sugarloaf Hill, Creevekeeran and 
Drummuckavall.

The International Monitoring Commission, set up in January 2004 to scrutinise 
the activities of paramilitary groups and to oversee the progress towards 
"normalisation" in the province, said last month that dissident republican 
groups were still a threat to the security forces, and loyalist paramilitaries 
remained deeply involved in organised crime.

However, the commission said that despite the continuing threats posed by 
these groups, the process of "normalisation" could go ahead as planned.

The number of British troops has been reduced from almost 14,000 in June 2004 
to about 9,000. It is due to be cut to about 5,000 by August 2007, with the 
number of military locations reduced from about 40 to 14.
 