
My first novel began as a serial in the San Francisco Chronicle. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/31/tales-city-armistead-maupin-damian-barr>
 I can not honestly claim that I set out to write a novel, since I was flying 
by the seat of my pants, pumping out 800 words a day, five days a week, in 
keeping with the needs of the gentlemen in the front office. Even the title was 
more or less dictated by my editors, since they wanted to make it clear to 
readers that (1) I was writing fiction and (2) I was writing fiction about San 
Francisco. Given a choice betweenThe San Francisco Story and Tales of the City, 
I settled on the latter because of its Dickensian echoes, though I worried 
it was too generic-sounding to ever belong to me completely. Thirty-eight years 
later I don't fret about that much any more.

My memory of that first year is one of panic and exhilaration. As another day 
and another chapter loomed, I scrambled for the pieces to this amorphous 
creature. I snatched names willy-nilly out of the air. My ingenue, Mary Ann 
Singleton, was a not-so-subtle variation on "single town". Her fellow tenants 
at 28 Barbary Lane, Mona Ramsey and Brian Hawkins had surnames drawn from my 
Southern father's self-published family history. Likewise, Michael Tolliver's 
last name was my uncle's middle name – at least in terms of its pronunciation, 
since he spelled it Taliferro. Landlady Anna Madrigal's name was my own 
invention, intended to evoke the pleasant rhythm ofMrs Miniver, a book I 
revered and had initially been serialised to great success in the Times. At 
least, I thought I had invented her name. It wasn't until many years later that 
I realised that Hayley Mills's mysterious governess in the 1964 film The Chalk 
Garden is called Miss Madrigal. Deborah Kerr's screen name had loitered for a 
dozen years somewhere in the back of my brain.

It was movies, mostly, that held sway over the invention of atmosphere in 
Tales of the City. I'm thinking of those sunny urban apartment house films – 
Bell, Book and Candle, Breakfast at Tiffany's, even Cabaret – as well as 
elements of Hitchcock films involving voyeurs with binoculars and gruesome, 
third-act falls from high places. The plotting emerged from my own skipping, 
stumbling life as a just-out gay man in San Francisco, that veritable asparagus 
garden of carnal delights. I built a whole chapter, for instance, out of the 
preppie guy I followed home one night only to learn that he was a shoe 
fetishist lusting after my Weejuns.

Also like Michael, I got as far as "the furniture buying stage" with a hunky 
Marine recruiter who successfully wooed me with a plastic medallion that read: 
"The Marines Are Looking for a Few Good Men". I even had a dreamy doctor 
boyfriend – a mastectomy specialist, not a gynecologist like Jon Fielding – who 
was ultimately unnerved by my growing contempt for the closet. An early job as 
a mail boy at an advertising agency (where, just like Mary Ann, I was required 
to raise the American flag every morning for my conservative boss) brought me 
into daily contact with a Mona-esque copywriter who declared herself "creative" 
by flaunting a hookah and a Victorian toilet in her office. Likewise the 
newspaper where I tapped outTales every afternoon offered a treasure trove of 
material, since my desk was adjacent to that of the society editor. (It was 
there I learned of a local hostess, a well-to-do lady with liberal intentions 
and a comically earnest air, who had thrown a luncheon at her penthouse "to rap 
about rape.") I liked working there in the "people department" (a new euphemism 
for the women's section in the age of feminism), since it offered handy 
distractions from the horror of the blank page. I would regale my sisters with 
tales of the night before, sparing them no detail, before finally committing 
them to paper at the 11th hour. Sometimes, when the panic overwhelmed me, I 
would flee the building entirely and walk two blocks to a plywood-cubicled sex 
club, where cheap daytime rates referred to as "The Businessman's Special" 
offered a moment or two of welcome mindlessness. After one such escape from my 
never-ending story I was called unexpectedly to the editor's office where, 10 
minutes into our discussion, I discovered a big pink glob of bubble gum stuck 
to the knee of my Levi's 501s. I thought that was funny at the time. Still do, 
come to think of it.

By the end of that crazed, single-minded year (it's no accident that Tales of 
the Cityconcludes on New Year's Eve) I had several hundred chapters that 
encompassed, among other oddities later excised, a sordid plotline involving a 
serial killer who strangled his victims with pantyhose and sprinkled their 
bodies with blue glitter. Harvey Ginsberg, the meticulous editor at Harper & 
Row in New York who had suggested "there might be a novel there" urged me to 
remove the hokey mystery thread and whittle the whole thing down into a tight 
little comedy of manners. My friend Rock Hudson offered me his Palm Springs 
house for this purpose, so I spent a week there, arranging chapters on his 
living room floor until they assumed a shape I could find acceptable. It was 
the first and only time I ever worked like that, and I found it immensely 
satisfying. Nowadays my habit is to polish as I go along.

• Armistead Maupin will be talking to John Mullan for the Guardian Book Club 
this evening at 6pm at The Tabernacle, 35 Powis Square, London W11.
theguardian.com/books 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/dec/17/armistead-maupin-book-club>.
 