
In 1974, when Armistead Maupin began writing what became Tales of the City, he 
thought of it as "an in-joke about the way life worked in San Francisco". Four 
decades later, that in-joke has been shared by more than 6 million readers. His 
stories of interlocking gay and straight lives in the city constitute one of 
the best-loved of literary sagas. TheNew York Times described reading them as 
"like dipping into an inexhaustible bag of M&Ms, with no risk of sugar 
overload". Now though, after four decades, that bag is finally about to be 
exhausted. The series will conclude with Maupin's ninth book,Days of Anne 
Madrigal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/dec/07/olympia-dukakis-anna-madrigal-armistead-maupin>
, published at the end of this month.

Quentin Crisp once introduced him with the boast: "This is Mr Maupin. He 
invented San Francisco." More importantly, Maupin virtually invented the 
mainstreaming of gay life and helped the world see that "the gay experience" 
was nothing lesser or greater than human experience.

Maupin came to a realisation of his homosexuality relatively late. He was 30 
when he came out, the same year he began writing. Taking stock of himself the 
way he would one of his characters, he once observed: "He had kept his heart 
(and his libido) under wraps for most of his life, only to discover that the 
thing he feared the most had actually become a source of great comfort and 
inspiration."

At the time he began writing, he saw gay fiction as both bleak and myopic. 
This was an era when Truman Capote still equated his homosexuality with his 
alcoholism and a climate in which Gore Vidal could claim: "There were 
homosexual acts, but not homosexual people." Maupin, however, had discovered a 
joyful fraternity and welcoming community in the bath houses and nightclubs of 
the city and decided, as he put it, to "[allow] a little air into the situation 
by actually placing gay people in the context of the world at large".

In doing so, he created a gloriously large world: his characters are a 
sprawling cast of eccentrics centred on 28 Barbary Lane, an address now firmly 
fixed in the canon of fictional residences. It's a household presided over by 
Anna Madrigal, the marijuana-growing, transgender landlady, who considers 
herself "a self-made woman [...] no one else in the world like her". InThe Days 
of Anna Madrigal, we find her as a 92-year-old, living with her ersatz family 
of strays and planning a trip to Burning Man, the week-long hippie bacchanalia 
held in the desert.

It's the kind of bohemia that would have blown a young Maupin's mind. He grew 
up in a conservative household in North Carolina, the son of a lawyer and a 
housewife. He first saw San Francisco in the late 1960s as a naval officer on 
his way to Vietnam and was instantly smitten. (Maupin later left his mark on 
military history in 1970 by being the last American sailor to withdraw from 
Cambodia.) It wasn't until he was 27, after a brief and ill-advised stint at 
law school, that he became a resident, beginning the tales soon after, first in 
the alternative weekly thePacific Sun before being picked up by the San 
Francisco Chronicle two years later.

He has said: "I conceived it by the seat of my pants, in a state of abject 
panic every morning." That explains the titbit-length chapters, the chatty 
rather than polished prose, and the glibly humorous tone.

Maupin has admitted that in the early days he kept Michael, the gay character, 
"very low key because I knew they'd say no if they saw what I was up to". Only 
once he had secured a solid following, hence a degree of control, did he feel 
comfortable bringing the gay characters in.

But even in San Francisco, the place where, as Edmund White 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/jan/06/edmund-white-life-in-writing> 
put it, "gay men came from across America to learn how to live gay lives", 
editors were squeamish about those gay lives taking their place in print. One 
of his bosses at the newspaper kept a baroque chart of theTales' dozens of 
characters on his office wall – an effort to ensure, as Maupin drolly noted, 
"that the homo characters didn't suddenly outnumber the hetero ones and thereby 
undermine the natural order of civilisation".

But however outlandish his characters and their adventures, Maupin's world 
always feels curiously wholesome. Perhaps that's because everything in theTales 
has been taken directly from his own very contented life. Luckily, it's a life 
that seems to attract enough colour to keep the stories rollicking along with 
ease.

There was an affair with the Hollywood movie star Rock Hudson, for example, 
who was coyly "named" in theTales with a line of blank spaces. A name effaced 
in print then, but later unforgettable when he became one of the first 
celebrities to speak publicly about having Aids. Hudson died in 1985, a year 
after Maupin publishedBabycakes, a novel widely regarded as the first work of 
fiction to address the crisis.

Maupin's most famous character and the most obvious authorial alter ego is the 
meek naif Michael "Mouse" Tolliver. It was through him, in fact, that Maupin 
came out to his parents. In the second book, 1980'sMore Tales of the City, 
Tolliver writes a letter to his mother and father telling them he's gay; Maupin 
knew that his parents, subscribers to theChronicle, would read it. Maupin 
Senior went on to lovingly accept his son as a gay man while Maupin himself has 
gladly accepted his role as a very visible gay icon.

"I realised," he said, "that part of my function was to be very clear and very 
public as a gay man. I'm prouder of that than anything else I've done."

In 1989, Maupin wrote what he thought was the last of the Tales series. In the 
nearly two decades that followed he kept busy with a 1993 TV mini-series of the
Tales and a non-Tales novel, Maybe the Moon. In 2007 though, he returned to the 
Tales. His seventh book went by the quietly triumphant title, Michael Tolliver 
Lives and sees a 55-year-old HIV positive Michael reflecting on surviving.

Critics have rolled their eyes at the Tales' many soap opera-like 
improbabilities, unaware that some of their furthest-fetched plot twists came 
from real life. InMichael Tolliver Lives, for example, our protagonist first 
sees his lover, Ben, on a dating website and then miraculously runs into him on 
the street. Maupin was browsing Daddyhunt.com when he came across Christopher 
Turner, an adult-film producer, but was too timid to message him. Soon after, 
he spotted him and chased him down Castro Street shouting the inimitable 
pick-up line: "Didn't I see you on Daddyhunt.com?" The couple will celebrate 
their seventh wedding anniversary next month.

Nonetheless, Maupin has for many years gently resisted the designation "gay 
writer", wary of the literary ghettoisation that it can bring. "I'm very 
proud," he said, "of being in the gay and lesbian section, but I don't want to 
be told that I can't sit up in the front of the book store with the straight, 
white writers."

Ian McKellen is a friend and fan and it was to Maupin that he turned in 1988 
when he agonised about coming out. Maupin urged him out of the closet, telling 
him he'd be a happier man and a stronger artist for it.

Maupin's work is just as loved by younger generations. Jake Shears, frontman 
of Scissor Sisters, was given the books as a 13-year-old by a couple of older 
gay friends and has described them as "a rite of passage". Like so many, he 
went on to read the entire series, meaning that when he was asked to work on a 
musical adaptation he said yes on the spot. The musical premiered in 2011 in – 
where else? – San Francisco.

Maupin is 69 now. Two years ago, "craving a little more space and some 
nature", he left his beloved San Francisco for Sante Fe where he and Turner 
live with their labradoodle. Nonetheless, the city he chronicled for all these 
decades continues to love him back; 12 June (the publication date ofMichael 
Tolliver Lives) will always be, as mayorally decreed, Michael Tolliver Day and 
tour guides still conduct walking tours of Maupin's city.

Harvey Milk, the first openly gay US politician, was assassinated two years 
after Maupin began theTales and in the four decades since Maupin has seen the 
world change. There's the internet, which he's taken to happily (his tweets are 
dotted with smiley faces and "darlings"), but, more importantly, he's witnessed 
huge victories for gay rights .

It's a testament of sorts to the belief that's guided Maupin all along, 
namely: "The world changes in direct proportion to the number of people willing 
to be honest about their lives."
 