
Armistead Maupin <https://www.theguardian.com/books/armisteadmaupin> speaks 
like he writes, in slow short sentences that trickle from beneath his white 
moustache like honey on the turn: sweet but sharp. When he talks about the 
things that anger him – the pope, for instance, or Republicanism – his pitch 
doesn't rise, his voice doesn't quicken. In fact, it's when discussing what he 
perceives as the wrongs of the world that Maupin, chronicler of gay life and 
the first novelist to tackle Aids, seems most at ease.

Maupin's 10 novels all linger on themes of identity, sexuality, loss and the 
logical ("as opposed to biological") family. He is, of course, most famous for 
hisTales of the City, which were first serialised in a San Francisco newspaper 
in the 1970s, growing into six volumes over the next 10 years. A mini-series 
(starring Laura Linney as token straight Mary Ann) was made in 1993, and a 
seventh book appeared 18 years later, in 2007. This month an eighth volume –
Mary Ann in Autumn – is published. It's a return to the heartbreaking and 
rickety world of Barbary Lane (or thereabouts) and a return, the critics are 
saying, to his 1970s best.

While Maupin's books have always featured soapy storylines – secret 
identities, strange religious sects, amnesia – these bubble in a basin of such 
delicate writing and beautifully flawed characters that for his many readers 
(one of whom, upon discovering his name was an anagram for "Is a man I dreamt 
up", wrote to him questioning his very existence) his novels are more like 
bibles. At a reading recently, a fan told him that when her best friend died, 
he'd been buried with Maupin's books.

Despite its ties to the 1970s and 1980s, the legacy of Tales of the City 
continues to grow. The day we meet, the pope has condoned condom use for the 
prevention of sexually transmitted disease. I ask Maupin how he feels about 
this inching forward of morals, and he scoffs. "The pope's barbarism is so 
enormous that all he could do is quit to impress me at this point, so deeply 
mired in hypocrisy, in bad thinking. I have very little patience for organised 
religion," he says, "which is mostly dedicated to demonising homosexuality. 
That shows you right there how little they know about the nature of love, and 
true spirituality."

Maupin (one-time lover of Rock Hudson, who appears in his novels as closeted 
film star ____ ___) got married in 2007 to Christopher Turner, the editor of a 
website he'd been browsing, Daddyhunt.com. At their wedding Laura Linney, to 
whom his new book is dedicated, read a poem –"The Bliss of With" – and at her 
wedding some months later, Maupin returned the favour. "The last line is 'You 
are my undoing and my altogether'," he says. "It's about the way someone takes 
you apart then puts you back together again. It was the loveliest way for Laura 
and me to be bonded for ever."

"For ever" is a theme he returns to often. Despite having served in Vietnam, 
Maupin's war, he says, has been with Aids. "I'm distressed to realise that now 
there are gay men who've lost their sense of self-worth to the degree that they 
experience a sense of relief when they're infected," he says, "because they 
think there's nothing else left to worry about. But of course that's really 
when the worrying starts." The worry, he says, of a "for ever" on medication. 
"People my age end up looking 90 after a lifetime on meds. But at least it is a 
lifetime now, if not an eternity".

Maupin has fallen happily into the role of international spokesperson for gay 
rights, but, at 66, is unafraid to veer endearingly off-message. InMore Tales 
of the City, his second novel, Michael Tolliver (the character Maupin based 
most clearly on himself) writes a coming out letter to his mother, a letter 
that's been used as a template by real people countless times since. Referring 
to this, Maupin explains why he hasn't lent his name to Dan Savage's "It Gets 
Better" campaign for bullied gay teens, a video project whose contributors 
include Barack Obama and Jake Shears from Scissor Sisters. "My work has 
basically been saying it gets better for the last 36 years," he sighs. "I'd be 
surprised if the suicide rates [that inspired Savage's video campaign] have 
really increased – the sad truth is that gay kids have been killing themselves 
for years, and it simply hasn't been reported because of their families' shame. 
But the thing what Dan's done thatis quite revolutionary, is calling upon 
adults to defend children. For years adult gay folks had been wary of 
concerning themselves with the plight of gay teenagers for fear of being 
accused of seducing them. But we're the experts. At least now people are 
willing to talk about the bullying – that's an improvement." However many 
decades pass, this will always be the story that Maupin tells, one of 
marginalised people fighting for a voice.

But then, just when you think you see where his sweetness is spreading, 
there's the unexpected sharpness, Alcatraz looming on the horizon of a peaceful 
Californian sea. "On the other hand," he adds, "when I was a child, 
homosexuality wasn't a constant topic of discussion. Now it's everywhere." He 
shakes his head. "Even though back then there was great darkness around the 
subject, the pressure for young people now is greater. It gets better, sure, 
but it gets worse too."
 