
"I never write a paragraph without being concerned about its clarity and 
entertainment value because I write to be read - not as a masturbatory 
exercise. That's extremely unstylish in literary circles today."

Birthplace

Washington DC, US

Education

University of North Carolina, US; failed law school.

Other jobs

Communications officer in Vietnam, reporter

Did you know?

Maupin was the person who outed the dying Rock Hudson: "I don't think I need 
permission from another person before I speak honestly about something that is 
widely known. Rock appeared with his lover in the social columns of the 
Hollywood Reporter. He cruised with me. While I am completely sympathetic to 
some poor schoolteacher in Idaho who's worried about losing his or her job, I 
am not to a movie star who is making millions keeping an illusion afloat that 
makes it tougher for the teacher in Idaho."

Critical verdict

Though the cheerfully readable Tales of the City series provides a snapshot of 
bathhouse culture pre-Aids San Francisco, Maupin insists that "from the 
beginning, I resolved to create a tapestry large enough to encompass all of 
humanity". Primarily a humanist, all his inclusive books have won critical 
plaudits as well as fans. Having drawn a line under the Tales, 2000's The Night 
Listener, "a psychological suspense tale" about the quasi-paternal relationship 
between a lonely middle-aged man and a young boy dying of Aids.

Recommended works

Maybe the Moon, his story of a female dwarf with Hollywood ambitions, adds 
subtlety to the candour of the Tales series; The Night Listener retains his 
affable readability while introducing darker themes.

Influences

His serial structure and complicated plotting alleviated by extraordinary 
coincidences and revelations have won him comparisons with Dickens.

Now read on

Inclusive, witty and readable, Ethan Mordden is a Maupin of the 80s; David 
Leavitt and Felice Picano are more serious-minded.

Adaptations

Maupin has adapted Maybe The Moon for the cinema.

Recommended biography

There is a biography by Patrick Gale.

Useful links and work online

Work online
· Extract: The Night Listener 
<http://www.booksattransworld.co.uk/catalog/extract.htm?command=search&db=twmain.txt&eqisbndata=0552142409>

Background
· Maupin the dog-lover <http://www.salon.com/12nov1995/feature/armistead.html>
 