
I remember this guy. He usually dressed like a clone in flannel shirts and 
501s, so he must have thought that loosened knit tie would make him look more 
journalistic. He had just moved into a cottage inthe Castro 
<http://www.sfgate.com/neighborhoods/sf/castro/>, having bounced between 
Russian and Telegraph Hills for most of the 70s. For five years, off and on, 
he'd been writing a column for the morning newspaper that was, in effect, a 
story without an ending. He wrote his columns on carbon paper, keeping one copy 
and delivering the other to the newspaper office, often in a frantic 
last-minute dash in his Volkswagen convertible. There were times when he was 
barely two days ahead of his readers. Like them, he was waiting breathlessly 
for what would happen next – but counting on his life to provide it.

In that regard San Francisco never failed him. His tales were often fuelled by 
the people around him: a closeted movie star who lured him (rather easily) to 
his suite at the Fairmont Hotel, a socialite who threw a fancy luncheon "to rap 
about rape", a homeless man who offered him coffee in a hidden lean-to on 
Telegraph Hill, a hulking construction worker who slow-danced with him at a gay 
rodeo. When a "co-ed bathhouse" opened on Valencia Street, this young man was 
there, taking notes. When the newspaper offered him cruises to Mexico and 
Alaska, he went on them – in part to see where they would lead his 
imagination. His never-ending story was a snuffling, ravenous beast that had to 
be fed on a daily basis, so anything meaty and available was tossed into its 
waiting maw.

When, for instance, he went home one night with someone aroused by his shoes 
(theWeejuns <https://bassshoes.harborghb.com/bass-weejuns-collection> he wore 
with his rugby shirt), he folded that incident straight into the mix. He even 
wrote about the things that hurt, the "affairettes" that broke his 
still-adolescent heart – the gorgeous but uptight doctor named Jon who 
performed mastectomies, the harmonica-playing marine recruiter who read him 
German poetry in bed and gave him a keychain that said: "The marines are 
looking for a few good men." It helped him make something useful – or at least 
entertaining – out of his romantic misadventures.

Which is not to say that his tales were especially autobiographical. The guy 
in this photo was all of his characters and none of them; reality was just his 
jumping-off point. He used to say that he was far more like DeDe Halcyon Day, 
the "recovering debutante" inTales of the City 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/books/data/book/fiction/9780552998765/tales-of-the-city>
, than Michael Tolliver, the romantic gay Floridian. After all, he had never 
entered a jockey shorts dance contest or swum naked into the Bohemian Grove 
with his clothes in a garbage bag; he would not have had the nerve. His nerve 
was largely confined to the written word and his insistence that gay folks were 
part of the human landscape and therefore deserved a place – and equal billing 
– in his chronicle of modern life. He was often at odds with his editors about 
this. One of them even kept an elaborate chart in his office to insure that the 
homo characters in "Tales" didn't suddenly outnumber the hetero ones and 
thereby undermine the natural order of civilisation.

And this guy loved that. He loved frightening the horses with that goofy grin 
on his face. He had kept his heart (and his libido) under wraps for most of his 
life, only to discover that the thing he feared the most had actually become a 
source of great comfort and inspiration. It thrilled him to testify for his own 
kind, to offer a pleasing shock of recognition to people whose stories were 
rarely told anywhere, much less in a "family newspaper". He used his column, in 
fact, as means of finally telling the truth about himself, coming out to his 
parents in North Carolina in the very letter that Michael Tolliver wrote to his 
folks in Florida. He would not have been able to do any of this had he not felt 
so embraced by a city where everyone – gay, straight and travelling – had 
learned to recognise, if not yet fully celebrate, the infinite possibilities of 
humanity.

That was 35 years ago, but I've been thinking about this young man a lot as my 
never-ending story enters an astonishing new era –one in which it can travel 
electronically to readers anywhere in the world 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Tales-Of-The-City-ebook/dp/B007533WD2/ref=sr_1_cc_1?s=aps&ie=UTF8&qid=1331550022&sr=1-1-catcorr>
. Could that guy in the loosened tie possibly have guessed how long his story 
would last or imagine the doors it would eventually open for him? It's better, 
perhaps, that he remained in the dark, living in the moment and sailing on his 
dreams. Come to think of it, it's always been better that way.
 