Tales of the City made its first appearance as a serial in which newspaper?  
The San Francisco Chronicle  The Los Angeles Times  Gay News  The Washington 
Post Which Tales of the City novel is said to have been the first work of 
fiction to feature the death of a character from Aids?  Significant Others  
Sure of You  Babycakes  Maybe The Moon Maupin’s 1992 novel Maybe the Moon was 
inspired by actor Tamara De Treaux. In which 1982 film did she appear?  Blade 
Runner  ET  Annie  Conan the Barbarian Who played Mary Ann Singleton in the 
1993 TV adaptation of Tales of the City?  Chloe Webb  Leslie Mann  Laura Linney 
 Olympia Dukakis Maupin wrote the original dialogue for a long-running musical 
revue. Which one?  Whoop-Dee-Doo!  Beach Blanket Babylon  Five Guys Named Moe  
At the Drop of a Hat Members of which band have written music and lyrics for 
the recent musical adaptation of Tales of the City?  Scissor Sisters  Pet Shop 
Boys  Nine Inch Nails  Goldfrapp Finish the quote, "Nobody's happy. What's 
happy? Happiness is over when …  … the sun rises on Barbary Lane."  … the fat 
lady sings."  … the lights come on."  … the vodka’s finished." Which novel 
revived the Tales of the City series in 2007?  The Night Listener  Significant 
Others  Mary Ann in Autumn  Michael Tolliver Lives Where is Mary Ann originally 
from?  Brooklyn, New York  Stamford, Conneticut  Cleveland, Ohio  Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania Which Tales of the City character says “Some people drink to 
forget, I smoke to remember"?  Brian Hawkins  Anna Madrigal  Mona Ramsey  
Michael Tolliver  You got…  You can take great Pride in your score, and: “To 
hell with anybody who thinks you're a damned fool!” (More Tales of the City)  A 
fair performance, so don't be downhearted. Remember: “Oh, Mona, we're all 
damned fools! Some of us just have more fun with it than others.” (Tales of the 
City)  Very poor. Take this advice: “You have to be strong and confident and 
pleased with yourself and never give the slightest impression that you can't 
hack it without that certain goddamn someone. You have to fake the hell out of 
it." (More Tales of the City)  Challenge your friends Submit answers  