 The British army's remaining five hilltop watchtowers in south Armagh will be 
taken down by early May, The Observer has learnt. The military posts, which 
Margaret Thatcher and her cabinet ordered built in the border region in the 
mid-Eighties, are being dismantled over the next three to four months, 
according to senior security sources. The bases on three hilltops at Crotlieve 
near Forkhill, Camlough Mountain and Faughil Mountain are to be pulled down by 
the 22nd Regiment (The Cheshires).
The sources said there were two reasons for speeding up the de-militarisation 
process (Operation Banner) in what was the most dangerous region for British 
soldiers in Europe. One said: 'The first thing is that on the ground the police 
are carrying out normal duties often without any military support. They are 
handing out speeding tickets and checking for drunk drivers in south Armagh; 
they are riding about on bikes in Newry.

'The second reason, which the government and MoD will never admit, is that 
they are speeding things up to help the Sinn Fein leadership. The government is 
privately worried that the recent spy scandals inside the republican movement 
has undermined Gerry Adams's authority. They [Adams and his colleagues] need 
some visible small victories - getting rid of the spy posts is an obvious way 
of giving the republicans something to cheer about.'

Officially the army is stressing that the re-deployment of units from The 
Cheshires from their base in Ballykinlar, Co Derry, into southArmagh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/armagh> is simply to replace the last Roulement 
Battalion, which currently occupies the posts as well as the nearby military 
base at Bessbrook Mill. An army spokesman said the target date for full 
normalisation was still August 2007. He said the Cheshires, who are being 
redeployed, would still provide military support for the PSNI in the region.

At the height of the British military presence there were 18 watchtowers in 
south Armagh. One of the key reasons for constructing the posts from 1986 was 
to watch Thomas 'Slab' Murphy, the then-IRA chief-of-staff whom MI5 once 
classified as the most dangerous terrorist in Europe. Two of the posts 
overlooked the millionaire smuggler's farm, which straddles the Irish border.
 