
Police in Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> 
have foiled a terror plot involving a bomb twice the size of the one that 
devastated Omagh in the single biggest atrocity of the Troubles.

The 270kg (600lb) device was discovered in a spot close to the border near 
Forkhill in South Armagh. It had a command wire attached to it that ran from 
NorthernIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> to a firing point 
inside the Irish Republic, police said today.

Its discovery came after a week-long search operation involving armed police 
officers, British army helicopters and Irish troops on either side of the South 
Armagh/North Louth border region.

During the seven-day security operation, a number of homes had to be evacuated 
and a road leading to a local horticultural business was closed to protect the 
public.

A senior police commander said there could have been a "devastating outcome" 
if the bomb had been detonated.

The North Louth/South Armagh <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/armagh> area is a 
stronghold for the Real IRA. It was from this region that the Omagh bomb plot 
was hatched and executed, 11 years ago.

Last month, the Real IRA staged a show of strength in the nearby village of 
Meigh. Armed dissidents patrolled the village with Kalashnikov rifles and 
rocket launchers, and even stopped traffic at a makeshift roadblock. A police 
patrol that drove into Meigh had to withdraw when officers realised they were 
outgunned by the Real IRA unit.

"The actions of terrorist criminals in planting this device in the Forkhill 
area put local people and police officers at significant risk," the local PSNI 
commander, Chief Inspector Sam Cordner, said today.

"Their actions were reckless and dangerous in the extreme. Their target may 
have been the police, but they did not care who they killed or injured.

"It is only through the hard work and professionalism of police officers and 
their military colleagues that the area has been made safe."

The remains of the device, which contained fertiliser-based homemade 
explosives, have been removed for further examination, a PSNI spokesman said.

The Sinn Féin MP for Newry and Armagh and Northern Ireland minister, Conor 
Murphy, said he was "extremely concerned" over the find.

He said: "I would question the motives of those who are putting the local 
community in such danger.

"I challenge those who have planted this bomb in the community to come forward 
and explain why they have done so. How is this furthering the struggle for 
Irish freedom?"

The local SDLP assembly member, Dominic Bradley, condemned those who had 
planted the bomb, but also questioned the police response.

"Everybody accepts the dangerous nature of policing this type of threat by the 
PSNI," he said. However, serious questions must be asked about the response 
time in dealing with the device and evacuating people from their nearby homes.

"It seems the PSNI may have known about this bomb days before they moved 
people. And if that's the case, then it is certainly cause for much concern."

The Real IRA and Continuity IRA have attempted to mount major bomb attacks 
since their terror campaigns intensified at the start of this year.

In January, the security forces found and defused a 300lb in Down, which they 
said was destined for Ballykinley army base on the coast. Five months later, 
around 100lbs of explosives were found in field near Rosslea, in Fermanagh. 
Security sources said this device, like the one found in Down, was to have been 
used against the army and police.

British troops and police officers remain the Real IRA and Continuity IRA's 
principal targets in their campaigns to destabilise the political power-sharing 
settlement in Northern Ireland. Both organisations regard Sinn Féin's presence 
in the power-sharing coalition with unionists as a sell-out of traditional 
republicanism.
 