
It was, unquestionably, a series for the fans. Whether it was quite the series 
they hoped for is a different issue, but it is a testament to Mitch Hurwitz's 
sheer boldness that, far from makingArrested Development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/arrested-development> more accessible 
to a new generation of fans, he decided to make it accessible only to the fans 
it already had, and then to challenge those. This series would be almost 
incomprehensible to anyone who has not obsessively watched the first three 
seasons; at the very least, those people would miss some of the show's most 
instantly enjoyable gags: the giant "Her?" above the altar as Ann and Gob 
prepare to marry, Lucille's prison number spelling "hello" (aka Annyong), the 
background sing-song "Mr F."

But Hurwitz bravely – and rightly – eschewed knocking out a sentimental rehash 
of the show's best-loved catchphrases on autopilot. Instead, he diced up his 
old show and served a meal that is far darker, weirder and less easily 
digestible than the show had ever been before.

And that's all to the good: in order to justify making a movie of Arrested 
Development, which has always been Hurwitz's stated intention, he had to prove 
that there is new life in this (by now) old show. Moreover, a man as creative 
as he is was always going to want to play with the format, partly because the 
old style has now been so thoroughly copied to the point of cliche (the 
occasional references to Modern Family felt like sly digs at that show's 
derivativeness), and partly because Netflix's decision to dump the whole series 
out at once allowed him an opportunity no sitcom-maker has had before, and he 
seized it. Instead of remaking Arrested Development, he has made a big, bloated 
behemoth of a show that has glimpses of genius but is only partly successful.

Hurwitz's decision to devote the episodes to one character sounded – initially 
– like a pretty good one. All the Bluths and Funkes are so fascinating, and 
part of the genius of the first three series was that the quick cutting and 
intersecting plotlines left you wanting more. But Hurwitz's new structure 
turned out to work only with some characters: Gob (his first episode was a 
mini-masterpiece), Lucille and Buster (I could easily have done with one more 
Buster episode).

By contrast, Michael's character – once the well-intentioned straight guy of 
the series – has become less likable, and not in a fun way, and spending too 
much time with him felt like a drag. Moreover, without Michael acting as the 
moral centre of the show, the show didn't appear to have a centre at all, but 
spun out listlessly. I wonder how much this has to do with the fact that 
Hurwitz was directing for the first time here. The first three series were all 
defined by a sense of deceptive control; this series felt overstuffed, as 
though it were helmed by a hyperactive teenager. The litany of celebrity guest 
stars exacerbated this sensation, with only Kristen Wiig as the young Lucille 
adding anything to proceedings (and Seth Rogen as young George Senior decidedly 
taking things away).

The overarching plotlines, with stories criss-crossing through the episodes 
and explanations coming hours after the event again worked only occasionally. 
When they did – such as the explanation for why Lucille seems to be sending a 
cheque to her granddaughter for plastic surgery – they slotted satisfyingly 
into place like a successful sudoku clue. When they didn't, they lurched 
tediously onwards.

This series was much darker and less funny than any of the previous three, 
with its easy references to sex offenders (though that was actually a lot 
funnier than it sounds), pimping out one's mother and sleeping with your son's 
girlfriend. Darkness is always a good path for Arrested to take, but the lack 
of laughs was a bigger problem. Some jokes occasionally fell flat or simply 
went too meta (even I got bored with the jokes about Ron Howard's kids). When a 
gag worked, it was excellent, but there were whole episodes where I didn't 
laugh once.

As for the denouement, I like that Hurwitz deliberately tricks the audience 
into thinking there will be some big showdown at the end, only then to suggest 
it was all a shaggy-dog story and the real tale here is about Michael and 
George Michael. But this would have worked better for me if those two – Michael 
in particular – had been a little more enjoyable to watch this time.

No, it doesn't really work, but as failures go, it is a very noble one. 
Hurwitz has tried to do something new and exciting. If he didn't get it quite 
right, he deserves an enormous amount of credit for taking the risk and making 
something so brilliantly, if occasionally unnecessarily, complex. A series to 
admire more than love.

Read Hadley Freeman's episode-by-episode reviews here. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/series/arrested-development-episode-by-episode>
 