
Before we get to Arrested Development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/arrested-development>, can we talk 
aboutGolden Girls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2010/oct/15/the-golden-girls-box-set>
? I love that you wrote Golden Girls – Bea Arthur and Betty White are just the 
best.
Well, Betty and Bea weren't necessarily the best of friends, you know. Bea was 
tough on the outside and so tender on the inside, whereas Betty was tough on 
the inside and so sweet on the outside. I just loved Bea.

The writing on Golden Girls still feels so sharp and modern
I take very little credit for all that, I was just lucky enough to be 24 and 
given a job on that show.

It's incredible watching Golden Girls now, as there is so much on that show 
you couldn't ever get on TV today, such as older women having sex – and talking 
about it
Absolutely. And I remember when Sex and the City started happening; I was 
like: "This is just the Golden Girls!" The characters would talk about sex and 
people would be so scandalised and I was like: "We did this! We talked about 
orgasms on NBC on Saturday night with older women." I don't think you could get 
a show with older women on TV today.
 The Pier Pressure episode of Arrested Development: everyone's favourite 
episode – now. Photograph: 20th Century Fox 
Why is that?
Well, I think they used to develop a lot of shows for TV that they didn't 
think would work, and I think Golden Girls was one of those – "Oh, we'll put it 
on Saturday night and bury it there." But also, television is in this crazy 
place where it's still trying to get this 12m audience but it doesn't exist. 
Golden Girls had 30m. We were cancelled when we had 8m. Now people have 4m and 
they're a hit. So it gets smaller and smaller and now there are streaming 
places such as Netflix and the marketplace has fragmented. I watched a little 
of Breaking Bad when it was broadcast and a lot streamed, and you do lose 
something ... It was really interesting with Arrested. We put the new series 
out at midnight so it was on at 3am on the east coast. I was trying to say: 
"Hey, don't watch this all at once, it's just an 8½-hour thing." But the New 
York Times reviewer really started us off on the wrong foot and created the 
impression that we got bad reviews when he wrote: "I watched six episodes. The 
shows are too slow, too long." I was like: "Yeah, it's 3am, you're watching 
until 9am, you're pissed off, it's memorial weekend, you don't get to have 
brunch with your family – I get it."

The reaction was a reversal of what you got for the first three episodes, in 
that the critics seemed wary whereas the public was a lot more enthusiastic
You know, I'd been putting so much effort into working the storylines out and 
which episodes would have which themes, over a period of four months. But at 
the end of the editing process I suddenly realised, oh, people are just going 
to binge-watch these shows – I don't know if we're doing the right delivery 
system. So when the shows went up, the first thing I read was Twitter and 
Twitter is self-selecting, in that if people are writing directly to me and 
using the hashtag, then they're probably being positive. Then we got a couple 
of those not so good reviews. You have to ask: "So what is the point? Do you 
try to get all good reviews? Get 30 million people to watch it?" And when 
someone asked me about the bad reviews I said: "I know some reviewers didn't 
like it but you know who liked it? People wholoved it." You want enough people 
to like it so that you can keep making more, but it's like publishing in that 
you don't necessarily write a novel and hope that it gets kids, adults, 
grandparents – everybody. You just say: "I hope this finds people who 
appreciate it."

 It felt like a series for the fans
I was aware that you can't be indifferent to your audience. I remember talking 
to Chris Guest once and he said: "I don't really care about my audience, I just 
do my comedy." And I thought "Well, I guess that's what an artist would say." 
Did John Lennon care when Sgt Pepper came out? He knew he wasn't doing another 
I Wanna Hold Your Hand. But I think he did care. Especially with comedy, if you 
wanna get a laugh, you have to care about your audience. So the first job for 
me was thinking about the people who had so taken to the show. And I think a 
lot of them were disappointed because they had a different expectation of what 
the show was going to be. Even when I did the original series, with every 
episode audiences would say, "Oh they ruined the show." I remember when we did 
the episode Pier Pressure, people hated it. Now it's everyone's favourite 
episode. People complained when there was more action, they hated Annyong, they 
hated Pier Pressure – every episode was like that. Then this new audience came 
along and they didn't differentiate between the episodes, they just looked at 
it all as Arrested and loved it.
 The Banana Stand – there's always money in it. Photograph: 20th Century 
Fox/Everett/Rex Features 
Now that the tone of Arrested Development's first three series has influenced 
so many shows, such as Community and 30 Rock, did you feel pressure to be 
revolutionary with the fourth series?
I always felt internal pressure to not repeat myself and it became really 
difficult to run a TV show that way because that's not how TV works. Even 
writing for the Golden Girls I remember my first episode was when Betty became 
the smart one – that was new. I remember somebody once said: "Your style is 
made from what you can't do," and I think I felt like: "Well I can't write 
jokes as well as these Golden Girls writers, so my stories will be more 
intricate or I'll find twists," and that has kind of remained my style even 
though I developed as a joke writer. Even in the second episode of Arrested I 
decided to burn down the Banana Stand because I was like, I don't want there to 
be any standing sets because people will then expect there to be certain 
standing sets. And Ron Howard said: "You might want to rebuild the Banana 
Stand."

Well, there's always money in the Banana Stand
It turned out there was always money in the Banana Stand.

Was that also slightly Freudian, in that you wanted to burn down the Chip Yard 
[the cookie business that Hurwitz and his brother started up as teenagers that 
bears noted similarities to the Banana Stand]?
Definitely. It's so funny to hear you say Chip Yard! Oh God, I used to pray 
that the Chip Yard would burn down. I was 13 and my brother was 15 and we had 
this little family business and it was just like Arrested in a way because no 
one then was just selling cookies, especially in a beach community where it was 
all ice-cream and popcorn. I remember people screaming at me: "You can't do 
that! I'm going to burn your fucking Chip Yard to the ground!" People were so 
angry. My father pushed us to do the Chip Yard to show us how hard it is to 
make a buck, but it wasn't difficult with the Chip Yard as it immediately 
started making money. So he was like: "This money is going into a college 
fund." So we didn't get any money and we worked around the clock – I still have 
burns on my arms. So I really liked this idea of some kid sweating in a stand 
while kids outside are laughing on the beach.

Speaking of working within constraints, you had to work with each actor 
separately as their schedules were so packed. In an ideal world, how would you 
have preferred to do the fourth series?
I actually would have preferred to do the movie. What happened was, by the 
time I sat down to do the movie, a lot of years had passed and I had a lot of 
story and so I sat down with Ron Howard. But we could barely get anyone to let 
us do this movie, it was very hard to get anyone interested in it. The 
prevailing belief was, the show was cancelled, why would you do a movie? But I 
had this anecdotal evidence that people were watching the show, but it was 
totally anecdotal – and of course I'd think people were watching the show.

Even Ron Howard couldn't get someone to greenlight a movie?
You'd think, but that's the movie business. So we sat down and he said: "OK, 
what are you thinking?" And I said: "It needs to be a trilogy." And he put his 
head in his hands and said: "I don't think they'll do that. How about if you 
make the first one and then we'll see." And I said: "But people then will be 
disappointed, I want them to know we'll resolve the story so I want it to be a 
trilogy." And he said, "It's not going to happen." So I went back to work and 
it became clear that even if I just spent a little time with each character, 
there wouldn't be time in a single movie ... So the idea that emerged was this 
anthology show, one character at a time, completely separate, just little 
webisodes. Then from there, I started being more ambitious and it became about 
how they all affect each other. Every problem that arises in the lives of the 
Bluths was started by another Bluth. It's completely self-generated. There's no 
exterior incident – everything is their fault.

Meanwhile, you were making Running Wilde with Will Arnett
That was one of the craziest TV stories of all time; it's like something out 
of a show parodying TV. You start with a premise and pitch it and it just kept 
getting changed and changed. So it was going to be about a rich guy in Los 
Angeles who had a little bit of entitlement and he had to deal with that. And 
it became about a guy with a castle – in New York City! – who has a littler 
girl who's the narrator. It went through eight different drafts before it even 
got picked up. But for some reason I got it into my head that I wanted to teach 
Will Arnett a lesson. I love Will, he is like my younger brother.
 Witty and mean: Jessica Walter (left) as Lucille Bluth. Photograph: 
20thC.Fox/Everett/Rex Features 
He's your hermano
Yes. He's my hermano! So when he said: "Let's just give up," I'd be like: "No. 
We're going to keep trying. We're going to rewrite it with a totally different 
premise." And he'd be like: "No, fuck them." I said: "No – not fuck them!" That 
was my lesson to him: you have to work hard in life. Will Arnett – he's never 
run a Chip Yard this boy – I have to teach him. Then we got to eight drafts 
before they said yes, then they wanted us to move the show to New York, so we 
rewrote it again. Then it got to the point where Fox were second-guessing me on 
every turn and I was taking every note but they were just all traumatised by 
working with me on Arrested, which I never thought was such a trauma for them 
but everyone at Fox was like: "Oh no, Mitch is difficult." Then it got to the 
sixth episode and the studio president said to me: "Just don't do whatever you 
think is a good idea." I said: "You're kidding me." He said: "I want you to be 
successful so just do the opposite of whatever you want to do." Having said all 
that, Will is funny in that show and I like to write for Will to be as funny as 
possible. Arguably he could be more successful playing more of a normal 
character.

I don't think so, I prefer it when he plays weird. His episodes in the fourth 
series are my favourite episodes.
I know, I know. He is so gifted and he can go small or big and everyone else 
who uses him says: "Just make him go big." But he is so good at falling apart – 
Gob's defence mechanisms are paper thin.

Lucille Bluth always reminds me a bit of Bea Arthur in Golden Girls, with a 
bit of Rue McClanahan thrown in from time to time.
Oh, that's funny! Lucille started out with a lot of my wife's mother in that 
character, who was much more genteel and more delicate [than Lucille], 
seemingly harmless. She'd say when she visited my wife's sister in college: 
"You now weigh more than the president of the US!" She's witty and mean. Then 
Jessica gets hold of those lines and bites into them with those Jewish rhythms 
of hers. So it's written passive aggressively and she does it aggressive.

Are you ever going to have her do a Play Misty For Me homage?
I can't believe we haven't done that yet! Thank you. You just got a storyline 
credit! You know, since we went off air everyone got so crazy with meta – 
Community, 30 Rock. So I said: "OK, no meta. We have to be careful with this 
because we're going to want to make every line of this meta, with references to 
George Michael and Superbad. So no meta." But … we might have to break the no 
meta rule for Play Misty, that is so great.

One of the biggest surprises of the fourth series is how the heart of the show 
moves from Michael to George Michael. George Michael is the moral compass
As fanciful as the show gets, I always try to start with, OK, what's the truth 
of their situation? So the most interesting storyline for me is the one who 
grew up, who was the most overshadowed and pure, and so it sounds cynical but I 
wanted to see him become a Bluth. So I said: "OK, let's see him get steamrolled 
into lying and his father assuming that they'll have the same relationship they 
had when George Michael was younger and what's that like?" That seemed to be 
the heart of it. Also, the conceit of the fourth series is what I think is true 
about all families: everybody thinks they're the normal one.
 Tony Hale as Buster. Photograph: 20th Century Fox 
Were you worried about making Michael so screwy in this show?
No, and maybe I should have been. But it was definitely a choice to take him 
out of the centre. So many times we've seen Michael leave the family and he's 
pulled back in.

Like in The Godfather
Exactly. But with this one I really wanted it to be with him being through 
with the family and he completely self-destructs. But he's going to have to 
come back for Buster, the most innocent member of the family, who's now charged 
with murder.

Does the fourth series look how you want it to?
It does. I'm super happy with it. But like anyone, I get buffered by the ups 
and downs with the press's reaction and I go to that a little too much because 
I'm a solicitous person and I want people to laugh. But in my heart of hearts, 
I'm really, really happy with it, for the dumbest reasons, like seeing George 
Michael in one episode talking about his software company with great ease, then 
in another episode you realise it wasn't with great ease, that was him starting 
to lie. I love stuff like that! I love experimenting with storylines, going 
from it being simple to all cause and effect. It was a crossword puzzle of a 
show and it was the hardest thing I've ever done.

So are you doing a movie now?
I hope so.

But you can't leave Buster hanging.
Oh, there's definitely more story.

So it will be on TV or Netflix?
Yeah, and I've got it all mapped out – well, about 8%.
 