
There was at least one moment during the long and bitter miners' strike when 
the police and the Nation Union of Mineworkers' leadership pursued the same 
objective. On 30 May 1984, Arthur Scargill's arrest outside the Orgreave coking 
plant was carefully orchestrated. Four consecutive days of successful picketing 
had effectively closed the plant. The police decided that the only way to break 
the line was to make a number of exemplary arrests.

The news that the president of the NUM himself was to be at Orgreave on the 
fifth day was greeted at police headquarters with unrestrained delight. On his 
arrival, a friendly photographer told Scargill that if he refused to "move on" 
he was sure to be arrested. He stood firm and embraced his fate. The result was 
one of the totemic pictures of the strike – Scargill, each arm pinioned by a 
police offer, the unrepentant martyr on his way to jail.

Whatever effect it had on the morale of the striking miners, the photograph of 
Scargill's arrest did less to win support from the public than a picture of a 
grinning picket wearing the sort of comedy police helmet on sale in shops along 
Blackpool's Golden Mile. Little else helped the miners' cause. The goodwill 
that they traditionally enjoyed had been sacrificed – as had the chances of 
winning an entirely justified dispute – by the NUM's indefensible decision not 
to ballot its members before the strike began.

Outside mining areas, antagonism – more against Scargill himself than his 
members – encouraged scepticism about police brutality and the manufacture of 
evidence against peaceful pickets. Both claims were undoubtedly justified. The 
only issue in doubt is who was to blame: the South Yorkshire force or 
reinforcements from outside the county, or both.

Twenty-five years on, one senior South Yorkshire officer told me that, at the 
height of the strike, he was on the point of demanding that visiting officers 
from theMetropolitan police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police>
 be sent home. They had arrived, he said, proclaiming that they were "up for 
it" and demonstrated the meaning of that expression by intentionally 
antagonising the pickets. When their coaches passed through lines of striking 
miners they waved five pound notes – the reward for the overtime that policing 
the strike required, and an irresistible provocation to miners whose families 
were barely able to buy groceries. They boasted in public houses about what a 
joy it was to "sort out the Commies" and, flaunting their swollen pay packets, 
made overtures – often distressingly successful – to local girls.

Traditionally Yorkshire miners enjoyed a friendly relationship with the local 
police. Between the wars, the Guards found the county a fruitful recruitment 
area, as young men trod the well-worn path from colliery, via five years with 
the colours, to constabulary. And in mining areas, old loyalties endure. My 
maternal grandfather moved straight from pit to police in Derbyshire. Most 
miners had a distant relative in the force. During the 1984 dispute, there was 
at least one inspector who would meet (and greet) his brother on the picket 
line.

That does not mean that – in the polarised atmosphere of 1984 – no South 
Yorkshire officer transgressed. The circumstances and conduct of the dispute 
made almost anything possible. But whoever was responsible, the undoubted 
malpractices only add another element to the tragedy. The miners were right.
Margaret Thatcher <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher> did 
want to break the NUM and close down the mining industry. The paradox is that 
the union's tactics ensured that she would succeed.

Roy Hattersley was deputy leader of the Labour party during the miners' strike.
 