
Arsène Wenger <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsene-wenger> has denied 
blocking Mathieu Debuchy from moving to Manchester United last January, but the 
Arsenal manager has revealed the French defender is up for sale.

Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> take on Crystal Palace 
at the Emirates on Sunday but Debuchy, who has spent only 16 minutes on the 
pitch for the club this season, will not be playing as he has a hamstring 
injury and has also slipped down the pecking order. He is arguably Wenger’s 
fourth-choice right-back behind Héctor Bellerín, Carl Jenkinson and the youth 
prospect Ainsley Maitland-Niles. The 31-year-old Frenchman has been frozen out 
of the first-team picture for some time, and spent the second half of last 
season on loan at Bordeaux.

Mathieu Debuchy determined to leave Arsenal in January transfer window
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/17/mathieu-debuchy-determined-to-leave-arsenal-january-transfer-window>
In an interview with L’Equipe, moreover, Debuchy claimed his relationship with 
Wenger had deteriorated and that a number of potential transfers had been 
prevented from happening. “We acknowledge each other, we say hello, nothing 
more,” he said. “My situation doesn’t meet what I had been hoping for, but 
that’s football. There have been things, injuries and the coach’s choices, that 
have meant that I haven’t played. Even if I don’t understand, I’m not 
surprised, I know how it works.

“I have had some very difficult moments. Now I try to channel that, to take it 
out in my work. I don’t show anything, I dig in. I have always worked like 
that. I want a way out. I want to take on a new challenge, to get back into it, 
to simply do my job properly. At a given time you miss the excitement, the 
adrenaline.”

Debuchy went on to suggest he had been denied the opportunity to sign for 
United last January and that further chances to leave in the summer failed to 
happen. “I wasn’t playing a lot, it was United, there’s nothing else to say. 
For me it was almost unexpected, but the coach said no,” he added. “It’s 
something I did not appreciate. He wasn’t using me, so I didn’t see his 
interest in doing that.

“I had opportunities at the end of the transfer window. Unfortunately the club 
didn’t want to let me go. I had a good pre‑season, I gave my all, but from the 
first game I wasn’t in the squad. It was a real blow. I said to myself that 
things weren’t starting well.”

However, Wenger insisted on Friday that United did not bid for the former 
Newcastle United player. “They have never made an offer for him,” he said. 
“It’s completely untrue. It’s sometimes surprising to hear things like that.”

He was also unequivocal when asked if Debuchy is for sale when the transfer 
window opens next week. “Yes, of course, but we speak. We have communication 
with all the players. It’s a little bit of a frustrated article from a player 
who is injured, you know when you are injured you cannot play.

“When he had the opportunities to play when Bellerín was injured, he was 
injured [too]. So I cannot do anything about that. I gave him last year the 
opportunity to go to Bordeaux on loan, but we had nobody coming in for him over 
the summer period and there are some things that are not true in this article.

“We never blocked him to go to Fiorentina, nor Espanyol. They had no interest 
in him at all because we checked that, so you have to take this [L’Equipe] 
article with a little distance.”
 