
Arsène Wenger <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsene-wenger> has warned 
that “every club loses big players” and no individual is bigger than Arsenal as 
he tries to keep several of his most important squad members.

Alexis Sánchez <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/sanchez-alexis> and 
Mesut Özil are involved in protracted negotiations over extending their deals, 
which expire in the summer of 2018. Reports this week suggested there was an 
offer from the Chinese Super League that could pay Sánchez £400,000 a week and 
Özil has been linked with a return to Real Madrid. Arsenal have sold players 
before as their contracts wound down, including Cesc Fàbregas and Robin van 
Persie, but Wenger believes the current situation is different and factors 
other than money will decide the outcome.

Asked whether he would consider selling Özil and Sánchez if they get down to 
having a year remaining on their contracts, Wenger said: “I’m not the only one 
who can decide that. A contract is negotiations, in this case between two 
parties.

“On my side, the best position is to achieve it earlier. These players will 
stay here for at least 18 months. I cannot repeat always the same things.

“I think at some stage you have to accept negotiations are private and secret, 
and we do not always have to come out every day to explain what we do in 
negotiations. We are professional people, we work until the last day of our 
contracts with full commitment.

“These players have 18 months on their contracts and no matter what happens, 
they will stay for 18 months. Hopefully they’ll stay for longer than that.”

Özil joined Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> from Real 
Madrid for £42.5m in 2013 and that was followed by the signing of Sánchez from 
Barcelona 12 months later. Both players are thought to earn £130,000 a week and 
Wenger expressed doubts whether either could be tempted to leave.

“I believe [the Sánchez offer] but why go to China today when you play in 
England?” he said. “I believe we live in a world where the big players earn a 
lot of money and they have the privilege to choose where they really want to 
play. You could say the prestige more than the self-esteem is linked with the 
players. But I think it is more down to the consistency of the quality, or the 
way the team plays football.

“Arsenal is a big club. It is not one or two players who will make the 
difference. The important thing is we are in a strong financial position; that 
was not the case before [when the club changed stadiums].

“We are in a financial position where we can plan our future and do what we 
want to do. And what is important is always to take care of the values of the 
club, and the identity of the club, and not to depend too much on one or two 
players.

“The history of Arsenal is bigger than that. In every single club, at some 
stage, they will have lost big players. Every club is full of regrets and full 
of tough decisions.”

Wenger confirmed the club had begun talks with Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain about a 
contract extension, after the England winger made a positive start to his sixth 
season with them.

The Spanish midfielder Santi Cazorla has also opened discussions and will 
activate a one-year option on his contract, which expires in 2018. Olivier 
Giroud, Jack Wilshere and Kieran Gibbs also have deals that expire then.

“We have a lot of work to do but [the media] are only interested in two 
cases,” Wenger said. “We have started negotiations with Oxlade-Chamberlain and 
also with Cazorla.

“We will certainly extend with Cazorla. We work as well on Giroud and on many 
players. There are six or seven cases at the moment but that is usual, it is 
every year like that.”
 