
Arsène Wenger <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsene-wenger> has 
admitted the loss of Santi Cazorla to injury for at least three months is “very 
bad news”, with the Arsenal manager unsure when the Spain midfielder will play 
again.

Cazorla will travel to Sweden next week for surgery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/01/santi-cazorla-arsenal-three-months-out>
 on a plantaris tendon after sustaining the injury in his right ankle in the 
6-0 Champions League victory against Ludogorets in October.

Alan Pardew admits Crystal Palace are in crisis ahead of Southampton match
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/02/crystal-palace-alan-pardew-crisis>
“For me it’s very bad news,” said Wenger. “You always know the date of the 
surgery but never the date where the player will play again. I always try to 
put absolutely everything in place to avoid surgery because it creates anxiety 
and rehab. When you can avoid it, you have to avoid it. Now they tell me that 
he will be out for two months at least, but two months can sometimes be three 
as well.

“He has an inflammation at the back of his foot. Nobody really knows where it 
comes from. The anti-inflammatory injections have not got rid of it. The 
surgeon decided to have an exploratory surgery, that means open and see what’s 
going on in there. He’s desperate to play football. He’s only happy on the 
football pitch. I’ve spoken to him, of course. He himself wants to get out of 
that vicious circle of going out and coming in again. He just wants to cure it.”

Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> travel to West Ham on 
Saturday with doubts over Olivier Giroud and Mohamed Elneny. It is the first 
time they have visited the London Stadium and Wenger has warned West Ham that 
it takes years to feel at home after a big move.

“It’s a bit like when we moved to the Emirates,” he said. “You feel a bit like 
you’re playing on neutral ground for a while. It takes a few years, because you 
have to make memories and build a little history. You move from somewhere full 
of history, and suddenly you move to a stadium where nothing happened before 
you came in. You feel a bit lonely there.

“You have to rebuild the environment. You can try, but you cannot create 
something artificially that doesn’t exist.”

Wenger recalled how his players even missed the orientation that they had 
become used to at Highbury. “When they played at Highbury, they kind of had a 
picture. When you play up front you know where the goal is, because of the 
signals coming from the crowd, you know where the adverts are and sometimes you 
have no time to make your decision, but you have a geographical reference when 
you stand on the pitch that is linked to the stadium. You have to recreate 
that.”

Wenger admits that Upton Park was a favourite place to visit, particularly 
when he first arrived in England 20 years ago. “I preferred the first version 
of the West Ham stadium, when he was very tight, one the most intimidating 
stadiums I knew.”

West Ham have just two Premier League wins in their first four months at the 
converted Olympic Stadium, but Wenger is still expecting a challenging evening. 
“They had a difficult start to the season but recently they’ve picked up with 
their quality and they played well against Tottenham and Manchester United,” 
Wenger noted. “They are difficult fixtures so overall it will be a very tight 
and intense game.”
 