
Stan Kroenke faces questioning from key Arsenal shareholders over his 
intentions as owner after the Guardian revealed he could use the club's own 
cash to pay for his acquisition. Red & White, the investment vehicle owned by 
Arsenal's 27% shareholderAlisher Usmanov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alisher-usmanov> and managed by Farhad 
Moshiri, will seek greater clarity over Kroenke's intentions for the club. 
Likewise the Arsenal Supporters Trust, a minority shareholders group, will this 
week send a letter to Kroenke outlining its position ahead of the distribution 
of his formal offer document.

Both are expected to seek assurances over what financing arrangements Kroenke 
has in place to fund his purchase of up to £500m of Arsenal shares, and over 
continued fan involvement in the club's ownership. There will also be requests 
for a pledge not to draw dividends or management fees out ofArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> or to use the club's own cash 
reserves to pay for his new shares.

Once more Kroenke's public‑relations adviser did not come back to the Guardian 
on Tuesdayfollowing its revelation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/apr/11/stan-kroenke-arsenal-takeover>
 that the Arsenal board did not ask Kroenke for any binding covenants relating 
to his financial husbandry of the club. Nothing currently prevents him 
accessing the club's cash for his personal benefit or from taking dividends, 
which Arsenal have not traditionally paid, and it is too late to insert such 
covenants now – that would require a complete renegotiation of Kroenke's bid 
for the club. But clearly Usmanov and the AST are keen to hold him to account 
on the Guardian's investigation.

If Kroenke refuses and siphons out the cash, then the practical effect of 
Arsène Wenger's recent frugality in the transfer market will have been to 
facilitate the American's buyout with Arsenal's own money. That is a common 
practice in business, but success-starved Arsenal fans would react with anger.

Justice for Storrie

Peter Storrie has made a rare appearance back in the game. The former 
Portsmouth chief executive, who along with Harry Redknapp and Milan Mandaric is 
awaiting a trial later this year over allegations of involvement in tax fraud 
while at Fratton Park, dispensed justice last week from his seat on a three-man 
disciplinary panel. Storrie was representing Hereford United and Torquay United 
in a case brought by the Football League after each club fielded an ineligible 
player during their League Two meeting in February. Hereford, who won the match 
3-1, were deducted three points, Torquay one. "The clubs appointed me to the 
panel; it was a one-off as far as I know," Storrie told Digger. "But I am 
available for future appointments if they come up." Clubs: you know where to 
apply.

Bin Hamman meets FA

The Football Association will meet Mohamed bin Hammam on 28 April to discuss 
the Qatari's plans for the Fifa presidency, should he be elected. Bin Hammam, 
president of the Asian Football Confederation, and the incumbent Fifa 
president, Sepp Blatter, have sent material to the FA outlining their 
manifestos. Blatter met the FA chairman, David Bernstein, its general 
secretary, Alex Horne, the international-development director, Jane Bateman, 
and Sir Trevor Brooking over lunch at Wembley last week. Bin Hammam will be 
similarly hosted ahead of a decision over whom to back at the FA board meeting 
on 19 May.

No brollies for McClaren

Steve McClaren still won't do umbrellas. It seems he remains touchy about that 
3-2 defeat by Croatia in the Wembley rain, which cost his England side 
qualification for Euro 2008. The former Middlesbrough, Twente and Wolfsburg 
manager donated a number of suits to his local Mind charity shop in Yarm, 
Yorkshire. One of them, a Marks & Spencer number he wore while England manager, 
went for £375. Another, from his time at Twente, went for £150. But when Mind's 
managers set up some publicity shots an umbrella as a prop, McClaren 
unexpectedly intervened. "We were taking photos and a traffic warden said we 
should get a brolly," the Mind manager, Lizzie Embleton, said. "But then Mr 
McClaren appeared from nowhere and said: 'none with the brolly.' I didn't know 
the significance of the brolly. I know now.'" An Armani two-piece and two Hugo 
Boss suits are still available. Perhaps McClaren sees himself more as a 
tracksuit manager these days.

Follow Matt Scott on Twitter: @diggermattscott 
<https://twitter.com/diggermattscott>
 