
When Stan Kroenke <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stan-kroenke> made one 
of his rare trips to London to drop in on his soccer franchise last season, the 
closest he got to witnessing discontent about the way the club is being run was 
a few pointed heckles at the AGM. This being Arsenal, the tone was more 
courteously indignant than outright insulting. But when he travelled back to 
the USA, he would have at least been aware that there was a section of the 
fanbase that was no longer buying into the "self-sustaining" concept.

There is a marked difference between some of the small shareholders applauding 
awkward questions and a rival major investor lobbing over a hand grenade. The 
open letter sent this week fromAlisher Usmanov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alisher-usmanov>, who owns a shade under 
30 per cent of the club, has taken Arsenal into very destructive territory. The 
twain have not been minded to meet before. Now a wholly uncivil war has broken 
out.

What a peculiar situation. Arsenal are owned by two billionaires, neither of 
whom bankroll the club at all. Kroenke and Usmanov share a business interest 
and yet they will not talk. Both needArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> to flourish to make the best out 
of their investment but they are at loggerheads about how to do so. You don't 
need to be Baron Sugar to realise that this is no way to run a successful 
business.

It is hard to see how Arsenal can ever make serious progress while they are so 
dysfunctional from an ownership point of view. The statement by Usmanov's Red 
and White was blatantly designed to stir up public feeling and garner support 
for change.

These days, as far as the Arsenal fans are concerned, you either back Kroenke 
and the status quo, or feel if you can't beat the oligarchs you had better join 
them. Regardless of any sides, what is undeniable is that one of the key 
parties will not even entertain sitting down with the other. Reading between 
the lines, that seems to irk Red and White more than any of the criticism about 
how to help Arsenal to challenge for trophies. The ownership struggle would 
certainly be a less divisive issue if Kroenke at least sat round a table with 
Usmanov before dismissing his ideas out of hand. In most hostile situations 
there is some form of an exchange of views to work towards the greater good. 
But not here.

There are currently two clearly defined, opposing camps – something reflected 
in arguments among supporters. Few teams win without people pulling in roughly 
the same direction. This unhealthy situation only increases the pressure on 
Arsène Wenger and the players to perform well. The minute they don't, the 
daggers will be drawn.

While Wenger has always resisted the temptation to discuss the effects of the 
ownership schism, and players rarely get too involved in club business unless 
they are seeking to engineer a transfer, there is no question that Arsenal are 
struggling to compete within their current strictures.

The board has a very different atmosphere to the old days, when the monthly 
meetings at Highbury saw a group of directors who were all lifelong fanatics 
discuss everything with the aim of trying to pass any motion unanimously. The 
current board feels less democratic in that most of the old school directors no 
longer wield any real power, having sold out to Kroenke. In the office 
buildings around the Emirates Stadium, the place is increasingly run like a big 
American corporation.

Arsenal's intention is to sit tight and hope the debate fuelled by Red and 
White blows over. Airing dirty laundry in public has never been their style. 
Besides, the board are steadfast about their commitment to self-sustainability. 
A club spokesman happily points out that they are in their 15th season in the 
Champions League and are not afraid to spend on transfers, having laid out £75m 
over the last financial year, and £20m so far this summer, with the promise of 
more to come. That is all well and good, until the words "Manchester" and 
"City" come into the equation.

It has never been harder to convince supporters paying for expensive tickets 
that self-sustainability can be competitive in a market dominated by 
benefactors. It has never been harder to convince players, either.

But the one person who needs no convincing about its merits is Kroenke. His 
approach to his sports franchises is to slowly sweat out his investments. Red 
and White may not be alone in thinking it is time for Stan to put up or sell 
up. Unfortunately for anyone who agitates for change, he appears to want 
nothing more than to do nothing.
 