
The morning after Arsenal's captain and outstanding player, Robin van Persie, 
announced he will not renew his contract and criticised the club's strategy and 
ambition, the club's brooding, frustrated 30% owner Alisher Usmanov piled in.In 
an "open letter to the board of directors" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/interactive/2012/jul/05/red-white-full-letter-arsenal-board>
 the Uzbek steel and telecommunications billionaire savaged Arsenal's direction 
and "self-financing model" under the 62% owner, the American Stan Kroenke, and 
argued the manager, Arsène Wenger, is being denied the wherewithal for success.

The "self-financing model" has been so sung by Arsenal in praise of their 
approach that it was presented as a beacon of good practice to the 
parliamentary select committee examining football's unholy relationship with 
money last year. In essenceArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> have for years prescribed that 
the club must live from its income, and no director or owner must put a penny 
into the club.

Usmanov lambasted it as hypocritical. He argued that it requires fans to pay 
the world's highest ticket prices and gives Wenger a diminished budget for 
players while the long-term former English shareholders put nothing in, then 
made huge personal fortunes for themselves selling to Kroenke.

"This policy is leading to the loss of our best players, often to our main 
competitors, and even causes the players themselves to question their future at 
the club and the club's ambitions," the letter argued.

In its timing and Usmanov's implied association of himself with players like 
Van Persie, this extraordinary intervention can justifiably be labelled 
opportunist. Yet there is a wounding coherence to the central argument, which 
goes to the heart of how Arsenal describe themselves, and are being run.

The attraction of "self-financing" which the chief executive, Ivan Gazidis, 
continually espouses,is that the cash available to Wenger comes from the money 
the club makes and not the beneficence of an owner. That accords with the 
thrust of Uefa's "financial fair play" rules, due to be enforced from 2014-15, 
which view clubs' reliance on individual rich men as unstable, generally 
inflationary and not what football should be about.

The fact that Van Persie could follow Samir Nasri and Gaël Clichy to 
Manchester City, the club powered by the polar opposite, Sheikh Mansour of Abu 
Dhabi, thrusting in around £1bn, makes Arsenal affronted, as regularly voiced 
by Wenger.

City also have financial fair play to grapple with but Usmanov argues he is 
not suggesting Arsenal become reliant on a billionaire like him. The Uzbek's 
stated position is that Arsenal's shareholders should invest some well-judged 
permanent money into the club, for shares, to repay the stadium mortgage and 
leave Arsenal debt-free.

The club has always set itself against that, arguing it is unnecessary because 
the debts owed from building the stadium are not punitive (net debt last year 
was £98m, the club paid £15m interest) and there are penalties for repaying it 
early. Gazidis argues any other funding from outside would leave the club 
unsustainable.

Yet the moral basis for such prudence and sobriety was fundamentally 
undermined when the former shareholders, under the chairmanship of Peter 
Hill-Wood, made multi-millions personally. Having effectively sacked David Dein 
for introducing Kroenke to buy ITV's 9.9% stake in 2007, they saw Dein sell his 
Arsenal shares to Usmanov, making £75m. With Kroenke rehabilitated as the 
board's preferred alternative to Usmanov, Hill-Wood sold, making £5.5m for a 
stake his family had held for three generations without ever making a penny 
from Arsenal. Richard Carr made more than £40m, also selling a long-held family 
stake to Kroenke, in 2009. The timing of the final sales were prompted by the 
terminal illness of Danny Fiszman, who made £160m from his sale of Arsenal 
shares to Kroenke before he died last year. Lady Nina Bracewell-Smith, another 
who inherited her Arsenal shares, which were formerly considered an emotional 
investment of support, made £116m selling them to Kroenke.

Usmanov's take on the "self-financing model" which delivered such windfall 
profits to the people who had liked to describe themselves as "custodians," 
verges on devastating.

"The self-financing model … allowed the major shareholders of the time to load 
the club with a liability [£260m debt building the Emirates]," he argued. "The 
board then appeared to pursue a policy of increasing ticket prices and 
squeezing the fans … until all of these shareholders … cashed out at vast 
profits."

Rather than provide Wenger with "a war chest" for top players to augment his 
treasured youth policy, the manager, Usmanov argued, has had to sell his best 
players due to "the club's tight finances".

Kroenke, who attends few matches and sees Arsenal as a financial investment, 
is pursuing the same policy, according to Usmanov, by not putting any money 
into the club.

Arsenal, declined to respond to Usmanov, a spokesman saying only: "The letter 
has been received and its contents are being considered."
 