
The Arsenal shareholder Alisher Usmanov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alisher-usmanov> has said he is concerned 
that the club's difficulties in hanging on to their best players has helped 
create great teams for their rivals. He also claimed that Thierry Henry has 
urged him to take over at the Emirates to stop the trophy drought.

Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> have not won anything 
since the FA Cup in 2005 and in recent years have sold the striker Robin van 
Persie, the midfielders Cesc Fábregas, Samir Nasri and Alex Song, and the 
left-back Gaël Clichy. Manchester United signed Van Persie; Fábregas and Song 
went to Barcelona; and Nasri and Clichy won the Premier League with Manchester 
City last season.

In an interview with the sports daily L'Equipe, Usmanov said: "The greatest 
achievement of Arsène Wenger is to have created two teams: the one that now 
plays for our rivals and the one that is trying to be among the best in the 
Premier League.

"That's why I say it's not enough to merely flatter the coach, but to give him 
the possibility to buy the best players, superstars. But not just stars, but 
those chosen by Wenger."

He added: "For me, he's one of the best coaches in the world, but it's not 
easy for him. I think he deserves that players are brought in at Arsenal when 
they're needed.

"The best players, and not being satisfied with selling our best players to 
our rivals. If that happens, we can ask everything of him. But, today, he's 
sacrificed. Because of the policy and we're all to blame. Everything's in [the 
Arsenal majority shareholder] Mr Kroenke's hands and I hope he succeeds, even 
if he doesn't go along with my ideas.

"It's unthinkable that the shareholders get well-paid while, for small clauses 
in contracts, we lose key players, symbols like Robin van Persie, Mathieu 
Flamini or Patrick Vieira. We should have increased their salaries when they 
started to be courted, started to look elsewhere. I don't know why we didn't 
propose that to them."

Usmanov owns just under 30% of Arsenal, less than the American businessman 
Stan Kroenke. But Usmanov claimed Henry wants him to take control of the club.

"I like many footballers and I'm in contact with some of them. Perhaps my 
favourite of the last 10, 15 years is Thierry Henry. He's pushing me to buy all 
of Arsenal's shares, but I cannot predict the future," he said.

"When I had the chance to buy some shares and become one of the main 
shareholders in the club, I didn't hesitate for a second. I was even ready to 
take total control. That wasn't possible because certain people preferred to 
make a profit and create, using me, an outside enemy. I remain portrayed as a 
pirate, an enemy. They have won that game."
 