
Stan Kroenke's unspoken support 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/aug/29/arsene-wenger-arsenal-health> 
for Arsène Wenger means this is not a make-or-break season for the Arsenal 
manager. But could it be for the club's American owner himself? In agreeing to 
pay about £150m to Arsenal directors and small shareholders to increase his 
stake in the club to 66.6% in April, the American was sold a vision for the 
club in which it would be a self-sustaining title challenger.

Yet with Samir Nasri sold for £24m in the knowledge he could leave for free 
next May, Wenger has since expressed frustration at being unable to satisfy the 
wage demands of his transfer targets.Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> have been priced out of moves 
for players such as Juan Mata as benefactor-funded clubs have upped the 
transfer fee ante beyond Arsenal's means.

That is partly Wenger's fault: he has lavished expensive wages on fringe 
players who have proved difficult to move on, restricting the funds available 
for signings. But Arsenal's competitors do not have the same worries about 
accommodating past purchases before making new acquisitions. This may present 
Kroenke with a dilemma, yet someone is preparing to offer him a solution. The 
RussianAlisher Usmanov <https://www.theguardian.com/business/alisher-usmanov>, 
who owns almost 30% of Arsenal and has continued buying shares since Kroenke's 
takeover, is by some reckonings Britain's richest man.

If Kroenke wants a way out of the club, and one that would enable him to turn 
a healthy profit on his investment to boot, he has only to pick up the phone. 
Kroenke certainly has no intention of doing so: he has always declared himself 
"a long-term investor". But Usmanov will not stop trying to tempt him.

The third man

The football-investment fund Quality Football Ireland came to this column's 
attention when it was involved inthe transfer of Roberto Jiménez from Benfica 
to the insolvent Real Zaragoza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/aug/11/transfers-roberto-jiminez-benfica-real-zaragoza>
 this month. It has since been involved in a few other third-party ownership 
deals, this time with Besiktas in Turkey, where third-party ownership is also 
permitted, in contrast to England where it is not. Peter Kenyon, the former 
Chelsea chief executive, confirmed to Digger that he and his associate, the 
Portuguese agentJorge Mendes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/jan/17/jorge-mendes-powerful-european-game>
, were acting as consultants to the fund. But it turns out that there could be 
rather more to it than that. Kenyon is managing partner of CAA Sports 
International, which Digger can reveal is the controlling shareholder of QFI. 
According to documents at the Companies Registration Office in Dublin, CAA owns 
69 of its 100 shares, with its principal director being CAA's general counsel, 
Michael Rubel. Ostensibly a "talent-representation agency", in buying up stakes 
in players CAA is taking its activities in a new direction, and it will surely 
not be long before other major player agencies follow suit.

Argyle in extra time

The bid by Peter Ridsdale, pictured, to take over Plymouth Argyle inched 
closer to becoming a reality last week when administrators announced that Kevin 
Heaney and his co-investors, who are taking over the club's property assets in 
an apparently separate transaction, had at last proved they can afford to do 
so. But there is little chance of the deal taking place for a while: the 
Football League's board must first give its approval and that is not expected 
to happen before its next formal meeting, on 8 September.

In safe hands?

Sepp Blatter was no doubt at pains to read and digest every element of a 
recent independent report he had commissioned entitled Safe Hands before he 
stated on Sunday: "They have a lot of recommendations but, in transparency, 
what can we do more?" He was referring to how his appointment of Placido 
Domingo to a Solutions Committee pre-empted the report's recommendations.

But he made no mention of the recommended limitation of presidential terms 
(naturally: Blatter is in his fourth), of the proper auditing of how 
distributions to national associations are spent or of the appointment of 
independent non-executive directors to Fifa's Executive Committee and Finance 
Committee. So what more could Fifa do for transparency? Ask the authors of that 
report: Transparency International.

Hannover lose again

German courts have all but rejected attempts by Hannover 96's chairman, Martin 
Kind, to overturn the 50+1 rule that ensures no single investor can own more 
than 49% of any club. A ruling delivered on Tuesday broadly supported the 
Bundesliga's rules over governance. Its chairman, Reinhard Rauball, said: "We 
must continue to fear any Spanish, Italian or English conditions."
 