
As an active participant in the art college disputes of 1968 while a student 
at the Royal College of Art, it gives me no gratification to find we are 
revisiting the same old issues (Suzanne Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/15/art-schools-wealthy-few-culture>
, 18 April). Of concern then was the Labour government’s intention to reduce 
the number of foundation courses. At the same time it raised the entry 
requirement to five GCE O-levels, which effectively excluded most secondary 
modern school students. Previously you could go to junior art college at 14. 
The final qualification was made a degree equivalent.

I recall debating this with Shirley Williams at a meeting staged by the Times 
Educational Supplement. I also pointed out to Jack Straw from the National 
Union of Students that if the contention was accepted that A-level art taught 
in a school was as good as a foundation course in an art college then all 
foundation courses would close.

Kim Howells became notable as the excluded Hornsey College of Art student who 
refused to be excluded. At the Royal College of Art we took in dispossessed 
Hornsey students and together organised in two weeks a national conference at 
the Roundhouse. It attracted students, lecturers, artists and designers from 
all over the UK and the government appointees reviewing art education.

We were very fortunate in the 60s as all art education was free. Today many of 
the students awarded places cannot afford to take them up.
Chris Owen
Market Harborough, Leicestershire

• The Headmasters’ and Headmistresses’ Conference, which represents the heads 
of the UK’s independent schools, is currently recruiting to its first national 
teacher training programme starting in August (Beyond university: the new wave 
of teacher training courses, 14 April). Given the recruitment and retention 
crisis and the need to develop high-quality teachers, it is a significant 
development. HMC teacher training is school-based and leads to a recognised 
PGCE qualification. Successful applicants are paid to train in some of the 
country’s leading independent schools and are required to gain experience 
teaching in state schools, qualifying them to work in both sectors. We are 
hopeful that this new initiative will both increase the numbers staying in 
teaching long-term and assist the stated ambition of all political parties to 
create the highest standards of teaching and school leadership.
Richard Harman
Chair, Headmasters’ and Headmistresses’ Conference

• Follow the Guardian letters desk on Twitter: @guardianletters 
<https://twitter.com/guardianletters>
 