
'Here," said Robert Wilson, making his way through an underground labyrinth of 
caverns, arches and alcoves, "I want a pile of yellow sulphur." In the 
darkness, people around him took careful note. "And here," continued the 
American guru of the avant garde nonchalantly, "I want hundreds of golden 
arrows flying through the air, suspended in mid-flight . . ."

The year was 1995, and the setting was the cavernous Clink Street Vaults on 
London's Bankside. I had gone behind the scenes, and was getting my first 
glimpse into the shadowy workings of an art production outfit known asArtangel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/artangel>. Although the company had 
been in existence for a few years, its ambitious new commission – HG, a vast 
installation by the legendarily demanding Wilson, based extremely loosely on 
The Time Machine by HG Wells – was on an altogether more monumental scale.

Following Wilson, the Artangel crew (producers Michael Morris and James 
Lingwood, plus an army of support staff) were unblinkingly jotting down even 
the most outlandish request. They then spent the ensuing months transforming 
this subterranean expanse into an immersive dreamscape of dripping lightbulbs, 
glittering sphinxes, mummified corpses and ruined temples.

"At one point, he requested an amphibian," remembers Morris, with a chuckle. 
"So we found this guy from a place called Animal Ark, who would show up every 
day with strange animals. Finally, he brought this weird thing called an 
axolotl: a dark, almost prehistoric creature with feathery gills. Bob gave a 
nod, and so the axolotl took up residence, a lurking presence at the bottom of 
a glowing tank of water."

For the past 20 years, Artangel has been playing a crucial, if backroom, role 
– as curator, facilitator, fundraiser, administrator, babysitter and celestial 
guardian – to some of Britain and the world's most radical, daring and 
provocative artists. Even before HG, the company had already made a splash in 
1993, as the unseen hand behind Rachel Whiteread's House, a concrete cast of 
the insides of an entire terraced house in London.

The work proved as controversial as Carl Andre's infamous pile of bricks and 
Damien Hirst's formaldehyde shark: it was praised as "testimony to the human 
spirit" and denigrated as "a joke" and "a monstrosity". On the day it won the 
Turner prize, Whiteread was named "worst artist of the year" by a subversive 
rival award.

Other comparably bold and confrontational Artangel projects include Jeremy 
Deller's 2001 The Battle of Orgreave, a spectacular real-time re-enactment of 
one of the most divisive conflicts of the miner's strike in 1984; and, also in 
2001, Michael Landy's Break Down, in which Landy set about obliterating all his 
worldly possessions, in the archly ironic consumer setting of a former C&A 
store in London. Few other organisations would have had the courage to take on 
such uncompromising, barrier-breaking projects. "No commercial gallery would 
touch me," says Landy. "So they were a godsend."

As well as supporting 55 or so artists over their two-decade span, Artangel 
pioneered the use of unconventional venues and refined the notion of 
spectacular one-off art events. "They've had a huge effect on the cultural 
landscape," says Deller. "Something like the Turbine Hall in Tate Modern – 
that's really just a kind of ongoing Artangel project. The Turbine Hall would 
never even have been thought about if it hadn't been for Artangel."

Low-key and reserved, the two men behind Artangel seem blithely unconcerned by 
the fact that, while they toil in the background, the artists are out there 
getting all the attention, glory and Turner prizes. "One of the main skills of 
a producer is the ability to step back," says Lingwood. "It's our job to keep 
perspective, to keep calm," adds Morris.

Two middle-class boys from not terribly artistic households, they met at 
Oundle school in Peterborough and became colleagues at the ICA in the 1980s, 
during its experimental golden years: Morris as director of performing arts, 
Lingwood overseeing the gallery. It was during this period that many of the 
ideas that fuelled the Artangel credo were conceived. "We were frustrated at 
the limitations of what we were doing," says Morris. "I wanted to do things of 
a different scale. We wanted to go beyond the white walls of the gallery and 
the black box of the theatre, to explore uncharted territory."

Ultimately, the duo wanted to completely change the way audiences experience 
art: "We wanted everything to seem like an event," says Lingwood, "with art so 
immersive and absorbing, you simply can't get away from it."

In 1991, they got the chance – when offered joint directorship of Artangel, 
which had existed in other incarnations since the mid-80s. Their breakthrough 
came when Lingwood paid a visit, shortly afterwards, to the studio of a 
little-known artist namedRachel Whiteread 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/whiteread>. "He just sat in the chair and 
I gave him a cup of tea," she recalls. "He asked if there was anything I wanted 
to make. And I said I'd like to cast a whole house in concrete. He just said, 
'Great, OK, let's do it.'"

As soon as the concrete had set on 193 Grove Road in Bow, the outrage and 
campaigning began. Just hours before it received the Turner prize, the council 
voted to have House demolished. "It was one of the worst days of my life," says 
Lingwood. "The first part of the evening was spent attending a meeting of Bow 
neighbourhood council. And I had to go from there to Millbank to convey the 
news to Rachel, before she learned that she had won the Turner prize." House 
was demolished in 1994.

Shredders and soldiers

But the notoriety and scandal put Artangel on the map, allowing them to move 
on to larger-scale projects such as HG. The two projects that really confirmed 
Artangel as a major force, however, came not from their trademark 
"conversations" with carefully selected artists, but from an open call for 
submissions via a national newspaper.

The first was Michael Landy's anticapitalist statement. "Michael was going to 
catalogue everything he owned and then just destroy it," says Lingwood. "The 
challenge was how to present this dismantling and deconstruction to the public 
in an interesting way." Artangel injected a sense of theatre with an 
"anti-production-line" of conveyor belts and chutes that fed Landy's clothes, 
cooker and even his Saab into gigantic mechanical shredders. Appropriately, 
when it was all over, all Landy had left was a boiler suit he borrowed from 
Artangel.

The second was Deller's pitch for The Battle of Orgreave, which was scrawled 
on one side of A4. "It was a haiku of a proposal," says Lingwood. "But its 
implications were enormous." Deller's plan to re-enact the clash in the fields 
around a South Yorkshire coking plant in 1984 proved a gargantuan logistical 
undertaking. It marshalled over 800 participants – some of them former miners 
and policemen who had faced each other in the original battle, others drawn 
from re-enactment societies all over the country. "On the night before, 
everyone gathered together in the fields of Orgreave, in a kind of makeshift 
military camp," says Lingwood. "It really felt like the night before a real 
battle."

Since those successes, Artangel has continued to take on only the most 
towering, unwieldy projects, including 2003's Imber, a three-day promenade 
event about the Salisbury Plain village evacuated in 1943 to make way for US 
soldiers training for the Normandy landings; and 2005's Küba, an video 
installation by Turkish artist Kutlug˘ Ataman that took place in a gigantic 
postal sorting office in central London.

To mark their 20th year, in a nod to posterity, the Artangel duo are donating 
part of their video archive to the Tate. They insist there is no grand plan for 
the future, simply the hope that new associations with new artists will take 
them on new journeys as huge in scale and ambition as House, Orgreave and Break 
Down. "I can't say what our strategy is because it involves things we don't 
know about yet," says Morris. "Expect more of what we've done," adds Lingwood. 
"And some of what we can't imagine."
 