
The building was once the scene for deep, passionate debates about how to 
combat the forces of Thatcherism and rescue an industry steeped in the 
traditions of organised labour. Soon, it will resound to the kerching of slot 
machines pumping out cash as gamblers score jackpots.

For the former HQ of the National Union of Mineworkers in Arthur Scargill's 
era is to become a 24-hour casino.

Labour-led Sheffield <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/sheffield> approved the 
new use at its licensing committee meeting on Monday and the proposal is now 
expected to pass the full council on the nod.

Where 20 years ago the discussion was of keeping the red flag flying high, it 
will now concern whether to go for red or black as croupiers will spin roulette 
wheels and hand out cards in the imposing block on Holly Street, which was 
designed in the shape of a colliery faceworker's pick.

Empty and unused for the last 20 years, it was created by Scargill after the 
defeat of the 1984/5 miners' strike when the union decided to move its national 
base from London to its northern heartlands.

The NUM took possession in 1988 but a dispute over the main entrance was never 
resolved during the union's five years there. A weed-lined gap was left between 
the pavement and the front door and visitors had to use a side entrance.

Scargill retreated further in the 1990s to the former NUM Yorkshire office in 
Barnsley, an ornate Victorian building nick-named King Arthur's Castle.

The contraction of mining and dramatic fall in the NUM's membership left the 
national office without a great deal to do compared to its heyday as one of the 
country's most powerful industrial organisations.

The planning decision will end Sheffield's distinction as the largest UK city 
not to have a casino in the centre. Planners received six letters of opposition 
and one submission from a local councillor, all concerned about the possibility 
of noise or trouble related to drinking.

Brook Leisure, the national casino chain which is also based in Barnsley, said 
that its record should reassure anyone with worries. Its spokesman Andrew 
Stevens said: "We will respect our neighbours. Casinos tend not to be as noisy 
as some other venues in the city."

The city's planning staff, who recommended demolishing the "out-of-character'' 
block five years ago, said that the new use should enhance the area around 
Sheffield's town hall and winter gardens. Councillors were advised that 
gamblers would be "less boisterous" than clubbers or pub drinkers.

A report to the committee said: "Casinos are usually very well managed and the 
dispersal of customers tends to be more widely spread, resulting in less noise 
and disturbance."

The 3,500 sq m (38,000 sq ft) developments will include a rooftop bar, two 
restaurants and shops. In one aspect at least the new use chimes with the aims 
of the NUM under Scargill. Brook Leisure said that the development would create 
130 jobs.
 