
The former miners' leader Arthur Scargill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/arthur-scargill> has won thousands of 
pounds in damages from the union he fiercely championed during 20 turbulent 
years as its leader.

But the 74-year-old's full claim for unpaid expenses when he worked as a legal 
consultant to the National Union of Mineworkers (NUM) after retirement was 
rejected by a judge in Sheffield.

Scargill, who claimed during the hearing to have devoted his life to the NUM 
and worked harder than any official in its history, was awarded £12,000 in 
compensation for a bungled office car scheme. Judge Robert Moore added £1,000 
to compensate for the union's refusal to maintain Scargill's membership during 
the dispute.

The judge told Sheffield county court that the Yorkshire area trust fund of 
the NUM had "a clear agenda both to disown him and to pay him as little as 
possible".

Scargill's barrister, Timothy Pitt-Payne QC, said the trust treated his client 
"in a thoroughly shabby way and in a way that was quite inappropriate, given 
his long and distinguished career within the union".

Scargill's hold over the union shrank in proportion to its decline as an 
industrial force from the "vanguard of the UK trade unions" to membership just 
a few thousand strong. But his formidable legal expertise, far less publicised 
during his heyday than his oratory and militant strike organisation, was still 
valued.

After stepping down from the £70,000-a-year presidency, he assisted with 
industrial injury claims, a failed attempt to reclaim £8m from the union's 
former solicitors, and disputes over the former HQ in Sheffield, which has 
since been taken over by a casino. He was paid £26,000 annually for the new 
role, but clashed over his right to an office car and mobile phone.

The judge said Scargill's work in his new role had been "meaningful and 
considerable" and his Ford Mondeo had been transferred with his change of job, 
with union payments for it totalling some £14,500 over four years.

But when he changed the car after five years, he was offered a derisory £50.

Scargill sat wearing a dark suit and red tie behind his QC as the judge 
rejected his claim for unpaid phone expenses. The hearing continues, with the 
judge due to rule on legal costs.
 