
Former National Union of Mineworkers leader Arthur Scargill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/arthur-scargill> joined fellow trade 
unionists on Friday to celebrate the 40th anniversary of a key victory during 
the 1972 miners' strike.

Now aged 74, the ex-NUM president said he had vivid memories of his role in 
the Battle of Saltley Gate, which saw at least 15,000 Birmingham engineers walk 
out in support of a picket by striking miners.

Around 100 trade unionists, many carrying banners, gathered near the site of 
the long-defunct Saltley Coke Works to commemorate the events of 10 February 
1972. Addressing the rally, Scargill recalled how he had secured the support of 
engineering union members in the days before 10 February when the police were 
finally forced to close the gates of the coke works.

Scargill, who was then a member of the union's Yorkshire area executive, told 
the crowd: "I said 'You have got a choice – you can either stand on the 
sidewalk and watch what's happening or you can join us and march into history'.

"To the eternal credit of the workers in Birmingham, they joined the miners on 
the 10th of February."

Scargill said that the events being commemorated had crystallised everything 
he believed in as a trade unionist, showing what working people could achieve 
if they were prepared to come to the assistance of workers in different 
industries struggling in a just cause.

"We lit a flame and we showed the way forward," he said, adding a call for the 
lessons learned in 1972 to be translated into the modern era.

The ex-union leader, a coalface worker at Woolley colliery near Barnsley at 
the time of the 1972 strike, also recalled how the local chief constable had 
agreed to four demands, including a request from Scargill to borrow a 
loudhailer because his own megaphone was broken.

Calling on trade unionists to oppose the coalition's "attacks" on the NHS and 
the education system, Scargill said: "The lesson of Saltley in 1972 was that 
you will not win by compromise – you will win by fighting back.

"The workers who turned out on that day lit a beacon - they showed the way 
that working people can bring about change."

Also present at the commemoration was former Yorkshire NUM vice-president Ken 
Capstick, and Unite's assistant general secretary, Tony Burke. Capstick told 
the rally he felt privileged to be invited to speak near the site of the 
historic protest.

The 70-year-old, who was a branch delegate at Wakefield's Parkhill pit in 
1972, said: "We are here to thank the working people of Birmingham who turned 
out and marched on those infamous gates."

Although it was right and proper to celebrate the anniversary, Capstick told 
the crowd it was also necessary to remember that "the enemy never sleeps".

Britain was currently facing the greatest class robbery it had seen over the 
past 200 years, claimed Capstick, who singled out the global banking industry 
for particular criticism.

He told the event: "They [bankers] have wrecked the world's economy and they 
made Las Vegas look like a haven of moderation.

"Working people are not the perpetrators of the economic crisis, they are the 
victims of it."
 