
The former National Union of Mineworkers leader Arthur Scargill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/arthur-scargill> has lost his fight to 
have the union continue to meet the costs of his London flat for his lifetime.

The NUM had asked Mr Justice Underhill at London's high court to declare that 
it has no such continuing obligation to 74-year-old Scargill, who was its 
president for 20 years until July 2002.

Scargill has occupied the Barbican apartment, rented from the Corporation of 
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, since June 1982.

The union also successfully disputed Scargill's fuel allowance at his Barnsley 
home and payment for the preparation of his annual tax return, but not the cost 
of the security system at his Yorkshire home.

Explaining his decision, the judge said Scargill's predecessors had enjoyed 
the "very generous benefit" of having houses in or near London bought for them 
by the union, adding that they were also allowed to occupy the properties after 
retiring at a very low rent, or to buy them at a "very reduced price".

But Scargill, he noted, had not taken up the benefit when it appeared in his 
first contract in 1982 – although the union's national executive committee had 
agreed to pay the rent and other expenses on his Barbican flat, which was near 
the NUM's London headquarters.

He rejected Scargill's claims that the union's payment of the rent on the flat 
was intended to replace the benefit his predecessors had enjoyed and was 
therefore a lifetime benefit.

The judge said the claim was not reflected in the original minutes of the NEC, 
was not backed up by the contract Scargill signed, and pointed out that the 
union had continued to subsidise the mortgage on his Yorkshire home.

He added: "It was [also] known at the time of his election that the union 
might well shortly be moving its headquarters outside London (as it in fact 
did). I have found that it is more likely that the understanding at that time 
was that the payment of the rent of the Barbican flat was in the nature of a 
facility to enable Mr Scargill to do his job properly and that he retained the 
right in due course to have a house bought for him by the union."

The judge went on to note that the union had not paid the rent on the flat for 
a six-year period from 1985, and that Scargill had decided in 1991 that he did 
not want to take up the housing benefit to which he had been entitled since 
1982, preferring the union to resume paying the rent on the flat.

What Scargill should then have done, he said, was go back to the union and get 
authorisation for the arrangement. Instead, without obtaining the NUM's 
blessing, he had sought legal advice, which supported his right to have the 
union pay for the flat.

"None of this was disclosed to the NEC," said the judge. "The legal advice was 
based on information provided by him which did not give the full picture; and 
anyway it could not make up for the absence of NEC authorisation."

As a result, he concluded, the contract appearing to give Scargill the right 
to have the NUM carry on paying the rent after he retired was not effective as 
the NEC had not approved it in the first place.

After the ruling, the NUM general secretary, Chris Kitchen, said it was 
"regrettable" that it had had to bring the case, while Scargill said the 
judgment was "perverse" and flew in the face of all the evidence.

He said: "There can be no doubt that 30 years ago I was given an entitlement 
to a property by the union and that entitlement continued during my retirement, 
as it had done for all my predecessors including Lord Gormley and, after he 
died, his widow Lady Gormley."

On the question of an appeal, he said: "I shall talk to my lawyers about what 
the best course of action will be, but I think any independent observer will 
regard this as yet another judgment with the anti-Scargill feeling about it."
 