
Alistair Gentry, freelance artist and writer <http://www.gentry-a.co.uk/>

Artists should be paid: Or at least compensated in some meaningful way. I have 
always been paid to do residencies; I've never paid do them ever. There has 
been a massive proliferation of so-called 'residencies' that are just 
short-term studio rental – you get no support, no guarantees, you pay for 
everything, and often the facilities will be so bad that you wouldn't put up 
with them if it was a holiday that you'd paid £1,000 to go on.

And that's what these 'residencies' are: bourgeois Butlins. Short-term studio 
rental is fine. Having a nice holiday in Italy and concentrating on your 
painting is fine. Arts organisations raising necessary funds is totally 
acceptable. But just call these things what they are.

It's not necessarily about a crude transaction of pay for work, but also right 
that an artist shouldn't be massively out of pocket as a result of taking up 
something that's offered as an opportunity. Everybody needs to recognise that 
venues and artists need money to function. Kudos, goodwill and opportunity 
don't buy our kids shoes, pay our rent, or keep the doors of community 
resources open.

A residency should be a beginning, not an end: Following one particular 
residency, I had a 10 year relationship with the venue. I worked with them many 
times subsequently and they supported me both pragmatically and in more 
emotional ways. To me this is absolutely a model of what a residency should 
lead to.

Rowan Geddis, residencies programmer, Gasworks <http://www.gasworks.org.uk/>

It's not always easy: Communication, clarity and understanding (things that 
make a residency great) can actually be very tricky, especially when dealing 
with so many different cultural and language differences and barriers. I'm 
talking specifically about the communication before the artist's arrival, in 
terms of managing their expectations and communicating what we can do for them, 
and what is expected of them in return.

Despite one's best intentions to be clear, there are sometimes expectations 
from the artists in terms of luxury and pampering, which it's just not within 
our means or within our remit to provide.

I guess many organisations are so familiar with their own set-up that it's 
hard for them to think what needs to be communicated to the artist ahead of 
time. I think both parties make presumptions based upon their previous 
experience, which can cause problems. It's certainly a constant learning 
process for us.

Do your research: The number one consideration for an artist interested in a 
residency would be to find the right match. There are so many different 
provisions and focuses, there's bound to be one that matches your practice, but 
to apply for everything regardless of a fit is just a waste of everyone's time. 
To thoroughly research the organisation and the model before applying is 
crucial – looking at the kind of artists selected previously is the best way to 
understand a programme.

Valentina Fois, director and curator, La Scatola Gallery 
<http://www.lascatolagallery.com/>

Mutual respect is the key. Diplomacy is also very important, reality is that 
we are all very different and it is impossible to like everyone all of the 
time! With so many differing cultures and habits and it is easy for one to lose 
their temper, however if you respect the other person and you have a positive 
attitude you can make the best out of a new experience such as a residency.

Top tips for the venue and artist: Build trust and respect each other; try to 
make the most out of a residency; look for a residency that suits your ethos; 
ask for feedback and evaluation when the residency terminates; be motived as 
often the budgets are very tight; and enjoy yourself!

Polly Bielecka, gallery director, Pangolin London 
<http://www.pangolinlondon.com/>

Be flexible: We certainly don't set out to micro-manage our artist's lives so 
we leave it entirely open to the artist to use the studio as often or as little 
as they like, and at any time of day. We would organise regular meetings to 
make sure both parties kept in touch and I think those help keep up the 
momentum. I suppose the meetings would happen with any exhibition we were 
organising, but they were perhaps more regular and being on site could easily 
happen at short notice.

Sam Underwood, sound artist and musical instrument designer 
<http://www.mrunderwood.co.uk/>

Know the benefits: Residencies vary a lot in terms of how long they are for, 
how they are structured and what resources and people are involved, but the 
main benefit I'd say is that they provide a space to work, sometimes physically 
but definitely mentally. Like anyone else we have other stuff going on in our 
lives and I certainly find it easier to remove such distractions from my day 
when I am formally on residence.

Fiona Ferguson, development director, Imaginate <http://www.imaginate.org.uk/>

Residencies are good for the sector as a whole: By stimulating new ideas and 
work, by supporting artists financially for a year which allows more 
experimentation and risk, by connecting artists more into the networks of that 
sector, by raising the profile of that sector, and so on.

Deirdre Nelson, artist <http://dstitch.blogspot.co.uk/>

Some key considerations for artists: Understand the residency expectations 
before applying; choose suitable programmes that fit in with your arts practice 
and methods of working; be prepared to be resourceful and engage with diverse 
communities; develop ways of explaining your work to diverse audiences; be 
enthusiastic and positive about new experiences.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up free to become amember of the Culture 
Professionals Network <https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals>.
 