
Arundhati Roy <https://www.theguardian.com/books/arundhatiroy> will turn 50 
this year. I hope to be excused of sexism (would one write this of a man?) when 
I say that she looks no more than 35 at most. Her vitality has always been 
striking. I remember her from one of her early visits to London as a slight, 
supple woman with an Indian cotton bag slung over her shoulder, and gleaming 
skin and hair that suggested yoga and aerobics, yoghurt and juice made from 
fresh limes. My wife had baked scones in her honour. Roy looked at the scones 
as though they might be deep-fried Mars bars, but eventually and daintily 
conceded to try one. In her bag was the manuscript of a first novel that was to 
make her famous and (by the standards of writers) rich, and though some of that 
future could have been predicted (the manuscript had caused a stir among 
publishers), no one could have foreseen the Booker prize and editions in 40 
languages. What has happened since the success of The God of Small Things is 
even more surprising. Among Indian public intellectuals, a bright category that 
includes the Nobel laureate Amartya Sen, Roy is probably now her country's most 
globally famous polemicist, as both a writer and speaker. Her essays are 
published across the world – the Guardian published a recent one in five parts 
– and she can pack out a big venue in New York and still have a few thousand 
listening outside.

In India she draws even bigger crowds, and switches from English to Hindi. She 
tours extensively, and often to the kind of country towns and small cities that 
rarely see anyone so celebrated. Recently, she told me, 5,000 tribal people 
from 34 districts had gathered to hear her at Bhubaneswar in Orissa. Some had 
walked for days to get there; 40 had been arrested and charged with waging war 
against the state; two, she believed, had died in jail. "So it isn't like 
Jaipur," she said, referring to India's first and largest literary festival, 
just ended, where well-fed writers are flown in from London and New York and 
put up in reupholstered palaces. This could easily have been her way of living, 
too – as, for a short time, it was. Instead she has spent the last dozen years 
castigating the Indian state for all its sins and omissions: grandiose dams 
that displace the poor peasantry, mineral quarries that threaten to do 
likewise, nuclear weapons, the occupation of Kashmir. Her prose takes few 
prisoners, and runs against the grain of urban India's swelling prosperity. A 
common criticism is her refusal to balance the bad against the good. Yes, the 
greed is spectacular. Yes, the corruption inside government may be obscene. 
Yes, 800 million people exist on less than 20 rupees (about 35p) a day. But 
look on the bright side. That leaves another 400 million doing better than ever 
before, in an economy growing at dizzying rates, withIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> now receiving the obeisance of the 
west. So why write so narrowly and speak so angrily?

Roy has a standard reply. "Suppose there are 10 people in this room. Seven are 
starving, and one is winning medals, and two are doing OK. And I say, 'Look at 
these seven people who are starving,' and you say, 'Oh don't be so negative, 
no, things are not so bad – look at the other three.' Really?"

She herself ranks quite high among the three-tenths. We met at her flat near 
Lodhi gardens, in one of the most desirable parts of south Delhi, where 4x4s 
with CD plates stand parked in dusty lanes, and diplomats come to shop. It 
would be wrong to see this as an example of a woman not practising what she 
preached. Although Roy is by no means a Gandhian renouncer of worldly goods, a 
good percentage of her royalties have funded causes she describes as "edgy", 
but is reluctant to name. "It's not that I want to live in some slum and wear a 
handloom sari," she said. "I'm not in sacrificial mode and I don't want to be 
saintly." But she found her sudden wealth problematic. Fame she could handle, 
but "the money just blew me out of the water. OK, so I wrote a good book, but 
that doesn't mean you need to be showered with money. If you're a political 
person, what do you do, what's the right way to deploy it?"

So, as a political person, how would she describe her politics? She has spent 
weeks with the Maoist insurgents in central India – a dangerous adventure in a 
bloody war that has killed thousands of people and emptied hundreds of villages 
– but she isn't a Maoist: "I'm not unaware of what that kind of doctrine can 
lead to." A Gandhian then? A snort of disbelief at the very idea: "I ask those 
people who say they are Gandhians, if you live in a tribal village in the heart 
of a forest and 800 paramilitaries surround it and start to burn it and rape 
the women, what Gandhian action would you prescribe? Gandhian politics is a 
form of celebrity politics. It needs an audience. They don't have an audience." 
A kind of liberal democrat perhaps? "The nation state is such a cunning 
instrument in the hands of capitalism now. You have a democracy that 
strengthens the idea of the nation as a marketplace."

She said, "I don't feel the need to define myself and give myself a flag." The 
self-description she will settle for is "writer", but when I wondered if that 
word in this context meant sympathetic observer or explainer or advocate, she 
said it was more than that. Recently she'd had a letter from a Maoist 
prisoner in central India reminding her that in an early essay, The Greater 
Common Good, which argued against dam-building in the Narmada valley, she had 
written: "I went to the valley because I thought the valley needed a writer." 
The letter added, "We need a writer too." Roy, then, sees in her writing an 
Orwellian duty to bridge social distance, to bring home the truth about the 
poor and disaffected to the prosperous and content, and to realise their 
surroundings and situation as a good novelist would. In fact, the distances she 
needs to bridge are far greater than Orwell's – Wigan miners weren't to old 
Etonians as hill tribes are to metropolitan Indians – and her writing is more 
prolix and melodramatic.

But for all that, she is intensely readable – fluent, never solemn and always 
confident. She denies extraordinary self-belief, but my guess is only because 
she's never lived without it. The scones episode was an early example (to the 
scone-maker: "Well, I might just try one"), but her novel's publication process 
threw up many others. She had never published a book before, but she demanded, 
and was granted, complete design control – "I wasn't going to have a jacket 
with tigers and ladies in saris" – and refused suggested changes to the text 
from Sonny Mehta, the distinguished nabob of New York publishing (to be fair, 
she said, he later admitted that he'd been wrong). It was confident – and wise, 
too – to say she felt no obligation to write another novel. The work of 
producing the first one, she said this week, had been like four years in jail. 
"I didn't want to be like some factory producing novels, and I don't want to 
live my life as a project – in some ways I want to do as little as possible. I 
didn't mean to write my other books [her essay anthologies] either. There's 
so much noise in the world, so why add to it? In my case, I only write when I 
can't not."

But what small demonstrations of her will these attitudes towards writing and 
publishing have turned out to be. Roy confronts her government on a wide range 
of issues. Last year there were calls for her to be charged with sedition after 
she was reported, not quite accurately, as calling for an independent Kashmir. 
By bitterly opposing Hindu nationalism in its violent as well as respectable 
forms – she would contest the difference – she has prompted a hatred that puts 
her in physical danger. Wherever this boldness has come from, it isn't the 
Indian ideal of the happy and extended family. Her mother ran away from a 
violent father in Kerala and married the first eligible man she met in Kolkata, 
a young assistant manager on a tea estate who was already victim to tea estate 
manager's occupational disease, which is alcoholism. They separated after three 
years, when Arundhati had still to reach two, and she and her mother and 
brother moved back to Kerala, where her mother ran (and still runs) a private 
co-ed school. In her daughter's word, a "character": she would lie in a zinc 
tub in her courtyard while one secretary clipped her toenails and the other 
took down her dictation for a letter of complaint to the local municipality. 
She now thinks of her mother as "one of the most extraordinary people I know". 
But the affection is retrospective. At the time she couldn't wait to get away – 
"I'd had enough of this family business" – and left home for Delhi aged 17. She 
had no contact with either her mother or brother for several years, until one 
day her brother read about her appearance in a film and managed to get in 
touch. A surprise that contained a greater surprise: he was in seedy hotel near 
the railway station and she was to guess who he had with him – a man Arundhati 
had no memory of ever seeing, their father. Her brother had found him in 
Kolkata, either on the streets or in the nearest thing to them, a home for the 
dying and destitute run by Mother Teresa. And so a reunion was arranged. She 
went, and met a ruin of a man who was "totally vacuous and completely happy". 
After the shock of his battered physical appearance wore off she imagined "how 
much worse I would have felt if he was some golf-playing CEO. This was much 
better."

She laughed at the last sentence, ironising her instinct for fiction and the 
underdog. Later she said she'd learned "to love and enjoy my father for what he 
was, I feel sorry that I couldn't do more for him". Not many members of India's 
elite, which is what she is, have a parent who's plunged so dramatically into 
the social abyss. Ascribing political beliefs to personal histories is a 
notoriously suspect activity; remedies for cruelty and inequality can require 
no more than an alert morality. Roy attributes her own awakening to "living as 
the child of a divorced parent and a mythical father among the smug Syrian 
Christians of south India – and also from leaving home at 17 and living on my 
wits". But that encounter 25 years ago in a squalid hotel may also have 
informed her.

Roy herself has been married twice, the second time to the film-maker and 
environmentalist Pradip Krishen. They now live separately. She's begun work on 
a second novel, 18 years after she started her first. "I want to think about 
detail now and not about the full picture. After I finished The God of Small 
Things there was nothing I wanted to understand more than the way the big 
wheels are working. Now that I do, I want to deploy that knowledge in minute 
observation."

Some people in India feel that they've had far too much of Roy the campaigner 
and not enough of Roy the novelist, though she may have more political support 
than her critics suggest. Her view is that she has divided the urban middle 
class. "Opinion is more polarised than you might think, and this worries the 
state quite a lot. The poor [including the Maoists] can remain in their forests 
and their villages. There are 200,000 paramilitaries already there [in central 
India] and the army's coming soon – the government knows how to deal with these 
things militarily." Middle-class sympathy, on the other hand, isn't so easily 
treated. "It's making the state unsure of itself and therefore more vicious."

An old friend of mine who knows her put it this way. "She's a bit of a 
solipsist – she just can't imagine life without herself in it. There are many 
cleverer people, just as concerned with injustices, who have more rounded and 
considered views. But there's nobody else who's as critically engaged with the 
state as she is and so willing to take it on. So is she a good thing? Yes."
 