
The Delhi home of the prize-winning Indian novelist and human rights campaigner
Arundhati Roy <https://www.theguardian.com/books/arundhatiroy> was besieged by 
Hindu women today demanding that she quit the country because of her outspoken 
views on Kashmir.

Around 150 members of the Bharatiya Janata Party's women's organisation 
surrounded the house chanting slogans such as: "Take back your statement, else 
leave India". The BJP is fiercely opposed to Kashmiri independence.

Addressing a conference in last month (OCT), Roy had declared: "Kashmir has 
never been an integral part ofIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>. 
It is a historical fact." The author, whose story 'The God of Small Things' won 
the 1997 Booker Prize, has supported Kashmiri secession in the past as well as 
diverse environmental and social causes.

The Indian government was reported at one stage to be considering launching a 
prosecution for sedition against Roy and the Kashmiri separatist leader Syed 
Ali Shah Geelani over their remarks.

In an email circulated by the 48-year-old Roy to supporters yesterday, she 
said that BJP activists had forced their way into her garden. "A mob of about a 
hundred people arrived at my house at 11 in the [Sunday] morning. They broke 
through the gate and vandalised property. They shouted slogans against me, and 
threatened to teach me a lesson."

Their arrival, she said, had been heralded by the appearance of TV outside 
broadcast (OB) vans anticipating the demonstration. "After they left," she 
explained, "the police advised us to let them know if in future we saw any OB 
vans hanging around the neighborhood because they said that was an indication 
that a mob was on its way.

"What is the nature of the agreement between these sections of the media and 
mobs and criminals in search of spectacle? Does the media which positions 
itself at the 'scene' in advance have a guarantee that the attacks and 
demonstrations will be non-violent? What happens if there is criminal trespass 
(as there was) or even something worse? Does the media then become accessory to 
the crime?"

Roy called on the Indian media to act more responsibly. "The government has 
indicated that it does not intend to go ahead with the charges of sedition 
against me ... So the task of punishing me for my views seems to have been 
taken on by right-wing storm troopers ... But why are sections of the 
mainstream media doing the same? Is a writer with unpopular views more 
dangerous than a suspect in a bomb blast?"
 