
Ministers called for a "revival of the art of deep thought" today as it was 
confirmed that a shake-up ofA-levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels> would lead to a reintroduction 
of traditional exams taken after two years of study.

The education secretary, Michael Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove> said he wanted to see 
A-levels become more academically rigorous and to scrap AS-levels. Universities 
fear that the current "bite-sized" system in which courses are broken up into 
units with their own exams fails to prepare students for the demands of a 
degree.

Gove will invite universities to design new A-levels, modelled on the 
Cambridge Pre-U, which is taken instead of A-levels by pupils at some state and 
private schools.

He said: "We will see fewer modules and more exams at the end of two years of 
sixth form and, as a result, a revival of the art of deep thought."

A spokesman for the department for education said the reforms would be 
introduced over the next three to five years.

The coalition government underlined its desire for more traditional teaching 
last week when Nick Gibb, the schools minister, expressed concern that 
schoolchildren lacked basic facts, such as who Miss Havisham is or who was in 
command at the battle of Waterloo.

Gibb told a conference: "The great figures of literature that still populate 
the conversations of all those who regard themselves as well-educated should be 
known to all.

"Yet to more and more people, Miss Havisham is a stranger – and even the most 
basic history and geography a mystery."

But Chris Keates, general secretary of the teaching union the NASUWT, warned 
that phasing out modular learning risked narrowing participation.

She said: "Too many in the past thought A-levels are not for me, but when they 
saw them broken down to modules, saw the breadth of them, it opens up a whole 
breadth of experience for students.

"This is another example of the government building an education system fit 
for the Cold War, not the 20th century.

"The question should not be, do they know who Miss Havisham is – but can they 
find out? Most can find information at the touch of a button."
 