
AS-levels <https://www.theguardian.com/education/aslevels> could be scrapped 
under reforms of the exams system that are also set to limit the number of 
re-sits students can take.

The move, outlined in proposals published by Ofqual, would mean a return to 
traditional two-yearA-levels <https://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels>, 
with exams at the end of the course.

Ofqual said the proposal, one of three suggestions for the future of 
AS-levels, had been put forward amid concerns from some quarters that the 
qualification has meant students focusing on exams at the expense of other 
interests such as sport and drama.

Currently, students sit AS-levels, which are qualifications in their own 
right, after one year of study, and can then decide whether to go on and study 
the second year to gain a full A-level.

The chief regulator, Glenys Stacey, insisted Ofqual was "neutral" on the 
future of AS-levels.

The proposals also contain plans to limit re-sits so a student can only 
re-take a paper once.

Research has shown that students "do not always treat exams seriously if they 
know they have the opportunity to re-sit", Ofqual said.

The current modular system, in which AS and A-levels are split into two 
modules each, is also set to be axed.

Ofqual is proposing that in future A-levels are no longer divided in this way 
as it makes it difficult for students to make connections between topics.

As expected, the exams regulator is also proposing that the January exam 
session be scrapped, so students can only take papers during the summer.

Ofqual's proposals for the future of A-levels in England, Wales and Northern 
Ireland are contained in a consultation document published on Tuesday.

Stacey said: "A qualification as important as the A-level needs to be kept 
under regular review to make sure that it continues to meet the needs of its 
users. Our research shows where users think that A-levels could be improved.

"The consultation also takes into account the government's wish that higher 
education becomes more involved in A-level development. We know that people 
have different views on whether AS-levels should continue. We are neutral on 
this issue, and the consultation outlines a range of options on which we would 
welcome feedback."

The other options for the AS-level are to make it a standalone one-year 
qualification with results that do not contribute to the A-level or to keep the 
current system, but make the proposed cuts to re-sits and January exams.

There are different views about whether the current AS and A-level system 
should be kept, Ofqual said.

"We know that some stakeholders from higher education and teaching do support 
the AS qualification being kept," the document says.

"They believe that it increases the breadth of the curriculum, supports 
transition from study at Key Stage 4 and keeps open the further study options 
for students.

"We also know that some stakeholders from these same groups do not support the 
AS qualification being kept.

"They believe that the AS qualification has a negative impact on teaching 
time, limits synoptic learning and results in students focusing on examinations 
at the expense of the pursuit of wider interests such as sport, drama and 
volunteering."

The document also questions whether A-levels should be graded in a different 
way in the future.

At the moment, the exams are graded from A*-E.

"It may also be appropriate for new A-levels to be identified by a different 
grading system to prevent a two-tier system during the period of reform," it 
says.

There have been suggestions from some quarters that students could be given a 
mark alongside their grade to help universities differentiate between 
candidates.

Last month, Ofqual said GCSE results could face a major overhaul, resulting in 
a cut in the number of grades available.

In its corporate plan, the exams regulator indicated that it was time to look 
at whether GCSE grades should still range from A*-G.

Tuesday's document also sets out plans to give universities more control over 
A-levels.

It says that in future exam boards will have to show that for each A-level 
qualification it has the support of at least 20 UK universities, including 12 
that are respected in the field or considered to be leading research 
institutions.

The new A-levels are all expected to be in place by 2018.

Before publication of the document, the Russell Group, which represents top 
universities including Oxford and Cambridge, said a move to cut A-level re-sits 
would be a "step in the right direction".

But it also indicated that an attempt to scrap AS-levels completely could be a 
step too far, as the qualifications are useful to universities.

Dr Wendy Piatt, director general of the Russell Group, said: "While A-levels 
are broadly fit for purpose, we do have several concerns. With the current 
modular system, students too often quickly forget the 'bite-sized chunks' of 
knowledge they have learned.

"This makes it harder for them to have an overall grasp of that subject, to 
synthesise information and to become independent learners. This consultation's 
proposals on ending the modular system and January exams are welcome.

"The proposed reduction in the number of re-sits that students are allowed to 
do would be a step in the right direction.

"We think it's fair that people are given a second chance if they have good 
reasons for under-performing in an exam, but more recently students have been 
allowed to do re-sits too frequently.

"Our universities are concerned that many of the students who don't get the 
grades first or second time around don't go on to do as well in their chosen 
degree course.

"AS-levels are useful to universities – as indicators of post-GCSE progress – 
and to students seeking to develop a broader range of knowledge."
 