
An advert for a vitamin supplement designed for women trying to conceive has 
been banned after the regulator ruled there was no proof that the product could 
increase the likelihood of pregnancy.


The national press ad for Pregnacare Conception showed an image of a sperm 
entering an egg and said: “For women who are trying for a baby zinc contributes 
to normal fertility and reproduction plus 20 nutrients including folic acid, 
vitamins B12, and D.”


Two readers, who believed the ad implied that the product would help women 
conceive, complained that the claims were not authorised on theEU register of 
nutrition and health claims <http://ec.europa.eu/nuhclaims/>. 

 Vitabiotics’ Pregnacare Conception advert. Photograph: PR 
Vitabiotics, which owns the brand, said the ad was intended to show the 
product was suitable for women who were trying to conceive but acknowledged 
that there was no authorised claim on the EU register that a particular food 
helped a woman to conceive.


It said the product name was not a claim in itself because it indicated when 
the product should be used – at around the time of conception.

They believed the average consumer targeted by the ad – women who were 
planning conception – would interpret the name in that way and not more widely.

The Advertising Standards Authority <https://www.theguardian.com/media/asa> 
(ASA) said only health claims listed as authorised on the EU register were 
permitted in marketing food, including supplements.

It said the emphasis on the words “trying for a baby” implied that the 
supplement had a health benefit over and above contributing to normal fertility 
and reproduction.


It said: “We considered that those aspects of the ad particularly, in 
combination with the product name and images of the sperm and egg and the 
smiling couple, resulted in an overall impression that the supplement could 
assist or increase the likelihood of conceiving, providing a ‘boost’ in 
fertility and reproduction to above-normal levels and thus playing a 
significant role in making any woman who took the product more likely to become 
pregnant.

“Because there were no authorised health claims that the product, or any of 
its constituent substances, could assist or increase the likelihood of 
conception, we concluded the ad was in breach of the code.”

It ruled that the ad must not appear again in its current form, adding: “We 
told Vitabiotics Ltd to ensure their ads did not include stated or implied 
unauthorised health claims in future.”
 