
Ascot <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ascot> has dropped the idea of 
installing rain covers at the track in favour of the possibility of running 
this year’s Qipco Champion Stakes on a newly configured inner course.

Heavy ground at Ascot takes more big names out of Champions Day
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/13/heavy-ground-ascot-champions-day>
Running rails will be put in place to create a track in the hope that the race 
will take place on better ground as it will not have been watered through the 
summer. The planned solution would also lessen the significance of the draw for 
the 10-furlong Group One event.

“We have undertaken extensive research in an effort to ensure we are running 
British Champions Day on the best possible ground available,” said the Ascot 
clerk of the course Chris Stickels on Thursday.

“Last year the existing outer Flat course was good to soft, soft in places. We 
also walked the area we are now thinking of using for the Champion Stakes and 
it was good, good to firm in places. Subsequent readings suggest we will see 
something similar.”

Champions Day was so successful that talk of changing its date is over
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/19/champions-day-success> 
Nick Smith, director of racing and communications at Ascot, added: “As is 
widely known, Ascot, Qipco and British Champions Series have looked into the 
possibility of using rain covers, and indeed built a section of polytunnel in 
Poland.

“We have concluded that these are not viable given that they would take a 
significant amount of time to erect and take down and any rain during the 
latter process would likely produce inconsistencies of going and damage to the 
track.

“We would not be protected against rain during and after the removal of the 
covers. By way of example, on the Friday prior to the 2015 King George VI and 
Queen Elizabeth Stakes, the ground was good to firm. However, following 35 mm 
of rain overnight, the race went off on soft. There are also potential drainage 
and waterlogging issues.”

Ascot’s ill-timed Champions Day is deflated by Australia’s retirement
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/oct/12/ascot-champions-day-shadow-australia-retirement>
Initial entries for the Champion Stakes close on August 2 and Ascot will be in 
a position to either state an intention to run the race on the inner course, or 
confirm a decision will be made closer to the race.

David Redvers, representing Qipco, said: “From the outset, Qipco has worked 
closely with both Ascot and British Champions Series to realise its ambitions 
for British Champions Day.

“With £4.2m in prize money on offer, we are always looking to innovate and 
improve the day and we believe that the inner Flat course option has the 
potential to further improve the quality of the Qipco Champion Stakes.”

Leading rider Ryan Moore believes the idea seems a “sensible” option. He 
added: “The Champion Stakes is such an important race and the proposed changes 
seem like a sensible and viable option of ensuring the race is run on the best 
possible ground available.”

The course announced that it is possible the British Champions Fillies and 
Mares Stakes and British Champions Long Distance Cup could also transfer to the 
inner course in the future, but slight distance changes would be required to 
produce ideal positions for their starts.

Those changes would not be allowed this year, however. Such alterations would 
need European Pattern Committee approval, which rules out the possibility of 
any changes to those races before 2017 at the earliest.
 