
I ordered 12 bottles of my favourite wine for home delivery from Asda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/asda> – on offer at a good price, which 
worked out at £62 (12 bottles at £5 and £2 delivery charge). It was scheduled 
to be delivered on a Saturday between 7pm and 9pm and I received an email 
reminder.

By 10pm there had been no delivery, so I phoned the helpline only to be told 
the order had (inexplicably) been cancelled. I was asked if I would like to 
reorder and take delivery on Sunday so I agreed, only to find that both the 
delivery charge and the wine had increased in price.

I cancelled and rang the next day having checked the terms and conditions, and 
asked that the original terms be honoured, but gave up after being put on hold. 
In the meantime I had a call from the fraud division of my credit card company 
to say my card had been compromised. Asda had taken the money for the wine from 
my card.

I eventually spoke to someone else at Asda who said the money would be in a 
holding bank and refunded in about a week. I explained that as my card was now 
blocked it would not be possible to put the money back on the card.

I was still not offered a reorder of the wine and I have heard nothing since. 
BC, Teignmouth, Devon

This became far more complicated than it needed to be once your card became 
blocked, which meant it was not possible to easily make the refund.

After our intervention, Asda’s customer service team got in touch with you to 
try to resolve the matter and to apologise for any inconvenience – and we 
gather all has now been sorted.

An Asda spokesperson said: “We’re disappointed that we didn’t meet our usual 
high standards. We have been in contact with BC to resolve the matter and have 
apologised and offered a gesture of goodwill to go some way towards making up 
for the inconvenience caused.”

We are glad this has been resolved to your satisfaction but we still don’t 
understand why your order was cancelled in the first place, or why Asda could 
not have reinstated the original order at the same price as a gesture of 
goodwill.

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at 
consumer.champions@theguardian.com <mailto:consumer.champions@theguardian.com> 
or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
 