
A look of mild concern crosses Tim Wheeler's face. Up until now, he and his 
fellow members ofAsh <https://www.theguardian.com/music/ash> have been a 
positive fountain of ebullience about finding themselves seated in the cramped 
backstage area of Loughborough University Students Union: a squat, brick 
building that lies not far from the Bastard Gates, an architectural feature 
christened in memory of the university's improbably-named former governor 
William Bastard. With all due respect to the august academic institution Mr 
Bastard did so much to promote, with its internationally recognised master's 
programme in renewable energy and its glittering list of alumni that includes 
Sebastian Coe and Monty Panesar, English cricket's "Sikh of Tweak", it seems an 
unlikely place for a band who've sold 8m albums to fetch up.

Nevertheless, Wheeler, bassist Mark Hamilton and drummer Rick McMurray seem 
admirably unphased, chatting enthusiastically about "trying to turn everything 
on its head" and how performing in small venues allows them to recapture the 
spirit of the band's early days, when they were teenagers, and even a visit to 
Loughborough carried a frission of excitement, requiring, as all their gigs in 
those days did, special dispensation from the headmaster of their school in 
Downpatrick. "Those were the most exciting times to be in the band," reflects 
Wheeler happily. "We released a string of singles – Kung Fu, Girl From Mars, 
Angel Interceptor, Goldfinger – and with each one we progressed, each one 
brought out a new facet of the band. We were at school, we didn't have time to 
record an album, you just thought about singles and doing gigs, so it's good to 
step back into that kind of mentality."

But now, it's nearly time for dinner, and a less thrilling memory is on 
Wheeler's mind. "The last time we ate here, we had the worst meal ever," he 
winces. "We watched the chef walk out midway through preparing our meal. This 
student guy took over. He did his best, but you could see he didn't have a clue 
what he was doing." His voice trails off, and his apparently eternally boyish 
features temporarily cloud with the expression of a man reflecting on how far 
away he currently is from the world of headlining festival slots and awards 
ceremonies – and indeed of lavish catering – he once inhabited.

He brightens. This is, he concedes, an exciting, if strange, time for Ash. The 
members are currently geographically scattered: McMurray lives in Scotland, 
while Hamilton and Wheeler are resident in Manhattan. "It's been good 
creatively, there are less distractions there," Wheeler says, a little oddly, 
as if he's just relocated to a village outside Tunbridge Wells. It is two years 
since they parted company with their major record label and announced that they 
weren't going to make any more albums, the better to embrace the digital 
future: "The way people listen to music has changed, and with the advent of the 
download, the emphasis has reverted from albums to single tracks."

This was not, says McMurray, the kind of blue-sky thinking that would have 
found much favour with a major record label: "Major labels just hear the words 
singles and no albums and freak out, because their thinking is that singles 
lose money and albums don't." Nor, he notes, was it met with untrammelled 
delight from Ash's fanbase, who took it as a coded announcement that the end 
was nigh, following the disappointing performance of their last album, Twilight 
of the Innocents.

"I think initially when we said we weren't going to do albums any more, people 
were a bit concerned. Their initial concern was that we were going to split up. 
But we made it clear to them that we were going to continue, we were just going 
to find a new way of doing things. They've had time to get used to the idea, 
they're starting to get excited."

The "new way of doing things" currently encompasses a plan to release 26 new 
songs – one a fortnight – over the course of a year via a subscription service 
on their website: the original plan was to do a more manageable one a month, 
says Hamilton, "but the Wedding Present already did that in the early 90s", so 
26 it is. To promote the venture, they are currently midway through an A-Z tour 
of Britain – 26 dates, every one of them corresponding to a letter of the 
alphabet (though there are a couple of cheats – X is for Exmouth, it seems). 
Tonight, it's Loughborough; tomorrow, it's Milton Keynes' unpromisingly named 
The Pitz.

The tour has taken them to the kind of places rock musicians usually fear to 
tread: Aldershot, East Grange – and Hastings, where they performed in a tiny 
club called The Crypt, its layout apparently designed by someone keen to 
prevent as many people as possible from actually seeing the band on stage. The 
last time Ash played there was their first live show on mainland Britain, back 
in 1994. Fifteen years on, the crowd that turned out was bafflingly diverse – 
aging rockers with ponytails to dressed-up teenage girls clutching alcopops, 
which, depending on your perspective, either tells you something about the 
impressive diversity of Ash's fanbase or speaks volumes about how little there 
is to do in Hastings of a Thursday evening.

Hamilton nods: "At some of the venues we've played, probably about 70% of the 
crowd have been locals, just there to see what's going on. They probably only 
knew a handful of songs, the singles, things like Burn Baby Burn." Improbably 
enough, they claim that the most vociferous crowd reaction thus far came in St 
Helier, Jersey, hardly renowned as a hotbed of licentious hedonism and 
rock'n'roll insurrection. "I think there was a touch of the Belfast syndrome as 
well, which we kind of grew up with," reasons McMurray. "Because hardly anyone 
ever went there in the 80s or early 90s, any band that did was completely blown 
away by the crowd, because they'd been so starved. It was like that in Jersey. 
We played there on Halloween and they were just going mad. No one ever 
goes there."

You suspect something similar might happen when the tour winds up in a local 
hall in Zennor, a village just north of Penzance that by all accounts makes St 
Helier look like New Orleans at the height of Mardi Gras. "We've seen a photo 
of it, and it's like a scout hut," says McMurray. "The village has like 200 
inhabitants or something like that. There's no mobile phone signal. You have to 
walk up the top of a hill to speak to anybody."

Playing a village hall in Cornwall in order to promote a string of 26 
fortnightly singles released via an internet subscription service is certainly 
an unusual way for a band to behave, although you get the impression that this 
is almost definitely the way things are going to go in the future: more bands 
setting up on their own, their interviews studded, as Ash's now are, with 
phrases like "added value" and "creative spending" and "subscription model", 
their time split between making music and devising new schemes to promote it. 
"I miss the money safety blanket of being on a major label," admits Wheeler, 
"because there's always the thought in the back of your head that if this 
fails, we're …"

"… fucked," says Hamilton flatly. "But it's not as if that money safety 
blanket even exists any more. We were lucky, we got signed when there was a lot 
of money about. Now, you hear about bands being signed for advances of 25 
grand. Are you taking the piss?"

"It's freeing," insists Wheeler. "We've been given more of a creative 
challenge. It's unleashed us. You can surprise people more along this path 
we're taking, and that's got to be better for everybody. You've got to keep 
people interested." In any case, he insists, Ash have always tried to think 
about more than the music, although it has to be said, not all of their past 
decisions displayed the kind of pragmatic financial acumen the current climate 
requires.

In the credit column, there was the 2001 tour in which they appeared at small 
venues chosen by fans voting online, a move credited with helping revitalise 
their career (despite selling 2m copies of their debut 1977, the band had found 
themselves "a grand away from going bankrupt" after the relative failure of its 
follow-up Nu-Clear Sounds). In the debit column, it possibly wasn't such a hot 
idea to spend £250,000 making a tour documentary called Teenage Wildlife – 
complete with Ewan McGregor as narrator – only to decide against releasing it. 
"Every time we came to finish it, we thought, bloody hell, we can't let our 
parents see this," says Hamilton. "We were just constantly drunk." Then there 
was their horror film, Slashed, which boasted a remarkable cast – "James 
Nesbitt, Dave Grohl, Chris Martin, Moby," recalls Wheeler – but never saw the 
light of day either. "We're still talking about using that footage," he says. 
"A lot of people will want to see Chris Martin getting axed to death. Actually, 
he was the best thing in it. He's a really, really good actor. He could be 
really strong in   a comedy."

They've got plenty of ideas for the future: "Now this is set up, we can keep 
it going forever," Wheeler says. You have to keep moving forward, he says, 
particularly when some of your most famous songs deal with distinctly teenage 
concerns that sound increasingly strange sung by a man in his 30s. He's not 
sure how much longer he can keep singing Oh Yeah, with its lyrics about 
divesting a girl of her school skirt and her summer blouse, "without sounding 
like a paedophile".

"We've never thought about how to get out of this. We've always thought about 
how we can continue doing this. This is another thing for us to survive, the 
way the music industry's changed."

"We don't know anything else," nods Hamilton. It's a pretty inarguable point, 
given that the three of them have been in Ash since they were 15. "We haven't 
done anything else, except picking potatoes a couple of times for pocket money."

Wheeler guffaws at the memory. "You see," he says, "it's this, or back to the 
spud field." And he heads out to brave the Loughborough Student Union backstage 
catering.
 