
Retro BBC1 police drama Ashes to Ashes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ashes-to-ashes> will return for a 
second series next year, the corporation confirmed today.

The 1980s drama, a sequel to Life on Mars, set in 1973, has regularly 
attracted audiences of about 6 million viewers after the series opener was seen 
by more than 7 million.

Ashes to Ashes stars Keeley Hawes as psychologist Alex Drake, who is 
transported back to London in 1981 where she encounters Philip Glenister's 
no-nonsense detective Gene Hunt.

The programme will return to BBC1 in 2009 after filming on the second series 
begins in the summer.

Details of the new series are under wraps until the season one finale screens 
tonight, so it is unclear if Alex Drake remains in 1981 or returns to the 
present day after her parents die in a car bomb.

"The 1980s have had a real revival over the past few months. Ashes to Ashes 
seems to have captured the imagination of the nation," said Simon 
Crawford-Collins, the executive producer and head of drama at Kudos Film and 
Television, the independent producer that makes the series in association with 
Monastic Productions.

"I'm sure viewers will be desperate to know who's back in the second series, 
but for now they'll just have to tune into the last episode of series one to 
find out."

Julie Gardner, the executive producer for the BBC and BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Wales head of drama, said she was 
delighted Ashes to Ashes would return.

"The series epitomises all that is great about BBC drama with its bold, 
confident storytelling and great characters. I can't wait for more blue 
eyeliner, [Audi] Quattro cars and 1980s music to burst on to our screens in 
2009."

· To contact the MediaGuardian newsdesk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857. For all other 
inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 7278 2332.

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 