
Move aside Melbourne - at last, Sydney has its own small bars culture. For 
years, Sydney's potential for hidey-hole drinking dens was stymied by 
prohibitive licensing laws – bars had to apply for a costly Au$15,000-a-year 
hotelier's licence, and were forced to serve alcohol with food. As a result, 
big bars ruled, and even the Lord Mayor, Clover Moore, agreed there was "a real 
call for smaller bars supporting a diverse, intimate and more civilised 
drinking culture". In July 2008, after a strong campaign led by Moore, a new 
"small bars" licence was introduced – drinking establishments could finally 
serve alcohol without food, and the licence fee was slashed to just $500. The 
result? A burgeoning boutique-bar scene. My guide around the new drinking dens 
was Myriam Thibault, a French expat living in Sydney and founder of
mytinerary.com.au <http://www.mytinerary.com.au>:

1. Small Bar, Central Business District
 Small bar, Sydney 
Opened in December 2008, this was one of the first small bars to open under 
the new licensing law, and is part ofSydney's Live Laneways project 
<http://www.onlysydney.com.au/sydney-nsw.php?id=22640>, designed to reinvent 
the unused alleys of the city in much the same way that Melbourne has done. 
It's set over three levels, all polished wood floors and wooden furniture; 
choose from the sandstone cellar, the cosy room upstairs, which has a few seats 
along the bar and a smattering of tables, or – if you're not too far gone to 
negotiate the precariously steep stairway at the back – nab one of the outdoor 
tables that spill onto the back laneway. Expect bottled beers from local 
breweries and good-value wines by the glass from Adelaide to Alsace. There's 
also live music every Thursday evening and bar food served until 10pm.

• 48 Erskine St; +61 2 9438 4559, smallbar.net.au <http://www.smallbar.net.au>

2. Bootleg Bar & Italian Food, Potts Point

It may only be a stroll from the city's famous red-light district, but this 
bolthole is about as homely and laid-back as a bar can get - tea lights 
flicker, soul music plays softly in the background, black and white photos of 
famous rockers frame the walls, and drinkers settle in to booths or bar tables. 
There's a good list of affordable wines, beer on tap and simple Italian dishes 
served until late – don't miss the special's chalkboard, with creations such as 
squid ink linguini with seared scallops and chilli.

• 175 Victoria Street, +61 2 9361 3884, bootlegbar.com.au 
<http://www.bootlegbar.com.au>

3. Pocket, Darlinghurst
 Pocket bar, Sydney 
Opened last summer, this drinking den is one of several new small bars to crop 
up in the Darlinghurst and Surry Hills area. It manages to be unpretentious and 
cool at the same time, with concrete floors and mix-match furniture, like 70s 
sofas, wooden benches, chesterfields and coffee tables. The walls are a mixture 
of exposed brick and Lichtenstein-esque murals, and the glass-topped bar 
doubles as a display case for various bits of art and knickknacks, as well as a 
bookcase with issues of National Geographic. Settle into a sofa and enjoy the 
funk play list over the sound system. They serve breakfast (eggs on sourdough) 
and dinner (chicken skewers, charcuterie plate etc), but their crepes – from 
savoury delights such as chirizo with spicy eggplant and feta, to calorific 
sweets like Nutella and strawberries – are to die for.

• 13 Burton Street, +61 2 9380 7002, pocketsydney.com.au 
<http://www.pocketsydney.com.au>

4. Shady Pines Saloon, Darlinghurst

Tucked away in a back alley parallel to Oxford Street with no sign (look out 
for the drab white curtains), this bar caused quite a stir when it opened 
earlier this year. Largely, because it's an unashamedly stylised country and 
western saloon bar straight out of a Spaghetti Western – small round wooden 
tables fill the darkened concrete room, overlooked by stuffed deer, carved 
wooden American Indians, "wanted" posters and a huge longhorn steer, which 
takes up almost an entire wall. Take a pew at the bar (three-quarters reclaimed 
wood from Arizona, quarter old basketball court) and ponder the drinks list: 
while a bourbon seems the drink of choice, the wine list is top-notch For a 
couple of weeks at a time, special bottles from a particular country – 
Portugal, Lebanon, Italy – are available by the glass.

• Shop 5, 256 Crown St, [no number] shadypinessaloon.com 
<http://www.shadypinessaloon.com>

5. Sticky Bar, Surry Hills

There's something exciting about a hidden bar where you have to call the owner 
to get in. In this case, the owner is an Italian called Michael Fantuz (there's 
a phone number at the entrance, which you call to be let in), and the tiny, 
dark bar is tucked away in a room above his quirky-cool Table For 20 restaurant 
- where diners sit at two large tables and dishes of Italian-influenced food, 
cooked by Michael's mother, get passed around. Like the restaurant, Sticky has 
an everyone's-welcome laid-back vibe; sink into one of the deco armchairs or 
leather Ottomans and ponder over the all-Italian wine list on the blackboards 
(the specialty is the "sticky" dessert wine), or the Italian-inspired cocktail 
list, while listening to cool tunes; live music is played during dinner, which 
is piped upstairs into the bar.

• 182 Campbell St, +61 4 1609 6916, tablefor20.blogspot.com 
<http://www.tablefor20.blogspot.com>

6. Fico, Surry Hills
 Fico Wine Bar, Sydney, Australia 
With no signage, no website and masked windows, Fico is a place you seek out 
rather than stumble across. Owned by the people behind Italian trattoria Il 
Baretto, just up the street, this is very much a chic, but cosy, wine bar, with 
around 30 varietals offered by the glass (there are also a couple of beers and 
other tipples on the menu). Small and intimate, with low hanging crown bulbs, 
deep-cushioned couches and calfskin ottomans, there are lots of little alcoves, 
perfect for a tête-à-tête. As would you expect from Italain restaurant owners, 
the food is stellar, too, with a selection of dishes such as Roman-style 
ravioli (stuffed with prosciutto and mozarella), and there's a free antipasto 
plate with the first glass of wine between 6-7pm.

• 544 Bourke St, Surry Hills; +61 2 9699 2133, 
ficowinebar.com.au/fico/frontdoor.html 
<http://www.ficowinebar.com.au/fico/frontdoor.html>

7. Name This Bar, Darlinghurst

This bar opened December 2009, and, having not yet decided on a name for it, 
the owners asked the public for their ideas. Along with suggestions for 
everything else - the bar erected an "ideas wall" on which patrons were invited 
to scrawl their thoughts. In the end Name This Bar – its working title – won 
out. The temporary "ideas wall" has been given permanent status, alongside 
other mismatched lounge-style decor. There's a decent wine list, happy hour 
with Au$5 bubbly cocktails, cider on tap and cheap eats - mezze, dips and 
dumplings - but it's the live art wars (two street artists in a "graffiti 
battle') and weekly jam sessions that many people come for.

• 197 Oxford Street, +61 2 9356 2123, namethisbar.com.au 
<http://www.namethisbar.com.au>

8. Mille Vini, Surry Hills

Housed in a small building that was a stonemason's workshop and bookmakers in 
previous lives, this buzzing wine bar-cum-restaurant retains an industrial feel 
with exposed sandstone walls and roof beams, mixed with sleek dark-wood 
furniture and hanging lamps. The name of the bar means "a thousand wines'", and 
there are, unsprisingly, 1,000 wines, as near as damn it, to choose from lining 
the floor-to-ceiling shelves and sourced from every corner of the globe. It 
gets busy, so arrive early and settle in for the night. A big glass cabinet 
showcases the ingredients that make up the spuntini (Italian tapas) – cured 
meats, zucchini flower, blocks of cheese and fat olives.

• 397 Crown St, Surry Hills, +61 2 9357 3366 [no website]

9. Delicado Foods, McMahons Point

On first impressions, you could mistake this place for being just another 
bottle-shop - a beautiful one at that, wood-clad with a huge wrought iron 
chandelier. Walk through the little doorway at the back, however, and you're in 
the most charming restaurant-cum-deli-cum-wine bar in Sydney. This is a Spanish 
place through and through, with Flamenco black and red walls, a deli counter 
stocked with Spanish meats and cheeses, a menu heavy with seafood, chorizo and 
paella, and a stunning range of Spanish wines, unmatched in Sydney. Buy wine 
for your meal from the bottle shop, or come between 4pm and 6pm for wine 
tastings (Au$35, or Au$45 with cheese).

* 134 Blues Point Rd, +61 2 9955 9399; delicadofoods.com.au 
<http://www.delicadofoods.com.au>

10. Fix St James, St James
 Fix wine bar, Sydney 
Originally a restaurant, Fix St James reinvented itself into a wine 
bar-cum-Italian bistro under the new small bar licence. And it works. The wine 
is definitely a highlight, "dedicated to hands-on-makers, small growers, 
crazies and fanatics", with little-known varieties and producers from Australia 
and beyond. Come just for a drink - during the week, its banquettes buzz with 
post-office Sydneysiders doing just that – or a meal, too. Owner and sommelier 
Stuart Knox knows his plonk, and will happily suggest wines to match your food. 
Go for the "quick fix" menu of five dishes, which are chosen by the chef, a 
steal at Au$44.

* 111 Elizabeth Street, + 2 9232 2767; fixstjames.com.au 
<http://www.fixstjames.com.au>

mytinerary.com.au <http://www.mytinerary.com.au> offers a half-day tailor-made 
wine tour from Au$99 per person (0061 1300 951 138, ). Virgin Atlantic (08448 
747747,virginatlantic.com <http://www.virginatlantic.com>) flies from London 
Heathrow to Sydney from £848 return. For more details visitaustralia.com 
<http://www.australia.com>

Getting there: Qantas (qantas.com 
<http://www.qantas.com.au/travel/airlines/home/gb/en>) from London Heathrow to 
Sydney from £749pp. Valid for departures 16 April-20 June 2011. Offer ends 31 
January 2011.
Further information Tourism Australia, australia.com  
<http://www.australia.com>
 