
It wasn't as basic as the rough-hewn homesteads 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slab_Hut> of the earliest Australian pioneers, 
but there was a plainness about it that harked back to simpler times.

Tucked out of sight down an unmade track near Flinders on the Mornington 
Peninsula, the old single-storey farmhouse was nothing fancy, but it had a 
whiff of history about it. Echoes of family life reverberated in the wooden 
floors of the box-like rooms. And it was easy to imagine it being furnished 
with home-made curtains, tables and chairs, its pantry stocked with preserves 
made from the fruit of the surrounding orchards. Outside was a different matter 
- its wraparound porch commanded millionaire views over rolling green acres 
that eventually ran out to the sea.

We weren't being shown around a site of cultural significance. There wasn't a 
plaque from the Australian National Trust affixed to an outside wall. And the 
person leading the group wasn't from the local historical society. He was an 
auctioneer, and he was taking prospective buyers (and me) around the property 
and explaining the potential of the site for redevelopment. Imagine tearing 
this down, he was saying, and building the house of your dreams on this plot.

This was in keeping with what's been happening on the Mornington Peninsula for 
the past 30 years. Just an hour outside metropolitan Melbourne, Mornington's 
beaches and farms have been providing simple sunny pleasure for generations of 
city dwellers since the 1870s, when paddle steamers first ran down the coast to 
Portsea. Around 100,000 people a year head down to Mornington in the height of 
summer. More recently, though, the suburban sprawl has been stretching further 
into these gentle green hills. But the biggest interlopers on the rural 
landscape have, without doubt, been the vineyards and their ever-expanding 
estates - the ''cellar doors'' (shops) and the accompanying restaurants.

The local tourist board has been happy to embrace this change. "If you haven't 
visited us for some time, you'll be very pleasantly surprised at how the 
Peninsula has redefined the traditional beach holiday. There's a new style and 
sophistication here... Our landscapes now have a delightfully Mediterranean 
air, with silvery olive groves, [and] hills laced with vineyards," says its 
brochure.

None of which is entirely new, of course - there has been development along 
the Peninsula since the end of the goldrush of 1850 when the summer cottages 
and thelimestone mansions of the rich 
<http://www.peninsuladiscovery.com.au/index.php/features> started to spring up 
in the honeypot resorts of Sorrento and Portsea.

That's not to say there aren't still small pleasures to be had today and quiet 
corners to explore - driving along country roads in the summer sunshine and 
picking up local produce along the way, before heading to a beach to enjoy a 
picnic.

The vineyards
 Mornington Peninsula vineyards 
Elgee Park <http://elgeeparkwines.street-directory.com.au/>, established by 
Baillieu Myer in Merricks in 1972, is generally accepted as being the oldest 
modern-day vineyard on the Mornington Peninsula. In the almost 40 years since 
its establishment, another 170 vineyards (with 50 cellar doors) have sprung up 
in the area. The Peninsula has a maritime climate that particularly suits pinot 
noir and chardonnay grapes - which have fuelled the expansion. It is "
Australia's little bit of Burgundy 
<http://www.jancisrobinson.com/articles/a201010027.html>", according to the 
English wine critic Jancis Robinson. But it is its proximity to Melbourne that 
has really boosted the ascendancy of the vine in these parts, and especially 
the proliferation of boutique wineries with their add-on eateries catering to 
urban escapees' tastes. According to Lindsay McCall, owner of theParinga Estate 
<http://www.paringaestate.com.au>, in Red Hill South, where once people used to 
visit six wineries on a day tour, they now only visit one or two because they 
are coming down to eat in the vineyards' restaurants as much as taste the wine 
<http://www.gourmettraveller.com.au/victorias-mornington-peninsula.htm>. 

So, when you arrive at a vineyard such as T'Gallant in Main Ridge – described 
by Melbourne newspaper The Age as ''funky and idiosyncratic'', and by their own 
website as ''Tuscany on the Mornington Peninsula'' - you can expect to find a 
laid-back brunchtime crowd enjoying pizzas in the rustic trattoria (actually a 
shed) along with a glass of their pinot noir, or their hallmark pinot grigio. 
At the other end of the scale is the Montalto vineyard and olive estate, 
inspired by owners John and Wendy Mitchell's holidays in the south of France, 
''where [they] became smitten with the vineyards rolling down the hills to the 
Mediterranean''. Here, an ultra modern timber and glass fine-dining restaurant 
serving ''estate to the plate'' produce looks out over Pennon Hill vineyards 
rolling down into the buxom cleft of a valley. There are modern sculptures 
dotted around the grounds - the vineyard also runs an annual Au$20,000 
(£13,000) sculpture prize - and visitors can enjoy these artistic impressions 
on the landscape as they meander along a wetlands walk, which also take in the 
kitchen gardens, vines and olives. This place is now a day trip in itself 
rather than just an opportunity to stock up on wine.

• T'Gallant, Mornington-Flinders Road, Main Ridge, + 3 5989 6577, 
tgallant.com.au <http://www.tgallant.com.au>
• Montalto Vineyard, 33 Shoreham Road, Red Hill South, +3 5989 8412, 
montalto.com.au <http://www.montalto.com.au>
• For a list of wineries open to the public, visit visitmorningtonpeninsula.org
 <http://http://www.visitmorningtonpeninsula.org/pdf/Guide-Dining-Tasting.pdf>

Mornington Peninsula national park

After an old-school barbecue of surf and turf on Flinders Ocean Beach - with 
food bought at the upscale town's general store and chardonnay from the 
aptly-namedTen Minutes By Tractor <http://www.tenminutesbytractor.com.au> 
vineyard - we drove back across the elevated section of the unspoilt 
hinterland. The scenery here was more reminiscent of bucolic Herefordshire than 
the Med, a land of round hay bales, strawberry farms and apple and cherry 
orchards. Then we skirted the Mornington Peninsula national park, the largest 
remaining slice of indigenous bush on the Peninsula with its eucalyptus forest 
and gum trees. Dotted along the verge were signs warning of free-ranging 
kangaroos, and we were not disappointed, spotting several bounding across the 
road from Flinders to Main Ridge.

Point Nepean national park
 Photograph: Andrew Harris/DK Limited/Corbis 
It was from a wild beach on this rugged headland that the 17th prime minister 
of Australia, and Mornington regular, Harold Holt disappeared after going for a 
swim off Cheviot Beach in December 1967. Despite one of Australia's largest 
search and rescue operations, his body was never recovered. Google searches, on 
the other hand, yield wild theories ranging from his suicide to his abduction 
by a Chinese submarine. But the chances are that a strong riptide in these 
sometimes treacherous waters swept him out to sea, and he drowned. A gentler 
and safer way to explore the area is on land via a dinky little transporter 
truck, which takes you from the visitor centre to Fort Nepean, where you can 
take in the late 19th-century tunnels and fortifications - known as Victoria's 
Gibraltar - protecting the narrow entrance to Port Phillip. However, it's more 
fun to find a quiet spot and enjoy the unspoilt coastal scenery and the 
panoramic views of Bass Strait, the Rip and Port Phillip Bay over a lazy picnic 
after stocking up at one of the groceries and delis in nearby Sorrento.

• Point Nepean Information Centre, +3 5984 1586, parkweb.vic.gov.au 
<http://www.parkweb.vic.gov.au/1park_display.cfm?park=281>. Family ticket on 
the transporter Au$22.50 (£14.80)

Swimming with dolphins and seals

For a somewhat safer dip than Mr Holt's - and for a bit of eco therapy - head 
to Sorrento pier, where you can hop on board a small fishing boat and go 
swimming with the 100 or so resident bottlenose dolphins in Port Phillip Bay. 
Polperro Dolphin Swims is a family-run business that has been operating here 
for more than 22 years and abides by good environmental practice by taking out 
small groups with a no-touch policy. They ferry you into the middle of the bay, 
where you are first introduced to a colony of fur seals that have set up home 
on a navigation platform. At this point, you enter the - surprisingly cold - 
water in wet suits, snorkels and masks and hold on to a line while the boat 
trawls you around the platform. Within seconds these curious and playful 
creatures will swim straight up to you, almost pressing their noses against 
your mask to check you out, before peeling away to perform their sleek and 
graceful underwater ballet as they roll and dive around you. You are not 
guaranteed to see the bottlenose dolphins and, unluckily, we didn't, though it 
is still an enjoyable boat excursion in itself, taking in the sweep of the bay 
and all the mansions dotting the coast. On an environmental note, however, 
there is a fear that therecent dredging to deepen shipping channels for 
container ships in Port Phillip Bay is threatening the dolphins' ecosystem 
<http://www.theage.com.au/national/businesses-fear-nosedive-as-dredging-ramped-up-20090117-7jm5.html>
.

• Polperro Dolphin Swims, +3 5988 8437, polperro.com.au 
<http://www.polperro.com.au>. Sorrento Pier daily at 8.30am and 1pm. (weather 
permitting), and other times by arrangement. Swimming costs AuS$125 (£82) for a 
3-4 hour trip

Getting there

Where to stay: Verve Beachside (vervebeachside.com.au 
<http://www.vervebeachside.com.au>) has contemporary beach houses to rent on 
the Mornington Peninsula from $1,400 (£922) a week.
Flights: Qantas (qantas.com 
<http://www.qantas.com.au/travel/airlines/home/gb/en>) flies London Heathrow to 
Melbourne from £736pp. Valid for departures between 16 April-20 June 2011. 
Offer ends 31 January 2011.
More information: visitmorningtonpeninsula.org, Tourism Australia, 
australia.com <http://www.australia.com>
 