
Ashley Giles <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ashley-giles> has flown back 
from Australia to attend a meeting at which a decision may well be taken to end 
Kevin Pietersen's international career, despite the possibility of Pietersen's 
omission undermining Giles's chances of being appointed the England team 
director.

Giles has been called to Lord's for discussions with Alastair Cook, who 
returned to England last week, and Paul Downton, the managing director of 
England cricket, that are thought to hold the key to Pietersen's future.

The superficially attractive possibility of Pietersen being considered only 
for one-day cricket, allowing him to play in Giles's squad for the World 
Twenty20 next month but leaving England to rebuild a Test team without him, is 
thought to have been ruled out.

It is either all forms of cricket or nothing and, after the England and Wales 
Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board confirmed it had 
taken the unusual step of arranging a meeting specifically to discuss 
Pietersen's future, the danger that he has played his last game for his adopted 
country must be seen as real.

England flopped in the last World T20 tournament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/world-twenty20-2012>, in Sri Lanka in the 
autumn of 2012, without Pietersen, who had beendropped for the disloyalty he 
showed to his captain Andrew Strauss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/12/kevin-pietersen-out-england-south-africa>
 during the home series against South Africa that summer. The evidence in 
Australia, where Giles's team were beaten 4-1 in the 50-over series and then 
thrashed in each of the three T20 games, again suggested that England need 
Pietersen to have any chance in Bangladesh – a tournament which Giles has 
admitted could prove crucial in his bid to prove himself as the right man to 
succeed Andy Flower.

Giles has spoken several times since being appointed one-day coach of having a 
good relationship with Pietersen, with whom he was a team-mate in the 2005 
Ashes series, and he recently described him as a "million pound asset".

Cook has also been credited with playing a key role in Pietersen's 
reintegration since that World T20 tournament of 2012, so were both he and 
Giles to decide to cut him adrift it would confirm major problems behind the 
scenes in Australia.

Pietersen has not commented since returning home after the Ashes whitewash in 
early January but he is understood to have met Downton last week as part of the 
review into England's miserable tour of Australia by the former wicketkeeper, 
who only officially succeeded Hugh Morris at the ECB this week.

There was some good news for Giles on Monday as Gary Kirsten, the former South 
Africa opener and coach who would be the most obviously qualified successor to 
Flower,distanced himself from the job 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/03/gary-kirsten-england-andy-flower-ashley-giles>
.

Kirsten was questioned in India, where he is to take charge of the Delhi 
Daredevils – Pietersen's former franchise – in the Indian Premier League this 
spring. He was able to take that lucrative position after resigning as South 
Africa's coach last July, and said that one of the major reasons for stepping 
away from international cricket was being able to spend more time at home with 
his family.

"As far as I'm concerned, my sentiments have not changed," Kirsten told ESPN 
Cricinfo when asked about the England vacancy. "I suppose it is flattering that 
people are thinking about me."

A couple of the other overseas contenders who were immediately linked with the 
vacancy, Tom Moody and Mickey Arthur, have confirmed their interest, as has 
Nottinghamshire's Mick Newell.

Martyn Moxon and Angus Fraser, the former England players who hold director of 
cricket roles with Yorkshire and Middlesex respectively, are also expected to 
apply.
 