
David Moyes will make a renewed attempt to eradicate diving from Ashley 
Young's game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/nov/06/ashley-young-diving-manchester-united>
 after the latest controversy involving the Manchester United winger.

Young's reputation suffered another blow against Real Sociedad on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/nov/05/real-sociedad-manchester-united-champions-league>
 when he won a penalty with a theatrical tumble to a slight pull from the home 
midfielder Markel Bergara. Robin van Persie missed the spot-kick as United were 
held to a goalless draw in the Basque country but maintained their place at the 
top of Group A.

The 28-year-old was widely condemned for his actions in San Sebastián and the 
former United players Roy Keane and Ray Wilkins accused the England 
international of conning the referee, Nicola Rizzoli. Wilkins branded the dive 
"pathetic".

Moyes refused to condemn Young in public after the game, instead focusing on 
the referee's performance on a night when Marouane Fellaini was dismissed for 
two bookable offences. Privately, however, the United manager is expected again 
to warn Young about going to ground too easily and reiterate his opposition to 
diving among his players.

The former Aston Villa winger has been unwilling or unable to heed previous 
warnings about his conduct from United managers. Sir Alex Ferguson cautioned 
Young after diving controversies against Villa and Queens Park Rangers, and the 
former United manager claimed in his latest autobiography that the player had 
matured in that regard.

But Moyes was compelled to speak to Young after he dived against Crystal 
Palace earlier this season and has started him in only two matches since that 
game. The winger's international prospects have also suffered over the past 
year as he struggles to fulfil the initial promise of an £18m move to Old 
Trafford in 2011.

Moyes is unlikely to tolerate further breaches of his disciplinary code as he 
imposes himself at Old Trafford. The Scot has been a leading advocate of 
retrospective punishment for diving for a number of years and, while Everton 
manager last season, fined his captain, Phil Neville, a week's wages for 
feigning a foul during a Merseyside derby. Neville's dive was all the more 
embarrassing for Moyes as he had criticised Luis Suárez's theatrics on the eve 
of the derby and claimed players who "con their way to results" would drive 
supporters away from the game.

Speaking last October, prior to the introduction of goalline technology and a 
three-man panel to review incidents missed by match officials, Moyes said: "I'm 
of the view that retrospective viewing of diving should be more important than 
some of the technology they are talking about bringing in. I think it would 
make the referee's job an awful lot easier if that was there. If you do it and 
you get banned for it, it wouldn't take long before you cut it out. It wouldn't 
take much – four or five people on a panel, referees, players and managers. I 
think it could be easily done."

The United manager, meanwhile, is likely to have Michael Carrick, Jonny Evans 
and Rafael da Silva back from injury for Sunday's Premier League meeting with 
Arsenal. All three missed theReal Sociedad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realsociedad> game but are in contention 
to return against the league leaders, when Rio Ferdinand admits United must 
show the consistency required to maintain hope of retaining the title. Moyes's 
side are unbeaten in eight matches in all competitions and host Arsenal having 
won successive league games for the first time under their new manager.

Ferdinand said: "We have had a few bad results at Old Trafford this season 
already and we can't continue like that. We have put together a decent run of 
games. People say we have to win this weekend against Arsenal but it doesn't 
matter whether it is Cardiff or Swansea or whoever – we have to win.

"People will be thinking we could be 11 points behind or five points behind 
Arsenal but it doesn't matter to us. If we were 10 points clear we'd want to 
win this game at home. That is not going to change. I don't think we have shown 
ourselves this season on a consistent basis, not just in the big games. It is 
time to start putting our foot on the pedal now and motor on. We have to do 
that if we want to remain in contention to win the league."
 