
More than 400 works that make up the finest private collection of Chinese 
modern art that exists in the west have been left to Britain's oldest museum, 
it has been announced.

The Ashmolean in Oxford <http://www.ashmolean.org> on Friday revealed details 
of what the museum's director, Christopher Brown, called "an extraordinary 
gift".

The donor was Professor Michael Sullivan, a long-time friend of the Ashmolean, 
who died in September. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/oct/25/michael-sullivan> Not 
only was he the pre-eminent western authority on modern Chinese art, he had 
also built up an astonishing collection – often buying directly from the 
artists themselves – which filled the walls of his Oxford flat.

Behind the bequest is a touching love story. Sullivan, a conscientious 
objector during the second world war, initially went to China in 1940 to drive 
lorries for the Red Cross. There he fell in love, first with the country, its 
history and its art, and then with Wu Baohuan, who became his wife in 1943 and 
thereafter became known as Khoan Sullivan.

After the war, Sullivan founded the art museum at the University of Malaya in 
Singapore and became professor of oriental art at Stanford University in 
California.

With his wife able to open doors, the Sullivans began making lasting 
friendships with significant Chinese artists. They gave him work and he began 
to become serious about buying it, building up a remarkable collection over 70 
years.

Khoan died a decade ago but Sullivan continued to collect until near the end 
of his life.

Shelagh Vainker, the Ashmolean's curator of Chinese art, said that Sullivan 
was "tremendously revered in China" and that an exhibition in his honour was 
staged at the NationalArt <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Museum 
of China in Beijing in 2012. This included works from his collection and also 
photographs of the Sullivans in China.

Brown recalled receiving a box of books about 18 months ago that had been 
packed away from his childhood. He opened it to discover a long-forgotten 
paperback copy of a seminal book on Chinese art by Sullivan, first published in 
1959.

"I must have asked for it as a school prize and evidently I had read it – in 
showing it to Michael I didn't have to rough it up in any way."

The bequeathed works are still being valued but have been conservatively 
valued at more than £15m. They include paintings by artists such as Qi Baishi, 
Zhang Daqian and Xu Bing.

The Ashmolean already has the best collection of modern Chinese art of any 
museum in Europe, one that it began collecting in the 1950s.

In addition to the bequest, the Ashmolean announced a 2014 exhibitions 
programme that will include shows of work by Cézanne and William Blake, and one 
on that most enduring of subjects, Tutankhamun.

The summer show will be staged in what is the 75th anniversary year of 
Oxford's Griffith Institute, home of renowned Egyptological archives. It will 
shine a light on Howard Carter's discovery of the pharaoh's tomb in 1922, as 
well as exploring the mania for the subject in popular culture that followed.
 