
In the teeth of the recession, the Ashmolean museum in Oxford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/oxford> has succeeded in raising £7.83m in less 
than eight months, through lottery grants and more than a thousand donations 
from members of the public, to buy a major work by the 19th century French 
painter Edouard Manet which would otherwise have left the country.

The Portrait of Madame Claus, a study for one of his most famous paintings, Le 
Balcon, regarded as a key work in the development of Impressionist art, was 
sold last year for £28.5m, after being in a private collection in England since 
it was bought from the artist's studio in 1884. The comparative bargain price 
the museum paid represents the tax breaks for works of art going to national 
collections.

On Wednesday, two pale serious young women came face to face in Oxford: Fanny 
Claus, the subject of the arresting 1868 painting, and Mara Talbot, the 
11-year-old who, with her mother, gave the final £30 donation to the public 
appeal.

"Maybe if she was smiling I might like her more," Mara eventually concluded, 
after studying her intently, and dealing coolly with the media – the 
photographers were bewitched by her own choice of outfit for the day, complete 
with flowery hair band, which chimed uncannily well with the painting – "but I 
do like her very much".

Mara's mother, Vicky Hirsch, a freelance art teacher, had only seen 
photographs of the painting when she gave £30 to the appeal last week. "We live 
quite near and we come here often. It's so important for people to be able to 
see real things in museums for free. And it seems appropriate in this week when 
we're celebrating the achievements of individuals in the Olympics, that the 
little somebody like me can afford to give can make such a big difference."

Christopher Brown, director of the Ashmolean – one of the oldest public 
museums in the world and the most visited outside London, with a million 
visitors a year – only saw the painting himself for the first time in February, 
in the gallery of a London art dealer. It had just been sold to an overseas 
buyer for £28.5m, but the government had put a temporary export bar on it to 
allow a British museum the chance of matching the price. Brown was enchanted, 
and did some rapid sums in his head.

"I realised that both the National Gallery, and the National Gallery of 
Scotland, who would both have liked it very much, were tied up in fundraising 
for the Titians, and that because it carried an 80% tax bill for the owners, 
which would be waived if it came to a national collection, we could get it for 
a quarter of its value – and that we really might be in with a chance."

The Heritage Lottery Fund gave £5.9m, the Art Fund charity another £850,000, 
and the rest came from trusts, patrons, and more than 1,000 donations from 
individual members of the public. In gratitude, it will be sent on a national 
tour to regional museums next year.

The painter John Singer Sargent fell in love with the picture in 1884, bought 
it at the studio sale after Manet's death, and brought it to England. By then 
the pale young woman was dead, too: Claus, a brilliant musician, had married 
the artist Pierre Prins, but died of tuberculosis in 1877, aged just 31. The 
painting had remained with Sargent's descendants until the sale.

The Ashmolean is most famous for its archaeology collections, but has a 
marvellous art collection including outstanding works by Pissarro and other 
contemporaries of Manet, and early Van Goghs. However, of Manet himself, in 
common with most British collections, they have very little: a small landscape 
and two unfinished oils, and a watercolour version of his Le Déjeuner Sur 
L'Herbe, a work considered scandalous in its day.

Colin Harrison, senior curator of European art, has already been on to the 
Quai D'Orsay museum in Paris to discuss exhibiting his new treasure 
side-by-side with Manet's very different final version, in which Fanny has 
retreated into the background, her face a blur, losing the expression of a 
woman deep in some private contemplation that makes the earlier version so 
haunting.

"Another obvious exhibition would be Manet in England – asking why in fact 
there are so few Manets in England, a real puzzle," Harrison said.

Although the picture will go on a national tour next year, Brown cannot wait 
to have it home permanently.

"Our pictures are really very good, but I think when you see this work on the 
gallery walls it will sing in a way that few of the others can manage."
 