
The Ashmolean Museum <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/ashmolean-museum> 
has been accused of underplaying the risk to its visitors after hackers stole 
the personal details of nearly 8,000 of them.

An email sent to those affected by the Oxford museum said that an unknown 
hacker has broken into its website, stealing their "names, addresses, email 
addresses, telephone numbers and date and time of visit".

It apologised to the 7,757 people affected, but said that no financial details 
were among those taken. It insisted that there was, therefore, only a "small 
risk" and limited the possible repercussions to "some unwanted marketing 
communications, whether by email, post or telephone".

But, in doing so, it was accused of either "underplaying or [being] ignorant 
of the risks". Online security expert Graham Cluley said that the details could 
be used to target visitors in scams.

"It's easy to imagine how scammers could use the telephone contact details and 
information about when people have visited the museum to trick the unwary into 
believing that it is the museum contacting them. This would be a pretty 
convincing ruse, and could lead to innocent members of the public being stung 
for donations," he said.

He added: "In a similar vein, online criminals could spam the mailing list – 
using information about the identity and past visits of museumgoers – tricking 
computer users into believing that they have won a prize from the museum and 
leading them into opening a dangerous attachment or clicking on a malicious 
link designed to infect their PCs."

According to the museum's email, the breach has been reported to the 
Information Commissioner's Office. It said the data was provided when customers 
bought exhibition tickets online.

A spokesman for the Oxford University institution said: "A cyber-attack on the 
Ashmolean Museum's website was recently identified and quickly blocked.

"No financial information and no sensitive personal data were exposed in the 
attack.

"Museum staff are working with staff of the university's IT services to manage 
the response to the incident and are doing everything possible to ensure there 
are no further such attacks."

The email, which was sent out on Wednesday afternoon, read: "This type of 
attack is encountered and blocked on a daily basis. Unfortunately, however, 
this particular attack managed to get through our web defences. We resolved the 
problem as soon as we could after we had discovered it.

"We are strengthening our web protection to ensure that this type of incident 
does not happen again."

The Information Commissioner's Office did not respond to a request for comment.
 