
A dazzling collection of old master drawings, originally assembled by the 
Ashmolean museum in Oxford to compensate for some distinctly second rate 
paintings, is going on display to celebrate the 330th birthday of one of the 
oldest public museums in the world.

The exhibition includes a wall of drawings by Michelangelo, a 15th century 
sketch by Durer, which is the oldest known example of an artist recording his 
travels in watercolour, and two tiny gems byLeonardo da Vinci 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/davinci>.

The star is a staggering drawing of the Transfiguration, made within weeks, if 
not days of the death of Raphael, which the museum director, Christopher Brown, 
and the chief curator, Jon Whiteley, called "the greatest old master drawing in 
the world". The artist made subtle changes to his designs for the faces of a 
beautiful young and an elderly bearded apostle, but the changes were never made 
in the painting in the Vatican, becauseRaphael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/raphael> died of fever – and 
according to the gossipy art historian Vasari, of being worn out from too much 
sex – at the age of 37. The painting was finished by his pupils.

The drawings, including works by Titian, Rembrandt, Rubens, Turner, Ingres, 
Degas, right up to a 1973 drawing by David Hockney and a 1993 drawing by Antony 
Gormley, normally live in the quiet darkness of the print room where, although 
anyone can ask to see them, they are among the museum's least visited 
treasures. The exhibition was described as a once in a lifetime chance to see 
them all on the walls together, until mid August.

Whiteley said that when the Ashmolean moved into its present handsome building 
in 1846, the Bodleian library's painting collection was transferred into grand 
new galleries – and a problem instantly became apparent: "We had a spectacular 
building, and objects barely worthy of exhibiting".

The comparison with the magnificent painting collection of Oxford's great 
rival, Cambridge's Fitzwilliam, was particularly mortifying. The Ashmolean 
couldn't afford to buy comparable paintings – though it now has a fine 
collection – and so bought fabulous but comparatively cheap drawings, including 
what became among the greatestMichelangelo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/michelangelo> and Raphael drawing 
collections in the world.

The 71 on display are a fraction of the 27,000-strong and still growing 
collection, but are described by Brown as "a star-studded line up".

There's as much emotion and tragedy in the exhibition as in a Hollywood 
blockbuster: a little sketch by Rembrandt, in a few flicks of brown ink, is his 
beloved wife, Saskia, asleep in bed – or more probably, given the date, dying 
of plague.

It includes a record of a surprising friendship, between the rumbustious 
Edwardian artist who lived long into the 20th century, Augustus John, and T E 
Lawrence, Lawrence of Arabia, whose career as an archaeologist and Arabist was 
shaped by visits to the Ashmolean. They met at the Paris peace conference at 
the end of the first world war, and became firm if improbable friends. John 
drew Lawrence in uniform in 1935, when Lawrence had enlisted in the Royal Air 
Force under the assumed name John Hume Ross. Lawrence loved the drawing so much 
– "striking, but not John at his best", Whiteley judged sternly – that he 
announced it would be the frontispiece of his new book. It never happened: 
within a few weeks Lawrence was dead in a motorbike crash, still argued over as 
accident or suicide.

Master Drawings, Ashmolean Oxford, until 18 August.
 