
Final preparations are being made to take five-year-old Ashya King to the 
Czech Republic <https://www.theguardian.com/world/czech-republic> for cancer 
treatment he could not get in England, after a high court judge approved his 
parents' request to do so.

The ruling followed the arrest and subsequent release of Brett and Naghmeh 
King, who took Ashya from a hospital in Southampton toSpain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain> without doctors' permission in a bid 
to get him the care they believed he needed.

The Málaga hospital where he was being treated said Ashya was in a stable 
condition, and that a flight to Prague would not pose a problem to his health, 
the Associated Press reported on Saturday.

Southern Málaga's Children's and Maternity hospital said its medical directors 
were due to meet on Saturday to review preparations, the agency said. The 
hospital said that a special aircraft would pick Ashya up.

Ashya's parents had their treatment plan approved on Friday after a telephone 
call between their lawyers, the hospital's legal representatives and a judge.

The Proton Therapy Centre in Prague said it has arranged a private medical 
jet, fitted with appropriate medical equipment, to transport the child from 
Spain.

The clinic has told the BBC it expects the earliest the young boy will arrive 
is Monday.

The Kings were arrested after British police raised the alarm when they took 
their son from hospital on 28 August. They were released when prosecutors 
withdrew an arrest warrant in the wake of a public outcry.

Portsmouth city council, which has responsibility over Ashya's welfare, 
launched family court litigation.

Mr Justice Baker began analysing issues surrounding Ashya's treatment at a 
hearing in the family division of the high court on Tuesday. The judge was told 
that Mr and Mrs King wanted their son to receive proton beam radiotherapy.

The judge said in his order, released on Friday, that Ashya could be taken to 
the Czech Republic. He said he had been told that specialists there had 
considered a treatment plan.

A spokesman for University Hospital Southampton NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> Foundation Trust has said: "[This] 
judgment will allow Ashya to get the treatment he urgently needs without any 
further delays.

"Throughout the period that we cared for Ashya and over the last few days, our 
only interest has been his health, medical treatment and welfare. We will 
continue to support any clinicians involved in his future care with advice and 
information."
 