
Five-year-old brain tumour patient Ashya King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ashya-king> has arrived in Prague for 
pioneering cancer treatment.

Ashya's father, Brett, said his son was "still in a weak state" and would be 
assessed in the coming days before undergoing the proton beam treatment.

Ashya arrived in the Czech Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/czech-republic> by private medical jet on 
Monday afternoon after undergoing treatment at Málaga's Materno Infantil 
hospital in southern Spain.

His arrival in Prague comes 11 days after the five-year-old hit the headlines 
when his parents took him from Southampton General hospital without the consent 
of doctors.

The couple travelled to Spain <https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain>, where 
they were subsequently arrested and held in custody after British police raised 
the alarm. They were released when prosecutors withdrew an arrest warrant in 
the wake of a public outcry.

Speaking after arriving at the Proton Medical Centre in Prague, Brett King 
told Sky News: "We're just so happy to be here. One month in trying to get 
here, pleading with the doctors, researching day and night to try and prove 
that proton was the best way to treat my son.

"In the end I couldn't convince them so we had to go spend time in the prisons 
– but eventually we made it, that's the main thing.

"We managed to get it all sorted out and be here at the Proton centre. This is 
what we wanted from the beginning."

King said Ashya's strength was improving and that he was aware of his 
surroundings, but that he would be observed closely by doctors before deciding 
whether he should undergo further chemotherapy before the proton beam treatment.

"He's still in a weak state but we've got a few days to help him and I'm sure 
they're going to give him the best treatment but not so strong it knocks him 
down. We just hope for the best for him."

He said that after being arrested the situation just got "worse and worse", 
leading to the couple being held in custody in a Madrid jail away from their 
son for 72 hours.

"They took our son away from us, nobody was allowed to see him. It's not just 
us being in prison, but when a little boy has got cancer he needs his parents," 
he added, thanking the public for rallying behind the family.

A spokeswoman for the Proton Therapy Centre in Prague confirmed that Ashya was 
to be admitted to the hospital on Monday and would be visited by his father.
 