
Ashya King <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ashya-king> is undergoing his 
first tests at a Czech clinic as doctors prepare him for proton-beam treatment.

The five-year-old brain tumour patient has been admitted to the Proton Therapy 
Centre Czech (PTC) in Prague.

A spokeswoman for the hospital said: "He will be undergoing the first MRI 
examination and a special mask (will be prepared) for his head.

"This will be used for fixing him in the same position during the treatment 
every day.

"He will be put asleep before that and he will wake up after noon."

Tuesday's procedures are expected to be completed by around 2pm local time.

On Monday, Ashya finally arrived in the Czech Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/czech-republic> after a legal battle over 
his care that saw his parents arrested in Spain and separated from him for 
several days.

Brett and Naghmeh King triggered an international police pursuit when they 
removed Ashya from Southampton general hospital on 28 August.

They were desperate for him to be given the proton therapy, which was not 
available to them on the NHS.

Speaking after arriving in Prague, Ashya's father told Sky News they were 
"just so happy to be here".

He said: "This is what we wanted from the beginning. Things went from bad to 
worse at one stage.

"We just want the best for Ashya. He's got to get through this, he's got to 
get better."

Ashya will undergo tests ahead of the possible proton therapy next week. It is 
expected to last for around five weeks, with the boy staying at Motol hospital 
and travelling to the PTC each day.

In a statement, the Proton Therapy Centre said: "If all goes well and the 
physicists are able to prepare Ashya's irradiation plan in four days instead of 
the standard 10 days, he will start the first irradiation on Monday. His plan 
takes 30 irradiation visits and is combined with chemotherapy.

"The chemotherapy will be applied by specialised oncologists at Motol 
university hospital, where Ashya is hospitalised with his mother."
 