
The fate of five-year-old Ashya King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ashya-king> was to be decided on Thursday 
as his desperate parents continued to insist he undergo proton beam therapy to 
treat his brain tumour.

As a family friend said the Kings were "blown away" by the level of support 
for their case, Ashya's father, Brett King, met a cancer specialist inSpain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain> to thrash out an urgent treatment 
plan for his son.

Brett and his wife, Naghmeh, have 24 hours to submit a detailed plan to treat 
Ashya before a crucial high court hearing in London.

The couple, from Southsea in Portsmouth, want Ashya to undergo proton beam 
treatment at a specialist medical facility in Prague, however it is thought he 
must first undergo chemotherapy, which could mean he is kept in Malaga's 
Materno Infantil hospital for several weeks.

A high court judge will rule on Monday on the best course of action for Ashya 
after hearing from the boy's parents via video link from Spain. The judge is 
also expected to decide whether Ashya should remain a ward of the court or 
whether Brett and Naghmeh King are given back custody of their son.

Proton beam treatment typically costs between £100,000 and £200,000 – but the 
children's charity Kids n Cancer has offered to contribute towards Ashya's 
therapy after online fundraising raised about £50,000.

The desperate legal wrangling has formed a complex background to the case, 
which saw the Kings travel hundreds of miles across Spain to be reunited with 
their son on Wednesday after being released from a Madrid prison.

Brett King and his eldest son, Danny, 23, visited Ashya on Thursday afternoon 
as the youngster spent a sixth day receiving treatment. His parents were 
arrested when they brought him to the hospital in Malaga on Saturday after 
removing him from Southampton general hospital without the consent of doctors.

Speaking outside the hospital on Thursday, family friend Daniel Pask, 35, said 
the Kings were uncertain about what would happen next to Ashya: "The family is 
in the same boat as everyone else – we just don't know what will happen next."

He added: "At the moment Ashya is in the best position we can hope for. The 
legal team are working tirelessly on the legal side of things.

"He is in a brilliant position the best that can be hoped for. There are 
various different legal matters.

"The family are of course looking to achieve the best possible care at the 
moment. We still don't know, it's not confirmed what is the best possible 
treatment and we are really hoping that today is the day that we can answer 
that."

Pask, who knows the Kings from their time living in Spain, said he did not 
know what course Ashya's treatment would take: "All I know is that the family, 
like everyone else, hope that today they can have some good news. They want the 
best treatment for Ashya and they want it at the right time.

"There are many, many experts on this. But there are fantastic doctors here in 
Spain – fantastic people, world class experts in this kind of thing.

"And now that we have all the attention, let's see what the experts say."

He said the King family were "blown away" by the level of support they have 
received: "They want to say thank you so much for the support. They're blown 
away by the generosity of people in this case. They're trying to wrap their 
heads around it.

"They're just a normal family and they've had this amazing response from the 
public and the press. All that support is wonderful, absolutely fantastic."

The security operation around the hospital was scaled down following 
Wednesday's chaos – when armed riot police grappled with the scrum of 
journalists that greeted the Kings' arrival at the hospital. Armed police are 
thought to have now been withdrawn from their 24-hour guard outside his room.

A spokeswoman for the UK Department of Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> said the Kings had yet to respond 
to the health secretary's offer to fly out a specialist oncologist to advise 
them on Ashya's treatment.
 