
Five-year-old Ashya King <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ashya-king> will 
next week begin pioneering cancer treatment with a 70% chance of survival, 
medics at a specialist Czech clinic said.

The brain tumour patient successfully underwent MRI and CT scans on Tuesday 
before the planned proton beam treatment in Prague next Monday.

His father, Brett, said Ashya was a "bit traumatised" after the prolonged 
legal battle that saw him taken from Southampton to Spain before arriving in 
Prague on Monday.

Ashya hit the headlines when his parents removed him from Southampton general 
hospital against the advice of doctors, leading to an international manhunt 
that saw the Kingsimprisoned in Madrid for 72 hours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/sep/03/ashya-king-parents-reunited-chaotic-scenes-hospital>
. The pair were released amid a public outcry, while Ashya received treatment 
in Malaga's Materno Infantil hospital.

Speaking as Ashya left Prague's Proton Therapy Centre on a stretcher clutching 
a teddy bear, Brett said: "The good news was that there's no visible signs that 
he has any regrowth of cancer. We'll find out in the next couple of days, with 
the spinal tap, if there's microscopic cancer in his fluid. But we're hoping 
not."

Jan Stary, head of the Prague Motol hospital children's haematology and 
oncology clinic, where Ashya is undergoing tests, said he could begin to 
receive proton beam therapy on Monday. He estimated that Ashya had a 70% chance 
of survival if the treatment was effective and said it would last six weeks.

A spokeswoman for Prague's Proton Therapy Centre said Ashya underwent MRI and 
CT scans on Tuesday. A special mask was also prepared for him, she said.

The proton treatment is being combined with a course of chemotherapy which 
Aysha is receiving in the city's Motol University hospital, where he is 
spending the evenings.

Doctors have estimated that Ashya's proton therapy will cost up to £70,000. 
The Kings have already begun the process of selling their Malaga home to fund 
the treatment, however the children's charityKids'n'Cancer UK 
<http://www.kidsncancer.org.uk/> has pledged to contribute to the cost 
alongside about £40,000 in online donations.
 