
A group of leading child cancer doctors have written to NHS England’s chief 
executive, Simon Stevens, in the wake of the high-profileAshya King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ashya-king> case to express concerns that 
other families will reject NHS advice and demand treatment abroad which could 
reduce children’s chances of survival.

Ashya, aged five, was taken 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/sep/03/ashya-kings-parents-told-southampton-hospital-take-son-abroad>
 from Southampton hospital in late August by his parents, who wanted proton 
therapy for their son following his surgery for a brain tumour. They believed 
it was a gentler form of radiotherapy than that advocated by UK doctors and 
would have fewer long-term side effects.

Their case prompted wide public sympathy for the parents, Brett and Naghmeh 
King, who spent more than 24 hours in jail in Marbella in Spain after UK 
authorities issued a European arrest warrant.

Doctors are worried that a potentially problematic precedent has been set, 
because theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> eventually agreed to 
pay for Ashya’s treatment after the family went on to Prague where Ashya 
received proton therapy.

They say other parents are already asking for proton therapy, which is not yet 
available in the UK. They warn that, in the case of a cancer like Ashya’s, 
timing is crucial and to travel abroad for treatment involves delays that could 
affect the outcome.

There are serious concerns in the medical community over Ashya’s case. Delays 
were caused by the flight to Spain, where the Kings have a property they had 
planned to sell to raise funds, and court proceedings in the UK to decide what 
treatment the boy should have. In the treatment of Ashya’s cancer, called 
medulloblastoma, radiotherapy should take place between four and six weeks 
after surgery – but Ashya’s did not start until more than seven weeks had 
passed. More importantly, the doctors say, Ashya’s chances of survival could be 
affected because he has not had the full treatment package. His parents have 
refused chemotherapy for him.

While he was based at the Motol hospital in Prague, travelling daily to the 
private proton therapy clinic, the Kings signed waivers to exempt their son 
from the drug infusions that doctors had prescribed and the British court had 
ordered. Brett King, Ashya’s father, said in a TV interview that he did not 
believe his son needed chemotherapy.

Roger Taylor, professor of clinical oncology at the College of Medicine, 
Swansea University, said good outcomes for children with Ashya’s condition were 
achieved only through the full combination of surgery, radiotherapy and 
chemotherapy.

“It’s only with that package of treatment that you achieve that 70-80% 
survival,” he said. “We do know from past experience the approximate outcomes 
without chemotherapy. In North America, there was a trial of two different 
doses of radiotherapy without chemotherapy. Survival was in the range of 
50-55%.”

It is understood the Kings are interested in immunotherapy for Ashya instead – 
an experimental approach being attempted by a few scientists which tries to 
prime the immune system to fight cancer cells, but is generally attempted only 
in cancer patients who have run out of other options. “It is not used anywhere 
as a substitute for chemotherapy,” said Taylor.

Ashya’s case captured the public imagination when the Kings were tracked down 
in Spain by international police, arrested and held in jail for the apparent 
crime of refusing the treatment NHS doctors recommended for their son.

David Cameron and Nick Clegg both backed the parents – the prime minister 
called for “an urgent outbreak of common sense” while his deputy said it was 
not appropriate to “throw the full force of the law” at the couple.

The family won huge public support through videos they posted on YouTube 
telling of their desire to do the best for their child and poignant photographs 
showing them with Ashya. Their concern has always been the side-effects of 
conventional cancer treatment. They sought proton therapy in the belief that it 
would do less long-term damage, even though in medulloblastoma, the entire 
brain and spine still have to be irradiated.

Children’s cancer doctors in the UK say the prominence and coverage of the 
case is causing other parents to question the advice they are given and seek 
treatment that they think is kinder but may – because of delays – make it more 
likely the cancer will come back. The survival rate among children whose 
medulloblastoma recurs is very low.

“They have this idea that there is something special about protons and [their 
child] can receive it without side-effects,” said one doctor, who worried about 
the erosion of trust between parents and clinicians. “From our point of view, I 
think this will mean the next few years of really difficult discussions with 
families.”

The group of doctors who have written to Stevens fear the decision of the NHS 
to pick up the bill for proton therapy in Prague will have made many families 
think the treatment is as good or better than their child can receive in the UK 
and that it faces opposition because of rationing or cost-cutting.

There were suspicions among some doctors that the decision of the NHS to pay 
the Prague bill was political, following the comments from Cameron and Clegg. 
NHS sources say, however, that there was no choice but to agree to the funding 
application, which came from the King family, because of the ruling about 
Ashya’s treatment made when the child was a ward of court, in the days after he 
was taken to Spain.

Mr Justice Baker ruled that proton therapy was a medically acceptable form of 
treatment for the child. “The course of treatment proposed by Mr and Mrs King 
is entirely reasonable. Ashya has a serious medical condition. Any parents in 
the position of Mr and Mrs King would do whatever they could to explore all 
options,” he said in his judgment.

A treatment plan, which stipulated proton beam therapy and chemotherapy, was 
agreed for Ashya by the court, which left the NHS no alternative but to agree 
to pay under the S2 reciprocal funding arrangements between European Union 
member states.

An NHS England spokesperson said: “NHS England takes decisions about treatment 
on the basis of evidence and what is in the best interest of the patient. Given 
that Ashya had travelled to Prague, it was clearly best that he continue to be 
treated uninterrupted so the NHS agreed to fund this care, as requested by his 
parents, in accordance with relevant European cross-border arrangements. We 
greatly hope he makes a full and successful recovery.”
 