
Five-year-old Ashya King is set to start a proton therapy treatment plan in the
Czech Republic <https://www.theguardian.com/world/czech-republic> to help him 
beat brain cancer.

His parents, Brett and Nagmeh King, sparked an international police pursuit 
after they removed Ashya from Southampton General hospital without doctors’ 
permission in a bid to take him abroad for the specialist treatment that was 
not offered to him in the UK.

The Proton Therapy Centre (PTC) in Prague released a schedule for the first 
day of the youngster’s treatment for a brain tumour, which will see him leave 
the University Hospital Motol on Monday morning and then undergo irradiation.

His doctor, radiation oncologist Barbora Ondrova, said: “There is a 70% to 80% 
survival rate for the condition such as Ashya has and there is now every reason 
to hope that he will make a full recovery.”

The Kings faced a legal battle to get their child to Prague after removing 
Ashya from hospital on 28 August, with a high court judge approving the move 
after they had been released from police custody in Spain.

Ashya now faces 30 visits to the PTC, with the first 13 focusing on the brain 
and spine, to ensure the tumour he had removed has not spread, and the 
remaining 17 to irradiate where the brain tumour once was.

The PTC, in a statement on its website, outlined the difference between proton 
beam therapy and conventional radiotherapy.

It said: “Proton therapy can be much better modulated and precisely focused 
into the tumour volume. In case of irradiation of medulloblastoma in Ashya, it 
is necessary to apply the highest possible dose into the former location but 
protect the tissue around as much as possible.

“In Ashya’s case, those are vital structures of the heart, lung, liver and 
intestines.”

Proton therapy would decrease the dose to other parts of the body, including 
the heart, liver and intestines and trachea by up to 80%, the PTC said.

“This means decreasing the risk of developing cardiovascular disorders, 
breathing disorders or metabolic disorders on the first place and better 
protection of the swallowing functions and normal food intake,” the statement 
continued.

According to the PTC’s website, Ondrova specialises in cancer in children and 
is a member of the Czech Society for Radiation Oncology, Biology and Physics.
 