
The parents of five-year-old Ashya King, who were briefly jailed after taking 
him from a British hospital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/sep/03/ashya-kings-parents-told-southampton-hospital-take-son-abroad>
 and fleeing abroad to seek treatment, have said he is now cancer-free.

Brett and Naghmeh King, who prompted an international police hunt in August 
when they took Ashya from a Southampton hospital against doctors’ wishes, said 
their son has made a “miracle” recovery from brain cancer.


The couple, from Southsea, Hants, were found in Spain, where they have a 
holiday home, anddetained for three nights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/sep/01/ashya-kings-parents-remanded-custody-judge-considers-extradition>
 before a high court judge in London granted permission for them to seek proton 
beam therapy at a centre in Prague in the Czech Republic.


They had feared that conventional radiotherapy, advocated by Ashya’s British 
doctors to treat his medulloblastoma following surgery, would “kill him or turn 
him into a vegetable”.


On Monday they said they were absolutely delighted that a recent scan showed 
no sign of the tumour.


“We have saved his life,” Brett King, 51, told the Sun newspaper, adding: “It 
justifies everything we went through. If we had left Ashya with theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> we don’t think he would have 
survived.”

Naghmeh King, 46, said: “We could not sleep before we got this news – now we 
are so full of hope for the future. We are jumping up and down with joy. It is 
a miracle we thought we would never see.”


Ashya has been recovering with his family at their home in Marbella. Before 
being taken abroad he had undergone surgery to remove the tumour, and was left 
weak and unable to move.

With doubts about the radiotherapy treatment offered at Southampton General 
hospital, his parents wanted proton beam therapy, which was not initially 
offered on the NHS although the health service later agreed to fund it. The 
treatment targets radiation directly at the tumour, avoiding healthy 
surrounding tissue, and is said to have a lower risk of side effects.


Staff at the Proton Therapy Centre in Prague, where Ashya had been treated, 
said they were thrilled to hear the news. Jana Kulhankova, marketing director 
at the centre, said: “Ashya’s doctor told me last week that Ashya is doing so 
well that he is able to release him for rehabilitation. If the scans are 
showing that Ashya is cancer-free, as Mr King says, then we are thrilled. That 
is what we have worked for.”


At the high court hearing last year doctors in Southampton had said proton 
beam therapy was unlikely to provide any benefit over standard radiotherapy but 
that they would not object to Ashya travelling to Prague for such treatment 
provided a treatment plan was agreed with the parents.


Southampton University Hospital Trust said at the time that the chances of 
surviving the condition that Ashya has are about 70%-80% after five years with 
appropriate treatment.

The health secretary, Jeremy Hunt, has announced a £250m investment in two new 
proton beam therapy centres expected to open in London and Manchester in 2018.

The NHS currently pays for those deemed appropriate for the therapy to go the 
United States for treatment. They must be assessed by a panel who may decide 
patients are not suitable if there is unlikely to be a clinical benefit from 
the treatment. More than 400 patents have been sent abroad since 2008, mostly 
children.





 