
Ashya King <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ashya-king>, the five-year-old 
boy with a brain tumour, will be able to receive specialist treatment in Prague 
for his cancer, following a dramatic high court ruling on Friday night.

At the end of a week-long battle in which his parents took the boy from 
Southampton general hospital and became the subject of an international 
manhunt, a judge ruled that Brett and Naghmeh King could take Ashya to receive 
proton beam therapy not routinely available on theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>.

But doctors from Southampton, speaking for the first time, told the Guardian 
that Ashya would not get the extra benefit from the treatment in Prague that 
his parents wanted, because most of his brain and spine will still have to be 
irradiated.

They also said that an application to a specialist board for NHS funding for 
proton beam therapy for Ashya was turned down earlier this week. The NHS funds 
children under certain circumstances to get proton beam therapy abroad and 
Southampton has often sent such patients for the treatment, but an application 
for Ashya to have it was rejected because it offers no benefit over 
conventional radiotherapy. The side effects will be the same.

Dr Peter Wilson, lead paediatrician at Southampton general hospital, said that 
the boy had wrongly been described as "dying" or "terminally ill" in the media.

Southampton's doctors had done everything possible to help the boy, he said, 
because he has a good chance of survival, but needs radiotherapy within six 
weeks of surgery – and it is now six weeks since he had an operation.

"Where we have been really misrepresented by the press and the family is where 
people have talked about a dying child," Wilson said. "Ashya is sick because of 
the surgery he has had. He has a 70%-80% chance of survival. For every week we 
do not treat him from this week, his chances of survival decrease."

Proton beam therapy holds no advantages in medallublastoma, Ashya's form of 
cancer, said Wilson. "For this particular tumour, the reason why the proton 
beam was not deemed to be of any benefit is because you have to irradiate most 
of the brain and spine anyway."

Radiotherapy is vital following surgery to remove the tumour because any 
remaining cancer cells have to be destroyed.

Proton beam therapy is commonly thought to be a kinder type of radiotherapy 
because it does not affect so much healthy tissue. But with this particular 
tumour, cancerous cells may be anywhere in the brain or spine, so the advantage 
protons have in treating highly localised tumours, for instance in eyes, is 
lost.

Wilson said that doctors had emailed and spoken to the Prague centre before 
the family disappeared, knowing that was the preference of Ashya's parents. 
Speaking to the Guardian, Wilson said doctors caring for Ashya had been 
misrepresented and he categorically denied that they had at any point 
threatened the parents with removing their rights over decisions about their 
son's treatment.

"We have to be really clear – we never threatened this family. What happened 
is that during discussions there were obviously disagreements between the 
paediatric oncology team and the family as to some of the treatment options. 
The parents asked if we refused any treatment for our child, what would happen 
to us? What was explained to them was that in certain circumstances, if a 
parent was to refuse treatment on behalf of their child and it was felt that 
would be putting the child at risk, we would consider going to the court."

Southampton hospital staff and the police have faced heavy criticism at the 
way Ashya's disappearance was handled, with Mr King saying he and his wife had 
been "treated like terrorists".

He claimed he had previously informed the hospital about his plans to seek 
proton beam therapy for his son but kept the date that he intended to take him 
secret, for fear he would be stopped.

The hospital alerted the police when it discovered that Ashya and his family 
had left because doctors were concerned for his safety, said Wilson.

"This boy had no cough reflex and no gag reflex and was fed via a nasogastric 
tube," he said. They had no idea the family had taken a feeding machine with a 
power cable and bags of feed and were worried that Ashya might choke. "If he 
had vomited and was in a car and not necessarily in the best position and the 
vomit ended up on his vocal chords or lungs, he could potentially have died," 
said Wilson, who as an intensive care doctor has seen children in that 
condition.

The fact that Ashya ended up well in Spain had a lot to do with luck, he said, 
refuting any suggestion that doctors had exaggerated the danger the boy was in.

Ashya's radiotherapy treatment needs to begin this week. In the UK under the 
gold standard treatment protocol, if there was a delay he would be given 
chemotherapy. Normally proton beam therapy takes two weeks to set up – a 
special mask has to be made for the patient. But Prague has told Southampton's 
doctors that it can expedite Ashya's case and treat him within 4-5 days.

A review of the role local authorities played in the Ashya King disappearance 
case was also announced. Portsmouth Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) 
said it would be examining all the actions involved in the case.

The couple were held by police in Spain on a European arrest warrant but were 
freed from Soto del Real prison on Tuesday night after British authorities 
abandoned their attempts to extradite them, amid a public backlash and 
following interventions from David Cameron and Nick Clegg.

The parents have since been reunited with their son, who is being treated at 
the Materno-Infantil hospital in the Spanish city of Malaga.

In a statement on Friday night, the LSCB said: "The review will look at all 
the actions involved and the findings will be made public. No further 
information will be released until the review has concluded."
 