
After 22 years battling against 76 counts of theft and false accounting, 
Britain's most notorious white-collar criminal,Asil Nadir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/asil-nadir>, is on Thursday expected to 
be sentenced to spend most of the rest of his life behind bars.

He has been convicted of stealing £28.8m from the Polly Peck empire he built 
into one of the stock market's largest companies in the three years before its 
abrupt collapse in 1990.

But the true scale of his fraudulent activities in the late 80s is thought to 
be much larger, with more than £380m secretly siphoned out of the FTSE 100 
group, according toSerious Fraud Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/serious-fraud-office> investigators. The 
mountain of evidence against Nadir meant that prosecutors chose to bring 
evidence relating to just 13 "sample" theft charges before a jury during the 
seven-month trial at the Old Bailey, which finished on Wednesday.

The twists and turns in the 71-year-old tycoon's story read like the chapters 
of a John Grisham thriller – lies, conspiracies, forgeries, controversial 
political donations, a ministerial resignation, as well as allegations of 
judicial corruption, SFO foul play and MI6 plots.

But the most dramatic act in this protracted drama occurred on 4 May 1993, 
when, despite purportedly having surrendered all passports and his family 
posting a record bail surety of £3.5m, Nadir asked Peter Dimond, a friend and 
pilot, to drive him to Compton Abbas airfield in Dorset and fly him to France.

From there, Nadir travelled to Turkey and on to Turkish-occupied northern 
Cyprus – a territory not recognised by the UK and therefore beyond the reach of 
the SFO. For the entire journey, he later told Turkish media, he had taken with 
him a gun, adding that he had been prepared to shoot anyone who tried to block 
his passage. It was to mark the beginning of a new lifestyle for Nadir, who, 
despite his great wealth and connections to the political elite of northern
Cyprus <https://www.theguardian.com/world/cyprus>, remained armed or 
accompanied by bodyguards throughout his 17 years on the island.

Ensconced in his guarded mountain villa, Nadir made no effort to maintain a 
low profile, inviting British media to visit and regaling them with conspiracy 
theories about how dark forces within the British establishment had conspired 
to engineer his downfall by foul means. He could never receive a fair trial in 
Britain, he said. Reporters were shown around his palatial new home, each of 
them always introduced with a mischievous grin to his two parrots, Polly and 
Peck.

In his early years in exile, Nadir was joined by figures alleged to have 
helped with the fraud and his flight from justice, including Dimond and his 
loyal lieutenant Elizabeth Forsyth, who had been involved in several money 
transfers. Both Forsyth and Dimond – eventually returned to the UK and 
separately found guilty for their roles in the scandal – had their respective 
convictions overturned on appeal.

Another figure linked to Nadir, Michael Francis, who had a conviction for 
attempted murder, also found his way to northern Cyprus. He had been involved 
in concocting a false allegation of a conspiracy to bribe Nadir's trial judge, 
Justice Tucker, some months before the tycoon's flight from the UK. It was this 
outlandish claim – one that Francis later claimed had been made up at the 
behest of the SFO – that Nadir was to rely on as an explanation for his flight 
from justice.

Ersin Tatar, a fellow Turkish Cypriot who had been Polly Peck's assistant 
treasurer, is now finance minister in northern Cyprus. He has never been 
charged with an offence but was named by the SFO during the trial among a list 
of Nadir's main helpers.

For years, Nadir's escape was chalked up as another dismal failure by the 
bungling SFO. But suggestions that SFO prosecutors had let Nadir slip through 
their fingers were wide of the mark. In truth, the agency had bitterly opposed 
granting him bail, believing Nadir was a strong flight risk. Justice Tucker 
took a more relaxed view and Nadir was given his liberty.

Whoever was to blame, the upshot was the same: for almost two decades it 
looked as though the former Polly Peck boss would see out his days basking in 
the sunshine of his Mediterranean hideaway, the one that got away.

For reasons still unclear, however, that position changed abruptly two years 
ago when Nadir signalled in a British newspaper interview that he would be 
prepared to return to the UK and face justice so long as an undertaking was 
given not to oppose bail. The move triggered a flurry of excitement at Elm 
House, the SFO's London headquarters, as investigators rushed to the archives 
to dust down the Polly Peck files.

In yet another bizarre twist, however, those reviewing these faded paperwork 
began falling ill and it quickly emerged that the documents had become 
contaminated with a toxic bacteria. All of the papers had to be laboriously 
photocopied by staff wearing protective clothing. Despite the Nadir case 
seeming in so many ways to be cursed, the then SFO director Richard Alderman 
took the brave decision to take up the challenge, agreeing to the terms on 
which Nadir said he would return.

The formalities ironed out, within a few months Britain's best-known 
white-collar fugitive stepped of a plane at Luton airport in August 2010, 
accompanied by a pack of hand-picked media selected to join him for the flight. 
Assembled reporters were told, with customary bravado, that he had returned to 
battle an "immense injustice and tremendous abuse of power".

"It is inconceivable that I would steal from the company I built up … I have 
always said that I was innocent and that has given me the courage and the 
determination to come back."

The impression of a man of means was maintained as Nadir, accompanied by his 
28-year-old wife, Nur, was whisked away in a chauffeur-driven Jaguar with 
blacked-out windows to the Mayfair flat which has been his home ever since. 
Subject to a curfew, he was ordered to wear an electronic tag and report to a 
police station weekly.

Before the trial began, Nadir, who had been granted legal aid to fund his 
defence, instructed his lawyers to apply for charges against him to be thrown 
out on multiple grounds, rehashing conspiracy theories worked up over decades 
on the veranda of his villa. He also claimed a weak heart had left him unfit to 
stand trial. Each of these tall stories were given short shrift by the court.

For much of the 80s, Nadir was feted in the City of London as a shining 
example of a new generation of self-made Thatcherite businessman. At the start 
of the decade he had folded his Cyprus-based citrus fruit trading business into 
an ailing stock market-listed rag trade firm based in the East End of London 
called Polly Peck, in which he had taken a majority interest. There followed a 
string of deals that saw the group diversify further, branching out into 
electronics with the launch of Turkish electronics company Vestel, and later 
acquiring the Del Monte fruit business and taking a majority stake in Japanese 
firm Sansui Electric.

Nadir became a cult figure, and every stockbroker in the Square Mile could 
rehearse the story: £1,000 invested in Polly Peck in 1979 was worth £1m 10 
years later. At its peak, the group was valued at £2.2bn. By the time the first 
cracks in the Polly Peck story began to surface, Nadir, who started in business 
as a schoolboy, selling newspapers and razor blades around the eastern Cypriot 
port of Famagusta, had built an army of fanatically loyal followers who rushed 
to his defence.

A day after the SFO's first raid on the company, Polly Peck directors asked 
the stock exchange for trading in company shares to be suspended, adding: "[We] 
wish to emphasise that the board deplores the recent attacks on its chairman." 
Forsyth also fought back against allegations, declaring : "I think the SFO is 
responsible for the collapse in the Polly Peck share price … A £1.5bn company 
was virtually wiped out in 24 hours." A month later, the company had imploded, 
owing debts of £550m.

Perhaps the most enduring campaigner on behalf of Nadir was the then 
Conservative MP and Northern Ireland minister Michael Mates, who ran a 
high-profile campaign to highlight several procedural flaws in the SFO probe, 
even suggesting there might be MI6 involvement in the case. Mates insisted he 
had taken up the matter in the interests of justice and took no view on Nadir's 
guilt or innocence. Nevertheless, others noted that Nadir had been a major Tory 
donor, giving £440,000 to party coffers.

Mates's position became even more difficult in the wake of Nadir's dramatic 
flight from justice, and he eventually chose to step down – but not before 
stunning his fellow MPs with a resignation speech savaging the SFO for alleged 
misconduct and deliberately trying to "destabilise" Nadir's defence.

But Mates's campaign was undermined after it emerged he had borrowed a car 
from Nadir's PR adviser. A further hint at a warm relationship between the two 
came when it emerged Mates had given a watch to Nadir as a birthday present, 
bearing the inscription: "Don't let the buggers get you down." Nadir later 
explained he had had an expensive watch removed from his wrist during a raid on 
his flat in Eaton Square, Belgravia, by his trustees in bankruptcy.

During the lengthy Old Bailey trial, Mates was one of the few Nadir allies who 
gave evidence in his defence – although he was only able to testify in relation 
to peripheral issues in the case.

At the heart of the Polly Peck fraud was a series of purported transfers to 
subsidiaries of Polly Peck in Turkey and Turkish-occupied northern Cyprus, 
which the SFO's counsel, Philip Shears QC, said were disguised in order to mask 
the fact they were for the benefit of Nadir or his associates.

In truth, the cash had been spirited away through a Nadir family trust in 
Jersey and on to Switzerland, where the money went was spent on secretly 
propping up Polly Peck's shares as well as bankrolling a lavish lifestyle for 
Nadir and his family. At trial it emerged that among the uses of stolen cash 
had been payments to race horse trainer Jenny Pitman, the purchase of Cypriot 
newspapers, a £1m antique fireplace from Christie's, a Ferrari Testarossa and 
several Mayfair properties as well as his Leicestershire estate Baggrave Hall.

Operations in Cyprus and Turkey, especially those of Polly Peck's carton 
packaging firm Unipac, came to be the main profit generators within the group – 
a fact that did not trouble directors or shareholders for many years. However, 
these were also divisions over which Nadir had almost total control, out of the 
prying eyes of his fellow directors. Unipac was run by Nadir's brother-in-law 
and was not audited by Polly Peck's accountants, Stoy Hayward.

Nadir's fellow directors and the company's auditors were fooled into thinking 
money had been switched from London to subsidiaries in northern Cyprus and 
Turkey. Later, after serious concerns eventually surfaced, Nadir claimed that 
hundreds of millions of pounds flowing out of the London parent company had 
been matched by cash deposits put back into the group via a northern Cyprus 
subsidiary.

Shears attacked these claims, suggesting they were based on lies and 
forgeries. He said Nadir's assertion that huge cash deposits were made by, or 
on behalf of, Nadir's elderly mother into an account at Industrial Bank of 
Kibris (IBK), a small bank privately owned by the former Polly Peck executive 
chairman, were implausible.

One document purporting to be a bank slip appeared to detail a deposit of 
148.8m Turkish lire denominated in 100 lire bank notes. "Such a huge quantity 
of bank notes is likely to have weighed approximately 135,185kg – over 135 
tonnes," said Shears. "As for the space taken up by such a volume of bank notes 
– if all the notes were piled on top of each other they would reach something 
like 300 times the height of Nelson's column."

Nadir spent last night in Belmarsh jail and will this morning learn how long 
he must serve behind bars. The SFO's director, David Green QC, last night paid 
tribute to the determination of his colleagues and predecessors, describing the 
complex prosecution relating to events up to 25 years ago as a remarkable 
achievement.
 