
Prosecutors have ridiculed Asil Nadir's explanation that hundreds of millions 
of pounds, allegedly stolen from the Polly Peck empire he ran until its 
collapse in 1990, had been matched by cash deposits put back into the group via 
a Northern Cypriot subsidiary.

Drawing to a close his five-day opening remarks, Philip Shears QC, cast doubt 
on claims that huge cash deposits were made by, or on behalf of, Nadir's 
elderly mother into an account at Industrial Bank of Kibris (IBK), a small bank 
privately owned by the Polly Peck executive chairman. Shears said the limited 
paperwork supporting these claims included forgeries.

One document purporting to be a bank slip appeared to detail a deposit of 
148.8m Turkish lire denominated in 100 lire bank notes. "Such a huge quantity 
of bank notes is likely to have weighed approximately 135,185kg – over 135 
tonnes," said Shears. "As for the space taken up by such a volume of bank notes 
– if all the notes were piled on top of each other they would reach something 
like 300 times the height of Nelson's Column."

He added: "What is also open to question is how the defendant's mother was 
physically able to transport and deposit such vast quantities of banknotes to a 
branch of the IBK on a regular basis. Without being flippant, we are now in the 
realms of fork-lift trucks and vans stuffed full of banknotes."

When it was put to him by police in the early 1990s that no one at Polly Peck 
appeared to know about these payments into IBK, Nadir had said: "The whole 
accounts department, the whole treasury department here and in parts of Cyprus 
and Turkey, were the people actually doing everything. To say nobody's aware of 
it is not a reasonable statement."

Nadir, 70, denies 13 counts of theft relating to £34m allegedly stolen from 
Polly Peck between 1987 and 1990. The Serious Fraud Office claims these 
transfers were only part of a wider pattern of theft which saw Nadir siphon 
almost £150m out of the stock market-listed company for his own ends.

Auditors, directors and investors were allegedly fooled into thinking the 
money had been switched to subsidiaries in Northern Cyprus and Turkey. The 
deception was said to have been carried out with the help of a band of Nadir 
loyalists in Mayfair and Northern Cyprus. One executive who allegedly blew the 
whistle on Nadir's cover-up story later claimed to have received repeated 
threats and said his house had been petrol bombed.

By September 1990 the purportedly cash-rich Polly Peck, which appeared to be 
generating much of its profits from Turkey and Northern Cyprus, agreed plans 
for a dividend payout and was making preparations to repay loans. According to 
the prosecution there was an increasing sense of crisis in the group as Nadir's 
repeated promises to arrange for cash held by Turkish and Cypriot subsidiaries 
to be repatriated to Polly Peck were not honoured.

On 25 October the group had defaulted on its borrowings and was declared 
insolvent, owing £550m. Administrators were blocked from gaining full access to 
the accounts, records and bank statements of Polly Peck's Northern Cypriot and 
Turkish subsidiaries, Shears told the jury, initially because of injunctions 
obtained by some of these firms.

Shears told the court Nadir had fled the UK months before he was due to stand 
trial in 1993 "in order to avoid prosecution". He returned to the UK in 2010.

Shears suggested jurors, when they come to hear evidence from witnesses, may 
feel they have to make allowances for fading memories. He added that "quite a 
number" of witnesses who could have given evidence back in 1993 have died so 
their statements will be read out instead. Among them is the late Kemal Birgen, 
who had been general manager of IBK up to April 1991. Birgen had stated that 
deposit slips supporting Nadir's version of events were forgeries.

After making such claims, Shears told the jury, Birgen later said he had been 
threatened, was sent dead chickens, and his house had been petrol bombed.

The trial continues.
 