
Asil Nadir <https://www.theguardian.com/business/asil-nadir>, the former boss 
of failed conglomerate Polly Peck, has been found guilty of 10 counts of 
stealing £28.6m from company coffers and will be sentenced on Thursday.

The amount stolen by the multimillionaire, who fled Britain in 1993 but 
returned in 2010, is the equivalent of £61,829,627 today, the Old Bailey was 
told.

The 71-year-old former tycoon, who had been a hero in the City of London for 
much of the 1980s, fled to Turkish-occupied northern Cyprus three years after 
the £2bn business empire collapsed in 1990.

He did not return to Britain until 2010, when the process of bringing him to 
trial was restarted. A jury – reduced by two members to three women and seven 
men – has taken seven months to hear all the evidence.

Immediately after the verdicts, Nadir's wife, Nur, said her husband planned to 
appeal. She said: "A guilty man does not come back to face justice of his own 
accord. My husband came back voluntarily. Polly Peck was his life.

"He wants justice for himself and for the tens of thousands of shareholders 
and employees. This unhappy affair is certainly not over yet."

The 28-year-old has been by her husband's side throughout the trial. They 
married when she was 21.

The judge said that despite the prosecution case that the amounts stolen were 
part of a larger theft, he could only pass sentence on counts on which Nadir 
had been convicted.

Another hearing will be held next month to deal with compensation claims. 
There will also be claims for "substantial" prosecution costs and repayment of 
legal aid.

Nadir was taken by prison van to Belmarsh high security prison and is expected 
to be transferred to another jail after being processed.

During the trial, counsel for the Serious Fraud Office, Philip Shears QC, 
alleged that Nadir had stolen £150m from Polly Peck coffers, using proceeds for 
himself and his family.

Shears said the lengthy trial had focused only on a small sample of Nadir's 
alleged thievery, with 13 counts on the indictment relating to the transfer of 
£34m out of Polly Peck.

Nadir had pleaded not guilty on all counts. Earlier in the trial Nadir had 
told the court he fled the UK because "my hope of a fair trial was in tatters. 
I had zero hope of receiving a fair trial."

When Polly Peck – once the Stock Exchange's fastest-growing company – crashed 
in 1990 it had debts of £550m. Creditors got a fraction of what they were owed 
and shareholders received nothing.

Nadir, 36th on the Sunday Times Rich List at one time, was arrested but was 
secretly flown out of Britain in a private plane in May 1993 before he could 
face trial.

He was originally accused of 66 counts, alleging theft of £380m. The money 
went on jewels, furniture, luxury properties and making his friends and family 
rich, jurors were told.
 