
Court No 8 at the Old Bailey felt listless , like a Cypriot village square on 
a hot summer's afternoon, its energy seemingly dissipated by the five months it 
has spent examining opaque company structures and complex transactions relating 
to the £150m theft charges alleged againstAsil Nadir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/asil-nadir> before he dramatically fled 
Britain in 1993.

Tuesday was going to be different. Nineteen years after he drove to a remote 
Dorset airfield and flew to the Turkish-controlled enclave known but barely 
recognised as the republic of Northern Cyprus, the former Polly Peck tycoon – 
once listed as Britain's's 36th richest man – finally got his day in court, the 
first of several before Mr Justice Holroyde.

The 66 charges levelled by the Serious Fraud Office in 1992-3 have now been 
slimmed down to 13 sample counts, which Nadir emphatically denied again Much 
has changed. Some witnesses have died and the SFO is no more. John Major's 
government which lost a defence minister, Michael Mates, over the "Don't let 
the buggers get you down" watch he sent to the defendant, has long gone. When 
Nadir did his runner Tony Blair was not yet even leader of the opposition.

Inevitably Nadir has changed too. He is now 71 and – as he reminded the jury 
more than once – in indifferent health. He wore a blue, double-breasted suit 
which has seen better days, and a patterned blue/yellow tie. His dyed hair 
curled down over his collar, a style feature shared with his barrister, Philip 
Hackett QC. He walked more confidently than he talked.

Inevitably the still-heavily accented voice sounded old, hesistant and often 
very tired. Nadir and his glamorous second wife, Nur who is 28 ( "younger than 
many of the court documents," say Old Bailey wits), have been in Court No 8 
since January. The accused is allowed bail. But he is tagged, Mayfair address 
or not.

"I was a totally broken man, my health was in tatters, my hopes of a fair 
trial was in tatters," Nadir explained. There were occasional bursts of energy 
as he spelled out a name or tried to recall the particular function of a 
company to the patient Hackett . Yellowstone Holdings? " A Cyprus entity for 
printing newspapers in Cyprus." Tristan? "I was wondering if that was the 
entity set up for my mother." There was a lot of talk of "entities" and quite a 
lot about his mother, Safiye Nadir, once said to have had £70m in her deposit 
accounts, though the supporting document was faked, the court has been told.

But by whom? That is what Nadir's appearance in the witness box on Tuesday was 
partly about. He told the jury – four women and seven men, younger than many 
juries – that he first went into business selling newspapers at six, but that 
his family had been forced to flee their native Cyprus in 1959 because of 
sectarian tensions between Greek and Turkish Cypriots. After moving into 
textiles he acquired a small £2m-a-year turnover company called Polly Peck. He 
turned it into a FTSE 100 conglomerate worth an estimated £2bn.

But Polly Peck crashed in controversial circimstances. Philip Shears QC, 
prosecuting, (Rumpole is definitely not in Court No 8), has spent months 
marshalling a case and supporting witnesses to prove that Nadir and his 
associates funnelled millions from publicly quoted Polly Peck to Northern 
Cyprus and into Turkish lira – and not (as the defence has said ) put them 
back. Those lira would weigh 135 tonnes, Shears said in January.

Nadir spent much of Tuesday talking his way through myriad companies and 
explaining the ancient and labrynthine way business is done in the Levant – 
quite different from European countries, but people understand it, he said. 
Currency depreciation may be high, but interest rates are higher. He seemed 
passionate about helping to modernise Turkey and his homeland. He was domiciled 
there for tax purposes until he was advised to re-base to Switzerland.

The thrust of his explanation was that things were done by associates employed 
to run his private affairs of which he was unaware because he was too busy 
running Polly Peck. Nadir spoke bitterly about the way he had been mistreated 
after charges were made, his mail intercepted, his business contacts (even with 
his mother) restricted.

Yet the exchanges that made jurors look more than usually attentive came when 
Hackett described the bizarre plot reported by the SFO to the original Old 
Bailey court in 1992. Someone had been plotting to bribe Mr Justice Tucker, the 
trial judge. Who had devised the alleged plot, Nadir's allies or his enemies? 
Nadir denied the conspiracy, and Tuesday's hearing did not resolve that 
curiosity.

But from the looks on their faces, both judge and Nadir's QC were frightened, 
Nadir recalled. He had been depending on a British high court judge – "his 
lordship" as he chose to put it – to give him the justice he sought. And now 
this. "It was a frightening situation for me." The jury is expected to reach 
its verdict in July. Meanwhile the case goes on (and on).
 