
Asil Nadir <https://www.theguardian.com/business/asil-nadir>, for almost 20 
years Britain's most famous fugitive from justice, has been found guilty of 
three counts of theft relating to his time as the boss of the Polly Peck empire 
which collapsed in 1990.

The 71-year-old, who built the sprawling, stock market-listed conglomerate 
from scratch, was accused of stealing almost £150m from the Mayfair-based group 
he allegedly ran "in an autocratic manner", according to the Serious Fraud 
Office, which brought the prosecution.

The trial has taken seven months, hearing evidence from many elderly and 
retired businessmen giving their recollection of events that took place more 
than two decades ago. The jury – down to just three women and seven men after 
two jurors were excused during marathon evidence sessions – deliberated for 
seven days before the judge indicated he would accept a majority verdict of 
nine to one.

At that point the jury indicated they had reached unanimous verdicts in 
relation to four of the 13 counts in the indictment against Nadir – acquitting 
him on one and convicting him on three. The jury are now continuing their 
deliberations in relation to the remaining counts.

During the trial, counsel for the SFO, Philip Shears QC, told the court of a 
wide pattern of repeated thefts, but said the prosecution focused on a small 
amount of that alleged behaviour relating to the transfer of £34m. Nadir denied 
all 13 charges.

Proceeds from years of alleged thievery are said to have gone on buying shares 
for himself, paying off personal tax bills and other debts linked to him or his 
associates.

At the start of the trial Shears explained to the jury why they were hearing 
evidence relating to events long forgotten by many. "Why are you trying matters 
so long ago? The answer is simple. He [Nadir] was due to stand trial in late 
1993 but in May of 1993 he fled the country to northern Cyprus, thus leaving 
the jurisdiction, only to return in August 2010."

Nadir was a hero among City investors in the 1980s, rapidly transforming a 
sleepy East End rag trade firm into a multinational conglomerate with interests 
in food, electronics, textiles and leisure. Its best-known brand was the Del 
Monte fruit group, and among its directors was Sir Michael Sandberg.

At the heart of the prosecution case is a series of transfers to subsidiaries 
of Polly Peck in Turkey and Turkish-occupied northern Cyprus, which Shears said 
were disguised in order to mask the fact they were for the benefit of Nadir or 
his associates.

Operations in these two territories, especially those of Polly Peck's carton 
packaging firm Unipac, came to be the main profit generators within the group. 
However, they were also divisions over which Nadir allegedly had the most 
control. Unipac was run by Nadir's brother-in-law and was not audited by Polly 
Peck's accountants, Stoy Hayward.
 