
The fallen business tycoon Asil Nadir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/asil-nadir>, who spent 17 years as a 
fugitive in apparent luxury in northern Cyprus before returning to the UK and 
being jailed last month for stealing £29m from his failed Polly Peck empire, 
has insisted he is broke.

Serious Fraud Office prosecutors are pursuing a £60m compensation claim on 
behalf of Polly Peck creditors following Nadir's conviction on 10 counts of 
theft from the sprawling conglomerate before it collapsed with debts of £550m 
in 1990.

Philip Shears QC, prosecuting, told the Old Bailey that Nadir's summary of his 
financial position was "an affront to common sense and to the manifest reality".

If the court agrees that 71-year-old Nadir has failed to give a credible 
account of his wealth, he could see his 10-year jail term extended by several 
years. Nevertheless, Nadir said that despite maintaining the trappings of 
wealth in Turkish-occupied northern Cyprus – and on his return to the UK two 
years ago including a retinue of bodyguards, a rented Mayfair apartment and the 
use of chauffeur-driven luxury cars – the former Polly Peck boss has no assets, 
not even a bank account.

Nadir, who is serving time in Belmarsh prison, argues that since he fled in 
1993 — four months before he was first due to stand trial — his lifestyle and 
some of his legal bills had been funded by his family and generous supporters, 
with the largest contribution latterly coming from Hamit Bagana, the joint 
owner ofTurkish airline Onur Air <http://www.onurair.com.tr/default_eng.aspx>. 
It was on an Onur Air jet that Nadir returned to the UK in 2010, promising in a 
blaze of publicity to fight in the courts the "immense injustice and tremendous 
abuse of power".

If sufficient assets are identified, as well as repaying Polly Peck creditors 
Nadir will be required to stump up for a substantial part of his legal costs 
during the seven-month trial, which were met by British taxpayers through the 
legal aid system.

Nadir admits receiving about £6,000 a month from a media empire in northern 
Cyprus which carries his initials, AN Graffics. However, he insisted that the 
business was owned by his elderly mother, who lives in Cyprus and is unwell. 
This, Shears noted, was contrary to the evidence of two Cypriot witnesses 
called by Nadir in his defence.

Beyond his income from AN Graffics, Nadir claims to have lived rent-free in a 
northern Cyprus home also owned by his mother and to have received an 
occasional allowance from her, in part to support his bodyguards and other 
household staff.

Before he left the UK Nadir, who was then declared insolvent, had become 
notorious for frustrating the efforts of his bankrupcy trustees. On one 
occasion some months before he fled, relations had reached such a low point 
that those conducting a raid on his then home in Eaton Square, Belgravia, 
central London, removed an expensive watch from his wrist. Shortly afterwards, 
as a birthday present, the then Conservative Northern Ireland minister Michael 
Mates gave him a replacement watch bearing the inscription "Don't let the 
buggers get you down".

Nadir companies had given generously to Tory campaign efforts, donating 
£440,000. Since his convictionparty officials said the donations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/aug/22/asil-nadir-conviction-conservative-party-donation?INTCMP=SRCH>
 "were accepted in good faith from what was then considered to be a leading 
British company."

Nadir was discharged from bankruptcy in February this year after "a supporter" 
made a payment of £750,000. However, Shears told the court that this should not 
be taken as an indication that the bankruptcy trustees had been satisfied that 
he had declared all his business interests to them.

The SFO has suggested the true amount Nadir siphoned out of the one-time FTSE 
100 business he headed could be more than £380m. The agency had failed to apply 
for a confiscation order in relation to Nadir — legally different from a 
compensation order — many years ago, which could have led to much greater 
claims being sought against him.

Counsel for Nadir, Philip Hackett QC, said much of the SFO's claims about his 
assets came from "the internet and Wikipedia". "There is not a shred of 
evidence that he has been involved in any business."

The judge, Mr Justice Holroyde, expressed some sympathy with the SFO's task of 
identifying assets in northern Cyprus, referring to "the concrete impossibility 
of getting information out of northern Cyprus unless Mr Nadir chooses to 
release it".

The hearing to consider the application for compensation has been adjourned 
until 31 October.
 