
Asil Nadir <https://www.theguardian.com/business/asil-nadir> has been ordered 
to pay back £5m of the £29m he stole from his Polly Peck business empire or 
serve an extra six years in prison.

Nadir, 71, who had been Britain's most famous fugitive from justice until he 
was jailed for 10 years this summer, was ordered to make the payment after a 
judge ruled that the disgraced tycoon was lying when he claimed to be penniless.

Justice Holroyde said it was an "affront to common sense" for Nadir to claim 
he had not earned any money during his 17 years in exile in northern Cyprus and 
was living on handouts from his mother.

"I simply cannot accept that such a proud and talented man, living in a 
community which admired him greatly, has for nearly two decades relied on 
subventions from his mother, his girlfriend [and a close friend]," Holroyde 
said in this judgement at the Old Bailey. "Why would he have impoverished and 
demeaned himself in that way?"

The judge said he was "maybe being more generous to him than he deserves" in 
ordering Nadir to pay back just £5m of the £29m stolen "out of pure greed".

Holroyde said he believed Nadir had enough money to "make it worth his while" 
to conceal his true financial position from the court. "He must have the means 
to meet £5m."

He pointed out that, during the theft trial, Nadir had "arrived at court every 
day in a chauffeur-driven Jaguar, and his wife in a £40,000 Range Rover".

The court heard that Nadir, who became known as the The Man from Del Monte 
after buying the fruit canning business, and his 28-year-old wife Nur were 
living in a Mayfair townhouse that cost £1m a year to rent. The judge rejected 
claims that a newspaper business and the lavish Loch Manor Cypriot mansion were 
owned by Nadir's mother, Safiye.

Holroyde said Nadir, who is serving his sentence at Belmarsh prison, south 
London, had chosen not to take the stand to defend himself because "he was not 
prepared to face cross examination".

Two of Nadir's key witnesses were caught out during the three-day hearing. The 
judge said the claim by Nadir's sister, Bilge Nevzat, that her brother had 
lived as a recluse while he was in exile in Cyprus was "impossible to 
reconcile" with a book she wrote describing her brother as a wonderfully 
dedicated businessman.

Nadir's claim not to have a bank account was also exposed as a lie when a 
friend, the Turkish airline tycoon Hamit Bagana, provided the court with 
financial records. Bagana had claimed he gave Nadir £4m to help pay his legal 
fees and support his lavish Mayfair lifestyle during the trial.

"The inescapable inference is that the bank account revealed to the court by 
Mr Bagana is but one of several," Holroyde said. He added that Nadir's wife had 
three bank accounts in Cyrpus in 2010, but none of them was in the local 
currency.

Prosecutors said the £29m thefts, worth £60m in today's money, were specimen 
representations of total thefts of more than £146m. The judge ordered Nadir to 
pay the £5m compensation to the administrators of Polly Peck International 
within two years, but he was not ordered to pay any of the costs of the 
seven-month theft trial, which is estimated to have cost the taxpayer about 
£23m.

Nadir had been a hero among City investors in the 1980s, when he rapidly 
transforming an East End rag trade firm into a £1.7bn multinational 
conglomerate with interests in food, including the Del Monte fruit group, 
electronics, textiles and leisure.

He had been due to stand trial in 1993, but fled to northern Cyprus in May 
that year on a private plane.
 