
I’m a gay man and I have a straight man as a roommate. We get along great and 
he’s very accepting of my gay lifestyle, but I’ve begun having feelings for 
him. To make matters worse, a girl he’s started dating has been over a lot and 
it’s killing me. I hate to ask him to move out because it’s hard to find a good 
roommate. What can I do?

Gay or straight, it makes no difference in terms of how painful it can be to 
develop romantic feelings for someone unattainable. It’s nice to hear that you 
found a straight guy secure enough in his sexuality to feel unthreatened by 
someone with a different orientation. To me, it shows how much our social 
landscapes have changed for the better.

Now… what to do about that pesky crush? Unless he has an especially dull 
gaydar, he probably knows about it and is flattered by the attention. Still, 
there is a tacit understanding that roommates will respect the boundaries – 
whether it’s not eating each other’s food, using all their shampoo or getting 
bummed out when they get involved with someone.

Crushes are often the by-product of a powerful new friendship. The pleasure of 
finding someone who’s fun to be with can be so intoxicating that your brain 
tricks you into believing it should be something more. Sometimes it is, but if 
we learn to show a little wisdom and self-restraint, this can be where truly 
meaningful friendships are born.

If you value your roommate as a friend you would like to have for the rest of 
your life, do whatever you can to let your infatuation blend into the 
background and eventually (hopefully) your friendship will come into focus. 
Spending time with other friends (ie venting) will help, as will refraining 
from too much alcohol in his presence. If it still tortures you to be in his 
vicinity, you’ll have to find a new roommate. Of course, expect feelings of 
anger from him. No one should have to lose their lease because they start 
dating, right?

If you haven’t established any formal rules about how often you have people 
sleeping over, now might be a good time. More than three times a week becomes 
like having another roommate, which changes the financials and isn’t fair. 
Eventually, he might want to move in with her anyway, and you won’t have to do 
anything except find a new roommate and nurse your bruised heart. Maybe look 
for a straight girl next time. She can write to me for advice when she develops 
a crush on you.

• Send your dilemmas about love, family or life in general to 
askmolly@theguardian.com <mailto:askmolly@theguardian.com>
 