
My husband wants to hire a Wicked camper van for our wedding anniversary 
holiday. I’m morally opposed to giving a penny to a company that thinks it’s OK 
to paintdisgusting slogans about women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/apr/12/activists-demand-wicked-campers-remove-misogynist-slogans-from-fleet>
 all over its vans. He won’t budge and insists this is the only way, as other 
options are too expensive or fuel-inefficient. This is going to be our first 
holiday together in five years and I really want it to be special, with no 
drama. But does this have to mean I compromise on an issue I feel so strongly 
about?
Nothing says romance like driving around in a camper van plastered with 
graffiti like “Drink till she’s pretty” and “I can already imagine the gaffer 
tape on your mouth”. Yuck. I don’t want to delve into a thorny discussion about 
the complexities of free speech – as a writer I’m explicitly for it – but a 
marketing campaign that’s founded uponmisogyny, homophobia 
<http://www.news.com.au/travel/travel-updates/advertising-watchdog-upholds-complaints-against-wicked-campers-over-offensive-camper-van-slogans/story-e6frfq80-1226621001186>
 andracism 
<http://www.theage.com.au//national/bligh-attacks-racist-campervan-slogans-20080717-3gqj.html>
 is, in practice, pretty awful. Wicked Campers did issue an apology after a 
petition was signed by over 100,000 people in 2014, and publicly agreed to 
remove the offensive slogans. As of today, however, it still hasn’t done so.

I’m also a big proponent of compromise, but to me, compromise means finding a 
solution that is agreeable to both parties, not just giving in to one. There 
are many other camper companies. If the additional expense really makes the 
trip unfeasible – and you can’t shorten the duration of the trip by a day or 
two (a simple way to cut costs) – then do something else this year and save 
your money for the next time you’re celebrating. Try to come up with three or 
four lower-priced options. If he refuses to budge, and is willing to completely 
disregard your feelings on the matter, I don’t really see much in your union to 
celebrate.

Your conviction in not supporting a company that promotes violence against 
women is commendable, but you can’t just say it. As someone who lives in 
California, to me it’s like saying you want to help conserve water because of 
the drought and then going home and taking 30-minute showers. Don’t just pay 
lip service to your principles. Refuse to go. He’s not going to take off on an 
anniversary holiday alone — and if he does, then I can think of a number of 
alternative things for you to spray paint on the back of that tacky rental van.

• Send your dilemmas about love, family or life in general to 
askmolly@theguardian.com <mailto:askmolly@theguardian.com>.
 