
I spent the first 10 years of my life on the poorer side of Barbados. We kept 
pigs and chickens, which were our only source of protein along with flying 
fish. I remember groups of women coming together to scale, gut and cook the 
fish. Every fin was trimmed, every scale removed. For them, this was a 
stress-free, relaxing ritual. When fresh ingredients are limited, what you have 
needs to be handled carefully and with respect.

My upbringing instilled me with a love of simplicity and seasonality. For 11 
years I ran the Churchill Arms restaurant in Paxford, Gloucestershire and, 
despite my classical training, I never obsessed with recipes – never! Each 
morning I would look at the fresh ingredients we had that day – vibrant 
mackerel, scallops still pulsing in their shells, broccoli so fresh the leaves 
and stalks can be sliced and diced and incorporated into the dish – and create 
the menu based on what was available.

Signature recipes are like a death knell for me. Food shouldn't be 
proprietorial or posturing. I don't want to make food that's revered. First and 
foremost, you need food to live. And, if possible, you want to feel good about 
yourself when you've created something simple that gives both yourself and 
others pleasure. If cooking the meal is stressful, then it goes without saying 
that the cook is unlikely to enjoy the occasion.

I want to use this new opportunity to prove that by keeping it fresh and 
uncomplicated, you can take the worry and stress out of everyday eating. I want 
to encourage you to enjoy food in a way that reflects your own lifestyle, 
abilities and tastes, giving you suggestions and practical advice on meal and 
menu planning and cooking techniques. Whether you're providing your kids with 
healthy packed lunches five days a week, stocking the freezer for elderly 
parents, encouraging teens in the kitchen, throwing an extravagant dinner party 
or cramming in your five-a-day, seven days a week.

It's my mission to stop you feeling like an unpaid chef in your own kitchen, 
so email your everyday eating questions to me atasksonya@theguardian.com 
<mailto:asksonya@theguardian.com>. I can't wait to hear from you.
 