
I recently lost my son to a major stroke just before his 37th birthday. There 
is not a day since that I haven’t cried for him. I am now at the comfort level 
of weeping, and I try to stay strong and continue with my life. But I feel 
guilty for being happy when he’s not here. How can I get over that guilt?

First off, I am deeply sorry. I can only imagine the agony you are in. I know 
the sadness must feel overwhelming, as if you might suffocate from it. (There’s 
a reason why people say “drowning in sorrow”.) It sounds as if the healing 
process has begun, but I want you to be sure that the “comfort level” you write 
about is your own, and not anyone else’s – meaning that if you need to cry 
every day until you feel you can’t cry any more, then so be it. No one will 
judge you for it.

The Swiss psychologist Elisabeth Kübler-Ross famously wrote about the five 
stages of grief: denial, anger, bargaining, depression, acceptance. It’s been a 
useful model for people, but it tends to be forgotten that these stages can 
occur out of order. You can get to the end stage of accepting and find yourself 
reverting to depression or anger. Trust that these stages are important for you 
to experience, and there are no real shortcuts.

My parents lost their young son to cancer before I was born. My mother 
recalled how, soon after he died, she found herself having to attend an outdoor 
party. She looked around in astonishment that there could be any kind of 
celebration after her baby had died. The world seemed impossibly cruel. 
Gradually she was able to find happiness as she started to live life again, but 
the memory of my brother endures. I can’t think of a day when he hasn’t been 
mentioned at least once. She carries the joy of having known and loved him, 
along with the weight of her loss. Holding that joy and grief simultaneously 
makes her one of the strongest people I know. My father experiences his grief 
differently, and so might you.

When you feel guilt, try to imagine how your son would feel. No son would like 
to imagine his mother unhappy. By going on, and living as fully and joyfully as 
you possibly can, you honour his memory. When it’s too much to hold inside, 
write down what you loved about him. If even that is too much, tell a close 
friend, or another family member, and let them carry the weight of it for a 
while.

• Send your dilemmas about love, family or life in general to 
askmolly@theguardian.com <mailto:askmolly@theguardian.com>
 