
I am a 12-year-old atheist attending a Christian all-girls’ school. Before 
I joined, I posted an atheist picture on a social media site. I thought it was 
fine, until a teacher asked to speak with me. Apparently, a few of my peers had 
dug up the picture and were concerned enough to show it to her. She asked me to 
delete it. What should I do?
Personally, I don’t believe your teacher should have the right to make you 
delete your post. She might if you’ve breached the school rules, but it seems 
unlikely, since you posted the picture before you even joined the school. If 
you want to make a stand, I’d reference theUnited Nations’ Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights <http://www.un.org/en/documents/udhr/>, which 
states that we have the right to freedom of thought, religion and expression. 
You can read the entire document online and memorise choice bits. (Hint: see 
articles 18 and 19.)

But here’s something I find interesting: the same document contains another 
section about the right to privacy. It was important enough to include in this 
screed, yet it’s something we willingly forfeit every day through social media. 
This might seem hopelessly old-fashioned, but I can’t help feeling you digital 
natives are basically consenting to your own surveillance.

No doubt my feelings are coloured by the fact that I lost a great deal of my 
own private life when I became a public person at a very young age. Trust me, 
once your privacy is gone, you never really get it back. The internet has only 
compounded this phenomenon, exponentially.

I use social media myself, with ambivalence. I try to think carefully about 
what I post, and still end up making dumb mistakes there is no real way of 
deleting. I’m an adult, however, and I’ve had years to figure out how I want to 
represent myself to the world.

It isn’t fair that your peers dug up your post and squealed on you, but the 
same thing could happen years from now, when you’re trying to get a job or a 
flat. I’m not saying that your opinion is wrong. Just think about what you want 
to share about yourself, and who in your life you deem worthy to have access.

I confess I wanted to show your letter to my own daughter, to prove there is 
at least one kid who actually wants my advice. Then it occurred to me that your 
own mother might feel the same way.

• Send your dilemmas about love, family or life in general to 
askmolly@theguardian.com <mailto:askmolly@theguardian.com>
 