
A close friend has announced her pregnancy. We both struggled to conceive, and 
our shared experience brought us closer. I lost a pregnancy a few months ago in 
its very early stages and, though my husband and I are undergoing treatment, my 
prospects for conceiving are bleak.

Here is the real problem: we want the same name for our potential daughters. 
It’s not an odd name, but neither is it very common or trendy.

She has “won the prize”. Does that give her the right to the name, should she 
have a daughter? I may never have a child, so it seems only right that they 
should take it, but I have no way of knowing how painful it might become for me 
and my husband. I think that she may ask for my blessing when the time comes. 
What do I say?
Miscarrying a wanted pregnancy, no matter what the stage, is heartbreaking. 
And worse, your grief is hard for others to understand, so you are stuck with 
isolation on top of pain. Having a close friend announce her pregnancy at the 
same time is a potent cocktail of conflicting emotions: happiness for your 
friend, jealousy, anger, shame for feeling anger, and exhaustion from trying so 
hard to cover up everything you are feeling. Just know that it’s normal and try 
not to beat yourself up. Your friend will have to understand if you need a 
little distance. Your closeness can always resume at a later date – hopefully 
once you and your husband have a child of your own, either naturally conceived 
or adopted. Both options are a blessing.

The name part is tricky. I’m curious: would it have been OK with both of you 
to use the same name had you both become pregnant? Or if the outcome had been 
reversed and you had “won the prize”, would you have taken the name?

Of course it would be lovely if your friend was compassionate enough to intuit 
your despair and name her daughter something else, but I don’t know how 
important this name is to her. Is it a family name? Perhaps this is your 
friend’s only chance at having a child, and if that’s the case it’s 
understandable that she would want to name her daughter what she likes. If she 
comes to you for your blessing, the best you can do is tell her the truth. You 
really don’t know how painful it will be. It might be less than you think. I 
suspect when you look back on this, years from now, a name will not be the 
thing that matters most.

• Send your dilemmas about love, family or life in general to 
askmolly@theguardian.com <mailto:askmolly@theguardian.com>
 