
A year ago, I agreed to write an advice column for this magazine with no idea 
of what to expect. I didn’t know if I would be any good at it, for a start, but 
I was interested to see what kind of questions I would receive.

Well, for the past year, as your dilemmas have poured in, I’ve answered as 
honestly and as helpfully as I could – though at times I’ve felt stymied by the 
limited word count. Some of your problems were far too complicated to be summed 
up, let alone solved, in 450 words. On the other hand (a phrase I have used 
often, since part of what I try to offer is the other point of view), even in 
the longest, most complex and agonising situation, the essential piece of 
advice I always returned to was: listen and talk more.

Recently, I read back over many of your letters and my responses to them, and 
if there was a consistent pattern to be found, that was it: listen more, talk 
more. There were other patterns, too, especially in the nature of the dilemmas. 
I received a number of letters from daughters who felt that their mothers 
didn’t love them, and mothers who felt the same way about their daughters. Men 
and women who didn’t know how to resist the overpowering pull of infidelity, 
couples struggling to reconcile how they felt about their mate after the 
honeymoon was over.

I couldn’t answer everyone who wrote in, but many were striking in their 
similarity – and, in the end, this reaffirmed what I suspected when I started: 
we are all the same. No matter what our gender, age, orientation, race, 
economic status or social background, we all worry about the same things: how 
do we find love, how do we keep it, and how do we bear the pain of losing it – 
either by betrayal, attrition or death?

Now it’s time to say goodbye, yet I find myself still thinking about many of 
you who sent letters to me. It’s a similar feeling to when I’ve finished a 
project – a book I’ve written, say, or a movie I’ve acted in – where I still 
worry about the characters afterwards and hope that they’re all right. It 
hasn’t happened every time, only with the characters who have got inside 
my head and heart.

I like to imagine that they found their way to a kind of happiness, even if 
I’m not there to see it. So, while many of you surely still have 
your questions, for those I’ve answered – I’ll take you with me. Thanks for 
listening. And keep talking.
 