
I have just discovered that my 11-year-old niece has taken hundreds of videos 
of herself and her friends doing largely innocent things such as playing and 
dancing, but also putting on makeup and so on. She also took videos of herself 
in the bathroom, sitting on the toilet. She has uploaded some to herYouTube 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/youtube> channel, but not the bathroom 
one. I am concerned about her online activity, as I am not around to control it 
and my parents, who are raising her, are computer illiterate. How do you 
suggest I deal with the situation? 

First thing I suggest is that you contact YouTube and notify them of your 
niece’s channel. In their terms of service, it’s clearly stated that if you are 
under 18, a parent or guardian’s consent is required. They also ask that anyone 
under 13 doesn’t use the service. But of course, this is a short-term fix.

The bigger issue is whether your niece fully grasps appropriate digital and 
cyber hygiene. It’s a common parenting issue – one that I struggle with on a 
near daily basis. Although the internet has been around for a while now, it’s 
still the wild west in many ways. Our digitally native kids don’t understand 
how their actions can come back to embarrass or harm them later.

It’s good of your parents to take on the responsibility of raising their 
granddaughter – I’m sure it isn’t easy. But part of parenting today is keeping 
our children safe in all realms, including the digital and virtual. Let your 
parents know your concerns and try not to resent their computer naivety. It can 
be hard to get used to technology – just as it’s hard for our children to 
understand how we existed without it. My own 11-year-old daughter recently 
stared at a payphone in an airport and asked how it worked. She thought it 
would be fun to call her father on it (even though we both had cell phones), 
and I recognised the same wonder in her eyes that my siblings and I shared the 
first time we playedPong <http://www.ponggame.org/> on the TV on Christmas 
morning. I just dated myself, but that’s kind of the point.

Offer to help them become more comfortable. Maybe they won’t be joining 
Snapchat, but they should be aware of their granddaughter’s activities. There 
are programs you can help them install to monitor what she’s up to. Ideally 
we’d like our kids to learn to self-monitor, since they are the ones having to 
navigate this woolly world wide web. After all, it’s only going to get more 
complicated.

• Send your dilemmas about love, family or life in general to 
askmolly@theguardian.com <mailto:askmolly@theguardian.com>
 