
I have been married for two years, and I love my wife to bits. The problem is 
that she lies. If it was a one-off lie it wouldn’t matter, but there are all 
these small things where I feel like she lies to get me to do things. I don’t 
know what to do. I feel sick and sad – and sometimes it makes me wonder if I am 
going crazy.

I get how crazy-making it is to deal with a person who lies, particularly 
someone so close to you. There are myriad reasons why people lie, and without 
knowing your wife, I can’t say what her reason is. I suspect it is something 
she learned in childhood. Maybe it was how her mother dealt with her father. 
Maybe it was a strategy that she found would work for avoiding conflict with 
her parents. Whatever the reason, it is something she needs to unlearn. Any 
successful relationship requires a huge amount of trust and goodwill to thrive, 
and deception undermines both. Eventually that lack of trust erodes the 
goodwill, and anger and suspicion take over. Before you know it, you’ll find 
yourselves estranged from each other.

If you haven’t talked to her about it in a calm moment, then now’s the time. I 
suggest bringing it up when you’re not angry, because it is less likely that 
she will react defensively. Hopefully she can at least try to commit to a more 
truthful relationship if she knows how much it matters, and you in turn need to 
forgive her lapses if she makes an honest effort.

My mother-in-law, a woman with a very strict moral code, used to lie without 
compunction (or malice) whenever it involved family – which was always the most 
important thing to her. It drove my husband (and me) crazy. Once, she told him 
that there was a birthday party his Greek relatives were throwing for him. We 
didn’t want to drive two hours out of the way after we had just arrived on 
holiday, but a party thrown in his honour? How could we possibly decline? 
Turned out, the party was actually for someone else – though the date 
conveniently fell on his birthday. When the lie was exposed, my furious and 
exasperated husband went to find his mother. She laughed and danced, swinging 
her arms back and forth above her head, in the Greek fashion. “But look at this 
party, agape-mou: aren’t you glad you came?”

She had us there. It was a great night.

• Send your dilemmas about love, family or life in general to 
askmolly@theguardian.com <mailto:askmolly@theguardian.com>
 