
My parents are smokers. They smoked when I was a child, in the car, in the 
house and everywhere in between. I was used to having conversations with them 
through clouds of smoke, until I hit adulthood, at which point smoking, and its 
adverse health effects, began to disgust and worry me. Now I have children of 
my own and live in a different country. If I visit my parents, I refuse to let 
my children breathe in their smoke, so will not stay with them. This decision 
is met with irritation and the suggestion of ingratitude on my part. It makes 
me sad that they choose cigarettes over being with my children. Am I being 
selfish?
Smoking is disgusting. Full disclosure requires that I reveal my own hypocrisy 
here: I’m a former smoker. I started as a teenager, much to the horror of my 
own parents, who gave up the habit when they had children. When the public 
no-smoking laws finally took hold in New York City, I dragged my poor friends 
to the same four restaurants in Manhattan known for turning the other way when 
their patrons lit up. I regret that it took so long for me to be able to quit 
for good, and it seems unfathomable to me now that I put my friends, not to 
mention my lungs, through all that.

Speaking from experience, smoking is an addiction that is incredibly hard to 
kick, but by no means impossible. Fortunately for me, by the time I had my own 
children, my non-smoking habit was already well established. But then I married 
into a Greek family. Greece hovers near the top of theworld’s biggest smokers 
list 
<http://www.marketwatch.com/story/10-countries-where-people-smoke-the-most-2014-07-22>
, just behind their Serbian and Bulgarian neighbours. We vacationed there in 
the summers, where I discovered the beautiful country through a hazy layer of 
cigarette smoke. Everyone seemed to smoke – with morning coffee, afternoon 
Nescafé frappés and evening ouzo. I was lucky that my mother-in-law no longer 
smoked in the house, as she had done when my husband was growing up.

It is the opposite of selfish to choose not to expose your children to the 
danger of secondhand smoke. It’s clear the scenario awakens complicated 
feelings you must have felt as a child, choking through the smoke during your 
own upbringing. It’s a powerful urge we parents have, to save our own kids from 
suffering the same things we did. You should feel secure in knowing that your 
children’s safety trumps your parents’ addiction.

• Send your dilemmas about love, family or life in general to 
askmolly@theguardian.com <>
 