
I am a 15-year-old girl, and I have known my best friend for more than 10 
years. Yet every time I see her talking to another friend, I get paranoid she’s 
going to leave me. What’s more, it feels as if we never have anything to talk 
about any more. I hang out with other friends as well, without her, so why am I 
getting so overly anxious?

I don’t think you’re paranoid to worry that she’s going to leave you, because 
if you continue on this road, it’s a certainty. Jealousy is stifling in any 
relationship, whether it’s romantic or platonic. It might be flattering for the 
recipient for a little while, but eventually he or she will find it suffocating.

The question of why you are feeling overly anxious is what to stay focused on. 
If you don’t get to the root of this, you are destined to sabotage your 
friendship, and probably repeat the same scenario in future relationships. To 
that point: it may be useful to look at the primary people in your life, to see 
if there might have been some kind of abandonment that you are inadvertently 
replicating. There’s a school of thought that says that whatever unresolved 
issues we have with our own parents, we unconsciously seek in the other 
significant bonds we form throughout our lives. This means that if you dealt 
with death or divorce in your parents’ lives – or even something less dramatic, 
like an angry or emotionally withholding parent – it can have an impact on the 
way you interact with others. Even our parents’ unresolved issues can get 
passed on to us.

I know this sounds like a case of Russian dolls (a doll inside a doll inside a 
doll…), but eventually, just like the toy, if you investigate you can usually 
find the source and deal with it, and hopefully avoid repeating it. Even if 
you’re doing your best not to reveal your anxiety to your friend, it’s there. 
You both feel it, and it’s a bummer. When friends stop being honest with each 
other, it makes for stilted conversation.

I’d suggest that while you embark on some self-reflection, you should also try 
to enjoy the other friendships in your life. Some variety and space might be 
the best things to reignite the fire of your friendship; and remember, 
smothering is a way to put it out.

• Send your dilemmas about love, family or life in general to 
askmolly@theguardian.com <>.
 