
I’ve been living with my partner for two years and am very happy but I really 
miss my own space. I am out a lot, seeing friends and while he has some social 
plans, he coordinates them with mine so we can spend more time together. 
However, this means I never have a night in alone. I long for an evening when I 
can cook for one and watch my own TV shows. What can I do?

I bet if I asked your partner what is the biggest issue he has with your 
relationship, he’d say, “I really love my partner… but we don’t spend enough 
time together.” One of the most common issues couples face is learning how to 
negotiate emotional distance. Anecdotally (and gender bias alert!), I feel like 
it’s women who tend to equate love and commitment with time spent together. Men 
feel loved when their partner gives them space.

Not to say that women can’t embody masculine traits and vice versa. I’m way 
more confrontational than my husband, have no problem expressing my opinion (as 
evidenced by this column) and love bourbon. He hates arguing, is an altogether 
superior homemaker and will drink cocktails only if they have a tiny umbrella 
in them. Then again, I’m more comfortable talking about my feelings and cry as 
easily as I breathe; he readsCormac McCarthy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/cormac-mccarthy>, likes to punch things and 
gets panicky when he doesn’t have space. Even after nearly 15 years together, I 
still forget this last part. It’s like when my kids throw tantrums and I 
realise it’s because they haven’t consumed anything other than cheese puffs and 
air for hours. When my husband doesn’t get the breathing room he needs, he 
doesn’t express his frustration by throwing himself on the floor and wailing: 
he just acts like a dude and shuts down.

The too close/not close tango is one you will find yourself dancing throughout 
this relationship. The mother of an old boyfriend told me that when you get 
together with someone, figure out if your first big argument is one you can 
live with for ever – because you’re going to keep having it.

It’s not so much what you argue about, but how. Try expressing your feelings 
with love, letting your partner know that having this space will enable you to 
be more fully engaged in the relationship. Scour Groupon for events that your 
partner can enjoy solo while you catch up on a show that only you like. If all 
else fails, beg.

• Send your dilemmas about love, family or life in general to 
askmolly@theguardian.com <mailto:askmolly@theguardian.com>
 