
I still live in the town I was born in and never thought I would stay as long 
as I have. I had a difficult childhood and always dreamed big, but was 
reluctant to make changes. Stability, something I never had when I was a child, 
proved to be very important to me as I grew older. Over the years, my friends 
moved away, but I stayed. I’ve arrived at a time in my life now where I really 
feel like I need to make a decision. I have a well-paid job here and financial 
security that I value because I grew up poor – it’s hard to give that up and 
venture into something new. On the other hand, I really miss my friends and 
would like to be closer to them. I feel like I’m in a state of inertia. What 
should I do?

I could write “Just do it” and leave it at that, but that slogan is already 
taken. Look, I get the reluctance to give up the stability that your current 
job gives you, but that stability can also be an imprisonment. I won’t argue 
that money isn’t important, especially when you had a financially unstable 
childhood and had to struggle to get where you are, but money’s not everything 
– it’s a piece of the happiness pie. The whole pie has a lot of pieces to it. 
And I believe that we shouldn’t overlook how essential meaningful relationships 
are to our happiness.

You don’t want to get to the end of your life and think “What if…” What if I 
had been more daring? Yes, it’s a risk, but life is a series of calculated 
risks. Sometimes they pay off, sometimes they don’t, but they always take us 
somewhere new. We learn, we live and grow, instead of sitting in a comfortable 
job accumulating piles of money to sustain a life that we don’t really enjoy.

This is a big move, though; so while I champion boldness, a little planning 
would also be a good idea. Start budgeting and saving. It will give you time to 
research, and possibly secure, a new job at your destination, and also provide 
a financial cushion for the transition. (I assume you’ve visited the place 
you’re thinking of? Enough times to get past the novelty?) A benefit of this is 
that, as much as we’re supposed to live in the moment, having something to look 
forward to can inject energy and focus into the here and now. So the act of 
preparing will itself reanimate you.

I suspect you won’t regret taking such a leap of faith.

• Send your dilemmas about love, family, or life in general to 
ask.molly@theguardian.com <>
 