
I love my wife. We have a great relationship of 13 years. But I have an 
employee who is stunningly beautiful. She is 24; I’m 40. I cannot take my eyes 
off her and when she is in the room I have palpitations. I respect her work and 
abilities very much, and if I could turn off my intense attraction to her, I 
would. We have a good working relationship, there is no flirting on either 
side, but I sometimes have to sit there with my eyes closed. My reactions feel 
entirely involuntary and very troubling. I don’t feel guilty, exactly, although 
being married I often wonder whether I should; but it is very distracting and 
upsetting. I can’t reassign her to work with other people as she is essential 
to the projects we work on together, but I need this to stop.

There’s no reason to feel guilty about being attracted to your stunning 
employee. We’re all susceptible to beauty and charm. In an ideal world, this 
situation would be something you could talk about with your wife. 
Unfortunately, she’d probably feel pretty bad hearing you’re shutting your eyes 
because this woman has such a powerful effect on you – though she’d feel much 
worse if you acted upon this infatuation.

I would suggest you first speak with someone who is impartial. When your 
hormones are firing, the only way that you can stop it is to step away from the 
situation.

Consider a couple of visits to a therapist or, if for some reason that’s 
unfeasible, talk to a close friend who has proven himself to be both decent and 
discreet. (What you don’t need is a hooting hyena cheering you on; when 
struggling with temptation, people often unconsciously seek out the voice of 
unreason.) Remember, you haven’t done anything wrong: in fact, the point of 
talking about it (with the right person) is to ensure that you don’t.

Then try, if you can, not to work so closely with your colleague. You said 
she’s essential – but so is your marriage. If you continue to be around her, 
chances are you’ll eventually act on your feelings. Not everybody does, of 
course, but it’s a foolish risk to take.

Limit your contact with her as much as possible – and that includes work 
parties.

• Send your dilemmas about love, family and life in general to 
askmolly@theguardian.com <mailto:askmolly@theguardian.com>
 