
I’m the oldest child in my family and have a different biological father from 
my siblings (something I didn’t learn until I was 30). I don’t have a lot in 
common with my family, but I have tried very hard to remain close to them. My 
parents are extremely close to my two siblings, so much so that they have 
family gatherings without telling me, or they invite me, but at a different 
time.

I know this is not a healthy relationship. The problem is that my parents and 
siblings are very quick to cut other family members out of their lives – 
including me. Once, they didn’t speak to me for over a year. Now that my 
children are adults, it feels as though they have little respect for my 
decision to keep forgiving my family. Am I a doormat or a peacemaker?

It’s hard to understand exactly why you choose to maintain a relationship with 
your mother, stepfather and half-siblings. They’ve made it clear they don’t 
value you in their lives and the lack of respect they show you is palpable. 
Giving you a different time at family gatherings? Come on. This is a mistake 
that can be made once.

You know yourself this is an unhealthy relationship, so what is it that keeps 
you tied in? I do find your willingness to forgive your family admirable, and 
your own happiness depends on it. But if they continue to treat you like this, 
I don’t see any reason why you should maintain a relationship with them. 
Forgive them for the pain they have needlessly caused you, and then let them 
go. Focus on the people in your life who are able to return your love without 
the drama.

There comes a point in our lives when we realise that family is not just 
something we are born with, but something we choose. Of course it’s ideal if 
we’re able to have a meaningful bond with our biological families, but just as 
important are the families that we make (our own children) as well as the 
circle of friends we create.

The true barometer for family is showing up, telling the truth and treating 
those we love with dignity and respect. It doesn’t sound like these people meet 
any of the criteria, so unless they have an epiphany and make a serious effort 
to make amends for their behaviour, I say listen to your children and cut them 
loose.

• Send your dilemmas about love, family or life in general to 
askmolly@theguardian.com <mailto:askmolly@theguardian.com>.
 