
I am a single mother of two young girls and I’m trying to date. My problem is 
that I don’t know what to divulge to my dates. The last guy I met, I told too 
much and scared him away. I want to find someone long-term who will be willing 
to one day be a stepfather to my daughters. But I feel so lost and out of touch 
with the dating world, I don’t want to fall flat on my face.
What do you consider telling too much? Did you tell him you cried at the 
finale of The Bachelor? That you wore Crocs for a year when they first came 
out? Then it’s perfectly understandable if your poor date ran screaming for the 
exit. However, letting him know that you are the mother of two is not too much 
– it’s the truth and it’s essential. Your kids are part of who you are, and any 
man who is spooked by this is not boyfriend material. In the words of a dear 
and divorced friend (also a mother of two), “You weed out those suckers right 
away! Who has that time to waste?”

Although I understand your fear of rejection, waiting to mention such an 
important detail can also undermine any chance of a successful future, since 
it’s hard not to view it as fraudulent: a kind of “bait and switch 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bait-and-switch>”. I would also encourage you to 
look at your inclination to conceal. To me it suggests an unspoken layer of 
shame. Being a mother is a wonderful thing. It’s challenging and exhausting at 
times, but it ultimately makes us stronger, deeper human beings. And single 
parents require an even vaster resource of strength, not to mention some 
kickass time-management skills. If you are finding a way to make it work, don’t 
look at it as something to hide, it’s something to celebrate.

I would, however, advise you to refrain from announcing too soon that you are 
looking for someone to be your children’s stepfather. Let the role that a 
prospective partner plays in your children’s lives develop organically. It’s a 
delicate transition, and you want to be sure that everyone has a chance to 
reconcile their own feelings. It goes without saying that any man you bring 
into your children’s lives should be someone you trust and with whom they feel 
comfortable.

I won’t deny that finding the perfect person might take a little longer, but 
you have a better chance of not being disappointed if you are honest upfront. 
It’s worth the wait.

• Send your dilemmas about love, family or life in general to 
askmolly@theguardian.com <mailto:askmolly@theguardian.com>
 