
I split up with my ex a year ago and quickly started dating. I met someone 
nice, but within weeks I discovered that my ex and my best friend had started a 
relationship. When I found out, I felt a rage I had never experienced. I want 
to forgive them but I can’t. I feel betrayed: it’s eating me up and affecting 
my current relationship. I know we can’t help how we feel for people, but I 
just wish they had looked elsewhere for comfort and love.

Ouch. As much as it hurts, the worst you can say about your ex-boyfriend’s 
behaviour is that it lacked imagination and grace. Granted, I’ve always found 
it disconcerting how once our relationships end we go from being the most 
important person in our significant other’s life to strangers – often overnight 
– but pursuing self-interest is standard post-breakup protocol. There are rare 
instances when people establish a real friendship afterwards, but that requires 
a suitable cooling-off time first. And let’s face it: he doesn’t sound like 
stellar friend material anyway.

The real betrayal is that of your best friend. Honesty and trust are the 
foundations of friendship and she has effectively trashed both. The chances of 
maintaining a friendship with her is unlikely, particularly if she is still 
dating your ex.

However, the forgiveness part is work that you must tackle, for your benefit. 
People think of forgiveness as something that has to happen all at once, like a 
religious epiphany, and when they can’t feel it, they give up. It’s more 
helpful to see it as something to practise, like piano or yoga. The more you do 
it, the better you get and the stronger you become.

I’m not suggesting you should have any kind of relationship with either one of 
them. Forgiving them isn’t contingent upon having them in your life. Try to 
take a few quiet moments from your day to reflect on the act of forgiveness, in 
all its forms. Think of people you would like to forgive (your ex and your 
friend), as well as those you might have hurt and who would like to forgive 
you. Maybe a girl you were unkind to in school, or someone you were dishonest 
with. Maybeyou are the person you need to forgive.

Focus on forgiving only as much as you can. Even the tiniest amount makes a 
difference. Perhaps by summer it won’t just be your wardrobe that feels 
lighter. It will be your heart, too.

• Send your dilemmas about love, family or life in general to 
askmolly@theguardian.com <mailto:askmolly@theguardian.com>
 