
I helped my friend get a job where I work. Recently, we both went for 
promotions, and the outcome is that hers is much better than mine. I can’t help 
feeling jealous and disappointed. She is a great friend and so generous. I just 
feel that this is something I have always wanted and she hasn’t aspired for it 
as much. How do I get over this?
One of the hardest things to accept is that one person’s success does not 
equal our failure, or vice versa. We stumble through life watching our friends 
and enemies alike getting promoted, making money, getting that big house, going 
on that extravagant vacation, all with that tedious little voice inside 
convincing us that if only it weren’t for them, all of this would be ours for 
the taking.

We operate on the false premise that there is a finite amount of good fortune 
in the world, and that these select few have gobbled it all up, leaving just 
crumbs for the rest of us. That voice is ill-informed, and the sooner we learn 
to silence it, the better.

I won’t deny that it’s a bitter pill to take when we have to stand by and 
watch people we don’t like succeeding and flourishing in areas that seem wholly 
undeserved, but watching a friend do the same can bring up even more 
complicated feelings: indignation, jealousy, shame – you name it. And it’s hard 
to walk around feeling that toxic.

Rest assured, we have all felt this way at one time or another. No matter how 
successful we are, it is rarely enough. Just realise that we are all in this 
together and your time will come. Let all of those negative emotions burn 
themselves out and try your best to foster the positive feelings that you have 
for your generous friend. Offer your congratulations, even if it doesn’t feel 
100% sincere. Don’t worry, your brain will catch up, just as research has shown 
that smiling when you don’t feel like it can actually combat stress and enhance 
your mood.

Your friend probably senses that her promotion is hard on you, and having you 
support her good fortune will mean a lot to your friendship. If she is really 
the great friend you say she is, she will be the one going out to bat for you 
the next time promotions are on the table.

• Send your dilemmas about love, family or life in general to 
askmolly@theguardian.com <mailto:askmolly@theguardian.com>
 