
One of my best friends jokingly made a negative remark about my wife in front 
of two other friends. What he said had a sexual connotation and it affected me 
badly. I felt threatened and angry. On the one hand, I feel bad about what he 
said; on the other, I risk losing a three-year friendship with him. How do I 
deal with this situation?

Is it worth trashing a three-year friendship over one negative comment that 
was obviously intended as a joke? I’m not sure it is, though that’s without 
knowing exactly how egregious the comment was. Even though you are 
understandably angry and maybe bewildered by your friend’s apparent 
insensitivity, it’s important to keep in mind that everyone makes a clunker of 
a joke now and again – something that sounded funnier in your head, or just a 
case of wildly misreading your audience.

I imagine your friend could tell from your visceral reaction that you were not 
amused and he probably won’t make the same mistake again. But if you want to be 
sure, take him aside, tell him those sorts of comments are unacceptable and 
give him a chance to apologise and make amends. If he doesn’t take it, then, 
yeah, the friendship is probably not worth salvaging.

It’s interesting that it took him three years to make such a joke, and I 
wonder what made him think that now would be OK. I’m going on very little 
information here: I don’t know if you are recently married and maybe he’s 
having a little trouble adjusting. Sometimes friends have one way of 
communicating, and those rules tacitly change when one person gets married or 
otherwise seriously involved. Perhaps he just needs your new situation spelled 
out a little more clearly. Another consideration: what kind of relationship 
does he have with your wife? Are they friends as well? Do they have a history? 
Perhaps this provocation masks some veiled anger somewhere along the line.

Chances are, though, it’s just a major fail of a joke and ought to be seen as 
such. If you do decide to stay friends with him – and I’m not sure there is an 
obvious reason why you shouldn’t – it’s important he knows that kind of humour 
is off the table. Another way to handle it (and I admit I’m being the 
provocateur now) is to discuss it with your wife. If she’s anything like me, 
she’ll know exactly what to say to put him in his place.

• Send your dilemmas about love, family or life in general to 
askmolly@theguardian.com <>
 