
My 20-year-old daughter has no friends. She has been bullied her whole life 
for being too thin, and it has given her low self-esteem. What can I do to help 
raise her confidence? She’s lonely. She works and attends school, but is too 
quiet and can’t make friends. I worry about her. I’ve tried many things, but 
she seems not to want help or to spend time with me. What can I do?
It’s understandable that you worry about your daughter: it’s part of our job 
description as mothers. Do they make friends, will they learn to read, will 
that lisp ever go away, when will she stop wearing the cat ears and the tail 
and saying “meow” instead of “hello”? From the moment my kids were born, I 
fretted over the timing of their every milestone; every little quirk opened a 
Pandora’s box of imagined future calamities in my over-anxious mind. The danger 
is that this kind of worry can obscure moments of real satisfaction.

When our children are in their formative years, we do everything we can to 
give them the social skills that they’ll need to succeed in life and be happy, 
but we are only guides. They are their own people, their own little islands. 
One of the hardest things to accept as a parent is that our kids will have to 
figure things out on their own as they go –just as we did – and that sometimes 
it will hurt. You can’t live your daughter’s life for her. Maybe sheis lonely, 
or maybe she is an introvert and prefers it that way. If she doesn’t, then she 
will have to be the one to transform her life.

It seems you’ve made it more than clear you are available for her, and she is 
lucky to have someone in her life who cares about her as deeply as you do. 
However, your approach might be counter-productive in terms of raising her 
self-confidence. I once had a friend who struggled with social anxiety and 
depression. She tended to isolate herself, as your daughter does, and in an 
effort to help her I wrote long and heartfelt letters detailing my worry. I 
also phoned way too often, smothering her with what another friend called my 
“vortex of good intentions”. Finally, she let me know that my worry was cloying 
and that it actually made her feel worse, not better.

If your daughter wants your help, you have to trust that she will come to you. 
And when she does, try to enjoy what you love about her, instead of seeing her 
as something that needs to be fixed.

• Send your dilemmas about love, family or life in general to 
askmolly@theguardian.com <>
 