
I’ve been with my partner for almost two years and we’re very happy together, 
but lately I have noticed that conversations quickly turn into arguments. The 
problem is that he’s a compulsive devil’s advocate, which upsets me, especially 
when I am confiding in him or would like to discuss a personal issue. He rarely 
takes my side and it makes me feel rejected. How can I make him see that in 
certain situations I don’t want his opinion, I just want support?




If what you want is support and not his opinion you need to let him know. Try 
this: “Honey (or your term of endearment of choice), right now I really need 
you to listen.” Some people are better at this than others, and it might take 
some gentle repeating on your part. Not to play the devil’s advocate myself 
(but let’s face it, that is essentially what I do) most likely he’s trying to 
help.

Often when we’re upset by a personal interaction with someone – an annoying 
work colleague, a family member – it can be helpful to see the other person’s 
point of view. Considering what the other person is feeling can help defuse our 
own anger or hurt. But getting to that place takes time, and it seems that he’s 
trying to rush things. He’s going into Mr Fix-it mode, which is, 
understandably, upsetting you.

I’m sure he doesn’t want to do this. In a quiet moment, when no one is 
annoyed, let him know that although you value his opinion (I’m assuming you do, 
when it isn’t presented in direct contrast to your own, and, when you’re 
upset), sometimes you really just need him to listen.

Ask Molly Ringwald: I cannot take my eyes off my beautiful workmate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jul/03/ask-molly-ringwald-attracted-to-workmate>
Of course being the grown-up, evolved woman that you are, you also have to 
realise that it’s OK for your partner to have an opinion that is different from 
your own. F Scott Fitzgerald once wrote, “The test of a first-rate intelligence 
is the ability to hold two opposed ideas in mind at the same time and still 
retain the ability to function.” OK, so maybe Fitzgerald isn’t the go-to guy 
for relationship guidance, but intelligent he certainly was.

The concept of holding different ideas is one that I try to practise. Not only 
does it make getting along with people much better; it strengthens our sense of 
compassion and connection, and makes it easier to get unstuck and let things go.

• Send your dilemmas about love, family and life in general to 
askmolly@theguardian.com <>
 