
Seventeen years ago, my partner and I split up, and my ex moved to the US to 
be with her new partner, taking my gorgeous daughter with her. For a few years, 
there was shared access and frequent visits, but after I was unemployed for 
a period and unable to make any financial contributions, this access 
evaporated. As a result, I have not seen or spoken to my daughter since she was 
seven. Twelve years later, I’ve discovered that she’s now at university here in 
the UK. It would be very easy to contact her via social media, but would it be 
fair to suddenly complicate her life in this way? Or should I just accept that, 
after so long, my relationship with her was in the past and belongs there? 
Speaking as a parent and a daughter, I feel that there is everything to be 
gained from trying to reconnect. There’s little doubt that she will have 
complicated feelings towards you, having grown up under the influence of a 
mother who probably resented the hell out of you for not sharing the financial 
burden.

You say you were unemployed for a time and were unable to make financial 
contributions, but what did you do after that time? Did you try to make amends? 
Some sort of contribution would go a long way towards showing your daughter 
that you are serious about being a father. Additionally, there are laws that 
protect against one parent preventing the other from having contact, so there 
should have been ways for you to stay in touch. If you didn’t fully explore 
them at the time, you need to accept your share of responsibility in the 
estrangement before you can move on and repair your relationship.

If having your daughter in your life matters to you, you need to make a 
serious, prolonged effort to have any kind of lasting effect. Be prepared for 
some rejection, and know that a strong foundation of trust takes years to 
build; you have a lot of making up to do.

If you can, it wouldn’t hurt to have some counselling to guide you through 
this process. Your daughter might harbour some pretty strong feelings of anger 
and abandonment towards you. Ultimately, the decision whether to have you in 
her life rests with her, and you will have to respect her wishes. But it’s 
worth trying everything you can to reconnect.

• Send your dilemmas about love, family or life in general to 
askmolly@theguardian.com <mailto:askmolly@theguardian.com>.
 