
My husband of seven years suffers from depression and anxiety, and medicates 
with alcohol. It’s got worse over time, but he denies it, thinks he’s normal 
and makes out I’m the crazy one for pointing it out. We have a six-year-old 
daughter, and I stay for her because I know it will be a bloody fight if we 
separate. But it is hard to take care of myself in the midst of it all. What 
can I do?

You don’t have the power to control your husband’s actions, but you do have 
the power to control your own. You also have the obligation to protect your 
daughter from being hurt (either emotionally or physically). There are many 
different treatments for alcoholism, but I believe they are successful only if 
the person in question admits to themselves that they have a problem, and 
clearly your strategies aren’t working. It’s time to look at other options.

If your husband’s alcohol abuse makes him violent in any way towards you or 
your daughter, you must get out immediately and contact the authorities. They 
should help you decide whether you need a restraining order. Perhaps you have 
family members or some good friends who can take you and your daughter in for a 
time. 

I am the last person who would like to see a father prevented from seeing his 
child, but the negative effects of having an alcoholic as a caretaker can be 
extreme. If he’s able to see what he is in danger of losing, perhaps he will 
make the decision to seek the help he needs.

Since he insists that everything is normal, I wonder what your friends think? 
Not justyour friends (people who automatically take your side) but friends of 
your marriage. If the majority are in agreement, you might want to consider 
some kind of “intervention”. Members of your families might want to participate 
if they are concerned. However, if you decide to pursue this option, make sure 
you consult a trained counsellor.

And then there’s you. You know those flight announcements that instruct adults 
to put on their oxygen mask before fitting one on their child? Well, I instruct 
you to do the same, metaphorically. Do whatever your resources will allow for 
you to take care of yourself. Contact friends and family, and see a therapist 
of your own, if you can. There are alsoAl-Anon <http://al-anonuk.org.uk> 
meetings where you can meet other people in similar situations.

• Send your dilemmas about love, family or life in general to 
askmolly@theguardian.com <mailto:askmolly@theguardian.com>
 