
I dislike my mother. I am 41 and I have reached a point where her words, 
actions and opinions are not something I want in my life any more. But I have 
two children, aged six and three, and my dilemma relates to them: do they have 
a right to see their grandmother? She’s not especially awful to them, just 
uninterested, ambivalent and abrupt. I don’t know what to do.

Even if you don’t particularly like your mother, it’s my opinion that your 
children do have a right to know her, provided she isn’t abusive and you set 
some clear ground rules. You may have felt powerless to call her out on her 
insensitivity when you were growing up; but if you feel that her behaviour is 
hurting your kids, then be honest with her and let her know.

This can go one of two ways: she can take your feedback seriously and make a 
concerted effort to change her interactions with them; or (and unfortunately 
the second option is the more likely) she can get defensive, deny any 
accountability and punish you by keeping her distance. If that’s the way it 
goes, then it’s her loss. You can feel at peace, knowing that you are doing 
your job protecting your kids.

There is a third possible outcome, a kind of hybrid, where she gets defensive 
at first and then comes round – but we’re dealing with years of ingrained 
behaviour, so, if she does change, it’s unlikely to happen overnight. It will 
take continual reminding on your part, and only you can decide if it’s worth 
the trouble. Personally, I think family is always worth a try. Who knows, 
through a campaign of compassionate honesty you might be able to repair your 
own relationship with her, too.

If you talk to her rather than write, take some time to outline first what you 
want to say. And don’t have the conversation right after she does something 
especially annoying: it’s the same principle as not going food shopping when 
you’re hungry; instead, wait until you’re clear-headed, or as clear-headed as 
you can be when sitting on 41 years of grievances.

Finally, since your own complicated feelings regarding your mother are likely 
to colour your children’s opinions of her, if you do decide to allow your kids 
the possibility of having their grandmother in their lives, avoid talking 
negatively about her around them. It’s tempting, but resist the urge. Wait 
until you’re out without them – that’s what friends, and bourbon, are for.

• Send your dilemmas about love, family or life in general to 
askmolly@theguardian.com <>
 