
Letter of the week

Q: We want to visit our youngest daughter in Sydney for three weeks in March. 
As we are trying to keep the costs down we were thinking about house-swapping. 
Is this is a good idea, and where do we begin?
Chris Lee, by email

A: A house swap can make for an economical base and give you the chance to 
live like a local. It is a growth area of the holiday market, as people look to 
cut costs. The process is straightforward: you sign up with an agency, which 
usually requires the payment of a fee. Then you contact other members and find 
a suitable swap. The Guardian newspaper's own Home Exchange (
guardianhomeexchange.co.uk <http://www.guardianhomeexchange.co.uk>) charges £29 
for a year's membership. As with other sites, it lets you view available 
properties before signing up. Alternatives includehomelink.org.uk 
<http://www.homelink.org.uk> and intervac.com <http://www.intervac.com>. 

Getting a successful swap will usually require some flexibility over dates and 
may take some time to arrange - while leaving Britain in March for Australia is 
good timing for you, it is less of an enticing prospect for a Sydneysider. The 
other main consideration is how you feel about having strangers living in your 
home. If you decide a house swap is not for you, a serviced flat may be a good 
option. Flats in the centre of Sydney start at around £72 a night with Sydney 
Serviced Apartments (sydneyservicedapartments.net 
<http://www.sydneyservicedapartments.net>).

Q: My eldest daughter is spending her gap year working as a volunteer with 
Project Trust at a performing arts school in Lady Grey in South Africa's 
Eastern Cape. I am planning to visit her with my youngest daughter (14) over 
Easter. Could you suggest the best way to travel there? I would prefer not to 
hire a car but I'm not sure how feasible it is to use public transport. We 
would like to spend our second week in Cape Town. Again, any suggestions of how 
to get there, where to stay and what to do would be gratefully received.
Jean Evans, Stirling

A: Lady Grey is a small town in the north-eastern highlands of South Africa's 
Eastern Cape province. Getting there is a little fiddly, as the nearest 
airport, at Bloemfontein, is three hours' drive away and there is no public 
transport to the town. Getting a flight to Bloemfontein from Scotland involves 
a couple of changes: the easiest route is to fly Edinburgh to Heathrow, then to 
Johannesburg before changing for Bloemfontein. Over Easter, one of the busiest 
times of year, Trailfinders (0845 0585858;trailfinders.com 
<http://www.trailfinders.com>) offers a fare of £899 for this route. 

You could cut around £200 off by flying to Johannesburg and driving from 
there, but I would not recommend a seven-plus hour journey on a first visit to 
South Africa, much of it on minor roads when you have just got off an overnight 
flight. You could fly back from Cape Town at little or no extra cost and a 
one-way flight from Bloemfontein to Cape Town will add around £50 to the total.

Many visitors to Cape Town base themselves in one of the Atlantic suburbs of 
the city and either hire a car or take taxis to get around. But there are also 
some affordable guest houses around more centrally located Green Point and the 
Waterfront should you hanker for something closer to the heart of Cape Town. 
For an overview of the city's attractions, plus links to accommodation, have a 
look atcapetown.travel <http://www.capetown.travel>. 

Q: I would like to go to the Balkan Peninsula in autumn or spring and visit as 
many of the capitals of the following countries as I can comfortably manage in 
a two-week trip: Albania, Montenegro, Bosnia Herzegovina, Kosovo and Macedonia. 
What is the easiest way to travel between them? I have looked at ferries from 
Corfu and Bari, and flying to Thessaloniki or Split. I would like to travel by 
train as much as possible.
Ralph Jones, Rochester

A: With a fortnight you could go to all of these places, but three weeks would 
be more comfortable. Kosovo is the only tricky part of your plan. The official 
line is that you will have problems getting into Serbia from Kosovo if you were 
not in Serbia immediately beforehand. Travellers have mixed reports of how a 
linear journey into Serbia from Kosovo works, from a polite border guard 
"cancelling" Kosovo entry stamps to late-night removals from buses. A way round 
this would be to exit Kosovo via the same third country - Macedonia or Albania 
- from which you entered; or to go to Kosovo after Serbia.

A logical route would involve flying to Dubrovnik, then heading north to 
Sarajevo via Mostar and back through the coast of Montenegro to Tirana, on to 
Ohrid and Skopje in Macedonia. From there you can go into Serbia, then Kosovo 
and back out to Serbia, which should be OK. Belgrade would make a sensible exit 
point, and JAT Airways (020 7629 2007;jatlondon.com <http://www.jatlondon.com>) 
flies from Belgrade to Heathrow for £105 including taxes. Seebalkanology.com 
<http://www.balkanology.com>.

Q: Next March, my father-in-law-to-be has offered to take his wife, daughters 
and associated baggage (partners) to Goa on an all-expenses-paid trip to 
celebrate his 60th birthday. I would like to give him and his guests a 
once-in-a-lifetime experience while we are there. He has holidayed in Goa for 
the past 10 years and has become quite a connoisseur of all thing Goan. I have 
a budget of £600 (£100 per person).
Nick Stone, by email

A: After a decade in Goa it may be that your father-in-law has seen and done 
all of what the state has to offer, but a few more obscure suggestions do 
spring to mind. First, getting away from the beaches into the hinterland can 
take you to Bhagwan Mahavir Wildlife Sanctuary, usually as part of a day tour 
also taking in Old Goa and Dudhsagar Falls. This waterfall is the 
second-highest in India. Further south, the Usgalimal rock carvings are the 
work of some of Goa's earliest inhabitants. You will need a car to get you 
there but won't have much company. And Divar Island is a little-visited treat 
that's lovely to explore by bicycle. The Goa Tourism Development Corporation (
goa-tourism.com <http://www.goa-tourism.com>) has day tours which may offer 
something new to him. Readers' suggestions are welcome.
 