
I am 30 and being bullied. It has been going on for two years and I have been 
ignoring it, not wanting to give my bully the power. This woman makes it her 
mission to spread rumours and gossip to manipulate our social situation. We are 
both participants in a hobby that involves a group of mutual friends. 
Unfortunately, by remaining silent in the face of the rumours, the community 
has labelled me as guilty. I only know this because good friends have warned me 
about what is going on. How do I make it stop? 

One of those platitudes that we hand down to our children is that bullying 
ends after school. Sadly, it doesn’t. There are bullies in every walk of life 
and in every career. In just about any social situation you can think of, you 
can count on a bully slithering around in the background. You are right about 
not giving your bully the power, but I know it’s hard.

I had a bully when I was in my 30s. She was a colleague, and if you’ve ever 
seen the movieAll About Eve <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u3IONdE15vQ>, you 
can get a sense of the plot. She wanted my job and made it her mission to 
discredit me and turn everyone against me. My daughter was two at the time, so 
when I wasn’t working, I was taking care of her. While I was busy, my colleague 
spent her time making friends with my co-workers, organising parties to which I 
was not invited. If her goal was to get my job, her behaviour only strengthened 
my resolve never to miss a day at work. I fought her puerility with unwavering 
professionalism. Sure, I could have exercised my power and got her fired, but 
to me that was an admission that she had real power, and bullies don’t – other 
than the power we give them. If they did, they wouldn’t resort to bullying 
behaviour. They gossip and manipulate in order to quieten the voice screaming 
in their head telling them that they aren’t good enough.

Fortunately, people are bound to figure them out. Eventually, my bully crossed 
the wrong person and ended up getting herself fired. The last couple of months 
that I spent with her replacement were lovely.

I suggest ignoring your bully, because it’s a waste of your time and energy. 
If she lies in front of you, call her out; otherwise, just let her burn herself 
out.

• Send your dilemmas about love, family, or life in general to 
askmolly@theguardian.com <>
 