
I am a gay man in the third year of a relationship with an older man; the age 
difference is just under a decade. We hooked up shortly before I moved away to 
university, and he’s been really supportive when I’ve needed help through 
mental illness, and does not bat an eyelid that I can’t contribute as much to 
the relationship financially as he can. But I feel I’m missing out by being in 
a committed relationship at such a young age, with somebody at a different 
stage of life, who will want to settle down as soon as I leave university. I 
find myself wondering what it might be like to date and get to know a 
completely new person. I don’t want to leave him, but I feel I could drift into 
a stage of life I’m not ready for.

There are pros and cons to a committed monogamous relationship, and there’s 
nothing wrong with wanting to explore a bit before settling down. It sounds as 
if your partner is a caring, nurturing person, so I think you owe him your 
honesty. You may find that he’s happy with some kind of open relationship, and 
this might be an option if it’s OK with both of you. Of course, there’s the 
risk that you might lose him if he’s looking for something more conventional, 
but I think it’s far better to discuss your needs and desires openly now than 
to choose the lying, cheating and going-down-in-flames option that invariably 
accompanies illicit affairs.

From my personal experience, relationships that have an age difference can 
work. My husband is younger than me and sometimes I, too, have felt we are at 
different stages in our lives. But then, as time has gone by, I have realised 
that there are so many things that contribute to a successful relationship – 
age being the least of them.

What seems to make a relationship of any kind endure is the shared desire for 
it to do so. I used to have a friend who was terrified of flying. One day he 
attempted to explain his anxiety, which employed a kind of magical thinking. He 
believed that every single person on the plane had to believe it could fly, and 
if there were any doubters, the plane would crash or never even be able to lift 
off the ground. While I found his theory of aviation funny and ridiculous, it 
is kind of a perfect metaphor for lasting relationships.

• Send your dilemmas about love, family or life in general to 
askmolly@theguardian.com <mailto:askmolly@theguardian.com>
 