
When I was first dating my boyfriend, he texted me one night saying he was 
going for a drink with my friend Lisa. They had bumped into each other at a 
work event. I immediately had a sick feeling in my stomach. Lisa is attractive 
and charming (most men I know like her or have slept with her). I didn’t say 
anything about my feelings at the time, but recently he got a text from Lisa 
and I got upset. I know we have a good relationship and I am probably 
overreacting, but I am wondering where these feelings are coming from and if I 
should listen to them. I trust my boyfriend, but these interactions with Lisa 
bother me a lot. What can I do?
It doesn’t seem as if you trust your boyfriend much. If you did, he should be 
able to hang out with the goddess Aphrodite and that would be OK. Maybe your 
jealousy is entirely unfounded, but I happen to think that the strong feelings 
you describe are there for a reason. It could be the result of past experiences 
that you’re bringing to this relationship – but if something feels wrong, that 
voice is worth listening to.

Every relationship has different rules and expectations that are best 
established at the beginning, rather than building on a foundation of distrust 
and resentment. Since Lisa is your friend (not an old friend of his), it 
doesn’t seem entirely appropriate for her to text your boyfriend and set up 
impromptu drinks meetings on a regular basis. Let your boyfriend know you don’t 
feel comfortable with it, and why, and come to an agreement about what is and 
isn’t OK with both of you. He might have some requests of his own with which 
you might not totally agree, but having a healthy relationship requires some 
compromises for the sake of your partner’s feelings, and that should be the 
priority here.

As far as Lisa goes, she should know better. There are some women who 
tirelessly take on the femme fatale role, unsatisfied until they’re sure they 
have the attention of every man, whether or not he is taken. Maybe she’s one of 
these types, maybe not, but let’s just say that if she makes a habit of texting 
your boyfriend without including you – unless she’s advising him what to get 
you for your birthday or anniversary – I’d definitely lose darling Lisa.

• Send your dilemmas about love, family or life in general to 
askmolly@theguardian.com <mailto:askmolly@theguardian.com>.
 