
A colleague and I have delivered several talks at the law schools across 
London in the last month, in the midst of the training contract application 
season and the vacation scheme milk-round.

In the audience was a mixture of aspiring lawyers looking for training 
contracts, future vacation schemers and those who had recently secured training 
contracts. What follows is a list of the questions were were asked most 
frequently.


Studying

How much of the knowledge gained on the Legal Practice Course (LPC) will I use 
as a trainee solicitor?

“This largely depends on the seats you do during your training contract,” says 
Aditi Misra, an ex-city lawyer and careers consultant at the University ofLaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/law>. “In a corporate seat, your LPC 
knowledge of, say, the Companies Act may be very useful. Alternatively, a seat 
in the securitisation or derivatives products departments may find you dealing 
with brand new areas you haven’t studied. The LPC will certainly help you 
develop key skills, such as research, drafting, analysis and team working but 
also the ability to pick up new areas of law.”

Is there anything I can do to prepare me for the start of a training contract?

Misra says: “If you know your first seat is in an area you have studied during 
your LPC then it’s worth reminding yourself of the key legislation and case 
law. It can also be helpful to remind yourself of how to draft effectively and 
how to use legal research databases.

Seven skills that will land you work experience at a law firm
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jan/04/seven-skills-that-will-land-you-work-experience-at-a-law-firm>
“I’d also recommend having a bit of a break if you can, as transitioning into 
a demanding full-time job can be quite challenging for a lot of students. Being 
a good trainee is a lot about your attitude. Always being enthusiastic and 
willing to lend a helping hand can go a long way in creating a good impression.”

Applications

Can I submit an application again if it’s rejected? If so, how will it be 
compared to the first attempt?

Michael Daniel, graduate recruitment advisor at DLA Piper, says: “You can 
submit a new application if you’ve been rejected in the past and it will be 
considered on its own merits. However, try to think about why your previous 
application may have been rejected in the first place.

“Do you have the minimum required grades? Did you do detailed research on the 
firm? And did you manage to show your commercial awareness and commitment to 
wanting a career in law? Take time to re-write your whole application if 
necessary to give yourself the best possible chance of progressing.”

Is it advisable to connect with graduate recruitment on social media?

Daniel says yes: “The graduate recruitment team is happy to answer any queries 
from students about the recruitment process or the firm in general. It’s also 
worth connecting or following firms’ social media pages as it’s often the best 
way to keep up-to-date with upcoming events at the firm and to be notified 
about upcoming application deadlines.”

In practice

What are the hours really like?

How do I decide what type of lawyer I want to be?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/may/11/how-do-i-decide-what-type-of-lawyer-i-want-to-be-trainee-solicitor>
“It’s a mixed bag”, says Joseph Smith, an associate at the London office of US 
firm Vedder Price. “It’s fair to say that as a junior, you’re most susceptible 
to inconsistent and demanding hours – especially if you’re working in 
‘transactional’ practice areas, such as corporate or banking. At times this can 
be challenging – all-nighters do occasionally happen!

“That said, having worked for both an international and a US law firm, it’s 
very much the expectation that you leave on time during the inevitable quiet 
periods throughout the year.”

How did you choose your training contract seats? Is there a best order?

“I knew from the outset that my interests lay in ‘transactional’ law rather 
than on the ‘contentious’ side. With this is mind, I selected seats that suited 
this interest,” says Smith.

“There’s often a lot of talk among trainees that you should aim to do your 
‘preferred’ qualification seat in your third seat – just before the application 
process begins – but I don’t know if this rings true for everyone, and this was 
certainly not the case at my training firm. Try as hard as you can in each of 
your training seats, because if you impress in a number of departments, this 
helps to build your internal profile and set you up for the position you want 
on qualification,” Smith adds.

How do lawyers stay commercially aware?

Law students: are you 'commercially aware'?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/oct/27/law-students-are-you-commercially-aware>
How you remain commercially aware as a lawyer is very different to how you do 
as a student. As a lawyer, you’re interacting with clients, business people, 
colleagues and other lawyers on a daily basis as well as having the opportunity 
to attend a whole host of internal and external training sessions and seminars.

Speaking with colleagues about the type of transactions they’re working on, 
having regular team meetings and being aware of common themes or trends on 
deals you’re involved with means you inevitably develop your commercial 
awareness every day.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 