
Supporters of the WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/julian-assange> have published an open 
letter signed by 500 prominent artists, Nobel prize winners and human rights 
organisations accusing the UK and Sweden of undermining the UN.

Among signatories to the international appeal are the Chinese sculptor Ai 
Weiwei <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ai-weiwei>, the Indian writer 
Arundhati Roy, the former Greek finance minister Yanis Varoufakis and the human 
rights campaigner Peter Tatchell.

Several Nobel prize winners including the Argentinian Adolfo Pérez Esquivel 
and the Northern Irish peace activist Mairead Maguire, as well as the film 
director Ken Loach, the musician Brian Eno, the author Naomi Klein, Prof Noam 
Chomsky and the journalist John Pilger have added their name to the letter.

Assange, who has sought asylum in the Ecuador embassy, is wanted in Sweden for 
questioning over rape and sexual assault allegations, which he denies. This 
month the UN working group on arbitrary detention (UNWGAD) formally found that 
he had beensubject to arbitrary detention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/04/julian-assange-wikileaks-arrest-friday-un-investigation>
, partially on the grounds that Swedish prosecutors used disproportionate 
methods, including a European arrest warrant, rather than initially 
interviewing him in the UK.

Philip Hammond, the UK foreign secretary, dismissed the UN report as 
“ridiculous”, called it “flawed in law” and described Assange as a fugitive 
from justice. Many senior British lawyers supported his defiance and stressed 
that the report was not binding on the UK courts.

The international letter declares: “We … condemn the reactions of the 
governments of Sweden and the United Kingdom to the finding by UNWGAD that 
Julian Assange is arbitrarily detained. The governments of Sweden and the 
United Kingdom are setting a dangerous precedent that undermines theUnited 
Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> human rights system 
as a whole.

“We urge Sweden and the United Kingdom to respect the binding nature of the 
human rights covenants on which the decision is based, including the 
international covenant on civil and political rights; as well as the 
independence, integrity and authority of the office of the high commissioner 
for human rights and the working group on arbitrary detention.”


The letter calls on both governments to comply with the UN group’s findings 
and “ensure the right of free movement of Mr Assange and accord him an 
enforceable right to compensation”.

Among the signatories is Prof Mads Andenas, the Norwegian former chair of 
UNWGAD. The letter was organised by theJustice for Assange 
<https://justice4assange.com/> website. The letter is headed: “Five hundred 
human rights organisations, Noble [sic] prize winners, jurists … condemn Sweden 
and UK over reaction to UNWGAD Assange findings.”


The letter was presented to a session of the UN Human Rights Council in Geneva 
on Tuesday. The UK has said it will challenge the WGAD opinion.
“It is extraordinary that so many NGOs have called on governments to act,” 
said Alfred de Zayas, the UN’s independent expert on democracy and equality.

“Already we have seen the British government response to the Assange UNWGAD 
case being cited in Sri Lanka and the Maldives to justify non-compliance with 
UNWGAD decisions and UN commitments like investigating war crimes,” said Jen 
Robinson, a member of Assange’s legal team in Geneva.
 