
Hi

I was very hesitant to write or talk but the latest appalling experience 
prompted me to share some thoughts that crossed my mind at the time and during 
my subsequent reading and search. This finally helped me in directing the 
argument or the discussion toward the other side rather than keep defending my 
views.

1. Tere are over 2200 American soldiers defected from the American army in 
Iraq.

2. What do they say after the Washington Post reported that the remains of 274 
soldiers died in Iraq were discovered in the rubbish refuse depot in an air 
base in Dover or Virginia? No wonder why the above soldiers defected from their 
army, they probably heard so many stories that have been swept under the carpet 
or into the dark rooms!

3. The torture POLICY was applied not just in Guantanamo bay but in Abu 
Ghraib, Busra and the rendition prisons. That was a try torture policy.

4. The storming of the religious sect (I can remember the name) in Oklahoma in 
which 146 people were killed by the police.

5. The total death in Libya according to their figures was over 102,000 people 
(64,000 people according to Mr Abdul Jalil in the first months of the bombing) 
, why the UN Human Right Council did note meet at the time and now are so 
concerned abut the Syrian's death.

6. In Libya there were correspondents from allover the world, why all of them 
consistently reported on one side of the story; i.e. everything that was 
against the government.

7. In keeping with their facts distortion policy, the BBC made an interview 
with Free Syrian Army in Turkey and he was asked live how many were they? His 
answer was 20-30 soldiers. The next bulletin they omitted the question 
altogether.

8. The revolutionary democracies that emerged during the Arab Spring, they are 
unable to agree on naming a Minister of Interior in one country and failed to 
form a cabinet for a long time in others and now we see that the majority in 
some new parliaments are refusing to join or be part of the government 
programme. This reminds me of what has happened in Algeria in the past.

9. Advocating free speech and expression should not provoke such a harsh and 
inhuman attacks on the demonstrators in Wall Street and the London and 
subsequently England streets.

10. Where is the freedmen of speech and the democracy that they are 
advocating, and the West proclaims that they have it, when they removed the 
Syrian TV page from FaceBook, they sanctioned Addunia and Al Watan etc. The 
Istanbul Council members managed to silence and savagely attack a delegation of 
Artists tried to get access to a meeting with the AL Secretary General in 
Cairo? Is this the democracy and freedom of expression that they are advocating 
and claiming to implement "in the months ahead"?

11. Do they are allow or can they tolerate the presence in their streets of 
heavily armed militia check points that was shown on Sky repeatedly during 6-7 
December by their Chief Correspondent Stuart Ramsey who has enteredSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> illegally (previous Sky reporter 
Jeremy Thompson "enjoyed his experience" during the 20 days that he spent 
legally in Syria)?

12. How would they explain the State Department requesting the armed militia 
not do benefit from the government amnesty and not to hand over their weapons 
describing them as well trained and desciplined?

13. How is bombing and destroying the railway lines, the oil pipelines, 
hijacking and killing doctors and scientists and other community leaders and 
ordinary people? Are they those armed militia that the State Department 
described as well trained and armed men?

Warmest x
 