
hello Dear

I am sold out with the turquoise, will get som recut by end of september, 
shall I

replace the one turquoise by pink quartz on pink gold ?

tell me,

loves and kisses

[XXXXXXXXXXXX]

Le 4 août 2011 à 11:38, AK a écrit:

I have a birthday, you are right, but don't worry if you can't it's not a big 
deal if they get them late, they are beautiful and worth the wait!

On Aug 4, 2011, at 2:13 PM, [XXXXXXXXXXXX] akhras wrote:

hello Asma

I will try , but the work shop is closed and they had technical troubles 
before closing so the have to get reorganised,

you have a birthday dead line or some thing like that ?

I do my best and let you know asap,

kisses and love

aa

Le 4 août 2011 à 08:37, AK a écrit:

Hello

Welcome back from holidays, I am glad you had a good time...

Really good news on the boutique, I will keep my fingers crossed for you and 
don't worry I am very good at keeping secrets!

For the necklaces, do you think you can finish them by end of August? If not, 
don't worry, but let me know either way. For delivery, I am sure I can find 
somebody who is going to be in Paris - we will sort it out when they are ready.

Kisses to you and [XXXXXXXXXXXX]

aaa

On Aug 2, 2011, at 1:47 AM, [XXXXXXXXXXXX] akhras wrote:

by the way, not a word for the boutique, I share the secret with you, but even 
my brothers don't know, it is still confidential, till september the 8, 
anything can still happen, inchallah not !!

;-)))

love

aa

Le 23 juil. 2011 à 20:50, AK a écrit:

Hello Cousin

I hope you are enjoying your holiday with [XXXXXXXXXXXX] . It's ok for the 
delay in the items, there is no hurry. Yes, the pave is the small diamond, as 
you can see, I am absolutely clueless when it comes to fine jewelry!

Kisses to you both, and don't worry, we are well!

aaa

On Jul 19, 2011, at 11:48 PM, [XXXXXXXXXXXX] akhras wrote:

Dear Asma,

I am ok, fighting for this bloody store still , it is so complicated , but I 
hope I 'll get it at the end of the story !

I didn't move at all but I am tomorrow flying to the Pyrénées with 
[XXXXXXXXXXXX] to visit friends,

then I will participate for a hole week to yoga workshop,

then back to the fight ;-)) and win !!!

The workshop is closing , so I can launch your order mid august to get it done 
by mid september not before, tell me if it is ok ..

what do you call small pave ? the "one" diamond as a Marilyn Monroe mole ?

otherwise at the time I am sold out with turquoise but have the blue calcedony,

let me know, I read my mail every day,

lot of love to all ,

aa

Le 19 juil. 2011 à 18:36, AK a écrit:

Hello [XXXXXXXXXXXX]

How are you? Are you back from holidays? I hope you managed to sort things out 
after your theft - after we spoke, I went home and did backup on all my things!

Sorry I took so long to reply, but I have only just got back the final 
requests for the beautiful lips - here they are:

- 1 Turquoise with yellow gold diamonds and small pave on side

- 1 Cornaline with yellow gold diamonds and small pave on side

- 1 Full Black Onyx with yellow gold diamonds and small pave on side

- 1 Amethyst with white gold diamonds and small pave on side.

Let me know how to proceed...

Many thanks

aaa

On Jun 29, 2011, at 5:13 PM, [XXXXXXXXXXXX] akhras wrote:

hello dearest Asma,

it was so nice to hear from you !!

to have some a thoughtless et futile moment her are the new color, full black 
onyx and cornaline is an orangy colour , both on yello gold would be great,

hug and kisses to all of you ,

loves

[XXXXXXXXXXXX]

<IMG_0299.JPG>
 