
how can i help you? i cant imagine you agree with what is going on -- you've 
done such great work, it can't all be lost on the basis of weeks of bad policy? 
honestly -- how can we be of help?m

On Wed, Dec 14, 2011 at 11:32 AM, AK <ak@alshahba.com> wrote:

My Dear Mayassa

I don't have a problem with frankness or honesty, in fact to me its like 
oxygen - I need it to survive. Life is not fair my friend - but ultimately 
there is a reality we all need to deal with!!!

Take care

aaa

On Dec 11, 2011, at 12:57 PM, Al Mayassa Al Thani wrote:

Dear Asma,

Thanks for your note. I did not want to give it to her before I asked, I 
respect your view point.

Its a very difficult time now in the Arab world, the Arab Spring has resulted 
in foundational change of how government operate their day to day duties. Its a 
shame thatSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> did not participate, 
although the IOC Syrian member was able to reflect the importance of sports at 
times of conflict.

Your last remark i think is unfair. My father regards President Bashar as a 
friend, despite the current tensions - he always gave him genuine advice; the 
opportunity for real change and development was lost a long time ago. 
Nevertheless, one one opportunity closes, others open up -- and I hope its not 
too late for reflection and coming out of the state of denial.

You may find my honesty harsh, but i am only this honest with people I 
consider friends and family. I think you know me by now, I speak my mind and 
happy to be corrected if i am misinformed. As you know, being in positions of 
affluence means that you are often told what you want to hear, and therefore 
voices of reason are rare and should not be undervalued.

We are busy. Always busy -- but it is the boys that keep me on my toes! Hope 
your children are coping under pressure.

To the better times...

m

On Sun, Dec 11, 2011 at 7:19 AM, AK <ak@alshahba.com> wrote:

Hi

Good to hear from you. I would prefer that she did not get my e-mail - I use 
this account only for family and friends. It would be difficult for me at this 
stage to consider her in either category after the insults they have directed 
towards the president - and I do not mean the typical political accusations, 
which come with the job. Should she require anything, her team have my office 
contacts.

As for the games, you may not have heard, but Doha is not a popular 
destination with Syrians at the moment! Too bad since you had a great 
opportunity to change people's views here of the gulf in general, but like all 
great opportunities, they are lost if you don't play your cards right. Hope 
your work is going well and keeping you busy - if it's not, I am sure the boys 
are!

Take care

aaa

On Dec 7, 2011, at 2:48 PM, Al Mayassa Al Thani wrote:

> dear asma,

> how are u? i hope u are well. really, hope the kids are good too.

> in a recent trip to turkey, the wife of the pm asked for your email address; 
she would like to write you.

> i said id ask you first, please let me know if you would like me to pass on 
your details.

> the arab games are about to begin - wasn't so long ago when we saw the doha 
asian games, hafez was so young but already brimming with intelligence.

> its too bad syria is not going to participate.

> best

> m
 