
The European Union has stepped up pressure on Syria's president, Bashar 
al-Assad <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bashar-al-assad>, by hitting his 
closest female relatives with new sanctions. The EU has barred his wife, 
mother, sister and sister-in-law from travelling in the EU and has frozen their 
bank accounts and other assets.

But, as armed clashes and shelling of civilian areas were reported across the 
country on another Friday of mass protests, it remained unclear how the move, 
aimed at curbing the luxury lifestyle of a dynasty engaged in a bloodbath in 
Syria, would affectAsma al-Assad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/asma-al-assad>, the president's British-born 
wife and until recently an international style icon.

The travel ban placed on the four women means they cannot enter the EU. But 
Asma al-Assad is exempted from that ban as the former investment banker is a UK 
national and may still travel to Britain, though not to the rest of the EU.

William Hague <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/williamhague>, the foreign 
secretary, confirmed that Assad would be able to visit her parents, who still 
live in London, but thought she was unlikely to. And despite the asset freeze, 
British government sources said Assad would still be able to use the house she 
owns in London. There would be no attempt to strip her of her British 
nationality.

"British passport-holders have a right of entry to the UK. But given we are 
imposing an asset freeze on all of these individuals and a travel ban on other 
members of the same family or regime, we are not expecting Mrs Assad to try and 
travel to the UK at present," Hague said after a meeting of EU foreign 
ministers in Brussels.

A cache of emails from the Assad regime recently leaked to the Guardian 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/assad-emails?intcmp=239> exposed a culture of 
high-living, luxury shopping sprees in London and Paris at the same time as the 
regime has turned its artillery indiscriminately on Homs and other heavily 
populated urban areas.

The latest violence saw fighting near the Turkish border as thousands took 
part in demonstrations in Damascus, where shots were fired. Security forces 
also opened fire at protesters in Aleppo, one of Assad's main centres of 
support. Shelling was reported from Homs and Idlib. Local activists said at 
least 18 people were killed throughout the country. Al-Jazeera TV said 37 had 
died.

Ausama Monajed, spokesman for the opposition Syrian National Council, called 
the EU measures "too little too late".

Under the EU visa regime, the overall travel ban does not stop the holder of a 
passport of an EU country from continuing to travel to that country.

British officials confirmed that Assad still had a valid UK passport.

"She can still enter the UK. There's nothing legal we can do about it without 
good reason," said one official.

The curbs on her ability to shop in London may be less comprehensive than 
previously thought.

The assets freeze means that any UK or EU bank accounts and credit cards would 
be frozen. But British officials said that under Home Office rules those 
blacklisted would be barred from purchasing "basic goods" but would still be 
able to shop for "luxury items". The criteria distinguishing basic from luxury 
goods was not clear.

"It is important to note that sanctions are imposed on individuals to 
encourage them to change their behaviour," said a British government source. 
"The imposition of sanctions would not lead to automatic arrest or action to 
deprive someone of their nationality."

Assad's assets held in the UK would, however, be frozen, the source added, 
noting that she would not be able to sell her London home or have access to 
rental income. "Any money or other asset that is held in the UK will be frozen 
and can only be unfrozen under a licence from the Treasury," the source said.

President Assad has been under EU sanctions for almost a year, to little 
appreciable effect on his policies and the bloody crackdown he has implemented 
against Syrian revolutionaries and civilians.

Ahmet Davutoglu, the foreign minister of Turkey, which has a 500-mile border 
withSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> and is hosting 17,000 
refugees with 1,000 arriving each day, said the president had to be stopped 
quickly, but Assad constantly played for time in order to crack down ever more 
ruthlessly.

"I compare Homs with Sarajevo [in the 1990s]," Davutoglu said in Brussels. "No 
one can justify attacking urban areas indiscriminately. Now they are attacking 
urban areas with heavy weapons. We have to act quickly … this massacre must be 
stopped."

The Turkish and EU foreign ministers discussed the real prospect of a 
full-blown civil war in Syria, a participant told the Guardian. "It's 
horrible," said the source. "The Syrian National Council is pressing us to send 
weapons, but no one is prepared to do that. The opposition is very divided."

In addition to Assad's relatives, eight other regime figures and two oil 
companies were targeted with sanctions.

The new sanctions, bringing to more than 100 the number of regime figures 
targeted by the EU, showed a resolve, said Hague, "to intensify the pressure, 
the economic and diplomatic stranglehold on this regime. We cannot just accept 
that this killing, this repression of the citizens of Syria, goes on."

The Assad women
 Anisa Makhlouf 
Anisa Makhlouf

The matriarch who maintains influence over the clan, 12 years after the death 
of her husband, Hafez al-Assad. Helped convince regime chiefs that the uprising 
is an Islamist coup.
 Asma al-Assad 
Asma al-Assad

The leaked emails painted a portrait of a woman comfortable with the trappings 
of office. She ordered luxury goods as Syria burned in chaos and seems very 
loyal to her husband.

Bushra al-Assad
 Bushra al-Assad 
Bushra upset the Assad clan when she eloped 13 years ago to marry Assef 
Shawkat, a divorced father 10 years her senior. Influential behind the scenes, 
but eschews the spotlight.

Manal al-Assad

The wife of the youngest Assad brother, Maher, who is reputed to be the 
regime's enforcer. The couple have two children and enjoy a life of privilege 
in Damascus.
 