
The European Union has sought to punish Syria's president, Bashar al-Assad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bashar-al-assad>, by targeting his closest 
female relatives, with sanctions barring his wife, mother, sister and 
sister-in-law from travelling in the EU and freezing bank accounts and other 
assets.

However, it remained unclear how the symbolic move aimed at curbing the luxury 
lifestyle of a dynasty engaged in a bloodbath in Syria would affectAsma al-Assad
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/asma-al-assad>, the president's wife and 
until recently an international style icon.

The travel ban placed on the four women means they cannot enter the EU. But 
Asma al-Assad is exempted from that overall ban since the British-born former 
investment banker is a UK national and may still travel to London, though not 
to the rest of the union.

William Hague, the foreign secretary, confirmed Assad would be able to visit 
her parents, who live in London, but thought she was unlikely to.

And despite the asset freeze, British government sources said Assad would 
still be able to use the house she owns in London. There would be no attempt to 
strip her of her British nationality.

"British passport-holders have a right of entry to the UK. But given we are 
imposing an asset freeze on all of these individuals and a travel ban on other 
members of the same family or regime, we are not expecting Mrs Assad to try and 
travel to the UK at present," Hague said after a meeting of EU foreign 
ministers in Brussels.

A cache of emails from the Assad regime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/assad-emails> recently leaked to the 
Guardian exposed a culture of high-living, luxury shopping sprees in London and 
Paris at the same time as the regime has turned its artillery indiscriminately 
on heavily populated urban areas.

It was not clear whether the blacklisting and assets freeze would prevent the 
Syrian first lady from engaging in shopping excursions to Harrod's if she so 
chooses.

Asked whether she could still go shopping in London, Hague said merely that he 
did not expect this to happen.

Under the EU visa regime, the overall travel ban does not stop the holder of a 
passport of an EU country from continuing to travel to that country.

British officials confirmed that Assad still had a valid UK passport.

"She can still enter the UK. There's nothing legal we can do about it without 
good reason," said one official.

The curbs on her ability to shop in London may be less comprehensive than 
previously thought.

The assets freeze means that any UK or EU bank accounts and credit cards would 
be frozen. But British officials said that under Home Office rules those 
blacklisted would be barred from purchasing "basic goods" but would still be 
able to shop for "luxury items". The criteria distinguishing basic from luxury 
goods was not clear.

"It is important to note that sanctions are imposed on individuals to 
encourage them to change their behaviour," said a British government source. 
"The imposition of sanctions would not lead to automatic arrest or action to 
deprive someone of their nationality."

Assad's assets held in the UK would, however, be frozen, the source added, 
noting that she would not be able to sell her London home or have access to 
rental income. "Any money or other asset that is held in the UK will be frozen 
and can only be unfrozen under a licence from the Treasury," the source said.

President Assad himself has been under EU sanctions for almost a year, to 
little appreciable effect on his policies and the bloody crackdown he has 
implemented against Syrian revolutionaries and civilians.

Ahmet Davutoglu, the foreign minister of Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey>, which has a 500-mile border with 
Syria and is hosting 17,000 refugees with a further 1,000 arriving each day, 
said the president had to be stopped quickly, but that he constantly played for 
time in order to crack down ever more ruthlessly.

"I compare Homs with Sarajevo [in the 1990s]," Davutoglu said in Brussels. "No 
one can justify attacking urban areas indiscriminately. Now they are attacking 
urban areas with heavy weapons. We have to act quickly …  This massacre must be 
stopped."

A lunch of the Turkish and EU foreign ministers discussed the real prospect of 
a full-blown civil war inSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>, a 
participant told the Guardian.

"It's horrible," said the source. "The [opposition] Syrian National Council is 
pressing us to send weapons, but no one is prepared to do that. The opposition 
is very divided."

In addition to his wife, President Assad's mother, sister, and sister-in-law, 
eight other regime figures and two oil companies were targeted with sanctions.

The new sanctions, bringing to more than 100 the number of regime figures 
targeted by the EU, showed a resolve, said Hague, "to intensify the pressure, 
the economic and diplomatic stranglehold on this regime".

"We cannot just accept that this killing, this repression of the citizens of 
Syria goes on."
 