
President Bashar al-Assad's father-in-law is under pressure to step down as 
co-chairman of the British Syrian Society after the resignation of all its 
British board members over the brutal repression of protests against the 
Damascus regime.

Dr Fawaz Akhras, a Harley street cardiologist, faced embarrassment last week 
over leaked emails published in the Guardian thatshowed him advising Assad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/mar/15/assad-emails-father-in-law-crackdown>
 on how to handle the crisis, and his daughter Asma – the president's wife –
shopping for luxury goods while violence raged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/mar/14/gilded-lifestyle-assad-coterie-conflict>
.

Sir Andrew Green, a former British ambassador to Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> and co-chairman of the society, 
admitted it had faced disarray over the past year, and that the emails – 
especially those showing Akhras advising Assad how to rebut evidence of 
civilians being tortured – were the last straw.

"This is all very sad," Green told the Guardian on Tuesday. "The BSS has done 
a lot of useful work but it's very hard to see how it can continue. In the 
light of the recent revelations, the five British board members have decided to 
resign."

Green and the treasurer, Brian Constant, will leave once their duties have 
been completed. Sir Gavyn Arthur, a former lord mayor of London, and two others 
have already gone.

The BSS has been in crisis since the uprising began last March. In September 
HSBC said it would no longer represent the society and Wafic Said, the 
British-Syrian billionaire and philanthropist, resigned as a director.

"The problem is that the BSS has buried its head in the sand, maintaining a 
policy of silence, which amounts to tacit support for the current regime in 
Syria and what is happening there," Said wrote in a letter obtained by the 
Guardian. "This is unacceptable. The BSS has lost all credibility."

Later the BSS issued a statement saying it was "saddened and appalled at the 
violence and loss of life in Syria". But it still faced criticism for giving 
comfort and cover to the regime as the bloodshed escalated. Several other 
members resigned.

Ghayth Armazani, the BSS executive director, said on Tuesday: "We will need to 
decide on the future of our society. Maybe we will have fresh elections. We are 
obviously in a difficult situation."

Chris Doyle, director of the Council for Arab British Understanding, said: "It 
would be hugely damaging to the society's credibility to re-elect Fawaz. He 
should have gone already."

In a related development, diplomats confirmed that the EU is to announce new 
sanctions against 12 "core" members of the Syrian regime, including Asma 
al-Assad,according to sources in Brussels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/mar/20/assad-wife-face-eu-sanctions>. 
The Foreign Office said: "These sanctions are increasing the economic and 
political pressure on the Syrian regime and will continue to stop flows of 
revenue to Assad."

Western governments are this week seeking statements condemning Syria from the 
UN security and human rights councils. The UN estimates 8,000 people have been 
killed.

Russia, which has protected Assad from international censure, showed signs of 
impatience on Tuesday. "We believe the Syrian leadership reacted wrongly to the 
first appearance of peaceful protests and ... is making very many mistakes," 
the foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, told Kommersant-FM radio station. But he 
warned it was unrealistic to demand that Assad resign as a condition of 
dialogue between the government and the opposition.

Russia denied reports it had sent anti-terrorist forces to the Syrian port of 
Tartous, where Russia has a naval base. Lavrov said recent car bombings in 
Aleppo and Damascus and "fairytales about the entry of Russian warships into 
Syrian ports" were disrupting efforts by Kofi Annan, the former UN secretary 
general, to secure a ceasefire and start talks.

On the ground in Syria, the eastern city of Deir el-Zour became the latest 
opposition stronghold to fall as government forces seized it from rebels on 
Tuesday, according to reports from AP.
 