
Lecturers at the University of Central England in Birmingham have reacted with 
cautious approval to the proposal to merge with neighbouring Aston University.

The plan, announced this week by the UCE vice-chancellor Peter Knight, would 
create an institution of 32,000 students with a £200m turnover under the Aston 
name.

Aston's council is due to meet next week to discuss the approach and until 
then the university is declining to comment. The Association of University 
Teachers at Aston also declined to comment - possibly indicating less 
enthusiasm for a merger from an institution that recently rejected a proposal 
to merge with the University of Birmingham.

Today Sue Davis, the regional official of the lecturers' union Natfhe, which 
has hundreds of members at UCE, said that academic staff would be intrigued to 
see what their terms and conditions would be in a new institution. But she said 
they union had been encouraged by Dr Knight's statement that he saw no reason 
for redundancies.

"I can see Aston and UCE coming together. Natfhe wants to be consulted on the 
terms of the actual proposals. To be fair to Peter Knight he has made a 
reasonable assessment of how the two institutions can work together - but how 
it will work in actuality is another matter," said Ms Davis.

Dr Knight has the backing of the UCE governors to ask the government to 
dissolve the former polytechnic (established as a university in 1992) and allow 
it to merge with Aston.

He said: "Aston and UCE have very little overlap in their academic curriculum 
so it is much more manageable. It [the merged university] would be a big hitter 
and a major economic force in the north and east of the city, which needs 
regeneration. Together we could really make that part of the city hum."

The two neighbouring institutions were operating on what was effectively one 
campus, he explained. In a paper to the UCE board he stated: "There is no doubt 
that the most stable relationship, which would yield long-term benefits, is 
likely to be a full merger. As the two universities have different 
constitutional structures this could be achieved by the transfer of UCE to the 
chartered University of Aston.

"Such a development would establish Aston University as a major university, 
mainly in the north and east side of the city with a turnover approaching 
£200m. It would ensure that integrated and coherent provision was available to 
all students studying at the enlarged Aston campus, and that the commitment of 
both institutions to the economic development of the learning and leisure 
quarter in Eastside was reinforced."

Birmingham University's vice-chancellor Michael Sterling welcomed the 
initiative, saying that all three universities in the city should look at how 
they could work together in combination, "or even as one institution" - a 
suggestion angrily rejected by Dr Knight who made clear he was only considering 
a merger with Aston.

A Birmingham University spokeswoman said they should be thinking big about 
higher education in the region. "We have always thought there is a lot more 
complementary provision between us than competitive. If there is a role for 
Birmingham, we are happy to play our part," she said.
 