
AstraZeneca has slipped back following weekend reports  
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-astrazeneca-medivation-deals-idUKKCN0XE147>it 
was considering a £7bn bid for San Francisco cancer treatment specialist 
Medivation.

The US company has already rejected an approach from France’s Sanofi, and is 
said to have hired advisers to help fend off any hostile move. Analysts believe 
there is likely to be interest from other pharmaceutical businesses, with
AstraZeneca <https://www.theguardian.com/business/astrazeneca> just one 
possible bidder. Shore Capital’s Dr Tara Raveendran said:

A bid for the company would fit with AstraZeneca’s recent strategic focus on 
oncology, with durvalumab, Lynparza and Tagrisso expected to collectively earn 
$12bn per annum in sales by 2023F a significant proportion of the $45bn target 
set by chief executive Pascal Soriot following the Pfizer-bid.

Alongside combinations of in-house drugs, Astrazeneca have also looked to 
acquisitions in order to acquire new oncology therapies, including the $4bn 
acquisition for a 55% stake in Acerta Pharma and their blood cancer candidate 
acalabrutinib. Medivation markets prostate cancer drug Xtandi in the US, which 
has come under scrutiny from US politicians who want to see a price reduction, 
but also has pipeline assets such as the P3 PARP-inhibitor talazoparib in 
development for patients with locally advanced and/or metastatic breast cancer 
with BRCA 1/2 mutation.

Whether Astrazeneca will actually make a bid remains unclear. Some have 
suggested that the company is unlikely to enter a bidding war, which could be 
significant given the interest of Sanofi and reported interest from other 
companies such as Roche.

Additionally, 2015 full year results showed the dilutive impact of recent 
transactions with Mr Soriot stating that further large deals would only occur 
if they could immediately boost earnings. However, with growth platform 
Brilinta recently missing its primary endpoint in the Socrates study, there may 
be pressure on Mr Soriot to deliver a share price reflective of Pfizer’s 
takeover offer two years ago and we would not rule out a bid at this stage.

Astra is currently down 3p at 4143.5p.
 