
What’s the name of the show? The Astronaut Wives Club

When does it premiere? Thursday 18 June at 8pm EST on ABC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/abc>

Let me guess, this show is about the wives of astronauts all hanging out? How 
did you know? It’s based on a book of the same name by Lily Koppel about the 
true lives of the women married to the Mercury project astronauts who first 
went into space.

What’s the show’s pedigree? As I said it’s based on a book, which Stephanie 
Savage, who also developed Gossip Girl and worked on The OC, adapted into a 
series. It was supposed to debut last summer, but was held for a year to 
improve it. That is never a good sign.

What happens in the premiere? The seven wives of the astronauts all meet and 
jockey for power on their husband’s behalf. They also endure a photoshoot for 
Life magazine, which holds the exclusive rights to their story. Alan Shepard 
(Desmond Harrington) is the first man chosen to go into space, but we find out 
that he’s a philandering jerk and his wife Louise (Dominique McElligott) is 
distant but loves him. In fact, all of the men are playing around a little bit 
too much down in Florida, so their wives plan a surprise visit and put an end 
to their shenanigans. Shepard’s initial flight is tense and Louise doesn’t want 
the attention from the rest of the women and she sends them packing when they 
arrive at her house with Tater Tot Surprise on the day of the launch. But it’s 
successful, she goes and apologizes to everyone, and then she gets rewarded 
with a trip to the White House.

Is this show any good? Have you ever been dragged along to a work party with 
your significant other, or maybe a family reunion, and you’re introduced to a 
whole host of people in quick succession and you don’t quite remember all of 
their names even though you’ve heard your partner speak about them dozens of 
times before? Then he leaves you and you’re just stranded at this party trying 
to pretend you care about what these strangers are talking about and you just 
don’t. You’d just rather be at home catching up on all the episodes of Orphan 
Black you have on the DVR.

Now imagine, if you will, that experience is a television show and that 
television show is The Astronaut Wives Club where the audience is, quite 
literally, introduced to all of the wives at once (at a party, no less) in very 
quick succession and they are given very few distinguishing characteristics, 
other than the blonde bombshell Rene Carpenter (Yvonne Strahovski). Eventually 
we learn that, along with reserved Louise and sultry Rene, Trudy Cooper (Odette 
Annable) is the feminist one, Betty Grissom (JoAnna Garcia Swisher) is the 
redhead, Marge Slayton (Erin Cummings) is the one with a secret past, Annie 
Glenn (Azure Parsons) has a lisp, and Jo Schirra (Zoe Boyle) is obsessed with a 
book called the Navy Wife, which has to do with the branch of the military, not 
the bean or the shade of blue.

That is all that defines any of these women and the show whisks the audience 
so quickly through meeting them without giving their characters any depth or 
individuality. Like being at your partner’s work event, you’re just struggling 
to remember everyone’s names and trying to differentiate them when they’re all 
sporting the same bob and wearing the same pastel sweater sets (as on fleek as 
they may be). This makes the pilot dreadfully boring.

The show is trying to finally pull away the curtain that Life magazine used to 
shield these women’s real stories from the public eye all those years ago, but 
there just doesn’t seem to be that much there. The writers can’t monkey around 
with history and make things too dramatic or sudsy (which is strange as this is 
the product of someone who worked on two of the last decade’s best soaps). What 
we’re left with is like an ambrosia salad made of Jell-O and mayonnaise – it 
may be a nostalgic treat to look at, but you certainly don’t want to taste it.

Which characters will you love? Trudy, a pilot in her own right, has just the 
right amount of spunk and a healthy disregard for her ne’er-do-well husband 
Gordon. My real favorite is Marge, the kind of dame who has some great stories 
to tell around an ashtray full of Pall Malls. She struggles to keep all of 
those good times (and bad) from affecting her husband’s career in the show’s 
one tiny bit of intrigue. And her secrets? Not that spectacular.

My real favorite is Marge, the kind of dame who has some great stories to tell 
around an ashtray full of Pall Malls

Which characters will you hate? It’s very hard to sympathize with Louise, who 
comes across as pointlessly cold and repressed without any reason. Maybe if we 
learned a bit more about her or were given something to like it would be 
better, but she just seems like an overly competitive, rude hardass who doesn’t 
want to associate with the other ladies.

What’s the best thing about it? The attention to period detail is absolutely 
flawless. (It probably doesn’t hurt that the media relentlessly covered these 
women’s lives at the time.) The outfits are fantastic, the hair and makeup are 
great, and everyone looks like she’s hanging out in Betty Draper’s kitchen. The 
art directors are working very hard, now if only the writers were giving them 
something to lurk beneath those burnished surfaces.

What’s the worst thing about it? Getting every single detail about American 
home life in the late 50s accurate isn’t hard to pull off. So why do some 
scenes use contemporary music (unless the soundtrack on the review copies of 
the episodes I watched was temporary)? It’s hard to stay in the moment when a 
song that just served as a jingle in a Starbucks ad is scoring the action.

Should you watch this show? The second and third episodes are much better when 
the women finally distinguish themselves from the pack, but there’s no reason 
to wade through that dreadful pilot to get there. If you find this period 
interesting, you’re better off reading the source material than wasting a 
beautiful summer night watching this show.
 