
AstraZeneca <https://www.theguardian.com/business/astrazeneca> has teamed up 
with genome pioneer Craig Venter to launch a huge gene hunt in the most 
comprehensive bet yet by a pharmaceutical firm on the potential of genetic 
variations to unlock routes to new medicines.


Treatments for cancers and Alzheimer's on the verge of a breakthrough
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/apr/20/treatments-cancers-alzheimers-verge-breakthrough>
 The initiative, announced on Friday, involves sequencing up to 2 million 
human genomes – the complete set of genetic code that acts as the software of 
life – including 500,000 DNA samples collected by AstraZeneca in clinical 
trials.

 Financial details of the 10-year project were not disclosed but Mene 
Pangalos, Astra’s head of early drug development, said the company would be 
investing “hundreds of millions of dollars”.

AstraZeneca <https://www.theguardian.com/business/astrazeneca> aims to 
identify rare genetic mutations involved in every kind of disease by scanning 
DNA from volunteers who agreed to have their genomes sequenced and to provide 
access to detailed medical records.

 The project is made possible by a dramatic fall in the cost of genetic 
sequencing. It took government-funded scientists $3bn (£2bn) and 13 years to 
sequence the first human genome by 2003. Today, it costs around $1,000 and 
takes just three days.

 AstraZeneca will work with Venter’s US company Human Longevity (HLI), which 
will sequence the genomes, including a million from HLI’s database, and use 
machine-learning software to find patterns in genetic variations.

 The British group, which is establishing an in-house genomics research centre 
in Cambridge, where it is relocating its global headquarters, has also 
partnered with the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute and Finland’s Institute for 
Molecular Medicine.

 AstraZeneca is not the first drugmaker to start amassing troves of human DNA 
in this way but Venter, one of the first scientists to sequence the human 
genome, said it was the biggest commitment to date by any pharmaceutical 
company.

 Regeneron Pharmaceuticals signed a deal with Pennsylvania’s Geisinger Health 
System two years ago to sequence partial genomes of some 250,000 volunteers, 
while Roche’s Genentech unit signed a deal last year for HLI to sequence tens 
of thousands of genomes.

 “The big thing here is the magnitude of what we are trying to do,” Pangalos 
said. “This takes it to a completely different level and I think it is going to 
be relevant of every therapeutic area.“

 Until now, the field of genomics has largely failed to live up to the hype of 
hoped-for medical breakthroughs, although more recently genetic understanding 
has been crucial in the development of some cancer treatments.

 Now, thanks to industrial-scale sequencing and advances in gene editing that 
allow scientists to quickly test the effects of genetic variations, progress is 
expected to accelerate.

Cancer breakthroughs trigger big pharma interest in drugs and deals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/01/cancer-breakthroughs-trigger-big-pharma-interest-drugs-deals>
 Venter believes it could also unleash a new era of forensics, with HLI trying 
to predict what people might look like from their DNA.

 AstraZeneca’s decision to embed genomics across its research and development 
follows a push last year by the company to expand gene testing into areas 
including heart disease and asthma.

 “I believe we really have finally turned the corner and genomics will become 
central in drug development efforts,” said David Goldstein, a genetics expert 
from Columbia University, who chairs AstraZeneca’s genomics advisory board.
 