
American astronomer-detectives have pinpointed the exact date and time at 
which one of the world's great photographers made one of his country's great 
images.

Ansel Adams <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ansel-adams> was always 
precise about exposure times and lens settings, but sometimes vague about when 
and where he took his pictures.

Autumn Moon has been dated as both 1944 and 1948. But Donald Olson and Russell 
Doescher of Texas State University and colleagues report in Sky and Telescope 
that they have settled the matter.

They pored over lunar tables, topographic maps, weather records and 
astronomical software, and decided that Adams created Autumn Moon on September 
15 1948, at 7.03pm Pacific daylight time.

Professor Olson and his colleagues are pioneers of a new science called 
forensic astronomy.

Using artists' notes and the sky details, they have identified the dates and 
places at which Vincent van Gogh painted two of his most famous pictures, and 
the exact spot where Edvard Munch conceived of his painting The Scream.

Five years ago, Prof Olson used one of Chaucer's Canterbury Tales to identify 
evidence of one of the planet's highest ever high tides.

Last year, he used his knowledge of the lunar cycle to propose a new date for 
the battle of Marathon in 490BC.

Adams's photograph is entitled Autumn Moon, the High Sierra from Glacier Point.

Prof Olson and his colleagues visited Yosemite national park in California to 
retrace the photographer's steps to the nearest 10ft. They calculated that to 
have snapped the waxing gibbous moon at exactly that height at that time, Adams 
must have set up his tripod just off the trail, below a stone hut at Glacier 
Point.

Prof Olson also rediscovered a long-forgotten colour version of the same 
scene. The evidence of the shadows shows that it must have been taken two 
minutes before the more famous black and white study. The team also found that 
57 years on, the pattern of lunar cycles was about to repeat itself. Between 
6.50 and 6.52pm on September 15 2005, astronomers and photography fans will 
have a chance to see exactly the same scene.
 