
The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) has charged AT&T with misleading millions 
of its smartphone customers, claiming the telecoms giant charged them for 
“unlimited” data plans while reducing their data speeds, in some cases by 
nearly 90%.

The FTC’s federal court complaint alleges 
<http://www.ftc.gov/system/files/documents/cases/141028attcmpt.pdf> that the 
company failed to adequately disclose to its unlimited data customers it would 
“throttle” their data speeds once they reached a certain limit, to the point 
that many common mobile phone applications – like web browsing, GPS navigation 
and watching streaming video – became difficult or “practically inoperable”, 
said the FTC chairwoman, Edith Ramirez.

“AT&T promised its customers ‘unlimited’ data, and in many instances, it has 
failed to deliver on that promise,” said Ramirez. “The issue here is simple: 
unlimited means unlimited.”

The mobile company, second largest in the US, called the charges “baseless” 
and “baffling” and claimed it had clearly communicated changes in its policies 
to its customers.

The FTC has recently shown a keen interest in the promises made by telecoms 
and tech companies. Google and Apple have both been sanctioned by the regulator 
over charges on mobile apps. Snapchat too wasreprimanded over privacy promises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/may/08/snapchat-ftc-false-claims-messaging-service>
 the FTC said it had failed to fulfill.



Ramirez said the FTC was defending a “bedrock principle” of customer 
protection that companies had to deliver on their promises. “If you make a 
promise about unlimited service, we expect you to fulfill those promises,” she 
said.

According to the FTC’s complaint, AT&T’s marketing materials emphasised the 
“unlimited” amount of data that would be available to consumers, but failed to 
alert them to the data speed cap. Customers who cancelled their contracts after 
being throttled were charged early termination fees, typically amounting to 
hundreds of dollars.


AT&T became the exclusive telecoms carrier for Apple’s iPhone in 2007, 
offering “unlimited” data for $20 a month. It dropped the unlimited plan in 
2010 for new customers, but by then millions of customers had taken up the plan.

The company began throttling data speeds in 2011 after customers used as 
little as 2 gigabytes of data in a billing period, the FTC charges. The 
regulator estimated that AT&T has throttled at least 3.5 million unique 
customers a total of more than 25 million times.

The FTC said millions of unlimited mobile data plan customers had elected to 
keep their unlimited mobile data plan rather than switch to a tiered mobile 
data plan or obtain service from another provider.

“Numerous customers using 3G devices have experienced an 80–90% decrease in 
speed when throttled under the original version of defendant’s throttling 
programme, and a 60–85% decrease under the revised version,” the FTC said in 
the complaint.

Consumers in AT&T focus groups strongly objected to the idea of a throttling 
programme and felt “unlimited should mean unlimited” and the company received 
thousands of complaints about the slow data speeds under the programme, 
according to company documents obtained by the FTC.

Some consumers quoted the definition of the word “unlimited”, while others 
called AT&T’s throttling programme a “bait and switch”. Many consumers also 
complained about the effect the throttling programme had on their ability to 
use GPS navigation, watch streaming videos, listen to streaming music and 
browse the web.

The complaint charges that AT&T violated the FTC Act by changing the terms of 
customers’ unlimited data plans while those customers were still under 
contract, and by failing to adequately disclose the nature of the throttling 
programme to consumers who renewed their unlimited data plans.

“The FTC’s allegations are baseless and have nothing to do with the substance 
of our network management programme. It’s baffling as to why the FTC would 
choose to take this action against a company that, like all major wireless 
providers, manages its network resources to provide the best possible service 
to all customers,” Wayne Watts, AT&T senior executive vice-president and 
general counsel, said in a written statement.

“We have been completely transparent with customers since the very beginning. 
We informed all unlimited data-plan customers via bill notices and a national 
press release that resulted in nearly 2,000 news stories, well before the 
programme was implemented.”

The FTC’s move follows on from an announcement that the Federal Communications 
Commission is investigating the throttling practices of the major mobile 
carriers.

“Wireless customers across the country are complaining that their supposedly 
‘unlimited’ data plans are not truly unlimited, because they are being 
throttled and they have not received appropriate notice,” said an FCC 
spokesman. “We continue to work on this important issue, including with our 
partners at the FTC, and we encourage customers to contact the FCC if they are 
being throttled by AT&T or other cellular providers.”

 