
The atheist bus campaign was a pretty good joke when it started and like all 
comedy it has to be played with a straight face if it is to work. Everyone has 
to pretend that it is an argument about ideas when it is much more primitive.

It started with Ariane Sherine being upset by fire and brimstone ads on the 
side of London buses – and these, we may assume, were also meant to upset and 
disconcert the unbelievers. So she invented a slogan and a campaign which was, 
let's face it, meant to piss the Christians off right back.

Every time a Christian is upset or complains the campaign can count another 
success.

But I am not sure whether Ron Heather 
<http://www.google.com/hostednews/afp/article/ALeqM5g2AMj4DnuWJpC3gMtGKVbiQDmbng>
, the elderly Southampton bus driver, is in on the joke. He says it goes 
against his beliefs to parade about with something so untrue and offensive on 
the side of his bus. So he has been found another route to drive. This is 
eminently sensible, even though bus drivers should not in principle be able to 
choose which messages their buses display according to their own preferences. 
But no member of the public suffers because of his actions. The atheists feel a 
warm glow that someone is noticing them and taking their ideas seriously. The 
Christians do too. So why should anyone worry?

I worry because the bus is so very silly if it's taken as an intellectual 
effort. No one believes there is "probably" no God. If you think that God is 
the kind of thing which can be assessed scientifically, then you suppose the 
probability of his existence is vanishingly small; if you believe in God and 
understand science, then you will not think that the probablity of God is 
something that can be calculated.

But if we translate the slogan into playground language it makes perfect 
sense. "Yah?", it asks "Boo! Sucks!" comes the reply. And advertising is hardly 
meant to be intellectually coherent. That's why it's absurdto complain to the 
ASA about it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/jan/13/religion-christianity>. 

Did the slogan have to be so fatuous as "don't worry"? The only people not 
worrying now are those who get all their news from the sides of buses. The idea 
that we should stop worrying is quite as irrational right now as anything urged 
by religions. The American empire is melting along with the world economy; if 
the economy survives and with it our prosperity, the icecaps will melt instead 
and that will be even worse. Most of the people now alive in the world have 
never known times when they should worry more – so being told not to worry 
because there probably isn't a God is about as useful as being told that Jesus 
will come back and make it all all right.

Blaming the world's troubles on religion is as irrational and detached from 
the evidence as anything that the religious believe. Like religious beliefs, 
though, belief in irreligion functions as a tribal marker. It divides us from 
them, and makes us feel better about doing them down. And some people obviously 
find in anti-religion the kind of cause and meaning which religion tells them 
is lacking from their lives. It would be very humourless to get upset or take 
them seriously.

The only proportionate Christian response to the bus has come from Southwark 
Cathedral 
<http://www.southlondon-today.co.uk/tn/News.cfm?id=1059&headline=Stray>, where 
the staff have taken in a homeless kitten which turned up at Christmas and 
named it Doorkins Magnificat. There is talk of making an application to the 
fabric commission for a catflap.
 