
In their latest poster campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2009/nov/18/atheist-bus-campaign>
, Ariane Sherine and members of the British Humanist Association appear to have 
decided that it is a Very Bad Thing that parents might try and bring up their 
children within a religious or philosophical framework of their choosing. They 
suggest it is wholly unacceptable that anyone might suggest that their own 
child might belong to a particular religion.

While I know I risk offending the loyal and noble readers of Cif here, I 
genuinely can't believe that people actually donated good money to spend on 
billboard advertising that proposes such a misguided and patronising argument.

It is telling that Sherine resorts to quoting Richard Dawkins when she needs 
to find someone to explain the rationale for the campaign: "Children are 
routinely labelled with the religion of their parents", Dawkins suggests. By 
who, exactly? And if the answer is by their parents, who are the BHA to tell 
them to stop?

It is surely central to the role of a parent, whether committed to a religious 
faith or not, to want to pass on to their child the things they value most, the 
beliefs and world view that shape how they live. It is also consistent with 
that role to want to have those beliefs and world view acknowledged and 
affirmed as part of their children's education.

That is why we have a diverse range of schools within the state sector, from 
which parents can choose. And they choose Church of England schools in their 
tens of thousands because we offer a balanced education within a Christian 
framework. We aim to develop in children the ability to make informed choices 
in life. We aim to give them a good understanding of Christianity, and other 
faiths too. We aim to make them good citizens, hospitable and respectful 
towards people of all faiths and none. And, yes, we do hope that they might 
decide – when the time is right – that Christianity is a faith worth exploring 
more deeply.

Last year, a poll commissioned by the church suggested that the majority of 
people agree that parents should be able to choose a state-run school for their 
child based on their own religious, moral or philosophical considerations. 
Two-thirds of parents held this opinion, consistent with the spirit of 
plurality in education which is protected by the European Convention on Human 
Rights.

Earlier this year, the Guardian commissioned a similar poll, which showed that 
"60% thought children benefited from a faith-based education, while 69% of 
those with school-age children supported a religious ethos at school".

In light of public support for faith-based education, the non-issue of 
"labelling children" could just be a smokescreen. But it's a shame that 
charitable donations are being used in such a wasteful way.
 