
The advertising regulator has received almost 150 complaints that an atheist 
ad campaign, proclaiming "There is probably no God. Now stop worrying and enjoy 
your life", is offensive to Christians and other religions that believe in a 
single God.

Stephen Green, the national director of Christian Voice, is among those who 
have complained to theAdvertising Standards Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/asa>, arguing that the atheist campaign 
broke the advertising code on the grounds of substantiation and truthfulness.

The ASA has received 141 complaints about the Atheist Bus Campaign which 
launched earlier this week 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/world/2009/jan/06/atheist-bus-campaign-nationwide> on 
buses throughout England, Scotland and Wales, as well as the London 
underground. However, 39 of the complaints are regarding newspaper and online 
articles about the campaign, which the ASA has no power to deal with.

The complainants claim the ad campaign is offensive to Christians and those of 
other monotheistic religions.

Green said: "It is given as a statement of fact and that means it must be 
capable of substantiation if it is not to break the rules.

"There is plenty of evidence for God, from people's personal experience, to 
the complexity, interdependence, beauty and design of the natural world.

"But there is scant evidence on the other side, so I think the advertisers are 
really going to struggle to show their claim is not an exaggeration or 
inaccurate, as the ASA code puts it."

The regulator has not yet decided if the complaints warrant a formal 
investigation to see if the campaign has broken the advertising code.

Hanne Stinson, the chief executive of the British Humanist Association, which 
launched the campaign, said she "pitied the ASA if they are going to be 
expected to rule on the probability of god's existence. However, if they do 
investigate we will be very happy to respond".

The campaign uses quotes from famous public figures – such as Albert Einstein, 
Douglas Adams, Emily Dickinson and Katharine Hepburn – who have either endorsed 
atheism or expressed scepticism about the concept of God.

Writer Ariane Sherine first suggested the idea in a Guardian Comment is Free 
blog last June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/oct/21/religion-advertising>, 
saying an atheist bus campaign would provide a reassuring counter-message to 
religious slogans threatening non-Christians with hell and damnation.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 