
Contributors to Thought for the Day mustn't attack the beliefs of others. It's 
a basic BBC rule. This is not a place where Christians can fire pot shots at 
Hindus or Muslims have a go at Judaism. Which is why it's just not appropriate 
for atheists. Not that they haven'timportant things to say 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/feb/06/religion-another-thought-for-the-day1>
. The problem is that atheism is defined by what it's against, that it is not 
theism. And to introduce such a sense of "againstness" would fundamentally 
alter TftD's character.

Some years ago, Richard Dawkins was offered a slot to experiment with a 
secular TftD. He told us religious explanations were "childish and 
self-indulgent", "infantile regression" and "lazy". The whole thing was one 
long assault.

Of course, lots of people will agree with Dawkins. And they absolutely must 
have equal access to the BBC's airwaves. But this sort of denunciation is not 
what TftD is about. My wife hates football – many do – but she hasn't been 
lobbying for a slot on Match of the Day to tell people why.

As individuals, atheists may have opinions. But on TftD I speak as a 
representative of a body of opinion that has a definable literature, a major 
place in world history and billions of adherents.

I wish atheists would get a life and stop following believers wherever they 
go, demanding to join in. Perhaps they are incapable of leaving us alone. For 
atheism is parasitic upon religious belief, united only by what it is against. 
Just as TftD should not include religious fundamentalists denouncing -heathens, 
so it should not include atheists denouncing believers. This is a place for a 
very different, gentler sort of reflection – and that's why so many people 
continue to love it.

Read the full blogs and join the debate online. From Monday Comment is free is 
podcasting a series of secular thoughts, Another Thought for the Day, from 
Claire Rayner, AC Grayling, Muriel Gray, Polly Toynbee and others,here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/series/another-thought-for-the-day>.
 