
Religion is on the decline, with nearly half of us in England and Wales – and 
more than half in Scotland – saying we have no religion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/23/no-religion-outnumber-christians-england-wales-study>
. But is faith also on the wane? Religion and faith are often treated as 
synonymous. But as an atheist I am frequently told that I must have faith too, 
since I can no more prove that God does not exist than theists can prove he 
does.

To see if faith is weakening we have to go beneath the apparent mathematical 
precision of surveys to the vaguer ideas they attempt to quantify. Even 
religiosity is hard to measure. Around half of us may not be “religious” but 
other surveys tend to show that a fifth of us at most – probably less – are 
prepared to call ourselves atheists. The remainder reject organised religion 
with its hard-to-swallow doctrines and inconvenient rules, but they retain a 
belief in a spiritual dimension that is more religious than it is secular.

People of no religion outnumber Christians in England and Wales – study
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/23/no-religion-outnumber-christians-england-wales-study>
If “religious” is a slippery concept, “faith” is even greasier. In some of its 
senses, we certainly do see plenty of faith outside organised religion. If 
faith is a kind of passionate conviction, for example, then look no further 
than the zealous breed of atheist who not only personally rejects religion, but 
also sees it as an offence to human rationality. Like the religious, their core 
belief becomes the centre of their lives, their moral compass, their blueprint 
for a better world.

Faith can also provide the godless with a source of salvation that is based 
more on hope than experience. Reason, for example, is vitally important, but 
mainly because, like democracy, it is only better than the alternatives. 
Nothing is more powerful for helping us to understand the world accurately. But 
when we use reason to try to move from understanding to managing and changing, 
experience tells us we often go horribly wrong. From central state socialism to 
failed “scientific” diets via the excesses of industrial agriculture, an 
over-abundance of faith in the power of rational planning has too often left us 
in a terrible mess.

The claim that non-believers have faith is most credible when applied to the 
meaning and value we place on life. Without religion, we live in a world that 
is, from an objective point of view, devoid of all purpose. Even the biological 
struggle for survival is a kind of cosmic accident about which the universe 
itself is indifferent. And yet we find value, in some sense even create it, 
giving a reason for living that nothing or no one else can give us.

So if faith is some kind of belief not fully warranted by reason and evidence, 
then, yes, the non-religious have it too. However, it would be a mistake to see 
this as proof of the equal importance of faith to everyone. The key factor is 
not whether or not we have faith of some kind, but in how central it is to how 
we live.

This is most evident when you probe the old canard that atheism is a faith 
position because you cannot prove God does not exist. This makes the mistake of 
assuming that everything that cannot be 100% proven is equally unproven, which 
is patently false. Atheists do not believe in God because they see no good 
evidence that such a deity exists. This falls short of full proof but it is 
fundamentally an evidence-based position. Many theists, however, believe that 
there is God while fully accepting that there is an absence of evidence for his 
existence. Indeed, Jesus said that those who believe without evidence have a 
purer faith than those, like Thomas, who demanded proof. “Blessed are they that 
have not seen, and yet have believed,” reports John’s Gospel.

No religion is the new religion | Andrew Brown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/20/no-religion-britons-atheism-christianity>
Given that historically faith has been seen as a distinctively religious 
virtue that non-believers – ye of little of faith – lack, it is curious that so 
many now want to attribute faith to us heathens. I think this is a sign of a 
lack of confidence among many religious believers who are aware that their 
beliefs seem increasingly out of place in the modern, scientific world and are 
therefore keen to show that, in fact, we’re all in the same boat of belief. If 
everyone needs faith, then religious belief requires no special justification 
when, actually, that is precisely what it does need.

What we all need is not best described as faith. It is simply more than can be 
proven by logic and science. We need to believe in things that are not entirely 
justified by reason, but that does not require us to embrace creeds that reason 
tells against. The non-religious do not find meaning, purpose and value by 
taking a leap into the unknown and transcendental. We find it in the beauty and 
joy of life, and in the empathy that makes us see value in the lives of others 
too. These things are not facts captured by fundamental physics but nor are 
they religious mysteries to be taken on faith. What grounds us ethically can be 
found entirely on the literal ground on which we live.
 