
A £140,000 advertising campaign aimed at persuading more people to "come out" 
as atheists waslaunched today 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2009/jan/06/religion-atheism> with a 
plan to broadcast a message doubting God's existence on the sides of buses, the 
tube and on screens in central London.

Its slogan – "There's probably no God. Now stop worrying and enjoy your life" 
– can already be seen on buses in central London. A total of 200 bendy buses in 
London and 600 buses across England, Scotland and Wales will carry the slogan 
from today and tomorrow following a fundraising drive which raised more than 
£140,000.

The money raised will also pay for 1,000 advertisements on London Underground 
from Monday. Organisers today unveiled a set of quotes from famous writers and 
thinkers who endorse the atheist message.

The launch, held today near the Albert memorial, featured speeches by Dawkins, 
author of The God Delusion; Ariane Sherine, creator of the Atheist Bus 
Campaign; and Hanne Stinson, from the British Humanist Association.

The fundraising drive was prompted by a suggestion from comedy writer Sherine, 
who received support from the British Humanist Association (BHA) and atheist 
campaignerRichard Dawkins <https://www.theguardian.com/science/dawkins>.

Sherine, a television comedy writer, suggested the idea in a Guardian Comment 
is Free bloglast June 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2008/jun/20/transport.religion>, 
saying an atheist bus campaign would provide a reassuring counter-message to 
religious slogans threatening non-Christians with hell and damnation.

Speaking at the launch , Sherine said the sheer number of donations received 
had demonstrated the strength of feeling in Britain.

She said: "This is a great day for freedom of speech in Britain and I'm really 
excited and thrilled that the adverts have been approved and I hope that they 
will make people smile on their way to work.

"I am very glad that we live in a country where people have the freedom to 
believe in whatever they want."

There has been overwhelming financial support for the project, which exceeded 
its funding target less than 24 hours after being launched, raising nearly nine 
times the amount needed to have its posters on buses.

Around £6,000 was needed to run adverts in London but within two days, 
individuals and organisations had pledged more than £87,000. More than £135,000 
has been pledged so far. Today's event will also reveal the next stages of the 
campaign.

The theology thinktank Theos welcomed the campaign, saying it was a "great 
way" to get people thinking about God. "The posters will encourage people to 
consider the most important question we will ever face in our lives. The slogan 
itself is a great discussion starter. Telling someone 'there's probably no God' 
is a bit like telling them they've probably remembered to lock their door. It 
creates the doubt that they might not have."

The success of the British campaign has inspired atheists in the US to run 
their own advertising slogans in Washington DC. The American Humanist 
Association launched a bus advertising campaign last November with the slogan, 
"Why believe in a god? Just be good for goodness' sake", appearing on the 
sides, rear and insides of the city's 230 buses.
 