
Unlike your bog-standard London bus, the atheist bus doesn't really get you 
anywhere (All aboard - including Einstein - as atheist bus advert campaign goes 
nationwide, 7 January). As we're never going to know whether God exists or not, 
what is the point of spending a lot of time, effort and money to suggest he 
might not? If this is purely an exercise in promoting freedom of speech and 
belief, it would be far more productive to donate these resources to a human 
rights organisation which is actively defending and protecting those at the 
sharp end of oppression of speech and belief. On another day in which thousands 
of people are dying in wars and of preventable diseases, this sort of empty 
grandstanding is offensive.

I have a suggestion for a slightly more positive and constructive - although 
just as wasteful - campaign. Why don't the atheists and those who believe in 
God get together to promote the same thing? Both camps obviously believe in 
goodness, kindness and charity. So why not actively promote these, instead of 
creating a negative and pointless turf war?
Tom Allen
Dubai Marina, United Arab Emirates 

Three cheers for the atheist bus! If the ads contribute to a national 
conversation about life's big questions, who could be against them? Of course, 
I'm setting aside some of the campaign's internal contradictions: is it an 
atheist or an agnostic bus campaign? The difference between the two is hardly 
negligible. And the enlisting of Emily Dickinson in support of the campaign is 
particularly ill-judged. Such a sublime poet eschews and transcends labels. "We 
both believe, and disbelieve a hundred times an Hour," wrote Dickinson in a 
letter to Otis Phillips Lord in 1882, "which keeps Believing nimble." Quite.
Rev Dr John Breadon
Oldbury, West Midlands

Having been inspired by the bold and dynamic slogan the British Humanist 
Association intends to use on London's buses - "There's probably no God" - may 
I suggest three more powerful slogans for buses? "The moon probably isn't made 
of green cheese." "The Earth probably isn't flat." "Babies probably aren't 
delivered by the stork."
Michael House
London

Howard Jacobson's article (Behold! Jesus the Jew, G2, 9 January) helpfully 
redresses impoverished and overly sentimental views of the person of Jesus, but 
singularly fails to address the current state of Christian theology and its 
understanding of Jesus. The 25 years since the publication of EP Sanders's 
seminal work Jesus and Judaism have been full of scholarly activity around the 
historical Jesus, his cultural milieu and the importance of understanding 
Jesus's Jewishness for a proper interpretation of New Testament texts.

In pursuing his line of argument, Jacobson is himself guilty of a series of 
errors and sins of omission. These include neglecting to mention the Jewishness 
of the concept of the "son of God" (Daniel 3:25) and the idea of bodily 
resurrection, Paul's own Jewishness and his concern for Israel (cf Romans 
10-11), and the fundamentally Jewish themes that run through the Gospel of 
John, which he finds antisemitic. Ironically, he is in danger of repeating the 
church's historical error of underplaying the Jewishness of Jesus and 
Christianity.
Paul Bickley
Researcher, Theos

Howard Jacobson's excellent article surprisingly fails to mention the work of 
Karen Armstrong, whose Channel 4 series and accompanying book The First 
Christian addressed similar issues some 25 years ago. The notion of Jesus as a 
reforming Jew whose legacy was decisively detached from the parent religion by 
Paul of Tarsus was, as far as I am aware, first presented there. She also makes 
the telling observation that the letters of St Paul - which effectively laid 
out the principles of Christian theology - actually predate the composition of 
the gospels, which, if true, suggests that the New Testament was conceived from 
the start as a means of putting Judaism in a bad light - with the appalling 
historical consequences of which we know.
William Bailey
Llangollen, Denbighshire
 