
Gerardo ‘Tata’ Martino, the former Argentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/argentina> coach who quit after failing 
to lift this summer’s Copa América Centenario, will take charge of Atlanta 
United in their first season in MLS next year.

Patrick Vieira brought a vital asset to New York City FC: respect
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/26/patrick-vieira-brought-a-vital-asset-to-new-york-city-fc-respect>
Martino was confirmed on Tuesday as the club’s inaugural head coach. The 
53-year-old resigned from his Argentina post in July in protest at what he 
called “serious problems” at the Argentinian FA, and Atlanta have spent the 
past couple of months negotiating to bring him to America.

“We are delighted that a manager of Gerardo’s caliber and pedigree will be 
leading our team into our inaugural season,” said Atlanta United president 
Darren Eales. “His deep experience and success at both the club and 
international levels speak for itself, and his vision and approach aligns very 
well with our club philosophy. We’re confident in his ability to help build a 
winning culture both on and off the pitch.”

Atlanta will join Minnesota United in MLS next season, as the league expands 
to 22 teams. Martino’s appointment represents a coup for the ambitious 
franchise, which has already sold more than 22,000 season tickets to break 
Seattle’sMLS <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mls> expansion team record.

“This is an incredibly exciting and historic day for our club,” said Atlanta 
United owner Arthur Blank. “Gerardo brings an unprecedented level of 
international experience to our head coaching position that will be a valuable 
asset to our players and demonstrates the continuing growth of Major League 
Soccer. We’re thrilled he’s chosen to join our club and look forward to 
welcoming him to Atlanta.”

Martino oversaw a record of 19 wins, seven draws and three losses in his two 
years in charge of Argentina, but failed to capture a trophy despite leading 
his team to two straight Copa America finals. His side lost to Chile on 
penalties in this year’s Copa, a year after the same outcome – a shootout 
defeat after a 0-0 draw – in last year’s tournament, meaning Argentina’s 
23-year wait for a trophy continues.

Martino coached Barcelona to second in La Liga in 2013-14, and led Paraguay to 
the World Cup quarter-finals in 2010, where they lost to Spain. His Newell’s 
Old Boys side reached the Copa Libertadores semi-final in 2013.
 