
You could get a bit more involved with this pilaf, cooking a vast amount of 
onion for a long time and adding all sorts of spices, fruit and herbs. The 
result would be delicious and worth the effort, if the timing's right, but if 
it's 9pm on a Monday evening you're not going to be in the mood for that, so 
this is a pared-down version.

(Serves 2)
For the tagine:
Olive oil
½ onion, peeled and finely chopped
1 garlic clove, peeled and sliced
1 tsp ras el hanout
Salt and pepper
1 aubergine, cut into 2.5cm dice
200g chopped tomatoes (tinned are fine)

For the bulgar pilaf:
½ onion, peeled and thinly sliced
1 tsp ground cumin
2 tsp ground coriander
½ tsp ground cinnamon
100g bulgar wheat
200ml chicken or vegetable stock
2 tbsp raisins
2 tbsp flaked almonds or 1 tbsp pine nuts (optional)

To serve:
Plain yoghurt
Small handful of fresh coriander

For the tagine, heat a splash of oil in a saucepan and gently cook the onion 
and garlic until soft. Add the ras el hanout along with a good pinch of salt 
and a twist of pepper, and cook over a medium heat for one minute, stirring 
continuously. Add the aubergine and tomatoes, and about 150ml water, stir to 
combine, then cover and cook for 15 minutes, until the aubergine is soft. Leave 
to cool. Cover and store in the fridge for up to five days.

For the pilaf, heat a splash of oil in a saucepan over a medium heat and cook 
the onion until soft and lightly browned. Stir in the spices and cook for a 
further minute, then add the bulgar wheat and stock. Bring to a boil, cover, 
and cook over the lowest heat for 15 minutes. Keeping the lid on, remove from 
the heat and leave to stand for five minutes. Stir through the raisins and 
almonds or pine nuts, if using. Cool, then cover and store in the fridge for up 
to five days.

Serve with the yoghurt and coriander.

• From Love Your Lunchbox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/food/9781909108806/love-your-lunchbox-do-ahead-recipes-to-liven-up-lunchtime>
 by James Ramsden.
 