
Economists in New Zealand <https://www.theguardian.com/world/newzealand> have 
expressed alarm at a housing market boom which could soon see average prices of 
property in the country’s largest city pass the $1m mark.


In Auckland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/auckland>, the cost of an 
average domestic property has risen from $550,000 during the last property boom 
in 2007 to nearly $810,000 now. House prices increased at a rate of 14% last 
year, while the rest of the country’s index remained stable.


Some houses are increasing in value by $1,000 every day while 36 suburbs in 
the city now have an average house value of $1m or more. And at current rates 
the whole city’s average will be $1m within a year-and-a-half.


The National government has in part recognised the boom and taken action for 
the first time to tackle what many believe is a housing crisis.


It announced a multimillion dollar development plan to build affordable homes, 
a move added to a previously announced tax on property speculators.


But some economists believe more needs to be done, and while growth is 
expected to slow, that will merely move the $1m mark back a month or two.


Small, one–bedroom apartments are selling for $800,000 and delapidated wrecks 
in barely desirable suburbs are fetching more than $1m.


Senior research analyst Nick Goodall of property analytics company CoreLogic 
said: “It is inevitable the average price in Auckland will be $1m.”


In the past 15 years housing has seen a phenomenal investment in Auckland, as 
huge demand and limited supply has increased prices at record levels.


Expensive land, and restrictions on building new and denser housing, has seen 
limited new stock come on the market. And a strong economy, record net 
migration, especially to Auckland, and banks happy to lend money in a market 
with significant capital gains, has seen people paying over the top of each 
other.


“The narrative goes because it has been good in the last 10 or 15 years, it 
must be good forever,” said Shamubeel Eaqub, principal economist at the 
Institute of Economic Research.


But it is impossible for this to continue, he says.


“Auckland is in a massive bubble.”


New Zealand is unique in the OECD, where Auckland is the country’s only major 
city.


And the city’s housing market is effectively holding the country’s economy to 
ransom: restricting interest rates, exchange rates, and limiting exports and 
business investments, according to Eaqub. And it is also having “caustic” 
social effects as the Kiwi dream of home ownership evaporates in Auckland.


The rampant growth in the past two years has made homes unaffordable for first 
home buyers in Auckland, according to an affordability report by AMP 360.


The growing inaccessibility of home ownership is also increasing inequality, 
according to Eaqub.


“It is telling the story of disconnect and resignation by younger generations 
that are falling further and further behind, and we are sowing the seed of 
inequality between generations that will grow more and more,” he said.


The savage competition in the market has also been blamed for growing 
xenophobic and anti–Asian attitudes. Although foreign buyer data is limited, 
Eaqub estimates about 8% of the Auckland market are identifiable cash buyers 
and likely to be foreigners, while investors are 45%.


In last week’s budget the government announced a $52m investment in the 
development of 500 hectares of state land in Auckland. The government had 
earlier revealed a tax on property speculators who sell houses within two 
years, and required foreign buyers to have a New Zealand bank account and tax 
number.


This is coupled with new Reserve Bank rules, specifically targeting Auckland 
property investors, requiring them to have a 30% deposit.


These are small steps in the right direction to signal the “sacred cow” of 
property investors are finally being targeted for their role in the housing 
crisis.


“Whenever we have conversations about Auckland, you can’t say it has been 
driven up by investors. It was foreigners, it was everybody else, but it wasn’t 
investors. Yet when we look at the numbers the majority who are the biggest 
group who buy and trade houses are people who own many properties,” said Eaqub.

 