
Behind The Ropes, Sky's peep into the lives of David Haye and Audley Harrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/audley-harrison>, was a decent first stab at 
the genre. It was no 24/7, HBO's award-winning version which has boosted that 
network's pay-per-view take up by 40%, but Sky did it on way less resources.

HBO gets three months, a huge budget and access all areas. Sky had four weeks 
and was hampered by Haye's refusal to let the cameras into his home or talk to 
his family.

Audley, meanwhile, loved it. The smart London kid from a broken home, who grew 
up on the notorious Stonebridge estate in north London and got himself a 
university degree, is a great advertisement for self-help. He deserves anything 
good that comes his way.

I don't think he's going to win, but he has finally won something that for a 
long time seemed out of his reach: the affection of the fans.

Chris Eubank did the same trick, turning from panto villain into lovable 
eccentric.

Ultimately, though, their job is fighting. Eubank, as hard a man as ever wore 
gloves, never totally opened up when he was a posturing champion, preferring 
mind games to the trenches. When called upon to do so towards the end of his 
career, against Carl Thompson, Steve Collins and Joe Calzaghe, he was not found 
wanting. In defeat, he became a hero.

If only Audley – who turned 39 a few weeks ago – had trusted himself to go 
all-out in the ring during his strange professional career rather than box 
safety-first from a distance like the excellent amateur he once was, he might 
already be a world champion.

Then again, maybe not. He's only done what works for him and all his moves are 
embedded in muscle memory developed since he took up the sport. If he tries to 
change now, he might make a total fool of himself.

Either way, we will miss him. He's already hinted tomorrow night's fight will 
be his last (although a win might change his mind). Let's hope he gives it all 
he's got.

Mobile hell

Rob Jorgensen, Sky's genial PR guy, has been more popular than usual the past 
few days. A national newspaper put his mobile phone number at the end of a 
story on the fight and Rob was deluged with calls from punters wanting to buy 
the fight. His new nickname is Call Centre.

Hatton comeback?

I hope rumours that Ricky Hatton is still thinking about fighting again are 
just that. Haye and Harrison went to his gym in Hyde this week for a final 
loosening up and the place was buzzing with the fight game's usual mix of 
nonsense and mischief.

Hatton wasn't there but his father, Ray, said: "As of today he's lost well 
over two stones. He's looking really good and very relaxed. He's getting back 
to his old self, his sense of humour's there and he's got that little spring in 
his step. I think working with some of the lads here and giving them a bit of 
advice [has been good for him] and obviously he's feeling a bit fitter."

Would he fight again? "I don't know," Ray said. "Ricky will be the one that 
makes his mind up. At the moment we're just happy we're seeing Ricky Hatton 
back and there's a buzz in the gym and just having his presence here and the 
little bit of advice he's doing."

Working out is fine. Getting knocked is not.
 