
For a fighter who has broken more promises than Nick Clegg, Audley Harrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/audley-harrison> has not lost the ability to 
leave his audience in that netherworld between incredulity and awe.

Only Harrison could recycle boasts from 10 years of underachievement and make 
them sound believable. If he takes David Haye's WBA heavyweight title from him 
at the MEN Arena on Saturday night, he will wonder at the shock on the faces of 
the 20,000 present – because he has been telling us it would be so not just for 
weeks but years.

This, he said again, is "the culmination of my journey". Don Quixote did not 
travel so far or so fruitlessly. So far, Harrison would add. In the final days 
before British boxing's biggest fight since Ricky Hatton beat Kostya Tszyu to 
win the world light-welterweight title in Manchester and this fine arena a 
little over five years agoin 2005, he is bursting with confidence.

Harrison and Haye, two of the sport's most articulate practitioners, would 
have made a good music hall double act and, performing separately, they left 
their audience punchline-drunk yet again.

No sporting event outside a high-society divorce settlement simultaneously 
raises as much heat and cash as a world heavyweight title fight, and, in the 
interests of acrimony, there seems no danger yet of a reconciliation between 
two boxers who once toured the club scene together, from London to Texas.

The setting today was Hatton's gym in Hyde on the outskirts of Manchester, the 
script a variation of past insults. Haye opened the smarty-pants stakes by 
stating he wants "more than a minute's entertainment" out of his 39-year-old 
challenger.

"I'm preparing for the best Audley Harrison," Haye said, "and I want the best 
Audley Harrison to turn up. I really do – for the viewers, the paying public, 
the people watching on Sky 3D. I know people who have actually bought 3D 
televisions specifically to watch this fight."

With all due respect to his roots, there may not be hundreds of them living in 
Bermondsey, where Haye grew up and still has an apartment. He inhabits a 
celebrity world now, with his eyes fixed on an acting career but his finger 
very much on the pulse of this fight. He moves as sharply as a welterweight and 
looked dazzlingly quick as he went through his loosening-up repertoire, a 
30-year-old champion at the height of his powers.

Harrison, meanwhile, did not disappoint. Alone, probably, among athletes who 
stand 6ft 6in and weigh 18 stone, he can often look as silly as he sounds. 
Today, dressed head-to-toe in bright red, he might have been mistaken for Santa 
had he wandered out into the night.

But Harrison is nobody's fool. He got this shot, as he reminded us, through 
perseverance and, where Haye brings zest, he has an undeniable presence. Rarely 
do you leave him not wondering if everything he has just said might come true.

He dragged up the fighter's pre-fight mantra – "I'm prepared to go 15 rounds" 
– but he did look in better shape than a week ago. "If it goes 12 rounds [the 
championship distance], I hope I get the right verdict."

That was not a slur on the officials, just an echo of past failure. He wants 
to be the first British Olympic champion to win a world title and he says: 
"This is my first chance. You only get one shot. These are the moments when I 
excel. You can't deny destiny. You don't just turn up with a hope and a prayer. 
I've been in training camp 12 weeks, paying the price. There will be no excuses 
this time."

That would be nice.
 