
Audley Harrison's journey, surely, is over. In just 70 seconds – 12 seconds 
quicker than hisdefeat to David Price last October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/oct/13/audley-harrison-david-price> – 
the 41-year-old heavyweight crumbled in the face of raw power, this time 
delivered by Deontay Wilder, who was entitled to celebrate his 28th straight 
knockout victory in as many fights with the chilling boast: "I'm a beast with 
God-given talent."

The 6ft 7in American, built along lean and muscular lines, immediately called 
out the Manchester heavyweight Tyson Fury, saying: "I will come back to England 
whenever he wants to fight him."

Fury offended some but caught everyone's attention with an uneven, spectacular 
debut at Madison Square Garden last weekend, when he knocked out the former 
world cruiserweight champion Steve Cunningham in a roughhouse brawl and signed 
off with a song for the crowd. He and Wilder could do good business one day.

Harrison has nowhere to go. As against Price, he barely pawed out a jab and, 
when Wilder started swinging lefts and rights in a neutral corner as if 
impersonating a threshing machine, Harrison was doomed. He took some crunching 
shots, slid down the ropes, covering his head as best he could and, although he 
bravely beat the count, his plea to the referee, Terry O'Connor, that he was 
fit to continue was as optimistic as scheduling this contest for 12 rounds in 
the first place.

"I beat the count," Harrison said. "I was still in the fight, ready to fight." 
He was not. When he looks at the tape, even this most inventive and charismatic 
of dreamers will know it. And, if he weighs up the evidence, he will admit 
there is no more to give, after 31 wins (23 stoppages) and four knockouts in 
seven defeats over 12 years. He has entertained us often – and enough. He won 
Olympic gold, in Sydney 13 years ago and he should cherish it.

As for the 27-year-old Wilder, who has been carefully groomed by Golden Boy 
Promotions since he won bronze at the Beijing Olympics, he may just be the real 
thing. He is raw and still untested but he has chilling power – and a good line 
in victory rhetoric.

"It was a great performance," Wilder said, "and a long time coming. I am going 
to be the next champion of the world. Nobody can stop my power. When I feel a 
face in my glove, it excites me.

"As soon as I hit him, the fight was over. His eyes were in the back of his 
head. I am a beast with a God-given talent but experience can take you only so 
far. Nobody can stop me." GBP's chief executive, Richard Schaefer was by 
Wilder's side, beaming.

Earlier, Amir Khan's brother Haroon, who won a bronze medal at the 
Commonwealth Games for Pakistan – an achievement greeted with admirable 
equanimity by the crowd – joined the ranks of several British boxing brothers 
in the professional game with a four-round points win over a three-fight 
novice, Brett Fidoe.

Khan is a slimline, bantamweight version of his brother, and the genetic tics 
were obvious: a stiff jab, lot of right hands thrown with vicious intent and a 
willingness to box in the hitting zone. He also showed decent evasive skills, 
although Fidoe, whose only win was a stoppage result in his last outing, 
reddened his features with a couple of good right-hand swipes.

Amir was not enthusiastic about Harry turning over when they first discussed 
it more than a year ago, although he has gradually warmed to the idea, and the 
younger Khan was honest enough to admit: "I could have fought better. There was 
a lot of pressure, obviously, but it was great to fight in front of a big 
crowd. Definitely different from the amateurs."

Harrison would agree with that.
 