
We all have embarrassing little episodes we like to expunge from our CV: the 
two months spent sitting at home eating cheese sandwiches waiting for Countdown 
to come on, the job we lost after taking an office car and crashing it on the 
A38 just outside Bridgwater or, in Audley Harrison's case, an entire 
professional career.

On Strictly Come Dancing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/strictly-come-dancing> on Saturday 
evening, Audley, who is one of the celebrity contestants, was consistently 
referred to as an Olympic gold medal winner, as if nothing had happened in the 
11 years since. But, unlike my unfortunate contretemps with a wall in North 
Petherton, Audley's misdeeds were caught on camera. The BBC must know, because 
they paid a million pounds to televise some of them. However, a discreet veil 
was drawn over the heavyweight's years of shame.

One would expect nothing less. This is not a show for delving into dark 
underbellies. The reason it manages a far more interesting mix of guests than 
most other celebrity formats is that participants know however hopeless they 
are at the actual dancing, in terms of the affections of the public their stock 
will undoubtedly rise. Strictly is pure escapism, the aim being to leave 
viewers with a warm and fuzzy feeling. No one is going to get hurt – in that 
respect, it is not unlike a fight between Harrison and David Haye.

Guests mostly fall into two categories; those wishing to restore their 
reputations after crimes against humanity (Ann Widdecombe, Edwina Currie, 
Robbie Savage) and presenters from breakfast television who want to be on telly 
when people might be awake. A third category is the rogue contestant like John 
Sergeant, of recent memory, or Russell Grant this year, happy to put on a 
snappy suit and mildly embarrass themselves in the cause of walking away with a 
decent‑sized cheque. Better than panto in Stevenage.

Robbie, bless him, rather destroyed the fourth wall, giving the celebrity game 
away. "I'm hoping to change people's perception of me," he said. Good luck with 
that, Robbie, but as many see you as something of a poser, with nice hair and 
teeth and a penchant for showy suits and improbably pointed shoes, and as that 
is more or less what ballroom dancing is all about, I do not predict much 
change.

Despite its clever, quirky cast list, I shall not be among those present when 
Strictly returns in three weeks. The rest of the family loves the show, but I 
do not consider dancing a spectator sport any more than, say, rugby union. I am 
joking, but the two matches I have watched so far, the All Blacks against Tonga 
in the opening game and England against Argentina on Saturday, have been less 
than captivating.

This is not unusual in the early stages of a World Cup – especially one like 
this, continuing for most of the rest of the year – and if I were an England 
rugby union fan I should not be too downhearted. Far better to grow into a 
tournament than reach your high point four minutes into the first match, as the 
England football team did in South Africa.

Clearly, though, there is work to be done for the guys – England rugby players 
are always known as "the guys", it is what distinguishes them from their 
football counterparts – as there is for the main broadcaster, ITV. Not that it 
has been an altogether bad start. Yanking Steve Rider back from the celebrity 
golf circuit was a smart move. Steve knows how to present live sport on TV, 
which as Channel Four's coverage of the World Athletics Championships 
demonstrated, is not a skill you should jettison lightly.

He has been doing it so long he has become, in Larry Sanders's memorable 
phrase, half man, half desk (the BBC used to allow him to stand up just once a 
year, for the Boat Race). Crucially, Rider is at ease with his pundits, which 
helps them open out and, in Francois Pienaar especially, he has one of the best 
– although the former South African captain, speculating on what the atmosphere 
in the England changing room might be like before kick-off, seemed to use one 
of the strangest expressions I have ever heard in broadcast sport: "Tense 
stomachs will be fluttering on steroids." I thought I might have misheard but a 
rerun of the tape and a Twitter inquiry appeared to confirm the quote.

On the subject of Twitter, many thanks to those who responded to my query 
about the point in the England match at which it was acceptable to open a beer, 
without the spectre of alcoholism rearing its head. The consensus is that for 
early-morning airport departures, global sports events, Christmas and funerals, 
normal rules regarding alcohol do not apply. Thank you for that, and for the 
suggestion that a small sharpener might actually help make ITV co-commentator 
Phil Vickery's chauvinism, delivered with all the verve of a speak-your-weight 
machine, more palatable.
 