
The shock of the American veteran Tony Thompson destroying the 6ft 8in British 
heavyweight hope David Price in two rounds in Liverpool earlier in the evening 
reverberated all the way to London, asAudley Harrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/audley-harrison> again lit a fire under his 
interesting career by winning his second Prizefighter trophy, becoming the 
first man to do so.

That was not a double any bookmaker had considered seriously beforehand. It is 
a measure of the calamity for Price that Harrison's win was by some way the 
lesser surprise.

In front of a packed house in boxing's East End cathedral, the man on a 
seemingly never-ending journey towards redemption, a boxer who has disappointed 
more times than an inconsiderate suitor, he pummelled the 32-year-old New 
Yorker Derric Rossy into submission in two rounds, although he protested lamely 
in a neutral corner after being decked for the second time.

As for Price, his punch resistance was always the unknown in his makeup and 
memories of his collapse in the Beijing Olympics against Roberto Cammarelli 
(whom gold medallist Anthony Joshua beat in the London Games) returned 
painfully as the British champion fell to the power of Thompson's southpaw 
flush under the ear. It was a significant blow in more ways than one. A lot of 
freight was being heaped on the Liverpudlian's broad shoulders and there has 
been no little talk lately of his moving without hindrance towards a world 
title shot against either of the Klitschko brothers.

As Price's handlers have to quickly reassess their strategy, the enigmatic 
Harrison has surprised us all again, coming back from the ignominy of a 
one-round stoppage in his last fight (and everyone thought it was going to be 
his last fight) against Price in October. What a turnaround.

Yet, at 41 and back under 17st for the first time since he won Olympic gold 13 
years ago, he has reinvented himself and in this format he is formidable. The 
prospect of boxing three opponents over three three-minute rounds does not seem 
to invest his spirit with the same doubts as when he is placed in the more 
dangerous environment of a big 12-round title bout. It takes him back to his 
amateur days of tournament boxing.

En route to the final, he took 33 seconds over the 32-year-old Dane, Claus 
Bertino, who looked as bemused as he was entitled to be after a short left 
scattered his senses, and his only friend was the top rope that kept him 
upright long enough to be led back to his corner.

That put £2,000 bonus in Audley's pocket for a stoppage win, and another 
£4,000 flew out of the coffers when Brixton's Ian Lewison did a similarly 
impressive one-round job on the 38-year-old Timo Hoffman (the first man to take 
Vitali Klitschko the distance – 13 years ago).

It was only his second stoppage loss, however, and the Londoner, a former 
England international finally taking the pro game seriously at 31, lived up to 
his wonderful fighting moniker, "Lay 'Em Out" Lewison – even if Timo finished 
standing up.

The other quarter-final stoppage belonged to Rogan, in the first contest of 
the evening. He looked full of fire and fight against the former world title 
challenger, Albert Sosnowski, even belting him through the ropes in the second 
round, straight into the lap of the promoter, Eddie Hearn, and his father, 
Barry. Hearn senior first brought young Eddie to this venerable old hall in 
1991 and he probably then did not think he would be back here 22 years later 
running the show. Prizefighter was Barry's baby and Eddie has fine-tuned the 
format into a consistent money-spinner, one of Sky's most reliable attractions.

Not every Prizefighter has been a brilliant blizzard of brawling, but many 
have and this time was no exception as the big men swung from the hip, not 
always with sophistication – and there was nobody in the sell-out house who 
complained much about that.

The visiting Americans Rossy and the pre-tournament favourite Travis "Freight 
Train" Walker went the three-round distance in their quarter-final, Rossy 
getting the nod for the right to mix it with Lewison in the second semi-final.

In that bout, the Brixton fighter showed more smarts and landed the more 
telling blows as Rossy faded under pressure, his bleeding mouth wide open and 
sucking at the warm air at the end of three entertaining rounds, but the judges 
saw in two rounds to one in the American's favour, not a decision that went 
down that well with the locals. I thought it marginal, but not outrageous.

Elsewhere on the bill, the former Great Britain Olympic captain Tom Stalker 
beat Kristian Laight with style over four rounds on his professional debut.
 