
Audley Harrison <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/audley-harrison> is so 
polite and amusing when referring to himself that he rarely fails to add a 
"Mister" to his latest self-appointed nickname. He is "Mr Delusional" and "Mr 
Cool Calm and Collected". Harrison is also the best talker in British boxing. 
His witty eloquence outshines even David Haye, his former friend and now bitter 
rival who has a similarly fast mouth and chattering relish for the sound of his 
own voice. If their battle for Haye's WBA heavyweight title was to be decided 
on a chat-show sofa, rather than in the ring in Manchester on Saturday night, 
Harrison would already be the new champion.

"Here I am, Mr Delusional," the 39-year-old Harrison says. "People thought 
there was no way I would pull myself out of a dark place and fight for the 
world title. They called me deluded. But guess what? Mr Delusional is about to 
become world heavyweight champion. It makes me remember what Maya Angelou said: 
'All great achievement takes time.' And it really does. It ain't easy."

It is far easier being a sucker for Harrison quoting an evocative 82-year-old 
poet in Angelou when, in bleak contrast, Haye suggested the fight will be "as 
one-sided as a gang rape". Haye sounded malicious and stupid. He is neither; 
but his complicated relationship with Harrison prompted such crass idiocy.

Mr Delusional becomes Mr Cool Calm and Collected as he analyses the brutish 
edge that has emerged in his former protege. "David is very nervous," Harrison 
says, stroking his wispy beard. "When David was 18 he worshipped me and so he 
knows I'm the master. And the more this promotion goes on the clearer it 
becomes.David Haye <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/davidhayeboxing> is the 
champion but this has become the Audley Harrison Show.

"I'm buoyant, excited, motivated, determined and ready to do what I was born 
to do. These are the moments where I wake up, where I stand up. Other people 
crumble under this pressure. But I'm totally cool, calm and collected because 
this is where I thrive. Ten years ago I proved it at the Olympics and I've gone 
back to that place. I'm Mr Cool Calm and Collected again."

Harrison is not just a snappy talker. In person he exudes an apparently serene 
conviction. A big man, at 6ft 5in and 18st, he leans in close and speaks 
intently. This is Harrison's way of imparting his certainty of victory; but 
none of this will matter unless he produces a riveting performance against Haye.

Yet, after 9½ disappointing years as a professional, Harrison cannot banish 
the bad memories. He returned from the Sydney Olympics in 2000 with a gold 
medal and a big-mouthed mantra that he would promote himself all the way to the 
undisputed heavyweight championship of the world. For a while it looked as if 
Harrison really believed he was Britain's answer to Muhammad Ali. The BBC 
swallowed the bait and presented him with a million-pound contract.

Harrison called himself A-Force; but his failure to match dizzying 
expectations has seen him ridiculed as "A-Farce", "Audrey" and "Fraudley". He 
has taken a prolonged public beating; and his four defeats are damning. Even in 
their own heads Danny Williams, Dominick Guinn, Michael Sprott and Martin Rogan 
are not kings of the ring; but they all beat Harrison. The big man looks down 
at a photograph of himself sprawled unconscious on the canvas after his fight 
against Sprott in 2007.

"Yeah," Harrison says, "he knocked me out all right. But two far worse things 
happened to me. The first was when the BBC's Peter Salmon told me the deal was 
over. That broke my spirit. It broke my heart. I had to sign with [the 
promoter] Frank Warren and that felt an even worse defeat. Those two moments 
sucked my soul and my energy and you saw what happened. I went through a very 
dark place. But it turned into a spiritual journey and I became a man."

Harrison's mediocre 27-4 record should not have secured him the right to 
challenge Haye for his world title. And yet, with the fight only days away, 
there is a sense that Harrison might be ready to unleash the one supreme 
performance of his career. Haye is nine years younger and he should be far too 
fast and hard-hitting; but the brash champion has always had a vulnerable chin 
and Harrison looks resolute.

Their tainted friendship has also leant a deeply personal edge to the 
build-up. "It's a shame," Harrison says, "because I had a lot of love for 
David. But I have genuine disenchantment with him now, genuine disappointment. 
I featured David on five of my promotions and taught him everything he knows 
about this business. Then, when I was in a hole, David wouldn't give me a slot 
on his bill – even though he was using my promotional blueprint. He did the 
wrong thing. But there's no malice or anger in me.

"Someone sent me a link to an old radio interview he did, back in the day, 
when we were at a party and David said [Harrison impersonates a whiney Haye], 
'I'll never fight Audley – he's my best friend. We travel all over the world 
together and the only time I'd ever consider us fighting is if we both had 
world titles.' I sat there, listening and smiling. We had fun times together – 
like at the world [amateur] championships in Houston in 1999. We always had a 
lot of success with the girls, me and David, and we blagged our way into this 
club. I told everyone David was a famous singer and I was his security. We 
pulled it off.

"David now says I'm jealous – but, if you study it from a sociological point 
of view, it's the opposite. I came back from the Olympics the biggest thing 
since sliced bread and he didn't even make the team. David was running behind 
my coat-tails for four years. I was the main man at the table and in those days 
I was nothing but a red-carpet guy. Who was envious? He sat in my jet stream. 
It's so beautiful the universe has brought us back to this place because 
David's still not satisfied in his heart and soul. He's talking about the 
public execution of Audley Harrison but he's running into the master – the guy 
he was envious of for so long."

He smiles as I read a quote from Haye saying that, because of their 
friendship, he knows Harrison's demons. "I laughed when I first saw that 
statement. Come on, my demons were the battle I fought for 18 months with the 
BBC and having to sign for Warren. My demons were always outside the ring. This 
will be the hardest fight of his life. I'm going to put everything on the line, 
and I expect him to do the same. But I will prevail."

Harrison, for all the derision flung at him, has endured hardship. "Life is 
really beautiful if you want it to be – but there are no handouts. I came from 
a broken home. My mum left when I was four and I grew up in a rough 
neighbourhood, Harlesden. I could easily say I'm a victim and people would 
sympathise. But I said: 'My environment doesn't matter – I'm going to make 
something of my life.'

"There's a saying that God doesn't give you anything you can't handle. Mother 
Teresa, bless her soul, said: 'I just wish he didn't trust me so much.' I feel 
the same. I can handle it but, sometimes, I just think, 'God, you really trust 
me' – because sometimes I feel under such pressure. But you keep going because 
life is a journey of light and shade."

Harrison talks calmly about the death of his brother. "Vincent passed away 
young, at 27. He was a drug-user but they said it was a brain haemorrhage in 
the end. He lived that lifestyle, and I was in that same fast lane. I could've 
perished. I was 19, running the streets, ended up in a young offenders 
institute – and that was my break.

"I had a chance to think: 'What am I doing with my life? I can't just be a 
petty criminal.' So I came out, got some qualifications and went to [Brunel] 
university. Vincent never had that chance. He was on the wild side; and he 
never came back."

The petty squabbling seems irrelevant now; and Harrison sounds magnanimous 
when withdrawing an allegation that Haye once "took liberties" with him in 
sparring. After his first defeat, to Williams, they sparred in front of Lennox 
Lewis. Haye roughed up a dispirited Harrison. "On reflection I have a different 
perspective," Harrison says. "David didn't know I was on the floor emotionally 
and spiritually. He expected the Audley he knew when we fought like cats and 
dogs years before. He was excited in front of Lennox. At the time I thought: 
'Why didn't he ease up?' He could see I was having my first spar after a loss 
and he should've been a friend. But I've mellowed.

"We sparred loads as amateurs in the England squad. He had speed and power but 
David never hurt me – not even when my confidence was so low. So how could he 
hurt me now? He can't. David lives a life of chaos. But my life is perfect. 
I've got a fantastic wife and a beautiful daughter. I've no needs or wishes – 
other than my God-given purpose to finish myboxing journey. Winning the world 
title will mean it's mission complete. It will seem all the more poignant 
because I'm going to beat David Haye with love. The beating I'm going to 
inflict on him comes out of love and compassion. I know it's going to be good 
for his soul and ego. That might sound strange but I'm cut from a different 
cloth to most people. And this is my moment."

A dangerous vision of Haye, moving towards Harrison with violent force, seeps 
into the mind. But Harrison shakes his head. "My victory is destiny," he 
insists. "Just sit back and get ready for your new heavyweight champion of the 
world: Mr Audley Harrison."
 