
Audrey Niffenegger <https://www.theguardian.com/books/audrey-niffenegger> is 
to return to the world of The Time Traveler's Wife with a glimpse into the life 
of Alba, Henry and Claire's chrono-impaired daughter, as she prepares to make 
the original novel available digitally for the first time.

Despite urging from her publishers, Niffenegger has withheld ebook rights to 
the novel since its publication in 2003. But she is now throwing her weight 
behind a new independent ebook website,Zola Books <https://zolabooks.com/>, 
through which she is planning to sell the novel later this year.

The author is also writing a 30-page sequel to the seven-million-copy 
bestseller for the site. It will focus on the life of Alba, the time-travelling 
daughter Henry, who was conceived with Claire during one of his visits to her 
life.

"I can see from history that the ebook [as a medium], while currently a little 
clunky and weird, is inevitably going to be gorgeous, so I kept the ebook to 
myself," said Niffenegger, the keynote speaker at theTLC literary conference  
<http://www.literaryconsultancy.co.uk/events/literary-conference-2013/>on 
Friday. "For a long time I was getting a reputation as this weird book luddite, 
but what I was doing was preserving my ebook virginity ... so the Time Traveler 
ebook sat around not being used for much of anything for what seemed like a 
long time, because everyone was pestering me for it. All my publishers were 
like: 'So, let's have it,' and I just did that thing where you don't answer 
your email."

Then Niffenegger's agent Joe Regal started Zola Books, named for the French 
author Émile Zola, which is, according to the author, "all about the idea that 
ebooks could and should be better", that they should be sold in partnership 
with independent booksellers "rather than trying to crush them, and that [the 
seller] should partner with authors so they can see the numbers and have total 
transparency".

"He wanted to bring a community of readers, authors and publishers – everyone 
involved – get them together and get them aligned, so they were functioning as 
an ecosystem rather than everyone trying to eat each other," said Niffenegger. 
"So I said to little Zola, you can have the Time Traveler ebook, and I will 
write a sequel for you."

In a wide-ranging speech looking at both the history of text and her own route 
to publication – Time Traveler was rejected by more than 30 agents before it 
was eventually taken on – Niffenegger also spoke of her optimism about the 
future.

"The thing for me which is so optimistic about the phase we are in right now 
is that the potential for all of us to open ourselves out and put ourselves out 
there has never been greater. Everything has led up to this. All this hard 
work, this intellectual flowering, it has now got us to a point where [our 
work] can really go everywhere," she said.

An artist before she was an author, Niffenegger added:"I don't think [ebooks] 
will ever nuke the world of physical books. I don't think the world of physical 
books needs to be afraid. Books are getting incredibly beautiful. So I'm 
feeling pretty good. Everyone's going: 'Oh my god, we're about to be eaten', 
but I don't think so. I think things are sort of bad right now, and need to be 
realigned, but the problems are obvious. Various people are working to restore 
balance, and people are mostly good-hearted. Readers want there to be books. 
And as long as we preserve the community and the ecosystem where everyone is 
dependent on everyone else, I think we will be fine."

Readers, said Niffenegger, "want something real and truthful, they want 
[writers] to tell them something about being human, and that hasn't changed."
 