
Aung San Suu Kyi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/aung-san-suu-kyi> has 
vowed to press for the release of political prisoners and student activists in 
Myanmar, hinting that a mass amnesty may be imminent, a week after her 
government took power.


In her first statement since assuming a broadly defined role as state 
counsellor, Aung San Suu Kyi said: “I am going to try … for the immediate 
release of political prisoners, political activists and students facing trial 
related to politics.” She did not provide a specific timeline.

The routine jailing of dissidents by the former junta stirred international 
outcry and support for the pro-democracy movement. Aung San Suu Kyi herself 
spent 15 years under house arrest, and many current National League for 
Democracy MPs served time in prison.

The quasi-civilian government that replaced the junta in 2011 freed hundreds 
of political detainees but also oversaw the detention of scores of others, 
particularly activists involved in land and education protests.

According to the Assistance Association for Political Prisoners, 90 political 
prisoners were in jail and more than 400 activists were facing trial as of 
February. The vast majority were arrested before last November’s elections, 
which Aung San Suu Kyi’s NLD won in a landslide.

Among those held are 40 students facing charges including unlawful assembly 
and rioting over education reform protests that were violently broken up by 
police in the central town of Letpadan in March 2015. Another 30 or so students 
are on bail but facing similar charges.

Aung San Suu Kyi is barred from the presidency by the junta-era constitution 
and has anointed her schoolfriend and close aide Htin Kyaw as president to act 
as her effective proxy. That means she does not have the direct power to order 
an amnesty.

The role of state counsellor allows her to liaise between the executive and 
legislative branches. The position was specially crafted for her by NLD MPs and 
is expected to help her live up to a pre-election vow to rule above the 
president.
 