
Ten Chinese nationals have been arrested in Hobart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/hobart> and their boat impounded 
amid suspicion of large-scale drug smuggling.

The foreign commercial vessel was spotted circling in international waters off 
Australia’s west coast and escorted to the southern capital on Friday by the 
navy’s HMAS Adelaide after a lengthy maritime monitoring mission.

Swarming with uniformed police, accompanied by a water police speedboat and 
backed by a tug, the 50m, low-lying boat – showing no name or flag – travelled 
up the city’s Derwent river.

The Australian Border Force confirmed that authorities, including specially 
assigned naval vessels and RAAF aircraft, had been following it for “some time” 
and went aboard on Monday.

“The behaviour of the vessel was unusual in that it was circling in an area 
outside the economic zone, more than 200 nautical miles off the southern coast 
of Australia,” the border force regional commander, James Watson, told 
reporters. “As a result of that behaviour, a decision was made to board the 
vessel.

“On Monday … personnel from HMAS Adelaide intercepted the vessel and boarded 
it on the basis of that vessel’s suspected involvement in illicit drug 
smuggling.”

They allegedly found drugs, believed to be just a sample of a much larger 
quantity. Authorities would not confirm the the amount or type of drugs or 
comment on reports that 160kg of cocaine were on board.

“All I can say is that we believe there’s a significant quantity of illegal 
substances on board,” Watson said.

The crew will be questioned while the vessel remains in a maritime exclusion 
zone for examination.

“It’s a former research vessel … it’s not an Australian-registered vessel,” 
Watson said. “The circumstances of what this vessel was doing, its capability 
and where it was going is going to be the subject of an ongoing inquiry.”

The boat was noticed during routine aerial surveillance off Western Australia 
and has been tracked as part of a cross-agency operation.

 