
The Dominators. The Untouchables. Neither label sat particularly well or 
caught on in any meaningful way, did it? You might not even remember them now, 
but those were the monikers that the marketing people tried slapping on Steve 
Waugh’s Australian side amid their 16-Test winning streak from 1999 to 2001. 
Aping the long-lived, lucrative cult of the 1948 Invincibles, there were books, 
limited-edition prints, videos and commemorative bats rushed out in honour of 
the Australians.

As for where Michael Clarke’s Australians of 2013-14 sit in the lineage of 
all-conquering teams, it’s tough to say. Like a limited-edition commemorative 
wine, it’s best to let an Ashes series breathe before you assess its merits. 
The contrasting scorelines of this series and the last provide ample proof of 
that.

As much as it’s a tale of Australia as winners, the enormity and frequency of 
England’s defeats are also central to the story. Though they never looked any 
more than adequate at best, it might be harsh to label the English among the 
worst visitors to Australian shores. For starters they might be seen as victims 
of poor scheduling, their own and the game’s at large.


Australian sides in Australian conditions are tough to beat. In tours of yore 
England warmed up and tuned up more thoroughly, with meaningful first-class 
fixtures spread throughout the summer. Now the Australian tour seems just as 
interminably long, yet affords the out-of-form player scant opportunity to iron 
out flaws and restore confidence.

This same scheduling also consigns the tourists to an endless merry-go-round 
of fixtures against the same opponent. The lack of a triangular one-day 
tournament to break the monotony and contagion of losing makes Australia an 
unforgiving workplace for a touring Englishman. Still, someone might have 
stopped the rot. After England’s 5-0 Ashes drubbing of 2006-7 the sight of 
mouthy, animated wicketkeeper Paul Nixon was both novelty and relief. It 
changed the personality of the team, rebooting the fragile and gloomy 
atmosphere. England improbably propelled themselves past New Zealand and then 
Australia (in two finals) for a consolation one-day series win.

Save for the odd flash of brilliance from Ravi Bopara and Jos Buttler, the 
limited-overs specialists this time have provided no meaningful release from 
the drudgery of month upon month of defeat. England’s sole ODI win seemed like 
a market correction barely worth mentioning.

England’s fortunes have now also suffered from having an extra format in which 
to lose. In the T20s, paceman Jade Dernbach was at least consistent, getting 
slogged and then gobbing off at his opponents afterwards at every turn. In this 
case, two negatives didn’t equal a positive.


So what were the positives? Ben Stokes has clearly been England’s shining 
light of the tour and Chris Jordan’s limited-overs performances have been 
encouraging, belying his insane, jittery run-up. The dour, steady performance 
of James Tredwell also seems oddly symbolic, showing that England’s best hope 
by the end of this tour was just to try to avoid ballsing it up completely and 
embarrassing themselves. It’s a state of mind in which Australia, too, have 
occasionally found themselves in recent years.

In the two limited-overs formats the Australians mostly struck selection gold. 
Nathan Coulter-Nile showed he is a genuine international player in the making, 
Chris Lynn gave a flash of his undoubted potential and James Muirhead looked 
calm and composed. By the time 39-year-old Brad Hodge got his call-up, it felt 
as though he’d been picked as a cruel joke at the tourists' expense, to rub it 
in a little. Thus with a third straight defeat in the T20s, England have lost 
12 games from 13 across three formats. If Australia challenged them to a bocce 
series, they’d probably lose that 3-0 too.

Ranking Clarke’s team against the dominant Australian line-ups of summers gone 
by might be misleading. It’s a statistical exercise and doesn’t take into 
account the unique personality of the current side; less talented thanRicky 
Ponting’s undefeated 2006-07 side 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/ci/engine/series/428731.html>, light on superstars 
next toWaugh’s 2002-03 team <http://static.espncricinfo.com/db/ARCHIVE/2002-03/>
, sharing a similarly potent bowling duo but lacking the outlaw aura ofIan 
Chappell’s 1974-75 squad 
<http://static.espncricinfo.com/db/ARCHIVE/1970S/1974-75/ENG_IN_AUS/>. Maybe 
they’re closer toRichie Benaud’s 1958-59 
<http://static.espncricinfo.com/db/ARCHIVE/1950S/1958-59/ENG_IN_AUS/> side that 
routed Peter May’s England 4-0, but even it could call on the likes of Neil 
Harvey, Alan Davidson and Ray Lindwall.

Older English fans would be doing well to recall the specifics of that doomed 
mission of 58-59, but the looming threat of disaster always hovered as it has 
this time around. Now Swann and Flower are both gone, Jonathan Trott faces a 
serious battle and the dependable keeper Matt Prior finds himself demoted.


May’s plight was similar to Cook’s in some ways. Tactically outgunned by 
Benaud at every turn, he watched his batsman dig themselves into deep, 
inescapable holes and even lost two of his bowlers, Brian Statham and Peter 
Loader, to injuries sustained in a car crash on the eve of the fifth Test. The 
Australians were rejuvenated under Benaud. Like Clarke with Mitchell Johnson, 
Benaud benefited enormously from the return of fast-bowling ace Lindwall to 
help close out the series.

What Clarke and his side found this summer was that once you’ve got an English 
touring side down for the count early in a series, it’s desperately hard for 
them to recover. A fade in the fourth or fifth Test, or even in the 
limited-overs games, would have been pardonable, but Australia never let up.


A common criticism of this Australian side in the wake of the Tests was that 
its top order remained shaky. That’s a theory that will be acutely tested in 
South Africa, but it’s worth noting that David Warner, Brad Haddin and Chris 
Rogers all scored more than 450 runs in the series. Pushing three players over 
that mark is a small but not insignificant statistical achievement that neither 
Benaud’s side (one), Chappell’s (two), Waugh’s (two) or Ponting’s (two) could 
manage. That unlikely trio may have masked fallibilities elsewhere, but it 
wasn’t Australia’s strike bowlers alone who won the series.

On Sunday night, just as England looked to be restricting Australia to a 
gettable total, home skipper George Bailey went on a 26-run scoring spree from 
Dernbach’s final over. After starting promisingly, the bowler unravelled. 
Running two from the last delivery, the Australian skipper was well short of 
his ground as Buttler swooped a glove down to take the bails. The English 
keeper missed, collecting them only on the way back, by which time Bailey was 
home. It said a lot about the summer. England couldn’t help but miss.
 