
The OECD report, Investing in Youth: Australia 
<http://www.oecd.org/social/investing-in-youth-australia-9789264257498-en.htm> 
released this week argues that the rise of the youth not in employment, 
education or training (Neets) requires a strong policy response including 
improving the quality of vocational education and training, better 
identification of at-risk youth and somewhat controversially, follow up on the 
recent tightening of eligibility for disability benefits to ensure youth are 
not on a path out of the labour force.

While here in Australia we don’t talk about the “the Great Recession”, for 
Australian youth the events of 2008-09 were truly a recession.

In March 2008, a record high 65.1% of those aged 15 to 24 were employed. By 
July 2016, it was just 58.8%. By contrast the fall in the percentage of those 
employed aged over 25 was just 0.7% points:

Not surprisingly, given that 10% drop in the level of youth in employment, the 
OECD report found that there had been a significant increase in the numbers of 
youth out of employment, but also out of education and training.

This is a crucial point.

Coalition revises superannuation package and dumps lifetime cap – politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/sep/15/pauline-hansons-speech-draws-cross-party-criticism-politics-live>
While there might be economic benefits from these youth working rather than 
learning, essentially the problem is that they are doing neither.

The OECD found that since 2008 there has been a 100,000 increase in the number 
of 15-29 year old Neets.

Now, including people up to 29 years old is a bit of a stretch but even when 
we use the standard youth employment definition of 15-24 year olds we see a 
similar increase.

In the middle of 2008, 9.9% of youth aged 15-24 were neither working nor in 
full-time education (the OECD figures include those in any form of education); 
now it is up to 11%.

But it is worth getting some historical context.

The current level of 11.0% is actually quite low. Prior to the mining boom 
years it was never below 12%:

It’s why I have in the past been rather quick to counter the narrative pushed 
by the likes of Joe Hockey that youth need to either be earning or learning.

The reality is that youth, almost as much ever in the past, are doing just 
that.

And it is important that the OECD notes the difference between those Neets who 
are looking for work, and those who are “idle Neets” – neither working, nor in 
education, nor even looking for work.

But a look at the figures again show that the current level of 6.5% of youth 
who could be classified as “idle Neets” is among the lowest level in the past 
30 years:

The big driver of the rise of Neets is the number of youth who are unemployed 
– having risen from 3.5% of all youth in 2008 to now 4.4%.

A look over the past 30 years shows that the big change has not been an 
increase in idle youth, but those who once left the education system to work, 
to those who are working while staying in education.

Thirty years ago, 61% of youth were workers who had left the education system; 
now only 41% are in that category. By contrast, back then only 10% were working 
and also attending full-time education compared to 26% of youth doing that now:

But that things are not too bad historically doesn’t mean we can dust our 
hands and not worry about the situation.

Even among 15-24 year olds, we are still talking about 344,000 people. And as 
the OECD report notes, there are also big issues when you break down the 
numbers.

The report notes that Indigenous youth are most at risk of falling into the 
not-employed, not-in education category. It found that while Indigenous youth 
represent 3% of the youth population they account for 10% of all Neets.

Similarly young women are much more likely to be “idle Neets” than are men.

While just 5% of male youth are idle Neets, 8% of women aged 15-24 are in that 
category:

The OECD notes that this is driven “entirely by women with young children.” So 
this includes women who are by no means idle at all, but who are prevented from 
working due to a “lack of access to affordable childcare and insufficiently 
flexible working arrangements”.

In response, the OECD argues the government focus on the availability and 
affordability of childcare, particularly for single parents and that it also 
“target childcare benefits more efficiently towards parents” on lower incomes.

It also notes that as those with year 10 or lower education attainment are 
more likely to become trapped in the Neet category, there should be work done 
to “improve the identification of youth at risk of dropping out of school 
through a timelier and more systematic sharing of school attendance data”.

It also argues that “high-quality vocational education and training is 
essential in preparing young people for the labour market” and that while 
Australia does have high numbers of such students, the low level of completion 
rates suggests a need for “further improved guidance for at-risk youth wishing 
to choose these routes”.

Germany the clear winner in EU fight to find jobs for the young
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/10/calabria-bavaria-eurozone-youth-unemployment-job-opportunities>
The report also noted that Newstart is “significantly less generous than those 
in other OECD countries”, and that it was clear that “the benefit rates on 
their own are not sufficient to keep a young person above the poverty line”.

One consequence of this is the rates of Australians on disability benefits is 
the sixth highest among the OECD. On this score, the report agreed with the 
government’s efforts to tighten the ability for people to gain access to the 
disability support pension because “a person’s chances of returning to 
employment are very low” once disability benefits have been granted.

The report was however quite scathing of the government’s work for the dole 
scheme. It noted that “there is little robust evidence” to show that such 
programs were effective, “in particular when compared to alternative measures 
such as training programs”. The report also found that work for the dole 
programs actually reduced youths’ participation in training.

Nearly 94% of Australian youth are either working, learning or trying to get 
work. That level is as high as it has ever been, but it does not mean we should 
not worry about the remaining 6%, because, above all, the biggest problem is 
that youth who are out of the work force and not in education are much more 
likely to end up living a life in poverty.
 