
Bernard Tomic might not be bothered about playing Davis Cup for Australia, but 
there was a time when it mattered more than just about anything else – nearly 
as much as beating England at cricket.

A reminder of those days arrived when a raft of great Australian players from 
the past were inducted here into the InternationalTennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Hall of Fame.

They included Frank Sedgman, John Newcombe, Rod Laver, Margaret Smith Court, 
Ashley Cooper, Pat Rafter, Ken Rosewall, Tony Roche, Lesley Turner Bowrey, 
Brian Tobin, Evonne Goolagong Cawley and Neale Fraser, all of whom were on hand 
at Melbourne Park to receive a Hall of Fame ring.

The Hall of Fame chairman, Christopher Clouser, said: "From record-setting 
grand slam champions to unstoppable Davis Cup teams, Australia boasts a tennis 
history that is among the most dynamic and storied in the world, and it is the 
goal of the International Tennis Hall of Fame to preserve and celebrate that 
history. These great Australian tennis legends have given so much to our sport 
over the years, and we are so pleased to be able to recognise their 
achievements once more with this special ring, which only the most successful 
and influential individuals in tennis will have the honour of wearing."

Sentimental? Certainly. But then there was a time when sentiment was not a 
dirty word.

Lendl eyes on young Murrays

Ivan Lendl, meanwhile, has his eyes on the future. His International Junior 
Tennis Academy has announced a fresh intake of the world's most promising young 
players this spring.

They are coming from Bulgaria, New Zealand and Russia, as well as Alabama, 
Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Maryland, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, South 
Carolina, South Dakota, Texas and Virginia in the United States.

None from the UK – but then he has his hands full with one player from there 
in Andy Murray. And who could deny that Lendl's association with the world No3 
has been anything but brilliant for business?

I'll break my racket if I want to

Goran Ivanisevic, in Melbourne to play in the legends' doubles with Cédric 
Pioline, is as entertaining as ever.

"I don't understand the crowd," he said. "They say we need characters – then 
you break the racket and they boo you. Everybody gets unhappy. I don't know why 
they're unhappy. If I want to break racket, it's my racket, who cares? I change 
the racket."

And who were the bat-basher's favourites in his playing days?

"I loved everyone. Actually I didn't like [Jim] Courier. I didn't have a good 
record against him, but I like [Andre] Agassi, I liked to play [Boris] Becker, 
[Stefan] Edberg … Actually I hate [Pete] Sampras because he ruined my life. I 
lost so many matches.

"I played Sampras 15 times; we never had a rally more than four times and they 
talking they changed the rules because of me? I don't think so. That era you 
have Boris Becker, you have [Michael] Stich, [Richard] Krajicek, you have 
Sampras, you have me ... and the courts were bullet-fast."

And his wit remains so.

Murray set to spark new equal prize money debate

Andy Murray has some interesting thoughts on why there are more upsets in 
women's tennis than on the men's tour. "I think the five-set matches are 
probably a good reason for that. The longer the match goes on… someone like a 
[David] Ferrer, for example, his game is so solid all the time, that to beat 
him over five sets... yesterday [coming from 0-2 down against Nicolás Almagro] 
was a perfect example. Almagro probably should have won the match.

"For two, two-and-a-half sets he was the better player, but you need to be the 
better player for three out of five. There are way more upsets in tournaments 
that are best-of-three sets in the men's just because you get off to a bad 
start and guys can get a quick win over you; whereas over best-of-five, it 
often takes five hours sometimes to beat the top players in the world. It's not 
easy."

And, if that doesn't start another debate about equal prize-money, nothing 
will.
 