
To many tennis fans, Rod Laver is just a name. To those who saw him play, he 
is much more than that.

He is more than his remarkable record, but dwell on it for a moment: the only 
player to win the calendar grand slam twice – as an amateur in 1962 and 
professional in 1969 – among 11 majors in all; he won 200 titles in his career, 
more than anyone else in the history of tennis; after he turned pro, he was 
world No1 from 1964 to 1970, the owner of a sport for an entire decade.

Laver was supreme on every surface, against any style; the revered Australian 
Davis Cup captain Harry Hopman called the Rockhampton-born left-hander "Rocket" 
and he lived up to the name on the court with vibrant but controlled tennis, 
yet he was quiet and humble away from it, a man not exactly in sync with the 
swinging 60s.

Just as important as his contribution as an athlete, in the Diary's humble 
opinion, has been his dignified presence ever since he retired. He is a 
reminder, in his every honest and uncontrived utterance, that humility 
embroiders greatness better than loudness.

In an era of serial brattishness across professional sport, Laver may look 
like an anachronism to the millionaires who walk the corridors of Melbourne 
Park, with their back-up teams and hi-tech kit, their gym-honed bodies and 
their attendant baggage of doubts and expectation. Life was simpler 50 years 
ago. Certainly, sport was, as Laver observed.

On Wednesday he shared some of his time with us, to reflect on a game that has 
changed significantly since he ruled, but which he loves nonetheless.

Not that he needed an invite to fly from California, where he has lived for 
many years, to a place where his eponymous centre court is the showplace for 
the tournament, but he was honoured, he said, to be asked in recognition of his 
first grand slam 50 years ago.

"The crowning jewel of my whole career is seeing the stadium lit up," he said.

"Sometimes you think, boy, 50 years is a long time ago." He is the sort of 
old-fashioned Aussie who still uses "boy" as an exclamation. There is little 
trace of an American accent. "The memories came flooding back, especially when 
I met Roy Emerson on the plane. I played him in three of the four finals."

He didn't say he won all of them. In fact, Emerson, a tremendous player in his 
own right, beat his fellow Queenslander only once in 15 attempts – the last 
time they met, in Buenos Aires in 1968. That's a fixture we are unlikely ever 
to see Rafael Nadal and Roger Federer playing.

Of his achievements, Laver said: "You don't start off trying to win the grand 
slam. You're just very happy to play the matches, tournaments. The thrill of 
going to the French championships, Wimbledon, US Open." And Buenos Aires.

And he put into perspective the values of his time, when he played for the fun 
and glory of it, and maybe some travelling expenses.

"When you're playing amateur tennis, just playing in the tournaments, you 
don't have the criteria of who wants to win it. It's amateur tennis. No one was 
really high on 'I've got to win this tournament for my career.' There was no 
career, because you're playing amateur tennis. There's no money in it."

Nor does he regret the subsequent changes. "The whole cycle has changed for 
the good.Tennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> is just 
unbelievable. What I saw last night – Federer beating Juan Martín del Potro – 
and being able to see the winner [of the title] is going to walk away with $2m, 
is great for the sport."

Later he appeared on ESPN with Federer. The Swiss, normally loquacious, was 
respectful, almost awed, in the presence of a man he first met here in 2006, 
when he cried on court after winning the championship.

"Do you remember who you played in those years?" was the first question 
Federer asked him. He did. As well as the scores. You can bet Federer will be 
just as sharp if asked the same question in 50 years' time.

"Rosewall was my toughest opponent," Laver told Federer. "He wasn't big and 
tall, but consistent. We had wooden rackets and you couldn't just hit winners 
all over the place. It looks like you and Rafa [Nadal] have such energetic 
matches. You must enjoy it. ["I do," said Roger.] That only comes when you know 
each other so well.

"We played 52 weeks of the year. To get a hotel free and the meals, you had to 
play the tournaments. The same applied in Europe. You had to be there."

Indeed, you did.
 