
Australia is back as an America's Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/americas-cup> challenger, with holders the 
Golden Gate Yacht Club on Tuesday accepting the Hamilton Island Yacht Club as 
the challenger of record for the 35th incarnation of the race.

Australian winemaker Bob Oatley and son Sandy submitted an official challenge 
with Team USA, owned by Larry Ellison, as soon as Oracle crossed the line to 
retain the Cup last week against Team New Zealand,winning the series 9-8 after 
overcoming an 8-1 deficit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/sep/25/americas-cup-victory-team-usa-comeback>
.

The American boat was skippered by Australian James Spithill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/sep/26/jimmy-spithill-oracle-team-usa-americas-cup>
, who had three of his compatriots on board including 2012 Olympic Laser gold 
medallist Tom Slingsby.

Team USA also boasted a broader Australian contingent that included coach 
Darren Bundock and general manger Grant Simmer, who was a crew member aboard 
Australia II in 1983 and has now been a part of four America's Cup wins.

Bob Oatley, who attended a lunch in Sydney last Thursday to mark the 30th 
anniversary of the America's Cup triumph by Alan Bond's Australia II, said the 
green and gold influence in Team USA's victory had piqued the interest of the 
Australian public.

"Given Australia's previous success in the America's Cup, the Admiral's Cup 
and Olympic yachting, and as proud Australians, we think it is time for our 
nation to be back in our sport's pinnacle event," Bob Oatley said in a 
statement.

"The recently completed America's Cup in San Francisco has revolutionised the 
sport for sailors and fans, and we were excited to see how many Australians 
played key roles on the teams and in the regatta organisation."

The Oatley's legacy on Australian racing is well known - their succession of 
yachts named Wild Oats have dominated ocean racing in Australia for years, 
including having won six of the last eight Sydney-Hobart races.

Australia have not entered a campaign since losing to the US off Fremantle in 
1987 in defence of their 1983 title.

Golden Gate Yacht club vice commodore Tom Ehman says the specifics of the 
race, including the dates, type of boat, format and rules, are subject to 
negotiation between the two teams.

"We are delighted to have Hamilton Island Yacht Club and the Oatley's leading 
Australia back into the America's Cup for the first time since 2000," Ehman 
said in a statement.

"Hamilton Island's challenge was filed on the day Australia was celebrating 
the 30th anniversary of Australia II's historic win in the 1983 America's Cup 
off Newport, RI, which ended New York Yacht Club's 132-year reign as the Cup's 
defender."

 