
The Climate Change Authority has advised the Australian government to 
institute two emissions trading schemes and strengthen regulations in order to 
meet Australia’s 2030 emission reduction targets and to allow it to lift those 
targets in line with international climate change obligations.

The move is expected to put pressure on the new environment and energy 
minister,Josh Frydenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/josh-frydenberg>, to strengthen 
Australia’s climate policies but it has received a mixed response.

Some commentators are critical of the report for making recommendations on how 
the government can reach its existing 2030 emissions targets yet not 
considering how it can meet its obligations made in Paris last year to keep 
warming “well below” 2C.


Climate authority split is no surprise – Australia has fought the same battle 
for 10 years | Lenore Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/30/climate-change-authority-split-no-surprise-emissions-trading-direct-action>
As Guardian Australia revealed on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/30/climate-change-authority-splits-over-ets-report-commissioned-by-coalition>
, two members of the authority were so outraged by the lack of ambition that 
they vowed to produce a dissenting “minority report”.

Wendy Craik, the chair of the Climate Change Authority, said: “The authority 
found that one size cannot fit all of the many opportunities that exist to 
reduce emissions across our economy. Australia needs a set of measures – in 
other words, a policy toolkit – that is well calibrated to capture reductions 
in different sectors.”

The “special review” and associated electricity modelling report recommended 
an intensity-based scheme for the electricity sector, where dirtier operations 
are more heavily penalised. It said the baseline should be reduced over time, 
and reach zero “well before 2050”.

Generators would have access to credits to help them stay within the 
baselines, making the system a type of emissions trading scheme.

The review also recommended the government strengthen its “safeguards” policy, 
which sets limits on how much greenhouse gas Australia’s biggest polluters can 
emit but is now so generous it doesn’t act to reduce emissions.

It says the baselines should decline over time, “in line with Australia’s 
Paris commitments”, and be extended to apply to more facilities.

The review said facilities covered by the safeguards mechanism could trade 
carbon credits to help reduce emissions, making the system a second emissions 
trading scheme. “We also think that an enhanced safeguard mechanism offers a 
pragmatic and durable way of reducing emissions across a range of industrial, 
manufacturing and resource sectors,” Craik said.

For sectors not covered by those two policies, the review recommended a suite 
of regulations, including emissions reduction standards for light vehicles, and 
recommended a “cost-benefit analysis” be conducted to examine carbon dioxide 
standards for heavy vehicles.

Energy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> efficiency information 
and regulations for buildings and homes should be continued and strengthened, 
the review recommended. It also called for an examination of the policies to be 
conducted every five years, starting in 2022.

In a media release, Craik said the report did not seek to reassess Australia’s 
2030 targets, instead focusing on “policy actions that Australia should take to 
meet its Paris obligations”.

But since Australia’s 2030 targets are widely acknowledged as inconsistent 
with agreements made at Paris, some people – including two members of the 
authority –think the organisation has not met the terms of reference for its 
review.

The review was commissioned by the government in December 2014 to advise it as 
to whether Australia should institute an emissions trading scheme, and was 
ordered to consider any international agreements Australia has entered into.

In December 2015 Australia signed the Paris agreement, in which governments 
agreed to limit global warming to “well below 2C” and to aim to limit it to 
just 1.5C. That imposes a global carbon budget beyond which the world must move 
to zero net carbon emissions.


We’ve seen less of the ‘frank and fearless’ advice expected of an independent 
institution
Adam Bandt 
The government now has a target to reduce carbon emissions to between 26% and 
28% below 2005 levels by 2030 – and the authority has made recommendations on 
how to meet that goal.

The Climate Institute released a report last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/23/australia-will-need-to-remove-co2-from-air-to-keep-warming-below-2c-says-climate-body>
 showing if Australia stuck to that target it would need to then reduce 
emissions to zero within five years to stay within its carbon budget.

The Greens’ climate and energy spokesman, Adam Bandt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adam-bandt>, said the government 
needed to listen to the authority’s call to strengthen policy, which he said it 
had made despite being “stacked” with Coalition appointments.

But Bandt was critical of the authority’s recommendations not being aimed at 
meeting Australia’s Paris obligations. “The final report of the special review 
backs the renewable energy target and outlines a range of potentially useful 
policies but they fail to add up to what the authority last year said is 
needed,” he said.

“Since original chair respected former RBA Governor Bernie Fraser resigned and 
the Abbott appointees took their position, we’ve seen less of the ‘frank and 
fearless’ advice expected of an independent institution.”

Erwin Jackson from the Climate Institute said his initial impressions of the 
report were that it had some valuable recommendations. “But the package as a 
whole is not balanced against the need to deliver what it has signed up to in 
Paris,” he told Guardian Australia.

“The emissions pathway that is implied in the report will use up 90% of the 
carbon budget by 2030,” Jackson said. “Paris has a number of objectives that 
the authority was required to consider. Those objectives are to limit warming 
to 1.5 to 2 degrees.

Share your pictures and stories of climate change in Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/02/share-your-pictures-and-stories-of-climate-climate-change-in-australia>
“The fundamentals of climate science say that if you emit a lot in the short 
term, you need to emit a lot less in the long term. So if these policies are 
implemented as they currently stand, after 2030, to meet the Paris objectives, 
carbon prices would need to skyrocket, coal plants would need to be closed in a 
matter of years and renewables investments would need to be scaled up beyond 
reasonable levels.”

The review periods of five years wouldn’t be enough to help Australia ratchet 
up its ambitions, Jackson said, since the first review would happen in 2022, 
two years after the government will be expected to update its targets.

Jackson was critical of the authority for “second guessing” the politics 
rather than producing objective advice.
 