
It was a modest crowd that gathered in the Dunblane youth and sports centre to 
watch Andy Murray'sAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> final appearance on a giant 
screen, with residents at one point almost outnumbered by photographers and 
camera crews.

This small cathedral town just north of Stirling is not much given to Murray 
mania, preferring to maintain a fierce but quiet pride in their most famous 
son. But they were with the local boy every step of the way: a chorus of cheers 
greeted every winning shot; a collective groan with each mistake and chance 
missed.

Many of those watching know the Murray family well and they felt the loss 
keenly. "I'm absolutely gutted for him," said Sue Lockwood, a trustee of the 
centre, who watched with her children. "Andy showed signs of magic there but
Roger Federer <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer> is not No 1 for 
nothing. Andy will be back, though. This just wasn't his time."

Ian Conway, the president of the northern county association of Tennis Scotland
 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> and a Murray family friend, said 
despite the outcome no one should doubt his ability.

"What do you do when you have the best player in the world, someone who has 
been 237 weeks at No 1? Federer is on a roll and I don't think anybody can beat 
him the way he played today.

"He has been in two grand slam finals now, he's six years younger than 
Federer, so bring on the next slam. It is great for British tennis and we must 
be very proud of him. It is only a matter of time before he wins one."

Conway said he was dismayed at Federer's pre-match comments, but doubted it 
had affected Murray, who, even at the age of ten was a "tough wee character".

"Federer has never criticised any of his peer players, however, he has with 
Andy," said Conway. "Is there a threat there that he sees with Andy, that he 
will be the one to unseat him? Andy is as strong as anything. That will not 
have upset him. But if [Federer] continues with those mind games in future I 
don't welcome it. It's not tennis and it's not Federer."

As the game narrowed in the third set, the room fell quiet, necks craned 
forward and fists punched in the air with every point gained for the Scot. When 
Murray roared for reassurance, they answered him. "He's feeling it here," said 
one woman, pressing her hand to her heart. "Good man, Andy. Good man."

Moira Cook, who owns a local restaurant and was preparing to hand out free 
champagne had Murray won, said: "It is just so great that he is at this level. 
This is not just a one off. This is someone great, and this is just the 
beginning for him. And it's so nice to think you know his mum and his granny."

Murray's grandparents, Roy and Shirley Erskine, watched the final at a 
friend's house. Speaking earlier, Shirley said her grandson had the game and 
the physical attributes to compete at this very highest level.

"We're just so proud of him and how far he has come and how hard he has 
worked," she said. "He deserves to be where he is."
 