
A new analysis has found racial disparities in the police use of force across 
differentAustin <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/austin> neighborhoods, 
even when controlling for neighborhood crime rates and income levels.


The new study, which used data released as part of a White House initiative 
launched last year, finds that the strongest predictor of the number of police 
use of force incidents in different neighborhoods is the crime rates in those 
neighborhoods.

But even controlling for crime rates, income and education levels, and rates 
of home ownership, black and Hispanic neighborhoods in theTexas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/texas> city still see a slightly higher 
number of use of force incidents, the new analysis found. Every 1% increase in 
the proportion of black residents in a neighborhood led to a 2.6% increase in 
use of force incidents, according to the analysis.

The Counted: people killed by police in the United States – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2015/jun/01/the-counted-police-killings-us-database>
In a highly segregated city such as Austin, that increase actually looks much 
larger when you apply it to the neighborhood level. Virtually all the 
neighborhoods on the city’s west side are less than 5% black, while many on the 
east side are closer to 60% black. Using the report’s findings, that could mean 
an increase in use of force of more than 140% from a typical white neighborhood 
to a typical black one after controlling for other variables. The use of force 
incidents measured included anything from use of a closed fist through use of 
batons, pepper spray and tasers, all the way to deadly force.

The new results line up with previous studies that have found clear racial 
disparities in police use of force. The analysis does not look specifically at 
racial disparities in fatal use of force,the most controversial area of 
research. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/26/black-men-minorities-killed-police-encounters-study>

“What it tells me is that we still have more work to do,” said Art Acevedo, 
Austin’s police chief of nearly a decade. “We have to continue to work in terms 
of our training on implicit and explicit bias for our department.”

But he said he believed that releasing the findings would help continue to 
build trust with the community, and that they would help the department improve 
in the long run.

“You can be an ostrich as a leader, and bury your head in the sand, or you can 
be forward-thinking and be scanning the environment constantly for threats or 
for opportunities to do better,” Acevedo said.

Austin is the first city in the country to go public with this kind of 
in-depth analysis of use of force disparities, a step that the White House, 
researchers, and the city’s police chief say they hope other departments will 
follow.

“I can’t say enough about Chief Acevedo’s willingness to put it all out 
there,” said Roy Austin, a White House domestic policy adviser focused on urban 
affairs, justice and opportunity. “We need more chiefs to step up like Chief 
Acevedo has done and say, ‘I have nothing to hide. Policing belongs to the 
community and we are going to show the community exactly what we are doing.’”

The Austin analysis was conducted independently by researchers from the Center 
for Policing Equity and the Urban Institute.

Black Americans are more likely to be subject to fatal and nonfatal use of 
police force than white Americans. The Guardian’s long-term investigation on 
police killings, the Counted, hasconsistently found that black Americans are 
more than twice as likely than white Americans to be killed by the police. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2015/jun/01/the-counted-police-killings-us-database>
 What’s less clear are the reasons behind this disparity, and what it would 
take to erase it.

Is the disparity purely based on community factors, such as crime levels or 
poverty? Is it driven by police department policies or individual police 
officer racial bias? Or does the disparity in use of force stem from dynamics 
between police and communities – such as Americans of some races being more 
likely to flee from the police in confrontations, or police officers responding 
to greater hostility toward the police in some neighborhoods rather than others?

The report argues that “the truth likely incorporates elements of each of 
these”, but that only better data and analysis can help reformers be more 
specific in finding where the fault lines are.

Previous studies, including a Harvard working paper released in July, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/reality-check/2016/jul/11/study-finds-no-racial-bias-police-shootings-data>
 found racial disparities in non-fatal police use of force, even controlling 
for a variety of factors – including police officers’ own descriptions of how 
compliant citizens were. The Harvard study found, in an in-depth analysis of 
Houston data, that black Americans were actually less likely, not more likely, 
than other Americans to be shot by the police, a controversial finding. It’s 
not clear to what extent the results in Houston or nine other areas the study 
examined in less depth might be representative of national trends.

The racial disparities in Austin’s use of force “are not direct evidence of 
racial prejudice”, the analysts from the Center for Policing Equity and the 
Urban Institute concluded. But by controlling for community-level factors, the 
researchers said, they could demonstrate that police factors or factors driven 
by the police-community relationship must play some role.

“Once again, we can say that crime is not sufficient to explain the racial 
disparities we see for both black and Latinos in the use of force,” said 
Phillip Atiba Goff, the lead researcher on the analysis.

The new analysis draws from two different initiatives exploring police use of 
force data: the White House’s Police Data Initiative, launched last year, which 
encourages departments to post public data about their use of force, and the 
National Justice Database, a National Science Foundation-funded effort to build 
a standardized national database about police use of force, which keeps its 
data private.

Austin is the first city in either of these efforts to agree to publicly 
release an in-depth analysis of its use of force data. Goff said the city-level 
study was designed to create a standardized model for other departments to 
analyze and then share their use of force data. Through the National Justice 
Database, departments can share data and have these analyses made privately 
available to them. Whether departments choose to release the results of their 
analyses publicly is up to police leaders, Goff said.

“These are scary questions to ask,” he said. “If I’m a chief, I don’t know how 
well my department is doing on these issues. I can reasonably worry, if the 
analyses reveal something that is disturbing to the community, I’m kicking a 
hornet’s nest.”

At the same time, he said, “You can’t fix a problem that you don’t know you 
have.”

Young black men killed by US police at highest rate in year of 1,134 deaths
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/31/the-counted-police-killings-2015-young-black-men>
Acevedo, the Austin chief, said: “My cops will not be surprised by the fact 
that we’re participating in this. We will talk to them about the fact that 
there is a use of force disparity, and our next step for us is that we continue 
to evaluate our training in terms of de-escalation.”

 The challenge with Austin being the only department so far to release this 
analysis so far, Acevedo said, was that “there’s no other points of reference.”

It’s not clear how Austin’s neighborhood use of force disparities might 
compare with other large cities. “As a profession, we’re only good as the 
weakest department in the nation,” Acevedo said. “We’re all a reflection of one 
another.”

Unlike prior studies, this new report doesn’t rely on the race of the 
individual citizens involved to draw its conclusions, but rather, looks at the 
demographics of the neighborhoods where the use of force incidents occurred. 
This, according to Goff, is the best way to understand how community-level 
factors such as crime, income and education might influence the disparate 
racial application of force.

Policing “is a neighborhood-by-neighborhood profession”, he said. “That’s how 
it’s experienced.”

The Austin neighborhood report also looked at traffic stops and found that 
black drivers of all ages were searched more frequently than white or Hispanic 
drivers. In addition, black drivers did not see the same reductions in stops 
with age that white and Hispanic drivers experienced. The report concedes, 
however, that the findings are “unable to control for drivers’ differential 
involvement in illegal activity or exposure to police” and cannot be taken by 
themselves as proof of bias in stops.
 