
To be consistent or inconsistent, that is the question. While Novak Djokovic, 
Rafael Nadal and Roger Federer have carved up 26 of the last 27 men's grand 
slam titles between them, predicting what will happen in women's tennis has 
become almost as perilous a task as guessing what Mario Balotelli will do next.

Some might say it's good for the game. After all, if you knew how every match 
was going to play out, what would be the point in watching? The capacity for 
surprise is one of the reasons we follow sport. Who would deny Francesca 
Schiavone her wonderfully unexpected French Open win in 2010, or Sam Stosur her 
shock victory in the eye of a Serena Williams storm in last year's US Open 
final?

Except there's an overriding feeling the women's game has lost a little 
credibility in its unpredictability, and that it desperately needs a player to 
step up to the plate. Two or three would be even better. There's nothing that 
captivates us more than a great sporting rivalry, and tennis has had its fair 
share over the years, whether it be Borg v McEnroe, Federer v Nadal, 
Navratilova v Evert, or Graf v Seles.

But for now, that will have to wait. Today, the run of four different women's 
champions in the last four grand slams will be stretched to five. OK,Maria 
Sharapova <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/maria-sharapova> is a three-times 
major winner, but her last victory came four long years ago in Australia, 
before shoulder surgery made her question whether she would ever hit a ball in 
anger again. Someone with lesser spirit and determination might not have done.

For Victoria Azarenka, this is her first major final. The 22-year-old 
Belarussian announced herself to the game in 2009 by winning in Miami, a 
tournament often called "the fifth grand slam". But her progress since has been 
slower than expected and she even briefly considered quitting last year. 
Hopefully it had nothing to dowith this 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/may/20/victoria-azarenka-small-talk>.

I hope you've got your ear plugs close at hand for this one. Personally I 
think there's far too much focus on shrieking/grunting in the women's game, but 
that hasn't stopped me from including a nice little graphic for you at the top 
of this page.Michelle Larcher de Brito 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dI22ZDn6K4Y> excluded, these two can pierce the 
eardrums like no others.

Stat attack. There's nothing between these two on paper. They've met six times 
before, winning three apiece. Azarenka has prevailed the last two times they've 
played each other on a hard court, but doing it on the biggest stage against 
one of the gutsiest competitors in the game is an altogether different 
proposition.

There's also the added pressure of the world No1 ranking as a prize: whoever 
wins today will take Caroline Wozniacki out of the firing line by replacing the 
grand slam-less Dane at the top of the rankings.

Azarenka has probably been hitting the ball and serving better than Sharapova 
during the tournament so far, but the Russian's experience could prove telling. 
That said, it didn't in last year's Wimbledon final against Petra Kvitova.

Sharapova and Azarenka are in the bowels of the Rod Laver arena winding their 
way on to court. Surprisingly there are no pre-match interviews, so the players 
strut straight out.

Thump, thump, thumpity thump, they're warming up. Sharapova is wearing a white 
dress with a radioactive green trim that is the same colour as her visor. 
Azarenka's headband is the exact same shade, but she opts for a long-sleeved 
blue top and white shorts. Not even a screech to speak of so far.

Sharapova won the toss, by the way, and has elected to receive.

First set: *Sharapova 1-0 Azarenka (denotes next server)
A cheap first point, as Azarenka tamely nets. Then it's Sharapova's turn to 
throw in an error, as she goes a foot or so long with a cross-court forehand. 
Signs of nerves as Azarenka double faults to slip 15-30 down. She takes a deep 
breath and rolls back her shoulders, but another double at 30-30 andit's break 
point to Sharapova. Azarenka wallops away a forehand winner to avert the 
danger, but not for long. Sharapova carves outanother break point and this time 
Azarenka goes wide. A mixed bag that opening game.

First set: Sharapova 2-0 Azarenka*
At 15-0, the best point of the match so far - and the longest rally so far - 
which Sharapova eventually wins with a deep, punishing stroke to Azarenka's 
backhand wing. The Belarussian can only prod the ball back into the tramlines. 
Sharapova moves 40-0 up, then throws in her first double of the day, before 
holding to 15. A smattering of applause from the crowd, but to be honest, it's 
not completely full at the moment. There are a few rows of empty seats at the 
back. Not good for a grand slam final.

First set: *Sharapova 2-1 Azarenka
Azarenka's ball toss is all over the place and a third double gives Sharapova 
the initiative at 0-30. Azarenka digs deep and reels off the next three points 
to edge 40-30 ahead. And she gets her name on the board with a darting forehand 
winner down the line. Even though it's 8pm in Melbourne it's a balmy 29 degrees 
and sunny. The weather report here in King's Cross meanwhile? Two degrees and 
cloudy.

First set: Sharapova 2-2 Azarenka*
Azarenka has got her eye in now. 0-15, 0-30, 0-40 and it's three break points. 
A loose backhand from Sharapova and she needs just the one. Sharapova appeals 
to Hawk-Eye but the call stands.

First set: *Sharapova 2-3 Azarenka
Azarenka is cranking up the pressure and a drive backhand volley puts her 30-0 
up. Seemingly aggrieved, Sharapova gives back as good as she gets on the next 
point, slamming a backhand winner. Undettered, Azarenka rattles off the next 
two points to take her third game on the spin. "COME ON," she cries. A 
fantastic recovery after a nervous start.

First set: Sharapova 3-3 Azarenka*
These two love to duke it out from the back of the court with their powerful 
ground strokes, and they're starting to bash the balls around with some real 
intent. Deuce. Advantage Sharapova. Deuce. Advantage Sharapova. And Sharapova 
holds with the first ace and quickest serve of the match so far. The camera 
pans to the great Rod Laver, who's back for more even after the five-hour 
marathon Andy Murray and Novak Djokovic served up yesterday.

First set: *Sharapova 3-4 Azarenka
They're right into this match now, they are. At 15-0, a punishing cross-court 
backhand from Azarenka draws the error. Cue a fist pump and another "COME ON", 
which to be fair, is probably louder than any shrieks or wails we've heard so 
far. Sharapova comes back with interest, crunching a forehand drive volley into 
the open court. Azarenka eventually holds to 30, finishing things off with a 
lovely change in tack, drawing Sharapova in before leaving her stranded with an 
inch-perfect lob. Anyone out there? Or are you all reading Mr Lutz's 
over-by-over? Bah.

First set: Sharapova 3-5 Azarenka*
A wonderful point at 15-15, which Sharapova finishes off when she wrong-foots 
Azarenka and drives a backhand winner down the line. Sharapova should close the 
game out from 40-15, but loses focus on her serve and Azarenka forges her way 
to advantage.Break point. Sharapova bludgeons a cross-court forehand winner, 
but can't repeat the trick when Azarenka brings up anotherbreak point. That's 
five of the last six games now for the Belarussian and she will serve for the 
opening set. Her greater variety and ability to finish the points by coming 
into the net is proving the difference.

Azarenka wins the first set 6-3
Azarenka moves 40-15 up with the minimum of fuss, and strides purposefully 
back to the baseline with the knowledge thatshe has two set points. Just the 
one will do as Sharapova nets. The set is Azarenka's after 47 minutes. She's 
halfway to her first grand slam title and the world No1 ranking. Will her nerve 
hold?

And an email! From Seamus Whitehead: "Hello, I'm alive and kicking - keeping 
an eye on the rival OBO but following the tennis really - one thing though, how 
many of the ladies have quite scary looking coaches?! Is it a pre-requisite?" 
Considering some of the intimidating characters we've had in women's tennis in 
the past, such as Mr Pierce, Mr Capriati and Mr Dokic, I'd say probably yes. 
Though no glare can surely be as scary as Sharapova's own.

Second set: Sharapova 3-6, 0-1 Azarenka*
Sharapova is going for broke now. She knows Azarenka is the better mover, 
volleyer and has the more variety, and she's trying to batter the poor life out 
of the tennis balls to counter it. It doesn't come off, and Azarenka breaks 
with a delightful cross-court winner with Sharapova stranded at the net. 
"Azarenka, down 0-2, wins 6/7 games to take the set," says Sports Illustrated's 
Jon Wertheim on Twitter. "A key to match was how well she'd handle occasion. So 
far, so good. and i might be in the minority but soundtrack not really 
detracting from enjoyment." Very true.

Second set: *Sharapova 3-6, 0-2 Azarenka
One thing Sharapova does have though is fight, probably like no other in the 
game, bar Serena Williams. She's a difficult player to love at times, but her 
determination makes her easy to respect. The Russian has achance to break at 
30-40, but nets. Azarenka takes the next two points to hold. Could be a big 
moment that. That's eight of the last nine games now.

Second set: Sharapova 3-6, 0-3 Azarenka*
That notorious Sharapova mettle is not enough. She slips to 15-40 down in the 
blink of an eye and it'stwo break points. She goes wide and it's a double break 
to Azarenka. What a cushion to have when you're attempting to win your first 
grand slam title. Make that nine of the last 10.

Second set: *Sharapova 3-6, 0-4 Azarenka
That scary coach Seamus mentioned earlier is urging Sharapova to step in a 
foot or two to counter the Azarenka onslaught, but it's to no avail. She's 
struggling to control the ball and looks all at sea. She does hit a return 
winner at 40-15 down, but on the next point Azarenka moves Sharapova left and 
right and left and right and left and right and Sharapova nets. A vital service 
game coming up for Sharapova.

Second set: Sharapova 3-6, 0-5 Azarenka*
The luck isn't with Sharapova either. At 0-15, she nails a winner, but it's 
called out. It's overruled on Hawk-Eye, but they'll replay the point. Sharapova 
keeps her focus to take it. 15-all. More controversy on the next point as this 
time Azarenka is on the wrong end of a bad call. Another replayed point. 
Justice is again done. 15-30. Sharapova tries to dictate the next point but 
Azarenka's consistency from the back of the court is brutal and Sharapova nets.
15-40, two break points. Sharapova saves one but not the other and Azarenka 
will serve for the title. What a shellacking for Sharapova. "Beatdown city," 
parps Patrick McEnroe on Twitter.

Azarenka wins the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> title 6-3, 6-0
Azarenka's arm probably feels like it weighs about 100kg right now but you 
wouldn't know it as she takes the first piont. There's still some fight in 
Sharapova as she darts a forehand winner down the line but surely it's too 
little, too late. The fire alarm then goes off at Guardian Towers which I have 
to say is more distracting than the sounds these two have emitted during this 
match, even though the noise levels have apparently reached 94.3 decibels. 
Sharapova buries another winner, before Azarenka does the same with interest, 
30-30. A lucky net cord for Sharapova and it's30-40, break point. She doesn't 
take it and from deuce it becomes advantage Azarenka,championship point. 
Sharapova nets after a lengthy exchange. Azarenka sinks to her knees. Gone is 
her usual my-finger-is-a-gun post-match celebration, instead she puts her head 
in her hands in disbelief. Exceptional tennis from the Belarussian in her first 
slam final. And not only has she now stepped up to the major winners' circle, 
she's also the new world No1. Not bad for day's work (or 82 minutes, to be 
exact). Sharapova, meanwhile, slumps into her chair and understandably looks 
rather stunned.

Presentation time. Martina Hingis, the Australian Open champion between 1997 
and 1999, is here to present the trophy. But first there's the pre-requisite 
speeches from tournament suits.

Sharapova then trudges up to collect her runners-up prize. Somehow she always 
seems more gracious when she loses than when she wins, and this time is no 
different as she says to Azarenka: "It was an honour to play against you. You 
have deserved this trophy, cherish it for as long as you can. As in any sport 
you have your good days, tough days and days when things just don't work out. 
Today Victoria was just better."

Then it's Azarenka's turn. After getting her hands on the trophy she initially 
seems lost for words. But she's not. First she thanks Sharapova for her speech, 
then it's her team, her family, the sponsors, the volunteers, the drivers (who 
apparently she's been feeding doughnuts to all fortnight), the physios, the 
ball kids and just about every man and his dog in Melbourne.

It's time for me to take my leave, but here's Simon Cambers's match report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jan/28/victoria-azarenka-wins-australian-open>
 and also a stat to finish with: it's the first time in tennis history all four 
grand slams are held by four different women who are all first-time winners.

Could Azarenka now be about to bring some consistency to the game? She's got a 
good chance, if today's performance is anything to go by. Her and Kvitova 
certainly look like the most likely contenders.

But for now, if it's consistency you crave, please join me tomorrow for the 
latest instalment of Nadal v Djokovic. It should be a cracker. Thanks for 
reading. Bye.
 