
The Australian government has announced it will increase the intensity of 
attacks onIslamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> – also known 
as Daesh – by changing the law to allow targeting of its combat support forces, 
not just those actively engaged in hostilities.

Labor offered in-principle support for the changes, which will allow strikes 
on logistics and support members of Isis without the legal risk of prosecution 
under Australian law.

Malcolm Turnbull also confirmed the government would introduce further 
counter-terrorism legislation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/25/turnbull-says-terrorist-threat-in-australia-is-real-as-he-pushes-for-indefinite-detention>
 including a post-sentence preventative detention system and control orders for 
younger Australians deemed vulnerable to radicalisation.

The prime minister told parliament on Thursday morning that Australian 
domestic law was “more restrictive than international law”, posing a legal risk 
that is “a major challenge to the effectiveness of our operations”.

Malcolm Turnbull says Islamic State losing its myth of invincibility
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/06/malcolm-turnbull-says-islamic-state-losing-its-myth-of-invincibility>
“It meant that the [Australian defence force’s] targeting base in Iraq and 
Syria was restricted, and we could not operate as freely as our coalition 
partners.”

At a briefing on Thursday, the chief of the defence force, Air Chief Marshal 
Mark Binskin, explained that domestic law only allows strikes against “those 
Daesh forces that are taking a direct and active part in hostilities”.

“It doesn’t allow us to target those important supporting elements that are 
key to their fighting ability, eg their logistics and support organisations.”

ADF personnel who kill Isis members not engaged in active hostilities are 
vulnerable to prosecution under the commonwealth criminal code.

Turnbull announced the government had reviewed its policy on targeting enemy 
combatants “to ensure our forces are empowered to act against Daesh in Iraq and 
Syria to the maximum extent allowed by international law”. He promised changes 
to the criminal code to eliminate the anomaly.

“This means that ADF personnel will be supported by our domestic laws,” he 
said. “They will be able to target Daesh at its core – joining with our 
coalition partners to target and kill a broader range of Daesh combatants – 
which is consistent with international law.”


Binskin said the changes would “allow us to target combat support elements of 
Daesh but it’s also important to me because it removes the ambiguity that my 
people operate under”.

The opposition leader, Bill Shorten, told parliament Labor would “continue to 
take the same constructive approach” it had in the 44th parliament when it 
helped the government pass four rounds of national security legislation, with 
some amendments.

He said he agreed with the principle of “targeting all members of Daesh … 
[but] of course we will need to see how the law and the drafting works”.

Shorten said the ADF had already targeted Daesh positions, infrastructure, 
headquarters and vehicles, including “Mad Max”-style vehicles.

But he warned the current anomaly created difficulties when targeting “the 
factories where they make equipment, where they cache their supplies, where 
they get the fuel trucks and the logistical element”.

Turnbull also addressed the role of religion and ideology in violent 
extremism, stating that some Isis fighters were motived by “a narrow and 
extreme interpretation of Islam”. He warned Isis was “opportunistically 
recruiting, radicalising and enabling individuals who are already in-country 
and have had no prior history with terrorist organisations”.

Some lone actors and small groups “are not deeply engaged with the Islamist 
ideology but are nonetheless, due to a range of reasons, including mental 
illness, susceptible to being radicalised rapidly”, he said.

Turnbull said about 200 people in Australia were being investigated for 
providing support to individuals and groups in the conflict in Syria and Iraq.

He announced the government would bring legislation for a post-sentence 
preventative detention system “to enable a continuing period of detention for 
high-risk terrorist offenders”.

I was held hostage by Isis. They fear our unity more than our airstrikes | 
Nicolas Hénin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/16/isis-bombs-hostage-syria-islamic-state-paris-attacks>
“It will be a court-supervised process similar to the arrangements that apply 
in a number of jurisdictions for sex offenders and for extremely violent 
individuals,” he said.

The government would introduce a measure recommended by the parliamentary 
joint committee on intelligence and security 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/25/turnbull-says-terrorist-threat-in-australia-is-real-as-he-pushes-for-indefinite-detention>
 to “strengthen our control order regime and address the regrettable trend of 
increasingly younger Australians being susceptible to the lies and propaganda 
of Daesh and extremist ideology”.

The Labor MP and anti-radicalisation expert, Anne Aly, told Guardian Australia 
that Turnbull’s account of radicalisation was “spot on and reflects what the 
research is showing – that particularly younger people aren’t engaged with 
radical ideologies but have other forms of grievance” or have aggressive traits.

Aly said laws had to respond to the changing threat environment, and it was 
“appropriate” that post-sentence preventative detention be used for terrorist 
offences, as it is for other crimes.

“With control orders, the fact is the average age of men, in particular … 
getting involved in radicalising views and moving on towards violence, has 
decreased.

“In order to be able to meet that threat head on we have to look at expanding 
control orders to people of a younger age.”
 