
British tennis's big day in Melbourne turned into a nightmare as Laura Robson, 
Elena Baltacha andAnne Keothavong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anne-keothavong> followed James Ward and 
Heather Watson in losing on the opening day of the Australian Open.

With six players in the main draws – a 20-year record for an overseas grand 
slam – there was optimism that some long overdue success was on the horizon, 
but not one of them managed to win a set.

But it failed to materialise as Watson, Ward, Baltacha, Robson and Keothavong 
all made swift exits.

Robson, at just 17 years old, is considered Britain's brightest female hope 
but she was outclassed by the 13th-seeded Serbian Jelena Jankovic, who won 6-2, 
6-0 in one hour and nine minutes.

The left-hander looked ill at ease from the off on Margaret Court Arena after 
dropping her opening service game.

She had three chances to hit back at 3-2 behind but once they went – the first 
after an ace from Jankovic which was only confirmed as in via Hawk-Eye, the 
match swiftly followed, with the second set a procession as Robson sprayed the 
ball around seemingly with little gameplan.

Baltacha departed shortly before Robson after losing to the lower-ranked 
Frenchwoman Stéphanie Foretz Gacon 6-2, 6-4. The Scot, Britain's leading female 
player, paid dearly for an awful start when she fell 4-0 behind and was unable 
to haul it back.

She found her range in the second set, trading blows with the 30-year-old, who 
at No107 in the world is ranked 53 places lower than Baltacha, but lost her 
nerve when serving at 4-4.

Foretz Gacon squandered six break points but broke through on the seventh and 
duly served it out to advance in one hour and 30 minutes.

The misery continued as the fifth Briton in action on Monday, Keothavong, 
retired from her match against Germany's Mona Barthel after dropping the first 
set 6-0.

The opening-day gloom meant British tennis fans were once again in the 
familiar position of having to rely on Andy Murray, with the world No4 due to 
open his campaign against the American Ryan Harrison tomorrow.

The tournament had started badly for Britain when Watson was thrashed by 
Victoria Azarenka. The 19-year-old from Guernsey was expected to struggle 
against the third seed but the one-sided nature of the contest did little to 
enhance her reputation.

Although Watson started well by winning the opening game at the Rod Laver 
Arena she was then steamrollered as the Belarusian, who claimed a title in 
Sydney last week and is among the favourites here, won the next 12 to secure an 
emphatic 6-1, 6-0 victory in one hour and seven minutes.

Afterwards Watson admitted she had not done herself justice. "I played a few 
good points here and there but I wasn't playing consistently enough," she said. 
"Vika played great and I can't remember her missing a ball, that's why she is 
No3 in the world. But I have to put up a bigger fight than that to get close.

"The first game was good but from there it was downhill. I have gained 
experience from this and I am not too upset because I tried my best even though 
I wasn't there today."

Ward had a better chance to progress but was ousted by the Slovenian Blaz 
Kavcic, ranked No103 in the world. The 24-year-old Londoner, who came through 
qualifying to play in the main draw of a slam for the first time outside 
Wimbledon, was broken six times en route to a 6-4, 6-3, 6-4 defeat.

"It was difficult out there due to the wind but it was the same for both of us 
and there are no excuses, it was a tough day," Ward said afterwards.

"It's disappointing because I lost. I am not happy about losing any match but 
it was a good chance. It has gone and I just have to move on and look forward 
to the next tournament."
 