
The Abbott government has elected to begin the process of joining the China-led
Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/asian-infrastructure-investment-bank> – 
but is still telegraphing concerns about the structure of the organisation.


China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> launched the $100bn proposal 
last year and more than 20 countries have announced their intention to be 
founding members.

There have been different views within the cabinet about whether Australia 
should join the institution. The United States has been distinctly cool on the 
proposal which, given its resources and membership, could ultimately rival 
other global financial institutions, like the World Bank.

When Britain joined the AIIB in mid March, the White House issued a rare 
public rebuke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/13/white-house-pointedly-asks-uk-to-use-its-voice-as-part-of-chinese-led-bank>
, declaring its hope and expectation that the UK would use its influence to 
ensure that high standards of governance are upheld. The US sees the AIIB as a 
vehicle for China to exert influence in the region.

The spectrum of cabinet views have prompted Australia to appear first 
supportive, then cool, then, over the past fortnight, supportive once again.

Last week the prime minister Tony Abbott told reporters he was in discussions 
with the United States and with Japan about Australia joining the AIIB.

The statement issued by the prime minister, Tony Abbott, the foreign minister, 
Julie Bishop, and the treasurer, Joe Hockey, early on Sunday, was still hedged.

Australia would sign a memorandum of understanding on the AIIB “which would 
allow Australia to participate as a prospective founding member in negotiations 
to set up the bank.”

“The government has discussed the AIIB extensively with China and other key 
partners inside and outside the region,” the joint statement said.

“Good progress has been made on the bank’s design, governance and transparency 
over the past few months, but we still have issues that we will address through 
ongoing consultations,” it said.


“Key matters to be resolved before Australia considers joining the AIIB 
include the bank’s board of directors having authority over key investment 
decisions, and that no one country control the bank.”
 