
It was Janko Tipsarevic, Serbia's third-best player, who put it perfectly. 
"With all respect to all other great competitors that this country had,Novak 
Djokovic <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic> is the best 
sportsman in our history." The world No49 posted the statement on Twitter after 
Djokovic's brilliant 7-6, 7-5, 6-4 victory over Roger Federer in the 
semi-finals here, a win that puts the 23-year-old Serb on the verge of his 
second grand slam.

Tipsarevic should know – after all, he was part of the team that created 
history for Serbia when they won the Davis Cup so brilliantly and emotionally 
last month. Djokovic won both his singles matches and the world No3 said the 
celebrations lasted "two days and two nights". "After that we were completely 
gone and we got sick, so that tells you all."

For Djokovic, winning the Davis Cup was a hugely pivotal moment. A proud 
patriot, "Nole" Djokovic has never turned his back on the competition in the 
way Roger Federer, Rafael Nadal and, more recently,Andy Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> have done by skipping matches in 
favour of concentrating on the grand slams. He has played almost all of his 
country's ties since he made his debut as a 17-year-old in 2004 and victory 
over France in Belgrade was the culmination of a lifelong dream.

"Our athletes are probably our biggest ambassadors for our country," Djokovic 
said. "There were celebrations all over the world. The people really loved the 
success that we have. Tennis has become a very popular sport in our country in 
the last two or three years. Before that, it was only team sports. We are still 
a nation of team sports – we are very successful in basketball, volleyball, 
handball and water polo.Tennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> never 
had a long history."

Having won the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> three years ago, Djokovic 
goes into final without the pressure of needing to break his grand slam duck. 
While Britain has been craving a men's champion for 75 years since Fred Perry's 
last US Open triumph, Serbia has been blessed with two grand slam winners in 
Djokovic and Ana Ivanovic.

Djokovic knows Murray well, having met the Scot for the first time when they 
were 13 in a junior tournament in France. The Serb remembers Murray as having 
"big hair" and finding his Scottish accent tough to understand. From that 
moment on, their lives have been intertwined and Djokovic has seen his friend 
have to deal with the pressure of a nation.

It is a pressure he might have had to cope with too, had he accepted an offer 
from the LTA, soon after the arrival of Roger Draper, to switch his allegiance 
from Serbia to Britain when he first hit the senior ranks. Financial assistance 
was the main reason Djokovic even considered the offer, which would have 
involved taking up residency in the UK and shunning Davis Cup tennis until he 
qualified to play for Britain, but a quick rise up the rankings brought its own 
rewards and he kept his heart in Serbia.

While more than a dozen newspaper reporters and perhaps twice that number of 
television and radio workers have travelled here to follow Murray's every move, 
there are only a couple of Serbian journalists on site and Djokovic joked that 
he spends more time speaking English these days than he does his native 
language. "On the one hand I would like to be in [Murray's] shoes because he 
gets a big support obviously, because of the country that he comes from," he 
said. "On the other hand I wouldn't like it because of the media attention and 
the pressure that he faces."

Pressure and nerves will play their part in the final, no doubt, and Djokovic 
said: "I feel that I'm more experienced. Winning a grand slam title here a 
couple years back and having that for the final, it's maybe a little bit of the 
mental advantage."
 