
Andy Murray has invariably dragged us to the edge of our seats. Rarely has he 
done it so dramatically when it mattered as in beating David Ferrer in four 
sets today to reach the final of theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> for the second year in a 
row.

He was on the brink of a knockout after an hour but recovered to leave the 
Spaniard on the ropes. Clearly drained after three hours and 46 minutes of 
high-octane tennis littered with scores of 20-plus rallies, he predicted that 
Sunday's final against Novak Djokovic was going to be "brutal".

It will be if he plays like this. He resorted to his serve to extricate 
himself from several tight spots but ran out of ideas when Ferrer kept running 
down even his most exquisite winners. It was then that Murray was drawn into a 
brawl, a decision he probably will regret, yet he survived it.

Those critics who demand that Murray abandon his passive aggression will be 
overjoyed to learn that he went to the net 56 times and scored winners on all 
but 16 occasions. There were mistakes, but there were also a string of quite 
stunning shots. Much of this was desperation, but it revealed Murray's 
willingness to adapt to crises. There may be a few of those against Djokovic.

Murray was out of sorts in the first set, conducted in the early-evening 
summer glow; fought like a demon in the second (during which he sent two 
rackets away to be restrung for more power) and overpowered Ferrer in a 
tie-break; blitzed the Spaniard in the third (when his rackets had been 
returned to him); then lapsed into his earlier torpor before hanging on in the 
fourth and crushing the Spaniard in a second tie-break.

If there is a soap with more twists, it would struggle to pass the credibility 
test of the most obscure satellite channel.

This 4-6, 7-6 (7-2), 6-1, 7-6 (7-2) win over three hours and 46 minutes was 
more fraught than any of the Scot's five other wins the past fortnight yet 
because of the way he came through the struggle, it was probably the most 
impressive.

"He's an unbelievable athlete, unbelievable competitor," a drained Murray said 
at courtside, before leaving to sooth his racked body in an ice bath. "He's 
such a tough player. There's going to be some nerves in a grand slam 
semi-final, certainly that was the case in the first set today. I changed 
racket tension just before the end of the second set, then finished a lot of 
points quicker.

"My first slam final [against Roger Federer in the 2008 US Open], I didn't now 
what was going on. Last year [here against Federer] was better – and I hope 
this is going to be better than last year's."

Asked about Djokovic, he said: "Experience-wise we're similar. We're good 
friends, practise a lot together, so there won't be any secrets – but it's 
going to be a brutal match."

Ferrer said: "I had my chance at set point in the second set but he served 
really well, in the important moments better than me. I tried, but Andy 
Murray's a very great player. The final? A difficult match. Andy and Novak are 
very consistent, but I don't know. It depends on the start of the match, the 
first set."

If Murray starts in the final the way he did today, he will be in trouble. The 
British No1 had to dig deep on countless occasions to see off Ferrer, who may 
never have played better tennis.

After a start that would have been more appropriate at the opening of a state 
funeral, with the fans barely responding to a series of mundane exchanges, it 
turned into the most enthralling dog fight. Murray's big serve got him out of 
trouble time and again. He served only nine aces, three of them in the 
tie-breaks.

At the three-hour point – the length of Djokovic's win over Federer the night 
before – Murray led two sets to one and it was 2-2 in the fourth. Not a soul in 
the arena could tell which way the match would go. Murray was breathing hard 
and sweating profusely, despite the mild conditions. Several times he looked up 
to his box, where his mother, Judy, was grim-faced and plainly concerned. But 
he came through several difficult patches as Ferrer's discipline deserted him.

The third set encouraged the belief among his supporters that Murray would 
stroll to the finish – but, almost inevitably, it was not to be. Ferrer roused 
himself magnificently in the fourth. Murray broke early to lead 2-0 but 
surrendered the initiative as the No7 seed refused to bow to the pressure.

The closing tie-break, however, mirrored the first almost exactly. When Murray 
raced to a 6-1 lead with his second ace, all that was left to wind the match up 
was a delightful final flourish, a delicate reverse chip that left Ferrer 
stranded and bereft.
 