
Vera Zvonareva is a darling off the court and pretty volatile on it - which is 
why she nearly lost it completely when the 21-gun salute to mark Australia Day 
went off when she was leading 6-3 and 3-0 in the second against Petra Kvitova.

She only just go it together to serve out at 6-4.

It would have been a sad way to go out of a grand slam that close to the 
semi-finals.

There was also an unscheduled distraction when a woman collapsed in the stand. 
Zvonareva later was more concerned about her than any inconvenience the guns 
might have caused.

"Someone wasn't feeling right in the stands," she said, "so it was a little 
bit of a distraction there. I hope the person is feeling all right now."

There was a more serious matter on the Russian's mind: the terrorist attack in 
Moscow. She wore a black ribbon on her visor to signal her sympathy.

"[When] the news came it was quite shocking," she said. "It was difficult. 
Definitely there was a moment where I felt a bit uncomfortable. You're calling 
back home and making sure everyone is okay, the people that you know. I just 
tried to put it away. It happened. It is terrible. But you try to move on."

LAVER OR MARTINA?


A little ripple from Graygate has made its way across the Pacific to the 
Australian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>.

In a robust discussion on Channel 7 here, a quiz question asking who was the 
greatest left-handed tennis player of all time went strictly down gender lines 
when the men voted for Rod Laver and the women were pretty adamant it should be 
Martina Navratilova.

No contest.

In case that sentence needs ending, this reporter has been chided on the blogs 
for talking about the poppets, so I must adjust the "light humour" button on 
the laptop or front up at Guardian Towers for some gender rehab.

Still, I can't think of a better description for those players who look and 
sound as if they've come out of the same academy somewhere deep in the forest, 
ponytails and headbands in place, and so scared of the net they double-fist 
their backhands from 10 feet behind the base line, grunting as if they'd just 
swallowed a jar of Vegemite.

Speaking of which, this from Brad Gilbert on Twitter, after he'd been 
introduced to the wonder food from hell: "That Vegemite experience was awful. 
It tastes like a super salty black beer paste gone bad!! Took me 22 minutes rid 
the bad taste."

G'DAYSVILLE


It's Australia Day. And, if you're not Australian, you probably wish you were, 
to borrow the old Irish joke. If not, though, and you can play tennis a bit, 
the local media will happily do a quick makeover on your heritage.

There was "Kangaroo" Caroline Wozniacki, of course; "Aussie" Kim Clijsters 
and, er, Ana Ivanovic (gone, but not forgotten for her liaison with Australian 
golfer Adam Scott).

WE LISTEN, SO YOU DON'T HAVE TO


Question: Do you want to be in the top five in the next two years?

Petra Kvitova: Who doesn't?
 