
Australia ended their tour of South Africa the same way it started - with a 
left-armer named Mitchell wreaking havoc in a resounding triumph at Centurion.


Mitchell Starc went for the throat as Australia made it five Twenty20 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/twenty20> wins on the trot, wrapping up a 
2-0 series triumph with a comfortable six-wicket victory on Saturday morning 
(AEDT).


Starc helped restrict the Proteas to a total of 7-128, while quick-fire knocks 
from Aaron Finch and Shane Watson helped Australia chase the modest total down 
in 15 overs.


South Africa skipper Faf du Plessis said Australia will be one of the teams to 
beat in the Twenty20 World Cup, which starts in Bangladesh later this month.

“They have a powerhouse batting order ... everyone in that top seven or eight 
can come in and take the game away from you,” he said.


“That’s very dangerous. It’s definitely a massive positive for them going into 
the World Cup on those (subcontinent) wickets. They’ve got a good side.”

Like Mitchell Johnson in the 281-run win in the first Test a month ago, Starc 
started with a fiery opening spell.


It begun with a maiden over, the last ball of which thundered into Quinton de 
Kock’s throat at almost 140 km/h.


“You don’t want to see anyone get hurt,” Starc said. “But you try and bowl 
fast. When you try to bowl a bumper, you try to hit them in the head, don’t 
you? “He’s OK, so I can say I’m pretty happy with it ... more importantly it 
was a dot ball.”

Starc trapped Hashim Amla lbw with a fine inswinger in his next over, and 
returned later to rattle Albie Morkel’s stumps and finish with figures of 2-16 
from four overs.


With Johnson in doubt for the Twenty20 World Cup with a toe infection, Starc 
could well be called in to lead the attack in Bangladesh.


“Part of my role is to try and swing that ball and attack the stumps and try 
and take wickets,” the man of the match said.


“As we saw today, if you can take wickets - in the first six overs especially 
but throughout the innings - it’s a lot harder to keep swinging at the end.


“Where if you’re two down or three down heading in to that last five, there’s 
a lot of freedom for the batsmen.”


De Kock recovered to top-score with 41 and claim player-of-the-series honours, 
but there were too many soft dismissals as the Proteas wilted in front of a 
sold-out crowd at SuperSport Park.


In response, Finch flayed 39 runs from 27 balls and Watson (35 from 28 balls) 
whacked two towering sixes.


Imran Tahir dismissed both but, even with David Warner rested, the home side 
didn’t have anywhere near enough runs.


“We got outplayed by a powerful Australian side,” Proteas coach Russell 
Domingo said.


Having accounted for England 3-0 and South Africa 2-0, the side will boast a 
truckload of confidence as they seek to win the only major piece of cricket 
silverware to elude Australia.


“We got a lot out of these two games as a team,” Starc said.


Australia’s T20 World Cup campaign starts Sunday week against Pakistan in 
Dhaka.
 