
David Warner frustrated South Africa on the field for a change. After 
Australia's defeat in Port Elizabeth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/23/south-africa-australia-second-test-port-elizabeth>
, Warner, who seldom gives the impression that he thinks long and hard before 
opening his mouth,cast aspersions about the South Africans' ability to find 
reverse swing so quickly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/27/david-warner-fined-australia-south-africa>
. In Cape Town, at the start of the third and final Test of the series, he 
opened his shoulders rather more eloquently.

Warner struck 135 from 152 balls, his fourth Test century of the winter, an 
innings that makes it well-nigh impossible for South Africa to win the series. 
Australia ended the first day on 331 for three with their captain, Michael 
Clarke, unbeaten on 92, his first significant contribution with the bat on the 
tour. To make matters worse for the home side, they were without their prime 
match-winner from mid-afternoon when Dale Steyn left the field with a hamstring 
problem.

"[Steyn] is going to have a little fitness test tomorrow ... there's still 
hope," the South Africa bowling coach, Allan Donald, said. "If you lose your 
gun bowler, which is Dale Steyn, then the rest are going to have to step up. 
We've done that on numerous occasions."

Warner was irrepressible from the start, highlighting the best way, which is 
often the Australian way, to react when faced with a contest in the balance. He 
attacked so vigorously on a true Newlands surface that Australia had reached 50 
within 10 overs. He received only modest support from Chris Rogers, who was 
caught at slip off Steyn, and Alex Doolan, who top-edged against Vernon 
Philander.

There was a captivating passage of play in mid-afternoon when Clarke came to 
the crease. Morne Morkel peppered him with short deliveries from around the 
wicket. The ball thudded into Clarke's helmet, body and gloves in swift 
succession (though not from the same delivery) but Clarke survived and by the 
end he was batting with familiar authority.

"It would have been easy to play a shot to try and stop that, but [Clarke] 
hung in there," Shane Warne, acting as a team consultant for Australia, said. 
"[His attitude was] you know what, over my dead body. You're going to have to 
keep hitting me until I can't stand up.

"He's got four, maybe five ice packs on [his hand] he's in a bit of pain, a 
bit of agony."

Warner was eventually caught behind from the off-spin of JP Duminy but this 
did not hinder Australia's progress greatly since Steve Smith was soon into his 
stride. Before the close his reached his fifty with a superb upper-cut for six 
against Morkel.

Australia had taken the unusual step of making a couple of team changes. Shane 
Watson returned to the side in place of Shaun Marsh; more strikingly, Peter 
Siddle was replaced by the pacier James Pattinson.
 