
The last time there were six British players in a grand slam tournament away 
from Wimbledon – on the hard courts of Flinders Park, here in 1992 – the 
euphoria was as short-lived as it was on the first day of the 2012 edition at 
Melbourne Park.

We have not come far, in truth.

Back then Jeremy Bates, Sara Gomer, Sam Smith, the US-born Monique Javer and 
the South Africa-born Clare Wood (who will manage the tennis competition at the 
London Olympics) went out in the first round. Jo Durie made it to the second 
round, where Larisa Savchenko Neiland won in three sets.

On Monday the losers were Heather Watson (the first on court, against Victoria 
Azarenka, and, after 67 minutes, the first in the whole tournament to pack her 
bags), James Ward, Elena Baltacha, Laura Robson andAnne Keothavong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anne-keothavong>. On Tuesday, Andy Murray is 
on his own again.

There were excuses, reasonable ones. Robson was on crutches with a suspected 
shin complaint only a month ago and Watson has just recovered from a sprained 
ankle. Baltacha has chronic problems with her hips. Keothavong went into her 
match having just recovered from food poisoning. Nevertheless, they won 20 
games between them, and not a single set.

And it comes to something when half a dozen British players getting into the 
main draw of a big tournament is a story in the first place. The argument that 
the British contingent at least did well to arrive at the party is a limp one. 
Across all competitions and categories, senior and junior, Australia have 43 
representatives in Melbourne, as do the United States. France has 40, Spain and 
Germany 32 each and the UK and Belgium … 13 each.

The LTA has poured millions into various schemes since 1992 but success where 
it really matters has been elusive. Tim Henman – who pretty much existed 
outside the system – flickered, teased and departed; Greg Rusedski, born in 
Canada, adopted his mother's birthplace, stayed and, as the coach of the 
victorious junior Davis Cup team, might yet make a substantial contribution to 
the game.

Not always universally popular as a player, Rusedski has shown admirable 
commitment to the cause. But what optimism there is in British tennis, for the 
time being, is confined to Murray at the top and some talented juniors yet to 
be exposed to the realities of life on the Tour.

The problems – or challenges as the Lawn Tennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Association would have it – are 
manifold. Subsidising players beyond what euphemistically can be called their 
development stage is an exercise in blind optimism. If these players are not 
good enough to make it, money used to make their lives more pleasant would 
surely be better spent spreading the game at grassroots level. That is where 
the future is. The present might not be quite as bad as it seems on a very 
black day in Melbourne, but the future is still a gamble. Just as it was in 
1992.

Miserable Monday, as was the case in the first round 20 years ago, is one day 
they will all want to forget.

Plus ça change ...

This, though, is very much an old world perspective. Where tennis has changed 
noticeably and will continue to do so is in the tearing down of theancien régime
and the inward-looking attitudes of those times. The deracinated Soviet Union, 
split into its myriad pieces, and its released eastern bloc satellites of an 
almost forgotten, grey era provide more than any of those above.

The power in the game has shifted dramatically east, a reality not reflected 
in either the administration of the game or the location of the grand slam 
tournaments. Certainly Adam Helfant, an American with the attendant corporate 
history, was reluctant to address the issue before departing recently as the 
executive chairman of the ATP.

It will be interesting to hear what Helfant's successor, the Australian Brad 
Drewett, has to say about it in the months and years to come. He has done much 
to spread the game in Asia, particularly China (where evidence of an explosion 
in interest is yet to manifest itself outside support for Li Na). Could Drewett 
inspire a new revolution in tennis?

Meanwhile, the game's four historic events – in Melbourne, Paris, New York and 
London – are properly regarded as sacred. But for how long can tennis ignore 
the unstoppable influence from the new Europe? How long before we have a fifth 
slam in, say, Moscow, Madrid or Belgrade?

As long as television pays the freight – and US network money still rules. 
Their patience in waiting for the next American tennis star is not endless.

Playing away?

An American winning a slam in New York would ignite interest that has been 
missing there since Pete Sampras ruled – even though home advantage means 
little any more in a game that changes constantly in technique, power, training 
methods and demographics.

The last Australian to win the men's title at home, for instance, was Mark 
Edmondson in 1976. Andy Roddick won the US Open nine years ago. Yannick Noah 
was the last Frenchman to win the title at Roland Garros … and don't even start 
with Fred Perry.

The game is global. The participants no longer are tied to the countries of 
their birth by residence, at least. A random trawl through the ATP's media 
guide reveals the priorities of many: Tomas Berdych, born in the Czech 
Republic, lives in the tax haven Monaco, where he has the Serb Novak Djokovic 
and the Swede Robin Soderling as neighbours, along with several others; the 
French players Richard Gasquet, Gaël Monfils and Gilles Simon live in 
Switzerland. And they all live in suitcases.

The audience, too, has changed. Boundaries are coming down everywhere in all 
our lives … and it still hurts when five Brits go out on day one of a slam.

And that rainbow hairband 


Laura Robson <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/laura-robson> wore a 
rainbow-coloured hairband during her match against Jelena Jankovic, in support 
of gay and lesbian rights, but added: "It was just a rainbow-coloured hairband. 
I didn't see anything about a protest today. I wore it because I believe in 
equal rights for everyone. That's it."

Did she see the recent comments of Margaret Court (on whose eponymous court 
she was playing) about homosexuality being a crime against God? "I did but it 
was through newspapers and things like – I never saw a direct quote from her. 
So I don't want to comment when I actually haven't spoken to her. I believe in 
equal rights for everyone – that is why I wore it."
 