
In the seconds after he had delivered his measured explanation of his defeat 
by David Ferrer in the quarter-finals of theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> – a result that made Andy 
Murray's life considerably more comfortable en route to a possible final 
rematch with Roger Federer – Rafael Nadal looked down at his fingernails and 
winced.

He was in another world. He had batted away some awkward questions 
diffidently. Now he wondered about that little nail on his finger. Maybe he 
would chew it away when the cameras had stopped rolling. Life goes on.

During the course of a difficult evening, his left hamstring had worried him 
far more than any hang nail. He had limped and shrugged even as the sun was 
setting over Melbourne. By the time the Australia Day fireworks had exploded 
over the nearby Yarra river, he was cringing and wincing at a rate of knots. 
The attempt to hold all four grand slam titles at once was over.

Bookmakers could not take in the shock as the red-hot favourite was slowly 
rent asunder by a respectable but unthreatening foe. Murray, watching nearby in 
his hotel, must have quietly given Ferrer a little cheer here and there. He 
trails him 2-3 over their careers but the defeats have been on clay, the wins 
on hard court.

Ferrer, seeded seventh, beat Nadal 6-4, 6-2, 6-3, in 2hr 33min. It seemed 
unfair that the world No1 should leave the fray in such a perfunctory manner. 
The manner of the defeat, too, was notable, coming a year to the day since 
Nadal retired hurt against Murray in Melbourne, as he struggled with the knee 
injuries that had threatened his career.

Still, this time he would not use his left hamstring as an excuse for, even 
though it was the body part most of the attendant media agreed was the source 
of his grief from late in the first set. Nadal greeted inquiries about his 
ailment with: "I would prefer don't talk a lot about the injury."

This was a cop out, legitimised only by his concern not to undermine the 
victory of Ferrer. Too noble? If there is a template for a champion to explain 
a defeat, Nadal set it in dignified splendour.

For the rest of us, Nadal's loss seemed to take on the cataclysmic proportions 
of an earthquake. He looked haggard and weak as he stretched across the 
baseline and made the journey to the net only under duress. His left leg, 
clearly, was not functioning properly as he struggled to load up on his 
left-handed forehand, his killer blow.

Nadal wasn't having it. "I couldn't do more," he said. "Tonight I think I 
played against a great player."

He did not. He lost to a clay-court specialist whose only grand slam 
semi-final before this was on the hard court of New York. In 14 matches against 
Nadal, Ferrer had won three times. To regard this as anything less than an 
upset is to buy into Nadal's concern for his friend.

Nadal would not be budged. But he did say: "I don't have to tell you about 
what I felt on the court because I tried my best all the time. But is obvious 
that I didn't feel at my best. I had a problem during the match, in the very 
beginning. After that, the match was almost over."

Ferrer was hardly more forthcoming. "It was not easy," he said. "Maybe Rafa he 
has a physical problem. I'm very happy with my game. I want to enjoy this 
moment, because it is not easy."

On a night of platitudes, Ferrer did not disappoint. "I know about Andy. It 
will be a difficult match because Andy is a top player. But I am confident. I 
will try to do my best. I need to play consistently, focused all the match, 
because Andy's a top player. He's very different to Rafa. I need to receive 
very well because Andy's got a very good first serve."

Ferrer reckoned he was playing the best tennis of his career since 2007. "But 
this is a very good moment in my life."

Indeed it was. It is Murray's job to dissect the win for what it is: devalued, 
perhaps, by Nadal's limp, enhanced, though, by Ferrer's bustling energy. He is 
not a walkover opponent. He will be buoyed by the biggest win of his career at 
this level and will view the final on Sunday every bit as enthusiastically as 
Murray.

Murray's four-set win over the robust young buck from Ukraine, Alexandr 
Dolgopolov, earlier in the day was a much tougher engagement. While Nadal 
refuses to use injury as an excuse, it clearly was the case. Murray's match was 
fought on level terms. Now the Scot must test himself against someone who was 
also dismissed as merely an inconvenient opponent.
 