
Australia’s unemployment rate has beaten market expectations to fall to its 
lowest rate since the federal Coalition came to power in 2013.

At 5.7 per cent, the March rate is the lowest rate since September 2013 and 
defied the predictions of economists who had expected a rise to 5.9% in March 
from 5.8% in February.

Australia can have good jobs without sacrificing employment growth | Greg 
Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/feb/11/australia-can-have-good-jobs-without-sacrificing-employment-growth>
The total number of people with jobs rose by 26,100 in the month, the 
Australian Bureau of Statistics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-bureau-of-statistics> 
said on Thursday, which was better than expectations of a rise of 20,000.

Full-time employment fell 8,800, while the number of part-time jobs was up by 
34,900.

Employment Minister Michaelia Cash said that during the past 12 months, the 
number of employed people had risen 2.2%, while the number of unemployed people 
had decreased 4.6%.

“So when a Coalition government is able to implement its economic agenda, you 
can clearly see it’s one of job growth and job creation,” she told reporters in 
Perth.

Labor’s employment spokesman, Brendan O’Connor, highlighted the skew towards 
part-time jobs.

“Anyone who gets a job is a good thing ... [but] it comes at the expense of 
the full-time jobs,” he told reporters in Sydney.

Commonwealth Securities economist Savanth Sebastian said the drop in the 
jobless rate would provide a big boost to consumer confidence.

“As we saw over the latter part of 2015, job security plays a big part in 
household consumption,” he said.

The participation rate, which refers to the number of people either employed 
or actively looking for work, was steady at 64.9%.

South Australia’s jobless rate fell slightly but remained the highest in the 
nation.

The state’s unemployment rate fell to 7.2% in March, down from a revised 7.6% 
in February.

The South Australian employment minister, Kyam Maher, said thousands more 
South Australians were employed compared with the same time in 2015, but the 
state economy continued to face significant challenges.


Queensland’s unemployment rate jumped half a percentage point to leapfrog the 
national average.

The state’s seasonally adjusted rate jumped from 5.6% in February to 6.1% in 
March, while the national average fell from 5.8% to 5.7%.
However Queensland’s trend unemployment rate remained steady at 6.0%, in line 
with the national average, which stayed at 5.8%.

New South Wales had its “diversified and buoyant” economy to thank after 
recording the lowest rate of unemployment across Australia for the 10th month 
running, said the state’s treasurer, Gladys Berejiklian.
The state’s jobless rate remained at 5.3% in March. Berejiklian said the 
result was due to record spending on road, rail, hospitals and schools, and 
suggested NSW employers were offering more hours to their workers.

Victoria has three million employed people for the first time, after more 
strong jobs growth.
There were 16,000 new full time jobs created in Victoria in March, taking the 
number of full time jobs created since November 2014 to 71,100.
Labor took power in November 2014 promising to create 100,000 full time jobs 
within two years.

The national figures further wind back expectations of an official interest 
rate cut next month.

JP Morgan economist Tom Kennedy said the Reserve Bank had been keenly watching 
for more positive signs from the labour market.

“Even though inflation is still providing the board with scope to ease, the 
activity data is hanging in there,” he said. “The RBA is on hold, that’s the 
bottom line.”

Before Thursday’s employment report, the market was pricing in a 23% 
probability of a May rate cut.

That’s now dwindled to 16%, National Australia Bank senior economist David de 
Garis said. “At the end of last week it was a 40% chance, but the market’s had 
some strong numbers this week,” he said.
 