
1) Bad start

After Novak Djokovic effectively put paid to Roger Federer’s title prospects 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/28/novak-djokovic-roger-federer-australian-open>
 in 54 minutes, the time it took for the defending champion to claim a two-set 
lead in the semi-finals, Andy Murray will have been under no illusions about 
the need to make a good start to his fifth Australian Open final. All nine of 
his previous wins against the Serb had come after winning the first set. Murray 
would doubtless have been hoping to repeat that pattern, sowing early seeds of 
doubt in the mind of an opponent who had beaten him in three previous finals at 
Melbourne Park, just as he had done in the 2012 US Open final and at Wimbledon 
the following summer. For a moment, as he fought back from 30-0 down in the 
opening game to earn a break point on the Djokovic serve, it looked as though 
he might succeed. But with Murray struggling to find his range from the 
baseline, Djokovic quickly snuffed out the danger and went on to win the 
opening five games. With half an hour gone it was Murray, not Djokovic, 
contemplating the possibility that it might not be his day.

2) Poor serving

Pitted against the best returner in the game for a fourth time in five 
Australian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> finals, 
Murray needed to serve with variety, depth and consistency, especially on the 
first ball. But a poor opening service game, punctuated by a double fault at 
15-40, set the tone for a dismal first set from Murray. Though Murray found the 
court with a highly respectable 69% of his first serves in the opener, he won 
less than half of those points. That was down to his own ragged baseline play 
and the contrasting early fluency of Djokovic, who swiftly settled into his 
customary rhythm off the ground. It is testimony to Murray’s doggedness that he 
went on to win 67% of the points on his first serve, hammering down 11 aces 
along the way. But it was a more familiar failing that really ended his hopes. 
Murray’s second serve has long been the weakest link in his game, but marked 
gains in speed and spin over the past year had fostered a belief that he was 
better equipped to face the world No1 this time out. It took all of half an 
hour for Djokovic to expose that reasoning as fallacy. Murray claimed just one 
point on his serve in the first set and a shockingly poor 35% overall. With 
stats like that, it is no surprise Djokovic was able to break five times in 
three sets.

3) Inconsistency from the back of the court

There is no quicker route back to the locker room than allowing Djokovic to 
dictate play from the baseline. Murray needed to play aggressively, and 
signalled his determination to do so virtually from the first ball of the 
warm-up. Yet there is a fine line between aggression and inconsistency. On a 
day when he lacked feel and flow, Murray tried his best to vary the tempo in 
the rallies, starting deep before working his way inside the baseline and 
opening the shoulders. In the second set, these changes of pace and power 
seemed to fluster Djokovic, rendering the Serb uncharacteristically passive at 
times. When Murray connected with his sliced backhand and fired some punishing 
two-handers crosscourt, the defending champion started to miss makeable balls. 
But Murray struggled to find his range off the backhand down the line, and in 
his anxiety to grasp the nettle he missed way too many forehands. An overall 
total of 64 unforced errors in three sets – compared with 28 over the five sets 
of hissemi-final win against Milos Raonic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/29/andy-murray-beats-milos-raonic-australian-open-semi-final>
 – tells its own story.

4) Below par footwork

Among the enduring memories of Murray’s epic 2012 Australian Open semi-final 
against Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jan/27/novak-djokovic-andy-murray-australian-open>
 is the astounding movement of two players who, along with Rafael Nadal and 
Roger Federer, have redefined the boundaries of what is deemed physically 
possible on a tennis court. Across five sets and almost as many hours, the 
indefatigable duo chased, harried and hustled their way around the Rod Laver 
Arena. This match was of a very different ilk. Murray is one of very few 
players who can match Djokovic physically, but on this occasion he looked 
uncharacteristically sluggish. The warning signs were there as early as the 
third game, when the scrambling Scot failed to run down an admittedly testing 
Djokovic drop shot. But Murray’s listlessness was evident in the plethora of 
missed forehands he racked up. On too many occasions, the tiny adjustments to 
his footwork that normally pass unnoticed were missing. A hangover from the 
physical rigours of his encounter with Raonic, perhaps, or the consequence of a 
late dash to watch his brother Jamie lift the men’s doubles title alongside 
Bruno Soares on Saturday night? Whatever the truth, on such fine margins are 
matches decided.

5) Mental frailty

Perhaps the most telling insight into Murray’s mental state came after the 
match, when he drew a line under an emotionally testing fortnight by paying a 
touching tribute to his wife, who is expecting their first child. His voice 
trembling, Murray said: “And to my wife Kim – I’m sure she’s going to be 
watching back home just now – you’ve been a legend the last few weeks, thank 
you for your support and I’ll be on the next flight home.” Kim’s father, Nigel 
Sears, collapsed in the stands on the middle Saturday and Murrayadmitted that 
his mind wandered in his subsequent match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/27/andy-murray-milos-raonic-australian-open-tennis-semi-finals>
 against Bernard Tomic. Did the emotional toll finally catch up with him 
against Djokovic? With so much going on in the background, it would have 
required a superhuman effort of willpower to step on court against the world 
No1 with a clear head, and it is perhaps unsurprising that Murray seemed 
mentally flat for the opening half hour. Yet the mind has mountains at the best 
of times against Djokovic – see the manner of Murray’s defeat to the Serb in 
last year’s final – and the Scot could ill afford to be less than 100% focused. 
“A lot’s been going on,” said Murray afterwards. “I started the last couple of 
matches quite slowly, I think, understandably in some respects. Obviously it’s 
not good to begin matches like that against someone like Novak. But I’m proud 
of the way I fought and managed to get myself back into the match and create 
chances for myself.” So he should be.
 