
Even allowing for the idiocy that occasionally infects the blogosphere, the 
spite showered onAndy Murray for losing a five-set semi-final 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2012/jan/27/novak-djokovic-andy-murray-australian-open>
 at a grand slam to the best player in the world was as uninformed as it was 
predictable as it was pathetic.

Whose opinion carries more weight: Novak Djokovic, who played in the match and 
said after four hours and 50 minutes of mutual hell on court with Murray: "Andy 
deserved the credit to come back after 2-5 down [in the fifth set]," or 
@hidingbehindstupidname who said: "skottish w**ker got no borllz choker lol!! 
#anyonebutmurray"?

The first is a real quote, of course, the second a conflation of contributions 
by the keyboard illiterati who indulge their prejudices without regard for 
spelling, taste or logic. What is the matter with these people? Are they the 
same heroes who shout abuse in football stadiums from the safety of the pack or 
a new breed of bedroom-bound saddos with no lives but the ones they lead 
through others?

A few critics were tempted to share the view that Murray blew it but that is 
harsh. They are entitled to their opinions, of course – as is 
@Imanidiotwithnolife, and who is to say my view is the right one? But let's 
look at some of what happened in that supposed fifth-set choke: Coming off the 
Djokovic blitz of the fourth set, Murray looked gone. It surely would be over 
quickly, was the consensus.

He had to save three break points to hold at 2-2, hitting an ace and a double 
fault before finishing with a big serve down the T. He was suffering.

Djokovic held to love. It looked worse. Murray on serve used his final 
challenge, then was broken by a resurgent Djokovic. It was now grim.

The end looked near – but Murray held to trail 3-5 and broke Djokovic to love 
for 4-5, holding again to level. Things were looking up. Djokovic had to save 
three break points to hold for 6-5. The momentum was with Murray.

Then, serving to stay in the match, Murray was helpless on spent legs to save 
two match points against a resurgent champion, and it was done.

Some choke.

Arrivederci

An Italian tennis journalist caught filming in a restricted area on the 
Melbourne Park site, including the players' lounge, paid for it by being thrown 
out of the tournament moments before the second semi-final. He said he was 
unaware he was doing anything wrong.

Rights issues get more complex by the day in sport, although Wimbledon have 
relented and will allow writers from websites to cover this year's tournament.

Here comes the hyphen 

Josh Ward-Hibbert has finally broken cover. The Nottingham teenager was little 
discussed until he stormed through the boys' singles, knocking over the eighth 
and ninth seeds before going out in the quarters to the Canadian Filip Peliwo – 
who went on to lose in Saturday's final to the Australian Luke Saville, now a 
two-times winner here.

Ward-Hibbert, 6ft 4in with a booming serve and as yet untamed forehand and a 
delightful single-handed backhand, looks to have the tools to make it as a 
professional. One seasoned Brit-prospect-watcher (a thankless task) said: "He 
has everything. He is built like Jo-Wilfried Tsonga, is a great athlete and 
plays with such energy and power."

Another reason you might notice the personable young man with the big game and 
easy smile is he is one of the few black juniors coming through.

On Friday, he made up for his disappointment in the singles by teaming up with 
the better-known Liam Broady to win the boys' doubles title. Seeded six, they 
won comfortably, 6-3, 6-2 in 44 minutes, against Filip Veger and Adam Pavlasek. 
(The Czech Pavlasek has an older girlfriend: the Wimbledon champion Petra 
Kvitova.)

Ward-Hibbert is still an innocent in an exciting world, undecided whether to 
go on the Tour this summer or go to college in the United States later in the 
year. He will decide in March.

"I'm 18, come from Nottingham. I have been training in Spain [at the 
Sotogrande academy on the Costa del Sol, run by the former British doubles No1 
Dan Kiernan]. I try to play aggressively. That's the only way I'm going to be 
able to go far in the game. I started with a single-handed backhand, I guess 
it's just habit and I work on it the best I can."

It is his serving that most easily catches the eye. "At Wimbledon, I got the 
junior record with 131mph. Pretty quick.

"I started at the Nottingham tennis centre, when I was about 13. I went to 
Spain when I was about 14 and I am at Soto full time. It's fantastic. I played 
a bit of basketball when I was younger but tennis was always my first sport. I 
was just better at it.

"I am trying to keep my options open, don't want to close any door. There's a 
chance I might be going into the American college system. It's a chance to get 
some great coaching. After four years there, I would come out of that and go on 
Tour. But I will see how it goes. I'm going to make a decision around March or 
a bit later. It starts in September this year.

"Obviously there's school involved but, for me, it's about improving my game 
over four years. I don't have a game that's going to peak at a younger age, so 
I've got to be patient. It would be easier on my parents, financially, too – 
and a high level of tennis."

For now, it's back to Nottingham to see his family (the hyphen comes from his 
mother and father, who kept their surnames). "Neither of them plays. My 
brother, Matthew, started and that's how I got into it. Not many hyphens on the 
tennis circuit. Hopefully, there will be one soon.

"I am out a lot but I try to get home as much as I can. It's tough but I don't 
get too homesick when I'm away for a long time.

"When I was a kid, I loved to see Federer play – Monfils and Tsonga too. Great 
entertainers. But I also like how Berdych plays, kind of big. He knows what he 
can do. I've walked by Federer a few times [here]. Tried to get eye contact. 
Got a little smile but he didn't really recognise me. Maybe some day he will. 
Hopefully on the other side of the net."
 