
Well this is a waste of time isn't it? I mean, now that Roger Federer and 
Rafael Nadal are both out, the remaining matches are just a formality - Andy 
Murray is going to win theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>. Right? Right?

If that's what you might think after seeing some of the coverage in Britain 
over the last few days then the reality is of course very different. Novak 
Djokovic, through to the final after beating Roger Federer yesterday, is two 
places above Murray in the world rankings and has beaten in four out of seven 
meetings.

Today's opponent, David Ferrer, might be two places lower at No7 in the 
rankings, but he too has beaten Murray more often (three times) than he has 
lost to him (twice). Now, that statistic does need qualifying, because so far 
all three of Ferrer's wins have come on clay - and it is no secret that that is 
the Spaniard's preferred surface.

But Ferrer is no slouch on hard courts either - four of his 10 ATP singles 
titles have been won on such a surface, including the one he claimed in 
Auckland just two short weeks ago. After a straight-sets win over Rafael Nadal 
in the last round, his confidence is sky high. All in all, there's every reason 
to believe this match should be a belter.

On the subject of surfaces While all three of Ferrer's wins against Murray 
have come on clay, both of the Brit's wins have come on hard courts - and both 
times in straight sets. Most notably, Murray beat Ferrer 6-2, 6-2 at the ATP 
World Tour Finals last November. He is, undoubtedly, a better hard court player 
than Ferrer. But the one asterisk here is that the surface used here at the 
Australian Open - Plexicushion Prestige - is slower than a lot of other hard 
courts. That will suit the Spaniard.

The players are out on court Ferrer wins the coin toss, and will serve first, 
but for now they're just knocking up. Murray is in a natty 
pea-and-ham-soup-green shirt and black shorts. Ferrer could be playing in a 
giant banana outfit for all I know - the Beeb's cameras have been fixed so 
firmly on Murray so far it's hard to know if there's actually anyone else 
playing.

Bah Ferrer's outfit just a black shirt and shorts combo with yellow detail 
down the sides. Perhaps just a really over-ripe banana?

Predictions ... "I reckon Murray will scrape through a five-setter with Ferrer 
and then be annihilated in the final," writes Martin Hutchings. I too reckon 
Murray will win in the end, but I'll say he does it in four sets.

Jamie Murray tweets ... "Watching tennis on bbc iplayer before going to 
practice...come on andy".

First set: Andy Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> 0-1 
David Ferrer* Nightmare! Disaster! The grand slam dream is falling apart! 
Ferrer holds his opening service game to 15, sealing the game with a 
straightforward passing shot down the line after he had sold Murray on the 
cross-court forehand.

First set: Andy Murray* 1-1 David Ferrer Murray glares angrily at the umpire 
after his first serve, a vicious wide slice, fizzes past Ferrer for an ace, 
only to then be called as a let. No matter - Ferrer manages to get his second 
attempt back, but his return is feeble and Murray dispatches it with a 
two-handed backhand. Two points later, at 30-15 we get what is surely a taste 
of things to come, as the pair share a long rally from the back of the court, 
before Murray finally makes his attack, forcing his way up the court and 
sealing the point with a right-to-left forehand. He holds to 15.

First set: Andy Murray 1-2 David Ferrer* Ferrer has been derided for his weak 
serve at times, but over the last year has worked hard to inject more pace. You 
can see the difference here as he fizzes them down with pace on first- and 
second-serve here, and the only point dropped this time around comes from a 
double fault.

First set: Andy Murray* 2-2 David Ferrer Ferrer still has nothing on Murray in 
the service department, of course, and the Brit summons up the first ace of the 
match here with a 130mph exocet straight down the middle of the court. In fact, 
on both occasions that Ferrer does get the ball back over the net in this game, 
he wins the point. But that is as many times as he can do so.

First set: Andy Murray 2-3 David Ferrer* "Andy!" shouts, erm, Andy, as his 
first attempted drop-shot of the match plops gently into the net. He thought 
for a moment he might have unsettled Ferrer with a fizzing cross-court forehand 
to go 0-15 up, but the Spaniard doesn't give him another sniff. Murray is not 
helping himself mind - he now has nine unforced errors already in this match.

First set: Andy Murray* 3-3 David Ferrer Ferrer does have quite a 
disconcerting grunt at times. Every time he gets stuck into a proper rally he 
starts emitting this noise after each shot which sounds a bit like an 
out-of-breath elderly northern man shouting "eh?" Murray still isn't giving him 
too many chances to get into rallies on his serve, though, and seals this game 
to 15 with another wicked effort straight down the middle of the court.

First set: Andy Murray 4-3 David Ferrer* The unforced errors continue for 
Murray - he is getting himself into rallies nicely but too often when he looks 
for the winner things go awry. At 15-0 he has Ferrer on his heels after a 
belted cross-court backhand but then with the whole court to aim at slaps his 
next shot long. Still, he forces his way back to 30-all and then to deuce when 
Ferrer whips a forehand into the tramlines. Suddenly the Spaniard is the one 
making the mistakes, wasting a first advantage before driving a forehand long 
to give Murray his first break point. And Ferrer promptly hands him the game by 
knocking a backhand wide!

First set: Andy Murray* 4-4 David Ferrer And now Ferrer has broken straight 
back. With both players so inclined towards a defensive game, it always seemed 
possible that this match could come down to which player showed the greater 
patience - staying in rallies and waiting for their opponent to make errors. 
But so far we haven't even had that many long rallies to be honest - the errors 
on both sides are happening with far too great a regularity. Murray digs 
himself into a hole with a backhand into the net to bring up 15-30, and Ferrer 
smells blood. Moving aggressively up the court he forces Murray into a series 
of impressive defensive backhands before dispatching an attempted lob with a 
perfect overhead. On break point we do get that rally at last, a series of 
fizzing groundstrokes that see both players scampering back and forth behind 
their baselines, but eventually it is Ferrer who manages to step up the court 
and deliver a stinging cross-court forehand which Murray can't quite reach.

First set: Andy Murray 4-5 David Ferrer* An absolutely preposterous, 
wonderful, rally at 15-30: I counted at least 6,047 shots (the official stats 
show 40, pah) before Ferrer finally succumbs and knocks a forehand into the 
net. That's more like what we were expecting. Murray fails to seize either of 
his two break points though, and Ferrer eventually holds after deuce. "In a 
match as tight as this, it's hard to know if Murray is Scottish or British," 
honks Gary Naylor. Don't be silly Gary, this is definitely Britain's Andy 
Murray. After all,Scotland's Andy Murray never lasts as far as the semi-finals.

David Ferrer wins the first set 6-4 After wasting those break points Murray 
seems to lose focus a little, and it is a very ragged forehand indeed that 
sails long to bring up 0-30. There's nothing like a 37-shot rally to sharpen 
the senses, though, especially when Murray is able to finish it with a 
delightful passing shot after Ferrer seemed to have given him too much to do 
with a half-court forehand. Nevertheless, the Spaniard gets his break point at 
30-40 and after a short rally Murray sends another backhand wide. That's only 
the second set Murray has dropped so far in this tournament.

Second set: David Ferrer* leads Andy Murray 6-4, 0-1 After the customary break 
both players resume looking more than a little ragged after their first-set 
exertions. Without playing especially well - one fine volley at 40-30 aside - 
Murray forces deuce. He blows his first advantage, but gives himself a second 
break point by again attacking the net after driving Ferrer away to the right 
of the court. And Ferrer promptly gifts him the game with a forehand into the 
tramlines. "Tucking into a sausage roll," tweets Jamie Murray. While your 
brother struggles, Jamie? How could you eat a time like this?

Second set: David Ferrer leads Andy Murray* 6-4, 1-1 Erm, haven't we seen this 
one before? Just like last set, Murray allows Ferrer to break back immediately. 
He actually rescued two break points after falling 0-40 behind but then played 
into the net to undo all his good work. He really hasn't got his first serve 
going yet and that's a big problem - Ferrer is attacking his second with gusto.

Second set: David Ferrer* leads Andy Murray 6-4, 2-1 Murray wastes a challenge 
at 15-30, his second of the match, calling for a review of a Ferrer serve that 
had landed dead on the line. Ferrer holds without dropping another point. "I'm 
concerned," writes Luke Remsbery. "If the picture at the top of the 
game-by-game is to be believed, that you've not so much been eating pea and ham 
soup (see preamble) as a combination of green highlighters and the radioactive 
waste from the opening credits of the Simpsons." Potayto, potahto.

Second set: David Ferrer leads Andy Murray* 6-4, 2-2 Much, much better from 
Murray, who brings up 40-0 with a devastating forehand down the line before 
eventually holding to 15. The serve is still not firing as consistently as he 
would like, though.

Second set: David Ferrer* leads Andy Murray 6-4, 3-2 What doesn't bode well 
for Murray at the moment is that he justlooks tired early in this set. Ferrer 
is springing around the baseline like a Jack Russell on heat whereas his 
opponent is all drooped shoulders and resigned looks. When Ferrer lines up a 
smash at the net, Murray simply drops his arm, giving up before the shot is 
even hit the remotest possibility that he might be able to return it. Ferrer 
holds to love. Murray has words for the umpire during the interval, though I 
wasn't able to make them out.

Second set: David Ferrer leads Andy Murray* 6-4, 3-3 Where he seemed so 
confident that Ferrer would dispatch that smash in the last game, Murray 
approaches his own one at 15-15 here with no belief whatsoever, tapping down a 
feeble effort that Ferrer blasts back at him. Murray's reflexes are not sharp 
enough to return the favour. He slips to 15-40 behind before finally 
rediscovering his first serve, thrashing down two unreturnable deliveries in 
succession to force deuce. A netted backhand gifts Ferrer another break point, 
but Murray rescues it, and in the end it is Murray's serve that rescues him, a 
string of booming efforts setting him up to hold serve on his second advantage.

Second set: David Ferrer* leads Andy Murray 6-4, 4-3 A beautiful, beautiful 
point from Ferrer to open the game, dragging his opponent this way and that 
before killing the point with an immaculate overhead, but Murray responds with 
an equally glorious backhand volley drop-shot, dug out from around his knees as 
he attacked the net. He forces deuce with another backhand volley - less 
impressive but not entirely dissimilar to the first. Ferrer clings on, after 
Murray is unable to tame Ferrer's passing crosscourt shot, but there was 
definitely a spring in the Brit's step again there. He looks to have shaken out 
of his funk.

Second set: David Ferrer leads Andy Murray* 6-4, 4-4 Better stuff again from 
Murray, who holds to 15. "Points should be deducted for grunting," grumbles Ian 
Copestake. "Or to balance things up Murray should be given the freedom to 
sledge or send abusive texts to his opponent during the break." I like it. 
Anyone got (clean) suggestions for what Murray could text Ferrer?

Second set: David Ferrer* leads Andy Murray 6-4, 5-4 It might not look like it 
on the scoreboard as Ferrer holds to love, but Murray continues to look far 
more lively than he was in the early part of this set. He comes thundering 
across the court to oh-so-nearly rescue the point at 30-0, flicking a backhand 
half-volley down the line butjust wide. As soon as the game ends he calls for 
someone to take several of his rackets (about four - still fresh in plastic 
bags) to be restrung. Big game coming up - last time he had to serve to stay in 
a set it didn't go so well ...

Second set: David Ferrer leads Andy Murray* 6-4, 5-5 The body language may 
have improved, but Murray just keeps on making errors, finding the middle of 
the net once again from the baseline to make it 30-30 before driving a backhand 
half-volley just long after this time being put under pressure by a fantastic 
Ferrer return to the middle of the baseline. His serve comes to the rescue, 
though, bringing the game to deuce and giving him the advantage before Ferrer 
plays wide.

Second set: David Ferrer* leads Andy Murray 6-4, 5-6 Huge, huge breakthrough 
for Murray. There was a sense that Ferrer was in trouble when his challenge 
failed to change the outcome of a wide forehand that made it 0-30, and even 
though he brought it back to 30-all the Spaniard never looked quite settled. 
Murray has used the dropshot only very sparingly so far, but he deploys it 
impeccably at 30-40, Ferrer dashing forwards to reach the shot by the left-hand 
tramlines but unable to clear the net. My Spanish is not great, but Ferrer 
definitely said several bad words very loudly as he went to sit down. "This is 
very frustrating," writes Guy Hornsby. "Murray's just been error-strewn, every 
time he gets a lead he throws it away. It's not the Murray we've seen so far, 
and it's all because his first serve needs to fire. I love Murray - he's a 
fighter, nuggety, like a lithe Colly with a tennis racket - but he can be 
agonising to watch sometimes. Come on, sort it out Andy."

Second set: David Ferrer leads Andy Murray* 6-4, 6-6 Another fantastic rally 
at 30-15, and Murray seemed to have Ferrer right where he wanted him as he 
drove up the court and towards the net. But when the moment came for the 
decisive shot, Murray chose the wrong option, Ferrer anticipating his 
crosscourt shot and unleashing the perfect risposte, a breathtaking pass from 
behind the baseline. Reinvigorated by this opportunity, he earns a breakpoint 
with a fine smash, then Murray plays into the tramlines to bring up the 
tie-break.

Second-set tie-break Murray 1-0 Ferrer* Murray seizes the first mini-break 
after a long rally. Might not mean so much the way this match has gone.

Second-set tie-break Murray* 3-0 Ferrer It will mean something if Murray can 
keep delivering serves like this. The first is unreturnable, and though Ferrer 
gets the second one back he slaps a forehand wide after a short rally.

Second-set tie-break Murray 5-0 Ferrer* He can't mess it up now, can he? 
Murray takes advantage of a poor dropshot from Ferrer and then the Spaniard's 
mistake puts him even further in control.

Second-set tie-break: Murray* 6-1 Ferrer An ace from Murray gives him six set 
points but he fails to take the first ...

Andy Murray wins the second set 7-6 (7-2) Ferrer is able to save one more set 
point, but in the end he succumbs to the inevitable. Murray certainly isn't 
making it easy for himself, and there is some concern over a possible injury 
after he clutched at his left leg a few times in that set, but he's right back 
in the match.

Third set: Andy Murray* 4-6, 7-6, 1-0 David Ferrer The crowd are entertained 
by a pair of dive-bombing seagulls, but after dropping the first point of the 
new set Murray simply glares at the birds with a fury that suggests he might 
like to dispatch them in the same way his brother did (accidentally) a sparrow 
with one errant shotduring practice last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/jan/19/jamie-murray-tennis-kills-sparrow>
. Eventually the birds depart but Murray recovers his composure to hold to 30.

Third set: Andy Murray 4-6, 7-6, 1-1 David Ferrer* The commentator on the BBC 
has got himself in a muddle, suggesting that Murray takes 45-minute ice baths 
after matches, then reducing his verdict to 45-second ice baths, before 
settling on 15-minute ice baths. In the Times this morning Judy Murray said 
they were usually either 10 minutes, or broken down into five two-minute 
sessions with a jump in the warm bath in-between each. So now you know. Ferrer 
holds to love. Chris Dunbar suggests an oldie but a goodie for possible text 
sledging: "Your mother was a hamster and your father smelt of elderberries," he 
chortles.

Third set: Andy Murray* 4-6, 7-6, 2-1 David Ferrer Ferrer's eyes are like 
saucers as he sizes up his opportunity for an early break at 30-40, but his 
two-handed backhand is crashed into bottom of the net cord. Ferrer quickly 
brings up another break point but Murray finds an ace when he needs it - 
slamming a flat serve down the middle of the court. Two points later, a similar 
serve seals the game - albeit not an ace on this occasion. Even though it has 
been inconsistent, Murray will still have his serve to thank if he comes 
through this match.

Third set: Andy Murray 4-6, 7-6, 3-1 David Ferrer* Is this match turning? 
Suddenly Murray seems to have the better of Ferrer, dominating the rallies as 
he continues to steam up the court at every opportunity. Consecutive passing 
shots down the right tramline bring up 0-40, and while Ferrer rescues the first 
break point, he cannot repeat the trick driving into the net to give Murray the 
break.

Third set: Andy Murray* 4-6, 7-6, 4-1 David Ferrer Murray really has been 
coming forwards so much more in the last set and a half. I see on Twittermy 
colleague Lawrence Donegan 
<http://twitter.com/#!/lawrencedonegan/status/30944334207516673> says that 
ESPN's coverage in the US just showed a graphic pointing out that he has been 
playing twice as many shots from inside the baseline as he had in the first 
set. Smart. He holds here with ease. "Re: Guy Hornsby comparing Andy Murray to 
Paul Collingwood," begins an angry Jonathan Taylor. "How. Very. Dare You. He's 
much more like Stuart Broad - a class performer but with an on-field petulance 
that makes him difficult to really love (unlike the walking man-crush that is 
Colly). Also, like Broad, Murray is young, British and talented, which means 
he's alternately over-hyped and over-criticised by the fickle UK sports press 
(present company excepted etc)."

Third set: Andy Murray 4-6, 7-6, 5-1 David Ferrer* What a shot that is from 
Murray and what a way to bring up the first double-break in any set so far this 
match. Having earned himself a break point on deuce, Murray was being forced 
back by Ferrer's fizzing forehands but from the baseline he dug out a 
half-volley of the highest order, lobbing his opponent perfectly and dropping 
the ball down well within the court on the far side. Absolutely sublime shot.

Andy Murray wins the third set, and leads 4-6, 7-6, 6-1 Well that certainly 
wasn't straightforward. From 40-15 Murray wastes two set points, then five 
times surrenders the advantage to Ferrer on deuce before finally overcoming his 
opponent at the end of a short rally, delivering a smash to the back of the 
court that Ferrer just can't get back. "It's a jolly good thing I didn't send 
you the email I wrote at 6-6 in the second set," writes Tom King. "All about 
how Murray was a typical bottler etc and so forth." Don't tempt fate just yet, 
Tom ...

Fourth set: Andy Murray leads David Ferrer* 4-6, 7-6, 6-1, 1-0 After that 
marathon last game to end the third set, Murray makes the perfect start to the 
fourth, breaking Ferrer's serve without dropping a single point. The shot which 
brought up 0-40 was a beaut, too, a crisp backhand feathered down the line and 
past Ferrer's outstretched racket. Lovely stuff.

Fourth set: Andy Murray* leads David Ferrer 4-6, 7-6, 6-1, 2-0 All of a sudden 
it's too easy for Murray, who breezes into a 40-0 advantage before holding to 
15. Ferrer, for the first time, looks tired.

Fourth set: Andy Murray leads David Ferrer* 4-6, 7-6, 6-1, 2-1 Total role 
reversal here. Where Murray was the one whose body language told a story in the 
first set, now it is Ferrer whose shoulders slump, whose brow is furrowed, and 
who seems to be making the lion's share of the unforced errors. He is not 
beaten yet, though, and from 0-30 down the Spaniard forces deuce, then rescues 
a break point before finally breaking down Murray's defence with a big forehand 
back across his body that left Murray wrong-footed at the baseline. "Supporting 
Andy Murray is akin to supporting the current Arsenal side," writes Colin 
Mackay. "The talent, touch and ability is all there, but you wonder where the 
steel is sometimes, and Christ does he fray the nerves; I bet he won't buy a 
central defender either ..."

Fourth set: Andy Murray* leads David Ferrer 4-6, 7-6, 6-1, 2-2 So Ferrer is 
very much not beaten yet, as it turns out. In fact, he's just pulled level in 
this set - breaking Murrayto love. You can't help but think Murray just got a 
bit ahead of himself and subsequently lost concentration. A couple of unforced 
errors in that game including a disappointing prod into the net on the final 
point.

Fourth set: Andy Murray leads David Ferrer* 4-6, 7-6, 6-1, 2-3 We're three 
hours into this match now but the standard of the rallying remains very high. 
Murray has a 'little moment' after a line call goes against him and says some 
words I shan't repeat. That makes it 40-30, and Ferrer sees out the game with 
another killer forehand from the baseline to end a rally he had dominated.

Fourth set: Andy Murray* leads David Ferrer 4-6, 7-6, 6-1, 3-3 Just when you 
think he might be reeling a little Murray comes up with another glorious shot 
to kill a rally in which Ferrer seemed to be getting the upper hand. At 
full-stretch as he chased a Ferrer forehand away to the right-hand side of the 
court, Murray managed to not only return the ball but strike it cleanly down 
the line where Ferrer had not hope of retrieving it. "Murray's spiky, driven 
and incredibly talented," writes Yvonne Fletcher, taking umbrage at Jonathan 
Taylor's earlier email. "What's not to like/love? We don't all want our heroes 
bland, conventional and dull a la Henman."

Fourth set: Andy Murray leads David Ferrer* 4-6, 7-6, 6-1, 3-4 Sloppy mistakes 
from Murray there as Ferrer holds to love. First he volleys into the net with 
the whole court at his mercy after he had taken his opponent out of the picture 
with a perfectly-judged lob. Then on game point he biffs a backhand wide.

Fourth set: Andy Murray* leads David Ferrer 4-6, 7-6, 6-1, 4-4 The crowd are 
getting behind Ferrer now at the Rod Laver arena, and he gives them something 
to cheer as he thwacks Murray's first serve straight back past his opponent to 
bring up 0-15. Murray's serve still stands him in good stead, though, an 
unreturnable effort bringing up 40-30 before Ferrer clips a backhand into the 
net to give him the game.

Fourth set: Andy Murray leads David Ferrer* 4-6, 7-6, 6-1, 4-5 Ferrer holds, 
slinging a forehand volley away to the right of the court after leaving Murray 
stranded in the far corner. The point before had been even more impressive, 
Ferrer digging out a volley from under his feet just when Murray seemed to have 
exposed the folly in his rush to the net. Not a bad match, this.

Fourth set: Andy Murray* leads David Ferrer 4-6, 7-6, 6-1, 5-5 I believe this 
is what certain Scots refer to "squeaky bum time", but Murray shows the 
steadier nerves as he aces Ferrer with a sliced serve to the forehand court, 
then backs his judgement to let a Ferrer shot sail past his shoulder and just 
long. He seals the game from the net, crashing his volley to the back corner of 
the court to leave Ferrer helpless.

Fourth set: Andy Murray leads David Ferrer* 4-6, 7-6, 6-1, 5-6 Ferrer shows 
that pace isn't the only way to an ace, beating Murray's racket with a 107mph 
curveball that swings away from his opponent half-way up the service box. But 
from 40-15 Murray fights back to deuce, showing remarkable dexterity first to 
retrieve a lob with a backhand winner, delivered with his back turned to his 
opponent, and then execute a textbook backhand volley to win the following 
point. Murray misses his opportunity on deuce, though, wafting wide after doing 
the hard work to set up a pass down the line. Ferrer holds.

Fourth set: Andy Murray* leads David Ferrer 4-6, 7-6, 6-1, 5-6 That's it, 
then, we're headed for another tie-break as Murray sees out his final service 
game of the set. There's a spot of what the BBC have been rather quaintly 
referring to as "earthy language" after a double fault costs him the first of 
three game points at 40-0, but two points later Ferrer plays into the net.

Fourth set tie-break: Murray 1-0 Ferrer* Mini-break once again for Murray to 
start the tie-break, vindicating entirely his decision to call for a challenge 
after a shot had been called long. The ball had in fact landed in, and Murray 
wins the replayed point.

Fourth set tie-break: Murray* 2-1 Ferrer This is where the big serve means so 
much. Murray aces Ferrer for the first point, and thought he had the second too 
after the Spaniard's forehand was called wide. Ferrer challenges, however, and 
like Murray two points ago, he is proved correct to do so. On the replayed 
point, Murray plays into the net.

Fourth set tie-break: Murray 4-1 Ferrer* Murray wastes no time gaining back 
his mini-break, pulling Ferrer this way and that on the baseline before 
delivering a killer blow on his backhand. The next point is a similar story, 
Murray advancing up the court this time to end a brief rally with a crosscourt 
forehand.

Fourth set tie-break: Murray* 6-1 Ferrer Another ace on the first point, 
followed by Ferrer playing long on the second. Murray has five match points for 
a place in the Australian Open final.

Andy Murray beats David Ferrer 4-6, 7-6 (7-2), 6-1, 7-6 (7-2) The crowd hails 
Ferrer after he hammers down a powerful serve that Murray can only return into 
the net, but it only a temporary reprieve for Ferrer, who succumbs on the next 
point as Murray charges to the net to put the game away. Andy Murray will play 
Novak Djokovic in the Australian Open final on Sunday morning, and we'll have 
live game-by-game coverage for that match too. Do hope you'll join us. In the 
meantime, thanks for reading, thanks for all your emails and sorry I couldn't 
use more.
 