
Australia have named the leg-spinner James Muirhead, after just two 
first-class appearances and four in the shortest format, in a weakened 14-man 
Twenty20 squad for the three-match series against England.

Muirhead took three for 52 for a Prime Minister's XI against Alastair Cook's 
men in a tour match. He and several others have the chance to earn a place in 
Australia's World Twenty20 squad, which will be named on 16 February. David 
Warner, Shane Watson and Mitchell Johnson are among those rested for the games 
against England.

"The NSP [National Selection Panel] is looking to develop spin bowling options 
for both the ICC World Twenty20 and the 2015 ICC World Cup," said the national 
selector, John Inverarity.

"Twenty-year-old James Muirhead has impressed recently. He is an exciting 
prospect as an emerging leg-spinner and will be looking to make the most of his 
opportunity."

Warner, Watson and Johnson, fresh from the Test and ODI series defeats of 
England, will fly out to South Africa on 29 January – the date of the first 
Twenty20 at Hobart – to prepare for the Test series, which begins on 12 
February in Centurion.

"The NSP is supporting [the Australia coach] Darren Lehmann and [the captain] 
Michael Clarke in their strong desire to give this Test series the highest 
priority and have the best possible preparation for the players who have 
performed so admirably this summer. As such some Test players and others were 
not considered for the T20 International squad," said Inverarity.

The batsman Chris Lynn is the only other uncapped player in the squad which 
will be captained by George Bailey, who was omitted from the 15-man Test squad 
to face South Africa.

"Cameron White and Chris Lynn have been in tremendous form this season and 
have shown themselves to be destructive hitters of the ball, as have 
all-rounders Dan Christian and Ben Cutting," said Inverarity.

Australia squad: G Bailey (captain), A Finch, D Christian, N Coulter-Nile, B 
Cutting, J Faulkner, J Hazelwood, M Henriques, G Maxwell, J Muirhead, C Lynn, M 
Starc, M Wade, C White.
 