
On the WTA's 40th birthday, women's tennis could have done without the No1 
player having to defend herself against accusations of gamesmanship to reach 
the final of theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>.

But that was the gory story in Melbourne on Thursday. Did the defending 
championVictoria Azarenka <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/victoria-azarenka> 
really have to leave the court a set and 5-4 up for a medical timeout, having 
just dropped serve and looking vulnerable against the rampant young American 
Sloane Stephens? She says so. She says she thought she was "having a heart 
attack", that she could hardly breath because of a rib injury.

Except she failed to mention any such injury or physical inconvenience to Sam 
Smith in the on-court television interview immediately after her win – after 
she'd returned to the court and, apparently fully recovered, finished Stephens 
off. Smith asked a simple question: "You had a few difficulties out there. Can 
you tell us why you had to go off, and how are you?"

"I almost did the choke of the year," she told Smith. "So many chances … 
couldn't close it out. I just couldn't lose, that's why I was so upset." No 
heart attack. No rib injury. No breathing problem.

She was fit enough after treatment to break the younger player's serve and 
book her place in the final, yet about 10 minutes earlier, she though she was 
"having a heart attack". It did not go down well with the crowd. True or not, 
it didn't look right, something neither player was willing to accept later.

The Belarusian, whose English is good, was more certain of her story in the 
12-minute media grilling about two hours after the match, than she was earlier, 
when giving versions that did not exactly conflict but nor did they fit. And 
Stephens, with whom she shares an agent, said she had no problem with her 
friend leaving the court. Both maintained they were not aware that it might 
have looked bad – even though questionable use of the timeouts has been an 
issue in the game for some time. Azarenka claimed to be blithely unaware that 
what she did appeared to everyone but her (and to Stephens) to be, well, 
cheating.

So, that's all hunky dory, then. Except it's not. The hanging committee in the 
press conference pretty much did not believe a word she said. There were too 
many inconsistencies, too many convenient agreements between players sharing 
the same agent.

But it's tough to accuse someone of outright lying on mere suspicion. My take, 
after examining tape of the last few games of the match, is that she was 
showing mild signs of discomfort, that there might have been a physical problem 
– but it hardly looked worse than the regular stress of any big match. Her 
first serves were still going in at 160kph-plus, her second sometimes dipping 
to 130kph, occasionally lower. Her movement, not exactly her strength, was OK, 
her shots solid – and her demeanour typically downbeat.

Azarenka is not a smiling presence on court at the best of times. Her grunting 
is infamous – so is her theatrical behaviour. Agnieszka Radwanska, who lost to 
her here last year, complained subsequently about Azarenka's behaviour after 
their match in Dubai in February, when she recovered during rallies after 
hobbling about in the breaks, and went on to win. It was not a good look for 
the game, Radwanska said – and she had plenty of supporters. In Thursday's 
press conference, Azarenka was adamant nothing like this had happened before. 
Would Radwanska see it that way?

The sequence of the incident in Melbourne was simple: after Stephens had saved 
five match points to get back to 4-5 down, Azarenka called for assistance from 
the trainer at courtside and, a few minutes later, left for a medical timeout. 
Stephens, meanwhile, sat motionless in her chair and stared straight ahead, 
unblinking for fully 30 seconds, staying "in the zone", as they say.

Later, she said the break, four minutes longer than the mandated five, had not 
bothered her. They were friends, they shared the same agent, she would have a 
chat with her later and she hoped she would go on and win the final.

The issue, though, is not one for Stephens or Azarenka to resolve, but those 
who allow star players, so central to the game's finances, to stretch the 
timeout and exploit the system to their advantage, especially against 
inexperienced or timid opponents. Stephens admitted later she had never taken a 
medical timeout and would not know how to if she had to. Blasé or ignorant?

Azarenka said she could have taken two five-minute timeouts, as her knee hurt 
too. So that's all right, then. She just took a five-minute break and stretched 
it to nine.

An opponent a little more distant from her than 19-year-old Stephens obviously 
is – Li Na in the final, for instance – might not be so understanding, might 
not take kindly to having their momentum so rudely interrupted at such a 
crucial point in a big match. In fact, Stephens did herself no favours with 
such a meek response. If she were more aware, more attuned to playing it hard, 
she would have wanted Azarenka back on court as quickly as possible so she 
could capitalise on her weakness. Radwanska would have been livid.

Professional sport is a tough, tough place. It is not somewhere to hide, 
however rich and important the key players are to its financial success.

Footballers are constantly ridiculed for getting away with crimes and 
misdemeanours on and off the pitch that ordinary citizens would be prosecuted 
for. These millionaire athletes are all well remunerated. They should also be 
well policed.

Today in Melbourne, Azarenka got away with something. We are still not sure 
what. We wish her a full recovery. Her opponent let her off the hook, and so 
did tennis. Why would she not do it again?

ON THE LIGHTER SIDE ...

The Australian Open website has collected some cute and not so cute moments 
from the tournament. Here are a few to treasure on a cold winter's night: 1) 
Jerzy Janowicz's absolutely top-of-the-range,Jeff Tarango Commemorative 
Medal-winning rant <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7hfTDuISM4U&feature=youtu.be>
; Sam Stosur wrapping up the Greg Norman Cup.Do try this at home. It's easy 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JTYUaj7VgBY&feature=youtu.be>; And, sorry Sam, 
gotta play it again 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kI1EjVHzFRg&feature=youtu.be> (it wasn't all 
bad, by the way). OK, that's enough gratuitous fun at someone else's expense 
... for now.
 