
Amid all the talk about the continued absence of Serena Williams from the 
women's tour because of injury, one fact has been lost; that Kim Clijsters is 
the best player in the world. Today, though, it was reconfirmed as the Belgian 
changed her game-plan midway through the final to pull off a fully deserved 
3-6, 6-3, 6-3 victory over Li Na of China, a win that gave her a first
Australian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> title and a 
fourth grand slam title in all.

The 27-year-old has now won three of the last six grand slam events, all in an 
18-month spell since she returned to the tour after two years of retirement, 
during which she got married and gave birth to her daughter, Jada. It was also 
her first grand slam away from New York, where she has triumphed three times, 
and yet more evidence that when she is at her best, she is the best. Williams, 
who has won 13 grand slam titles, might disagree but she has not played since 
Wimbledon last summer and until she returns there can surely be little argument.

As Li's final backhand flew wide, the Belgian burst into tears on court and 
threw her arms up in a mixture of celebration and relief. Since her first visit 
here in 2000, Clijsters has always been a darling of the crowd but if it is 
possible, she managed to endear herself to them even more when she addressed 
them after accepting the trophy. "Now I finally feel like you guys can call me 
Aussie Kim because I won the title," she said.

"To win it in this way it means a lot. I think it's that moment that 
overwhelms you, where your mind has been so focused, I'm fighting for every 
shot, running a lot of balls down, and it's finished. That's what makes it just 
nice, and I guess this big relief kind of overwhelms you a little bit."

What made her victory more impressive was that it was not a simple master 
class in aggressive hitting. After a slow start, when she lost the first eight 
points and looked a bundle of nerves, Li was actually the more consistent from 
the baseline and her shots carried more weight.

In the past when things have gone against her, Clijsters has sometimes 
struggled to find a plan B, continuing to just hammer the ball and hope it 
comes off. More often than not, it has, but today she had to change things 
because Li, who was trying to become the first Chinese to win a grand slam 
singles title, was winning the baseline battle.

Perhaps the knowledge that a live television audience in China estimated to be 
in the hundreds of millions were cheering her on was an inspiration to Li. 
Whatever it was, she had Clijsters worried. "She did everything better than me 
in that first set," Clijsters said. "Her groundstrokes were heavier, deeper. 
She served better, she returned better. So I tried to mix it up a little bit, 
put some slices in, also hit a few higher shots that just made her make some 
unforced errors. I saw her get a little bit aggravated and just tried to hang 
in there."

It worked a treat. Without consistent pace to feed off, Li began to make 
mistakes and from 3-3 in the second set, Clijsters broke twice to level the 
match. Li gave herself hope when she recovered an early break in the third but 
Clijsters then stormed clear and served out with ease to clinch victory.

Li said her first experience of playing in a grand slam final had given her 
the taste for more. "I think I played great tennis but she just played better 
than me," she said. "After the match in the locker room I made the joke that we 
should only play one set in tennis. But I am still happy what I did today, I am 
proud for myself."

Clijsters will climb one spot to No2 when the new rankings are released on 
Monday and her return to the top is surely only a matter of time, so small is 
the gap between herself and the No1, Caroline Wozniacki of Denmark.
 