
When that old miserablist Nietzsche said joy and suffering were inseparable, 
he probably did not imagine his theory would be endorsed by a Spanish tennis 
player after a grand slam final lasting five hours and 53 minutes in faraway 
Melbourne more than a century later.

If anything, Rafael Nadal put the point more succinctly in the early hours of 
the morning here when he described enduring his seventh successive loss against
Novak Djokovic <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic> as "the 
toughest match I ever played", adding in his charming version of English: "You 
look around and you see the watch, five hours, four hours, three hours, finally 
five hours 53. Seems like never gonna finish, no? But that's nice be there 
fighting, trying to go to the limit, bring your body to the limit of his 
chances. Something I really enjoy, and I always said is good suffer, enjoy – 
enjoy suffering, no?"

The winner saw it that way, too. "I absolutely agree with him," Djokovic said. 
"I maybe had a similar feeling in a couple of matches, but nothing like this. 
You are in pain, you suffer, you know that you're trying to activate your legs, 
you're trying to push yourself another point, just one more point, one more 
game. You're going through so much suffering your toes are bleeding. Everything 
is just outrageous – but you're still enjoying that pain."

Was this his greatest match? "Wimbledon is right up there next to this one 
because it's the tournament that I always dreamed of winning. But this one I 
think comes out on the top because we played almost six hours. That is 
incredible, incredible."

He described, too, the blizzard of emotions that consumed him in battle, 
especially so when he collapsed to the ground after hit the last of 31 shots 
wide at 4-4 in the fourth. "I was just thinking of getting some air and trying 
to recover for next point. A thousand thoughts going through the mind, trying 
to separate the right from wrong, trying to prioritise the next point, taking 
it step by step."

He spotted also that Nadal was taking more risks than normal as the end 
approached. "In the last game when I was serving I had a feeling that he was 
really trying to step into the backhand and forehand, going for everything or 
nothing."

It was what he did to save two match points against Roger Federer in the 
US Open semi‑final, and was chastised for it by the miffed Swiss, who preached 
the work ethic over hit-and-hope tennis.

The Spaniard has always described Federer as the best player in the history of 
the game. What, now, then of Djokovic? "Now he's the best in the world," Nadal 
said. "That's how great it is. He has a part of the history today, winning five 
grand slams. We'll see where he arrives."

Where Djokovic was heading as dawn approached was off to "celebrate like a 
Serb" – just as he did after beating Nadal at Wimbledon. He said: "It's already 
4am. I don't know how far I can go, but right now I'm up for everything. 
Breakfast? I don't know … Food is not on my mind right now." There is, after 
all, just so much joy in suffering.
 