
It would be foolish to assume that Andy Murray's hopes of winning his first 
grand slam have improved markedly because of Rafa Nadal's dramatic exit on his 
side of the draw in theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>. However, it would be 
similarly naive to imagine that David Ferrer, rated seventh in the world and 
Nadal's surprise conqueror yesterday, poses anything like as big a threat as 
the world No1 would have done in Friday'ssemi-final.

Indeed, had Nadal somehow managed to conjure a win on one good leg in his 
quarter-final against his compatriot (a forlorn hope after just a few games), 
he would have been a sitting duck for Murray. So, the challenge that remains is 
a live one, and Murray will not dwell on his altered circumstances.

What he will take heart from in the rolling drama that enveloped the Rod Laver 
Arena over several hours is his own continued excellence in accounting for the 
vibrant and fearless young Ukrainian Alexandr Dolgopolov, as well as Ferrer's 
minor struggle in seeing off an opponent who, from early in their match, was 
plainly suffering with a tight left hamstring.

Nadal might have been literally hamstrung but Ferrer, for some of the battle, 
was figuratively so. There were no such doubts in Murray's match. "He's just 
unorthodox," Murray said of Dolgopolov, whom he had beaten in their one 
previous meeting, in the Davis Cup in Odessa four years ago. "He's very 
different to how most guys play. It's tough to get into a rhythm. But he's also 
a very, very good player, definitely not someone to be underestimated."

It was a year to the day since Murray put Nadal out of this tournament, 
hobbling on one leg. If there are worries about the Spaniard's immediate 
future, they do not centre on the long-term knee problems that manifested 
themselves in 2010, but a corked thigh. Murray, meanwhile, looks in great shape 
two matches out from creating history. He has come through five divergent tests 
of his skills and temperament so convincingly that his first slam is clearly 
more attainable than in either of his two previous attempts, here last year and 
in New York in 2008, both against Roger Federer.

If he does it – and he has to beat Ferrer and either Federer or Novak Djokovic 
to do what no British player has done since before the second world war – a 
burden will be lifted not just from his shoulders but that of British tennis 
across the board. Murray's 2011 Australian Open report card records 
conservative wins over outsiders Karol Beck and Illya Marchenko, one of more 
invention against the ranked Guillermo García López, a comprehensive education 
of the tough but unsophisticated Jürgen Melzer and yesterday's intense battle 
with Dolgopolov, one of the game's coming talents.

Dolgopolov, who is coached by the British-born Australian, Jack Reader, and 
inspired by genes passed down from his father, Oleksandr, the one-time coach of 
the Russian great Andrei Medvedev, arrived with a face known only to the 
sport's hardcore and a name few could comfortably spell or pronounce. He soon 
made his presence felt. This was the match that stretched Murray's resilience 
and fitness further than the others: he dropped a set for the first time in the 
tournament and, also for the first time, went beyond two hours for the result, 
7-5, 6-3, 6-7, 6-3 in 184 minutes.

If Murray can pass his next examination, the ultimate prize will be even more 
palpable than it was in last year's final, when he disintegrated in three sets. 
It is unlikely there will be a repeat of that embarrassment, nor of the tears 
that flowed so publicly afterwards. Murray has recovered from his 2010 
breakdown to the point where he is now almost as feared among his peers almost 
as Nadal and Federer.

Derided for his negativity, he has stubbornly refused all counsel in 
rebuilding his game. His coach Miles Maclagan left in July by consent that was 
as incentivised as it was mutual and, since then, Murray has grown as a player, 
adding selective aggression to his formidable defence. It was that combination 
that did for Dolgopolov, whose world ranking will soar from 46 into the 20s.

Murray is probably as relaxed here as he has been in any tournament over the 
past 12 months. That will have a lot to do with his burgeoning sense of 
self-worth at the highest level – and, maybe, Billy Connolly. The Scottish 
comedian, much loved here, has been a wild-haired presence at courtside in 
support of his countryman and Murray reciprocated the favour by attending his 
concert on Tuesday night.

Did the Big Yin single him out for any jokes? "No, he didn't. I wouldn't have 
minded. I don't mind people making jokes about me."

Dolgopolov's coach is another long-haired joker. Proud of his hippy mien and a 
back story that covers the tennis landscape from Adelaide to small corners of 
South America, Reader left Fleetwood in Lancashire 46 years ago. He has done 
marvellously well to groom the raw talent of Dolgopolov, and they are obviously 
a good fit in a sport that often resembles a divorce court.

Could Murray, we wondered, go all the way after such a rousing contest with 
his player? As a naturalised Australian the past eight years, Reader was 
entitled to his pithy response: "You've got the Ashes, what more do you want?"
 