
For the first time it is possible to proffer the notion that England played 
Australia'sMitchell Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mitchell-johnson>
 really rather well during the Ashes series. Perhaps that may be stretching the 
truth a little, but England coped with him better than South Africa managed in 
the first Test at Centurion. The world's top-rated team lost by 281 runs, the 
same margin of defeat as England endured in Australia's last Test at Sydney.

In the final innings of the match, South Africa were dismissed for 200, with 
Johnson taking five for 59 to give him a match haul of 12 for 127, his 
career-best figures. Against England, Johnson terrorised the tail brilliantly; 
against South Africa the upper order has been nonplussed as well. Johnson was 
inevitably the man of the match for the fourth time in Australia's past six 
Test matches. He stuck to the formula that worked so well against England on a 
pitch that grew more unreliable as the game progressed. In fact, Michael Clarke 
witnessed so much movement at first hand in the first two overs of the day that 
he promptly declared with a lead of 482 and almost two days to go.

Once again, Johnson propelled the ball close to 150km/h most of the time. His 
short deliveries were superbly directed at shoulder height, allowing no escape. 
When he bowled full he discovered batsmen understandably reluctant to venture 
on to the front foot. He barely wasted a delivery. On Saturday, Ryan Harris and 
Peter Siddle offered typically solid support. Currently, Johnson, a butt of 
ridicule three years ago, is the best bowler in the world, whatever the ICC 
list says.

For the second time in the match, Alviro Petersen was in no position to blunt 
him. Two of his victims, Graeme Smith and JP Duminy, were superbly caught off 
the middle of their bats by Alex Doolan at short-leg, and Ryan McLaren was 
caught behind. Only Hashim Amla and AB de Villiers have played him with any 
conviction. For the second time in the match, De Villiers was caught off 
Johnson in front of the wicket, driving aggressively when running out of 
partners.

As Australia head for Port Elizabeth for the second Test in a three-match 
series, their only concern is whether/how to reinstate Shane Watson into their 
team. The two "newcomers", who did not appear in the Ashes, had superb games. 
Shaun Marsh, the 30-year-old son of Geoff, in his eighth Test, hit 148 in the 
first innings; Doolan, 28 and in his first match, compiled an impressive 89 in 
the second.

Two months ago, England could find no answer to Johnson after a numbing defeat 
in Brisbane. It will be fascinating to see whether South Africa can respond any 
better.
 