
Morning. Anyone awake?

So as Andy Murray looks to break Britain's 75-year grand slam duck tomorrow, 
Li Na <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/li-na> will attempt to create an even 
bigger piece of history for Chinese tennis today. Never before has China had a 
grand slam singles champion – male or female – indeed this is the first time a 
player from a country with a population of 1.3 billion has contested a major 
singles final.

With an estimated 330 million households able to watch the final on Chinese 
state TV, some are predicting this could be the most-viewed tennis match of 
all-time. But it seems one person who won't be tuning in is Li's own mother, 
who's never even seen her daughter play a professional match. "She can't watch 
me play tennis," Li revealed after her semi-final. "I'll ask her many times. 
She's so nervous."

Meanwhile the most anxious member of Team Clijsters today will probably be her 
husband, who will be hoping his wife doesn't engage in any bizarre head-shaving 
shenanigans if she emerges victorious. That's the deal Clijsters struck with 
her coach, Wim Fissette, after he did the same when she won the US Open.

Li actually beat Clijsters in the Sydney final earlier this month, even though 
Clijsters had led 5-0 in the first set. But you'd expect the Belgian, on the 
biggest stage, to be a different proposition today. It's her eighth grand slam 
final, she's going for a fourth major title and her third since coming out of 
retirement – though it would be her first victory in Australia, having lost the 
2004 final to Justine Henin.

In terms of playing styles, they're very similar. They both go for their 
shots, leaving little margin for error and are sometimes as likely to make five 
mistakes in a row as they are five winners. I can't see Li being too fazed by 
the big occasion, but Clijsters's superior movement around the court, combined 
with her greater experience, should give her the edge.

At least I hope it does. I must admit I'll be cheering for Clijsters today, 
mainly to save some professional face in front of the boss. When Sean Ingle 
asked me a fortnight ago whether it was worth putting some money on Li, I 
emphatically declared she'd get no further than the semis. I think her odds 
were 30-1 or maybe even a bit longer at the time. Hmm.

8.31am: The players should be on court any minute. Meanwhile in the Eurosport 
studio, Amélie Mauresmo has gone for Clijsters in two, Mats Wilander for 
Clijsters in three. Good to see they're on my side.

And here they are.  Clijsters is once again wearing her radioactive green 
ensemble, which isn't too dissimilar in shade to the outfit which Murray has 
been blinding everyone with over the past fortnight. Li goes for the more 
subdued white and navy blue. Not a hint of red in sight.

Thwack, thwack, thwack, the players are warming up in front of a virtually 
packed house on the Rod Laver Arena. Both are introduced to the crowd. "Aussie 
Kim" seems to get the slightly bigger cheer.

*Li 0-1 Clijsters (* denotes next server)
Clijsters opens up with an ace, before holding to love. It's a warm night in 
Melbourne, around 25 degrees, and it's predicted to be even balmier for Murray 
v Djokovic tomorrow.

Li 0-2 Clijsters* 
Faultless from Clijsters so far as she breaks to love, courtesy of a slightly 
fortunate net cord at 0-40. Clijsters is moving very well already, dictating 
the rallies. Li just needs to steady the nerves and take a deep breath.

*Li 1-2 Clijsters 
That'll do. Li buries a smash to take the first point of the game. She gets to 
30-all but then overcooks a forehand to give Clijsters game point. Li runs 
around her backhand to hit a heavy forehand down the line and Clijsters can 
only net. Deuce. Another thunderous shot from Li gives her break point which 
she duly takes at the first opportunity. After losing the first eight points of 
the match, the ninth seed breaks straight back.

Li 2-2 Clijsters* 
A comfortable hold for Li, to 15. She's soaking up Clijsters's pace now and 
giving it back as good as she gets. And Britain can kind of claim 
representation in both singles finals, by the way, with Alison Lang sitting in 
the umpire's chair today.

*Li 2-3 Clijsters
Clijsters moves to 40-15, before Li decides to mix it up with a 
perfectly-executed drop shot, which Clijsters scurries up to and dumps in the 
net. But Li then undoes her good work by firing a forehand long.

Li 3-3 Clijsters*
Clijsters opens up the court and drills a forehand down the line to set up two 
break points at 15-40. Li saves the first with plenty of scampering and big 
hitting and Clijsters then sends her return long as it goes to deuce. And deuce 
again. And deuce again. Before Li edges through.

*Li 4-3 Clijsters
A terrible overhead from Clijsters allows Li back into the rally at 15-30 and 
Li ekes out two break points. Clijsters nets as Li goes ahead for the first 
time in the match. And an email. "What's that tattoo on Li Na's chest?" 
enquires Dave Freeman, who's clearly not, erm, watching the tennis. It's a rose 
inside a heart, I believe.

Li 5-3 Clijsters*
Li looks comfortable at 30-0 but now it's her turn to throw in a few lazy 
points. Break point for Clijsters at 30-40. But Clijsters scoops a backhand 
long and it's deuce. A decent serve out wide from Li and Clijsters nets. 
Clijsters hits a forehand wide on the next point and she'll now have to serve 
to stay in the set.

Li wins the first set 6-3
Li thumps a forehand down the line to give herself two set points at 15-40. 
She misses with a backhand on the first, but then seals the set probably with 
the shot of the match. On the run, with Clijsters stranded at the net, she 
nails a forehand cross-court winner. That makes things interesting. Wonder how 
many people are watching in China now?

Li 6-3, 0-1 Clijsters*
Even though Clijsters's natural inclination is to attack, you feel she maybe 
needs to just mix things up a bit if she's to get back into this. Too many of 
the points are now being played on Li's terms. Though as I say that, a booming 
forehand from Clijsters gives her a break point opportunity. She can't take the 
first chance, but gets another when Li dumps a weak backhand into the net. And 
then Li gifts her the game with a double fault.

*Li 6-3 1-1 Clijsters
Li aims a bit of a rant at her poor husband at 15-all, but it seems to do the 
trick as she breaks straight back. "I am so excited to see this match in 
China," says Kennith Zhang. "All sports channel in China, CCTV5, GDTV-sports 
and BTV-sport all live broadcast this match! In weibo(chinese edition twitter), 
"Li na" almost pop up every second......I guess there are over 300 million 
Chinese seeing match now."

Li 6-3 1-2 Clijsters*
And another break. That's four in a row now. And an email from Gary Naylor. 
"There's a high attrition rate in the women's game and a lot of men appear to 
play injured – it's something that shouldn't really happen in a non-contact 
sport. But then again, the hard court surface favoured for most of the year 
seems designed to cause injury. Why don't they get rid of it and use a surface 
that avoids, rather than promotes, injury? And why don't players sue the ATP 
and WTA for risking their health?"

Certainly the Plexicushion surface they use at the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> is kinder on the body than 
most of the hard courts the players play on. But I think the issue is also the 
length of the season, which is something both the WTA and ATP are trying to 
address. The WTA season has been slightly shorter for the last few years and 
the ATP are looking to cut back their calendar from 2012. But more still needs 
to be done, for sure.

*Li 6-3 2-2 Clijsters
And another break. "Is it down to nerves or great returning?" asks Dave 
Freeman. That's women's tennis for you.

*Li 6-3 3-3 Clijsters
"Appreciate the chat with Gary Naylor on surfaces and injuries, but, um, any 
news about the tennis?" asks Jonathan Shaw. Okay, here goes. Li becomes the 
first to hold serve in the second set to go 3-2 up. Clijsters still looks 
shocked at the way Li is being able to out-hit her and seems a bit panicked, 
unlike Li who crafts a beautiful point to get to 30-all on Clijsters's serve. 
But Li just misses with a lob and Clijsters gets the chance to hold at 40-30. 
An unforced error from Li gives Clijsters the game but the Belgian will need to 
step it up soon otherwise the 300 million people or so watching in China could 
be cheering very loudly soon.

Li 6-3 3-4 Clijsters*
Sensing the urgency, some clean hitting from Clijsters sets up two break 
points at 15-40. On the first, she can only put a backhand in the net after 
some good defence from her opponent. It's Li who has Clijsters scurrying around 
on the next point but Clijsters withstands the attack and then aims a backhand 
winner down the line. The celebrations in China may have to wait.

*Li 6-3 3-5 Clijsters
Li got herself involved in a bit of an exchange with the umpire between games. 
Apparently the suggestion was that she's been getting a bit of coaching from 
her box, which Li disputed. Perhaps it might be what she needs to just regain a 
bit of focus. But it doesn't seem to help, with the errors coming more 
frequently from her racket now. Clijsters holds to 30 as she charges to the net 
and Li's lob goes long. Li will serve to stay in the set.

Clijsters wins the second set 6-3
At 30-15, Li sends a loose forehand long, she seems to be a bit unhappy about 
noise from the crowd mid-point. She recovers to go 40-30 up but Clijsters pegs 
it back to deuce. A lengthy rally follows, which Clijsters claims with a 
forehand missile down the line.And that's set point.  A fierce return from 
Clijsters and Li nets. This will be only the second time in five years that a 
women's grand slam final has gone to three sets.

*Li 6-3 3-6 0-1 Clijsters
A comfortable hold for Clijsters as she takes the game to love. My money would 
be on Clijsters now. She's soaked up what Li has thrown at her and you feel her 
experience will see her through in the decider. Li exchanges a few more words 
with Alison Lang at the changeover. This time it's about the noise from the 
crowd. She needs to refocus quickly.

Li 6-3 3-6 0-2 Clijsters*
It's all Clijsters at the moment as she carves out three break points. Li 
saves the first with a whipped cross-court forehand. Ace. 30-40. But on the 
next point, she comes to the net, has most of the court to aim into, but a poor 
backhand volley goes wide. Clijsters is in the ascendancy.

*Li 6-3 3-6 1-2 Clijsters
A fist pump from Li as she nails a backhand winner to get to 15-all. A double 
fault from Clijsters and it's 30-all. Li then seizes on a weak second serve and 
sets up a break point chance at 30-40. Nothing giving. But another double from 
Clijsters and it's advantage Li. And the Chinese thwacks a winner down to line 
to take it.

Li 6-3 3-6 1-3 Clijsters*
Must admit I didn't see the first four points of the game because the computer 
crashed. But from 30-all, Li buries a short ball from Clijsters. She looks to 
have the point wrapped up at 40-30, having got Clijsters on the back foot, but 
her forehand down the line goes into the net. Deuce. Li doubles and it's break 
point Clijsters. And a loose backhand from Li and Clijsters once again has the 
edge. Somehow there have been 13 breaks of serve in the match so far.

*Li 6-3 3-6 1-4 Clijsters
More from Gary Naylor. "If the season's length is too long, why don't they 
just play fewer tournaments? That approach has worked for Serena and Venus for 
years." Problem is the players are obligated to play a certain number of 
tournaments – if fit – and get fined if they don't. Though sure, Serena and 
Venus have had their fair share of sick notes over the years. Meanwhile on 
court, an emphatic hold for Clijsters, to love, as she consolidates the break.

Li 6-3 3-6 2-4 Clijsters*
Li gets herself in a bit of trouble at 15-30 with a couple of sloppy errors 
but recovers to 40-30, courtesy of a failed appeal from Clijsters on Hawk-Eye. 
Li keeps her composure to hold to 30.

*Li 6-3 3-6 2-5 Clijsters
Clijsters buries an overhead - something she's been struggling with so far 
today - to move 15-0 up. An unsuccessful challenge from Li and Clijsters moves 
30-15 ahead. At 40-15, Li's return sails well into the tramlines and it's hard 
to see a way back for the 28-year-old. That's now 38 unforced errors from her. 
Can she at least force Clijsters to serve for the title?

Li 6-3 3-6 3-5 Clijsters*
15-0. 30-0. 40-0. Li then nets a backhand but Clijsters overcooks a forehand 
and the Belgian will now serve for her first Australian Open title, after two 
hours.

Clijsters wins 3-6 6-3 6-3
Clijsters thumps a forehand down the line to get to 15-0. Now it's a big 
cross-court winner to make it 30-0. Then a fierce backhand forces the error 
from Li.Three championship points.  Clijsters misses her first serve, but makes 
the second and a backhand from Li sails wide. Cue tears of joy from Clijsters. 
She looks like she can't quite believe it. Li buries her head in her towel. A 
tremendous effort from her but in the end Clijsters's greater experience told, 
she was able to stay calmer than Li in that final set. It's a fourth grand slam 
crown for Clijsters and her first away from the US Open.

Trophy time After some dreary music which goes on for far too long, and some 
speeches from some suits that go on for far too long, it's time for the 
presentation. Li comes up first, still managing a big smile. The £685,000 
runners-up cheque probably helps. First she congratulates Clijsters, then 
thanks her family (no mention of her husband's snoring this time, but she does 
tell him how much she loves him) and wishes everyone a happy Chinese New Year.

Then it's Clijsters's turn. She thanks some dentist in Melbourne who fixed a 
chipped tooth for her when she arrived in Australia. Then it's her uncle. And 
her coach. And her fitness trainer. And her husband. And some others. Then the 
crowd. "I finally feel like you guys can call me Aussie Kim," she says. 
Deprived of sporting success this winter, I think the Aussies will have no 
hesitation in claiming this one. No mention of the shaved head though.

As Clijsters parades the trophy, it's time for me to take my leave. Thanks for 
keeping me company and be sure to come back tomorrow for Murray v Djokovic. Li 
couldn't quite do it today, but Murray will pull it off tomorrow. Won't he?
 