


Agnieszka Radwanska produced tennis from another planet to beat the defending 
Australian Open champion Victoria Azarenka in three sets on Wednesday and earn 
a semi-final place against Dominika Cibulkova.

The lithe Pole, the nearest approximation to Justine Henin on the women's 
tour, bewildered Azarenka with one wonder shot after another in the third set 
to win 6-1, 5-7, 6-0, a scoreline that correctly told the story of the 
champion's frustration.

Azarenka, chasing a hat-trick of Australian titles to emulate the feat of 
Martina Hingis in the late 90s, follows the men's champion, Novak Djokovic, out 
of the tournament leaving the way for the possibility of a final between 
contenders who have not tasted victory in a major.

The young Canadian Eugenie Bouchard plays the 2008 French Open champion Li Na 
in the other semi-final, a match of youth and experience to savour.

“For sure it was the best quarter-final I have played here,” Radwanska said. 
“I've been in a couple here [this was actually her fourth]. I'm so happy I was 
able to step up to reach the semi-final. I lost against [Azarenka] so many 
times, I just had to play my best tennis, be aggressive, go for every shot I 
could, and it worked today.”

Asked how she played an astonishing volley from behind her back, moving 
towards the baseline, for the most unlikely winner in the third set, she said, 
“A lot of hard work. I will be 25 in a couple of weeks, that means 20 years on 
a tennis court.”

The first set flew by in 33 minutes as Azarenka struggled to cope with 
Radwanska's uncanny anticipation and sublime touch.

Ahead in the serving cycle, Azarenka broke Radwanska to love with an 
unreachable crosscourt forehand to level at a set apiece after nearly an 
hour-and-a-half.

Neither player was entirely comfortable but the second seed had the force of a 
fightback to lift her, while Radwanska seemed to briefly lose her way in sight 
of a two-set victory. In the flash of a few brilliant shots, however, she was 
3-0 in the deciding set, as Azarenka's concentration slipped.

When Radwanska went to 4-0 with a rare ace, Azarenka was disconsolate. When 
she won what might be the point of the tournament for 30-30 in the fifth game – 
a bewildering exchanged she initiated with a running backhand smash and 
finished with a reflex angled volley – her opponent could only look on in awe. 
When she almost matched it moments later for break point, the arena rose to 
greet her – and when Azarenka double-faulted to drop serve ... well, the 
humiliation was all but complete.

Radwanska, serving for the match, followed a double-fault with a winner, then 
pinned Azarenka deep and forced a timid backhand out of her for two match 
points, needing only one.

It was tennis of the very highest quality. If she produces it against 
Cibulkova – who earlier beat the promising Simona Halep with ridiculous ease, 
dropping just three games in an hour – Radwanska will start favourite in the 
final, whoever she faces.
 