
A few years ago I went to an antenatal class reunion, where we celebrated our 
babies now being grown up enough to start school. One of the mums suggested we 
write down what we thought our children would go on to do when they were grown 
up – only opening the envelope once our children had graduated to see if our 
predictions had come true.

I wrote down “engineer”. My little boy was obsessed with building things out 
of Lego – when he wasn’t spending hours designing complicated routes with his 
train set in order to re-enact the adventures of Thomas the Tank Engine. I was 
convinced that he would end up in a career building and designing complex 
structures.


Autism in the workplace – an opportunity not a drawback
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/11/autism-in-the-workplace-an-opportunity-not-a-drawback>
My son will be 20 on his next birthday, about to finish his college studies, 
now on the cusp of the world of work. I was partially right with my prediction 
all those years ago; he progressed from building Lego and train tracks to 
online simulations, Minecraft and Kerbal Space Program. He loves IT and 
computers; designing them, building them, fixing them.


During his school years he was also diagnosed with high-functioning autism, 
sometimes called Asperger syndrome. He’s the first to admit that he’s a bit of 
a geek.

In the early days, following his diagnosis, I worried about keeping him 
motivated in school and tried to convince him of the importance and relevance 
of his exams. Now I worry about him leaving full-time education and finding a 
job, I worry about how he can show an employer what a fantastic asset he could 
be, and I worry about not being there to intervene if and when things start to 
go wrong.

While my son is still in full-time education he is supported by an Education, 
Health and Care Plan (EHCP). This details the strategies and support he needs 
to achieve his goals in life. I attend annual reviews to discuss how he is 
doing but, most importantly, I maintain close contact with his teachers to keep 
him both on track and identify when things are starting to go awry. The EHCP 
underpins everything my son wants from his education and beyond (he was very 
much part of the process in developing it) and how his college can support him 
to achieve this.


This will all end once he enters the workplace Then he will be on his own. No 
more meetings, no interventions, no EHCP plans. It will be down to my son and 
his employer to make things work, for both their benefits.


I know this from bitter experience. Initially, instead of A-levels, my son 
decided he wanted to do an apprenticeship. In typical, very direct and logical 
fashion, he had made up his mind that a degree in computer engineering would be 
a waste of time and money as he wanted to get out and do the work, not just 
learn about it. On paper, the apprenticeship gave him the chance to have real 
work experience and money – plus to get the qualifications that he grudgingly 
acknowledged he needed to prove he was a genius at all things IT (his words, 
not mine).


Things started off well; he enjoyed his independence and being treated as an 
adult, his employer knew about his autism and my son and I had discussed his 
concerns about some of the areas of his new job which might prove difficult for 
him. We worked on strategies for raising any concerns with his employer should 
they arise.

 Then, unbeknown to me, things began to spiral out of control: he was becoming 
overwhelmed with deadlines, not finishing projects, turning up late for work. I 
had seen this before in school, but then I would get a call from the special 
needs co-ordinator and we would work out a plan to get my son back on track.


I only found out how bad things had become once it was too late and his 
contract was not renewed. That’s the difference between school and the 
workplace: once your child starts work, you become quite disempowered as their 
parent, you can only hope that you have done your job well enough in preparing 
them for the world of work, that they will have the skills to self-manage or 
know when to ask for help.


The challenge we parents of young adults with Asperger’s face is helping them 
find a role where their skills are recognised and rewarded and where an 
employer has enough understanding and awareness of autism to know how to get 
the best out of them so that they will succeed in their work.


It’s hard enough to let go of your children as they grow up and become adults, 
it’s doubly hard when they have autism. I have spent the past 20 years getting 
to know and understand this incredible, intelligent, complex, funny, motivated 
and kind young man and I want the people he works for to do the same. I want my 
son to have a productive and fulfilling next phase of his life, a career, a 
chance to live independently, a chance to shine and show the world what he can 
do. A chance to be a fully functioning member of society where his skills and 
talents are recognised and rewarded.


Parents of young people with Asperger’s need employers to know that, with the 
right support, our children can be an incredible asset not a hindrance. It’s 
easy for an employer to say it’s not working out, but at what cost? The loss of 
a potentially brilliant employee?


As a friend of mine, faced with a similar situation, said: “It’s all or 
nothing They will either excel in an environment that rewards (and accepts) 
their skills and behaviours or they will spend their lives on benefits; there’s 
no in-between”.


Our job as parents is to prepare our children for the world. This takes a 
little longer when you have a child with high-functioning autism but at some 
point we also need to step back and let go, hoping that everything you have 
done to prepare them for the world of work has sunk in (while still being 
prepared to be there to catch them if they fall).


In my son’s case we are working on a plan B to help him achieve his ambitions. 
His experience in an office environment served to confirm that a traditional 
career is not for him. While at college, he has been supplementing his income 
by running a part-time IT support business: sorting out Wi-Fi issues, broken 
laptops and backing up photos for local friends. He has even built a database 
for a small charity. When he leaves college next year, he wants to run his 
business full-time. He has a vision that maybe it will grow big enough so that 
he can take on his own apprentices – people like him – and create an 
environment where they can flourish and succeed.


I guess I’m due for a reunion with my antenatal group again, and I can tell 
them that I was right; my son did end up building things after all, just not in 
the way I had predicted all those years ago.

 