
Insurance group Aviva is one of the many casualties of the Brexit vote, down 
nearly 16% on Friday and off another 4% now.

With its shares down 16.5p to 358.3p so far on Monday, Aviva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/avivabusiness> has issued an update 
saying the decision to leave the European Union would not have a major effect 
on its operations. It said:

Aviva’s capital position is resilient to market stress, and the company 
estimates that as of close of the markets on Friday 24th June 2016, its 
Solvency II coverage ratio remained close to the top of its working range of 
150% - 180%.

As announced on 24th June 2016, Aviva has conducted extensive analysis of the 
possible implications of a vote to leave the EU and considers it will have no 
significant operational impact on the company.

At Aviva’s 2015 preliminary results, published in March 2016, Aviva reported a 
Solvency II ratio of 180% and a surplus of £9.7 billion. Aviva has one of the 
strongest and most resilient balance sheets in the UK insurance sector with low 
sensitivity to market stress and over the last four years Aviva has tripled its 
economic capital surplus.

Aviva will continue to monitor the technical implications of the vote to 
leave, which will only be resolved after several years of negotiating a new 
relationship between the UK and the EU.

Meanwhile analysts at Macquarie suggested the falls had been overdone:

Aviva share price fell by more than other UK insurers, inline with the UK 
banks. We believe this reflects the Aviva balance sheet of three years ago 
rather than today. Aviva have taken action to reduce volatility ahead of the 
solvency II framework including disposing distressed property loans, reducing 
equity volatility (a 25% fall in markets was only 3% off the solvency II ratio 
at the year end). While we do not believe Aviva has a “fortress” balance sheet, 
it does offer a compelling valuation and dividend yield.

 We have lowered our price target to 442p from 502p on lower expected 
earnings, and have upgraded to outperform [from neutral].

While we expect flat earnings and modest dividend growth, we believe Aviva 
should outperform if the de-risking actions have made the business more 
resilient.
 