
In November 2011 we suffered a leak from the mains water supply to our flat. 
The leak lasted less than 10 minutes. However, almost five months later we've 
yet to return to our home.

Our building is insured by Axa <https://www.theguardian.com/business/axa>, 
which appointed loss adjusters. Its loss adjusters moved us (at our insistence) 
to alternative accommodation as our six-year-old son's room was uninhabitable. 
It also appointed a contractor to assess the repair to our flat, and this is 
where it all went wrong.

The contractor concluded the damage to the lower half of our walls was due to 
a pre-existing rising-damp condition and the insurer was not liable. Our home 
was fitted with a damp-proof course 15 years ago by the previous owner. We 
refurbished four years ago and have never had damp problems. The pattern of 
rising damp matches the pattern of water egress and exists nowhere else in the 
flat.

Dealing with Axa's loss adjuster was exasperating. Finally, having had enough, 
we appointed our own loss assessor. We obtained an independent damp report from 
a surveyor that concluded our flat does not have a condition of rising damp and 
submitted this to Axa. Axa's response was that while the report from our 
surveyor and the one from its loss adjuster conflicted, it would accept the 
result of a third-party inspection and told us we could arrange an inspection 
with a contractor of our choice. We complied and, again, the result was no 
rising damp.

We are now five months down the line and, because Axa failed to pay for our 
alternative accommodation in time, we are living with friends while our son is 
miles away with his grandparents. Please help.ES, Brighton, East Sussex

This was a complicated case because of the number of the different parts of 
the claim under dispute and the length of time that this had been going on. The 
good news is that you are now back in your house; the bad news is this took six 
months when it should have been a matter of weeks.

We feel Axa failed in its duty of care to you and should have dealt with this 
more efficiently from the start – and it acknowledges this. However, the case 
was complicated by several factors, many of which appear to have been 
exacerbated by the involvement of middlemen (such as the loss assessor).

The total cost of your claim, according to Axa, was £31,808, of which it had 
paid the bulk. Once we became involved it offered to pay you an additional 
£3,000. This is made up of outstanding claim costs of £2,500 and £500 for 
stress and inconvenience. It said it would not pay you the £4,000 cost of your 
assessor as it is not contractually obliged to pay for experts you have 
appointed.

Given that you felt compelled to appoint the assessor because of Axa's 
failings, coupled with the fact you ended up separated from your son and spent 
months trying to resolve this, we didn't feel £500 was sufficient to reflect 
the stress and inconvenience.

Axa dug its heels in because it continually disputed various elements of your 
story, while you continually disputed its version of events. Axa's claims and 
underwriting director then became involved and, with some persuading from us, 
you and he had a conversation about the discrepancies in your two stories. It 
soon emerged, as we had suggested, that the waters between you may have been 
muddied by third parties and that, in fact, you could iron out a lot of your 
differences.

Axa can now see that you were oblivious to many of the things it thought you 
were being obstructive about. It has now agreed to add another £2,000 to the 
amount, which gives you a £5,000 settlement.

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at 
consumer.champions@theguardian.com <mailto:consumer.champions@theguardian.com> 
or write to Bachelor & Brignall, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
 