
My 24-year-old daughter was covered by an Axa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/axa> travel insurance policy when she met 
me for a holiday in Cambodia and Vietnam in July. Unfortunately, on the last 
day of our trip she became seriously ill with dengue fever and was admitted to 
hospital.

I collected all the evidence the insurer needed from the hospital and Axa 
agreed that my daughter was covered for her medical emergency and the losses 
resulting from it.

Because of the medical emergency we both missed our flights home from Hanoi 
via Kuala Lumpur. Axa agreed to fund my daughter’s ticket on a later flight 
direct from Hanoi to the UK and told me I would have to buy my own ticket and 
claim it back when I got home. Meanwhile, it paid for my hotel stay while she 
was in hospital, which suggests it accepted that my place was at her side.

However, after our return to the UK, Axa refused to pay the £900 for my 
rebooked flight home, arguing that my daughter could have flown home alone. The 
insurer seems unable to grasp that I had to miss my flight because I could not 
leave my daughter seriously ill, on her own, unable to communicate, on the 
other side of the world.AC, Northampton

Insurance companies are not noted for their delicacy of feeling, but Axa’s 
stance is unusually crass. Your missed flight was a consequential loss because 
it departed the day your daughter was admitted to hospital. It is therefore 
irrelevant whether she was fit to fly home alone after days of treatment.

Axa, when I laboriously spell this out, comes to realise this. At first it 
apologises for the “delay” in settling the claim – a claim it clearly had no 
intention of honouring before you invoked the media – but has now said it will 
refund you the £900.

Once pressed for its reasons for refusing you it blames an “error” and offers 
you £180 – which should just cover the cost of having your luggage, stranded in 
Kuala Lumpur and couriered home (another cost Axa had promised to cover, but 
didn’t).

“We are very disappointed to hear that the customer did not receive the usual 
level of service from Axa and we hope that the compensation offered reflects 
how sorry we are for this,” says a spokesperson. “We have reviewed our 
processes to ensure this does not happen again.”

If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk <mailto: 
your.problems@observer.co.uk> or write to Your Problems, The Observer, Kings 
Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number.
 