
Financial services group Axa <https://www.theguardian.com/business/axa> has 
announced plans to close its final salary pension to existing members, in a 
move one union claimed would result in employees having to work an extra five 
years to achieve the same retirement pay out.

The company told staff it planned to move 2,300 employees currently in the 
scheme to a defined contribution pension, where payments are not guaranteed and 
depend on the performance of the underlying fund. These schemes are cheaper to 
run as the investment risk is transferred from the employer to the employee.

In common with many other firms Axa, whose business is providing pensions 
alongside other financial products, had already closed the final salary scheme 
to new members. Since 2003 they have been enrolled in a defined contribution 
scheme.

"We have worked hard to maintain our defined benefit (final salary) pension 
scheme over the past few years and have introduced a number of changes to try 
to keep the scheme sustainable," a spokesperson said. "Like many other 
companies before us, we are now proposing that the scheme be closed pending a 
further 60 days of consultation."

Benefits that have already been accrued in the scheme will be kept. The 
spokesperson added: "This allows us to harmonise pension arrangements in a 
fairer way across our employee base and ensure that all of our employees have 
access to long-term pension provision."

Unite, Britain's biggest union and the representative for Axa staff, expressed 
anger over the plans and said it could not rule out industrial action. It said 
it had put forward a range of alternatives including possible changes to 
members' contributions or accrual rates, but these had all been rejected by Axa.

Unite's national officer, Dominic Hook, said: "The move to end the defined 
benefit pension scheme at Axa is appalling and unjustified. Long-serving staff 
now face the prospect of having to work an extra five years to get the same 
level of pension and [the move] puts all the investment risk on to the staff."

He added: "The decision by Axa is unacceptable and industrial action will be 
among the options being discussed with members if Axa refuses to reconsider its 
proposals."
 