
Victoria Azarenka <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/victoria-azarenka> has 
advanced to her first grand slam final after outlasting defending champion Kim 
Clijsters in a remarkable encounter at the Australian Open.

Clijsters, on what could have been her last appearance down under as she is 
due to retire at the end of the season, fought hard but Azarenka's bludgeoning 
ground strokes proved too much as the Belarusian won 6-4, 1-6, 6-3 in two hours 
and 12 minutes of absorbing tennis.

Azarenka will meet Maria Sharapova of Russia, who defeated Petra Kvitova of 
the Czech Republic 6-2, 3-6, 6-4 in their semi-final.

Clijsters's impending departure from the women's game means the chasing pack 
are jostling for position and on this evidence Azarenka will be at the 
forefront.

Her powerful all-court game has seen her knock on the door for a number of 
years but the way she regrouped after losing the second set suggests she is 
becoming a more complete player.

She also had to come through some nervy moments in the final stages but did so 
impressively to set up a meeting with either Maria Sharapova or Petra Kvitova 
in Saturday's final.

"I felt like my hand weighed about 200kg and my body was 1,000kg, everything 
was shaking but that feeling when you finally win is such a relief, I just want 
to cry," she said. "I was just trying to stay in the moment.

"Kim really took over in the second set and I felt there was nothing I could 
do. In the third I just tried to let my shots go a little bit.

"I am really glad that I fought for every ball." 

On her improved mental attitude, she joked: "I think before you all thought I 
was a mental case but I was just young and emotional."

Azarenka was outstanding in the early exchanges, her greater weight of shot 
pushing Clijsters further behind the baseline and she was quick to punish the 
short ball.

She broke for a 2-1 lead and overcame some uncertain moments on serve and a 
noisy flypast to celebrate Australia Day to see out the set.

The second was a complete contrast as Azarenka started to throw in numerous 
unforced errors and the experienced Clijsters seized her chance, winning it in 
36 minutes to level matters.

Previously that would have signalled the beginning of the end for Azarenka but 
she displayed her new-found mental fortitude to claim a 4-1 lead despite 
Clijsters's best efforts.

The four-time grand slam champion was staring down the barrel at 4-2, 40-0 
down but in a courageous last stand hit back to break and get it back on serve.

But again Azarenka stood firm, a crushing forehand seeing her break back and 
she served it out.
 