
I climb the steep Calçada da Glória by the funicular railway tracks, my 
leather soles slipping off marble cobbles that are like uneven cubes of 
volcanic ice. One foot goes and I grab the broken rail. This dramatic urban 
gorge slices through the old town of Lisbon. Graffiti covers the walls in 
spaghetti swirling scrawls of spray-can anarchist colour. I meet Parker outside 
Alfaia. The aluminium chair is on such a gradient that, as I sit, I slide into 
its back.

A selection of cheese, ham and olives is brought to the table. It is worth 
going to Lisbon just to eat Azeitao cheese. The ancient, muslin-wrapped rind 
looks like the skin of an Egyptian mummy. The top has been sliced off and a 
tiny spoon stands in the runny interior. It is made in Portugal's highest 
mountains from raw, unpasteurised ewe's milk, using Cardoon thistle instead of 
rennet. We dribble it like honey over the fresh bread, the sweet pungency 
dilating our nostrils as it coats the roof of our mouths. A purple plate of 
octopus appears, peppered with a mild chilli. Parker's dad is a botanist and he 
tells me about the Scoville scale, which is used to grade the heat of chillies. 
A jalapeno is around 3,000, a bell pepper is zero. What we're eating would just 
make a couple of hundred.

On our right is the window of the kitchen. Rows of silvery bass stare past us 
at the sun-faded photographs of last year's hair-dos in the hairdresser's 
window over the street. The chef sees us and sticks thumb and forefinger into 
the eyes of a pointy-snouted sea salmon, holding it up for us to see, gaping 
the gills like a floppy grin.

We order fish. The Caldeirada de peixes do mar is different sea fish sliced 
into pieces to be cooked in tomato, onion, garlic, white wine, peppers, 
together with potatoes. Crude chunks of unknown fish swim in a sauce that 
tastes as if it has simmered overnight. In case the deep yellow potatoes have 
not absorbed every flavour, there are soppy slices of bread at the bottom, 
under the bones. We scrape the last dribble of Azeitao from the rind. We drip 
the last drop of red wine. The cobbles seem slippier on the way down.

· The writer is the lead singer with Franz Ferdinand
 