
The Azerbaijani writer Akram Aylisli, who saw his books burned and endured 
calls for his ear to be cut off four years ago after writing about massacres of 
Armenians, has reportedly been prevented from travelling abroad to an Italian 
literary festival.

Aylisli was a popular writer in Azerbaijan until the publication of his 2012 
novella Stone Dreams, which told of the conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan 
in the 20th century, and of the massacres of Armenians by Azeris. He was due to 
speak at the Incroci di Civiltà festival in Venice on Thursday, but the 
Armenian news agencyArmenpress reported  
<http://armenpress.am/eng/news/841308/writer-akram-aylisli-detained-by-police-at-heydar-aliyev-airport.html>
on Wednesday that he had been detained by airport police at Baku airport.

Officials whom I have known for years are still frightened to say hello to 
me... My children lost their jobs
Akram Aylisli, interviewed in Index on Censorship 
The Turan news agency, quoting the ministry of internal affairs, said  
<http://contact.az/docs/2016/Social/033000151050en.htm#.VvuwcOJ97IW>the 
detention was “in connection with the conflict he had stirred with the staff of 
the border service”.

Before he published Stone Dreams, Aylisli had been awarded a host of prizes in 
Azerbaijan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/azerbaijan>. But the release of 
the story saw his title of People’s Writer withdrawn, his pension revoked and 
his writing removed from school curriculums. His wife and son lost their jobs, 
his books were burned and a reward was offered to anyone who would cut off his 
ear.

Rachael Jolley, editor of Index on Censorship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/censorship>, which publishes a new story 
written by Aylisli in its latest magazine, told the Guardian: “Azerbaijan’s 
recent record of detaining its critics looks to continue with the detention of 
playwright and novelist Akram Aylisli at Baku airport today... We hope that the 
interior ministry will quickly reconsider this detention and release this 
important writer.”

Rebecca Vincent, coordinator of the Sport for Rights campaign 
<https://www.facebook.com/sport4rights>, which works to draw attention to human 
rights issues in Azerbaijan, confirmed that Aylisli was still being detained, 
and that the writer was with his son. Vincent said that Aylisli’s detention 
“shows that the vicious cycle of politically motivated arrests continues in 
Azerbaijan, undermining any goodwill generated by the releases of 16 political 
prisoners over the past two weeks”.

“On the very day that Azerbaijani President Aliyev arrives in Washington, DC, 
hoping for an audience with President Obama, his regime continues his dirty 
work at home, targeting government critics,” said Vincent. “We call for 
Aylisli’s immediate and unconditional release, along with the release of all 
remaining political prisoners in Azerbaijan.”

Incroci di Civiltà festival management issued a statement, saying it 
“understood with regret that Azeri author Akram Aylisli has been detained by 
the airport police at the Baku airport, wishes that the situation may resolve 
in a positive way and that the author may intervene at the International 
Festival, which has always promoted freedom of expression and dialogue between 
cultures.”

In an interview with Index on Censorship 
<https://www.indexoncensorship.org/2016/03/staging-shakespearean-dissent-spring-magazine-2016/>
 published this week, Aylisli said he was still facing persecution in his home 
country. “The dreadful sanctions employed against me and my family remain in 
force. Officials whom I have known for years are still frightened to say hello 
to me,” he said. “I am automatically banished from everything under the control 
of the state. Despite this I am still resisting, because I have thousands of 
readers in this country and, most of all, we owe them gratitude for bringing me 
where I am.”

Aylisli’s new short story, The Polecat, tells of a man in a post-Soviet 
village that is slowly being abandoned by its young people. The man, Qubus, has 
seen polecats tortured and killed in the village a few months earlier, and now 
dreams of polecats coming back to the village to take their revenge.

“In Azerbaijan, a polecat is a rare and mystical animal. What people know of 
them is mostly hearsay. This metaphor contains a hidden philosophical message. 
People maul a living creature, without knowing what it is and why exactly they 
need to destroy it,” the writer told Index on Censorship.

The magazine’s deputy editor, Vicky Baker, said the story “uses metaphor to 
tackle ideas of freedom and self-censorship”, and “also shows originality, 
humour and insight into post-Soviet village life”.

Diana Markosian's best photograph: the 105-year-old Armenian who escaped 
genocide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/30/diana-markosian-best-photograph-movses-haneshyan-interview>
“Akram Aylisli is a hugely talented writer, who went from being lauded 
nationwide to being a pariah of the state,” said Baker. “[He] was punished for 
not following the official narrative of history and for approaching a story 
from multiple viewpoints, like any good writer should. He has been left with no 
outlets for his work, which is why we were happy to publish one of his short 
stories, translated it into English for the first time, and share it with a new 
audience.”

Aylisli was nominated for the Nobel peace prize in 2014 
<http://akramaylisli.info/english/nomination/> by a host of academics, as the 
“first Turkic author to write a novel about the Armenian genocide”, referring 
to the Turkic ethnic group spread throughout western Asia, including Turkey.

“Many Turkish writers – such as Nâzim Hikmet and Orhan Pamuk – told the truth 
about the genocide, but Mr Aylisli was the first to express that pain in a 
literary work which is very personal, deep and hard-won,” the academics wrote 
to the Norwegian Nobel committee at the time.

“The Azerbaijani authorities burn the paper on which this hard truth was 
printed and try to oppress its author. But strange as it might seem, the 
artistic truth can be more powerful than the repressive state apparatus, more 
powerful than military force and mass media.”
 