
As if it did not have enough on their plates,  British Airways was last night 
being forced to consider the prospect of ejection from the FTSE-100 index of 
leading shares should yesterday's plane crash in New York prove to be another 
terrorist atrocity.

BA's place is under threat because of the move by  BT (off 15.25p at 310.25p) 
to split its fixed-line and mobile operations into two listed companies. As 
"future BT" and mm02  will both be big enough to command places in the blue 
chip index, another company must be ejected on Thursday.

At the close of business last night the lowest valued constituent was fund 
management group Schroders, down 8.5p at 710p, but things are close. Following 
yesterday's disaster, BA, which saw its shares fall 11.25p to 161p, was in 98th 
place with a market value of £1.74bn.

As index compiler FTSE will base its decision on Thursday's closing prices it 
is possible, particularly if the cause of the crash proves to be a bomb, that 
BA's market value will fall below that of Schroders (£1.6bn) over the course of 
the next three trading sessions.

If so, BA will be facing the indignity of life in the FTSE 250 on Monday 
morning.

The crash of the Airbus passenger jet cast a shadow over trading on the London 
market. The FTSE 100 tumbled as far as 5,063.3, its lowest level since November 
1, as the news broke but trimmed those losses as reports emerged that the crash 
may have been due to engine failure.

At the close of trading, the blue chip index was 98 points lower at 5,146.2, 
with dealers reporting little evidence of the panic selling that followed the 
September 11 attacks. In fact, turnover was subdued with just 1.8bn shares 
changing hands as investors decided to wait for a fuller picture to emerge from 
New York

Nevertheless, there was no mercy for those companies exposed to the airline 
sector. Engine maker Rolls-Royce was an obvious target for the sellers, losing 
10.25p to 158.75p. So too was airport operator BAA , down 28p to 564p.  BAE 
Systems was also hit, slipping 5p to 333p, because of its stake in EADS, the 
company which controls Airbus.

Insurance issues also suffered on worries about fresh liabilities. Royal & Sun 
Alliance was 16.5p weaker at 370.5p, while CGNU shed 10p to 857.5p.

Leading shares had been on the defensive before the crash, as investors 
continued to book profits made in the past month and a half. Invensys, the 
heavily indebted industrial controls and automation group, dominated early 
trading following weekend press reports that the company will cut its interim 
dividend this week and admit it has a pension shortfall of up to £500m. Invensys
 closed 4.25p lower at 74.5p.

Mining group  BHP Billiton was one of the few bright spots, rising 6.5p to 
312p, as analysts identified it as one of the companies that will benefit from 
the significant production cuts in the copper market announced last week. ABN 
Amro reckons the copper price, which hit a 17-year low last week, has probably 
reached its low point for the cycle.

Elsewhere,  Brambles, the industrial services group, eased 11p to 361p on 
fears that Thursday's trading update will be accompanied by a profits warning.

Although its Chep pallet business is thought to have experienced strong sales 
momentum, dealers are concerned about the other side of its business which is 
exposed to the steel industry.

Lower down the corporate ladder, the serviced office specialist  Regus, up 
9.5p to 45.5p, again headed the mid cap leaderboard. Dealers said investors 
were taking the view that Friday's cost cutting measures would help the company 
ride out the current recession.

An upgrade from "buy" to "strong buy" from house broker USB Warburg ensured 
there was strong demand for Marlborough Stirling, the financial software firm. 
The Swiss stockbroker expects the acquisition of Exchange FS , up 3.5p to 
33.5p, to further boost the already strong performance of the company. 
Marlborough shares settled at 194.5p, up 14.5p.

In the smaller companies sector,  Provalis, the biotech group, was marked 4.5p 
higher at 16p after it received two important clearances from US regulators for 
its diabetes test, Glycosal

The clearances mean Glycosal can now be used at any location, including the 
home. Previously specialist diabetes clinics and laboratories could only use 
it. Chief executive Phil Gould said the decision by the Food and Drug 
Administration would allow Glycosal to reach its full potential in a market 
estimated to be worth over $1bn per year.

Even before the events in New York,  Ultra Electronics, aerospace and defence 
group, found itself in the doldrums. Its shares eventually closed down 14.5p to 
409p after ING Barings downgraded its rating on the stock to "hold" from "buy" 
and then cut its profits forecasts on fears that guidance from the company at 
the end of the month could disappoint.

According to the broker, a deal to supply a battlefield information system has 
been delayed, while sales at its aerospace division, which counts Airbus as a 
big customer, have fallen sharply. It also thinks the company is set to 
announce job cuts.

 Healthcare group  Medical Solutions was also under pressure, falling 9.5p to 
14.25p after warning that full-year profits would be significantly below market 
expectations. House broker Teather & Greenwood responded to the news by 
lowering its rating to "hold" from "strong buy" and predicting a full year loss 
of £400,000. It was previously expecting a profit of £900,000.

Despite saying it had no plans for a management buy-out, retail investors 
continued to chase textiles group Sherwood International higher. The shares 
ended 1.25p stronger at 10.25p.
 