
“Funding for an early-stage company or project is sometimes next to useless if 
that money isn’t accompanied by advice and support on how that money should be 
used effectively to grow the business,” says Tushar Agarwal, co-founder ofHubble
 <https://hubblehq.com/>, an online marketplace for office space.


Having a bright idea doesn’t always mean you’ll also have the wherewithal to 
bring it to the market and make a success of it in the long-term. This holds 
true for the culture sector as much as for the world of tech. However, while 
it’s common for startups such as Hubble to take advantage of formalised 
structures of mentoring and support made available along with investment, the 
predominant funding model in the arts still tends to involve handing over the 
cash and sending an organisation on its way.

The future of arts funding – webchat roundup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2015/mar/24/future-arts-funding-webchat-roundup>
As the arts sector grapples with an ever more challenging funding climate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2015/mar/24/future-arts-funding-webchat-roundup>
, it might be time for culture and creative industry funders to think a little 
differently about how they do things.

The past few years have seen the birth of an entirely new model of early-stage 
funding in the tech world. Accelerator programmes work by gathering a number of 
startups together in one place for an intensive period in which ideas are 
interrogated, networks are developed and startups are given the tools to access 
further investment.


Startups also receive investment from the accelerator itself, in exchange for 
founder shares. The specifics vary programme to programme but the deal is 
usually somewhere in the region of £20,000 for 8% equity. Could such a model, 
adapted to take into account the particular needs of the subsidised sector, be 
effective in culture sector funding?

Linisha Palm, co-founder of online photography marketplace PhotoPitch 
<https://photopitch.me/>, knows all about accelerators. She took the company 
through a programme with Birmingham-basedOxygen Accelerator 
<http://www.oxygenaccelerator.com/> last year.

“I’m not sure that PhotoPitch would still be here if we didn’t get all that 
support and mentoring from both our angel investor and Oxygen mentors. I even 
think that if we had just got the funding without the mentoring, we would have 
experienced a slow death. One thing most entrepreneurs suffer from is that 
endless enthusiasm around the concept that makes it hard to acknowledge that it 
might be time for a change of strategy.”

Tristan Watson, programme director of Ignite100 Accelerator <http://ignite.io/>
 in Newcastle, agrees: “Every company will have different gaps in their 
knowledge, but the most common ones are the ability to apply critical thinking 
to their own idea and to test their assumptions rather than accept them at face 
value.”

Ignite100, like most accelerators, facilitates this process by creating an 
environment that fosters peer-to-peer learning. “Instead of being a team of 
two-to-four people, you become part of a team of 25 or 30 … all of whom have 
different skillsets, networks and backgrounds and who will help each other to 
succeed,” says Watson.

Startups going through the accelerator process are also paired with mentors 
with complementary experience and expertise, whether that be in marketing, 
sales, insurance or any other potential blind spot.

Some accelerators also offer startups the opportunity to pitch to potential 
investors as part of the process – whether business angels or venture 
capitalists. Other programmes look favourably on mentors buying equity in the 
very startups they’ve been mentoring. This gives them “skin in the game,” says 
Agarwal, whose team went through an accelerator programme with London-based 
incubatorSeedcamp <http://seedcamp.com/> last year. “There is a direct 
correlation between the company doing well and the investor doing well – hence, 
they are incentivised to help the business in any way they can.”

Smart money

The process works outside the highly competitive world of accelerators too, 
with access to this “smart money” also available via networks of business angel 
investors. James Badgett, co-founder of theAngel Investment Network 
<https://www.angelinvestmentnetwork.co.uk/>, explains: “When searching for 
relevant investors we firstly look for those with relevant experience to those 
seeking funding. Our investors cover a huge range of backgrounds so we often 
have some incredible fits.

“For any business, getting the investment you need is the first requirement, 
but many good startups may also have a choice of who they want to invest. Many 
entrepreneurs are more likely to take what they see as ‘smart money’ as this 
will not only give them the investment, but advice and contacts.”

Arts organisations aren’t necessarily in a position to offer business angels a 
return on investment in the conventional sense – and it would be reductive to 
expect the whole cultural sector to suddenly start to turn a profit. But if we 
substitute “impact” for “return” then surely the same incentives apply? Could 
existing grant funders, local councils, Arts Council England or local 
enterprise partnerships be persuaded to don a pair of angel wings?

Equity isn’t the only financing model to embrace mentoring and network 
building. Loan finance does something similar and the arts sector is already 
benefiting from a number of schemes that provide loans at favourable rates of 
interest alongside business support.

The government-funded Start Up Loans scheme <http://www.startuploans.co.uk/>, 
for example, offers free business planning to new firms before any money is 
paid out, then pairs each business with a mentor once a loan is agreed. 
Recipients are also invited to free training courses across the UK. A 
spokesperson from the company said that it is seeing an increase in 
applications from creative, arts and media organisations and that they hope 
further businesses in the culture sector will be encouraged to take advantage 
of the scheme in the future.

Creative Industry Finance <https://www.creativeindustryfinance.org.uk/> (CIF), 
meanwhile, is a funding and business development initiative that was set up 
with the sector in mind. It provides one-to-one support to ensure businesses 
are “investment ready” before introducing them to a social, commercial or 
alternative lender that will meet their needs.

Loan finance shouldn’t be seen as a straight-up replacement for grant funding, 
says Sarah Thirtle, head of business lending programmes atCreative United 
<http://www.creativeunited.org.uk/>, which runs CIF, but rather as another tool 
to unlock growth.

“Grant funding is vital for talent development and projects that seek to 
experiment and push artistic boundaries,” she says. “Loan finance can be used 
to enable organisations and enterprises to invest in their income-generation 
strategies and infrastructure, turning their efforts into profits that they are 
able to invest back into their future work.”

Mentoring, collaboration, networking, shared work spaces – the cultural sector 
has been embracing these ideas for years. The only real novelty here is the 
notion of formalising them as part of the funding landscape. It need not be a 
huge change for the arts, but it could have a major impact on the way arts, 
culture and creative industry professionals work. Time to make a start(up)?

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 