
Probably the river Amazon is the last remaining region of the earth where the 
traveller can really feel that the twentieth century may be only an unpleasant 
dream.


It was not, however, for this reason that Mrs Rachel Goodman bought a ticket 
on the Liverpool cargo-liner Hubert, which set off nearly four months ago on a 
leisurely 15,000-mile trip to the Caribbean and the Amazon. She was in search 
of tropical birds to add to her collection of 300, which has spread from 
semi-detached house to garden aviary in Cranleigh Drive, Brooklands, near 
Manchester.

Mr and Mrs Goodman and their 24-year-old son jointly manage a small chain of 
bakers’ and confectioners’ shops, and each of them is intensely interested in a 
hobby which bores the others - Mr Goodman is a messer-about-in-boats and their 
son John is a motor racing enthusiast - so the family allocate the annual quota 
of work to be done so as to enable each to spend part of each year in pursuit 
of his favourite hobby.

Mrs Goodman, who is 46, took three months off this year and, armed with a 
series of introductions to fellow-enthusiasts, set off on her expedition. At 
Manaus the captain of the Hubert, the chief engineer, and Mrs Goodman went 
ashore to dine with a millionaire who provided an “astonishing” meal at a 
supremely luxurious hotel in the middle of the jungle.

At Santarem, another port of call on the Amazon, Mrs Goodman’s voyage made its 
only contact with the fashions of this century - there was an election in 
progress, and from amplifiers hidden high in the palm trees politicians 
competed with a musical programme for the votes of the population. But even 
here there was the sort of old-fashioned welcome which the holiday brochures 
claim awaits all visitors everywhere. Mrs Goodman was presented with armfuls of 
native fruits: mangoes, avocados, and guavas; mainly, she thinks, because her 
hair is blonde, a thing not seen in those parts before.

Hit-and-miss affair
But these pleasant experiences, repeated at each stopping place, were only 
preludes and entirely incidental to the real business of the expedition, which 
was to collect new specimens. Though she has been a collector for only four 
years - her interest grew after someone had given her a pair of budgerigars as 
a present - Mrs Goodman was on the look-out for rare and beautiful tropical 
birds. She had her import licences, and took her own crates; when there were 
not enough of these the ship’s carpenter knocked up a few more.

The actual trapping of wild creatures in the Amazon is still to some extent a 
hit-and-miss affair. Mrs Goodman made her major foray into the jungle when her 
8,000-ton ship stopped at the small town of Cocal - “very jungly, with houses 
on stilts and the main road simply planks on trestles over the water” - to load 
limber. Here the Hubert’s call is “the event of the year.”

Terrified into nets
The native hunters go out from this place and lay nets in the undergrowth in a 
circle around a point where they intend to start a fire. When the nets are set 
up a large tree is fired, and terrifies almost every living thing - including 
birds - into the nets. Another, more peaceable, method of obtaining specimens 
is to buy them “fantastically cheaply” from the native boys who climb trees and 
take the young - parrots especially - from the nests. Then of course there was 
the little boy who gave her his favourite pet, a rare dwarf parrot, as a 
memento of her visit.

Back in Brooklands with her memories of the poor but contented communities a 
thousand miles up the biggest river in the world - she hopes to go there again 
next year - Mrs Goodman has transferred her new specimen to cages in heated 
sheds. Most of the colony thrive, as well they might, on spongecake soaked in 
honey; but some, like the red-headed sugar bird, jib at this diet, and for such 
fastidious birds a supply of grubs has to be bought.

For most people the ownership of a private tropical aviary obviously would be 
both impracticable and exorbitantly expensive. It absorbs all Mrs Goodman’s 
spare time and cash. She is president of cage bird societies in Cheadle and 
Wythenshawe and exhibits her birds from time to time, without going to any 
special lengths to groom them.

Apart from three dogs and “Woodbine Willie,” the small freshwater turtle, a 
visitor to the Goodman front room is confronted with a brilliantly coloured 
uncaged macaw pondering some immutable truth on the back of an armchair. A 
little farther off a blue-fronted Amazon parrot maintains a similarly severe 
and unmoving demeanour. In a cage in the corner a saddleback parrot may mumble 
to itself in its mother tongue, Portuguese (it is learning English now).
 