
Two of the highest-profile executives to step down after the banking crisis 
last year re-emerged in new jobs today, when Andy Hornby was confirmed as chief 
executive ofAlliance Boots <https://www.theguardian.com/business/allianceboots> 
and Bob Wigley appointed chairman of Yell.

The appointments begin what is likely to be the attempted rehabilitation of a 
generation of bosses held responsible for the decisions that took the banking 
industry to the brink of collapse.

The stakes are highest for Hornby, still only 42, and the chief executive of 
HBOS when it was pushed into a hurried sale to Lloyds at the peak of the crisis.
He was forced into a humbling public apology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/feb/10/executive-pay-bonuses-banking>
 for his role in the near demise of the bank and has been widely pilloried by 
investors and politicians. HBOS reported losses of £10bn last year and the 
taxpayer has been forced to invest billions of pounds.

He was first offered the top job at Boots in 2003, but was persuaded to stay at
HBOS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/hbos> by a large pay rise, a 
decision he doubtless came to regret as the financial crisis erupted last year 
and his reputation was shredded.

Wigley, 48, ran the European, Middle East and Africa business of Merrill Lynch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/merrill-lynch> at the time of its 
emergency rescue by Bank of America in the same fateful week in September that 
Lloyds took control of HBOS. In contrast to Hornby, Wigley has escaped direct 
criticism.

Wigley, who last year authored a paper for London mayor Boris Johnson to 
provide a blueprint for the City's future, stood down in January and control of 
the business outside the US was handed to a Bank of America executive. He said 
yesterday he felt he didn't "have any reputational damage to repair, but rather 
I want to build on what I achieved at Merrill Lynch".

Nick Isles, policy director at the Work Foundation 
<http://www.theworkfoundation.com/> thinktank and consultancy, said the 
comeback of Hornby, in particular, was a "worrying" sign that nothing had been 
learned from the upheavals of the past year.

"We have some of the biggest crashes in capitalism going on around our ears 
and the guys at the heart of it go on to bigger and better things," he said. 
"It shows a lack of insight among the decision makers at our large companies.

"It is still essentially a closed shop, a mates' club. There is this knee-jerk 
obeisance to the idea of experience. We have to root out this misconception 
that there is a massive differential between those at the top and the next tier 
down."

Another survivor is the former RBS board director Mark Fisher, who last week 
was promoted from running operations and IT at Lloyds to taking charge of the 
integration of HBOS once the director running the merger retires in September.

Not everyone who lost a job in the tumult of last year has walked into another 
highly paid role. The Financial Services Authority was reported to have blocked 
the former head of the investment banking arm of the Royal Bank of Scotland, 
Johnny Cameron, from taking a senior role at Greenhill, the independent 
investment bank, in April. Others are still struggling with damage to their 
reputations, includingSir Tim McKillop, the former RBS chairman who quit the BP 
board 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/apr/01/tom-mckillop-resigns-bp-rbs> 
in April instead of facing angry shareholders.

Roots at Boots
For Hornby, the Boots job is a return to his roots in retail. He carved out an 
enviable reputation at Asda, where he was a protege of Archie Norman, and was 
regarded as a breath of fresh air in the banking industry when he joined 
Halifax in 1999. He was educated at Oxford and Harvard, did a stint as a 
management consultant, and is also a director at Home Retail Group, which owns 
Argos and Homebase.
The chief executive role at Alliance Boots has been vacant since the departure 
of Richard Baker in 2007, shortly after the high street chemist was bought for 
£11bn in the largest private equity deal seen in Europe. Filling it allows 
Stefano Pessina, the Italian billionaire and executive chairman who led the 
takeover, to step back from day-to-day running of the business and focus on 
strategy. Pessina praised Hornby's "wealth of retail and marketing experience".

By taking a job at a privately owned company, Hornby will hope to begin 
repairing his reputation away from the glare and the short-term demands of the 
City. He had managed to defuse some of the outrage directed his way by turning 
down a £1m payoff from HBOS and instead taking £2,970 in statutory redundancy 
pay. He did, however, stay on briefly as a consultant on £60,000 a month.

Hornby was made chief executive at HBOS in 2006 when he was only 39. He 
arrives at Alliance Boots during the toughest of times for the high street, 
although the business is in reasonably good shape. The company reported sales 
of £20.5bn in the year to 31 March, up 16%, and trading profits almost 12% 
higher at £953m. The retailer did not disclose how much Hornby would be paid in 
his new job.

Descent to Yell
The scale of the challenge facing Wigley is significantly larger. Shares in 
Yell, which owns the Yellow Pages in the UK as well as directory businesses in 
the US, Spain and South America, are trading at about 37p, way below the peak 
of 643.5p in February 2007.
The business is saddled with £4.2bn of debt and needs to refinance £3bn of 
that by 2011. It is facing cyclical challenges from a desperately bad 
advertising market, but also structural changes as classified advertising moves 
online. It fell to a £1bn loss last year and is expecting revenue to drop 11% 
this quarter.

Wigley will be paid £250,000 a year for the non-executive role, almost 
£100,000 more than the man he is replacing, which he said "reflects the 
challenge that needs to be addressed".

Wigley said he felt he had nothing to prove. "I ran a very profitable business 
in Europe and left after Merrills was taken over because there were two people 
and only one job. There hasn't been a bad article written about me. I have 
moved to a different stage in my life now where I want to do a few different 
things where I can make a contribution."

He said there were two immediate issues at Yell: addressing the capital 
structure and the "misconception" that the business was not grasping the 
opportunity presented by the internet.

Wigley replaces Bob Scott, who lost his job as chairman because of his 
involvement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/may/20/goodwin-pension-scandal-yell> 
in the banking crisis. Scott had been the senior independent director at Royal 
Bank of Scotland and headed the remuneration committee when RBS chairman Sir 
Fred Goodwin's £700,000-a-year pension was rubber-stamped.

Scott has yet to announce his next move.
 