
The leader of so-called Islamic State (Isis), Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, has 
reportedly been seriously wounded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/21/isis-leader-abu-bakr-al-baghdadi-wounded-air-strike>
 and is no longer in control of the jihadi organisation following an air strike 
in western Iraq. The development, once confirmed, should be welcomed. But the 
international community’s efforts to defeat Isis still have some way to go.

Eliminating Baghdadi will, above all, undermine Isis’s aura of invincibility, 
something that has allowed it to recruit local and international jihadis, 
helping it bring down borders at will and seize control of large swaths of 
territory across easternSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> and 
western Iraq.

Win or lose Tikrit, Isis can only be defeated in Iraq by the Sunni
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/08/tikrit-isis-can-only-defeated-in-iraq-by-the-sunni>
In addition, the wounding of Baghdadi comes at a time when the momentum is 
turning against the group. Since launching its offensive in Iraq last year, 
Isis has not made any significant territorial gains. Baghdad and southernIraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> is secured, as is the Kurdistan 
region. Two weeks ago Iraqi forces liberated Tikrit and they are expected to 
retake additional towns and cities from Isis in due course.

In other words, the group’s battlefield prowess and discipline is being 
matched by local indigenous forces backed by the US, Iran and the broader 
international community. Isis’s efforts to mobilise local populations, its 
resources and its general capacity to repair and rebuild are taking a hit. In 
Iraq it is largely on the defensive, while in Syria Isis is facing increasing 
local resistance.

That said, the military campaign is only part of the solution, not least 
because Isis functions on the basis of a strong leadership hierarchy that, 
potentially, could render Baghdadi redundant. It also remains entrenched within 
local populations. There is some resistance but support for those actors taking 
a stand against the group has so far been insufficient.

The rise of Isis can be attributed to the lack of institutions, weak or failed 
states and a volatile and polarised region as much as to its own capability and 
ambition. Isis is a product of civil war in Syria and instability in Iraq. It 
is, essentially, a rebranded version of Iraq’s Sunni insurgency that was 
comprised of a range of disparate actors including al-Qaida in Iraq, remnants 
of the Ba’ath regime and local as well as international jihadis.

While this means Isis can be contained and forced to disintegrate in the way 
the insurgency was after 2007, as a result of the US troop surge and the 
co-opting of Sunni Arab tribes, it also means that long-term measures will be 
needed to defeat and prevent it from re-emerging.

Isis is a product of civil war in Syria and instability in Iraq

This will require good governance, institution-building and remedying the 
sectarian polarisation that has provided Isis with an environment conducive to 
its brand of radical Islam. In Iraq, for example, Isis thrives on 
dissatisfaction within the Sunni Arab community, which resents the post-2003 
political order and the empowerment of the country’s majority Shia.

Stabilising Iraq and containing Isis there might be a realistic prospect. But 
in Syria, where the civil war shows no sign of abating and where Isis’s main 
apparatus is located, it is less so. Lastly, tensions between regional powers 
Iran and Saudi Arabia are on the increase, exacerbating problems. Baghdadi’s 
wounding could mark a turning point – but it is far from being enough to deal 
Isis a fatal blow.
 