
Sarah Waters’ story of a widow and her daughter who take in a pair of lodgers 
in 1920s London, The Paying Guests, is the novel on the Baileys shortlist to 
have best held readers’ attention, according to ebook retailer Kobo.


As judges chaired by Liberty director Shami Chakrabarti prepare to announce 
their choice of winner from the six-strong shortlist for the Baileys women’s 
prize for fiction, Kobo said that Waters’ contender was not only the most 
bought novel from its ebook store, it was also the most read.

The ebook retailer is able to track and analyse how far readers get in the 
books it sells, with The Paying Guests completed by 63% of those who 
downloaded. This is the highest percentage of the six titles on the Baileys 
shortlist to be fully read – almost two times more than Ali Smith’s 
award-winning How to Be Both, which was finished by only 34%.

Baileys prize shortlist - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gallery/2015/apr/14/baileys-prize-shortlist-in-pictures>
Waters, who has been shortlisted twice before for the award but has never won, 
is also odds-on favourite to win the prize, according to bookie William Hill, 
which puts her at 9/4 to win. Smith is second, at 3/1.

In contrast, the second most-completed novel on the shortlist, according to 
Kobo, is Rachel Cusk’s Outline, the story of a creative writing teacher 
visiting Athens, which held 60% of its readers to the end. Anne Tyler’s 
multi-generational tale A Spool of Blue Thread, completed by 58% of readers, 
placed third. Kamila Shamsie’s A God in Every Stone came fourth, Laline Paull’s 
The Bees fifth, and How to Be Both sixth, on this metric, said Kobo.

But the ebook retailer said that The Bees, the story of sanitation worker bee 
Flora 717, was nonetheless the “most gripping” novel from the shortlist, with 
readers engaged in the book for an average of 1hr 7mins per session. “With an 
average of 17 reading sessions, it’s evident this novel had readers hooked from 
the off,” said Kobo. The Paying Guests, by contrast, took “a lengthy 36 reading 
sessions to complete, with each session lasting for just under 53 minutes”.

Chakrabarti’s judging panel, which also includes Laura Bates, Grace Dent, 
Helen Dunmore and Cathy Newman, will unveil the winner on Wednesday evening, 
who will join former winners of the prize including Zadie Smith and Lionel 
Shriver.

After Waters and Smith, William Hill puts Paull in third position to take the 
prize, at 4/1. In joint fourth place to win, according to the bookie, are Tyler 
and Cusk, at 5/1, while Shamsie is at 6/1.
 