


Spain's Banco Santander <https://www.theguardian.com/business/santander>, 
which has 20 million customers in Britain, is offering to buy back at a 
discount bonds worth billions of euros, in a move that could land hefty profits 
and raise its capital ratios.

The Madrid-based bank, which controls Abbey, Alliance & Leicester and Bradford 
& Bingley in the UK, said it offered to buy bonds with a face value of €16.5bn 
(£14.3bn) at a discount of between 61% and 95.5%.

The bonds were all issued by vehicles that the bank set up to package consumer 
and home loans of Spanish clients. Bondholders have to decide whether to 
respond to the call and sell their bonds at a loss.

"You're offering bondholders some certainty but certainty has a price, and 
today more than ever," said a credit analyst.

Investors who have lost millions of pounds as credit and equity markets 
plunged over the past two years may be willing to accept cash now, instead of 
holding on to the bonds until they mature.

"You would sell below par if you are worried about recovery or need to raise 
cash and are otherwise unable to do so given illiquidity in the securities," 
said Vasant Mehta, a credit analyst at Payden & Rygel, an asset manager that 
specialises in bonds.

The bank, Europe's second-largest after HSBC, said the offer was aimed at 
improving "the efficiency of the group's capital structure and [strengthening] 
the balance of Grupo Santander."

Banks in the UK and continental Europe are under pressure to boost their 
profitability and strengthen their capital ratios after losing billions of 
pounds since the global credit crunch started two years ago. Other banks have 
bought back debt, although Santander's tender is the biggest to date, analysts 
said.

"The price is decent relative to secondary market prices and is voluntary – 
most people would be indifferent or happy," said a credit analyst at a major 
investment bank.

Private equity <https://www.theguardian.com/business/privateequity> companies 
have also bought back some of the debt issued by the companies they own, a move 
that sometimes angers investors as they bought the discounted debt betting that 
the private equity firm would withdraw its support for the business rather than 
put in more capital.
 