
The marching band of Alabama’s oldest private, historically black liberal arts 
college has accepted an invitation to perform at Donald Trump’s inaugural 
parade, organizers said.

Rebecca Ferguson says she will play Trump inauguration if she can sing Strange 
Fruit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/02/rebecca-ferguson-says-she-will-play-trump-inauguration-if-she-can-sing-strange-fruit>
Talladega College’s band will march at Trump’s inauguration on 20 January, 
although other historically black schools such as Howard University, which 
performed at Barack Obama’s first inaugural parade, have said they will not be 
marching at the event.

“We were a bit horrified to hear of the invitation,” said Shirley Ferrill of 
Fairfield,Alabama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alabama>, a member of 
Talladega’s Class of 1974.

“I don’t want my alma mater to give the appearance of supporting him,” Ferrill 
said of Trump on Monday. “Ignore, decline or whatever, but please don’t send 
our band out in our name to do that.”

Ferrill began an online petition 
<https://www.change.org/p/mr-harry-l-coaxum-chairman-board-of-trustees-get-talladega-college-to-withdraw-from-the-inaugural-parade-for-donald-trump>
 this weekend requesting the band withdraw from the parade. On Tuesday morning, 
it had more than 500 signatures. “For Alabama’s oldest historically black 
college to give him a stamp of approval, I say no, and that is why I put the 
petition out there,” she later told the Guardian.

Another petition 
<https://www.change.org/p/donald-trump-talladega-college-band-going-to-the-inaugural-parade>
 was started in support of the band playing in the inaugural parade,AL.com 
reported 
<http://www.al.com/news/index.ssf/2017/01/talladega_college_marching_tor.html>. 
“We believe that this parade is not about politics, it’s about seeing firsthand 
the process of a transition. Its not to support of no political party its about 
the experience that the students will obtain,” the petition reads in imperfect 
grammar. “We are not one-track thinkers and believe everyone is entitled to the 
own beliefs. However we are in support of The United States of America.” Some 
93 people have signed the petition so far.

The move has lit up Talladega College’s social media sites with a sharp debate 
about the band’s decision to participate in the parade. Some voiced strong 
opposition, while others support the band’s participation.


“After how black people were treated at Trump’s rallies, you’re going to go 
and shuck and jive down Pennsylvania Avenue? For what?” Seinya SamForay of 
Chicago told the Associated Press. “What they did is a slap in the face to 
other black universities.”

SamForay was among dozens of people commenting on the school’s social media 
sites.

The Presidential Inaugural Committee announced Friday that the Talladega 
College Marching Tornadoes was among 40 groups, including high school bands and 
military organizations, scheduled to perform in the parade. Some members of the 
Marist College band in upstate New York, also scheduled to perform at the 
inauguration, say they won’t participate, a school spokesman said on Monday.


Ron White of Atlanta, a 1997 graduate of another historically black college, 
Fort Valley State University in Georgia, said he questioned why band members 
from Talladega “should be playing all these patriotic tunes for someone who has 
degraded us.”

At the same time, though, White said he respects the office of the president 
and he hopes that Talladega’s band does well.

“What they should do in my opinion is play that national anthem the best way 
they’ve ever played it in their life, because you’re basically saluting the 
country,” White said in an interview.

The nation’s historically black colleges and universities instill in students 
the idea that “ignored behavior is condoned behavior”, said Reese Walker of 
Memphis, who marched in the band at Mississippi Valley State University. That’s 
one reason he doesn’t think Talladega College should participate.


The Guardian called and emailed the college’s public affairs office, the 
office of the president and reached out to the school band via Facebook

A Facebook page for “The Great Talladega College Tornado Marching Band” wrote 
on 22 December <https://www.facebook.com/TheGreatTornado/posts/633988093471473> 
that the invitation was a “monumentus [sic] achievement for not only just the 
College and the band program but, for the entire state of Alabama! Keep us in 
your hearts and prayers as we vow to make you all proud!!” The post has a mix 
of positive and negative comments.

The college was founded in 1867, by the descendants of the slaves who helped 
to build its first building, according to historical documents on the college’s 
website.

The decision to march in Trump’s inaugural parade has also sparked controversy 
at Marist College in Poughkeepsie, New York. The band will be marching, but 
some of its members will be staying home, school spokesman Greg Cannon said 
Monday.


“They don’t want to have anything to do with the inauguration or President 
Trump and we respect that, and that’s their right,” Cannon said.

“We’re not looking to put anybody in a spot that conflicts with their personal 
beliefs,” he added.

About six to eight Marist band members among more than 100 have said they 
won’t perform, Cannon said. He said there won’t be any repercussions for those 
students, and they will still have a place in the band when it returns from 
Washington DC.

On Monday British singer Rebecca Ferguson said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/02/rebecca-ferguson-says-she-will-play-trump-inauguration-if-she-can-sing-strange-fruit>
 she would accept an invitation to perform at Trump’s inauguration on condition 
she be allowed to sing the anti-lynching anthem Strange Fruit.

The Associated Press contributed to this report
 