
The full extent of the Bank of England’s emergency action to prevent the 
collapse of the banking system is revealed on Wednesday as it releases 
previously secret documents detailing its frantic day to day efforts to prop up 
high street banks during the financial crisis.

Threadneedle Street adopted code names for the high street banks on its rescue 
list and discloses how close Alliance & Leicester came to needing the financial 
support from the state that was later handed out toHBOS and Royal Bank of 
Scotland in 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/oct/13/marketturmoil-creditcrunch>.

Publishing documents after a four-year battle with the Treasury select 
committee, theBank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> also reveals how 
ill-prepared it was for the worst financial collapse in modern history, with 
senior officials changing their minds about the effectiveness of the regulatory 
system in place as the crisis unfolded.

The minutes of meetings of the Bank’s court – akin to a board of directors – 
cover the period from the start of the financial crisis, whenqueues formed 
outside Northern Rock branches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2007/sep/14/money2> in September 2007, to 
the middle of 2009, by which time RBS had been bailed out and HBOS rescued by 
Lloyds TSB.

They show that:

• The court was kept in the dark about the scale of the problems at Northern 
Rock <https://www.theguardian.com/business/northern-rock> until the central 
bank was forced into mounting an emergency funding line.

• The Bank congratulated itself on how well the tripartite system of 
regulation it shared with the Treasury and the Financial Services Authority 
worked evenafter the near collapse of Northern Rock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2007/sep/13/northernrock>.

• An emergency committee of the court called Transco – set up after the 
Northern Rock crisis – met seven times in the fortnight leading to the bailout 
of the banking system in October 2008 and provided tens of billions of support 
to stop banks collapsing.

• The Bank fully supported the increase in national debt sanctioned by the 
then Labour government to rescue the banks and considered the action to be no 
threat to the solvency of the UK.

With the UK’s persistent budget deficit already a key battle ground for the 
May 2015 election, the minutes provide support for Labour’s argument that the 
deterioration in the public finances was justified by the need to rescue the 
banks. The minutes of a meeting held in February 2009 said: “It was suggested 
that much of the public commentary about the credit worthiness of the UK 
government was ill-informed. There was no doubt that the fiscal deficit would 
rise sharply … Although such a large increase would not be desirable in the 
long run, it was sensible to do that in the short term.”

The minutes are released under the guidance of the governor of the Bank of 
England, Mark Carney,who replaced Mervyn King, now Lord King, in July 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/27/mark-carney-first-year-bank-of-england-governor-verdict>
. Carney said: “The financial crisis was a turning point in the bank’s history. 
These minutes provide further insight into the Bank’s actions during the 
exceptional period – the policies implemented to mitigate the crisis, the 
lessons that were learnt and how the Bank changed as a result.”

The Bank – whose powers have now been bolstered to take over regulation of the 
banking system – defended itself by saying that at the time it had no powers to 
tackle macro-prudential risk and was not responsible for banking supervision 
and that there was not resolution authority. The coalition tore up the 
tripartite system after taking power in 2010 and broke up the FSA.

“The roles, in a crisis, of the Bank, the Treasury and the FSA were 
ill-defined,” the Bank said. “These issues were rapidly identified during the 
period covered by the minutes.” It said the situation had been rectified by the 
changes brought in by the coalition.

But Andrew Tyrie, the chairman of the Treasury select committee, said the 
minutes showed how the Bank’s executive team had reversed its position towards 
the tripartite system. “At the start of the Northern Rock crisis the court was 
told by the Bank executive (and by the then chairman of the FSA) how well it 
was working. Soon, though, it was told that tensions were evident. But before 
long the governor was telling the court that the tripartite arrangements were 
‘not sufficiently workable or relevant to managing a crisis’.”

The banks in trouble were given code names. Alliance & Leicester, eventually 
taken over by the UK arm of Spanish bank Santander, was known as Tiger; 
Bradford & Bingley, part nationalised in September 2008, was Badger. RBS was 
dubbed Phoenix while Lloyds TSB was Lark to HBOS’s Fox. Minutes from November 
2007 show a £3bn funding facility was discussed for Alliance & Leicester.

“It was reported that during the last three days discussions had been taking 
place with a potential UK banking suitor. In those circumstances it was 
suggested that there was a possibility that the Bank’s swap facility might not 
be required,” the minutes said.

In October 2008, the minutes of the emergency Transco sub board discussing 
handing £22bn of loans toHBOS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/hbos>, 
said: “In order for the government to make progress on a wider solution to the 
financial crisis, occupied with the problems of Fox on a daily basis. The Bank 
had informed HM Treasury who were content with the proposed actions.”

The minutes, Tyrie said, showed “the Bank appears to have been a very 
hierarchical organisation, with clear signs of ‘groupthink’ among its 
leadership”.

“The executive rarely acknowledged possible weaknesses in its views or, other 
than grudgingly, admitted that it might have been unprepared for the crisis,” 
said Tyrie. “The court does not seem to have challenged the executive strongly. 
The non-executives acted on occasion more as cheerleaders for the executive’s 
views, and accepted its policy priorities".

“Taken as a whole, these minutes make the clearest possible case for radical 
reform of the Bank’s governance and the need to address the manifest 
inadequacies of the archaic approach upon which the Bank were relying during 
the crisis,” said Tyrie.
 