
Leading Republicans have demanded that Barack Obama scrap plans to try the 
organisers of the 9/11 attacks in civilian courtsafter a New York jury 
acquitted an alleged terrorist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/nov/18/guantanamo-detainee-ahmed-khalfan-ghailani>
 of more than 200 murder charges over al-Qaida's bombing of US embassies in 
east Africa.

Ahmed Khalfan Ghailani's conviction on the sole charge of conspiracy to 
destroy government property in the 1998 bombings has reignited the bitter 
debate about Obama's plan to move the alleged 9/11 mastermind,Khalid Sheikh 
Mohammed <https://www.theguardian.com/world/khalid-sheikh-mohammed>, and other 
Guantánamo detainees to the US and try them in civilian courts.

Ghailani was acquitted on 284 other charges, mostly murder and conspiracy, 
over the deaths of 213 people, including 12 Americans, in the attacks on the 
embassies in Nairobi and Dar es Salaam. He faces imprisonment for 20 years to 
life.

Mitch McConnell, Republican Senate leader, said the verdict was "all the proof 
we need that the administration's approach to prosecuting terrorists has been 
deeply misguided and indeed potentially harmful as a matter of national 
security".

"Most Americans wondered why we would even take the chance. And now they're 
wondering when the administration will admit it was wrong and assure us just as 
confidently that terrorists will be tried from now on in the military 
commission system that was established for this very purpose at the secure 
facility atGuantánamo Bay <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/guantanamo-bay>, 
or detained indefinitely, if they cannot be tried without jeopardising national 
security."

Obama has argued that the military commissions were damaging to the US because 
much of the world regarded them as unjust. The military tribunals were tainted 
by the mistreatment and torture of prisoners.

The justice department says federal civilian courts have convicted more than 
400 people on terrorism-related charges since 9/11. Military commissions have 
secured convictions for just five.

Peter King, who is expected to become head of the homeland security committee 
in the new Congress in January, said he would use that position to hold 
hearings into what he has called the administration's "insane" handling of 
terrorism trials. "This is a tragic wake-up call to theObama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> to immediately 
abandon its ill-advised plan to try Guantánamo terrorists [in civilian 
courts]," he said. "We must treat them as wartime enemies and try them in 
military commissions at Guantánamo."

King blamed Ghailani's acquittal on all but one count on rules of evidence in 
civilian courts which forced the judge, Lewis Kaplan, to exclude a witness who 
the US authorities learned about from information obtained during CIA 
interrogation. Ghailani's lawyers claim he was tortured.

The witness, Hussein Abebe, was to have testified that he sold Ghailani the 
explosives used to attack the US embassy in Dar es Salaam. The judge ruled the 
information had been improperly obtained.

"Once the judge excluded the testimony of a witness who would have connected 
Ghailani to these horrible acts, which would have brought about a conviction, 
it became very, very difficult to convict him. This is the real danger, the 
real insanity if you will, of bringing these cases in a civilian court," said 
King. "If this had been in a military commission, that evidence would have been 
allowed and I'm confident that Ghailani would have been convicted."

However, Kaplan in his ruling on the witness said that the testimony would 
also have been excluded by a military judge because of restrictions on the use 
of evidence obtained through coercion.

But today, the nuances of legal procedure were largely drowned under a barrage 
of attacks on the president over the case. Keep America Safe, a rightwing group 
run by Liz Cheney, the former vice-president's daughter, and other hardline 
conservatives, called the decision to try Ghailani in a civilian court 
"irresponsible and reckless".

"The Obama administration recklessly insisted on a civilian trial for Ahmed 
Ghailani, and rolled the dice in a time of war," it said. "It's dangerous. It 
signals weakness in a time of war."

King said he doubts Mohammed will go on trial in New York in the near future. 
"I doubt if he's going to be tried in the next several years. I think the 
president has boxed himself in to a corner and I think you'll find Khalid 
Sheikh Mohammed kept in Guantánamo along with the other 9/11 defendants and 
he'll be held indefinitely and sometime after 2012, depending on what happens 
in that election, then the president will decide," he said. "If they have a 
trial in Guantánamo it'll look like too much of a reversal for the president. I 
think they're just going to put everything on ice and let him sit there for the 
next several years."

Prize captive proves a headache

The capture of Khalid Sheikh Mohammed should have been a prize victory in 
America "war on terror". Instead, the self-confessed mastermind of the 9/11 
attacks is proving to be a severe political embarrassment amid a bitter dispute 
over where and how he should be tried along with four of his accomplices.
Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> favours a 
civilian court because he says treating Mohammed as a common criminal and 
giving him the same protections afforded to Americans will weaken the al-Qaida 
operative's claim to be fighting a legitimate war against America.

But others fear that the rules of a civilian court – which will preclude the 
use of testimony or other evidence obtained through torture of while Mohammed 
was held in secret CIA prisons for years – will weaken the case against him and 
risk the embarrassment of his acquittal on at least some of the charges against 
him. Mohammed was waterboarded 183 times according to a justice department memo 
obtained by the New York Times.

Some New York politicians are also against having his trial in the city he 
attacked because of concerns about costs and security.
 