
Barclays <https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> Bank is the most 
complained-about financial services company in the UK, according to figures 
released today.

The bank's customers lodged 8,283 complaints with the Financial Ombudsman 
Service (FOS) from 1 January to 30 June, of which 5,226 were about banking and 
credit services and 2,085 about insurance cases.

More than two-thirds (71%) were upheld in the complainant's favour – 67% of 
the banking and credit complaints and 93% of the insurance complaints, most of 
which related to payment-protection insurance policies.

It is the first time the FOS has named and shamed individual financial 
businesses, including banks, insurance companies and investment firms. The data 
covers a total of 69,841 complaints handled by the FOS in the first half of the 
year. Of the 100,000 businesses under its remit, 142 accounted for 87% of all 
complaints.

Banks topped the table, with five groups each receiving more than 3,000 
complaints and together accounting for 38,286 cases. Lloyds TSB was the subject 
of 6,947 complaints, Bank of Scotland 5,804, Abbey 2,493, NatWest 2,379, MBNA 
2,298, HSBC 2,177,Royal Bank of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup> 1,812, Alliance 
& Leicester 1,786 and Nationwide Building Society 1,149.

The FOS was deluged with complaints about unauthorised overdraft charges in 
2007 and 2008, but a spokesman said the latest complaints focused on other 
aspects of banking services and charges.

Consumers who have a complaint must first approach the company providing the 
service or product, and then go to the FOS if they do not get a satisfactory 
response. The ombudsman found in consumers' favour in an average of 59% cases.

The ombudsman service upheld 61% of banking-related complaints, 41% of 
mortgage complaints, 70% of general insurance complaints and 42% of 
investment-related complaints.

Sir Christopher Kelly, chairman of the FOS, said he hoped publication of the 
detailed information would "help" financial businesses to improve their 
complaints handling and reduce the number of unresolved disputes referred to 
the FOS.

"I will now be writing to the chairmen of the financial businesses that 
generate the largest proportion of our complaints workload, to ask them to 
consider very carefully both their own complaints performance – as reflected in 
the data we are publishing today – and the complaints performance of their 
competitors," he said.

Walter Merricks, who will be stepping down as chief ombudsman next month after 
10 years in the role, said: "We have already been providing comparative 
complaints data on a private basis to the larger financial businesses, but this 
has led to no improvement in the standard of complaints handling by the 
worse-performing businesses.

"I believe that putting this information into the open will now give those 
worse-performing businesses vital encouragement to improve."

The Association of British Insurers said the complaints categories were too 
general to be of any help to a consumer trying to choose a specific product.

It said: "To be of any use, published complaints information needs to relate 
to the products that customers buy. The effect of this categorisation is that a 
motor insurance customer looking at the FOS data will see a number of banks as 
the worst performing firms on 'General insurance & pure protection'.

"This is due primarily to complaints about the sale of payment protection 
insurance by banks. It will say nothing about a firm's performance as a motor 
insurer, a product that is sold by an entirely different part of the business 
and in an entirely different way."

The British Bankers Association said the vast majority of its members' 
customers had no problems with their accounts.

"Millions of transactions for millions of customers go through the banking 
system every day and, while it is inevitable that occasionally things go wrong, 
banks are not complacent and are continually working to improve service and 
efficiency," it said.

"Whilst no one wants to receive complaints, banks will always try to solve 
speedily any problems their customers have; put in context, the proportion of 
reportable complaints is still very small at 3.5 per thousand products held."

The FOS already publishes a range of complaints data 
<http://www.financial-ombudsman.org.uk/publications/complaints-data.html>, 
including the number of complaints about different financial products and the 
proportion of complaints upheld in relation to those products.
 