


1. Blenheim Palace, Oxfordshire <http://www.blenheimpalace.com>

Winston Churchill's family seat was begun by John Vanbrugh in 1705 and 
completed almost two decades later by Nicholas Hawksmoor. Much of the bill 
was footed by the state, in honour of the Duke of Marlborough's wartime 
victories. Vanbrugh was sacked mid-build, but Blenheim's combination of 
severity and magnificence is a monument to a great architect as well as a great 
soldier. "Capability" Brown landscaped the grounds.



2. St Paul's Cathedral, London <http://www.stpauls.co.uk>

"Reader, if you seek his memorial, look around you." That's the English 
translation of the Latin epitaph at Christopher Wren's final resting place. 
"Around you" is London's great Anglican cathedral, built between 1677 and 1697 
after fire destroyed the old St Paul's. The dome is one of the world's largest, 
and St Paul's was the capital's tallest building until the 1960s. Don't miss 
the crypt with Wren's tomb and those of the Duke of Wellington and Admiral Lord 
Nelson, or the Whispering Gallery far above it.

020-7246 8357



3. Castle Howard, North Yorkshire <http://www.castlehoward.co.uk>

The 145-room Castle Howard was John Vanbrugh's first commission as an 
architect, exuberantly decorated with coronets, cherubs, urns, a dome and a 
temple of the Four Winds. Begun in 1699 under the third Earl of Carlisle, it 
was not completed until 1811, by which time the Carlisles were throwing much of 
Vanbrugh's masterplans out of the window. The structure was still impressive 
enough to feature in the TV series Brideshead Revisited, as the lost home 
of the aristocratic Marchmains.

01653 648333



4. Royal Naval College, Greenwich, London <http://www.oldroyalnavalcollege.org>

The centrepiece of "Maritime Greenwich", described by Unesco as the "finest 
and most dramatically sited architectural and landscape ensemble in the British 
Isles". Beginning in 1696, Wren and Hawksmoor worked for nothing on what was 
originally a hospital for sailors, succeeded by John Vanbrugh and others, until 
1752. Queen Mary had the plans modified and the buildings split up when she 
realised they would block her view of the Thames from Queen's House. For the 
best overview, head for the opposite bank, on the Isle of Dogs.

020-8269 4747



5. Chatsworth House, Derbyshire <http://www.chatsworth.org>

On the east bank of the river Derwent, the grand 126-room Chatsworth looks 
across to the hills that fringe the Wye valley, and is the work of baroque 
architects William Talman and Thomas Archer, as well as the later Jeffry 
Wyatville. The only surviving facade is Talman's eastern side, though a rich 
suite of baroque state rooms stretches across the south front. Archer's work 
can be seen in the Cascade House, a temple at the top of a water feature in the 
grounds.

01246 565300



6. 36-43 Bedford Row, London

Not all baroque buildings were churches or stately homes. These houses, now 
mostly occupied by lawyers, are the work of Nicholas Barbon, who pioneered 
terraced housing when he wasn't sitting in parliament or helping to invent 
buildings insurance. Between 1670 and 1700 he redeveloped swaths of 
fire-damaged London to the west of the City, ignoring legal restrictions 
whenever he could get away it. Bedford Row was completed in 1684, although much 
of the street was rebuilt in the Georgian era.

Not open to the public



7. Christ Church, Spitalfields, City of London <http://www.ccspitalfields.org>

One of the finest "commissioners' churches" built to serve London's new 
settlements in the early 1700s, Nicholas Hawksmoor's Christ Church combines a 
plain box of a nave with a broad tower topped by a monumental steeple. It was 
insensitively remodelled in the 1850s and almost demolished in the 1960s, but 
has been restored in recent decades, working from the original plans where 
possible.

020-7377 6793



8. Custom House, Kings Lynn 
<http://www.west-norfolk.gov.uk/default.aspx?page=21817>

Henry Bell, son of a local merchant, built this Dutch-style trading house in 
1685. A grand tour of Europe had helped to make him "an ingenious architect and 
wit", in the words of the scientist Robert Hooke. What Nikolaus Pevsner called 
"one of the most perfect buildings ever built" was recently restored and houses 
the tourist office and a display of maritime industry.

01553 763044




 <http://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/main/w-seaton-delaval-hall>

John Vanbrugh's last country house, and for many his finest work, Seaton 
Delaval was unfinished at the time of his death. The interior still bears the 
marks of a fire in 1822, supposedly caused by jackdaws nesting in the chimneys, 
but the exteriors remain a perfect example of English baroque. The grounds 
house a mausoleum for a Delaval who supposedly died after being kicked in a 
"vital organ" by a laundry maid.

0191-237 9100



10. St John's church, Smith Square, London <http://www.sjss.org.uk>

Legend has it that when Thomas Archer asked Queen Anne what the new church in 
London's Smith Square should look like, she kicked over her stool and snapped, 
"Like that!" Hence the four towers, completed in 1728, and the nickname "Queen 
Anne's Footstool". The building is now a concert hall. The architect Hugh 
Casson once said: "Just to come across it in that quiet square is an event."

020-7222 1061

Architects of the age: Nicholas Hawksmoor and John Vanbrugh

Both pupils of Christopher Wren, Hawksmoor (1661-1736) and Vanbrugh 
(1664-1726) were the hugely imaginative masters of the English baroque, a 
theatrical style adopted from Catholic Italy and France and transformed, and 
disciplined, in Protestant England. Hawksmoor and Vanbrugh (pictured) worked 
together on some of our finest monumental buildings, notably Blenheim Palace, 
Oxfordshire, and Castle Howard, Yorkshire.

Vanbrugh, born in Chester, led a dashing life. A dramatist – who wrote The 
Provok'd Wife while a prisoner in the Bastille, he was also a soldier, famous 
wit and man about town. His Seaton Delaval, recently saved for the nation, is a 
wonder. John Soane, one of England's most inventive architects, described "Van" 
as the "Shakespeare of architecture".

Hawskmoor, by contrast, was an altogether darker and more intense talent. Born 
in humble circumstances in Nottinghamshire, Hawksmoor's work with Wren at St 
Paul's Cathedral and the Royal Naval College, Greenwich, is outstanding. But 
his solo work – Easton Neston House (1682-1702), five London churches, notably 
Christ Church, Spitalfields (1714-29) and the circular Mausoleum at Castle 
Howard (1729-42), are laws to themselves; the work of true genius.
 