
A trilogy of documentaries on contemporary Britain by award-winning film-maker 
Adam Curtis <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/adam-curtis> and new 
comedy from Frankie Boyle will be among the expanded range of on-demand-only 
content to feature on the souped-up BBC iPlayer.

The enhanced iPlayer, unveiled by BBC director general Tony Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/tony-hall> on Tuesday as the new "front 
door" to the corporation's output, will have a greater range of content 
commissioned for the on-demand service rather than TV, including original drama 
and comedy short films.

Original Comedy Shorts for the iPlayer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/iplayer> will include Frankie Boyle and Bob 
Mortimer's Cookery Show, a satire on interactive TV.

The iPlayer short will be controversial comedian Boyle's first work aired by 
theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> since he left BBC2 panel show 
Mock the Week in 2009.

Danny Cohen, the BBC director of television, said the corporation would "make 
sure everything he [Boyle] does on the BBC has our standards and values".

Others who will feature in the iPlayer comedy short films, to be available 
from May, include Meera Syal, Matt Berry and Stewart Lee.

Curtis will make three iPlayer-only films exploring themes of hypocrisy, 
deception and corruption in contemporary Britain – Out There, At the Mountains 
of Madness and Dream Baby Dream – available from July.

Hall said of the new iPlayer: "It's a staging post. This journey will never 
end. It's just the start.

"iPlayer is a metaphor for the BBC it allows us to inform, educate and 
entertain but in new interesting, creative ways we can only imagine at the 
moment. We're beginning to bring life to the vision we've all got of the 
iPlayer being the front door for many more people to the BBC.

"We want you to be able to find content you might not have known you might 
like or at all, in a much more personal and effortless way."

Last autumn, in his first major speech since becoming director general,  Hall 
said he wanted more personalisation on iPlayer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/oct/08/tony-hall-bbc-digital>, 
including "personalised collections of content".

The new iPlayer goes some way towards doing that, with new features such as an 
improved "recommendation engine" so that instead of being asked if they want to 
watch the show again as happens currently, viewers will be offered the next 
episode of a series or given suggestions for other shows.

But more is due to come, with Dan Taylor, the head of BBC iPlayer, saying 
there are "more exciting plans" on the horizon "in the personalisation space".

Hall has talked about the upgraded iPlayer offering more personalisation and 
being a key plank of his "My BBC" strategy, treating audiences "like owners, 
not just licence fee payers".

On Tuesday, Hall said: "You'll be able to find so many more programmes you 
might like – and I hope everyone enjoys the new design. It's just a first step 
to reinventing BBC iPlayer, the best online television service in the world."

The BBC is also introducing "collections" of curated programming on iPlayer 
linked to particular national, sporting or cultural events and anniversaries or 
BBC TV and radio seasons.

Among the first is a BBC4: Great War Interviews Collection, featuring 13 
previously unseen interviews with first world war veterans and civilians, 
curated by Sir Max Hastings and available on iPlayer from Tuesday.

Next month will bring a guided tour of Matisse: The Cut-Outs Exhibition at 
Tate Modern by Goldie; while in May there will be a Chelsea Flower Show 
collection in collaboration with the Royal Horticultural Society, offering a 
tour of the show gardens.

Other exclusive iPlayer content will include My God, It's Full of Fans, a film 
commissioned to accompany BBC2's history of science fiction documentary series 
My God, It's Full of Stars; and the new series premiere of People Just Do 
Nothing, a comedy commissioned after being piloted on the service via the BBC3 
Comedy Feeds initiative.

BBC iPlayer will also have revamped responsive design, updated mobile and 
tablet apps and new features including more advanced recommendations, smarter 
search and image-led navigation.

Other new iPlayer features promised by the BBC include improved access to 
channels and categories; "the best ever playback experience"; a new-look 
favourites section that updates with the latest episodes of a show available; 
and an opt-in preview on computer, tablet and mobile browsers and a range of 
connected TVs.

Launched on Christmas Day 2007, iPlayer's last major upgrade was in 2011.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 