
The BBC's iPlayer has been a huge success, and nothing illustrates that better 
than the amount of data it ships. iPlayer boss Anthony Rose has revealed some 
of the numbers inan interview with CNet UK's Crave 
<http://crave.cnet.co.uk/software/0,39029471,49302215-1,00.htm>, and he says:

"I think that at the moment, just for streaming, iPlayer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/iplayer> uses about 60Gbps of bandwidth 
(that's about 7.5GB downloaded every second) in an evening peak. I think about 
15Gbps for downloads, and about 1.5Gbps for iPhone. So overall on a particular 
peak day we may hit 100Gbps (about 12.5 gigabytes per second) although 
typically it'll be somewhat less than that. That turns out to be up to 7 
petabytes of data transfer a month."

Rose says the BBC no longer uses peer-to-peer distribution, which got a 
negative reaction from some people (eg me). He wants us all to be "happy, 
unequivocally, using iPlayer".
Rose says the BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> uses about 60 
servers to encode tapes in numerous different formats:

"We create about 14 different formats, ranging from about 160Kbps for some 
mobile, over-the-air streaming, through to 1,500Kbps for our highest iPlayer SD 
quality stream, in H.264 played out as Flash. We also create 3Mbps [for 
standard definition] on Virgin Media, and now for our HD content we create 
3.2Mbps HD. So it's about 14 or 15 flavours.
"We typically make a 3GP format, which is really H.264. We make VP6, H.264, 
MPEG-2 and we make Windows Media Video. And then we deliver those in various 
ways."

The BBC provides the RealPlayer format for mobile devices, while the WMV is a 
"DRM format, typically where you can download or side-load to portable media 
players or Windows Media Center or Windows Media Extender devices."

Rose is also asked about the choice of Adobe Air for the iPlayer client 
software platform. He says:

"We had to be on Mac, PC and Linux, so we spent a lot of time analysing 
solutions that we could use, including what I call 'speed dating' companies 
that offer solutions in this area. But ultimately we chose Adobe Air for two 
key reasons: number one, it had a system that allowed our seven-day or 30-day 
playback to be enabled and controlled on PC, Mac and Linux. That's a 
requirement of a DRM, not that we want to use DRM, but we're forced to because 
we make content available for download. It's part of our rights framework."

Rose also notes that iPlayer usage peaks a bit later than TV usage, "but 
interestingly, iPlayer on the iPhone peaks at about midnight. So people are 
clearly going to bed with their iPhone and watching in bed."

 