
Staff at the BBC’s Asian Network are to hold a one-day strike over proposed 
staff cuts, theNational Union of Journalists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/nationalunionofjournalists> (NUJ) has 
announced.

The industrial action is due to take place on Wednesday 19 August and follows 
a silent protest on Wednesday and Thursday this week.

The broadcaster plans to cut one of its two Birmingham-based editor roles and 
move the popular Bobby Friction programme to London. That follows swingeing 
cuts to staff and budgets at theAsian Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/asian-network>, staff said.

The union also accused BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> management 
of threatening staff over plans to hold the silent protest this week.

“The strike is to demonstrate to the BBC how upset and angry we are at the 
proposals. The BBC keeps picking on the Asian Network. After axing half the 
staff in 2012 and halving its budget, we were promised the network would not be 
asked to make any more cuts,” said a member of staff on the Asian Network.

“The loss of an editor’s post will increase workload and exacerbate the 
problems of communication between editors and staff which already exist.”

Keith Murray, NUJ BBC rep, said: “After sacking half its staff three years 
ago, we were told no more savings would be needed from the network. Yet they’ve 
come back for more.

“It is a beacon of diversity in an organisation which remains predominantly 
white and middle class. This is true of the management structure at the Asian 
Network. Staff are stretched to the limit and they’ve had enough. When 
management threatened staff over plans for a silent protest, members felt 
forced into taking this action.”

The union said that, apart from The Archers, the Asian Network was the last 
remaining network radio output based in Birmingham, “leaving the Mailbox, the 
much-vaunted BBC facility, costing £2.14m a year, half-empty”.

It added that television programmes such as Coast, Countryfile, the Hairy 
Bikers, and the Radio 4 shows You and Yours, Farming Today, and Costing the 
Earth have all been moved from the Mailbox building in recent years.

A BBC spokesperson said: “One Asian Network programme is moving to London 
following a staff restructure, prompted by our ongoing efficiency savings. The 
station still broadcasts much of its output from Birmingham. We have conducted 
a thorough consultation process with the union over the one post that is 
closing so it is disappointing they have chosen to take this action.”
 