
The BBC has drawn up new guidelines designed to stop the outside interests of 
senior managers from embarrassing the corporation in the wake of the row over 
Alan Yentob’s chairmanship ofKids Company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/kids-company>.

The former BBC creative director resigned from his role in December, saying 
media coverage of his role as chair of Kids Company had become a “serious 
distraction”. The BBC Trust decided not to pursue an investigation into Yentob, 
who had been accused of interfering inBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> reporting of the collapse of Kids 
Company, but asked the corporation to examine its guidelines.

The new rules, announced on Tuesday, include a requirement to consider 
“potential for reputational embarrassment or damage” as well as advice to take 
special care when charities are involved.

Conflict of interest assessments for senior managers will also be reviewed 
annually, and a code of practice will be drawn up for all members of the BBC’s 
executive board.

In an introduction to the new guidelines, BBC trustee and chair of the trust’s 
editorial standards committee Richard Ayre said: “The more senior the 
individual and the more prominent the outside body, the greater the need for 
robust systems for managing conflicts of interest, especially if those bodies 
become the subject of public controversy and a focus of interest for BBC 
programmes.”

Ayre added that explicit rules for the most senior BBC executives would become 
even more important if the government adoptsthe Clementi report’s 
recommendation to introduce a unitary executive board with a majority of 
non-executive members 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/01/bbc-regulation-ofcom-trust-david-clementi>
.

“In asking the BBC to review these systems, we were also aware that the 
government is considering whether the future BBC should be run by a board with 
a majority of non-executive members, many of them likely to have a range of 
outside interests,” he said. “So a proper, transparent mechanism for handling 
potential conflicts needs to be in place.”

The BBC described the changes as “small” and “simple” measures that “provide 
clarity and further strengthen our policies”.

A BBC spokesperson added: “To ensure complete clarity for board members and 
reinforce the BBC’s commitment to transparency, we will – like the NHS, BBC 
Trust and other public bodies – bring all the responsibilities of executive 
board or equivalent members, including the declaration of personal interests, 
together in one place ready for the likely changes in governance arrangements 
under a new charter.”
 