
The BBC has lost its eighth senior executive in as many months, The Wrong Mans 
executive producer Mark Freeland, with a parting shot at the way theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> is being reorganised.


Freeland, who is controller of fiction and entertainment at the BBC’s in-house 
production department, announced his departure a day before it will relaunch as 
BBC Studios on Friday.

Freeland said “strategic changes” being put in place by new BBC Studios 
director Mark Linsey would “not give me the creative platform I need to be at 
my very best and add maximum value to the [BBC] Studios project.

“The highest standards of creativity and value amount to a position of 
personal integrity to me. Those of you who know me, will appreciate that 
creativity - being close to production and talent - is absolutely central to 
the way I operate.”

His departure means there will be three empty seats at the BBC Studios 
eight-strong top table when it launches on Friday, part of BBC director general 
Tony Hall’s bid to introduce more competition at the corporation.

Freeland once compared the BBC’s 2,000-strong in-house production team as a 
“Ferrari in a farmyard” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jan/18/bbc-in-house-production-netflix-independents>
 but will not be at the wheel of the BBC’s programme-making revolution.


BBC Studios, headed by the BBC’s former entertainment chief Linsey following 
the unexpected departure of its first boss Peter Salmon, now has three 
vacancies - Freeland’s head of scripted comedy and drama role, the head of 
natural history job vacated by Wendy Darke, and head of digital.

He becomes the eighth senior executive to leave the BBC in as many months, 
along with director of television Danny Cohen, controller of seasons and 
special projects Janice Hadlow, creative directorAlan Yentob 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alan-yentob>, BBC2 controller Kim 
Shillinglaw.

Salmon’s departure was announced by the BBC in March, with Darke’s exit, along 
with drama chief Polly Hill, who is leaving to join ITV, confirmed earlier this 
month.

Top-level change at BBC and ITV means uncertain future for UK television
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/10/itv-bbc-polly-hill-kevin-lygo-drama>
Freeland, the BBC’s former head of comedy where he made programmes such as 
James Corden’s The Wrong Mans, was appointed controller of fiction and 
entertainment at the BBC’s in-house production team in 2014. It ends his second 
stint at the corporation.


“For someone who never thought they’d bluff their way into the BBC, the two 
visits I’ve had here, leading first in commissioning and then production, have 
been a fantastic privilege and a real blast,” said Freeland in a statement.

“I have worked across comedy, drama and entertainment with amazing people.”

BBC Studios will launch in its first phase on Friday, becoming separate from 
the BBC’s television arm responsible for broadcasting, and responsible for its 
own budget and its own accountability.

Hall’s vision of a BBC Studios able to make programmes for all-comers, ITV, 
Channel 4 and Sky included, will not come into fruition until next year and 
only if it is given the go-ahead by the government in its review of the BBC’s 
royal charter.

It also needs to pass various regulatory hurdles, including the BBC Trust.

In return, independent producers, prevented by BBC quotas from making more 
than 50% of its TV output, will be free to pitch for almost the entire schedule 
for the first time.

Mark Freeland’s email to BBC staff - in full 

Dear All,

Tomorrow BBC Studios is set to launch. As it reaches for the stars, I am 
writing to tell you that I will not be going on that journey with you.

In the last few weeks, since Director of BBC Studios, Mark Linsey started in 
his role, we have been discussing together the way he is taking Studios 
forward. As one would expect, he is making strategic changes in various areas & 
I know he will share those with you very soon.

I have decided that some of the proposed changes he is making will not give me 
the creative platform I need to be at my very best & add maximum value to the 
Studios project. The highest standards of creativity & value amount to a 
position of personal integrity to me. Those of you who know me, will appreciate 
that creativity - being close to production & talent - is absolutely central to 
the way I operate. Except the morning after 5-a-side football, it makes me leap 
out of bed in the morning & gets my heart beating faster.

Though I will not be taking up my leadership role in BBC Studios, I’ll be 
around for a little while longer before leaving the BBC, so I won’t rattle on 
about myself any more. But suffice to say, for someone who never thought they’d 
bluff their way into the BBC, the two visits I’ve had here, leading first in 
Commissioning & then Production, have been a fantastic privilege & a real 
blast. I have worked across Comedy, Drama & Entertainment with amazing people.

At this point, though, I’m sure you’ll understand if I especially thank my 
friends in Comedy, who became my second family - often better behaved than my 
real one. I can’t say more rewarding - that would get me into real trouble. 
Working with you has been a great comic relief & a proper honour.

I will be announcing my next move soon. But part of that, will be watching 
Studios from the outside as it develops itself into its own entity.

Good luck, an enormous thank you & I’ll see you all soon,

Mark
 