
The threat of the BBC's Christmas schedule being hit by strike action over 
compulsory redundancies has grown after it emerged that the corporation has 
been hiring outside staff rather than redeploying those facing job losses.

With just a week to go until a ballot on industrial action closes, the 
National Union of Journalists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/nationalunionofjournalists> has urged its 
members to vote yes as "a swathe" of its members are "facing compulsory 
redundancy" across the BBC Asian Network, BBC News, the World Service and BBC 
Scotland over the next year.

The exact number of compulsory cuts is still unspecified, but the most 
imminent cases are five NUJ members who work at digital radio station theAsian 
Network <https://www.theguardian.com/media/asian-network> and are set to lose 
their jobs on 31 December 2012.

The Asian Network is having its budget cut by around a fifth as part of the 
BBC's Delivering Quality First cost-saving programme and will lose around half 
of its staff.

The BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> signed up to an agreement 
offering those at risk of redundancy other posts within the corporation, but 
the NUJ claims some managers have not been implementing the deal.

Examples given by the NUJ include a case in Northampton, where a BBC English 
Regions video journalist did a job on attachment for two years "without a 
single adverse comment on their performance, but the post was boarded and given 
to a candidate from ITV Anglia".

In another instance, an online broadcast journalism job in Leicester – home of 
the BBC's Asian Network – was "given to a candidate from outside the BBC 
instead of to an 'at risk' NUJ member in the Asian Network who's on the same 
grade and whose desk is about five metres away", according to the union.

In a letter to NUJ members, the national broadcasting organiser, Sue Harris, 
said: "Despite signing up to a shiny new redeployment agreement (which looks 
great on paper), BBC management are still not implementing it.

"The NUJ has always maintained a principled stance against compulsory 
redundancy. Sadly, it seems that yet again we have to threaten strike action to 
make BBC management stick to their own commitments. So please vote yes [in the 
strike ballot]."

After the NUJ ballot closes on 7 December, union officials will meet to 
"consider the ballot result and determine the action to be taken".

A BBC spokeswoman said: "We are extremely disappointed that the NUJ have 
chosen to ballot their members about industrial action.

"We have implemented all the redeployment commitments we agreed with the joint 
unions in a timetable agreed with them. We are making considerable efforts to 
avoid compulsory redundancies. However, the BBC has to make significant cuts 
and we have always been clear that it will not always be possible to avoid them 
completely."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 