
BBC Trust chair Rona Fairhead <https://www.theguardian.com/media/rona-fairhead>
 has said it is still investigating the behaviour of Alan Yentob over his 
involvement with defunct charity Kids Company despite receiving reassurances 
from the most senior BBC managers that he had not compromised its editorial 
independence.


Fairhead said the trust’s editorial standards committee was in discussions 
with Tony Hall, director general of theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> over the matter.

The BBC Trust had already concluded a provisional report into Yentob, the 
BBC’s creative director, following accusations that he abused his position at 
the BBC in relation to his role as chairman of the now-closed south London 
children’s charity,Kids Company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/kids-company>.

Pressure has mounted on Yentob after he admitted that he had stood beside a 
Radio 4 producer while the charity’s founder, Camila Batmanghelidjih, was 
interviewed on the Today programme in July. “If it was intimidating, I regret 
it,” Yentob told MPs last week.

He also telephoned a senior staff member at Newsnight thought to be editor Ian 
Katz, to ask him to delay a report critical of financial management at Kids 
Company, and telephoned Radio 4 presenter Ed Stourton ahead of a report on The 
World at One.

Asked at the Society of Editors conference in London on Monday if it was 
acceptable behaviour for a BBC executive, Fairhead said the trust would look at 
whether BBC editorial policies were breached and if current guidelines were 
appropriate and needed changing.

“There is the issue that Alan was chair of Kids Company and therefore it’s 
appropriate that he can speak on its behalf but cannot ... act in a way which 
would undermine the editorial integrity of the BBC and that is the judgement 
that everybody is trying to make,” said Fairhead.

“We have had very direct and ongoing conversations with the executive team who 
are managing this, absolutely with Tony Hall, the director general, very clear 
and explicit conversations.”

Fairhead said the trust had been reassured by BBC management that the 
editorial independence of the BBC had not been compromised.

“We have been given that reassurance. We have had a provisional report but 
that will carry on, we will be looking [into it] further,” she said.

“I don’t want to stray into the management side because I think it’s for them 
to manage the situation but I think you do need to look at were the editorial 
processes breached, are the guidelines appropriate and are there any changes 
that need to be made and will be taken on board for the future.”

She added: “All I can say is if you look at the BBC’s coverage, nobody could 
say it wasn’t covered fully and deeply, at least as fully, as by others. From a 
trust’s point of view, that’s what matters.”


But Fairhead was criticised by some members of the Society of Editors 
audience, including former Sky News executive Simon Bucks who said it 
“undermines journalistic integrity”.


“I don’t understand why the BBC Trust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-trust> cannot simply say that it is 
unacceptable for a BBC executive to interfere in any matter which is outside 
their own remit. Surely you should be able to do that and you would expect the 
management of the BBC to say that,” said Bucks.

Fairhead said: “We have asked for assurance that the editorial integrity 
wasn’t compromised and we had that reassurance but we are still taking directly 
to the director general.”


Pressed by Radio 4 presenter Steve Hewlett on the issue, Fairhead said it was 
“an issue for management” and what the trust had to do is “confirm with 
management who are managing this process that they believe that editorial 
independence and integrity was not compromised”.

Asked if she expected such a situation to happen again, Fairhead replied: “No. 
We have made it clear that editorial independence and integrity is critical to 
the BBC.”

The Trust said the provisional report had been conducted verbally. A 
spokesperson added: “The issues for the BBC Trust relate to the editorial 
integrity of BBC news and whether guidelines on conflict of interest are being 
applied. Following the early media reports about Kids Company in July, the 
Trust asked for and received assurance from management that the editorial 
integrity of BBC news had not been compromised.

“Following the more recent media reports relating to the World at One, the 
Trust raised these issues as a matter of course at the regular monthly meeting 
of its Editorial Standards Committee. Dialogue on this is continuing.”

A BBC spokesperson said: “Our journalism has retained its integrity throughout 
– indeed we have led on the story – and we have stated this publicly on more 
than one occasion.”
 