
The BBC was forced to deny renewed claims of ageism today after it confirmed 
that the 66-year-old Strictly Come Dancing judge Arlene Phillips will be 
replaced by the 30-year-old singer Alesha Dixon 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/organgrinder/2009/jun/18/strictly-come-dancing-alesha-dixon>
 for the new series this autumn.

The BBC has been accused of treating older female stars badly before, when 
59-year-old Moira Stuart was dropped from her Sunday morning news bulletin and
Countryfile hosts Michaela Strachan, Charlotte Smith, Miriam O'Reilly and 
Juliet Morris, who are all in their 40s and 50s, were replaced with younger 
hosts <http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2008/nov/28/countryfile-bbc>.

Jay Hunt, the BBC1 controller, speaking at the launch of BBC1's autumn season 
today, denied Phillips had been dropped because of her age, saying that there 
were other older women on BBC1, such as 60-year-old Anne Robinson, who is 
returning to front Watchdog.

Hunt said the decision to drop Phillips had been made as part of an overall 
refresh for the dancing reality show, which will also see former Royal Ballet 
principal ballerina Darcey Bussell join as a guest judge for the final three 
weeks and the introduction of a new Friday launch show.

The BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> will also hope that the 
arrival of Dixon, who won the show in 2007, will pull in more younger viewers 
and help it compete better against ITV1's The X Factor in the ratings battle.

Phillips is to move to The One Show, where she will become a regular 
contributor giving her take on the new series of Strictly as well as making 
films about dance. Hunt said she hoped Phillips would become "the face of 
factual" on BBC1.

"What's happened with Strictly is about refreshing that brand," Hunt said. 
"I'm delighted that Arlene is joining The One Show. It's the most prominent 
show on BBC1 after the news.

"Is it about ageism? Absolutely not. It's not about bringing in a younger 
audience. The average age of the BBC1 viewer is 52, so why would I take older 
women off the channel?

"Strictly is not the Olympics for ballroom dancing, it's an entertainment 
show. Alesha has lived through it, [but] we've still got all the experts who 
understand the technicalities of the Argentinian tango. Strictly will feel like 
an event on the channel that you haven't seen before."

When asked why Phillips was dropped and not one of the male judges - 
65-year-old Len Goodman, 53-year-old Bruno Tonioli and Craig Revel Horwood, 44, 
Hunt replied: "It was not an easy decision to take. When I looked at the four 
people we had, Bruno is the joker, Craig is the Simon Cowell of the show and 
Len is the head judge. Arlene has elements of all of them, but when you look at 
it, Arlene was the obvious one to change.

"Of course she is disappointed but she is incredibly excited about moving to 
The One Show. This gives her the opportunity to be the face of factual on the 
channel."

Hunt confirmed that 81-year-old Bruce Forsyth had signed up for the new run of 
the show, which is expected to launch in early September, although she said he 
had taken a pay cut.

There has also been a rejig of how the voting works, after the row that 
engulfed the show last year 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2008/dec/16/strictlycomedancing-bbc>.

This year, following an audit by consultants KPMG, there has been a change in 
the way the number of votes will be allocated.

Hunt also admitted she was disappointed in Graham Norton's new entertainment 
show, Totally Saturday, which has been a flop in the ratings. "Totally Saturday 
was not as good as it should have been," she said.

Other new programme highlights on BBC1 this autumn include Wounded, a 
90-minute documentary which will follow the recovery of two British soldiers 
over the course of a year after they are severely injured in Afghanistan. "It 
is utterly heartbreaking and totally uplifting," Hunt said.

Doctor Who's new monster, The Flood, was also unveiled today. The drama 
returns to BBC1 for three specials towards the end of the year in which David 
Tennant will bow out after four years in the lead role.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediaguardian.co.uk or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 