
Outgoing Channel 4 chief executive Andy Duncan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andyduncan> criticised the BBC today for 
failing to deliver on its promises to strike deals to that would have helped 
struggling commercially-funded public service broadcasters.

Giving evidence to the House of Lords communications committee's inquiry into 
the British film and TV industries, Duncan pointed to the corporation's failure 
to achieve agreements on regional news,BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Worldwide and Project Marquee.

"When you look at their income, which in absolute terms is very high and in 
relative terms is unbelievable now – the billion-pound gap between the licence 
fee and commercial revenues – I'm disappointed they have not managed to develop 
some of these partnerships more successfully as an organisation," he told peers.

Although he said he was a "massive fan" of the BBC, having worked there as 
director of marketing before he joinedChannel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> in 2004, he added that it tended 
to act in its own interests.

"It's a self-sufficient organisation that likes to control things and be in 
charge of things," he said, warning that the BBC could end up being "cut down 
to size".

"I fear they will have their resources cut, rather than using these to 
productively partner others in the industry that would have kept those 
resources in the system," Duncan added.

Channel 4 has given up hope of concluding a major joint venture deal with BBC 
Worldwide, Duncan admitted today.

However, Duncan said negotiations continued over a possible deal between 
Channel 4 and BBC Worldwide, the corporation's commercial arm, concerning areas 
such as DVD distribution and advertising sales. Earlier this week he told the 
Daily Telegraphthat even these agreements would not be concluded this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/nov/03/cuts-channel-4-bbc-worldwide>.

The debate about the licence fee, which the BBC is determined not to see 
"top-sliced" to fund other broadcasters, and the approach of the general 
election had affected the BBC Worldwide discussions, Duncan suggested.

"Ultimately they decided they would stick it out, perhaps looking to an 
election coming up. They thought they would bide their time and live to fight 
another day," he said.

Duncan, who had hoped to close a deal to help secure Channel 4's future 
funding before he leaves the broadcaster before the end of the year, added that 
the negotiations had been complicated by the "tripartite" nature of the 
corporation, with BBC Worldwide, the main public service arm led by director 
general Mark Thompson, and the BBC Trust to deal with.

Talks with BBC Worldwide earlier this year were aimed at creating a joint 
venture encompassing assets including UKTV's channels, Channel 4's own digital 
services such as E4, and possibly 2Entertain, the DVD distributor in which the 
corporation's commercial arm owns 60%.

John Smith, the BBC Worldwide chief executive, told the Lords communications 
committee in May that the proposed joint venture with Channel 4 would have an 
annual turnover of £800m and generate £200m profit. This profit would be 
ploughed back into subsidising BBC and Channel 4 public service content.

Today Duncan also questioned the BBC's position in the acquisition market, 
given that Channel 4 has slashed its costs on acquired film and drama from 
£130m to between £95m and £100m.

"There's no commercial imperative and all of that content would find its way 
on to UK TV screens in some way," he said.

Duncan added that while Channel 4 was not in danger of going bust, it would be 
forced to continue cutting expensive public service broadcasting to make ends 
meet, and he warned this could have dire consequences for British broadcasting.

"If nothing happens over the next three years you might get to the point where 
[public service broadcasting] is so diminished that people might think Channel 
4's not that different from what you get in the market, so why not privatise 
it."

He said if the BBC had a monopoly of public service broadcasting, it could 
then be denied resources, leaving then country with "a diminished BBC and 
that's it".

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 