
The chief executive of BBC Worldwide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-worldwide> has been lambasted by a 
committee of MPs for maintaining a “shroud of secrecy” over whether Alan Yentob 
has a lucrative commercial deal for global sales of the BBC1 TV series Imagine 
he presents.

Tim Davie <https://www.theguardian.com/media/timdavie>, the chief executive of 
the commercial arm of the BBC, was repeatedly grilled about the potential 
existence of a lucrative deal for a cut of international sales of Imagine by 
members of the House of Commons culture select committee.

Yentob, whose position at the BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> has 
come under scrutiny and criticism following the fallout from the Kids Company 
charity scandal, is paid £183,000 as the corporation’s creative director and a 
further six-figure sum to present Imagine.

Labour MP Christian Matheson quizzed Davie extensively about the existence of 
a further deal related to a slice of international TV sales of the show, with 
Davie demurring or deflecting at every turn.

“I think it appropriate not to comment on an individual’s deal with BBC 
Worldwide on their programmes,” he said. “I’m not going to talk about the 
detail of it. The principle surely is are you as the owner of the intellectual 
property getting a proper return and margin from it from BBC Worldwide. Our 
values are in line with the BBC but we are a commercial organisation. I don’t 
think it is in the interest of licence fee payers [to publicise] that person X 
gets Y or whatever as you get into a vey difficult situation.”

Later in the session, part of the committee’s look at the corporation ahead of 
BBC charter renewal, the baton was taken up by SNP MP John Nicolson.

Nicolson upbraided Davie for dodging Matheson’s questions pointing out that he 
wasn’t asking about any commercially sensitive detail – a line of argument 
Davie used to avoid answering – but “just about the existence” of a deal.

He said that it was not healthy if a person with a “huge reputation” in 
broadcasting can leverage personally lucrative deals for themselves “when much 
of the capability came from the BBC licence fee”.

He said Davie was leaving the issue “shrouded in mystery” and “firing people’s 
interest” in Yentob.

“And you just won’t answer,” he told Davie.

“As a commercial executive I’m not swayed by the rank [of someone] in the 
slightest,” said Davie. “The bottom line is I’m running a commercial operation 
and I don’t want to pay anyone more than I have to. I have no interest in 
paying anyone anything I don’t need to be. I’m interested on returning 
investment [to the BBC].”

BBC Worldwide has form in cutting deals with stars, most notably with former 
Top Gear presenter Jeremy Clarkson and ex-executive producer Andy Wilman.

Between them the duo owned half of a company called Bedder 6, with BBC 
Worldwide the other shareholder, which exploited Top Gear’s global commercial 
potential.

However the corporation has tried to steer away from such deals after it 
became increasingly embarrassing having to reveal tens of millions of pounds of 
payouts to Clarkson and Wilman in a series of annual reports.

BBC Worldwide bought out the pair, Clarkson was paid £8.4m for his stake and 
had accrued £10.24m in dividends over five years from the venture,in September 
2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jul/16/jeremy-clarkson-top-gear-bbc-worldwide>
.

 