
We are deeply disappointed that Jack Straw has resurrected his old chestnut of 
abolishing the European parliament because of low voter turnout (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/feb/21/european-parliament-abolish-jack-straw>
, 22 February). The European parliament is directly elected precisely because 
the 1970s system of sending a delegation of MPs and peers to Strasbourg was 
manifestly undemocratic and ineffective.

Today, the parliament of 27 nations has equal decision-making powers with the 
council of ministers and works amazingly well and does an effective job in 
holding the European commission to account. It is an exceptional achievement in 
a continent so often previously scarred by war. To return to the past would 
mean that legislative scrutiny could at best only be cursory because of the 
constraints of MPs attempting to do two jobs.

Given European election campaigns that concentrate on national issues and a 
Eurosceptic media added to an impenetrable electoral system (courtesy of Mr 
Straw), it is no surprise that turnouts are low. Does Mr Straw also advocate 
the abolition of local government, where voter turnout is also low?

Members of the European parliament listen to the voices of the citizens who 
elect them and have scored numerous successes in amending proposed legislation 
for the better, including data protection, anti-discrimination, services sold 
across borders, testing of chemicals, clear water and air, and yes, 
importantly, working time and health and safety. All of these of necessity are 
more effectively regulated across borders, requiring European legislation.

We should be proud of the work of most of our MEPs, not disrespect them.
Anita Pollack, Carole Tongue, Glenys Kinnock, Mel Read, Eryl McNally, Ken 
CollinsFormer MEPs, Joyce Quin Former MEP and former Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> minister, Neil Kinnock Former 
European commissioner, David Harley Former deputy secretary general, European 
parliament,Roger Liddle Former adviser to European commissioner Peter Mandelson,
Neal LawsonCompass, Michael Rubenstein, Luke Akehurst, Dr Robin Wilson, Cllr 
Wes Streeting, Professor George IrvinSoas, Patrick Diamond Policy Network, 
Matthew SowemimoFormer research director, European Movement UK, Federico 
Guerrieri, Niccolo MilaneseCo-president, European Alternatives, Alessandro 
ValeraResearch manager, European Alternatives

• Jack Straw calls for the abolition of the European parliament and a return 
to an EU assembly composed of representatives from national parliaments. This 
is not a new idea, but it is a surprise to see this argument coming from a 
senior and pro-European British politician, and hence must be taken seriously. 
Here are three areas where the former foreign secretary gets it wrong.

First, it is easy to forget how ineffectual the European parliament (EP) was 
before 1979. We abandoned the old model because few national MPs took seriously 
their responsibilities in Brussels. And demands on MEPs are far greater now 
than they were in 1979, with the expanded policy agenda of the EU, the 
extensive legislative powers of the European parliament, and the expansion of 
the EU single market to 27 countries and 500 million citizens. Asking MPs to 
sit in Westminster and Brussels would only serve to weaken democratic control 
over the EU's decision-making by having politicians with only a partial 
interest in the work of the parliament they were sitting in.

Second, Straw ignores how successful the European parliament has been in some 
areas. Any objective assessment of the use of powers by the European parliament 
points to an improvement in EU governance because of European parliament 
action, from holding the commission (and commissioners) to account, to 
improving EU-wide legislation and even standing up to the European council and 
the US government over the sharing of European citizens' personal data with the 
US as part of the Swift agreement. Of all the EU institutions, it's the 
parliament that is increasingly making more sophisticated decisions in the 
interests of its citizens. Approximately 25% of amendments to legislation 
proposed by the European parliament end up as law, which is considerably more 
than any national parliament in Europe, where majorities are whipped into line 
to vote for unamended government bills.

Third, yes, few British citizens know who their MEPs are or bother to vote in 
EP elections, but this has more to do with the way MEPs are elected in the UK 
than with the EP per se. Since 1999 British MEPs have been elected by a form of 
regional party-list PR, where voters can choose between parties but cannot 
choose between individual politicians. Most other EU countries – including 
Ireland, Denmark, Finland, the Netherlands, Italy, Sweden, Belgium, Slovenia, 
Latvia, and Estonia – use a form of PR which allows voters to choose between 
candidates from the same political party. When politicians from the same party 
have to compete with each other for votes they spend more time campaigning 
directly to citizens, and as a result citizens from countries who have such 
preferential voting systems are more likely to be contacted by MEPs and receive 
information during EP elections than are citizens in countries with the British 
systems. It is no coincidence that voter turnout in EP elections is higher in 
these other countries.

In short, British politicians should stop blaming the European parliament for 
the failure of British politicians and the British media to educate people 
about the European parliament or the failure of UK governments to introduce a 
better system for electing British MEPs.
Professor Simon Hix
London School of Economics and Political Science

• I was surprised and disappointed to read in the Guardian of Jack Straw's 
view that the directly elected European parliament should be wound up. Jack is 
undoubtedly correct to say that the parliament has not yet adequately fulfilled 
its mission to connect the European citizens with the EU decision-making 
process. While the EP must take its share of the blame for this failure, so too 
must national governments, political parties and the media who conspicuously 
underreport the work of the parliament.

The answer, however, is not to abolish the parliament but to better understand 
the vital work it does in bringing much-needed scrutiny to the EU 
decision-making process.

A recent salient example is the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement (Acta), 
the international agreement between the EU and 10 countries aimed at tackling 
global commercial-scale counterfeiting and piracy. Acta was agreed by all the 
EU member states and would now be adopted if the EP was not required to give 
its consent. Citizens concerned about Acta's impact on internet freedom have 
been bombarding MEPs with emails (I have been receiving some 500 a week for the 
last six weeks or so). As a result the EP is giving close consideration to Acta.
Acta <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/acta> has generated massive media 
coverage across Europe, particularly in Poland and France, but (with the 
exception of the Guardian and FT) hardly a word in the mainstream UK media. 
This scrutiny has led six member states to suspend ratification of a document 
they previously happily signed up to.

Whether the EP now says yes or no to Acta, we will have fulfilled our role of 
bringing democratic scrutiny to an important EU decision.

A similar example is the action the EP took to end the scandal of details of 
individual's financial transaction being sent to the US authorities without any 
human rights safeguards. This so-called Swift arrangement was signed off by 
member state governments, but put an end to by the European parliament.
David Martin MEP
Labour, Scotland

• Jack Straw has been a fixture of British politics for more than 30 years, 
consistent in his moderate Euroscepticism, effective as foreign secretary in 
opposing, whenever possible, democratic institutional reform in the EU, and 
whose views of the parliament have oscillated between the critical and the 
unprintable.

In his call at the IPPR conference for the EP to be abolished and replaced 
with "an assembly of national parliaments" he displays a nostalgia for a 
parliamentary construct in the EU which was tried between 1958 and 1979 and 
which failed. Part-time European parliamentarians with national mandates and 
duties were unable to carry out their largely consultative functions then. How 
could a dual mandate MP/MEP possibly cope now in the era of generalised 
co-decision, with the EP scrutinising and sharing in responsibility for 
practically all EU laws, ensuring full public accountability of the commission 
to parliament and parliamentary oversight of the EU's external and trade 
activities? The answer is that such an assembly would be a fig leaf for 
democratic control, making life easier certainly for diplomats and bureaucrats 
and, indeed, foreign ministers, but totally incapable of shaping EU decisions.

The problem for the parliament is not a lack of powers, of competences or 
seriousness in the way it carries out its democratic responsibilities. Any 
objective assessment of the use it has made of its powers to improve sometimes 
very complicated legislation, to hold the commission to account and to make EU 
financing more transparent, would have to recognise that the parliament is 
playing the kind of role for which it was set up, and for which we have 
elections.

The real difficulty resides in addressing not a democratic deficit but a 
participation deficit. It would be helpful of course if national media were to 
follow the work of the EP more seriously. But the key has to be the 
transforming of the elections to the European parliament into clear choices 
about Europe's future, with European parties offering competing programmes 
which could start the process of making those elections genuinely European. The 
record of Mr Straw and his colleagues in office was to campaign half-heartedly 
at best during European elections, and preferably to avoid throughout any 
mention of Europe – with the dismal outcomes that we all remember. If 
high-profile national politicians give the impression that there is nothing 
relevant at stake in an election, then why should voters put themselves out?

Now he comes up with a simple solution; abolish the EP altogether. Needless to 
add that such a proposal would require the unanimous agreement of all member 
states – a precaution for constitutional change upon which Mr Straw always 
insisted – and will therefore simply not happen. The next elections to the EP 
take place in spring 2014 – politicians anxious to bridge "the divide between 
the European people and the European Union" should devote their energies to 
making those elections a success, rather than floating half-baked 
ill-thought-out ideas which were already discredited 40 years ago.
Julian Priestley
Former secretary general of the European parliament, 1997-2007

• It is interesting to hear Jack Straw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jackstraw> complaining of a "democratic 
deficit" with reference to the European parliament. Here in Scotland we are 
only too aware of the feelings of political frustration and impotence 
engendered by such a deficit. The UK is governed by a coalition of the parties 
that came third and fourth in our elections; a perverse inversion of the 
distribution of power, with the PM's party currently represented by one MSP in 
Holyrood. If we were not listened to when we protested against the Iraq 
misadventure to a Labour government we helped into power, how loud would our 
voice be now if we were to protest against military intervention in Iran or 
Somalia when there are practically no votes at stake for the coalition? It 
beggars belief that people fell for David Cameron's PR stunt in coming to 
Edinburgh to plead for the UK status quo. He knows that the more Margaret 
Thatcher's heir pleads for a political cause, the more the people of Scotland 
will reject it. Haste ye back, David!
Colin Hall
Dundee

• Abolishing the European parliament as Labour's Jack Straw advocates would 
not solve the European Union's alleged democratic deficit.

It is unsurprising that only 8% of people believe that their voice counts in 
the EU given the conspiracy of silence among Westminster-centred politicians 
and media when it comes to the decisions made by democratically elected MEPs. 
MEPs in the European parliament make European law in conjunction with UK 
ministers in the European Council, but because this process does not take place 
in London it is not news. Even the BBC is now planning to further cut its 
coverage of the EU decision-making progress by axingThe Record Europe 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006tt0f>, its only remaining weekly programme 
exclusively dedicated to the work of MEPs and their interaction with the other 
EU institutions. In the absence of informed media coverage of the work MEPs do, 
it is small wonder that people do not feel the urge to go out and vote in 
European elections. Does Jack Straw also advocate abolishing local councils and 
indeed the House of Commons as a solution to political disengagement and low 
voter turnout? 
Fiona Hall MEP
Leader of the Liberal Democrat delegation in the European parliament

• This package of letters was amended on 24 February 2012, to add the letter 
above from Fiona Hall MEP
 