
Understanding emotions is an increasingly important aspect of business. And 
with more organisations investing in management frameworks based on behaviours 
and values, emotions are being welcomed into the workplace.

But what is emotional intelligence (EI) and, more importantly, how can 
understanding it help you succeed in the world of work? In his book,Working 
with Emotional Intelligence 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780747543848>
, Daniel Goleman defines EI as: "The capacity for recognising our own feelings 
and those of others, for motivating ourselves and for managing emotions well in 
ourselves and in our relationships."

Although it is a broad and evolving area of research, there are some simple 
and effective starting points to consider to boost your EI:

Self awareness

Whether at work, an interview or giving a presentation, recognising your own 
emotions and how to work within that context can be incredibly useful. We all 
come into work with emotional and personal baggage; a looming deadline, the 
excitement of a holiday or simply a bad night's sleep.

It's likely you'll experience several emotions over the course of a single day 
– we don't work in a vacuum. By recognising that simple fact you can work on 
techniques to manage your time more productively. We're all humans, we have 
emotions and that's ok.

You're already emotionally intelligent

Everyone has a wealth of experience to draw on when it comes to EI, whether 
you're starting off in a career or taking on your first management position. We 
can all sense when a friend is unhappy or overwhelmed, often by just reading 
their body language and mannerisms.

Most of us have a good ability to read others and pick up on their moods, and 
this can be translated into the world of work. When someone is emotionally 
overwhelmed it can be hard to think with clarity and even harder to work on 
complex tasks. If you notice a colleague is struggling then your support and 
empathy can reframe their day. Just offering to make a cup of tea and let them 
talk through their issues can make all the difference.

Atmosphere

We've all done it, something has gone wrong and we want the whole world to 
know about it. But emotions are contagious, and very quickly the whole office 
can be affected by the way you do, or don't, handle your feelings. Henry 
Stewart, chief executive ofHappy <http://www.happy.co.uk/>, a training 
organisation that focuses on people says: "The key is a combination of a 
positive public culture and emotional support in one-to-ones. Research shows 
even one positive person – and it doesn't have to be the manager – can make the 
whole workplace more positive, and more effective."

The dangers of email

Email is cold communication. The way they're interpreted can vary greatly – 
and that can be full of pitfalls. When you're delivering information 
face-to-face you can sense the emotional reaction of your colleagues and use 
intonation and body language to express your message appropriately. If you're 
delivering feedback, contentious or challenging information, face-to-face is 
always the best option.

But if email is your only option, ask a friend or colleague to proofread it 
and give you honest feedback on how your tone comes across. This is also 
something to consider when writing job applications and covering letters as a 
lot of warmth and animation can be lost if you don't think carefully about the 
language you use. Try reading it out loud – if it sounds robotic or unnatural 
then that's probably how others will be read it.

Emotional planning

Build emotional planning into your life. It may sound peculiar but thinking 
about what's going on in your world, inside and outside of work, can help you 
plan how you and your colleagues will be feeling in the future. Moving house, a 
partner changing jobs or starting part-time study, for example, can all take a 
massive emotional toll. In the same vein, big campaigns, restructures or job 
interviews can all be draining and affect the way you feel.

If you know you're going to be under a lot of pressure, let your line manager, 
colleagues and your loved ones know. A fully informed support network will be 
more effective when you need it the most. It's all too easy to fall into a 
culture of going it alone. And remember, your colleagues are not mind-readers 
and may not realise you're overwhelmed unless you say so.

And finally, remain positive

We all know that wonderful feeling when you receive excellent customer 
service. You've ordered a coffee and the barista is charming and makes you feel 
like you're the only coffee drinker in the world. You leave feeling great about 
your day. That's because optimism is contagious. If you can be optimistic and 
enthused yourself, you'll find your manager, colleagues and clients will pick 
up on this. So by smiling when you answer the phone, celebrating the small 
successes of your team or tackling each job application with vigour, your 
optimism will have a positive impact on those around you.

Sally Pearman is deputy managing director at The Centre 
<http://www.the-centre.co.uk/>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 