
The two biggest influences on results in the African Cup of Nations are 
ability and geography: how good the players are and where they come from. The 
25th tournament starts today in Egypt. It is, remarkably, the 24th to have been 
staged north of the equator: roughly, in the top half of the continent.

The hosts traditionally deserve respect. Since the competition was expanded to 
include eight or more teams in 1965, the hosts have won it seven times out of 
20. In other words, they have a 35% success rate. It compares favourably with 
the 33% success rate of hosts in the Copa America, 28% in the World Cup and the 
measly 12% in the European Championship.

But other countries from the same region also deserve respect. Traditionally 
North African countries do well in North Africa and West African countries in 
West Africa. In the last 20 tournaments 14 of the 78 entries from the region in 
which the event was being staged have won the competition (17%), compared with 
only seven of the 127 from elsewhere (6%). In other words, local countries have 
performed almost three times as well as those from farther afield. So much for 
the earth; now let us adjust our gaze to the stars.

Fifa rankings are often a useful guide to ability. Since they began, 14 times 
out of 24 the highest-ranked country in a Cup of Nations group won it - a 58% 
success rate, which is more than twice as good as the 26% which could have been 
expected by picking competitors at random.

When Fifa rankings are used in conjunction with geographical proximity to the 
tournament, the effect can be astonishing. When the highest-ranked country in a 
group came from the region in which the tournament was being staged, they won 
that group seven times out of eight - an 87% success rate.

Cameroon and Nigeria are the likeliest winners of their groups, but at 4-6 and 
6-4 their odds are no more than fair. The countries who may represent value for 
money to top their sections are the hosts Egypt at 11-8 and fellow North 
Africans Tunisia at evens.

Exchanges tip, by Dan Roebuck

Egypt, the hosts, can be backed at a generous price to win their group in the 
Cup of Nations as they aim to win their fifth continental title since 1957

As African Cup of Nations hosts Egypt have an excellent chance to win the 
tournament but are an even better bet to win their group. And the best way to 
back the Pharaohs is on the exchanges at around 2.3 (just over 5-4) to win 
Group A. Egypt play the group outsiders Libya in the opening match of the 
tournament (and are 1.35 - a shade bigger than 1-3 - to win) and look 
certainties to pick up three points. Should Ivory Coast, second favourites to 
win the section, lose to Morocco who are third in the market, or even draw with 
the North Africans when they meet on Sunday, Egypt will most probably go 
odds-on to top the group. Then, traders can take a profit if they so wish but 
as Egypt have twice won the African Cup of Nations on home soil (in 1959 and 
1986) and four times in total, my advice would be to keep the bet in play.
 