
I wish someone had told me when I started working as an alumni officer that 
there is a small window of opportunity to engage with your alumni, after that, 
their lives become to busy and a disconnect with the university sets in.

But first, a bit of background. I joined Liverpool John Moores University 
<http://www.ljmu.ac.uk/> (LJMU) as alumni relations manager in 2007. I am 
responsible for the growth of our alumni association which involves developing 
and maintaining local, national and international alumni groups, online and 
offline communications, our social media presence and delivery of a calendar of 
events. In addition, I need to recognise opportunities to engage our alumni and 
their organisations in ourWorld of Work <http://www.ljmu.ac.uk/wow/> (WoW) 
programme. It's a busy diary.

Before I took the job, LJMU had a significant network of alumni that were 
disconnected from the university. I came into it knowing full well that 
building relationships out of nothing - with people who are now located all 
over the world - would be a challenge. But it is not dissimilar from building a 
client base, and after spending six years as an entrepreneur, that was a skill 
I had.

But I could not have been prepared for the reality: trying to reach out to 
100,000 alumni with limited resources. Meeting your alumni face-to-face is 
important and gaining a broad understanding of their current industry necessary 
if you are to begin an informed and productive conversation that will lead to 
greater engagement or a commitment to help the university. Establishing and 
managing international group activity, when you only see them only once a year, 
tests your powers of written and verbal communication.

It has also been challenging to become knowledgeable about as many industries 
as possible. I have to be able to present to all groups something of value that 
they can gain from maintaining a relationship with their university after 
they've graduated. But equally, working with so many different professions has 
been very rewarding: I have met everyone from lawyers to engineers; nurses to 
artists; teachers to sports scientists.

The task of engaging meaningfully with such a diverse group of people can be 
daunting but fortunately, I am not on my own. An early priority for me was to 
re-energise the LJMUAlumni 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/alumni> Board who help me 
shape what LJMU's alumni strategy: what we should be doing for our alumni, how 
we should be doing it and what LJMU developments we would like our alumni to 
hear about. The board has been generous with its time, advice and support.

As the role and university have evolved, alumni relations has become more than 
a precursor to fundraising. It is about connecting the university past to the 
university present. Take the WoW programme which has enabled many of our 
students to engage with organisations they wouldn't normally have access to 
including the NHS, Marks & Spencer, British Chambers of Commerce, Sony and 
United Utilities. From time to time that relationship with industry is brokered 
by one of our alumni. It's a great moment when you hear that one of our alumni 
contacts has led to a student success story. In that respect, alumni that are 
engaging with us are helping us to mould our next generation of supporters.

The future of alumni relations is bound to be interesting. Students who'll 
graduate before the fees increase are likely to think that the university no 
longer need their support. That we are receiving ample funds from incoming 
students. They'll no longer see the need to engage with their alma mater. It is 
to them we really need to convey that the relationship is about more than just 
finance. From an alumni relations perspective, a cohesive global network has 
the potential to deliver excellent results for the institution if it is 
nurtured correctly.

I am proud of what I have achieved to date. Anytime one of our alumni shows a 
greater interest in the university shows we are taking steps in the right 
direction.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, become a member of theHigher Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 