
"You cannot stand in front of this case and not feel your heart beat faster – 
it is astonishing," said Jon Whiteley, starry-eyed in front of a magnificent 
298-year-old violin called the Alard on display for the first time. Nearby are 
some evocatively named relatives: the Viotti, the Batta-Piatigorsky, the 
Boissier-Sarasate, the Lady Blunt and, the most famous of them all, the Messiah 
– some of the finest stringed instruments ever created.

They are worth a terrifying sum, possibly in the hundreds of millions. The 
Lady Blunt has twice set a world-record price at auction,last selling for £9.8m 
in June 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jun/21/stradivarius-violin-sold-record-japan-fund>
. Extra security has been put in place for the two-month-long show.

The instruments are from the golden period of Antonio Stradivari, the greatest 
of all violin makers. TheAshmolean museum in Oxford <http://www.ashmolean.org/> 
is preparing the first significant UK show devoted to him.

Twenty-one instruments are on display, around half of them from the first two 
decades of the 18th century, when Stradivari was at his creative peak. 
Whiteley, who curated the exhibition, said: "We have, at the risk of sounding 
boastful, acquired a spectacular group of the very finest and best preserved 
golden period instruments. These are no common or garden Stradivari, if there 
is such a thing. They are the greatest, the pearls, the finest of them all."

These instruments are often the most prized possessions of those who own them. 
"Violins among musicians usually have a higher status than wives," joked 
Charles Beare, the violin expert who has acted as adviser to the show. At the 
exhibition's heart is the Ashmolean's Stradivarius, the Messiah, which has not 
leftOxford <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/oxford> since it was given to the 
city in 1939.

"The thing is, if the Messiah's not going to go around the world, the world 
has to come to the Messiah," said Beare. There are around 700 surviving 
Stradivari instruments in the world, with the finest and best preserved now 
gathered in Oxford, he said. On display is the earliest known Stradivari, the 
Serdet from 1666, as well as a Stradivari guitar, mandolin, viola and cello.

Beare said his favourite Stradivari changed every day, but for many it will be 
the Messiah, which looks so fresh, so untouched, that many people think it is a 
copy. Of course it is not, said Whiteley, and although it has been played – by 
great players including Pablo de Sarasate, Nathan Milstein and Yehudi Menuhin – 
it is remarkably unused, and was given to the museum on the understanding it 
would not be played again.

In the late 19th century its owner Jean-Baptiste Vuillaume gave it a new 
fingerboard, pegs, bass bar and tailpiece to bring it up to modern playing 
standards. "I wish he hadn't done it," said Whiteley. "If he had only left it 
as it was this would have been the one single Stradivari violin that would have 
survived in an intact condition, the way it had left its workshop."

But the instruments were created to be heard. Each instrument's sound is 
celebrated and can be heard in the show's audio guide.

The exhibition includes an impression of Stradivari's studio in Cremona, 
Italy, displaying his original tools, models and patterns. It also includes 
performances. On Tuesday, Cecilia Stinton, a violinist who works at the 
Ashmolean, played a Stradivarius known as the Beechback, joining two others to 
play Beethoven's Opus 8 Serenade. What does it feel like to play a 
Stradivarius? "Awesome, really, in the true sense of the word," said Stinton. 
"On top of the normal adrenaline which goes with having to perform, there is 
that thought that you're holding something which is worth God knows how many 
millions, and then there is the thought: 'I'm going to add another layer to the 
ownership.' It's like that thing when you shake hands with your idol and you 
don't want to wash your hands again."

Stradivarius is at the Ashmolean in Oxford, 13 June-11 August

• This article was amended on 12 June 2013. The original headline referred to 
21 of the finest Stradivarius "violins" where it should have said "instruments"
 