
The moment when good teams become potentially great ones is less about numbers 
and more about how they make their opponents feel. A record-equalling 14 
successive wins – 11 of them by 10 points or more – does not make Eddie Jones’s 
team the world’s best, but even the All Blacks can sense the approaching hooves 
of England. “If we are peaking like this now what are we going to be like in 
two years’ time?” asked Ben Youngs, his visible excitement clear for all to see.

And why not? Repeating their Six Nations grand slam trick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/mar/19/eddie-jones-revolution-england-six-nations-grand-slam>
 of last season would not just yield a world record for Test wins by a Tier One 
nation but also guarantee a feelgoodraft of English Lions next summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/04/england-ireland-scotland-wales-rugby-lions>
. If they do negotiate the Six Nations unscathed – always easier said than done 
– even England’s second team to Argentina next June will be welcomed with some 
apprehension. Beyond that lies another distinctly winnable home autumn series, 
with no games presently scheduled against New Zealand until November 2018.

Michael Cheika’s Wallabies slip behind as England have last laugh | Michael 
Aylwin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/03/australia-england-michael-cheika-wallabies-england-eddie-jones>
It grants Jones the most precious coaching gifts of all: time and space. 
England have scored 46 tries since early February and beaten Australia four 
times inside six months, when they are supposedly in the foothills of a 
rebuilding operation. They were desperately poor for the first 20 minutes on 
Saturday, looking a nervous team who, back-row wise, had brought a knife to a 
gunfight.

To see them end up with a convincing four-try victory was to wonder again what 
will happen when they play for 80 minutes. Just imagine when Billy Vunipola,
Maro Itoje 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/03/premiership-rugby-roundup-bath-saracens-maro-itoje>
 and Joe Launchbury are all back available, when they start scrummaging with 
more devil, when Jack Nowell, Anthony Watson and Elliot Daly are buzzing again 
or when a fully fit, revitalised Manu Tuilagi shows up. Think of a day when 
they inject more pace into their back row to complement the existing power and 
cussedness, or start risking the occasional killer offload. This England team 
have already matched their country’s best-ever run but, in many ways, their 
adventure has barely begun.

Jones even confirmed that both Owen Farrell and Dylan Hartley, two of his main 
lieutenants, had only been at around 80% of their optimum level this autumn 
after lengthy early-season injury breaks. While Hartley is under increasing 
pressure from Jamie George for his starting spot, his influence as captain has 
been colossal all year. It was Farrell, though, who was singled out by his head 
coach. “Owen Farrell is the spirit of the team,” Jones said.

“He’s an absolute competitor and always wants to do things well. To win those 
four Tests when your inside-centre is nowhere near his best is a pretty good 
effort. He’s the standard-bearer. I remember when I was at Saracens he played a 
trial against Toulon when he was just 16. Sonny Bill Williams, who was making 
his debut for Toulon, whacked Owen and stood over the top of him. He just 
bounced up on his feet and continued like nothing had happened. You could tell 
he was going to be a good player.” Crucially, too, Farrell’s goal‑kicking keeps 
England ahead, even when they are wavering elsewhere.

The award for the year’s most improved player, though, is a dead-heat between 
Vunipola and Youngs, neither of whom were as fit or sharp under the previous 
regime. Even Youngs has been pleasantly surprised. “From the moment we rocked 
up in February and had the first meeting under Eddie. I thought: ‘This is the 
guy who can get the best out of this side.’ He just instils confidence.”

Being lobbed a bag of sweets as a not-so-subtle message to lose some weight 
also had the desired effect. “When I turned up he said: ‘You need to be lighter 
and leaner.’ The way the game is going it is quicker and faster and he needed 
me to operate at a higher level.”

Youngs’s latest extravagant try-creating dummy – his opposite number, Nick 
Phipps, bought the whole department store before watching the Leicester man dot 
down England’s third – also illustrated his burgeoning confidence. Jonathan 
Joseph’s two opportunistic scores further underlined his consistent value but 
Jones is not about to allow anyone to grow cosy.

“We’re always looking for x-factor players,” he said, citing the galvanising 
effect ofNehe Milner-Skudder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/30/waisake-naholo-the-big-surprise-in-all-blacks-rugby-world-cup-squad>
 on last year’s All Blacks World Cup winners. “They make a hell of a difference 
to your team.” Itoje is clearly one of those and starting the versatile young 
Saracens man in the back row against France would make sense. Daly, too, is too 
good simply to sit in Joseph’s shadow. Jones says he already knows his Six 
Nations squad but the English-qualifiedSam Underhill, currently at Ospreys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/25/eddie-jones-sam-underhill-england-rfu-autumn-tests>
, remains one to keep an eye on. Anyone wishing to be involved, though, will 
have to rip off the changing-room door with desire.

“The guy I got satisfaction out of playing well against Australia was Marland 
Yarde,” Jones said. “I remember going to a Quins game about eight months ago 
and their supporters were going: ‘He’s crap. This guy’s hopeless.’ But he’s 
really worked hard and had a storming game.”

The need to keep improving further was duly restated at one-to-one meetings 
with all squad members before they left camp to rejoin their clubs. The only 
caveat is the heavy diet of domestic and European club rugby prior to England’s 
next game, at home to France on 4 February. Leicester, for example, must face 
Munster home and away, followed by Exeter, Saracens, Wasps, Racing Métro and 
Glasgow. “It’s pretty relentless,” Youngs said. “The run we have at Leicester 
between now and February is horrendous .”

The upside is that English rugby’s longer-term outlook has not been so bright 
for a decade and a half. “If you look at the squad’s average age we still have 
tremendous players to come back in,” Youngs said. “It’s very exciting. The 
message is we want to be the No1 team in the world and that’s all we talk 
about. Suddenly you start believing we can be.”

Walking away from Twickenham on Saturday evening it felt less like the end of 
the Test year and more like the start of something special.

England Brown; Yarde, Joseph, Farrell (Te’o, 68), May; Ford, Youngs (Care, 
63); M Vunipola (Marler, 59) Hartley (capt; George, 59), Cole (Sinckler, 67), 
Lawes (Ewels, 73), Kruis, Robshaw, Wood, Hughes.

Tries Joseph 2, Yarde, Youngs. Cons Farrell 3, Ford. Pens Farrell 3.

Australia Folau; Haylett-Petty, Kuridrani, Hodge, Naivalu (Speight, 69); Foley 
(Cooper, 69), Phipps (Frisby, 69); Sio (Robertson, 57), Moore (capt; Latu, 73), 
Kepu (Slipper, 72) Douglas (Mumm, 61), Simmons, Pocock, Hooper, Timani 
(McMahon, 67).

Tries Naivalu, Kepu. Con Foley. Pens Foley 3.

Sin-bin Haylett-Petty 72.

Referee J Peyper (SA). Attendance 81,787.
 