
"It's been a very tough year," Ben Ainslie says on a mild morning in New York 
as he allows himself to step back and reflect on a tumultuous 2013. The world's 
most successful sailor is in the midst of reliving the sporting comeback of the 
year – which saw his late introduction to the America's Cup inspire the US 
Oracle team. They recovered from an 8-1 deficit andwon the eight remaining 
races against their New Zealand rivals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2013/sep/26/america-cup-ben-ainslie-oracle-dramatic-victory-video>
to clinch the oldest trophy in international sport.

The amazing transformation, however, was preceded by terrible tragedy. One of 
Ainslie's closest friends,Andrew "Bart" Simpson, was killed while practising 
for the America's Cup in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/may/10/andrew-simpson-british-sailing-golden-generation>
. Ainslie and Simpson hoped to, one day, lead a British boat and win a race 
which started on the waters around the Isle of Wight in 1851. Britain has never 
come close to lifting the cup since then.

After he became the most decorated sailor in Olympic history, winning his 
fourth successive gold in 2012 to follow his silver medal in 1996, Ainslie 
joined Oracle as a support member. Simpson, meanwhile, was part of the Swedish 
team who hoped to win the right to compete in their boat Artemis. It was part 
of their united quest to deepen their knowledge of sailing's most important 
event.

Midway through a disastrous series for Oracle, Anslie was asked to come on 
board and work in the unfamiliar role of tactician. He galvanised the listing 
US boat and was directly responsible for the dramatic turnaround. But, despite 
the delirious victory, Ainslie was pulled up short by the memory ofSimpson's 
death in those same waters near San Francisco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/may/10/andrew-simpson-dies-yacht-capsizes>
.

"After we crossed the line there were immediate celebrations on the boat," 
Ainslie remembers. "We had pulled off a remarkable win and were so happy. But 
soon after the bedlam died down I thought about Bart. We had to sail the boat 
back to our base and this meant we were in the very stretch of water where the 
Artemis capsized. I could not stop thinking about Bart."

Ainslie is not a sentimental man but his voice thickens and he pauses to 
gather himself. "It was a special time to concentrate on Bart and pay my 
respects. It was the end of the wholeAmerica's Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/americas-cup> saga which had started with 
Bart's death and ended with the final winning race. To pass that very spot put 
things to rest. It was very poignant.

"When it happened, the Oracle was sailing right next to Artemis. 
Unfortunately, I had a first-hand view. Of course we knew pretty quickly that 
somebody was missing. As a sailor, you know that if someone is missing for that 
amount of time it's unlikely to be good news. We didn't know which of the guys 
from Artemis was gone but every one of them is a good comrade. I had probably 
sailed or shared a beer with every single one of them. But when I found out it 
was Bart …"

Ainslie's voice drifts into silence before he forces himself to continue. "The 
whole world caved in really …"

Ainslie has again been nominated for the BBC's Sports Personality of the Year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/poll/2013/nov/27/sports-personality-year-bbc-who-should-win-award-poll>
, which will be announced on Sunday, but he is understandably consumed by the 
memory of Simpson. "Ever since we were kids we had been racing against each 
other. Most of our careers we'd been in the same class of boat so we built a 
strong bond driving across continents together for many years – just the two of 
us with our boats on a trailer behind the car. The only negative was our 
chasing the same Olympic spot most of our career, and that was tough. But it 
was a credit to Bart that it never got in the way of our friendship.

"Bart had a very good technical brain. He was very good at setting boats up 
and he understood the engineering of the sport. So he was perfectly suited to 
the America's Cup. It's just a tragedy and now his wife, Leah, and their two 
sons, Freddie and Hamish, are trying to rebuild their lives. Iain Percy [who 
won Olympic gold and silver in partnership with Simpson in 2008 and 2012] has 
been fantastic in spending so much time with them. And us other close friends 
keep in touch,work on Bart's foundation <http://www.andrewsimpsonsailing.org/>, 
and try to see them whenever we can."

What would Simpson have made of Ainslie's outlandish America's Cup win? "He 
would've had a wry smile. Bart was always the first to congratulate you if 
you'd had a good race. He was a true supporter of sailing. So he would have 
been happy. But we just wish he was here to be part of it."
 Oracle's tactician Sir Ben Ainslie holds the America's Cupaloft as he 
celebrates onstage after they beat New Zealand in September's final race of the 
series. Photograph: Justin Sullivan/Getty Images 
It's indicative of sailing's small world that Ainslie was part of the New 
Zealand America's Cup team in 2005. "They brought me in as a strategist," he 
says, "and he's the guy who supports the tactician as he makes those key 
decisions. But we soon decided that the best thing for me was to learn how to 
helm these big boats and match-race them. That's what I really wanted to do. I 
was with the New Zealanders until 2007 and so I knew most of the guys who raced 
this year. While I was delighted to be part of a winning team I did spare a 
thought for those great guys. It was tough on them."

If it's unlikely that New Zealand would have succumbed had the US not made the 
desperate call for Ainslie, it seems even stranger that the 36-year-old should 
have become a tactician for the first time in his long career. "It was a huge 
challenge, and very rewarding, especially with me having mostly raced as an 
individual."

Even a racer as hardened as Ainslie must have felt queasy with nerves when he 
joined a losing team in an unfamiliar role. "I was slightly anxious," he says 
dryly, "because I'd never done the role and the software was challenging. I was 
working with data I'd never seen while the whole world was watching and 
listening to my instructions. I had a 24-hour cramming session before my first 
race. It was a tough decision for the team and they were bold enough to make 
that change. I must also credit John Kostecki, whose place I took, because he 
was incredibly professional in supporting me."

Ainslie deflects any suggestion that he alone changed the course of the 
America's Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/sep/29/observer-editorial-salute-ben-ainslie-americas-cup>
 – and he dutifully praises the entire team. Yet there was something thrilling 
in hearing the multiple Olympic champion exhort his crew in the final race, 
resorting to a visceral cry of: "This is it … this is it …work your arses off!"

"Yeah, well," he chuckles, "we had some pretty sophisticated equipment with 
fancy earpieces and mouthpieces but it was still tough communicating with each 
other over the wind noise. But the television coverage was great and I watched 
some of the races for the first time last week. I was astonished by how close 
many of those races were. I can understand why people have been stopping me in 
the street to say how gripped they were by the America's Cup – even if they had 
never been sailing fans."

Trailing by seven, and needing to win every one of the races that were left, 
surely even Ainslie must have been close to admitting defeat? "It's a strange 
psychology and it becomes very simple. You either win the race or go home. It 
took us a couple of weeks but we finally drew level. And the longer it went on 
the harder it became for New Zealand. By the time we got to eight-all I just 
felt we needed to avoid any stupid errors. But then our wing got damaged just 
before the final race and we got it fixed just in time. It was dramatic until 
the very end."

Such drama has helped Ainslie in his quest to lead a British boat in the 
challenge to win the America's Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/sep/26/ben-ainslie-seeks-uk-americas-cup-win>
. He is in New York for two reasons. "I'm here to see my girlfriend Georgie 
[Thompson, the former Sky Sports presenter who is now working in US television] 
but I've also got a meeting with JP Morgan – one of our sponsors.

"Georgie's doing great and we're on target with our America's Cup plans. We've 
been working very hard and have two models for raising the money. One is the 
commercial side and the other is through private investment. We're focusing on 
the second because we can't really push the commercial side until we have 
confirmation of the event in terms of the date and venue. But there has been a 
lot of generosity from private investors. That's given us a lot of confidence."

Ainslie recently flew to Abu Dhabi to spend time with Adrian Newey – the 
British design wizard who has turned Formula One into a procession with his Red 
Bull car winning constructor and drivers' championships, for Sebastian Vettel, 
the last four seasons.The dream combination of Newey and Ainslie has been 
mooted for years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2013/sep/27/british-americas-cup-boat-ben-ainslie-team>
 and both men have spoken openly of their interest in working together – even 
if the sailor is careful not to upset Red Bull.

"I was fascinated by F1 and Red Bull is such a successful team that there is 
so much we can learn from their structure, management and design. Adrian was 
interested in the America's Cup and how we'd developed the boats last time out. 
So we had a great conversation but, look, Adrian is committed to Red Bull for 
the foreseeable future. I wasn't trying to worm him away. I'm also a huge 
admirer of Christian Horner [Red Bull's team principal]. But if Adrian was 
interested in the America's Cup in the future, whether as a consultant or in 
any other way he could work it round his existing commitments, we'd love to 
have him involved."

Andy Murray seems a certainty to win the BBC's Sports Personality of the Year, 
but Ainslie is heartened by the way his latest nomination reflects the rising 
popularity of his once marginalised sport. "Ten years ago people looked down at 
sailing as one of those odd sports that no one really understood or cared 
about. Now, especially in the wake of the America's Cup, sailing has become 
quite cool."

Asked who he admires most on the list, Ainslie settles on two favourites. "The 
obvious one is Andy – to finally win Wimbledon shows he's a fantastic 
sportsman. And I was fortunate to meet [the jockey] AP McCoy for the first time 
last month. What a lovely guy and what longevity he's shown in such a tough 
sport. You can see that in all the broken bones he's endured. I felt a real 
bond with AP as we spoke about all our different injuries and the structure of 
our sports."

Ainslie's long battle with injury, especially to his back, means that he has 
"definitely" retired from Olympic competition. But he reiterates that "winning 
the America's Cup in a British boat is really the final hurdle. The hardest 
part is getting the money together but we've been working incredibly hard and 
had lots of success. We've had heartache along the way but we think that, this 
time, we really are going to do it."
 