
Portsmouth has proved a worthy venue for the America’s Cup, according to 
Britain’s leading sailor, SirBen Ainslie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ainslie>. The four-times Olympic gold medal 
winner was speaking after winds of more than 30 knots had caused the 
cancellation of the second day of the Louis Vuitton America’s Cup World Series 
on Sunday.

Organisers brought forward the two races by 90 minutes in to try to avoid the 
worst of the weather, which was moving in from the west. But when the wind 
limit of 25 knots was reached the waterfront arena and fanzone area were 
evacuated, before racing was called off.

But, according to Ainslie, the location had already proved itself on Saturday 
when his all-British Land Rover BAR team won the first race and came second in 
the next to take an overall lead before the series moves to Gothenburg next 
month.

He said: “The event has been a huge success. I’ve never seen anything like 
yesterday. I was just delighted we were able to perform well in front of our 
home crowd. This is a good start to bringing the America’s Cup to Portsmouth. 
We have seen how much actual support there would be for the event and what a 
great race course it is out there.”

The America’s Cup proper will be held in Bermuda in 2017. If Ainslie’s team 
get there and succeed in defeatingthe holders, Oracle Team USA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/sep/25/americas-cup-victory-team-usa-comeback>
, they will have the right to choose the venue for the next competition.

Ainslie had no complaints about the decision to call off the racing on Sunday. 
“It’s absolutely the right decision when you see the conditions out there, and 
these fixed wings,” he said. “The wind limit of 25 knots is the right limit – 
and it was clearly beyond that today. So it was the right call. If we had gone 
out there today quite a few of the boats would have capsized. People would have 
got hurt, been injured. We can’t mess around with these boats. They’re very, 
very powerful and, if they get out of control, it’s absolute carnage. So there 
is no question it was the right decision not to race.”

On Friday and Saturday the boats achieved speeds of 40 to 50mph and the 
skipper of the British team added: “With these wing sails you obviously can’t 
take them down, you can’t take shelter. And therefore, if you go out in unsafe 
conditions, it’s very dangerous.”

The Land Rover BAR team leave Portsmouth with 19 points from Saturday’s races, 
one point ahead of Emirates New Zealand, who were third in Saturday’s opening 
race before winning the second. Then come the Oracle Team USA (16), followed by 
the teams representing France (13), Japan (13) and Sweden (11).

These points – and double points were up for grabs on Sunday – will help 
decide who will take on the USA in Bermuda.

Asked what he had learned about the opposition over the weekend, Ainslie 
replied: “Nothing out of the ordinary. We expected Oracle to be strong and they 
were. I think [Sweden’s] Artemis had a tough day yesterday but they’re very 
strong. Both those teams have continued on from the last cup with similar 
personnel and you can see that the newer teams have had to bring in new people. 
It takes a while to build those relationships.

“So I’m so pleased that our team put on a really good show in the first time 
we’ve really raced together. It’s a good sign for the future. Now I’m looking 
forward to Gothenburg.”
 