
Ben Ainslie is confident that rivals Team New Zealand will be strong 
challengers at the 2017 America’s Cup despite the team being highly critical of 
the controversial decision toreduce the boat size for the competition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/03/americas-cup-ben-ainslie-luna-rossa-row>
.

Earlier this year plans were approved to change boats from 62ft (AC62) 
catamarans to AC45s in the 45ft to 50ft range for the 2017 competition in 
Bermuda. The decision resulted in the Italian team Luna Rossa withdrawing from 
the America’s Cup and Team New Zealand’s chief executive accused the remaining 
four crews of “self-serving manoeuvring”.

Ainslie, who won the 2013 America’s Cup in remarkable circumstances against 
the New Zealanders with Team Oracle USA, is fronting a new British team for the 
2017 competition and on Wednesday announced a new partnership with Land Rover. 
Ainslie’s team was renamed Land Rover BAR at their new multimillion pound base 
in Portsmouth that became operational this week.

Luna Rossa pull out of America’s Cup in protest over reduced boat size
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/02/americas-cup-luna-rossa-pull-out>
Of the row regarding boat size for 2017, Ainslie said: “It was regrettable 
that Luna Rossa decided to withdraw from the cup – Team New Zealand have been 
having a pretty tumultuous time of late and I think there is a lot more going 
on within that team other than just the issues around the class rule.

“Now we have teams committed to moving forward in this exciting new class of 
boat, sharing a common goal. Team New Zealand, like ourselves, are heavily 
reliant on commercial funding. I’ll be hugely surprised that as a commercial 
team they could suddenly decide to not compete. I’m confident they will be 
there and be a strong challenger like they have been in the past.

“We supported the shift to smaller boats for two reasons. Firstly, the 
longer-term vision from all the teams was to have continuity in the circuit, 
that we could collectively design a boat for the next America’s Cup and use the 
same one beyond. The other side was to reduce the costs; this new class of boat 
is containerised so the logistics of getting it around the world are more 
achievable.”

Land Rover, the British automotive manufacturer, becomes a central part of 
Ainslie’s technical innovation group. It is the latest move by the four-times 
Olympic sailing champion to cement links with the motor industry, having 
already recruited Adrian Newey – Formula One’s most decorated designer – and 
Martin Whitmarsh, the former McLaren team principal who became BAR’s chief 
executive in March.

Next month the America’s Cup World Series event takes place in Portsmouth, a 
qualification race for the 35th America’s Cup in Bermuda. More than 90,000 
tickets have already been sold for the four days.
 