BubbleShare: Share photos <http://www.bubbleshare.com/album/384105/overview> 
Howard's house nearly burnt down, so he was unable to file his Chelsea review 
before he went on holiday though he did drop off this beautiful set of pictures 
from the show. So here below is a special preview of Dan Pearson's review for 
the magazine this Sunday:

Chelsea is like no other show. Caught between spring and summer, with the 
freshness of one and the expectation of the other, it is an intense experience 
that brings people and plants together. I always leave with a notebook full of 
observations and things I must try, but also with the rather odd feeling that I 
have eaten far too much cake.

Though the tent is always my favourite part of the show - I love the pure, 
unadulterated excellence and the lifetimes of knowledge all under one roof - I 
was particularly drawn to the gardens this year. They are a crazy confection. 
Six days of perfection, a finished piece without room for evolution, but if you 
think of them as theatre they are a wonderful means of exchanging ideas, and 
doing so fast. Trees are shipped in from the continent and buildings are thrown 
up ready-assembled in a matter of days. Cushions are plumped - not to be sat 
on! - and if there are weeds in a garden, they have been lovingly tended and 
artfully planted.

I am always fascinated by the zeitgeist of the show, for there is an unspoken 
pulling together that characterises each year. This time, it was in the 
predominance of green and the turning away from the need to fill the beds with 
flower. I heard several people comment that many of the gardens looked the 
same, but there was a richness to each and several were brimming with 
confidence. They proved a respite from a couple of real shockers - gardens that 
sang and danced and demanded attention in a sensory, design-laden overload. As 
one friend said: 'I am all for digging up the lawn, but goodness, I'd like to 
grass over some of these!'

Of the green gardens, the Laurent-Perrier, which is always elegant, worked 
beautifully. This winner of Best in Show garden would have been greener, but 
its designer, Tom Stuart-Smith, says there was a mutiny on the stand when he 
decided to pull out the white Paeonia 'Jan Van Leuven'. I am glad he kept them 
as contrast to the lush palette of shiny Asarum and Epimedium, Rodgersia and 
feathery Selinum. Cool bars of water held in zinc troughs bisected the space 
and hovered between the low planting while reflecting the grove of cloud-pruned 
hornbeam. It was a sophisticated garden but one that could have done with a 
little ruffling, or a month or two to let things spill over.

I liked Andy Sturgeon's garden for Cancer Research UK (Gold)very much and 
revisited it several times. It was dynamic and confident in its play with 
space, dipping down in the middle and using the changes in level to cantilever 
stone terraces and layers of dark, image-reflecting water. I didn't think he 
needed the Mary Quant sculptural wall, but I did like the fact that he had 
chosen not to let the public see the garden all at once. A good bit of theatre 
keeps the audience guessing and makes them use their imagination.

This is what I am really looking for in a Chelsea garden, to be transported 
for a moment, and this garden did that, holding you in the grove of Chilean 
Nothofagus, the fine tracery of branches a contrast to the dark trunks and 
cartwheels of tree fern. Green was the undercurrent here, too, and it was 
stacked upon itself, with relief in silvery Astelias, spangled white Libertia 
and the occasional fleck of black Iris chrysographes. Of all the gardens, this 
was the one that held together most successfully.

There were parts of gardens I liked elsewhere. Though I had to separate the 
front of Diarmuid Gavin's garden (Bronze Flora), with its lunacy of daisy 
parasols, from the back, which was dramatically sombre; I did enjoy the dark 
laurel bosque of clipped laurel. Nothing would have grown in the shade, in 
reality, but it was ballsy and fun and it had a sense of place. The seating 
area in the Reflective Garden by Clare Agnew also worked (Silver-Gilt Flora). 
It was a cool space beneath unclipped Platanus and it was good to see planting 
used boldly, too. Big clumps of Rheum palmatum 'Tanguticum' (Beth Chatto's 
stock plants) and effervescent Crambe with Stipa gigantea contrasted with large 
blocks of white iris. These were plants we have seen many times, but they were 
used with courage.

The best part of Cleve West's garden for Bupa (Gold) had turned away from 
flowers at the front to hedge off an enclosure around a giant concrete sphere. 
It was a bold move, and yet calming, and it was good to hear that the garden 
was to be reassembled in →

← its entirety in one of the Bupa care homes. That gave the garden a feeling 
of having something real about it, a future.

The use of materials in some of the gardens was very successful. The QVC 
garden by Wynniatt-Husey Clarke (Silver Flora), with its rammed earth wall and 
textured verticals of exposed stone, was a strong but not overbearing contrast 
to an über meadow by Sarah Price. This was a planting that you had to be lost 
in for the moment rather than worrying if it would ever really survive outside 
the show. It was a refreshing moment, though, and a welcome contrast with its 
free and contrasting use of colour - Hesperis, Aquilegia and Gillenia. These 
were a sensuous foil to the dramatic Cirsium heterophyllum. I liked the feeling 
that all these plants were like heightened versions of their wild relatives, 
made more so by the romance of the planting. The Cirsium was so bright it had a 
halo when backlit by the sun.

For the shock of the new I enjoyed the Fleming's and Trailfinders' Australian 
garden. It was as if a whole aesthetic had been beamed into Chelsea from the 
Outback, though I am sure it will have an influence. It was a warm place, quite 
obviously a show garden, but very certain in its direction. Layered sculptural 
seating, an outdoor table complete with smoking barbecue, huge latticed 
containers packed with rugged stone, decking used like it should be, with sun 
in mind, a fun wall of beautiful mosaic and dark water sliding away into a dark 
funnel. It had levity and didn't take itself too seriously.

Before I left I backed into the tent for a reality check. I wondered at the 
range of Camassias on the NCCPG stand: cream, green, amethyst, navy and pink. I 
had never seen anything like them before. Fergus Garrett from Great Dixter was 
also there to exhibit new plants. He was dwarfed by, but enthusing about, a new 
giant fennel -

a cross between the Ferula communis and F tingitana. It was a Chelsea moment 
caught in a nutshell. A head full of gardens, a bursting notebook, but room for 
one last exciting thing to mark the year, and make the next pilgrimage that 
much more desirable.

dan.pearson@observer.co.uk
 