
A new idea for ... budget travellers


Discover the World has a new self-drive trip for travellers around New 
Zealand's highlights, but on a budget. The 22-day itinerary starts in Auckland 
and takes in the Bay of Islands, the Coromandel Peninsula, Napier, Wellington, 
the Marlborough Sounds, Nelson, Kaikoura, Christchurch, Lake Tekapo, Queenstown 
and Dunedin. There is also a 14-day option. The price includes transfers, 
standard/budget room-only accommodation, standard car rental, car insurance, 
the Interislander ferry and a road map, but excludes flights.
• New Zealand on a Budget from £750pp for 14 days or £1,118pp for 22 days, 
based on two sharing; 01737 214250,discover-the-world.co.uk 
<http://www.discover-the-world.co.uk/en/>

A new idea for ... students


Planning a gap year? Not exactly rolling in cash? Go to New Zealand. The 
country needs casual workers during the Rugby World Cup (9 September-23 
October) to staff the restaurants and bars, or help with event security and 
construction. A working holiday visa is valid for those aged 18-30 for up to 23 
months – there are unlimited places for UK residents, and applications are 
often approved in less than three days. Nigel Bickle, the head of immigration, 
said: "The 2011 Rugby World Cup is an excellent opportunity for Brits to visit 
our country, soak up the party atmosphere and gain some work experience along 
the way." It's certainly a brilliant time to visit: New Zealand has never 
hosted an event on this scale before and organisers are really going to town – 
there are masses of cultural events planned (realnzfestival.com 
<http://www.nz2011.govt.nz/experiencerealnz/>) as well as the rugby.
• Find more details and apply at newzealandnow.govt.nz 
<http://www.newzealandnow.govt.nz/rugby-world-cup-2011~379.html>

A new idea for ... luxury travellers


There's glamping, and then there's Minaret Station. New Zealand's first 
ultra-luxury campsite is tucked away in a remote glacial valley in the Southern 
Alps, accessible only by helicopter (15 minutes from Wanaka airport). The 
palatial tents feature sheepskin carpets, king-size beds, en suite bathrooms, 
and private decks complete with hot tub. Guides are on hand to point out hiking 
trails, fly-fishing rivers and wild game, or to whisk you away in the 
helicopter to explore the rugged Fiordland west coast. There's no need to pack 
your camping stove, either – the chef at the camp's "mountain kitchen" will 
cater to your every whim.
• From £895pp a night for the first two nights, then £500pp a night, based on 
two sharing. Includes helicopter transfers, breakfast, lunch, canapés, gourmet 
dinner, all drinks and a private guide; +64 275 889 865,minaretstation.com 
<http://www.minaretstation.com/> 

A new idea for ... adventurers

 Sky Dive Franz 
The adventure capital of the world doesn't rest on its laurels – New Zealand 
is constantly dreaming up new ways to terrify tourists. Bungee jump pioneer AJ 
Hackett has just opened a bungee trampoline at its Queenstown centre, and a 
ZipRide is following later this year. While the former is a rather tame, 
family-friendly activity, the latter packs more of a punch. Riders will reach 
speeds of up to 60kph racing down the 150m lines over the Kawarau river. Still 
not scary enough? Sky Dive Franz is now operating New Zealand's highest tandem 
skydive, with at least 75 seconds of freefall. If jumping out of a plane 5.4km 
above the glaciers of the Southern Alps doesn't scare you, then ... you must be 
a Kiwi.
• Bungee trampoline, £10 for adults and £7.50 for children, bungy.co.nz 
<http://www.bungy.co.nz/kawarau-bungy-centre/kawarau-bungy-trampoline>; Sky 
Dive Franz, from £155 at 12,000ft to £280 at 18,000ft,skydivefranz.co.nz 
<http://www.skydivefranz.co.nz/skydiving-franz-josef>

A new idea for ... foodies


New Zealand has a fantastic food culture: seafood, rare-breed meat, great wine 
and seriously good coffee. To discover it, Zest gourmet walking tours lead 
visitors round various cities' best cafes, restaurants, markets, food shops and 
bars, including those of Wellington and Auckland. Launched on 1 July, the 
four-hour Ponsonby Gourmet Walk explores the cafe culture of Auckland's hip 
suburb, and from 1 November, the Auckland City Tastes will unearth the best 
food in the city centre.
• £95pp including tastings and lunch with a glass of wine; +64 4 801 9198, 
zestfoodtours.co.nz 
<http://www.zestfoodtours.co.nz/Overview/Auckland/Overview.htm>

A new idea for ... cyclists

 Hanmer 
Get out of your campervan and on to your bike: cycling is the perfect way to 
explore New Zealand's stunning scenery. Even better, on this trip, all the hard 
work has been done for you. No, not the pedalling – that's still your job – but 
the route-planning. Eighteen "Great Rides" have been set up across the country 
at a cost of almost £26m, totalling more than 2,000km of trail. Eleven routes 
already have sections that are open, and all 18 should be up and running by 
summer 2012. For now, the 64km St James cycle trail, near Hanmer Springs on the 
South Island, is the only route that can be tackled in its entirety. The trail 
takes cyclists down river valleys, past lakes and through beech forests, over 
an alpine crossing that reaches 1,308m at its highest point. The terrain is 
steep and rough, requiring river crossings in places, so it's for experienced 
cyclists only. Top mountain bikers can do it in a tough 10 hours, but there are 
three huts and lots of camping spots for those making a weekend of it. Cycle 
hire is available in Hanmer Springs, where the town's thermal pools will ease 
aching legs.
• Visit nzcycletrail.com <http://www.nzcycletrail.com/st-james-cycle-trail> 
for more information; Hanmer Adventure (+64 3 315 7233,hanmeradventure.co.nz 
<http://www.hanmeradventure.co.nz/PicsHotel/HanmerAdventure/CustomPages/StandardPres.aspx?ID=18027>
) has bikes for hire at £21 a day

A new idea for ... walkers


Trampers (New Zealand hikers) have dreamed of a country-long walking trail 
since the 70s, but only now are their plans coming to fruition. By the end of 
the year, a 3,000km trail – one of the longest in the world – will run from 
Cape Reinga in the far north to Bluff in the far south. New paths will link 
existing ones, creating a continuous route along coast and countryside and over 
volcanoes. Allow four months to complete the whole trail. Failing that, pick a 
section for a day's stroll or a two-week trek. Unlike New Zealand's traditional 
back country tramping tracks, Te Araroa connects villages, towns and seven 
cities, so it's easy to dip in and out of.
• More than 90% of the route is now open. Download detailed maps and track 
notes atteararoa.org.nz <http://www.teararoa.org.nz/thetrail/>
 