
A campaign to save the UK's leading Asian music station will be stepped up 
tomorrow when hundreds of supporters are expected to descend onBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> headquarters for the UK's first Bhangra 
flashmob.

Organisers say the event, to be held outside Broadcasting House in Portland 
Place, London, is the start of a new wave of protests designed to persuade the 
BBC to drop plans to scrap theAsian Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/asian-network>.

It comes as the consultation period on the BBC's Strategy Review, which in 
February proposed axing digital radio stations BBC 6 Music and the Asian 
Network, is due to conclude on Tuesday.

"The Bhangra music flashmob is a fun way of making two serious points," said 
organiser Sunny Hundal. "First to show that a lot of people are angry about the 
BBC's decision to close down the Asian Network, and secondly, that it directly 
affects the vitality of fusion Asian music created in the UK."

More than 100 prominent British Asians – including writer Meera Syal, Olympic 
boxer Amir Khan and Bollywood star Shilpa Shetty – signed up to the campaign to 
save the station after the review by director general, Mark Thompson.

A letter to the BBC Trust <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-trust> 
chairman, Sir Michael Lyons, also signed by Bend It Like Beckham director 
Gurinder Chadha, England cricketer Vikram Solanki and singers Jay Sean and MIA 
, expressed profound shock at the closure decision.

Hundal, the editor of political blog Liberal Conspiracy, said the protest was 
the next stage in the campaign. "Asian Network reaches nearly a quarter of all 
British Asians every week and many of those listeners will be abandoned by this 
move," he added.

Protesters are asking the Equality and Human Rights Commission to investigate 
if closure could mean Asian licence fee payers will lose out.

"The BBC has to do an equality assessment as part of this process to see how 
this decision will affect Asian listeners," said Hundal. "We would like the 
EHRC to look at the BBC's proposals to ensure that Asian licence fee payers are 
not losing out."

The decision to close 6Music led to an outcry, with almost 180,000 people 
joining thecampaign <http://www.facebook.com/group.php?gid=278123313911> to 
save the station. 6Music's audience rose by 50% in the latest Rajar figures, 
following the announcement.

Announcing closure of the Asian Network in March, the BBC said the station's 
output was expensive in terms of cost per listener – it cost a total of £12.1m 
in 2008-09 – and its output was "inconsistent".

An interim report is expected within two months of consultations closing. If 
it decides to press ahead with closure, the BBC would carry out an equality 
assessment.

"In the summer, when we plan to publish our provisional conclusions, we are 
aiming to say publicly whether or not the specific 6Music/Asian Network 
proposals appear to be compatible with the overall strategy that we are setting 
for the BBC," said a BBC Trust spokeswoman.

There has been a high profile campaign in support of 6Music and Hundal said 
supporters of the Asian Network were keen to make their voices heard.

"We've been slightly disappointed that senior BBC executives have focused 
their concerns on 6Music listeners but largely ignored Asian Network listeners, 
who are affected much more," he said.

In one of the more unusual campaign events, musician Ranvir Singh Verma is 
planning to walk backwards from London to Birmingham.

He will set off on the 120-mile walk after the flashmob protest and says he 
came up with the idea after reading about Lotan Baba, the "rolling saint" who 
has rolled his body more than 18,000 miles across India for unity and peace.

"His belief in penance is what encouraged me to devise this challenge," said 
Verma. "There are also many Native American communities that have one member 
that does everything backwards, including riding a horse. This acts as a 
reminder of the stupidity of humanity and the need to address our actions from 
time to time."
 