
Brown stickiness drips over the edge of the cone on to my fingers. I need both 
hands to hold it. Behind me there's a boring statue. Boring old buildings are 
all around. The boring road is bright white marble, unbearably hot under my 
sandals. I'm five, in Ephesus. My parents want to educate me. I'm not 
interested. I've never tasted ice-cream like this before. Not only does it 
taste of chocolate, but there are bits of chocolate in it too.

Now it's a yellow stickiness that drips over the edge. I catch it with my 
tongue before it hits my fingers and instantly remember Ephesus. Jesus 
stretches his arms into the haze. Sugar Loaf looms towards me. Copacabana curls 
below. Rio. By the sea-oh. I've never tasted ice-cream like this before. Not 
only does it taste of sweetcorn, but there are bits of sweetcorn in it: chewy 
flecks of skin in the deep yellow ice. Vultures sweep silent arcs beneath the 
cable car.

Cardboard discs by our plates indicate whether we want more or not. On the red 
side, a fat-faced pig pats his bulging belly, hand up in happy resignation: não 
obrigado! On the green side he holds his knife and fork, grinning with 
gluttonous glee: sim por favor! Our Brazilian friends have taken us to the 
Porcão barbecue restaurant. Porcão means big fat pig. We load our plates from 
an extravagant salad bar with artichoke, palm hearts and mushrooms. Eduardo's 
plate is empty. He smiles patiently. Black-aproned waiters emerge through 
wrought-iron gates from the furnace. Each holds a bayonet of meat, fresh from 
the flame: sausage, silverside, leg of lamb. Eduardo's disc remains red. A 
bayonet of picanha appears. The noble cut. The sirloin tip. Eduardo flips to 
green. The waiter's sabre slices the caramelised outer layer, revealing deep 
red moistness. I pick a slice with the tweezers by my plate. It's good. Marta 
laughs at the idea of filet mignon - soft, but no flavour. A rapier point thuds 
into the table. What looks like 50 plump cashews are speared on the blade. They 
are chicken hearts. A dozen are flicked on my plate. They're chewy, extremely 
rich and meatier than chicken. I hear a murmuring about how Brazilian beef can 
be eaten by vegetarians, as it is so pure, so organic. The last disc flips from 
green to red.

· The writer is the lead singer with Franz Ferdinand.
 