
As the demonstrations targeting the Bilderberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bilderberg> conference of international 
leaders in Chantilly, Virginia, drew to a close on Sunday, dozens of protesters 
gathered around one man, hoping for a picture or an autograph.

"Alex, what's next?" one protester repeatedly yelled.

"God bless you, Alex," said a number of others, as they stood outside a 
service entrance to a heavily guarded Marriott.

The object of their adoration was Alex Jones, an Austin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/austin>, Texas-based radio host and 
counter-culture icon. A stout man with close-cropped hair, Jones was dressed in 
denim, his temples soaked with sweat.

Throughout the morning black sedans and SUVs would leave the property amid 
jeers from the crowd. The passengers, the demonstrators believed, were members 
of an international elite intent on establishing a "new world order".

Police had confined the protesters to patches of grass on either side of the 
entrance, and at one point prevented anyone from crossing one side to the 
other. Then Jones arrived.

"Get 'em, Alex," said one woman, as Jones made a beeline for the police. 
Surrounded by his media crew – who live-streamed every moment with their cell 
phones – Jones spoke to the officers. Moments later he managed to cross the 
street, with dozens of his supporters behind him.

The protesters saw the achievement as a victory, cheering, chanting and 
pumping their fists in the air.

Jones quickly took control of the situation, using his unmistakable voice– 
amplified by a megaphone – to launch into a full-throated denunciation of the 
global elite, the erosion of rights and liberty, and the establishment of 
federal "reeducation camps".

"The best bullhorner there is," one protester said of Jones's oratory skills. 
When Jones began describing how he likes to use multiple megaphones end to end, 
a demonstrator called him "the people's L-Rad", a reference to a sonic weapon 
police departments sometimes use against protesters.

Without Jones's radio show and website it is difficult to estimate how many 
demonstrators would have turned out to protest against the off-the-record 
Bilderberg meeting over the past three days. T-shirts bearing the name of his 
programme and references to his work were staple elements throughout the rally. 
Demonstrators would repeat a tag line from his show: "What's the answer to 
1984? 1776!"

"Alex has been, more than anyone by far, instrumental in waking people up to 
what's going on in the world today; the Bilderbergs, the destruction of our 
constitution and our rights, mass poisoning, mass vaccinations," said John 
Kopel. "He's done it all."

"Even if you don't like his style, what he's done for the freedom movement in 
America is immense," Kopel said. "That's why I'm here. I look at his website 
every day. He's an inspiration."

"He's incredible," said Carmine Diiorio, who travelled from Baltimore to 
protest at Bilderberg. Diiorio carried an elaborate hand-drawn sign that his 
15-year-old daughter made.

The sign caught Jones's eye. As the radio host approached to get a closer 
look, Diiorio yelled, "Death to the new world order, Alex!" Jones delighted in 
the artwork, had his crew take photos, and later signed it.

"He's only one person but it really gives you a testament of what one person 
can achieve," Diiorio said.

Jones is not without his critics, who say he uses his influence to promote 
paranoia and conspiracy theories, based on incomplete or self-serving research. 
His focus on secret societies with ties to devil worship and mass eugenics 
programs, controversial 9/11 theories and the power of the Illuminati, have 
been ridiculed and dismissed by figures on both sides of the political aisle as 
well as journalists and independent observers.

With respect to this year's Bilderberg protests – the most well-attended ever, 
by most accounts – Jones said his show was "central to kicking it off".

With a network of supporters that often relies on Jones for their news, the 
radio host says he does face challenges.

"You do get off balance when you're trying to talk to sources, get reports 
out, take photos, shoot video, sign autographs. It's like a balancing act," 
Jones said. "It does tend to fracture the thought process. Very stressful."
 