
The Russian billionaire Alisher Usmanov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alisher-usmanov> has upped his stake in 
Arsenal to "over 27%". Red & White Holdings Limited, which is jointly owned by 
the Usbek oil magnate and Farhad Moshiri, made the brief announcement on 
Tuesday but did not give any details as to the additional stock acquired.

The American Stan Kroenke <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stan-kroenke> 
remains the largest individual shareholder in the Premier League club, with 
29.9%. Under the strict financial rules of the City, were any party to cross 
the 29.99% takeover threshold, they would be obliged to make a formal offer for 
the remainder of the shares.

The news that Usmanov – who unlike Kroenke does not have a seat on the Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> board – has continued his steady 
accumulation will add further speculation that the Gunners, currently the only 
one of the so-called big five not in foreign ownership, are set for more 
changes behind the scenes.

However, during April 2010 the Red & White group released a statement 
maintaining that a full-blown offer was not on its agenda and it remained "a 
committed long-term investor in Arsenal".

The former director Lady Nina Bracewell-Smith put her family's 15.9% stake up 
for sale in April and these latest dealings could be the result of some minor 
tradings. The non-executive director Danny Fiszman, who controls 16% of shares, 
is the club's other major shareholder.

Usmanov has long called for Arsenal to invest heavily in the team but in 2009 
saw his proposed rights issue to generate new cash turned down in favour of the 
status quo which sees the Emirates club remain self-financing as they attempt 
to end six years without a trophy.

Red & White Holdings had argued the scheme would help to reduce both the 
long-term debt of some £400m, which is mainly associated with the new stadium, 
and also give the manager Arsène Wenger extra transfer funds.

In the six months to November 30 2010, Arsenal announced an overall loss of 
£2.5m, but their football-related profit is £9.3m, compared with £18m for the 
same period a year before.

On the pitch Wenger's men have endured a testing few weeks which saw them 
suffer a shock Carling Cup final defeat by Birmingham City at Wembley before 
being eliminated from Europe in Barcelona and from the FA Cup at Manchester 
United.

Heading into the international break, Arsenal trail the league leaders United 
by five points but hold a game in hand. However, should the Gunners win all of 
their remaining nine league fixtures, which include a trip to north London 
rivals Tottenham before a 1 May meeting with United, then they will be 
champions.
 