
Labor is getting caught between thundering demands from both the Coalition and 
the tabloids to shun the terrible, economy-destroying Greens andsome nimble 
sorties from the Greens themselves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/15/greens-would-demand-change-to-asylum-seeker-policy-under-power-sharing-deal-with-labor>
.

The combined effect of this Green-themed pincer movement is that Bill Shorten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten>, who is otherwise 
running an effective campaign, is being regularly diverted from his daily 
message.

The election campaign began with the Greens’ Adam Bandt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adam-bandt> musing about the 
conditions for a Labor-Green deal to form government in the event of a hung 
parliament. Every Coalition MP in the vicinity of a microphone declared that to 
be a terrifying prospect that would lead directly to higher taxes, an armada of 
people smuggler boats and sky high carbon taxes.

Thanks Daily Telegraph, I welcome a debate about the overthrow of capitalism | 
Jim Casey
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/12/thanks-daily-telegraph-i-welcome-a-debate-about-the-overthrow-of-capitalism>
News Corp papers were so outraged by the prospect that they sent both leaders 
a “solemn pledge” to sign, which ludicrously, they both did.

Then they were immediately asked to rule out calling another election, which – 
in the event of a hung parliament – is obviously the only option besides 
entering into an arrangement with enough crossbenchers to ensure supply and 
confidence in the government and then negotiating each piece of legislation.

And of course no government since 2004 has had an absolute majority in both 
houses which means every government has had to do deals or enter into 
arrangements with the Greens or minor parties or independents to get its 
legislation through.

After this election, even if the Coalition wins a majority in the lower house, 
it is almost certain to have to govern with the support of Nick Xenophon and a 
few other assorted independents in the Senate – all of whom will have agendas 
they want to advance, just like the Greens do. No one to date has asked any 
leader to sign a “solemn pledge” ruling out ever entering an arrangement with 
Xenophon, or Jacqui Lambie. Nor has anyone been asked to sign “solemn pledges” 
specifically ruling out a deal with Bob Katter or Andrew Wilkie or any of the 
others who could sit on the lower house crossbench in the event of a hung 
parliament. Shorten did, of his own volition, generalise his Daily Tele vow to 
“not entering any deals with any other party.”

Despite not making much sense, this scare from the right has given the Greens 
far more presence in the campaign than would normally come their way, diverted 
Labor onto subjects they’d prefer not to talk about, and highlighted 
inconsistencies in Labor’s message.

The Coalition’s argument came unstuck momentarily when it became evident the 
Liberals were considering preference deals that would help the Greens win key 
inner city seats from Labor in both Sydney and Melbourne.

But that was quickly subsumed by a daily “revelation” of a Labor candidate or 
departing MP who has at some time expressed a humanitarian concern about 
refugees – cited as more evidence that Labor is “weak” on border protection.

This is apparently now a form of political heresy in the major parties, even 
supporting the #letthemstay campaign which was specifically about 267 refugees, 
including children and babies, who were about to be deported back to Nauru. 
Even though around half of that group were allowed to stay in Australia under 
community detention by the Coalition, the “outed” Labor candidates dutifully 
insisted they were 100% committed to offshore detention and turning back the 
boats.

Richard Di Natale opens up to GQ on pacts, policy and dealing with the Liberals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/09/richard-di-natale-floats-idea-of-eventual-liberal-greens-coalition-government>
Labor’s internal disquiet over the asylum issue is deeper than the 
Coalition’s, although there are MPs with concerns on both sides. But whoever 
wins this election will have to go beyond the slogans and find some place to 
settle the refugees on Manus Island, especially now the Papua New Guinea 
supreme court has ruled the detention centre illegal, as well as those on 
Nauru. And many Australians would applaud MPs struggling with a policy that 
cannot find a solution to a system that has left people in detention for three 
years and driven some to suicidal desperation. But there’s apparently no room 
for that reality during an election. Both Labor and the Coalition count the 
days when Labor candidate’s doubts have surfaced as “wins” for the Coalition.

And from the left, like the quick little kid who knows exactly how to start a 
fight between the big guys,the Greens are skilfully adding to Labor’s discomfort
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/10/australian-election-2016-turnbull-shorten-coalition-greens-labor-catchup>
.

The latest example – an announcement that they would attempt to legislate to 
ensure no changes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/16/greens-vow-to-change-law-to-prevent-penalty-rate-cuts-adam-bandt>
 are made to Sunday penalty rates. Labor has been fudging its answers on this. 
It is promising to protect penalty rates and now says it would make another 
submission to the Fair Work Commission if it won government, arguing against 
any change. But is much less clear about what it would do if the commission 
still recommended a cut. Shorten has said Labor would respect the decision, 
because once one government overturns a decision to make it more generous, 
future governments of different persuasions would find it far easier to go in 
the opposite direction.

But that leaves Labor’s penalty rates “guarantees” looking less certain, which 
was, of course, the Greens’ purpose.
 