
Queensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> police have 
dismissed reports that parliamentarian Billy Gordon has been cleared of 
domestic violence allegations.

Gordon’s electoral office said on Thursday that the far-north Queensland MP, 
who a former partner accused of having assaulted her prior to his career in 
politics, had been told by officers that no charges would be laid.

However, a senior Queensland police source told Guardian Australia that 
investigators would make it “crystal clear” when they had reached that decision 
in the high-profile matter.

“We’re not there yet,” the source said.

A police spokesman said the investigation had not been finalised.

Gordon, the rookie MP from the seat of Cook, was forced to quit the governing 
Labor party in April after revelations of a juvenile criminal history, unpaid 
child support and the abuse allegations that subsequently led to the police 
probe.

The Palaszczuk government’s slim parliamentary majority appeared tenuous amid 
uncertainty over Gordon’s future but Labor continues to hold the numbers with 
the Cook MP’s support as an independent.

His office on Thursday said Gordon had been told he would face no charges and 
described the mood as “very happy”.

Gordon told the Cairns Post 
<http://www.cairnspost.com.au/news/cairns/cook-mp-billy-gordon-says-he-has-been-cleared-of-domestic-violence-allegations/story-fnpqrsxl-1227403057258>
 that he had undergone “the ultimate baptism of fire”.

 “This was never about domestic violence … it’s been a dirty, grotty 
[campaign] and it was a convenient political tool that people decided to use,” 
he said.

“We’ve got a leader of the opposition [Lawrence Springborg] that’s failed 
three or four times to become premier of this state, I think there’s a degree 
of desperation there and malice, that’s almost institutionalised in the LNP.”

Those who are not charged as a result of a police investigation are generally 
not told they have been cleared of allegations, but that the matter has been 
finalised with police taking no further action.
 