Classification Mountain challenge 
Distance 7km (4.4 miles) circular

Typical duration 5 hours

Height gain 970m

Starting point Car park next to bridge over Allt na Dunaiche

OS grid reference NG 559 216 (Explorer map 411)

Walk in a nutshell

You'll need the best part of a day, and plenty of stamina, but your efforts 
will be amply rewarded by the unimpeded views of the imposing mountain Bla 
Bheinn (pronounced Blaven). After a gentle climb, the route continues steeply, 
yielding wonderful vantage points all the way up. Peaking not once but twice, 
it then descends - partly zigzagging and taking in more spectacular views - 
retracing the initial outward leg back to the start.

Why it's so special

This is nature at its unspoilt best. Its isolated position gives it some of 
the island's best views, across Glen Sligachan to the jagged Cuillin ridge, and 
even further across the sea to the Isles of Rum and Eigg, and the Scottish 
mainland. If you have any breath left at the summit, the panorama will take it 
away.

Keep your eyes peeled for 

If you're really lucky, you might catch a golden eagle soaring past.

But bear in mind

Although this approach provides a relatively gentle ascent (compared with the 
far steeper route via Clach Glas - seasoned mountaineers only), it can get 
rough underfoot and requires some mild scrambling.

Impress your companions

Bla Bheinn overlooks one of the oldest rubbish tips in Britain. High Pasture 
Cave (on the opposite side of Loch Slapin) contains a rich deposit of animal 
bones, shellfish and pottery fragments, as well as evidence of fires, left by 
late bronze-age and iron-age communities.

Recover afterwards

When the Blue Shed Cafe opened in 2001, it was the first shop in Torrin since 
the late 1960s. Help keep this one open by enjoying the homemade food and a 
well-earned cup of tea - not to mention the view.

And if it's tipping down

Come prepared, and fully equipped, for bad weather; however, one of the best 
all-weather attractions on Skye has to be the Serpentarium on the edge of 
Broadford.

How to get there

By car From Broadford, follow the B8083 through Torrin and along the bank of 
Loch Slapin to its northernmost point. The car park lies 500m past the head of 
the loch.

By bus The 49 departs from Broadford twice daily (though not necessarily at 
the best times for an ascent). Ask to be dropped at the bridge over the Allt na 
Dunaiche.

Step-by-step guide
Walk ID 2070

1. From car park, follow new path northwards towards the Allt na Dunaiche and 
follow it downstream to road-bridge, where a well-built path leads up the 
opposite bank.

2-3. Not far up the path, a gate through deer-fence leads to more open hill. 
After 2km of gentle climbing, the path swings southwards and starts to climb 
more steeply after crossing stream. This leads up into Coire Uaigneach.

4. Once in corrie, there is a choice of routes to summit. The normal route 
goes sharp right and climbs steeply up, but a better route for views is to 
cross the corrie, passing a prominent boulder, and heading for col opposite 
(leaving normal route for descent). Final climb to col is over scree - easiest 
to right.

5-7. From col, there are traces of path immediately above, not always easily 
visible from below; this improves with height. Carry on up and, almost by 
surprise, you reach the south top.

8-9. Just to north, and slightly higher, is the north top - but beware: there 
is a little notch to be negotiated first. A short scramble leads down into 
notch, although an eroded dyke to right (south-east) may be easier. The main 
top is a short walk up from base of notch. The only way of avoiding this 
completely is to climb by normal route (described here as descent route).

10-11. Immediately north of main top are steep cliffs, so the descent route 
turns eastwards, following rocky path (dramatic views down on narrow ridge of 
Clach Glas). The path zigzags down between outcrops and over screes, keeping a 
fair distance from cliff edge.

12-13. As height is lost, screes give way to grass crossed by fairly eroded 
path. After a few more zigzags around lower outcrops, the outward route is 
joined roughly level with the huge boulder passed on your way up. The remainder 
of route is that taken on the ascent.
 