
Ask anyone to summarise how Blackburn managed to win their first League title 
for 81 years and they will undoubtedly recall Jack Walker's wealth, Alan 
Shearer's goals and his SAS partnership with Chris Sutton – probably in that 
order.

A quick internet search generates season reviews which invariably but 
frustratingly convey the message that "moneybags" Blackburn "bought their way 
to the title". While Rovers owe a huge debt of gratitude to their generous 
benefactor, which their fans continue to vociferously acknowledge, the emphasis 
on money is unjust and the assertion that they only won the league because of 
it is ignorant of the facts and holds no weight.

To win a league, a team must invest in playing staff. Rovers admittedly spent 
a considerable amount on their strike force, twice breaking the British 
transfer record and parting with £8.3 million, while also signing Tim Flowers 
in a record deal for a goalkeeper. However, in terms of financial outlay on the 
first team that won the league, that is just about it.

There is a mistaken assumption that the club also spent heavily on Graeme Le 
Saux, Colin Hendry and captain Tim Sherwood, perhaps because they became 
indispensable so quickly and were sold on for big profit. In fact, all three 
were acquired on the cheap: Hendry for £700,000, the same price the club sold 
him for two years earlier; Le Saux, who was out of favour at Chelsea, for 
around the same and Sherwood from Norwich City for a mere £400,000.

However, based on calculations of the reported transfer fees for the roughly 
first choice starting XIs of both clubs in the 1994-95 season (taking into 
account injuries and long-term suspension), Rovers spent far less than the 
incumbent champions,Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united>. Peter Schmeichel, 
Denis Irwin, Steve Bruce, Gary Pallister, Andrei Kanchelskis, Paul Ince, Roy 
Keane, Ryan Giggs, Brian McClair, Mark Hughes and Andy Cole cost £19.33m.

Whereas Flowers, Henning Berg, Hendry, Ian Pearce, Le Saux, Stuart Ripley, 
Mark Atkins, Sherwood, Jason Wilcox, Shearer and Sutton set Rovers back a 
comparatively low £14.7m. Given that these squads – in particular United's – 
took years to assemble, perhaps a fairer assessment would be to look at the 
1994-95 spend in isolation. Even on this basis, United's outlay exceeded their 
rivals'.

Comparisons with other clubs are also favourable. Blackburn's entire back four 
cost less than Newcastle paid for Darren Peacock and less than half of the sum 
required to bring Phil Babb and John Scales to Liverpool. In Carlton Palmer,
Leeds United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leedsunited> spent more on a 
single midfielder than Rovers did across their starting midfield four – 
illustrating that Rovers' spending was largely limited to their front two and 
not wasted unlike so many others.

How Blackburn happened to accidentally hoodwink so many into believing this 
"bought the league" fallacy is partly because of their wilful blindness to some 
of Kenny Dalglish's shrewd forays in the transfer market and abundance of 
unsung heroes. Take Atkins, for example. Signed from Scunthorpe United for 
£45,000 as a right-back, he filled in for the injured David Batty in central 
midfield and made 30 league appearances during the title-winning campaign, 
scoring six times – the well timed volley at home to Southampton being the pick 
of a number of sweet strikes.

Other astute additions to play major roles included Berg, who was a relatively 
unknown 23-year-old at the time of his move from Lillestrom for under half a 
million, and the largely forgotten Pearce, who had only made four senior 
appearances before he joined the club for £300,000 – both insignificant sums 
even then.

Also fundamental to Rovers' success was the organisation and desire instilled 
in the side and, pivotally, the width provided by Wilcox (who incidentally came 
through the ranks as a trainee) and Ripley. Despite lacking natural pace, they 
both had the knack of being able to create the half a yard required to deliver 
crosses into areas where Shearer and Sutton thrived, scoring 49 of Rovers' 80 
league goals.

Rovers' rise was remarkable. Dalglish took over an unfashionable club lying in 
the bottom half of the old Second Division and won promotion to the newPremier 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> at his first 
attempt. The following two seasons saw the club finish fourth and then 
runners-up, before being crowned Champions of England.

It is not disputed that the club were able to offer substantial wages to 
attract players, but they bought wisely rather than overly and deserved nothing 
less than the success they achieved. It is a story that is unlikely to happen 
again and one that should be celebrated with respect and admiration, rather 
than viewed as the 1990's version of Roman Abramovich's Chelsea or present day 
Manchester City.

• This is an article from our Guardian Sport Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/series/guardian-sport-network>

• This article first appeared on When Saturday Comes <http://www.wsc.co.uk/>

• Follow When Saturday Comes <https://twitter.com/wsc_magazine> on Twitter
 