
Tony Blair was sounding out the possibility of becoming president of the 
European commission three years before hestood down as prime minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/sep/19/tony-blair-gordon-brown>, his 
former spin doctor Alastair Campbell has claimed.

In the latest instalment of his diaries, Campbell also says that Blair decided 
to walk away from No 10 in 2004 because of the tension withGordon Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gordon-brown>. Blair eventually stood 
down in 2007.

Campbell, who left his post as communications director in 2003, reveals that 
Blair asked him to consider returning in order to mastermind a campaign to 
secure the European job.

Various soundings were made among other European politicians, including 
Ireland’s then prime minister, Bertie Ahern, and France’s minister of the 
interior, Nicolas Sarkozy, both of whom were sympathetic. The French president, 
Jacques Chirac, was not in favour, however.

In the end, nothing came of the venture, writes Campbell in his new book, 
Outside, Inside, 2003-2005, due to be published next week. But political 
journalists will be riveted by the confirmation of the bitter relationship at 
the time between Blair and Brown.

Campbell says: “A lot of the time the press exaggerated our difficulties. This 
was one period where if anything they underplayed them because they didn’t know 
just how bad things were.

“This was the closest Tony got to leaving and at the time I was terrified it 
would get out because it was one of those stories that would have taken on its 
own momentum.


 “Tony had pretty much had enough and was being ground down by Gordon. In the 
end he realised that and decided he had to stay and see it through.”

In 2007, after he had quit as prime minister, there was speculation that Blair 
was angling for a different European post, as president of the European 
council. Brown was reported to have supported the idea. But there was 
opposition to Blair’s potential candidacy from the Conservatives and the 
Liberal Democrats.

The fifth volume of Campbell’s diaries, published by Biteback, are to be 
serialised in the New European newspaper.

Biteback’s managing director, Iain Dale, says: “Alastair’s new diaries offer 
an incredible insight into an extraordinary period of political history.”
 