
What’s the name of this show? Blood & Oil.

When does it premiere? Sunday, 27 September, at 9pm EST on ABC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/abc>.

Wasn’t this a show already? Yeah, it was a Discovery reality show in 2013 
about a family trying to strike it rich in the oil business. It has since been 
canceled.

What is this show about – and don’t say blood and oil? Well, there is no blood 
in the pilot, but there is plenty of oil. Billy and Cody (Gossip Girl’s Chace 
Crawford and Rebecca Rittenhouse) move from some nondescript heartland town to 
North Dakota to open some laundromats. Because of the oil boom in the area, 
there are tons of people with money to spend and, apparently, nowhere to wash 
their clothes. However, the pair’s truck turns over on the way to their new 
life and they’re financially ruined. Thanks to some insider trading, though, 
they end up with a parcel of land that is very desirable to oil tycoon Hap 
Briggs (Don Johnson), who oversees his fortune with his ambitious wife Carla 
(Amber Valletta, giving her best Robin Wright in House of Cards). Billy and Hap 
form a bond that Hap never found with his dastardly son Wick (Scott Michael 
Foster), who turns out to be a total criminal.

What is up with these names? I don’t know. Apparently Hap and Wick are what 
you call people who live in the Badlands.

Is this supposed to be a soap? Yes, it is, and considering that both Dallas 
and Dynasty, two of the greatest primetime soaps in television history, were 
about oil families, it seems like this is a natural fit. However, it is missing 
the epic scope that most soaps have. Right now there are only four main 
characters and no big families or intricate corporate structures to speak of. 
Soaps fair best when there are lots of shifting alliances and complex dynamics 
to exploit. How fun is a battle when there are only four soldiers and they’re 
all good guys?

If it’s a soap, it has to be pretty glamorous and luxurious, right? Sadly, no. 
While Dynasty and Dallas were known for their luscious furs and glittering 
diamonds, the only luxury in the Blood & Oil pilot is Hap’s private jet. He 
lives in a large but not ostentatious house, wears jeans and a cowboy hat, and 
drives around in a pickup truck. Billy and Cody think they got lucky after they 
score a room in a local motel. Don’t the writers know that we don’t want to 
watch poor people in our escapist television?

It’s even hard to buy that North Dakota is some kind of boomtown for the oil 
business. I knowit actually is 
<http://www.npr.org/2015/03/20/393639392/some-anxiety-but-no-slowdown-for-north-dakota-oil-boom-town>
, but the way it’s depicted in the show, the nightlife looks more like Mardi 
Gras with caribou or a sanitized version of Deadwood. Yes, there might be a lot 
of money, but if the money isn’t translating into some sort of aspirational and 
heightened reality, it’s just no fun.

Is this project a reaction to Empire and the new life for the primetime soap? 
No, but it doesn’t hurt that it’s landing in the middle of that zeitgeist. ABC 
actually bought this pilot back in 2013 and it’s been developed in a few 
iterations since then, featuring two different show runners, a whole bunch of 
recasting, and more names thanAlexis Morell Carrington Colby Dexter Rowan 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alexis_Colby>. It’s more likely trying to 
replace Revenge, the Sunday night soap that went off the air after treading 
water for several seasons. Other than Amber Valletta co-starring in both, it’s 
hard to see the similarities. At its best, Revenge had panache, mystery, 
suspense, a campy female villain, and just enough craziness to make it 
seductive and addictive. Blood & Oil has ... what? Oil, I guess. No blood, and 
certainly no panache, mystery, or suspense.

Is there room for improvement? Of course there’s room for improvement, but 
once HBO and the cable channels get into full swing on Sunday nights later this 
fall, it’s probably going to be too late for Blood and Oil, a show too 
traditional and bland to stand out in this cluttered TV landscape.

Should you watch this show? No, you shouldn’t. There are things with a lot 
more blood than Blood & Oil.
 