
“Er, lovely to meet you, Mr Sisi,” said David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> upon the Egyptian 
president’s arrival at Downing Street. “I’m terribly sorry to have had to 
ground all British planes flying in and out of Sharm el-Sheikh, but as it 
happens, I’ve got to ground you for half an hour or so as I’ve got important 
affairs of state to attend to. But I’ll leave the TV on in the sitting-room for 
you, and if you could try not to execute any of the protesters outside in 
Whitehall while I’m away, I’d be very grateful. Slaters.”


With that, the prime minister leapt into his limo to make the short journey 
along the Embankment to the Savoy, where he was due to collect his 
Parliamentarian of the Year prize at the Spectator’s annual Westminster awards 
lunch. It was an award, the magazine’s editor, Fraser Nelson, pointed out with 
razor sharp double-edges, that had been earned for winning a general election 
which Cameron himself had been so certain he would lose, he had already written 
his resignation speech before the announcement of the results.

Still, an award is an award, and the prime minister is in no position to turn 
down any piece of good news that comes his way right now. To be fair, he was 
sufficiently concerned about the situation in Sharm el-Sheikh to turn up a bit 
late, though that might have been just as well, as it allowed him to miss a 
pig’s head knob gag from last year’s winner,Alex Salmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alexsalmond>. The former leader of the 
SNP has a curious relationship with Westminster: he never misses the chance to 
knock it, but he also never misses an opportunity to enjoy its largesse.

The briefness of Cameron’s visit also meant he didn’t have as much time as he 
might have liked to catch up with his old friend and communications director,
Andy Coulson <https://www.theguardian.com/media/andy-coulson>, who was seated 
tantalisingly close to his former boss on table eight.

No words were officially exchanged between the two, though Cameron did mouth 
something towards his old mucker that sounded suspiciously like, “So sorry not 
to have seen you for a while. We must catch up soon. Leave a message on my 
voicemail – and don’t worry too much about your community service work. When 
Theresa’s surveillance bill comes in, you will get a formal pardon. LOLS X.”

Coulson tried to get up to reply, but a loud screech rang through the 
Riverside Room. Those electronic tags can be such a nuisance.

That the months since the general election haven’t been the land of milk and 
honey Cameron may have expected was reflected in the choice of energy minister, 
Amber Rudd, as Minister of the Year. With virtually every other member of the 
cabinet having ruled themselves out through complacency, incompetence and 
hubris, Rudd was the last woman standing. The way things are going for the 
Tories right now, her award almost guarantees that the lights will be going out 
over England between now and Christmas.

Jeremy Corbyn declined to collect his award for Campaigner of the Year, 
allowing Diane Abbott to pick it up instead. Try keeping her away. The lights! 
The cameras! The action!

The audience was then treated to a well-intentioned lecture from Lady Meacher 
and Lady Hollis, who were awarded their gongs as Peers of the Year for voting 
down the chancellor’s tax cuts. Though the Savoy might not have been the most 
appropriate location to remind everyone of the importance of looking after the 
poor.

With the Tories’ Johnny Mercer having disappointed everyone by making the 
worst speech of the year for the Best Speech of the Year award, it was left to
Michael Gove <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove> to send 
everyone home happy with a speech of genuine wit and sparkle.

Gove is an old hand at this, and picks up an award almost every year in 
recognition of his crowd-pleasing skills. The trouble was, the justice minister 
and former chief whip hasn’t exactly covered himself in glory over the past 12 
months (as Gove himself acknowledged). Thankfully, the Speccie had this covered 
by inventing a new award category, the Guy Fawkes award. Make that the Bonfire 
of the Vanities.
 