
My advice about this book is simple: buy it 
<https://www.bitebackpublishing.com/books/london-s-boroughs-at-50> today <> and 
read it. Read all of it from front to back and then re-read whole sections or 
even just little bits, either for the fun of it or to help you place some 
contemporary London trend or event in the context of London government’s 
sometimes chaotic, sometimes pragmatic, often impressive recent past. The 
evolution of the capital can be as confusing as it is enthralling. London’s 
Boroughs At 50 does a terrific job of making sense of it.

Tony Travers, as anyone who pays attention to the running of the city knows, 
is the pre-eminent public academic in his field. He is director of British 
Government at the London School of Economics, co-director ofLSE London 
<http://www.lse.ac.uk/home.aspx> and a frequent presence on TV and radio, 
explaining complicated issues with clarity, precision and a sharp eye for the 
ironies of history.

Like other London-centric journalists I make sure to keep in touch with 
Professor Travers who, in the course of an hour’s conversation, can be relied 
on to share at least five insights you’d never thought of and five facts you 
didn’t know. In so doing he equips you with more material for future articles 
than you can hope to find time to make use of. I should add that I am kindly 
mentioned in the Acknowledgments of his latest book, which tracks the creation 
and subsequent progress of the 32 local authorities that came into existence in 
1965.


You might worry that the above disclosures mean my judgement of London’s 
Boroughs At 50 is slanted. I wouldn’t bother. Instead, reflect upon the 
condition of the British capital in 1957 when the government appointed 
solicitor Sir Edwin Herbert to chair a Royal Commission which would examine how 
to re-constructLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> government for 
the post-war age.

The capital was bomb-scarred, losing population from its very insides and 
widely seen as in decline. It was also pretty tricky to define: “an amorphous 
concept,” as Travers puts it in a passage describing an inexorable outward 
growth that Elizabeth I was among the first to fail to curtail.

The Herbert Commission proposed 51 London boroughs. The reduced number defined 
in the subsequent London Government Act of 1963 were joined by the Greater 
London Council (GLC), a “top-tier” entity covering a wider area than its 
predecessor London County Council and put in charge of such as the fire service 
and flood prevention across Greater London while sharing responsibility with 
boroughs for housing, planning and roads.


Travers’ book contains several mentions of famous battles over the proposed 
Ringways road system <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/London_Ringways>, an idea 
emanating from the Ministry of Transport but eagerly supported by the GLC. Had 
the project been completed, including an inner “Motorway Box 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ringway_1>”, the M1 would have reached all the 
way down to Hyde Park and tens of thousands of homes would have been torn down. 
It would have wrecked the place.


Bits of it were built, mostly notably the Westway. But the boroughs resisted 
and won. It was an early example of why they matter and why they (unlike the 
GLC) they have not only survived but had a huge impact on how London now looks 
and works. “Together, these authorities control more than double the [£17bn] 
budget of the Mayor of London,” Travers writes. “Different boroughs’ policies 
in relation, for example, to planning, roads, housing and the environment can 
be read on the streets and the skyline of the city.”

The heart of his book comprises economical yet penetrating individual 
portraits of the 32 boroughs: appreciative character studies that track complex 
interplays between places and policies amid the larger patterns of 
extraordinary social change in London over the past half-century. Travers draws 
out vital differences and sometimes surprising similarities between this 
diverse group of local state institutions.


In the east we find a cluster of very different boroughs all trying to contend 
with the consequences of London’s lost industrial past in various ways. Newham 
is perhaps the most conspicuous example. Travers describes theTate and Lyle 
plant <http://www.thesugargirls.com/tatelyle/> there as “one of the most 
important, enduring industrial icons” of London - it was, after all, one of the 
few major companies based in Newham that didn’t move out as part a calamitous 
economic decline between the mid-Sixties and the Eighties. Today, Newham is a 
regeneration crucible, one “increasingly linked into the post-industrial growth 
of inner and central London.”


The Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park, of course, has become a huge part of that: 
“The regeneration undertaken was on a scale that might otherwise have taken 
decades.” Bringing a successful modern Games to London was the triumph 
primarily of Ken Livingstone and Tessa Jowell, but they weren’t the first to 
try. Travers mentions that Conservative GLC leaderSir Horace Cutler had a go 
back in the late 1970s 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/radio4/today/reports/politics/borisandhorace_20080501.shtml>
. See what I mean about diverting facts?


The stories of Greenwich, Bexley, Southwark, Tower Hamlets, Lewisham and 
Barking and Dagenham all contain variations on that essential Newham theme. The 
eastward reach of London’s gravitational shift now extends to the last of 
these, described by Travers as having “positioned itself as a growth area of 
London rather than as two outward-facing Essex towns. The cottage garden estate 
borough is embracing the metropolis.” Look out, Havering, you could be next.


Nucleus boroughs Westminster and Camden are intriguingly compared and 
contrasted. Despite being mostly Labour-run during its lifetime and to some 
extent a part of the radical Left insurgences of the late 1970s and 1980s, the 
latter has much in common with the Tory-dominated former, Travers maintains. 
Socially and demographically very alike, they are also jointly responsible for 
the West End.


Noting that Westminster is today “a more politically relaxed place than in the 
past” - a past that includes thelastingly harmful “home for votes” scandal 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/westminster-chief-were-sorry-for-dame-shirley-and-homes-for-votes-6769837.html>
 - Travers describes it as “London’s primary guardian and protector against a 
massive daily onslaught of development, noise and people.” Camden’s approach 
since its creation has, he writes, been “generally to encourage commercial and 
community development.” Though very different politically, the two boroughs 
have similar priorities to balance in meeting similar challenges.

Each borough portrait underlines the wide variety of Greater London and the 
political cultures that have shaped it: Richmond is probably the least changed, 
its councillors persuaded by articulate residents’ pressure to conserve its 
look and feel; eternally Tory Kensington and Chelsea is enduringly moderate and 
its Conservative group “has perhaps more in common with shire Tories than urban 
ones”.


Wandsworth, the flagship for “small state” service delivery, has been a huge 
Tory success story yet its approach has not been widely copied; Sutton, proudly 
suburban, is still a Liberal Democrat redoubt, despite grave parliamentary 
losses in that part of Outer London earlier this year; Hillingdon’s civic 
centre, Travers writes, “is probably the most important municipal building 
constructed in London since 1965.” It is also the only London borough to have, 
inRuislip Lido <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ruislip_Lido>, “a lake with a 
functioning beach.”


In his summary analysis and closing observations, as throughout his borough 
portraits, Travers writes a lot about housing and particularly housing estates. 
These, after all, were the most significant contributions the 32 new councils 
were able to make to their boroughs’ infrastructures in their earliest “slum 
clearance” days. Travers documents that while some the the early estates have 
stood the test of time, the architectural and social failings of many have 
resulted in their being replaced thanks to the very councils that built them.


That sometimes fraught process has become part of the larger struggle to 
facilitate delivering around 50,000 additional homes in London a year. Today, 
social and other “affordable” housing supply comes substantially from boroughs 
extracting it as a by-product of permitting large private developments, as with 
Vauxhall/Nine Elms. It’s not an ideal paradigm, but for the present it is 
inescapable. The means proposed for enhancing and regulating it look likely to 
define key differences between the candidates to become London’s next mayor.


Given the crisis mood presently surrounding London housing, it’s easy to 
overlook how much the big picture has improved. In 1965, Travers reminds us, 
“there were still thousands of homes without basic facilities such as 
bathrooms.” In Southwark, 59% were in that state. The boroughs can take a lot 
of credit for that and, Travers believes, for much else.


They’ve lasted in part because, despite some low points, they’ve performed 
their functions well and also because the Herbert Commission and co got the 
size of them right: “Any smaller and they would have been under-powered, any 
larger and they might have been remote.” With a London-wide strategic successor 
to the GLC restored in the form of the Greater London Authority led by an 
elected mayor, Travers thinks the “bottom-heavy, two-tier” combination has 
proven to be a good one for London, and a model that emerging mega-cities might 
follow.

How far has this been due to prescience and how far down to luck? Some of 
both, no doubt, along with a need for real world practicality. Travers 
describes the system of London government that exists today as “the product of 
two factors: the way the urban area of London grew outwards and the City of 
London’s approach to protecting its boundaries.”


The success of the City Corporation 
<http://www.cityoflondon.gov.uk/Pages/default.aspx> - that 33rd and, by some 
distance, oldest of London’s local authorities - in holding on to its 
historical boundaries and powers is, unsurprisingly, often seen as resulting in 
an arcane domain of unacceptable privilege. And yet, Travers argues, it 
provided a template for the boroughs as well as being the seed from which a 
complementary London-wide institution has grown.


“The boroughs and the City really are 33 different places,” he writes. And 
yet: “They have developed together over 50 years into an essential part of 
London’s patchwork of local government.” There’s no better guide to that 
patchwork than this book - a patchwork that has formed so much of the city’s 
fabric as a whole.


London’s Boroughs At 50 by Tony Travers is published by Biteback Books 
<https://www.bitebackpublishing.com/books/london-s-boroughs-at-50>. 

 