
One of the strange anomalies in the Booker's long and (reasonably) exalted 
history is the fact that JG Ballard never won it. Not for the Drowned World. 
Not for High Rise. Not for Crash. Not for Cocaine Nights. Not – most notably – 
for Empire Of The Sun. A quarter-century on, this failure to reward greatness 
seems a travesty. Even at the time it annoyed plenty of critics andAnita 
Brookner <https://www.theguardian.com/books/anita-brookner>, the writer 
lucky-unlucky enough to be chosen in his place, took a lot of stick.

Malcolm Bradbury called her winning novel, Hotel du Lac, "parochial", and 
thundered that it was not the sort of book that should have won the Booker. The 
New Statesman said it was "pretentious" although did at least do Brookner the 
kindness of noting that "it wasn't her fault that she won the prize." The 
author herself half-apologised that her books are "quite nice but unimportant" 
and suggested it might have been better if Empire Of The Sun had won in its 
place. She was right. Both from the point of view that Empire Of The Sun is so 
very good, but also because of the anger her victory provoked. The sense of 
outraged justice created by the perception that Hotel du Lac usurped Ballard's 
crown is unfortunate. This is not a book that should enrage. It is actually one 
that should be admired and enjoyed. Quietly maybe, but still fervently.

Written in clean and simple, but also subtly suggestive, prose it tells of 
Edith Hope, a romantic novelist on a "curious interlude in her life". She has 
been forced into temporary exile in the "stolid" Swiss hotel of the book's 
title after a romantic indiscretion that has outraged her friends so much that 
they have ordered her away to have a good long think.

At first, Edith does indeed mope around, failing to write her latest blousy 
novel, trying to decide how she should make her way through life and soaking up 
and reflecting back the melancholy atmosphere of her surroundings. This 
pathetic fallacy is wonderfully handled, and the descriptions of the quiet, 
snooty hotel, where one imagines the air is almost as heavy as the 
old-fashioned furniture, are as evocative as they are amusing:

"As far as guests were concerned, it took a perverse pride in its very absence 
of attractions, so that any visitor mildly looking for a room would be puzzled 
and deflected by the sparseness of the terrace, the muted hush of the lobby … 
There was no sauna, no hairdresser and certainly no glass cases displaying 
items of jewellery; the bar was small and dark and its austerity did not 
encourage people to linger."

Meanwhile, the portrayals of the other guests are positively – delightfully – 
cruel, especially the overbearing, over-monied Mrs Pusey and her curiously 
devoted daughter who decide to make cheering Edith up their project. Naturally, 
they only really succeed in boring and patronising her, but even so the 
distraction they and others provide lifts Edith from her solipsism and it comes 
as a pleasant surprise somewhere around the two-thirds mark to realise that 
Edith is on the mend.

But as things start to get brighter for the heroine, they unfortunately get 
duller for the reader. Brookner's prose is so splendid in its own right that 
Hotel du Lac never felt less than impressive to me. But the understated and all 
too realistic discomfort of the opening gives way to something more 
overwrought. After pages and pages of delightfully painful getting-to-know-you 
small talk the characters suddenly seem to know each other far too well. It 
jars when these near strangers start in with the deep dark teatime of the soul 
and begin analysing each other in often insulting detail. One guest, Mr 
Neville, even proposes to Edith. He says: "I need a wife whom I can trust" (no 
matter that he has only known her for a matter of days). He reasons that she 
might as well take up his offer since at the moment "you are desolate."

Of course, Brookner's sly humour is still at play and plenty of the absurdity 
of this proposal is intentional. But it's still a misstep, plunging the reader 
out of the suspension of disbelief and making a previously very natural 
narrative seem contrived. It's hard to take Edith and her world entirely 
seriously from this point on and the ending, although elegant and enjoyably 
provocative, doesn't quite ring true. Such problems knock the book some way 
back from being the "classic" the Spectator once declared it, but it's worth 
saying again that this is a book to enjoy for what it is rather than what it 
isn't. It's a funny, flawed, but still beautifully written study in melancholy. 
A pleasure. Even if it isn't as good as Empire Of The Sun.

Next time: The Bone People by Keri Hulme
 