
It ranks as one of the most remarkable comebacks in UK business - the 
appointment of Andy Hornby to runAlliance Boots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/allianceboots> nine months after losing 
his grip on the banking group HBOS in such spectacular fashion.

Supporters of the former wunderkind of the corporate world like to portray him 
as a victim of circumstance, caught up in the eddies of world events and of a 
broken system that forgot banking was about more than marketing. He deserves a 
second chance, they say.

Others, viewing him through the prism of the banking crisis that pitched the 
world into recession, see only another example of a well-rewarded executive 
finding a comfortable job with a salary of about £800,000 a year and nary a 
backward glance at the damage he has left behind. For them, he has accepted the 
job at Alliance Boots with indecent haste, like a divorcee rushing down the 
aisle again before the ink has dried on the legal papers.

Either way, it is an astonishing testament to the self-confidence of a man 
still only 42, whip-thin and boyish, who has managed to shake off the 
humiliation of a public grilling over his failure at HBOS and being pilloried 
by investors, the public and commentators alike. In a vituperative assault last 
week, the Daily Mail described Hornby's rehabilitation as "an affront" to 
taxpayers forced to support the takeover ofHBOS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/hbos> by Lloyds and suggested that bank 
executives "should hang their heads in shame".

Hornby is "very excited" about his new role and getting back into a routine 
after talking to a "range of people" about jobs. He had been approached by 
Boots six years ago and the retailer had the added allure of being a privately 
owned company: "The sector's good and it's a plus for me that is out of the 
limelight."

The youngest of five and the son of a headmaster, Hornby had not been 
accustomed to things going badly. He studied English at Oxford and took the 
traditional route of ambitious young guns, spending three years with the Boston 
Consulting Group, then doing an MBA at Harvard, where he came top of his class 
of 800. He was a protege of Archie Norman at Asda and joined the Halifax in 
1999 to run the retail business.

Shortly after he joined Halifax, he was asked if he wanted the top job. "Gosh, 
I really don't know," he said, before adding: "I'd be surprised if in 10 to 15 
years' time, I'm not running something. Running something big." He didn't have 
to wait that long: he was given the top job of the combined Halifax/Bank of 
Scotland group in 2006 at 39, one of the youngest chief executives in the top 
flight of UK companies. "Andy Hornby is a superstar," said breathless analysts 
at Dresdner Kleinwort.

Norman says age has never been an issue for Hornby: "He doesn't think of 
himself as the youngest person in the room. He has a lively intelligence and 
one he wears lightly." In 1991, Hornby married Catherine, another Harvard 
alumna whom he met at Oxford, and they have a son and a daughter.

He was firmly from the Asda school of management, where senior executives wore 
George clothes on Fridays, shops were called "theatres" and bosses would wear a 
baseball cap if they didn't want to be disturbed.

He brought the same kind of light touch to the Halifax, stripping out carpets 
in branches, personally choosing the piped music and using staff, or 
"colleagues" as he would call them, in the advertising, making a star of 
singing bank clerk Howard Brown. He also introduced "Ask Andy" sessions, to 
answer staff questions. It all made him terribly popular. Ged Nichols, who runs 
the Accord union, confounds expectations and says he bears Hornby no malice: 
"He was a good leader and very open to the unions. Whether he had the breadth 
of vision to take on the bigger job is for others to judge."

Critics argue that his marketing bons mots counted for little when he was made 
chief executive and faced a far more complex banking business and issues of 
capital markets and risk. He took over at the peak of the market - with HBOS 
shares at an all-time high and a property boom in full steam - and inherited an 
apparently successful business model. The Achilles heel was the corporate 
lending division under Peter Cummings, which invested heavily in property, and 
which Hornby privately admits he failed to get a grip on. When the market 
turned, HBOS lost almost £11bn.

At the Treasury select committee hearings, he appeared lost and broken, his 
apology oddly anaemic. "We are extremely sorry for the turn of events," he 
said, adding that he did not feel "personally culpable".

Hornby, who turned down a £1m severance package from HBOS, describes the 
events of the past year as "very, very" tough. "It's been tough for the family 
and tough for everyone. It made me all the more determined to make sure that I 
got the next phase right and found the right thing. I worked really hard to do 
that.

"I've been very clear. It's a very complex situation and an awful lot of 
different things came together, but I'm not ducking my own responsibility. I 
wanted to do the right thing for the company." Hence the deal with Lloyds? "It 
was important and, by the way, at every stage you are trying to do the right 
thing for 70,000 people in terms of a long-term outlook. I would never 
trivialise what has happened. It has been monumental for the whole banking 
system and the important thing is that everyone needs to learn from what has 
happened."

Supporters say he worked tirelessly to get a good deal from Lloyds, with 
little back-up from his chairman or directors. "I think it got very hard for 
him. Not clinical depression, but he was having very little sleep, he was 
working seven days a week and didn't have the support or people to talk to," 
Norman says.

Peter Hahn at the Cass Business School, also a former banker, says Hornby is a 
"good catch" for Boots, praising his retail skills. "He didn't hire himself at 
HBOS. The board did, and no one would have turned that job down. The reality is 
they thought they were a retailer and forgot they were a bank. Boards weren't 
in charge. They were hiring the wrong people, going for unchecked growth. At 
HBOS there were serious problems and strategies that caused problems before 
Andy's time.

"He is not completely innocent; he didn't say 'What, are we nuts? We should 
stop this', and he was there at the end of it. But by the timeAndy Hornby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/andy-hornby> took over, everyone's foot 
was so firmly on the pedal, no one even knew where the brake was any more."

Norman says Hornby will bounce back. "Things went right and things went wrong, 
but he has a life to lead. If we threw away everyone who was in the wrong place 
at the wrong time, we'd lose a lot of talent.

"If he was at the end of his career, he might feel differently about things. 
But he is a young guy, he is not warped by what has happened, he has been 
through this and now he has got a lot to prove. And that will be a big 
motivator for him - to prove people wrong."

The CV

Name Andrew Hornby

Born January 1967, Bristol

Education Clifton College; St Peter's College, Oxford (English degree); 
Harvard Business School (MBA)

Career: Boston Consulting Group; Blue Circle Home Products (1993-95); Asda, 
latterly managing director of the George clothing business (1996-99); Halifax, 
chief executive of retail division (1999-2005); HBOS, chief operating officer 
(2005-06); HBOS, chief executive (2006-09); Alliance Boots, chief executive 
(2009-)

Family Married with two children.
 