
The last time many people would have caught a glimpse of Michael Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove> was on the morning after the 
EU referendum when he appeared before the TV cameras looking like a bloke who 
had just come down from a bad acid trip to discover he had murdered several of 
his closest friends.

That, though, turned out to be just the start of his Charlie Manson political 
killing spree. Within a week, he had stabbed Boris Johnson repeatedly in the 
front before crashing and burning in his bid to become prime minister. His 
punishment was to be sent to the backbenches to reflect on the foolishness of 
his actions.

As justice secretary, Gove was a firm believer in the saying, “If you can’t do 
the time, don’t do the crime,” but he’s not finding it so easy to put into 
practice himself.

The normal sentence for a serial killer is life without parole, but Gove has 
come to the conclusion that, in his case, a couple of months is quite long 
enough. Mikey has had enough of being just another political hack, occasionally 
chipping in with backbench speeches that go unreported and unappreciated. Mikey 
believes he is worth more than this. Mikey believes the world is ready for The 
Return of the Govester. Mikey 2.0.

Sadly for Mikey, just about the only person to agree with him is the 
Brexit-supporting Labour peerMaurice Glasman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/jul/19/lord-glasman-radical-traditionalist>
, and the pair have set up a two-man commission to “Do Something About 
Immigration”. Which is why Mikey finally got the attention he had been craving 
for so long and was invited to appear on Sky News.

Sometimes you have to be careful what you wish for. There are some 
humiliations even a politician shouldn’t be made to endure. “Let’s just remind 
ourselves of one of the most momentous occasions of this summer,” said Sky’s
Adam Boulton <https://www.theguardian.com/media/adam-boulton>, not even 
bothering to conceal a smirk. The screen switched to Boris Johnson announcing 
he wasn’t going to run for leadership of the Conservative party after all. 
“What did you think when you saw that?”

“I didn’t watch it,” Gove insisted.

Boulton arched an eyebrow. Was Mikey really trying to suggest he hadn’t 
bothered to watch Boris: My Part in His Downfall? No matter. Boulton pressed on.

“But you did effectively bring about Boris’s withdrawal from the leadership 
race?” he observed.

“That was a complete coincidence,” said Mikey.

“Treachery. Nicking his phone. Conspiracy ...”

“That’s an unfair characterisation.”

“So there was no betrayal by you?”

“No. The mistake I made was that I should have paused before offering Boris 
support.”

Or, indeed, before withdrawing it. It’s fair to say Mikey has a bit of a way 
to go in his rehabilitation classes. Restorative justice must be on next year’s 
curriculum.

Boulton pressed on for an easy kill of his own. “So, what was your biggest 
mistake?” he enquired. “Supporting Boris, knifing Boris or thinking you were 
fit to be prime minister?”

“I did come third,” Mikey squeaked, defiantly.

“But more MPs believed even Andrea Leadsom was a better bet than you 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/02/andrea-leadsom-v-theresa-may>
.” That was the lowest of low blows. Living with the knowledge your colleagues 
have more faith in the environment minister’s competency is enough to keep 
anyone in therapy for decades.

Boulton’s bloodlust was out of control. Gove had been a key man and was now 
excluded. Boris was foreign secretary and doing well and Gove wasn’t. “You’re 
left to going around bayoneting the wounded,” he said, oblivious to the irony 
he was guilty of doing just that himself.

By now, Mikey was a wreck, praying for the interview to end as quickly as 
possible. He’d only imagined doing a three-minute interview and it was already 
creeping up to 10. Mikey found himself babbling stuff he knew that even he 
didn’t believe. “It’s great news the pound has been devalued by 30%,” he 
insisted.

“So, what are the immigration targets of your new commission?” asked Boulton, 
finally getting round to the reason Mikey had volunteered himself for this 
debacle.

“Um ... er ... I don’t really know. That’s why I want to have a commission.”

As Mikey tiptoed out of the studios, his phone rang. Maybe it was Theresa 
asking him back into the cabinet, having been dazzled by his performance. It 
wasn’t. It was his probation officer. His licence had been revoked.
 