
Tim Farron was just stepping up to his party conference podium when Brangelina 
split. Cue TV gags about Hollywood ructions ruining Tim’s big day. So of course 
a Facebook furore and Twitter deluge followed the Brad Pitt andAngelina Jolie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/angelinajolie> rupture (while the Bun and the 
Mirrorcleared six or eight pages and more upmarket editors pondered which way 
to turn).

But is past behaviour any real guide to divorce news today? Celebrity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/celebrity> magazine sales on both 
sides of the Atlantic are far from their lofty peak and sliding. Pitt plays 
grizzled heroes these days; Jolie seems happier behind a camera, directing. Six 
children are many things, but not perhaps the guarantee of continuing 
rose-tinted romance. Pitt’s previous marriage to Jennifer Aniston is old news, 
remembered in tranquillity byFriends fans who were young at the time.

So what did it all – the millions of the words, the melee of “sources” – add 
up too? When in doubt, turn to another hangover of great gossiping past:Perez 
Hilton <https://www.theguardian.com/media/perez-hilton>, busily aggregating the 
tales of cancelled rapture for his dotcom followers. He started with 35 stories 
from different sites (and building). Including: “It’s rumoured that the actress 
was ‘fed up’ with Brad’s alleged substance abuse and anger issues.” “Angelina 
reportedly hired private eye to uncover alleged affair with Marion Cotillard.” 
“Close sources say divorce had nothing to do with cheating.” “Marion Cotillard 
addresses affair rumours AND announces she’s pregnant with her second baby.” 
The couple “fought a lot over the years as more details surrounding their 
shocking divorce come to light”.

A forest of allegedly in a shocking swamp of reportedly. No revelation 
standing tall for more than a few nanoseconds (except perhaps “Watch the exact 
moment George Clooney found out about the divorce!”) Who cares about so much 
mutually self-cancelling tosh across acres of pages and screens?

At least the web can float and junk it in a trice. Click once for oblivion. 
Without, indeed, even pausing to address the resonant question posed by Louise 
Mensch’s Heat Street site: “Did Angelina’s friendship with British Lord William 
Hague freeze out Brad?”

Or perhaps they just couldn’t agree about Brexit.
 