
After hosting such a wonderful start to the World Cup it is about time Brazil 
joined their own party. Controversy overshadowed victory over Croatia and a 
goalless draw against Mexico five days later was not what an expectant public 
had in mind. There is tension in the air.Luiz Felipe Scolari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/luiz-felipe-scolari> has been playing the 
blame game, pointing the finger at the media, and now Alan Shearer, of all 
people, is getting under Brazil’s skin.

“Idiotic” was the word Dani Alves used to describe Shearer’s criticism of 
Fred, who is in danger of becoming this team’s Serginho, the maligned Brazilian 
striker whose limited ability made him the scapegoat for anything and 
everything that went wrong on the pitch in the early 80s. “Now the ball is 
round again,” João Saldanha, a formerBrazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil> manager, said rather cruelly when 
Serginho was substituted against New Zealand in 1982.

Shearer’s assessment of Fred was not as scathing but it was damning all the 
same. “I just don’t understand why Brazil are still picking him,” the former 
England striker said. “He doesn’t move, he doesn’t shoot and he’s dragging the 
team down. I don’t know if Brazil should change the system or play Neymar as a 
false nine but the fact is that Fred is not the answer for what they are doing 
now.”

It hit a nerve. Alves was furious – “These are some of the most idiotic 
comments that we can hear,” he said – yet, if truth be told, plenty of 
Brazilians would be nodding their head at the BBC pundit’s thoughts. Fred, the 
man who finished as joint top scorer at the Confederations Cup last year, has 
been peripheral bordering on invisible here.

The statistics are not kind. Fred has produced one attempt on goal in 158 
minutes – a header from a corner. He completed 10 accurate passes against 
Croatia – a game when he made a single run into the attacking third. Only half 
of the 16 passes he made during his 68 minutes on the pitch against Mexico 
found a Brazil shirt. He has not created a chance, never mind registered an 
assist, and he has lost the ball 17 times in total.

There are two schools of thought here: either Fred has to be taken out of the 
line of fire and given a break or he needs a run-out against one of the weakest 
teams in this tournament in order to give him the best possible chance of 
getting off the mark and regaining self-belief. Scolari has decided to go with 
the latter.

Cameroon, Brazil’s opponents at the Estádio Nacional, have been a shambles on 
and off the pitch. They initially refused to board the plane to Brazil after a 
row over bonuses. When Volker Finke’s side did get here they were quickly 
eliminated after losing their first two matches and the only blows their 
players have landed have been on each other, after Benoît Assou-Ekotto clashed 
with his team-mate Benjamin Moukandjoduring the humiliating 4-0 defeat against 
Croatia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/19/croatia-cameroon-world-cup-group-b-match-report>
.

Brazil, who need a point to be sure of reaching the knockout stage, have been 
preaching caution and makingCameroon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cameroon> sound like a wounded animal. 
“We will be facing a team that comes without any responsibility,” David Luiz 
said. “Their players will want to show that they can do better than they did in 
the first two matches. A victory against the hosts would be like a title to 
them.” Yet it is hard to look at this fixture as anything other than the 
perfect chance for theSeleção to cut loose before a last-16 game against 
Holland or Chile.

It is not that Brazil have been terrible; they have just not looked like 
Brazil. Scolari is a pragmatist and times change – there is no point pining for 
the days when Zico, Falcao and Socrates operated on the basis that they would 
always be able to score one more than the opposition. At the same time it has 
been alarming to see so little creativity in the team and the extent to which 
Neymar is relied on to make things happen.

A quick history lesson tells us that Brazil have been here before. In 1958 
they scored three in their first match and drew their second 0-0, as is the 
case now. Vicente Feola, the Brazil coach at the time, made changes. He brought 
a 17-year-old by the name of Edson Arantes do Nascimento into the team – 
otherwise known asPelé <https://www.theguardian.com/football/pele>.

Garrincha, that mercurial dribbler, was also granted a starting place. Brazil 
won their next four games, scored 13 goals in the process – Pelé got six of 
them as Garrincha wreaked havoc – and they were crowned world champions for the 
first time.

And there the similarities end. There is nobody remotely close to Pelé or 
Garrincha – a player capable of coming in and transforming the fortunes of the 
team – sitting on the current Brazil bench. Jô, who scored six goals in 42 
largely forgettable appearances for Manchester City a few years ago, was 
Scolari’s go-to man when Fred was withdrawn against Mexico. The other two 
substitutes introduced that night were Bernard, the Shakhtar Donetsk winger, 
and Chelsea’s Willian – talented but not world-beaters.

There is something missing, not just up front but in the centre of midfield, 
where Brazil are failing to dominate games – Marcelo and Alves are far more 
influential on the flanks – leading to calls for Paulinho to be dropped. For 
those who regularly watch the Premier League, it will come as a surprise that 
the Tottenham Hotspur midfielder is picked in preference to Manchester City’s 
Fernandinho. Paulinho gets forward more than Fernandinho but he is neither 
attacking nor defending well at the moment.

It is, of course, still early days and two games into a World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> is far too soon to be 
tipping a winner or, for that matter, writing off a team that is on the verge 
of reaching the last 16. Brazil, most people believe, will get better. They 
have a sprinkling of world-class players, a game-changer in Neymar and the 
weight of a nation behind them.

Some of those fans were overcome with emotion when the bus carrying the 
message “Brace Yourselves! The Sixth Is Coming!” pulled into the Brasilia 
Palace hotel just before midnight on Saturday. The public had been barred from 
entering the premises 12 hours earlier and exclusive guests are banned from 
taking photographs. Brazil are being kept well under wraps. On the pitch, 
however, everyone wants to see what Scolari’s players have to offer.
 