
Heather Poore, youth volunteering project manager, Global Action Plan 
<http://www.globalactionplan.org.uk/>

Have patience. It's very hard to get work straight away so be creative about 
how you can gain experience in the industry

After a few weeks of trawling the internet looking for work in the 
environmental sector I received an email from Milkround with a link to a new 
youth volunteering programme which had just been launched by the environmental 
charity Global Action Plan. The project looked fun, engaging, involved other 
young people and aimed to save carbon so I sent them an email straight away. I 
was one of the first volunteers to ask for more information and register with 
the project so was fortunate to then be invited to the launch of the 
governments Road to Copenhagen strategy at London Zoo, with Global Action Plan, 
where I met Ed Miliband and heard about the government's plans for developing a 
sustainable future.

At the event I met staff from Global Action Plan for the first time and having 
got on really well with them I was fortunate to then be offered an internship. 
I started the internship straight away, volunteering in its youth team. After 
volunteering full time for two months a job vacancy opened up within the 
organisation, so I applied and was successful. In October 2009, five months 
after my initial contact with Global Action Plan, I became the youth 
volunteering coordinator.

I realise that this sounds like it all came really easily, but having had no 
working experience in the environmental sector I had very little confidence 
which is why being able to commit to something as a volunteer and learn the 
ropes before becoming employed was a huge benefit. This also demonstrates that 
opportunities can crop up at any time and it's just a case of taking the 
initiative to email people, ask questions and find out more as often as you can.

Attend every event, conference, workshop and volunteering day you possibly can

There is so much going on in the environmental sector as sustainability feeds 
into absolutely everything. Although you can read a lot online, attending 
events and speaking to people first-hand exposes you to so much more 
information, gives you a chance to gain insights, ask direct questions and, 
most importantly, make contacts.

When I meet people I like to find out about their backgrounds, what their job 
involves and what their goals are. This makes it possible to identify areas 
where we could potentially collaborate or promote each others work and 
achievements. I also like to ask about people's interests as it helps me gain 
an idea about the bigger picture, such as people's motives and routes to 
joining the environmental sector, which then helps me communicate and engage 
others in environmental issues.

The beauty of the environmental sector is you meet people who are all out to 
achieve a common goal, yet are all approaching the goal from a different 
motive, background, perspective and are faced by different challenges. It's 
important to be aware of as many of these factors as possible.

Sign up to all of the environmental news, jobs websites and newsletters

My favourite sites are Springwise <http://www.springwise.com/> and 
BusinessGreen Daily <http://www.businessgreen.com/>. Twitter is also a 
fantastic way to keep on top of the latest news and hear from people directly, 
I particularly like to follow The Environmentalist and (even if I didn't work 
for them) Global Action Plan/Trewin Restorick are great ones to follow for 
keeping up to date with practical action taken around climate change within 
schools, business, young people and communities.

I now work on the Greenprint 2020 
<http://www.globalactionplan.org.uk/greenprint-2020-vision> project where we 
give 16 to 25 year olds to the opportunity to have their say, create their 
vision of a sustainable future and then provide them the tools to work towards 
creating it. We offer volunteering opportunities and internships which have so 
far helped many young people make that first step into gaining experience in 
the environmental world, so I would advise any young person to register for the
newsletters <http://www.surveymonkey.com/s/Greenprint2020newsletter>, Twitter 
<http://www.twitter.com/greenprint2020> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/GP2020> news feeds – that's how I started out!


Laura Duggan, environmental executive, George Best Belfast City Airport 
<http://www.belfastcityairport.com/>

You need to gain experience in the field

When I first decided that I would like to get involved in the environmental 
sector, I joinedVoluntary Service International in Dublin <http://www.vsi.ie> 
and undertook a short term volunteer project in Iceland on the theme of 
environment and sustainability. I was also really interested in development 
studies as well and so I took a course at night delivered bySUAS Educational 
Development <http://www.suas.ie>. I knew then that I wanted to pursue further 
studies in the field and so I decided to apply for a master's in Leadership for 
Sustainable Development at Queens' University Belfast. I chose this course in 
particular because it was very much geared towards gaining professional and 
practical first-hand experience and was to involve a number of short term 
placements in the NGO, governance and business sectors.

During this master's, I worked with Northern Ireland Environment Link (the 
forum and networking body for environmental organisations in Northern Ireland 
<http:>) to conduct research on the sustainability of transport in Northern 
Ireland and with theDepartment of Agriculture and Rural Development in Northern 
Ireland <http://www.dardni.gov.uk> collating existing statistical information 
with respect to rural areas to inform the wider project under way to develop a 
Rural Evidence Base for Northern Ireland. While I was fortunate to be put in 
touch with these organisations by my course director, it was necessary to prove 
early on that I was up for the task.

I found these placements enormously helpful for me in terms of gaining 
in-depth knowledge in key areas and being exposed to leaders in the field 
driving sustainable change and having the opportunity to learn from them. 
Furthermore, it gave me the chance to demonstrate the ability to work 
autonomously and to meet tight deadlines while producing work that was of a 
high quality and succinct.

I was really lucky to have also been awarded a North-South Masters Bursary for 
2008-09 (IBEC-CBI Joint Business Council, Universities Ireland 
<http://www.universitiesireland.ie/news/scholarship2008.php>) which was 
sponsored by George Best Belfast City Airport. For this reason, I had the 
opportunity to undertake my business placement at the airport where I carried 
out a review of the environmental policies and practices of the airport's 
business partners and suppliers. Through demonstrating my ability and 
commitment during this placement I managed to secure a fixed term contract as 
environmental officer with the airport on graduating from my master's.

Overall, by undertaking placements in various sectors and subject areas, it 
allowed me to get a better appreciation of the challenges and opportunities for 
the delivery of environmental improvement and sustainability across sectors as 
well as acquire in-depth knowledge in range of areas including, sustainable 
transport policy, low carbon technologies, climate change policy, sustainable 
procurement, environmental legislation, and so forth, which I think is hugely 
important given that the environmental/sustainability sector is so broad and 
cross cutting in nature.

Be flexible and and don't be afraid to stray beyond your comfort zone in terms 
of previous academic and professional experience.

I undertook a number of placements as part of my master's. These were quite 
varied and sometimes did not have a strong link to my academic studies – for 
example my placement in the Rural Policy division in the Department of 
Agriculture and Rural Development. That being said, I was able to apply 
previously acquired professional and academic skills to conduct research and 
compile and present findings while learning about the field as I went along. I 
think this was hugely important step for me to be able to demonstrate my 
flexibility and transferable skills.

Charlie Symonds, knowledge transfer associate – sustainable development 
engineer,Stannah Stairlifts <http://www.stannahstairlifts.co.uk/> and Oxford 
Brookes University. <http://www.brookes.ac.uk/>

Show leadership in pushing environmental issues and know how to communicate 
your ideas a non technical audience

When speaking with colleagues around the business there is not always a deep 
understanding of the environmental issues we face in today's society. The 
environmental field is a fast moving one and it is important to stay up-to-date 
with the latest thinking. This must then be filtered out around the business to 
people who are not necessarily environmental professionals. It is therefore 
important to be able to explain these principles in a clear fashion to a 
non-technical audience.

An example of this would be when introducing Stannah to the principles of life 
cycle assessment and how to go about conducting a study. I found the best way 
to do this was using diagrams and flow charts to clearly show the stages and 
activates/data that were needed for each task. I also try to read and summarise 
legislation putting it in context by showing how this might have an impact on 
our business.

I speak with management to try and gain their buy-in on my ideas and speak 
with the people conducting affected roles to try and put together the best 
proposal. Communication is therefore important at many levels within the 
business.

I have developed my knowledge by reading around the area of environmental 
issues and sustainable design, paying particular interest to life cycle 
assessment. TheIEMA <http://www.iema.net/> website and the Environmentalist 
Magazine <http://www.environmentalistonline.com/> have proved good sources of 
information on environmental issues, legislation and conferences to attend.

I have done some training on Neuro Linguistic Programming and watch successful 
people in the media to try and model their behaviour and style of presenting 
(Barack Obama would be a good example). This has helped me in presenting ideas 
to the business and leading with confidence. I have also completed theChartered 
Management Institute level 5 Diploma in Management and Leadership 
<http://www.managers.org.uk/> which has given me many of the core skills I use 
on a day to day basis.

The Knowledge Transfer Partnership gave me a start in my career

I would fully promote the Knowledge Transfer Partnership 
<http://www.ktponline.org.uk> as a scheme to anyone starting out on their 
career after university. These partnerships are available across a broad range 
of industries.

The KTP is a partnership formed as a three-way project between a graduate, an 
organisation and a university with the project being part funded by the
Technology Strategy Board <http://www.innovateuk.org/>. In my case this was 
Stannah Stairlifts Ltd and Oxford Brookes University. I have supervisors at 
both the university and at Stannah with my role being to take the learning 
developed within the university on product sustainability and imbed it within 
Stannah.

With my project been based around improving product and business 
sustainability, working on the KTP has enabled me to dramatically deepen my 
knowledge in this field and also apply this to a business on a live project.

Heather Poore is a youth volunteering project manager at environment charity 
Global Action Plan <http://www.globalactionplan.org.uk/>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 