
Britain voting to leave the European Union would play into the hands of 
Islamic State terrorists, ex-Downing Street spin doctorAlastair Campbell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alastaircampbell> has warned.

Other international figures hoping for a Brexit are the Russian president, 
Vladimir Putin, and US presidential hopeful Donald Trump, he claimed.

Tony Blair’s one-time right-hand man penned his remarks for a speech on 
Thursday to a conference in Dublin, where he is rallying business leaders to 
mount a campaign to persuade 1.5 million Irish voters in Britain to back 
staying within the union.

“No serious overseas player thinks we should leave, unless it suits their 
agenda,” he will tell the Irish Business and Employers Confederation.

“Putin probably. Isis definitely. And, depending what mood he is in, Donald 
Trump. That’s about it on the international scene.”

Observers have suggested Britain voting to leave in the in/out referendum on 
23 June would aid Islamic terrorists andPutin in their aim to destabiliseEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

US Republican presidential candidate Trump has claimed the UK could back an 
exit because of the migration crisis.

Campbell said the referendum was as significant to Britain as several general 
elections.

“The historic significance, if we leave, is greater than any of the elections 
I was involved in,” he said. “The consequences – for jobs, living standards, 
culture, national security and our standing in the world – are greater.”

Campbell, a firm backer of the remain camp, said he would not call the result 
at this stage. But he said: “Iif I had to put my life on it, right here, right 
now” he believed the UK would vote to stay within the EU.

As in the Scottish independence referendum, he predicted an “emotional 
rollercoaster” in the weeks before the nation decides.

Campbell is appealing to Irish people to help swing the vote towards remaining 
within the EU by lifting the phone or emailing family, friends and contacts 
among more than 1.5 million people living in the UK who are fromIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>.

“I urge you, the Irish, with a legitimate interest in the outcome, and genuine 
concerns as I have been hearing in recent days, to get stuck in,” he said.

“Yes, only the British people will decide. But you can be influencers, and you 
must be. It is a legitimate and necessary thing to do. Please do it. My country 
needs you.

“The real battle is going to be fought in millions of British homes and 
workplaces as people turn to friends and family and people we trust and 
respect, work with and for. And that includes people who do not have a vote, 
like you.”
 