
Ahead of the Activate New York Summit 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/activate-new-york>, Kathryn Peters, 
the co-founder of TurboVote, spoke to us about how their platform is being used 
to improve the voter registration process in the US and her hopes to completely 
redesign the user experience.

Can you tell us a bit about TurboVote and your reasons for founding it?

My friend Seth Flaxman first came to me with the idea – he realised he'd 
missed an election back home. He was living in another state for graduate 
school, and he'd never even heard about it. So he came to me to ask how hard it 
would be to build an election-reminder service.

I happen to be from a town with an amazing clerk who sends reminder emails, 
and I was surprised to find out that she's the exception rather than the norm. 
It seemed like such an obvious, simple idea I had to make it happen. It turns 
out collecting and managing data for 7,000 jurisdictions is a bit harder than 
I'd expected – but by the time I learned that, I was too attached to the idea 
to quit.

How does TurboVote work?

We track elections (and deadlines, forms, and rules) across the US and use 
them to create customised voting reminders for anyone who wants them, so you 
can sign up once and have all the election information you'll ever need, when 
you need it.

When a user first signs up, we'll help her register to vote or update her 
registration, ask whether she prefers to vote by mail or at the polls, and then 
send her reminders about upcoming elections. And because getting registered or 
requesting a ballot still requires paper forms in most places, we'll even mail 
her the right completed paperwork at the right moment, with an addressed, 
stamped envelope.

How are you partnering with other organisations to deliver your service?

We work with colleges and other non-profit organisations and help them 
institutionalise voter engagement into their core operations. These partners 
also sponsor mailings, so we can send the necessary forms to their voters. 
Students at Webster College even made a video comparing our voter registration 
process to renting a DVD from Netflix, which was great.

Next, we're beginning to design and build tools for local election offices, to 
simplify their work and help them better serve their voters. I spent a research 
week this spring back home in Missouri shadowing Boone County Clerk Wendy Noren 
– and left with dozens of ideas for collaboration.

What results have you seen from your service?

We're serving just over 200,000 voters today. Of the people who were 
registering to vote for the first time with us last year, 75% voted in the 
presidential election, as did 80% of those who used the site to update their 
voter registrations. This year, we sent out reminders about hundreds of state 
and local elections and are working with nearly all of Virginia's public 
colleges and universities to register students for this November's 
gubernatorial election.

What's next for TurboVote?

Plenty. I'm putting together a brain trust of election officials to help 
develop and test tools for tracking absentee ballots through the mail. From 
there, we'll keep building out an election administration toolkit, until we 
completely redesign the user experience for voting so it actually fits the way 
we live today. I should be able to register to vote online, request a ballot, 
and have it delivered to my mailbox. That kind of integration means working 
with government, and changing how they serve voters.

We're also building application programming interfaces (APIs) and developer 
tools to share all this data we have, so it's easier to integrate voter 
engagement into everything and reaching people who don't participate – yet.

Finally, what is your message for the delegates attending the Guardian's 
Activate <https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/activate> New York Summit?

There's far more innovation happening in government than you'd expect; it's 
just harder for good ideas to catch on and go viral.

Kathryn Peters is the co-founder of TurboVote <https://turbovote.org/register>

Get more articles like this sent direct to your inbox by signing up for free 
membership <https://register.theguardian.com/media/> to the Guardian Media 
Network <https://www.theguardian.com/media-network> – this content is brought 
to you byGuardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. 
 