
Brisbane’s Asian Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/asian-champions-league> campaign is on 
life support after a 3-1 defeat to Suwon Bluewings in South Korea.

After a cagey opening half, the hosts tore the game to shreds with a flurry of 
goals after the break, taking a huge step towards wrapping up second spot in 
Group G and qualifying for the round of 16 at the Roar’s expense.

Brisbane must beat group leaders Beijing Guoan in China on April 21 and 
Japan’s Urawa Red Diamonds on the Gold Coast on May 5 – while also relying on 
the Bluewings to falter at the same time – to have any chance of remaining in 
the tournament.

A horrendous miscued pass from the usually reliable Luke Brattan in the 52nd 
minute opened the door for Suwon to assert control. Brattan mistakenly bobbled 
the ball right into the path of international Jong Tae-se, who steadied and 
then played in Kwon Chang-hoon for a smooth finish past goalkeeper Jamie Young.

Nine minutes later, Suwon doubled their advantage when Seo Jung-jin skinned 
left-back Corey Brown and pulled the trigger from close range.

A brilliant long-range free-kick from Yeom Ki-hun in the 67th minute whistled 
into the top corner of the net and made it three for the Bluewings.

Socceroos defender Luke DeVere headed in a consolation goal with less than 15 
minutes to go but, despite the Roar’s historic knack for comebacks, there was 
nothing more to come.

Rubbing salt into the wounds for the Roar was a second-half injury to young 
defender James Donachie, who was making his first appearance since returning 
from international duty.

With Donachie, DeVere, Brown and captain Matt McKay all on deck and prized 
playmaker Thomas Broich fit again, Brisbane fielded a side verging on full 
strength but lacked any penetration in the final third.

Their only other clear-cut chance came through Brandon Borrello moments after 
Suwon’s first goal, but the young striker fired wide of the mark.

Suwon should have taken the lead much earlier, after they butchered two golden 
chances in the same passage of play just before the interval.

The first was served up to the home side on a platter by Young, who coughed up 
possession to Lee Sang-ho on the edge of his own area with a miscued pass. 
Deputising for the injured Michael Theo (groin), Young was able to scramble and 
make a desperate save.
 