
For more than 30 years successive Conservative and Labour prime ministers have 
declared with a pleading ebullience that Britain is "open for business". In 
response, some of the richest people from around the world have strode through 
the open doors. Oligarchs swarm to vibrant London, choosing the capital over 
New York as a favoured destination. The City of London is still a magnet, the 
2008 crash fast becoming a distant memory. Even British politics is open for 
business. Election strategists from the US, Australia and South Africa wave 
their wands on behalf of the three main parties. Foreign donors line up to fund 
the Conservatives' next election campaign, as a few did for Labour at the last 
election. In the UK all are more than welcome to run our companies, football 
clubs and buy our properties.

Or at least they were. The familiar incantation about openness is suddenly 
qualified. The shooting down of Malaysia Airlines flight MH17 by Russian 
separatists and Vladimir Putin's response has caused a degree of ideological 
confusion at the top of the Conservative party. Even the most enthusiastic 
advocates of laissez-faire economics are thrown into a degree of farcical 
bewilderment in the face of Putin's assertive nationalism.Monty Python's Flying 
Circus might have taken a bow in London last weekend but the surreal prospect 
of a tennis match involving David Cameron, Boris Johnson and the wife of a 
former Putin ally exceeds in dark absurdity any sketch revived by John Cleese 
and co. Vladimir Chernukhin, a billionaire, was deputy finance minister during 
Putin's first term as president of Russia. Chernukin's wifebid for the match at 
a recent Tory party fundraising dinner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/jul/23/boris-johnson-tennis-match-russian-chernukhin>
.

Plans for the sporting contest are not going smoothly. The Tory competitors, 
united in their instinctive enthusiasm for global wealth pouring into London, 
are troubled. After the shooting down of MH17 Cameron declared that he would 
consider it unthinkable to sell a warship to Russia, as France is planning to 
do. In contrast to such French amorality, Cameron called for the toughest 
possible sanctions against Russia. Yet there he is planning to play tennis with 
former colleagues of Putin in order to raise £160,000 for the Conservative 
party.

At first Johnson raised doubts that the game with the Russian "geezer" would 
go ahead. Later he popped up to declare the match was on. There has been much 
anxious checking at the top of the Conservative party as to the relationship 
between the oligarch and Putin. Johnson is reassured but even now some senior 
Conservatives worry about the symbolism of a prime-ministerial tennis match for 
cash with any figures associated with Putin. The game might still not take 
place.

The circuitous ambiguity extends well beyond a game of tennis. Cameron calls 
for tough sanctions, but measures being considered in response to his calls are 
likely to hit the UK more than any other EU countries, to the concern of UK 
ministers.

The conflict between doing what is right and the need to attract the globe's 
wealthiest people was in play long before the current international crisis. 
Last year, after some agonising, George Osborne confirmed that foreign owners 
of UK property would pay capital gains tax for the first time. The move was 
aimed in particular at oligarchs buying up properties in London and leaving 
them unoccupied. On theToday programme Evan Davis of the BBC asked the 
chancellor why the policy had not been introduced previously. Osborne replied 
candidly that both Labour and Conservative governments were worried that the 
tax would scare off foreign investors from the London property market. That is 
the deal in open Britain: the very rich can make even bigger fortunes because 
they bring in vast amounts of cash. In Brussels, where Cameron has called for 
tough sanctions against Russia, the UK's capital is sometimes referred to as 
Londongrad.

Some MPs have called for Cameron to target business figures close to Putin's 
regime, citingRoman Abramovich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/roman-abramovich>, the owner of Chelsea 
football club, Alisher Usmanov, who holds a stake in Arsenal, and Mikhail 
Fridman, who runs the £18bn investment vehicle LetterOne Group, which has 
offices on Park Lane. Cameron hesitates much as Osborne paused in relation to 
capital gains tax. Cameron wants to be seen to be tough against Putin, but the 
oligarchs' money boosts the UK economy.

It is no coincidence that two of the three oligarchs are linked with football 
clubs. The Premier League is famously open for business. Wealthy families from 
the US own Manchester United and Liverpool. Sheikh Mansour, who bought 
Manchester City, is one of football's wealthiest owners, with a family fortune 
of at least $1 trillion. The wealthy foreign owners turn to the Premier League 
for many reasons. The most fundamental one is that the UK's light regulatory 
touch makes it easier for them to do so.

Football highlights the contradictory feelings in the UK. Most fans do not 
complain when they acquire a wealthy owner. The best footballers join their 
clubs on fantasy salaries. The newly owned clubs start to win trophies that 
fans had dreamed about for decades.

But the downsides are deep and work on many different levels, from 
astronomical ticket prices to clubs becoming no more than commodities for 
distant owners, a means to make easy money. In English football lines of 
control and accountability are narrow. Transparency is virtually nonexistent. 
In World Cup-winning Germany clubs allocate half their shares to fans and since 
the turn of the century there has been a national development scheme that 
trains thousands of German professional coaches. In England fans are powerless 
and the short term is what matters, winning the next match and the one after 
that. If foreign players and managers are what is required to meet immediate 
needs those needs must be met. Politics has followed football. Preparing for 
the closest election in decades, the Australian Lynton Crosby is the key 
strategist forDavid Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron>
. Ed Miliband has hired President Obama's ally David Axelrod. Cameron had 
already turned to another member of the Obama team, Jim Messina. Nick Clegg's 
director of strategy is the South African Ryan Coetzee. They are hired for the 
same reasons the FA turned to Sven-Göran Eriksson and then Fabio Capello. 
Crosby, in particular, has more power in relation to election planning than any 
Tory cabinet minister apart from Osborne. The policy pledges made before an 
election shape what happens subsequently if a party wins.

There is no direct connection between the appointment of foreign strategists 
and the partial dependence on foreign donors to keep parties afloat. The 
strategist plays a direct role. The donor provides cash. But both are symptoms 
of the fact that political parties are dying in the UK. Memberships are 
falling. Fewer talented figures are attracted to politics. Leaders turn to 
talent from abroad and need cash where they can find it to fund their parties. 
Chernukin was by no means the only foreign donor at the Conservatives' recent 
fundraising dinner and a grand private members' club. Russian property 
developers, a Greek shipping tycoon, an Iranian investment banker, a Slovenian 
private equity magnate, Bermudan and Dubai-based financiers mingled with stars 
of the Tory party. Mahmoud Khayami, a French citizen, was one of Labour's 
biggest backers before the last election.

Party leaders hate raising money and do it because they are too scared to call 
for state funding for parties, or are ideologically opposed to such a move. 
Quite often feeling relatively besieged and powerless, leaders do not recognise 
that to some business figures they seem omnipotent in their might. Some foreign 
donors hand over money because they enjoy the proximity to apparent power and 
that is the end of it. The cash is pocket money for them. But others seek 
influence with the access their money has purchased. "Donate to the 
Conservative party and stop the mansion tax from being introduced" is a potent 
message to some foreign donors at the moment. Only the Conservatives oppose the 
tax.

How to explain the resolute enthusiasm with which the UK has embraced the 
openness of globalisation from the big bang in the 1980s through to Tony 
Blair's New Labour and now in relation to the 21st-century super-city of 
London? Part of the answer lies in the obvious short-term benefits. There is an 
injection of dynamism, energy and cultural variety as well as cash when a 
country is indiscriminately open. Part of the New Labour settlement was to 
accept with a near-Thatcherite relish the vibrancy of markets and spend the 
cash that flowed to improve public services. For decades, as a backlash against 
the stifling corporatist 1970s, momentum has been with those who argue for the 
lightest of light touches.

But now there are wobbles even among some of the most committed free 
marketeers. The recent attempt by theUS firm Pfizer to take over the UK drugs 
company AstraZeneca 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/19/pfizer-failed-takeover-bid-astrazeneca>
 provoked an unusual range of dissent across the political spectrum. The three 
main parties discovered a passion for research and development that they feared 
might be undermined by the takeover. In the media theDaily Mail led the 
opposition. Even Osborne, a committed free marketer and the latest chancellor 
to stress that Britain is open for business, in his last budget, expressed 
doubts about the bid and sought more robust levels of commitment from Pfizer. 
Miliband called for a public-interest test to become law, a proposal now 
supported by the business secretary, Vince Cable.

Meanwhile, Osborne goes ahead with his capital gains tax on foreign owners. 
Cameron worries about sanctions against Russia that might cost hundreds of 
millions of pounds, but still plans for them. Possibly Miliband will introduce 
state funding of political parties if he wins, ending the reliance on foreign 
donors. If Labour were to win the election it will not only be foreign 
governments that can bid to run the UK's railways, but the British one too.

Such freakishly unusual interventions are signs that attitudes towards 
openness are changing slightly in the UK. If a slick prime minister and a 
popular mayor are thrown into bewildered doubt over whether or not to play a 
tennis match, the tectonic plates are shifting. Suddenly Britain is open for 
business with a few more conditions attached.
 