
Despite the Church of England spokesperson’s view that global “adherence to 
religion is growing rather than decreasing” (Christians now in a minority as UK 
becomes less religious 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/23/no-religion-outnumber-christians-england-wales-study>
, 24 May), the latest data pointing to a rapidly increasing non-religious 
society in the UK must ring alarm bells for the future state of Christianity. I 
have been very lucky to have grown up as part of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Youth 
Association (AMYA), which constantly engages its younger members to not only 
learn about their faith, but also to develop attitudes that help them to 
integrate with wider society through activities such as poppy appeals, charity 
collections and blood donations; furthermore, they get their youngsters to 
organise events and deliver speeches at local, regional and national levels, 
which grants them key experiences to better prepare them for the world of work. 
Religious institutions need to remain relevant if they want to survive; if they 
fail to address both moral and secular issues in modern ways, youngsters will 
look for leadership elsewhere. I sincerely hope the church finds a way to 
counter this downward spiral; perhaps they could glean some new ideas by 
looking at how AMYA engages its youth.
Usman Khan
Croydon

• You concentrate on the decline of Anglicanism and Roman Catholicism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/catholicism>, but fail to identify the 
significant increase in Protestant evangelicals. “Other Christians” (mainly 
evangelicals) are now almost twice as numerous as Roman Catholics! But the 
overall figures confirm that England and Wales is minority Christian. These 
countries are presently heathen but, in time, due to demographic trends, 
England and Wales will be majority Muslim. Looking ahead, much thought will now 
have to be given to the role of the Church of England as the established church 
and, indeed, the crown itself. As a royalist I am concerned at these trends.
Lord Kilclooney
House of Lords

• In view of your front-page headline, “Christians now in a minority as UK 
becomes less religious”, should not more than half of the bishops in the House 
of Lords be removed? Surely they are irrelevant to our now more secular society.
Bernard Lancaster
Forest Town, Nottinghamshire

• If the decline in church membership is set to continue, it’s worth looking 
at the bathwater that we’re throwing out with the baby. It’s fine that we’re 
living without ancient texts as our moral guides, but less fine that we find 
ourselves lonely, without communities to sustain us. Can we have a national 
conversation about how a good community is organised, and by what principles it 
survives? Like, how we can be interested in other people’s different ideas and 
experiences, rather than surrounding ourselves with people who agree with us? 
And how we can educate our children to be involved in helping other people and 
the planet? Most of all, how we can retrieve the concept of “the common good”?
Alison Leonard
Hebden Bridge, West Yorkshire
 