
Britain is now officially a billionaires' playground, with more billionaires 
per capita than any other country.

This elite club has 104 members who share a fortune of more than £301bn. That 
figure compares with 30 – worth £65bn – a decade ago, and gives Britain more 
billionaires per head of population than any other country in the G8,according 
to the Sunday Times Rich List 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/news/uk_news/National/article1409583.ece>.

Indian-born brothers Sri and Gopi Hinduja top the list with a fortune of 
£11.9bn. The London-based pair, who run the global conglomerate Hinduja Group, 
saw their wealth rise by £1.3bn in the past year, knocking Russian business 
magnateAlisher Usmanov <https://www.theguardian.com/business/alisher-usmanov> 
off the top after the Arsenal shareholder's fortune fell to £10.6bn.

Many of the list's members pay little or no income tax because they are not 
domiciled here.

With a fortune of nearly £4bn, Lady Green, wife of Topshop tycoon Sir Philip 
Green, is one of 14 women on the list, but she lives in Monaco. Ann Gloag, who 
is listed along with her brother, Sir Brian Souter, as being worth £1bn, is the 
only businesswoman on the list, with the rest either inheriting or gaining 
billionaire status through marriage.

The super-rich want to live in Britain because of "culture, financial 
services, nice tax regime, good education for their kids and a nice lifestyle 
where they meet their friends", Philip Beresford, the study's author, told the 
BBC. London has more billionaires than any other city in the world with 72 – 
far ahead of its nearest rival, Moscow, which has 48.

Only three of the top 20 are British, with Sir David and Sir Frederick 
Barclay, the publishers and property developers, the only self-made 
billionaires in this group. The richest Briton, the Duke of Westminster, is 
ranked 10th with a fortune of £8.5bn.

A decade ago, having £700m in the bank was enough to be among Britain's 50 
wealthiest people, but today you need at least £1.7bn. The combined wealth of 
the Britain's super-rich is now greater than 2008's pre-recession levels, when 
the total wealth of the UK's 75 billionaires was £201bn.

The biggest risers are Kirsten and Jorn Rausing, members of the Tetra Pak 
dynasty, who saw their wealth surge from £3.7bn to £8.8bn. Usmanov was the 
biggest faller, down 20%.

Among the new members of the club is West End producer Sir Cameron Mackintosh, 
whose fortune increased by £175m to £1bn, and Jon Hunt, the founder of estate 
agents Foxtons, who is now worth £1.1bn. The wealthiest new entry is Carrie and 
Francois Perrodo and their family, who own the London-based Perenco oil and gas 
operation and are worth an esitmated £6.1bn.
 