
A friend of the British hostage being threatened with murder by Islamic State 
militants has made an impassionedvideotaped plea 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qftTf0itVm4> to the group's leader in an 
attempt to save his life.

The appeal, in both Arabic and English and addressed directly to Abu Bakr 
al-Baghdadi, who styles himself as caliph of the self-proclaimed state, was 
posted on YouTube Wednesday, four days after militantsthreatened to kill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/14/alan-henning-isis-syria-hostage-aid-worker>
 the aid convoy volunteer from north-west England.

The friend, who calls himself Abu Abdullah, is understood to have witnessed 
Alan Henning's abduction near Aleppo last December. After describing how the 
taxi driver from Greater Manchester – "a family man, a good man" – washed cars 
to raise money to buy medical equipment for Syrians, he breaks down, begging 
al-Baghdadi to spare his life.

"He felt safe, relaxed and happy, believing as we did that no harm could come 
to him, or us, while he was in the place under your care – especially because 
he was bringing much needed aid to the brothers and sisters inSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>." He begs al-Baghdadi to "honour our 
amana" – a pledge of safety that Henning had received from his Muslim friends – 
and set him free.

Henning, 47, who is married with two teenage children, volunteered to join his 
Muslim friends on the convoy last Christmas. It is thought to have been at 
least his second trip to Syria.

He and his friends were surrounded by armed men at a warehouse a short time 
after crossing the Turkish border on Boxing Day. He was separated from the 
group, according to accounts that some gave to journalists after they were 
released and returned to Britain, and taken away.

They and Henning's family remained silent about his plight, on the advice of 
the UK Foreign Office, until he appeared in the group's latest video last 
weekend.

Entitled A Message to the Allies of America, the film first shows David 
Haines, the Scottish aid worker, being forced to deliver a speech in which he 
blames his death upon David Cameron and Britain's relationship with the United 
States. It then depicts Haines's murder by beheading.

The killer is then shown holding Henning by the collar of the orange jumpsuit 
in which he is dressed. Indicating towards his captive with his knife, the 
killer says: "If you, Cameron, persist in fighting theIslamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis>, then you, like your master Obama, 
will have the blood of your people on your hands."

As well as making the video appeal, Henning's friends released a clip in which 
Henning explains why he has decided to spend Christmas travelling to Syria.

He says that joining a Syrian aid convoy was "all worthwhile when you see what 
is needed actually get to where it needs to go. That makes it all worthwhile.

"No sacrifice we do is nothing compared to what they're going through every 
day on a daily basis."

Cage, an organisation founded by Moazzam Begg to campaign for the release of 
prisoners in Guantánamo Bay after his own release from the US military 
facility, described Henning's kidnapping as a contravention of Islamic law. 
Begg was himselfcharged with alleged terror offences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/mar/01/moazzam-begg-charged-syria-terrorism-offences-guantanamo-bay>
 relating to Syria earlier this year.

In a statement, Cage research director Asim Qureshi said: "Alan Henning is not 
involved in any hostility to Islam or Muslims. Therefore, he cannot be 
considered a prisoner of war under Islamic law and should be released 
immediately. We believe there are no grounds for holding Henning prisoner or 
executing him."

In his appeal, Abu Abdullah goes on: "Alan was moved by the suffering of the 
Syrian people, in particular the children. He devoted all his free time, 
raising money and awareness about the suffering. He washed cars to raise money, 
he collected aid, he talked to everybody he met about the crimes committed 
against the Muslims in Syria.

"In December last year he missed Christmas with his own family, to spend it 
helping our brothers and sisters in Syria. We all remember one night, on the 
journey to Syria, some brothers were so tired they wanted to get a hotel. But 
Alan said: 'No, not me, I'm going to sleep in the van, and the money I save, it 
can go towards the Syrian people.' This is the kind of man he was.

"He is a family man. He is a good man. Like you and like us, his only interest 
was helping to relieve the suffering of brothers and sisters in Syria. Please 
do not take his life to pay for the crimes that the international governments 
have committed. Alan ignored advice from the British government and took the 
risk to travel to Syria to help the people.

"We read every day about innocent brothers and sisters being killed in the air 
strikes, but this man is innocent of all these crimes. He has no affiliation 
with any political agenda.

"He has shown through his actions, and his love and concern for our brothers 
and sisters that he is not an enemy of Islam or the Islamic State. We plead 
with you to show him compassion and mercy as he showed compassion and mercy for 
the Muslims of Syria."

Finally, he says: "We beg you to tread the path of justice and show him the 
compassion that Allah, praise be upon him, placed in the hearts of the 
believers and in your heart.

"Please show the world how merciful Muslims can be. We know you're not scared 
of the creation, only the Creator, so please, please, please release Alan."
 