
Athletes are always striving to find new ways to become faster – Adam Gemili 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-gemili>, though, has taken it several 
steps further by using his dissertation to investigate whether doing certain 
warm-up exercises helps sprinters go quicker.

So do they? “Yes they do, which is really interesting,” he says. “Although 
more research is needed.”

The 21-year-old is hoping for a high 2:1 from his degree in sports and 
exercise science at the University of East London – “but if I smash up my 
dissertation potentially I can take it up to a first,” he says – but 
increasingly he has eyes only for the track.

“I’m in very good shape,” Gemili says. “Last year I had a couple of minor 
injuries but I’ve not had anything this year. My plan is to open up in the 100m 
in May and get a personal best, and then run some 200m races before the UK 
trials in July.”

After that his focus will turn to the world championships in Beijing in August 
where he will be aiming to continue the medal success he enjoyed in Glasgow at 
the Commonwealth Games and in Zurich at the European championships in 2014.

Gemili shattered the 20-second barrier over 200m in winning European gold in 
19.98sec and also took a 100m silver medal at the Commonwealth Games. But he 
has yet to break 10 seconds for 100m, something he is targeting this year.

“As a sprinter I would love to do that but as long as I can get the execution 
of my race good I’ll be more than happy,” he says. “I know some sprinters say 
that’s their be all and end all, they have to go sub- 10. But it’s about going 
into the championships, competing well and getting medals.

“In the Commonwealth Games last year, pretty much everyone in that final had 
run sub-10 but it’s whoever crosses the line first, second and third walks away 
with the medals.”

Gemili always seems to pull out his big performances at major championships 
while contemporaries struggle, something he puts down to intensive work with 
the psychologist Steve Peters. “I do a lot of work psychologically,” he adds. 
“Everyone gets nervous. If any sprinter tells you otherwise they would probably 
be lying. But I work hard enjoying being out there rather than getting really 
nervous like maybe some other people do.”

He hopes his dissertation may help him gain another small edge too. “It’s 
post-activation potentiation, to do with your muscles,” he explains. “And I 
based it around testing it on sprinters and it was actually a really good 
project which hopefully I can relate to myself as well.

“I worked with some sprint volunteers from Loughborough who train with Leon 
Baptiste. Basically it was them testing force and can you elicit more force by 
doing certain exercises in a warm-up.

“They weren’t quite Usain Bolt or elite athlete standard but they are highly 
trained athletes. I shared what I found with my coach, Steve Fudge, and the 
sports science guys at BritishAthletics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics>. And hopefully I can start 
implementing some of that stuff, which will be cool.”
 