
With markets moving higher, boosted by positive Chinese data and the prospect 
of deals in the pharmaceutical sector,BSkyB has been lifted by hopes that its 
European move would pay dividends.

Analysts at Nomura raised their rating on the satellite broadcaster from 
reduce to neutral with a target price raised from 870p to 900p. With BSkyB 
spending some £5bn to buy 21st Century Fox's 100% stake in Sky Italia and its 
57% controlling stake in Sky Deutschland, Nomura said:
 The bullish aspect to this transaction is that it: a) becomes by far the 
leading company in European pay TV; b) gains access to growth opportunities by 
expanding its target market from 30m homes in the UK and Ireland to 97m homes 
by adding Germany, Austria and Italy; c) creates a wider platform for 
innovation and customer service; d) gains access to £200m of synergies with far 
more to come from revenue synergies, common box platform and common R&D further 
down the line; and e) in the longer term, it may also benefit from scale if 
film studios and sports leagues ever sell rights on a pan-European basis. 
Accretion to earnings and free cash flow from 2017 onwards smoothes the 
potential hit from the Premier League auction and leaves valuation looking more 
reasonable even on our above-consensus 60% assumed Premier League inflation.

Some challenges are still to be faced: it is not all plain sailing. The 
timing, close to the Fox offer for Time Warner is unlikely to be a coincidence. 
While Italy may benefit from economic recovery, this could be slow and it is 
still a tough, competitive market. We believe Germany is very attractive, but 
profit estimates are still high. BT still has to be faced in the UK.

BSkyB has added 17.5p to 892p, but the biggest riser is Reckitt Benckiser. The 
company behind Cillit Bang and Durex condoms is up 130p at £52 as it said it 
would spin off its pharmaceutical business. It also reported a 3% rise in 
second quarter like for like revenues.

Meanwhile GlaxoSmithKline has climbed 9p to £14.32 after chief executive Sir 
Andrew Witty told the Financial Times he was open to the idea of demerging its 
consumer healthcare business.

Positive industrial earnings figures from China have supported the mining 
sector, withAnglo American up 2.5p to £16.42.

Positive results from Ryanair have helped rival easyJet climb 15p to £13.47.

But Aberdeen Asset Management has dropped 14.4p to 445p despite improved 
market performance, as it reported a fall in funds under management after a 
series of client withdrawals.

Overall, despite continuing concerns about Ukraine and Gaza, the FTSE 100 has 
edged up 4.13 points to 6795.68.
 