
This year, fees rise in many universities to the maximum of £9,000. This sum 
will be paid by the government direct to your university in the form of a loan, 
which you will repay, plus interest, once you've graduated and are earning more 
than £21,000 a year.

"It may sound daunting," says Annie Christodoulidis, a second-year history 
student at York university, "but it's not crippling." Her views are echoed by 
Sussex university financial assistance officer Jon Dale: "The repayment terms 
have never been better." But, he explains, it is important that students are 
speedy with their application to Student Finance England (responsible for 
administering the loans): "For those starting courses in 2013, applications can 
go in from the beginning of 2013. It's a great deal simpler than in the past. 
All that is required is for students to provide their total parental income and 
the relevant national insurance number(s). Everything is now checked 
automatically."

Living costs

Your living costs as a student will be in the region of £7,000 a year (more in 
London), although some universities suggest a minimum budget of £8,000. A 
maintenance loan, paid directly into your bank account and repayable under the 
same conditions as the fee loan, will cover part of your living costs. The size 
of your loan depends on your total household income, but all full-time students 
qualify for £3,575 a year.

Students <https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> from a household 
where the total income is less than £42,601 also qualify for a non-repayable 
maintenance grant on a sliding scale. For families with incomes below £25,000 a 
year, a student is eligible for the full grant of £3,250. This reduces to £500 
for a household income of £42,600.

Many students face a shortfall. This might be met through a combination of 
family support, university bursary, part-time job, or bank overdraft. National 
scholarships are also available to students with a family income of £25,000 or 
less, and give you the first year of tuition free of fees. Most universities 
also run their own array of small bursary schemes: check their websites for 
details of how to apply.

"When it comes to grants," says Jon Dale, "it is important that students shop 
around, because on top of the government money available to students from 
families with incomes below £42,600, universities offer some generous hardship 
funds, bursaries and scholarships.

Managing your budget as a student is a vital skill and it's not easy, 
especially when you first move away from home and become financially 
independent. Ann Musk, at the student wellbeing service at Newcastle 
University, says: "If there's one piece of advice I'd want every student to 
know if they hit financial difficulties, it is: get in touch with student 
services. It's incredible how financially innocent many students are when they 
arrive here, allowing debts to get out of hand."

Additional reporting by Jerome Monahan

Top Tips
Living on a budget

• Withdraw a set amount of cash once a week and live on it

• Book all rail tickets in advance

• Learn to cook – avoid takeaways

• Use a high-interest account for your grants/loans and transfer a weekly sum 
to a current account

• Don't buy books for your courses: use your library and the JSTOR online 
academic article database most universities subscribe to

• Use the cheapest supermarkets

• Sort luxuries from necessities

• Use a debit, not a credit card

• Online gambling is not the way to solve your financial woes

• Contact student support services if you hit difficulties

Jerome Monahan

• This story was changed on 04.10.12 to clarify that Student Finance will be 
accepting applications from early 2013, rather than December.
 