
Q I am about to receive more than £230,000 from the sale of a property I owned 
jointly with my ex-wife. Everything has been settled financially between us so 
there are no outstanding liabilities. I am 72-years-old and currently have 
adequate income to meet my needs. My question is how best to invest the money?

A My first advice would be to put yourself in a position where you are not 
rushed and have adequate time to identify your priorities. When you get the 
money you will almost certainly be pestered by the bank where your money is 
received offering to advise you on investment. Personally, I think it is an 
invasion of privacy to use knowledge of your account to create a selling 
opportunity. However, you can use the bank services to "buy" time while you 
consider your options.

Instead of leaving the money in your current account, or even a savings 
account offering very poor interest rates, tell the bank to transfer the money 
to a money market account for a fixed period of a week, a month or longer, 
depending on how much time you need to properly establish your priorities. 
These little-known accounts allow savers with large amounts of money to deposit 
to lock it away for a specified period of time while earning a decent rate of 
interest.

When considering what to do next, try to assess how much extra income you 
require to improve your lifestyle. Bear in mind that there are two major 
threats - one is taxation, the other is the more long-term problem of inflation 
eroding the capital value of your money.

Traditionally, investing in the stock market has provided the best protection 
against inflation by offering superior capital growth over a long period of 
time. However, it is risky and expensive, as well as inflexible.

You may well decide that at your age you don't really need capital growth. You 
may well prefer to be in a position to pay for better holidays or cars, while 
also being able to help your children out if they can put up a convincing case.

At present, simple cash savings are providing a return in excess of inflation, 
with limited risk. There is intense competition driving up returns with lots of 
bargains. Shop around to secure the best interest rate, but be careful about 
hidden charges and misleading statements.

The banks and building societies are up to all kinds of tricks in their 
efforts to attract savings. Quite often the highest quoted rates are dependent 
on bonuses linked to withdrawal restrictions, or there is a requirement to 
maintain a regular flow of investments and a minimum balance in an account that 
otherwise pays a very poor rate of interest.

Interest paid on cash savings is also subject to tax, so it makes sense to use 
any available tax-efficient investments. Index-linkedNational Savings 
certificates <http://www.nsandi.com/products/ilsc/index.jsp> are very good 
value at present, providing protection against inflation, as measured by the 
retail price index, and a good return while inflation is running high.

You can only invest up to £15,000 in each issue, of which there are currently 
two open. However, there are several new issues each year so the total amount 
that can be invested over a 12-month period will be a lot more than £30,000. 
You can get an application form from anyPost Office 
<http://www.postoffice.co.uk/portal/po/jump1?mediaId=19300237&catId=19300232>, 
or you can invest over the phone or via the internet using a debit card.

Larger amounts can be invested in index-linked gilts (government securities), 
but this normally requires advice from a stockbroker, which can be expensive. 
Isas provide limited tax advantages as you can only invest up to £3,000 in cash 
each year. You can get tax-free income from an Isa using the remaining £4,000 
to invest in bonds, rather than shares, but while it's worth making use of your 
allowance you won't be able to put much of your lump sum in there.

There may also be scope for tax-efficient savings through a personal pension. 
Basically, this involves using the allowance available to everyone without any 
earnings of putting up to £3,600 a year into a pension. A standard rate 
taxpayer only has to pay £2,808after allowing for tax relief at 22%. 
Higher-rate taxpayers can claim a further 18% back from the taxman reducing the 
total outlay to £2,160 .

Because of your age, you will be able to stake your claim to the pension 
straight away, and could withdraw 25% (£900) of the £3,600 invested tax free. 
The remaining 75% would then be invested in a pension annuity that provides 
regular income for life depending on your age and sex - the older you are the 
better the rate. The annuity income is taxable, but you will have received £900 
tax-free on an investment of £2,160 in the first year alone.

The other major tax opportunity is using your £9,200-a-year capital gains tax 
exemption. However, this requires making a capital gain - normally from 
investing in shares with the risk of losing money and having to pay for 
financial advice either through fees or commission.

With share values close to record levels it may be a good time to settle for 
less risky investments, especially while deposit interest rates can provide a 
good, short-term return.
 