
Burkina Faso <https://www.theguardian.com/world/burkina-faso> will return to 
civilian rule and an interim government led by the president, Michel Kafando, 
will be reinstated, reversing a military coup, according to Benin’s president, 
Thomas Boni Yayi.


 “We are going to relaunch the transition under way – a transition led by 
civilians, with Michel Kafando,” he said on Saturday after meeting the coup 
leader, Gen Gilbert Diendéré, in Burkina Faso’s capital, Ouagadougou.

The announcement followed a third day of unrest as hundreds of protesters 
burned tyres and erected barricades in the streets of Ouagadougou.

 Young people wielding sticks and slingshots dragged fences into the streets 
to block soldiers loyal to Diendéré, who was facing intense diplomatic pressure 
over Thursday’s putsch.

 At least 10 people have been killed and more than 100 injured in street 
clashes with soldiers since the coup condemned by the US, France (the former 
colonial power) and the UN. Most of the casualties were treated for gunshot 
wounds.

 Unlike on previous days, there was no sign of soldiers from the presidential 
guard in central Ouagadougou, although residents reported sporadic gunfire in 
the suburbs.

 In the latest sign that support for Diendéré may be collapsing, the army 
chief, Gen Pingrenoma Zagré, joined national and international actors in 
condemning the violence.

 In an effort to mediate an end to the crisis, the Senegalese president, Macky 
Sall, met Diendéré overnight.

 A third round of talks, between Diendéré and Yayi Boni, began on Saturday.

 “We need to create a dynamic of reconciliation and forgiveness and stop the 
violence,” said Sall, who is head of the west African regional bloc Ecowas.

 Soldiers from the presidential guard stormed into a cabinet meeting on 
Wednesday and abducted Kafando and ministers, disrupting a transition period 
due to end with elections on 11 October

Kafando has since been freed and is in his residence, where he met mediators 
earlier on Saturday.

The coup leaders, calling themselves the National Democratic Council, opposed 
the interim government’s plans to dissolve the presidential guard and claimed 
the country faced instability after some candidates were barred from standing 
in the elections.

 On Saturday, Diendéré repeated an earlier pledge not to remain in power for 
long.

Burkina Faso requests aid as floods set to worsen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/11/burkina-faso-calls-aid-floods-worsen>
 “We simply want a set of proposals that allow us to get to the elections in 
all peace and serenity while assuring that the results are uncontested and 
incontestable,” he told France’s TV5Monde.

The African Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africanunion> has 
suspended Burkina Faso’s membership and given leaders until Tuesday to restore 
the former government.

Burkina Faso, whose citizens toppled president Blaise Compaoré last year as he 
sought to extend his 27-year rule, had been seen as a model by pro-democracy 
campaigners across sub-SaharanAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>.

 Under Compaoré, Burkina Faso emerged as a regional ally of France and the US 
against al-Qaida-linked militants, thought to be active in the north as well as 
neighbouring Mali.

 Burkina hosts about 200 special forces as part of France’s Barkhane regional 
anti-terrorist operation, while Diendéré took part in US-sponsored regional 
counter-terrorism exercises in February.
 