
Q I am due to receive some shares in Standard Life as l have had a pensions 
policy for several years. I have never held shares before and know next to 
nothing about the stock market. A friend had some "windfall" shares from Abbey 
National and has held on to them, although she would now like to get the money 
instead. What are my options?

A When Standard Life sends out its share offer pack on June 15, it will offer 
three options. One is to keep the free shares allocated to with-profit 
policyholders when the flotation takes place next month.

The second is to sell the shares allocated immediately through an arrangement 
with the registrars, Computershare. The third option will be to keep the free 
shares and buy additional shares at a special discounted price.

The choice you make depends on individual circumstances, such as whether you 
need the money right away. Another factor will be your opinion of the group's 
short and long-term prospects and whether you will gain more from retaining the 
shares and benefiting from dividends and capital growth than cashing them in 
now.

The possibility of a takeover offer being launched for the group should 
already be reflected in the flotation price, which is forecast to be between 
240p and 290p.

However, the actual price on the launch date could go up or down, depending on 
market conditions at the time and anticipated demand from institutional 
investors.

While the group has an intrinsic, asset-based value, the launch price could be 
influenced considerably by other factors affecting market sentiment generally.

If US action against Iran suddenly became more likely, or there was a big 
terrorist incident, the value of all shares - including Standard Life - could 
fall considerably.

But a takeover battle with several contenders could push the price up 
substantially. Historically, shares have provided better long-term returns than 
cash but that means taking a five-year view.

Standard Life is a little unusual as until just a few years ago it was the 
biggest, most vocal, supporter, of being a mutual organisation with no annoying 
shareholders to put up with.

It used to bang on about the benefits of mutuality and indeed in 2000 
persuaded a majority of its policyholders to reject a demutualisation plan at a 
much higher level than the present offer.

The group has been forced, following a series of blunders and bad management 
decisions, to change its attitude completely. Suddenly, becoming a publicly 
quoted company is the right way for the future.

It will be interesting to see whether the staff and management can cope with 
such a drastic change in attitude. While the "free" shares will only be given 
to with-profit policyholders, who in theory own the group, shares at a 
discounted price will be offered to all the group's customers.

Some overseas customers will not be eligible to receive the shares, free or at 
a discount, because of regulatory problems. Those with free shares will get 
cash instead.

The size of the discount will be announced on June 15, when the share offer 
pack is distributed. If you do decide to sell your free shares immediately, you 
will have no problem in disposing of them with very little cost.

But if you decide to retain them and take advantage of buying more shares at a 
discounted price, you will have to consider the normal difficulties of when and 
how to sell shares.

Standard Life does not have its own share dealing service for customers, 
unlike some of the other companies that demutualised such as the Halifax, now 
part of the HBOS group.

The main problem for those with relatively small shareholdings, often as a 
result of receiving "windfalls", is cost.

High street banks offer a stockbroking service but there is normally a minimum 
charge that often represents a high percentage of the market value of the 
shares. A minimum charge of £15, for example, is a very high percentage if the 
shares are worth less than £200.

Traditional stockbrokers are not interested in dealing with small investors, 
but there are "execution only" brokers that charge more competitively although 
they also have minimum fees. They do not offer advice and simply process the 
sale or purchase requested.

The internet has made share dealing much easier with a wider range of choice 
for regular or occasional share traders. Unfortunately, the money laundering 
regulations can make share trading a long winded and tedious business with lots 
of paperwork involved.

Even for a modest one-off transaction you will have to provide proof of your 
identity and address. There is no way to avoid this, except possibly using your 
bank's share dealing service where the bank already holds this information.

Finally, remember that when you sell shares there is potential capital gains 
tax liability. Free shares obviously have a nil base cost, so if you sell them 
it is quite possible to make a gain exceeding the annual capital gains tax-free 
allowance of £8,800. To avoid this liability, you might have to spread the sale 
of your shares over a number of years.
 