
Over the past five years Cafédirect has ploughed more than half its profits 
back into the businesses of its grower partners, blazing a trail for 
reinvestment in the communities it trades with and giving its growers a say in 
how the business is run.

Cafédirect has always been a pioneer in ethical business.

The company started trading before the Fairtrade Foundation mark was first 
used in the UK and it was the first coffee brand to carry the certification. 
When Cafédirect realised that some of its producers' needs were not being met 
by the two main tenets of Fairtrade – minimum prices and social premiums – it 
set up its producer partnership programme (PPP) to invest money back into the 
producer groups it trades with.

The partnership was set up in 1996 and goes above and beyond Fairtrade 
criteria to help growers address such issues as earning and maintaining 
Fairtrade certification, improving product quality, making organisations more 
efficient and adapting to climate change.

Offering support to farmers in these areas helps them build stronger and more 
self-sufficient businesses.

This goes straight to the heart of Cafédirect's mission, which is to change 
lives and build communities through inspirational, sustainable business.

A lot more than just an ethical label

Many companies in the agricultural sector rely on using ethical labels, such 
as Fairtrade and Rainforest Alliance, to prove they are committed to having a 
positive social impact on farmers at the start of their supply chains.

But while these labels allow consumers to compare products they're also 
problematic, and consumers are increasingly confused about what the labels mean 
in practice. Is one ethical label more sustainable than another, for instance, 
and are there shades of Fairtrade?

Donating a portion of profits to a charitable cause is another way of claiming 
positive social impact but which in reality, can often be tokenistic, without 
addressing the real issue. What's more, the causes funded often have little or 
nothing to do with the positive or negative impacts of the business making the 
donation. Some businesses dictate how the money must be spent, without any real 
understanding of the needs and issues on the ground.

Cafédirect never assumes it understands what's best for its partner 
organisations. To truly understand the positive and negative impacts of its 
business, the company cultivates long-term relationships with each of its 39 
producers. These relationships are a long way from being faceless transactions 
between buyers and sellers. Because it believes two-way dialogue is the only 
way to properly grasp issues on the ground, Cafédirect invests time and money 
in having regular face-to-face meetings in London and abroad.

The long-term approach also applies to its investment in the communities it 
trades with. The company's commitment to pay at least one third of its profits 
into the partnership each year is much more than a philanthropic gesture.

In fact, Cafédirect has invested more than half of its profits into the 
partnership over the past five years, despite the recession. It has also taken 
steps to make sure the commitment will continue to be met in the coming years, 
for however long the hard times persist.

The Guardian's judges felt that Cafédirect's commitment to reinvesting in the 
communities where it operates stood out by a long way.

It's a commitment that also reflects the company's holistic view of 
sustainability, which goes well beyond environmental issues to face its 
economic and social impacts head on.

This approach to sustainability is enshrined in its gold standard guiding 
principles, which inform the company's goals, its strategic direction and the 
way it operates. While many companies talk about integrating sustainability 
into their strategic processes, it's fair to say that sustainability truly sits 
at the heart of Cafédirect, inspiring every single thing the company does.

"Cafédirect's producer partnership programme is truly integrated into the 
business and not merely an add-on" – The Guardian judges

Giving producers a voice

One of the company's main aims is to empower smallholder producers. This stems 
from the long-term view that lasting change and impact come from actions that 
are decided, implemented and evaluated by the communities they are going to 
affect.

To that end the Cafédirect partnership works to help producers become 
sustainable in their own right.

A recent shift from employing third party organisations to implement 
activities to having the PPP funds managed by a 100% producer-owned 
organisation, is one way of achieving this. Now it's the growers themselves who 
are responsible for making the decisions about how to spend the invested profit.

Another way Cafédirect gives producers a voice is to make sure that it is 
never the sole buyer for any of its partners, actively encouraging growers to 
find new buyers. This prevents buyers from becoming dependent on the company 
and proves that Cafédirect is not out to use its buyer-power to manipulate its 
partners for profit.

The company's producers don't only benefit from sharing the partnership's 
profits; they are also actively involved in risk management and 
decision-making. Cafédirect forecasts its purchases, giving producer groups 
more freedom to set prices. Two producer directors also sit on the company's 
board and nearly all producers own shares in the company.

To make sure it fully understands its impact and makes the right changes to 
improve it, Cafédirect has invested heavily in assessment.

Over the past six years it has funded nine independent impact assessments, 
looking at the impact of its business model and that of the PPP in various 
regions and with various partners. In 2009 the company commissioned a 
comprehensive evaluation of the partnership, including all 39 producer 
partners. Using the findings of the evaluation, the company put together a new 
three-year strategy, which included the shift from ownership to a producer-run 
foundation.

The move actually resulted in Cafédirect closing its own partnership 
department.

Cafédirect is rightly proud of its achievements. For a small company it is 
setting a big example, showing that its business model, of which the 
partnership is part, can be used to run business differently, in a way where 
everyone involved benefits and has a say.

Lorna Thorpe is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 