
Stretch, whirlpool, surf. I repeat the mantra while preparing my first flat 
white, at a top-notch La Marzocco espresso machine that an hour ago was as 
alien to me as the cockpit of a Formula One racing car.

I am on the barista training course at Allpress Espresso, one of Auckland's 
premier roasters, to learn how to make the antipodean take on white coffee, the 
flat white. Perfected in New Zealand – which bickers with Australia over who 
actually invented it back in the 80s – the flat white is a single shot of 
espresso blended with steamed velvety milk; strong, creamy, not too frothy.

In the last couple of years, the flat white coffee has become the in drink in 
London's hipster neighbourhoods; spreading from Soho cafes such as Flat White, 
andDose Espresso <http://www.dose-espresso.com/> in Smithfield, which first 
catered to homesick Kiwis, to the new spate of cool coffee shops that have 
opened recently in East London –Tina We Salute You <http://tinawesaluteyou.com/>
,Mouse & De Lotz <http://www.mousedelotz.com/>, Wilton's, Taste of Bitter Love 
<http://www.tasteofbitterlove.com/>, and Prufrock where 2009 World Barista 
Champion Gwilym Davies works.

And the brew is gearing up to become as widely known in the UK as the 
country's last great export, Flight Of The Conchords, as at the beginning of 
the year, the nationwide chains joined in. Peter Andre launched Costa Coffee's 
maiden flat white in January, around the same time that Starbucks got in on the 
act. Next month, Allpress is due to open a roastery/cafe in Shoreditch,

I went back to the Auckland original, to see if the city really does make the 
best coffee in the world, and to learn how to make a flat white myself.

After stretching (gradually warming the milk) and the whirlpool (steaming the 
liquid to make a latte froth), I surf – swirling the metal jug to mix the 
bubbles back into the milk. Under the careful eye of my tutor, Monica, I have 
already made a half-decent espresso. Now I gently pour the velvety liquid over 
a spoon to blend it with the shot. As the cup fills, I move the spoon away so a 
nice slug of cream falls on top. Perfect. New Zealand's biggest city boasts one 
of the strongest claims to have devised the flat white as we know it, thanks to 
an explosion of espresso-drinking in the mid-80s. No one is quite sure where it 
all began, but the boho DKD was generally considered the first Auckland venue, 
though Sydneysiders reckon they beat the Kiwis to it. In one hangout, I speak 
to Jackson, who roasts beans in his own garage, and speaks fondly of those 
times. "I was a student and I remember drinking flat whites back then," he 
says. "We used to watch subtitled films at the Civic Theatre and have coffee 
and cake after."

DKD is long gone, but its legacy and that of other pioneers remains in a 
thriving cafe society. Aucklanders use coffee shops as social venues, as we 
might pubs, for business meetings, to catch up with mates or simply read the 
paper. And they take coffee seriously, with 140 roasters in New Zealand, many 
based in this city. Even if most Kiwis do not roast beans themselves, many buy 
them freshly ground to supply their own gleaming Italian machines.

Back in the 80s, cafe owners aped continental mores, a practice continued by 
Auckland's finest city centre institution, Reslau (39 Elliott Street). Its 
narrow space barely provides room for a handful of tiny tables and just one 
banquette. The coffee is perfect (I am an expert now) and the individual salmon 
quiches from the tea trolley exquisite – the owners' mum does the baking. 
Reslau offers a rare slice of chic in Auckland's drab central business 
district, an area that many locals avoid.

The city's industrial waterfront lacks charisma – there's a motorway running 
through it – and many of the suburbs are livelier, with quirky, original cafes. 
I found the best flat white at Espresso Workshop (2 Owens Road,
espressoworkshop.co.nz) <http://espressoworkshop.co.nz/espresso_bar.htm>, a 
perfect name for this bustling Epsom joint that acts as a caffeine laboratory. 
Despite coming only as a single shot, its version offers bags of punchy flavour 
without bitterness. Suddenly I realise I have halted a lifelong habit, adding 
sugar to my coffee.

Other cafes provide more leisurely vibes. Not far from the city centre in 
Freeman's Bay, down a side street of warehouses converted into architects' 
studios, lies Queenie's Lunchroom (24a Spring Street,queenieslunchroom.co.nz 
<http://www.queenieslunchroom.co.nz/>), last year's top dog from a shortlist of 
50 in local magazine Metro's annual survey of Auckland cafes. Queenie's has 
only been open a year or so, and reflects a move away from minimalism to 
kitscher decor, with its painting-by-numbers mural of a Maori rural scene and a 
chandelier made from antlers. Its food was as good as the place looked: I went 
forhuevos rancheros, a classic Mexican breakfast of eggs with tangy salsa. My 
partner went for scrambled eggs with fresh spinach on toast.

Further out, plenty of environs are worth exploring – Grey Lynn's Richmond 
Road is one of the quieter thoroughfares, yet still dotted with interesting 
shops and cafes, while Kingsland has a more youthful buzz and great food. We 
fell for Frolic Café (653 Manukau Road,frolic.co.nz <http://www.frolic.co.nz/>) 
in Royal Oak, opposite the entrance to One Tree Hill, an extinct volcano that 
provides views over the isthmus to Auckland's harbours. With room to spread 
around and a back garden, Frolic is designed for Sunday lounging. Its coffee 
has a soothing mocha-like sweetness.

Good One (42 Douglas Street), off the uber-trendy Ponsonby Road, lacks a 
kitchen, but makes up for it with lamb sausage rolls and sardines on toast. 
This no-nonsense, post-industrial shed is a proper beanhead's mecca that leads 
the way in the lastest trend – filter coffee. Forget those clumsy, 80s, plastic 
monstrosities; this is how to imbibe single-origin beans.

I am presented with a wooden tray that holds a mug with a dainty ceramic 
filter, milk and a jug of hot water. Big in Japan, I am told, and the process 
hints at the elegance of that nation's tea ceremony. Ethiopian Yirgacheffe 
coffee has a burnt toast taste that is oddly warming. Not everyone's cup of 
tea, so to speak, but I am reminded once more of every local's reply when I ask 
for a cafe tip: "You can't really get a bad cup of coffee in Auckland."

• Allpress Espresso holds Coffee Knowledge (around £37) and Perfect Cup (£31) 
classes at its store (266 Ponsonby Road, +64 9 307 5555,allpress.co.nz 
<http://nz.allpressespresso.com/#/for-your-cafe/barista-training/>) on Tuesday 
evenings. Classes will also take place at the new London branch. Doubles at the 
boutique Hotel de Brett (+64 9 925 9000,hoteldebrett.com 
<http://www.hoteldebrett.com/>), from £137, including breakfast and pre-dinner 
drink. The Quest Ponsonby (+64 9 360 4240,questponsonby.co.nz 
<http://www.questponsonby.co.nz/>) has studio apartments from £63 per night and 
one-bedroom apartments from £73
 