
It's 7am at Angkor Wat and there's not a tourist in sight. It's blissfully 
quiet, the first clear June morning after two days of torrential rains. The 
only souls around are a small group of Buddhist pilgrims, lighting incense at 
the rear of the spectacular Khmer temple. The bleary-eyed early-risers, who 
woke in darkness to board tour buses to Angkor archaeological park for sunrise 
photo ops, have already trundled back to their breakfast buffets.

I'm not here for sightseeing, however, I'm heading further into the forest 
surrounding the stupendous temple complex with Australian archaeologist Dr 
Damian Evans to meet the archaeologistsfrom Cambodia, the Philippines and the 
USA, who are working on new excavations 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/jun/18/lasers-lost-city-angkor-wat-cambodia>
.

The release this month by the US National Academy of Sciences 
<http://www.nasonline.org/> of a report on the results of a high-tech survey of 
Khmer Empire sites, undertaken in April 2012, has rocked the archaeological 
world and captured travellers' imaginations.

A monumental, sophisticated, densely populated urban landscape, which dates 
back more than 700 years, has been identified. It includes and connects Angkor 
cities such as Angkor Wat, Angkor Thom and Bayon, with the rarely visited 
medieval city ruins of Phnom Kulen, Beng Mealea and Koh Ker, over 100km away.
 Srah Damrie, Siem Reap archaeology, Mount Kulen. Photograph: /Terence Carter 
Evans was one of the report authors and the lead archaeologist and director of 
the project, which only became known outside local and archaeological circles 
with the release of the report this month.

As we make our way through dense vegetation, he explains how eight key 
archaeological groups, including the Cambodian government's Apsara Authority, 
which manages archaeological sites, collaborated on the project. It began with 
the survey using an airborne laser scanning instrument called Lidar, strapped 
to a helicopter, to search for ruins and other structures (the size of the area 
covered by the helicopter doing the survey was 320 sq km). Developed in the 
1990s, it's only recently that the technology has matured to the level where it 
can penetrate dense vegetation and provide extremely detailed models of the 
forest floor.

"For archaeologists, these lumps and bumps that we see in the forest, each has 
a meaning," Evans explains, pointing out gentle mounds. "These are all the 
traces of the civilisation of the city associated with Angkor Wat, made of wood 
and thatch, that has disappeared. It's these contours that remain inscribed 
into the forest landscape we study."

Smoke wafts from the fires lit to keep mosquitoes at bay. Dotted between the 
mounds are several rectangular holes in the ground where Dr Miriam Stark from 
the University of Hawaii and her team are at work.

"We're really interested in understanding residence patterns, where and how 
people lived and who they were," Stark explains excitedly, showing me 
X-ray-like images of the area we're in. "Before, it took more than three 
intensive weeks of [preparation] before we knew where to dig. Now, with Lidar, 
it's as if you just peel a layer off and it's there!" With clipboards and pens 
in hand, the team records a wealth of discoveries, such as shards of Ming 
Dynasty ceramics.
 Ta Prohm Temple, Siem Reap. Photograph: Terence Cartere 
Scholars have based their idea of all medieval cities around the world on 
European cities, explains Professor Roland Fletcher, director of the Greater 
Angkor Project. But now, it seems there was a colossal low-density urban sprawl 
here, a conurbation of different places with massive working citadels with 
enormous infrastructure. Remote temples cities like Koh Ker, 120km from Siem 
Reap, and Beng Mealea, 52km away, once thought of as isolated, would have been 
large outlying service centres for Angkor within a huge hinterland.

"This is a highly managed system, the most extensive pre-industrial city in 
the world," he says, though referring to its complexity rather than its size. 
"The Lidar results show there were three cities [here] at the end of the 9th 
century – the largest was on top of Mount Kulen, creating an [equivalent to] 
industrial 19th-century Britain."

The city is so enormous it is unlikely to ever exist as one excavated site, 
but tourism here is likely to increase. There's talk of a cutting-edge museum 
presenting the exciting new discoveries, new archaeological sites in the 
future, and greater interest in little-visited outlying temples already 
accessible to the public.

We decide to head to one of these Phnom Kulen, a site rarely visited by 
tourists, with just a few companies offering expeditions and treks there.

"Phnom Kulen is a sacred mountain, a holy place for Cambodians," Tat, our 
guide from Backyard Travel tells us en route. His ancestors called this place 
Mahendraparvata, or the Mountain of Indra, King of the Gods. "We call it the 
Mountain of the Lychees now. Look, you can see it here," he says, pointing to a 
long, low, flat plateau that barely rises above the palms, banana plants and 
rubber trees that skirt the road and hug the traditional stilted timber houses 
dotting the lush emerald-green countryside.
 Carvings at Ta Nei Temple, Siem Reap and at Srah Damrie, Mount Kulen. 
Photograph: Terence Carter 
Phnom Kulen may not be the dramatic mist-shrouded peak I imagined, yet the 
492m-high, 8km-wide and 32km-long mountain is visible for the whole 90-minute 
drive north from Siem Reap to the foothills of Mount Kulen national park. We 
intend to hike to the summit, and the remains of the three-tiered temple of 
Prasat Rong Chen that marks the site where the Khmer Empire was founded in AD 
802, when a Brahmin priest declared Jayavarman II universal monarch – just two 
years after Charlemagne was made Holy Roman Emperor – will be nothing less than 
dramatic.

Mahendraparvata was never really "lost" – the mountain has long been known as 
the location of the sandstone quarries that built Angkor's cities, as well as 
the source of water for a complex system that irrigated the vast empire. When 
we visit, people are wading in the River of A Thousand Lingas, a section of the 
stream boasting stone carvings on its floor. Villagers frequently stumble 
across finds, recently some bronze, copper and sandstone statues of Hindu gods 
Vishnu, Shiva and Lakshmi. But the Lidar survey confirmed that Mahendraparvata 
was part of a city, and much larger than suspected – maybe as big as 
present-day Phnom Penh.

We leave our air-conditioned four-wheel drive behind and soon we're bouncing 
along muddy tracks on the back of motorbikes behind guides familiar with the 
landmine-riddled mountainside, that was the last stronghold of the Khmer Rouge. 
 Workers on a dig at Angkor Wat. Photograph: Terence Carter 
They lead us towards the summit. It's a slow journey, over narrow, bumpy dirt 
trails – only the most intrepid travellers come here. We cross log bridges and 
ride straight through flowing streams. Scattered across the mountain are 
ruined, foliage-covered temples, ancient highway markers and, at Sras Damrei or 
Elephant Pond, massive statues of an elephant and lions. The thought that more 
sites like this could soon be discovered is thrilling.

Back in Siem Reap we take to the air in a helicopter to get a better idea of 
what this urban landscape might have looked like. Had I taken the flight two 
weeks' ago, I would have gasped at the magnificence of the isolated temple 
structures with their imposing walls and moats surrounded by forests. Now, I 
see patterns of bumps and lines on the vast floodplain as beautiful remnants of 
an immense, effervescent city that technology and archaeology are finally 
bringing to life.

While many believe this site will become one of Asia's greatest wonders, and 
tourism bodies are eager to see excavations progress quickly and more 
archaeological sites opened up to visitors, the extraordinary size of the area 
means work will be costly and take years. In the meantime, however, the 
intrepid can play at being Indiana Jones at undeveloped sites on Phnom Kulen, 
and temple cities such as Beng Mealea and Koh Ker – and let their imaginations 
run wild.

• Backyard Travel <http://www.backyardtravel.com/> offers one-day expeditions 
to Mount Kulen for $136pp, and day trips to Koh Ker and Beng Mealea for $126.
Shinta Mani Hotel <http://shintamani.com/> (+855 63 761 998) provided rooms; 
prices start from $170 B&B.HeliStar <http://helistarcambodia.com/> offers 
flights over Angkor, including Mount Kulen and Koh Ker, starting from $90pp
 