
Cambridge University is warning ministers that it will be forced to admit 
fewer state school students if a shakeup ofA-levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels> goes ahead, it emerged today.

The university's head of admissions, Geoff Parks, has written to the education 
secretary,Michael Gove <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove>, to 
say it would be wrong to change A-level exams so that students sat them only 
after two years of study. Gove said this month he would implement reforms over 
the next three to five years to end A-levels being broken up into "bite-sized" 
AS-levels that can be taken throughout the course. He said they failed to 
prepare students for the demands of a degree and scrapping them would signal 
"the revival of the art of deep thought".

Parks's letter, sent to the Times Educational Supplement, said AS-levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/aslevels> were an "invaluable indicator 
of progress" that had helped the university increase its intake of students 
from low-income families in state schools.

Figures from 2007-8 show that the number of state school pupils at Cambridge 
rose to 59%, compared with 55% the year before.

Parks wrote: "A large part of this success derives from the confidence 
engendered in students from non-traditional backgrounds when they achieve high 
examination grades at the end of year 12. We are worried ... that if AS-level 
disappears, we will lose many of the gains in terms of fair admissions and 
widening participation that we have made in the last decade."

The Department for Education said it was clear that confidence in public exams 
needed to be restored. "We are listening carefully to universities, employers 
and academic subject bodies' views to ensure A-levels are rigorous and equip 
young people for higher education," said a spokesman. "We will look in detail 
at exam structure, including whether schools and colleges should be able to 
offer traditional two-year A-levels alongside or instead of modular A-levels."
 