
David Cameron is right to make an extra £20m available for English language 
teaching for new migrants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/18/muslim-women-to-be-taught-english-in-20m-plan-to-beat-backward-attitudes>
. He did, after all, preside over much deeper funding cuts in 2011 for English 
language classes that have left new migrants on 1,000-plus waiting lists for 
courses at their local adult education colleges.

But the prime minister is wrong to link the issue of integratiing a small 
proportion of new migrants who can’t speak English, with that of tackling 
extremism. After all, speaking perfect English doesn’t appear to be a big 
problem for those British jihadis in Islamic State’s videos.

Cameron’s demands that newly arrived Muslim women must improve the fluency of 
their English raises a number of other questions.

Why just Muslim women? And why should foreign-born wives or husbands who 
arrive on a spousal visaface deportation if they don’t improve their English 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/18/pm-migrant-spouses-who-fail-english-test-may-have-to-leave-uk>
? And just how many older British emigrants would have to come home if the 
Spanish suddenly decided that they had to learn the local language as a 
condition of their continuing residence in the Costa del Sol?

Cameron first proposed “making sure that immigrants speak the language of 
their new home” five years ago when he made a controversial speech in which he 
declared thatstate-sponsored multiculturalism had failed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/feb/05/david-cameron-speech-criticised-edl>
.

Homegrown terrorism, he argued in that Munich speech, could grow among 
alienated young people living in separate communities with no anchor in the 
culture of their homeland. It was only later that we learned that declaring the 
death of multiculturalism meant deep cuts – £400m-plus – in the adult skills 
budget, which pays for most provision of teaching English to speakers of other 
languages (Esol).

Cameron repeated the canard in his Times article on Monday, claiming that a 
Pakistani-born mother at home in Bradford who can’t speak English “can help a 
young person’s slide towards radicalisation”.

Migrant spouses who fail English test may have to leave UK, says Cameron
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/18/pm-migrant-spouses-who-fail-english-test-may-have-to-leave-uk>
The “separate lives, separate communities” narrative certainly had some force 
behind it at the time of the riots in the northern cities of Burnley, Oldham 
and Bradford in 2001. But that was about the need to build community cohesion 
and to ensure women had the language skills to make their own choice as to 
whether to go out to work.

But when the results of the 2011 census came out they showed that not speaking 
English was a problem that affected only 138,000 migrants, fewer than 0.3% of 
the population. Many of those who spoke no English at all were actually an 
older generation who had come as grandparents to join their families.

Cameron cites what he says are new figures showing “there are 190,000 British 
Muslim women – 22% – who speak little or no English”, but he seems to hint that 
many of them are grandmothers when he says that “many have lived here for 
decades”. The problem of Pakistani or Bangladeshi women trapped in a domestic 
role at home because they don’t have the language skills has been recognised 
for more than 20 years.


But the way to tackle it is to provide access to the English language classes 
they need, not to cut them. Last year George Osborne threatened to cut the 
benefits of unemployed new migrants who failed to learn English. Now Cameron 
says they will deport those who don’t try to learn.

But it is clear that the problem isn’t a lack of incentives. The National 
Association for Teaching English and Community Languages to Adults says 
Cameron’s cuts led to a 42% drop in the number of migrant adults able to take 
English courses, from 82,900 students in 2012-13 to 48,300 in 2013-14. Today’s 
extra £20m will at least be a step in the right direction.

The coalition government recognised that it had been a mistake to conflate 
tackling extremism with building cohesive communities and separated the Prevent 
and communities programmes. Cameron should be wary of conflating them again 
lest he start blaming elderly Bangladeshi grandmothers for the threat from 
jihadism.
 