
David Cameron gave misleading evidence to the Leveson inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry> over his friendship with 
the former News International chief executive Rebekah Brooks, according to a 
new book by a journalist with close links to No 10.

In one of the most authoritative accounts of Downing Street's links with News 
International, Matthew d'Ancona also writes that the prime minister was 
awestruck by the formerNews of the World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsoftheworld> editor Andy Coulson.

D'Ancona, who has known the prime minister for 20 years, says the prime 
minister was wrong to tell the Leveson inquiry that he saw Brooks more 
frequently after her marriage to his Eton contemporary Charlie Brooks. "I was 
definitely seeing her more often because of my sort of friendship with Charlie 
and as a neighbour," Cameron told Leveson of his fellow members of the 
"Chipping Norton set".

The former Spectator editor dismisses this account in a new book on the 
coalition, In It Together. D'Ancona writes: "But this was misleading. Cameron 
knew Charlie Brooks only slightly before his marriage to Rebekah. It was 
Rebekah who brought him closer to Charlie, not the other way round."

D'Ancona writes that Brooks got close to Cameron by a mixture of charm and 
persuasion. He writes that Brooks was different from other journalist friends 
he named at Leveson, such as the Economist's Xan Smiley. "Rebekah Brooks was 
different. She was not a member of the Cameroon gang, the 'Notting Hill Set' or 
a veteran of the Tory research department. Yet her charm … had enabled her to 
break through Cameron's armour."

Brooks is due to stand trial next month on five charges in relation to 
allegations of conspiracy to hack phones, conspiracy to pervert the course of 
justice and conspiracy to commit misconduct in public office. She denies the 
charges and has pleaded not guilty.

In his account of the coalition, d'Ancona writes that Cameron did not ask 
Coulson about allegations of phone hacking at the News of the World while he 
was editor. He writes: "Cameron was notably incurious in his conversations with 
his former employee about what, precisely, had happened at the newspaper on his 
watch."

Coulson is due to stand trial next month on three charges in relation to 
allegations of conspiring to hack phones and allegations over a conspiracy to 
commit misconduct in public office during his editorship. Coulson has denied 
the charges and pleaded not guilty.

D'Ancona writes of how Coulson became an indispensable member of Cameron's 
inner circle after joining the Tory party as communications director in 2007. 
He writes: "Coulson shared with [George] Osborne a desire to root coalition 
politics in a language that could be sold on the doorstep and pave the way to 
an outright Conservative victory in 2015.

"Cameron, in contrast, was awestruck by his communications director, whom he 
privately described in lyrical language … He treated Coulson as a redtop 
shaman, a source of knowledge about the world of tabloids, Essex and 
kitchen-table politics."

Coulson resigned as the No 10 communications director in January 2011 as 
reports about alleged phone hacking at the News of the World intensified. He 
denied any knowledge of illegal phone hacking and resigned because he said a 
spokesman could no longer continue when he needed a spokesman himself.

The book says the agreement between Cameron, Nick Clegg and Ed Miliband over 
the Leveson report strained the coalition. In the early part of this year, when 
Clegg and Miliband were pressing the prime minister to strengthen his position, 
Cameron "snapped" at his deputy: "You can go off and do whatever you want with 
Labour!"

But Clegg had earlier told Cameron that the negotiations with Miliband showed 
why he did not want to enter a coalition with the Labour, despite the fact that 
Labour and the Lib Dems were closer on press reform. D'Ancona writes: "After 
one meeting of the party leaders in which the Labour leader had moralised a 
little too much, Clegg turned to Cameron and said: 'Now you can see why I don't 
want to go into coalition with him'."

The remarks by Clegg, which are relatively recent, may undermine his claim 
that he has no preference over a future Lib Dem coalition partner if the party 
holds the balance of power after the next election.

The book reveals that Cameron took his appearance before the Leveson enquiry 
so seriously that Lord Feldman, his old friend and tennis partner at Brasenose 
College Oxford, assumed the role of the counsel for the enquiry in a prep 
session.

Feldman himself faced pressure on Sunday over his own relations with the media 
when he appeared to change tack over allegations that he described Tory 
activists earlier this year as "swivel-eyed" loons. Feldman initially dismissed 
the claim that he made the remarks, reported in the Times, Daily Telegraph and 
Daily Mail, as "completely untrue".

But he told a Tory conference question and answer session with party members, 
which was inadvertently shown on the conference television channel: "For me it 
was particularly unpleasant because I felt that everything I had done since 
2008 was aimed in that direction [improving relations with the voluntary party] 
and was distorted by these journalists. So, these things happen.

"I'm not a professional politician. I don't interact with journalists every 
day. They have chosen to − really a crass distortion of a conversation. And, as 
I say, it's not what I think and it's not what I said."

A No 10 source said of the claims about Cameron in the d'Ancona book: "The 
idea that the prime minister has misled Leveson is complete nonsense. The other 
claims are assertions that have no basis in reality."
 