
Q Recently, I briefly played an online poker game. I paid with a credit card, 
issued by Egg. In hindsight this was a mistake. Firstly, I am not a regular 
gambler. In fact I had never gambled online before, and had barely gambled in 
the real world. I knew when to quit and did so. I chose to use a credit card 
because I always use them to pay online - they offer some protection against 
fraud. However, I have some complaints as to how I was treated.

Egg did not make it clear that gambling transactions are treated as a cash 
advance and incur extortionate interest rates plus fees, never mind the fact 
that as I have an Egg savings account I should not have been charged said fees. 
I also felt Egg took an extremely heavy-handed and judgemental approach towards 
me - they blocked my card. Following a letter requesting that I have a 
discussion with them, I found the staff incredibly rude. One person kept 
implying I was an idiot for using a credit card to gamble, and said the card 
was being primarily used for gambling - it was a couple of small transactions! 
I then said I did not wish to use the card, due to their treatment of me, and 
was virtually bullied into agreeing to make it repayment-only. I am now 
extremely worried it will have a negative impact on my future credit rating. I 
have never mismanaged the account, it wasn't near its limit, and I have never 
missed a payment or made a late payment.

I also transferred a balance to my Egg card to reduce the overdraft on my bank 
account. As I explained to Egg on the phone, this was because I was temporarily 
between jobs due to security checks being completed. These have now 
successfully been done and I have started my new position in the civil service, 
which represents a considerable career advancement. However, Egg staff 
continually tried to use this against me, saying I was unemployed and demanding 
to know why I had made the transfer. If they do not want customers to use this 
facility, why offer it? I always intended to pay the extra balance back, and 
have now done so. I wrote to Egg to complain, and received a completely 
unsatisfactory response. This stated that "Egg do not condone gambling on our 
accounts". If this is the case, why do they not inform customers of this and 
block their cards against such use?

I am extremely distressed at Egg's assassination of my character. I would 
simply like them to acknowledge their mistakes and apologise for the upset they 
have caused with their heavy-handed manner. I feel I am being unfairly punished 
for one silly mistake.
C

A Just how many times did you gamble online? Are you sure you are not in 
denial? You start by implying it was once; then you say a couple of times. 
Maybe it was three or four or five times? More importantly, just how much did 
you lose? This is what happens when you succumb to the temptation of easy money 
- what did you expect? So it's no good blaming Egg for your difficulties.

It is true that while all credit cards apply surcharges for gaming sites, 
effectively treating the transaction as cash, they do not publicise this. But 
Egg can't ban you from using it for gaming; it is Visa/Mastercard that make the 
rules. And I can imagine your potential anger if you had set out for a night of 
gaming and found that you were prohibited.

Just because you have an Egg savings account, however, doesn't mean you are 
let off credit card costs. Egg tells me it blocked your card because of its 
"unusual use" - it was trying to protect you against fraud. This suggests to me 
more than a passing acquaintance with online gaming.

Yes, Egg might have handled you more diplomatically, but if its rough 
treatment has stopped you gambling then be thankful. You complain of character 
assassination, but you are partly to blame. Meanwhile, contact Gamblers 
Anonymous <http://www.gamblersanonymous.org.uk/> if you still have gaming urges.
 