
Q My employer has suddenly decided that everybody must take off the last two 
weeks in July using their annual holiday entitlement because of a lack of work. 
This is in addition to the three days we have to take over the Christmas 
period. My contract states that they can ask me to take up to five days, 
defined by them. People who have used up their holiday entitlement, or have 
existing future holidays booked, will not be affected by the request and can 
come to work as usual - so it isn't really a shutdown - and in any case there 
is plenty of work in my area of the company. This has been instigated without 
any dialogue with the workforce. Can they do this?

A What is wrong with managers? It is as if the minute they get their own 
offices and decision-making powers they forget the people working for them are 
human and go mad with power - determined to hand down crazy edicts when an 
honest chat would have got them a great deal further.

Your company, which is a subsidiary of a large multinational, is obviously 
under the squeeze. The workforce, presumably, would like to see it still 
functioning this time next year without loads of redundancies and increased 
pressures on time and resources. Your bosses, I would imagine, feel the same. 
So quite why they just couldn't explain the situation and ask for volunteers to 
take holiday at the end of July I don't know. Apparently they are determined to 
squander goodwill as if a new truckload will be delivered tomorrow. It won't.

As for your enforced holiday, and whether the company are entitled to make you 
take it, you rather answer your own question: if your contract stipulates five 
days of defined leave then that's what they're entitled to define - not two 
weeks because it's a bad year. They are out of order with this demand, which is 
all very well for me to say, but a bit difficult for you on your own to tackle.

You say your site has around 60 workers, many of whom will be affected by 
these changes, or object in principle to the way the situation has been 
handled. If you are union members then this is the time to use your collective 
muscle. If you are not there is still no reason why you cannot all meet to 
discuss the situation and decide on a course of action. By not applying the 
rule equally across the board I image your managers are banking on the 
workforce splitting on the issue. Surprise them by uniting on it.

Not a feasible or desirable plan of action in your eyes? Then you should go 
and talk to your manager. But you need to decide what you want to achieve 
before doing so. Do you want to make the point that the company needs to stop 
squandering its goodwill and talk to its employees, or, more pragmatically, 
that you don't want to take this holiday right now.

In terms of the latter, you have good business reasons to stay in work in July 
and can argue that as the company isn't actually going to be shutting down it 
is perfectly possible for you to come to work and be productive. This should 
get results without you having to get out your contract and jab your finger at 
the relevant paragraphs.

However, I think the way your company has handled this situation has been so 
poor that it does need to be pointed out that they cannot just say: "Hard times 
- so we're going to ignore your contracts". It's an easy justification, but 
also a dangerous one. Effectively threatening people with their jobs (which is 
actually what they are doing) is not a way to run a business. And it shouldn't 
take the employees (or me) to point that out.
 