
This week the city of Austin played host to SXSW Eco <http://sxsweco.com/>, 
the international conference on the future of sustainability. Following the 
global climate marches and summit of last month, its tagline, “Where urgency 
meets opportunity”, seemed apt. We know the problems that climate change poses: 
but what are the solutions? And what does this mean for cities?


The discussions largely focused on US cities, though it was stressed that 
cities around the world could and should learn from each other’s solutions. 
Here are a few of the tentative conclusions.

We don’t need more food

We often hear that with a rapidly rising global population, we urgently need 
to produce more food. “This is a myth,” said Rick Nahmias, founder ofFood 
Forward <http://foodforward.org>, an organisation based in LA that taps into 
the growing “gleaning movement” by redistributing leftover food from 
wholesalers, market sellers and farmers to those in need. According to Nahmias, 
almost one in six Americans suffer from food poverty; but, he argues, the food 
is already there – it’s just being wasted. Through diverting food from 
landfills and distributing it to people, those suffering from hunger are fed, 
food waste is reduced and community is built in the process.

Other organisations in cities around the US are doing similar gleaning and 
redistributing, or “food recovery”, operations.Rotary First Harvest 
<http://firstharvest.org> in Seattle connects farmers and truckers trying to 
get rid of food with volunteers and food banks in order to relieve hunger. In 
Austin, too, theKeep Austin Fed <http://keepaustinfed.org/about-kaf/> scheme 
gleans food from restaurants and gives it to charities helping those who are 
hungry. Nahmias believes a lack of political will and distribution systems are 
keeping some people hungry, while others have an overabundance of food. But 
gleaning and redistribution initiatives like these may become more commonplace 
very soon, at least in the US. In July 2015, it will become illegal for 
restaurants in New York to send food waste to landfills.

We can’t climate-proof cities

“It’s simply not possible,” stated Eric Klinenberg, sociologist and author. 
What we can do, he continued, is adapt cities to prepare for the threats of 
climate change. From the destructive impact of Chicago’s great heatwave, New 
Orleans’ Hurricane Katrina or New York’s Superstorm Sandy, it’s clear that US 
cities need to be better prepared.

Old forms of protection won’t cut it any more, either. Cities have a tendency 
to build walls and gates in order to keep out things they do not want. We 
continue to do this today, to prevent flooding. But walls are not the answer, 
argued Klinenberg. “Building walls is stupid: the water just goes somewhere 
else, and fragile ecosystems are threatened.” After Sandy, one proposed tactic 
was to create a wall in order to keep New York from being flooded. But other 
methods have been favoured in the Rebuild by Design competition,including a 
flood protection system that doubles up as a community park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jun/09/will-new-yorks-billion-dollar-design-contest-prevent-future-flooding>
.

Leadership matters ...


While the state of Texas does not recognise climate change as an issue, Austin 
is taking sustainability very seriously. It has abike share 
<https://austin.bcycle.com> and a car share scheme 
<https://www.car2go.com/en/austin/>. Its Office of Sustainability 
<http://www.austintexas.gov/department/sustainability> runs programmes to 
combat climate change as well as a mobile app encouraging greener behaviours. 
It has banned plastic bags and committed to zero emissions by 2050. Electric 
vehicles are popular, as well as solar power. If cities want to be more 
sustainable, more resilient against climate change, city leaders are crucial in 
pushing forward this vision and the strategies that can implement it.

... but involve the community 

While it’s important for city leaders to lead the charge, it was stressed that 
successful projects of sustainable change and development rely on local 
communities being fully involved in the process and taking ownership of it. 
Shelley Poticha of theNRDC <http://www.nrdc.org> described a “new awareness” 
within the organisation that communities are part of the climate solution. But 
there is not a one-project-fits-all method. Change and real resilience has to 
be community-led and community-specific; ideas cannot simply be parachuted in.

The Atlanta BeltLine <http://beltline.org>, a 22-mile loop of abandoned land 
repurposed into a cycling and walking trail linking 45 neighbourhoods in the 
city, is a project that came to fruition through placing the community at the 
core of its development. It includes public art, an arboretum, public parks, 
affordable housing and community gardens. “Giving communities ownership is 
crucial,” explained the BeltLine’s urban designer Ryan Gravel. “It will be 
messy but it will be worth it. Community involvement makes projects more viable 
and work better in the long run.”

Rapido 
<http://futuresforumvgs.blogspot.co.uk/2014/10/a-solution-to-our-housing-problems.html>
 is a disaster recovery housing project in Brownsville, Texas facilitated by 
the local community development corporation. It works largely with low-income 
families struggling to rebuild their home following a disaster, providing them 
with a rapid-response core house structure, moving them through a design 
process that shapes the house to their needs as well as forming local 
partnerships to ensure whole teams are in place when disaster hits. Nick 
Mitchell-Bennett, executive director of the Brownsville Community Development 
Corporation, calls it “development with morals”, and argues that this kind of 
investment in preparing for disasters is vital for resilience.

Improve the everyday

Adapting to climate change can feel like a task too large to stomach. Which is 
why climate change mitigation and sustainability projects can’t just be about 
“resiliency”; they need to deliver tangible, everyday benefits to citizens’ 
wellbeing, quality of life and health so that more people embrace them. In 
turn, as we grapple with constrained resources, public amenity projects like 
parks need to work harder to be better at mitigating the impact of climate 
change. Our city elements have to multitask. As Nette Compton fromThe Trust for 
Public Land <http://www.tpl.org> explained, in limited space and with minimum 
funding, environmental benefits are not enough; there need to be economic, 
community, and educational benefits, too.

In Rotterdam, the Benthemplein water square is a sunken park and skatepark 
that in times of flooding is transformed into a water storage basin. In South 
LA, the Avalon Green Alley network involves making back alleys into green bike 
lanes that can absorb water. The creation of Brooklyn Bridge Park provided 
waterside amenity space for local residents; its design also absorbs storm 
water to reduce flooding and removes the pavement to mitigate the city’s heat 
island effect.

Don’t forget books, pools and magic pavements

SXSWEco’s Place by Design competition aimed to celebrate visionary public 
space designs with tangible community benefits. The three winners were 
announced on Tuesday:Libros Libres <http://lfldallas.org>, a literacy and 
community design initiative in Dallas, part of the global Little Free Library 
movement to create small book shelters and new local gathering spaces;+ POOL 
<http://www.pluspool.org>, a floating public pool in New York that filters the 
river water; andPavegen <http://www.pavegen.com>, a London-based project that 
installs paving stones that can turn footsteps into renewable electricity.

What do you think about these issues, ideas and projects? How can cities best 
adapt to climate change? Share your thoughts in the comments below
 