
It should by rights have gone stale by now, but the announcement of the Cannes 
competition list is an annual event which retains for me its fascination and 
excitement, although I have just now made the mistake of watching theTV Cannes 
hype reel <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=> online, guaranteed to take the 
seasoned Cannes-lover from lip-smacking anticipation to nauseated satiety in 
just under three-and-a-quarter minutes.

Cannes 2010 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/cannes-2010> sure does have a 
heck of an act to follow in the form of Cannes 2009, which provided four of the 
most avidly talked-about and enthused-over movies of last year: The White 
Ribbon, Inglourious Basterds, A Prophet and Antichrist. It also provided a bona 
fide animated classic in the form of Up, which also spearheaded the new 3D 
revolution. That was the great "auteur smackdown" year and, though there aren't 
quite as many monster directorial names in this year's list, it is still a 
blue-chip lineup with names like Godard, Kiarostami, Allen and Leigh, and more 
films likely to be added to the competition list in the coming weeks. It 
emphasises the mighty pre-eminence of Cannes in the festival circuit. Other 
European festivals are starting to look a little anaemic as the brightest and 
best hold out for a Cannes entry. In particular, Berlin this year looked dull, 
stodgy and featureless.

Festival director Thierry Frémaux has opted to bookend the festival with 
high-gloss Hollywood products: Ridley Scott's Robin Hood and Oliver Stone's 
Wall Street 2: Money Never Sleeps. I'm not sure how much importance anyone is 
attaching to the first – although it may well be enjoyable – but Stone's 
picture has the opportunity for some relevant satire. Gordon Gekko is released 
from jail for more adventures, and the trailer incidentally shows what looks 
like awitty variation on the traditional return-of-personal-effects scene 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/video/2010/mar/18/wall-street-money-never-sleeps>
, as pioneered by The Blues Brothers.

Woody Allen <https://www.theguardian.com/film/woodyallen> – a director to whom 
Cannes is endlessly loyal – is showing his new comedy You Will Meet a Tall Dark 
Stranger, out of competition, to which critics, fans and onlookers can only 
repeat the old adage about hope springing eternal in the human breast. Terrence 
Malick's The Tree of Life, which many had predicted would be at Cannes, does 
not appear – reportedly not yet ready.

Abbas Kiarostami returns to Cannes with his Certified Copy (Copie Conforme), 
starring Juliette Binoche. It's his first film to be made outside Iran and it 
has an intriguingly atypical storyline: an English writer on a book-tour of 
Italy meets a Frenchwoman and embarks on a romantic adventure with her. It 
certainly sounds much different from his previous film, also featuring Binoche: 
Shirin, a quasi-static evocation of the faces of Iranian women watching a 
movie. This film was considered to have somehow intuited, in an inspired way, 
the famous and tragic news photo of the "Angel of Iran",Neda Agha Soltan 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2009/jun/22/neda-soltani-death-iran>.

The festival this year features a highly anticipated sequel: Burnt By the Sun 
2 (Utomlyonnye solntsem 2), by Nikita Mikhalkov, evidently a followup to his 
1994 classic Burnt By the Sun, a drama of Stalinist Russia in the 1930s. 
Milkhalkov has a towering reputation on account of this film, not really 
damaged by the memory of a rather stodgy period drama The Barber of Siberia, 
which opened the festival in 1999.

South Korea, always a presence at Cannes, is represented by Im Sang-soo with 
The Housemaid, a remake of the 1960 thriller about a man who has an affair with 
the family housemaid, and Lee Chang-dong (the director of Peppermint Candy and 
Secret Sunshine) with Poetry, a dark character piece about a woman trying to 
come to terms with her husband's death.

Britain's hopes reside largely, once again, in Mike Leigh, one of the tiny 
elite of British directors considered by Cannes to be proper auteurs. (I was 
talking to a young British director yesterday who spoke about this a little 
dyspeptically, counting off the favoured directors: "Loach, Leigh, 
Winterbottom, Greenaway … because of course there are no other British 
directors!") Leigh's film –a production still can be seen here 
<http://www.talkingfilms.net/mike-leigh-next-film-is-called-another-year> – 
stars Lesley Manville and Jim Broadbent and is called Another Year. It's a 
title which might invite weary festivalgoing sarcasm, were it not for the fact 
that Leigh has been on a remarkable winning streak lately of making excellent 
films, and this may well be another.

I have to confess to a slight heart-sinking feeling at the sight of Alejandro 
González Iñárritu's Biutiful, starring Javier Bardem, about a man involved in 
illicit and illegal activity who suddenly comes across a childhood friend who 
is now a police officer. This director's Amores Perros made its sensational 
debut at Critic's Week in Cannes in 2000, but since then audiences have had 
ample opportunity to tire of his mannerism of presenting a multistranded drama 
and withholding until the last moment the revelation of how all these people 
are connected. Babel, his 2006 film on these lines, was bafflingly regarded 
with saucer-eyed awe at Cannes, despite the fact that it was a tower of tripe, 
a pillar of piffle and a column of codswallop. However … he has undoubted flair 
and brilliant technique. Biutiful may be beautiful.Production still here 
<http://theplaylist.blogspot.com/2009/11/alejandro-gonzalez-inarritus-biutiful.html>
.

The French presence at Cannes seems relatively low-key. Veteran Bertrand 
Tavernier presents his period costume drama La Princesse de Montpensier, but 
actor and Bond villain Mathieu Amalric rather sensationally has a film in the 
main competition entitled Tournée, about French showgirls in the United States 
– he is both star and director. Amalric is such a pungent personality that this 
has to be a hot ticket, but Cannes regulars will remember with a shudder 
Vincent Gallo's wildly self-indulgent and overblown psychological drama Brown 
Bunny. Let's hope Amalric is not about to get into a myxomatosis situation. 
Gilles Marchand's thriller Blackhole (L'Autre Monde), co-written with Dominik 
Moll, has a slot in the Midnight Screenings sidebar. Rachid Bouchareb's Outside 
the Law (Hors la Loi), about the Algerian campaign against the French colonial 
masters, looks very promising.

A couple of years back, Paolo Sorrentino's Il Divo 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/124317/divo> and Matteo Garrone's Gomorrah
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/124302/gomorrah> heralded a mini-Italian 
wave, thecontinuing implications of which are discussed in the new edition of 
Sight and Sound <http://www.bfi.org.uk/sightandsound/feature/49611>.

This year, Daniele Luchetti, the director of the much-liked My Brother Is an 
Only Child, returns with his comedy about a Rome factory worker called Our Life 
(La Nostra Vita). I should also note that in the Special Screenings section is 
Sabina Guzzanti's Draquila – L'Italia Che Trema, about what the L'Aquila 
earthquake and the government's attitude to it reveals about Silvio Berlusconi. 
In her 2005 film Viva Zapatero, the actor and satirist showed herself to be one 
of the very few people involved in Italian film – arguably, perhaps, the only 
person – prepared to attack Berlusconi directly and openly. Her new film will 
surely be worth a look.

The reappearance of Jean-Luc Godard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jeanlucgodard> has attracted rumours that 
this film, Socialisme, in Un Certain Regard, would be his swansong. Happily, 
this does not appear to be the case: he has another project entitled The Lost: 
A Search for Six of Six Million in development. The new offering appears to be 
a portmanteau movie in which, of the director-participants, Godard is first 
among equals. Godard is 79, and could be forgiven for wanting to slow up, but 
the Portuguese director Manoel de Oliveira has now passed his 101st birthday 
and shows no sign of wanting to do anything of the sort; he has a new film in 
Cannes, The Strange Case of Angelica (O Estranho Caso de Angélica), and his 
career now looks positively Struldbruggian.

And this hardly scratches the surface of what's on offer. As ever, it's an 
intensely alluring prospect.
 