
Many people might think The Great Gatsby has already had a premiere with 
reviews from American screenings widely available. But for its British star,
Carey Mulligan <https://www.theguardian.com/film/carey-mulligan>, the red 
carpet Cannes screening of Baz Luhrmann's 3D extravaganza on Wednesday evening 
will secure her position among the top flight of international talent.

The film will officially open the annual event in the south of France, 
regarded as the leading festival in the cinema industry's calendar. Mulligan is 
expected to attend alongside Lurhrman and her co-star,Leonardo DiCaprio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/leonardodicaprio>, and will be the glamorous 
focus of the most high-profile function of the fortnight.

The actor from Surrey, who is married to Marcus Mumford of the award-winning 
band Mumford and Sons, is to have a second moment of glory later in the 
festival when she appears in the new Coen brothers' film about country music,
Inside Llewyn Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/154516/inside-llewyn-davis>. Mulligan 
stars opposite Justin Timberlake and John Goodman in a film that critics are 
predicting may prove to be one of the hits of Cannes 2013.

After taking on the role of Daisy Buchanan, made famously stylish by Mia 
Farrow in the 1974 version of F Scott Fitzgerald's novel, Mulligan is next set 
to tackle the role that helped to establish Julie Christie as the leading 
British female star of her generation: Bathsheba Everdene inFar From the 
Madding Crowd. The actor, who will celebrate her 28th birthday shortly after 
the festival closes on 26 May, was the first choice of the Danish director 
Thomas Vinterberg to play the part in his radical retelling of Thomas Hardy's 
rural saga.

The character of Bathsheba is wilder and more spirited than Fitzgerald's 
fragile heroine inThe Great Gatsby, but like Dais, she is the beautiful object 
of desire at the heart of an ill-starred love story. Matthew Goode, recently 
seen inStoker, and Matthias Schoenaerts, star of Rust and Bone, are expected to 
play opposite Mulligan as the soldier Sergeant Troy and the shepherd Gabriel 
Oak, parts taken by Terence Stamp and Alan Bates in the 1967John Schlesinger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/john-schlesinger> film.

Vinterberg made his name with the 1998 film Festen and is one of the founder 
members of the Dogme collective of directors set up in 1995 to promote the idea 
of filming with natural light and the minimum of artifice. He recently 
impressed critics with his Danish language film,The Hunt, which earned Mads 
Mikkelsen a best actor prize at Cannes last year. Vinterberg has been looking 
for an English language project, but he is an unexpected choice to handle an 
adaptation of a English literary classic.

The screenplay for the film, which is being backed by BBC Films, DNA Films and 
Fox Searchlight, is being written by David Nicholls, who adapted Hardy'sTess of 
the D'Urbervillesin 2008 for the BBC series starring Gemma Arterton and Eddie 
Redmayne.

Mulligan started her career winning praise for performances in Pride and 
Prejudice, in which she shared a screen with Keira Knightley, and in the 
television adaptation ofBleak House. She won an international reputation for 
her portrayal of the studious young woman inAn Education, the film based on the 
early life of the formerObserver journalist Lynn Barber.

Since then she has taken risks by accepting a role in Steve McQueen's 
challenging film about sexual addiction,Shame 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142860/shame>, and starred opposite 
Ryan Gosling in the acclaimed thrillerDrive. While Mulligan promises to be the 
most prominent British attraction in this year's Cannes festival, there are a 
few other contenders.The Selfish Giant, the second film from Clio Barnard, the 
British director who madeThe Arbor, is a present-day reworking of Oscar Wilde's 
fairlytale and is playing in the Directors' Fortnight, whileFor Those In Peril, 
a debut from the young Scottish film-maker Paul Wright, will screen as part of 
Critics' Week.

Stephen Frears's drama, Muhammad Ali's Greatest Fight, is a look at the boxing 
champion's period as a conscientious objector during the Vietnam war and will 
also screen out of the main competition.

Finally, a week ago festival organisers announced that the latest film by Jim 
Jarmusch, who made his name in 1984 withStranger Than Paradise, will be in the 
running for the Palme D'Or, the first time for the director since his 2005 
entry,Broken Flowers.

It may not sound like a British film, but it was made independently by the 
veteran London producer Jeremy Thomas and it stars British actors Tom 
Hiddleston and Tilda Swinton as two vampires who have loved each other for 
centuries.

Excluded from the original line-up announced three weeks ago, it was given a 
late reprieve by Cannes selectors.
 