
Mischievous and mysterious at all times, Jean-Luc Godard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jeanlucgodard> presented Cannes with his 
latest and possibly even last work,Film Socialism, playing in the Un Certain 
Regard category: it's a complex fragmented poem of a movie, flashing up on to 
the screen images, sequences, archive-reel material and, as ever with this 
film-maker, gnomic slogans and phrases, here in bold, sans-serif capitals, 
white on black. Flouting the traditional conventions of character and 
storytelling more thoroughly than in recent work such as Our Music or In Praise 
of Love, Godard was more than ever concerned with ideas. Perhaps it is absurd 
to demand of him a moral, or a guiding aesthetic, but as far as one could be 
divined, it came down to one idealistic statement: "Les idées nous séparent; 
les rêves nous rapprochent (Ideas divide us; dreams bring us together)".

Film Socialism is indeed like an uncertainly remembered dream. Its first 
section appears to take place on a cruise ship: various disjointed sequences 
follow one another; then we shift to a family-owned petrol station somewhere in 
France. A confrontation between French and German passengers appears to 
resonate with disputes and tensions within the family; archive film shows 
searing images from the second world war, from Israel and Palestine, from the 
modern-day Odessa Steps. On paper, these elements sound exasperating, baffling 
and banal – and that's certainly how they were received by some. But I found 
their confrontational quality, and the bold juxtapositions, very resonant. 
Godard himself did not appear, having sent his apologies from his Swiss home. 
We have to hope that the 79-year-old is not very sick. Cannes, and cinema, 
would be duller and dumber without him.

On, then, to a very singular love story, an oddity with probably the strangest 
"meet-cute" in the history of romantic cinema. Abbas Kiarostami'sCertified Copy
, playing in competition, starsJuliette Binoche 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/juliette-binoche> as a French gallery owner 
with a troubled marriage, who attends a reading on art history given by a 
visiting British author. As the author, William Shimell looks pleasantly like a 
grey-haired English version of Chris Noth, Sex and the City's Mr Big.

Binoche is intrigued, albeit disagreeably, by what she sees as this man's 
conceited, wrong-headed theories about artistic copies and their equivalence 
with any original. She takes him to see a venerated copy in an art gallery, but 
their prickly, quarrelsome relationship takes a strange turn when he is 
mistaken by a cafe owner for Binoche's husband. On a whim, they decide to play 
along with the fiction, and Shimell becomes the "copy" of her spouse. They have 
arguments, discussions, they break up and make up, and achieve a miraculous 
kind of intimacy and self-knowledge.

It really is quite a strange notion: I wonder if Kiarostami was inspired by 
Richard Linklater's Before Sunset and Before Sunrise, or even the dialogue 
scenes between Woody Allen and Diane Keaton in Manhattan or Annie Hall. It is 
as if the idiom of "relationship comedy" has been translated into Kiarostami's 
much more austere, high-minded language – and, well, the result is sometimes a 
bit Berlitz language school. Shimell's character is very supercilious and 
unsympathetic – he has a Basil Fawlty-esque fit of temper in a restaurant – and 
it is not easy to tell if this is deliberate, or if Kiarostami thinks Shimell 
elegant and cerebral. The film is not entirely successful, but it's engaging 
enough; there's one of Kiarostami's trademark dialogue scenes in a moving car, 
shot through the windshield with a fixed camera. It also has a sight gag 
involving a hands-free mobile phone that would make Woody Allen proud.

So far, the frontrunner for the Palme d'Or has been Mike Leigh's Another Year. 
It now has a serious rival in Xavier Beauvois'sOf Gods and Men, based on a 
true-life case from 1996, in which seven French Cistercian monks from a 
monastery in Algeria were kidnapped and murdered. This stunningly serious and 
passionate movie investigates the monks' spiritual trials, finding in them 
something equivalent to Thomas Becket or even Christ. A "last supper" scene in 
which the monks, knowing that their hour of trial is at hand, sit down together 
to eat, left Cannes audiences speechless. Lambert Wilson as the monks' leader, 
Brother Christian, must surely be in line for the best actor prize.
 