
Cannes 2010 may have been a non-vintage year in many ways, but it yielded a 
glorious Palme d'Or winner in the form of Uncle Boonmee Who Can Recall His Past 
Lives, by the Thai directorApichatpong Weerasethakul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/apichatpong-weerasethakul>, an utterly 
beguiling film, bewitchingly mysterious and strange in his distinctive manner, 
and unselfconsciously yet unapologetically spiritual – a spirituality that the 
director quietly offers as an alternative to the belligerent nationalism and 
factious politics for which Thailand is now in the news.

It is a compassionate film that combines gentle comedy with fantasy and offers 
a transcendental vision of love, which manifests itself most vividly at the 
moment of our death. Its success may modify the somewhat cliched critical view 
of Asian cinema at Cannes as something affectless and opaque. After the 
successive triumphs of his last two films,Tropical Malady 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/theguardian/2005/mar/04/apichatpong-weerasethakul> 
andSyndromes and a Century 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2007/sep/21/worldcinema.drama>, this showed a 
film-maker whose imagination is at its strongest and most confident: his 
creative idiom pulses like a powerful heartbeat. After watching this movie, I 
was so swooningly captivated, I almost felt like going to live in some sort of 
tent near the director's home in Chiangmai in Thailand, a true believer, like 
one of the followers of Tolstoy encamped near his home at the beginning of the 
last century.

The film is loosely inspired by a pamphlet entitled A Man Who Can Recall Past 
Lives, which the director found in a monastery in north-east Thailand, about an 
old man called Uncle Boonmee who helped at the temple and told gentle tales of 
his past lives and past incarnations as humans and animals. Weerasethakul's 
movie imagines a widower called Boonmee, played by the non-professional 
Thanapat Saisaymar, who is suffering from a terminal disease and has come to 
the remote forests of his boyhood – the location, as he believes, of his past 
spirit lives – to die. But his memory of these past lives is not merely a case 
of earlier incarnations being presented as a kind of mystical "flashback", but 
his memory of those lives which are now lost to him: his dead wife and lost 
son. His encounter with these past lives is gently comic, strange, dream-like 
and deeply moving. I write about this film in more detail here.

The Grand Prix for Xavier Beauvois's Of Men and Gods  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/135867/des-hommes-et-des-dieux>was for me 
another very satisfying award: a fictionalised version of the true-life story 
from 1996 of French Cistercian monks being kidnapped by Islamic fundamentalists 
from their monastery in Algeria and finally murdered in circumstances that have 
never been fully explained. Boldly and powerfully, Beauvois makes of this case 
a religious and Catholic parable, almost like TS Eliot's Murder in the 
Cathedral, with the monks being progressively menaced by extremists, but 
refusing to leave, refusing to abandon their calling; yet declining to modify 
their respect for the traditions of the Qur'an, and reluctant to abandon the 
local people who have come to depend on them. Gradually, they make themselves 
ready for martyrdom. The final sequence has a delirious, inspirational quality, 
an extravagant and explicit reference to the last supper: the monks enjoy some 
unaccustomed red wine at their modest supper, as Tchaikovsky's Swan Lake plays 
– an almost Kubrickian flourish – and Beauvois's camera lingers on their 
careworn faces as they realise what must be in store for them all. Are they 
achieving something for which they have yearned throughout a lifetime of 
prayer: a state of grace? It is a very powerful movie, and I look forward to 
seeing it again when it is released in the UK.

I'm afraid I can't exactly praise the jury's decision to give the best actress 
prize to Juliette Binoche for her performance in Abbas Kiarostami's odd 
romantic adventureCertified Copy 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/135872/copie-conforme>: she plays a 
gallery owner in Tuscany who strikes up an intense relationship with a visiting 
British author whom she has agreed to show around. Of course, Binoche is a 
wonderful performer, and appearing on the poster for this year's festival as 
she does, she is a virtual talismanic presence in Cannes. You don't expect 
anything less than a first-class contribution from Juliette Binoche, and that 
is what you get from her here. But I must frankly say that she is hobbled by 
the strange oddity of the film that she appears in, by the uneasy, uncertain 
quality of the dialogue – Kiarostami is working for the first time in English – 
and the fact that she has to act opposite William Shimell, an opera singer who 
here makes his debut as a film actor. Shimell gives of his best: he is 
obviously someone with presence and intelligence, and his performance was liked 
by many in Cannes. But I have to say I think he is returning to opera after 
this. The scene in which Binoche retreats to the ladies' room to get herself 
glammed up with lipstick and earrings was hugely praised by critics: I found 
this enthusiasm really quite baffling. Certified Copy was a semi-successful 
curiosity; Binoche's performance was semi-successful also. I would have 
preferred to see the best actress prize go to the Korean performer Youn 
Yuh-jung, playing the sinister housekeeper in Im Sang-soo's elegant suspense 
thriller The Housemaid.

The best actor prize was divided between Javier Bardem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/javierbardem> for Alejandro González 
Iñárritu's intense underworld drama Biutiful and to the young Italian Elio 
Germano for Daniele Luchetti's La Nostra Vita (Our Life). Again, I'm out of 
sympathy here. Biutiful is a madly over-the-top rhapsodic tragedy that piles on 
the woe. Bardem plays a street hustler in Barcelona who is running a crew of 
Senegalese illegals selling drugs and is also working with some Chinese 
wiseguys who have a whole warehouse cellar packed with illegals working in a 
sweatshop. Bardem's character has also the (genuine) gift of seeing dead 
people, and makes a few euros on the side contacting the departed for grieving 
relatives: he himself is dying of prostate cancer. He has access to huge hidden 
stashes of cash, but lives in poverty. We are persistently invited to see him 
as a sympathetic, flawed character with raw integrity, despite the fact that he 
is complicit in a horrendous event that occurs three-quarters of the way 
through the movie; he does not give himself up to the police, is not seen 
making amends in any other way and the movie never appears to regard him as 
guilty in any sense. It is an exasperating performance in a basically 
exasperating movie.

Elio Germano, in La Nostra Vita 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/135878/la-nostra-vita>, is a dynamic, 
charismatic, endlessly watchable actor. He plays Claudio, a construction 
worker, happily married with two kids and a third on the way. Everything is 
great in his life, although he could do with a little more money. Then an awful 
thing happens and Claudio makes a decision to cover it up, and carry on with 
his modest life as best he can. It's not a bad film, though finally much more 
sentimental and lenient than the audience might expect from its shocking 
opening. Germano is great – it's not stretching things to compare him to the 
young De Niro in Mean Streets.

Mahamat Saleh Haroun won the jury prize for his excellent film A Screaming Man 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/135870/un-homme-qui-crie>, which was 
thought by some in Cannes to be over-schematic, but whose directness and 
simplicity I found entirely compelling. In fact, I should have liked the best 
actor prize to go to Youssouf Djaoro, playing Adam, the sixtysomething pool 
attendant at a luxury hotel in Chad, whose son works alongside him. But when 
Adam loses his job, and is then pressured by the authorities to send his son 
off to war to fight insurgent rebels, Adam is put into a painful, complex 
situation.

I'm sorry to say that the jury gave the best director prize to Mathieu Amalric 
for his directing debut On Tour, an emotionally flat, 
not-very-well-acted-or-directed vanity project in which Amalric plays a former 
TV producer who is taking a troupe of neo-burlesque strippers from the US on a 
regional tour of his native France, and wondering whether to bring them to 
Paris, where he must confront his past and slay personal demons. I found this 
film boring, with a negligent, lazily extreme performance from Amalric himself. 
He is usually such a treat. Not this time. The directing prize should surely 
have gone toMike Leigh <https://www.theguardian.com/film/mikeleigh>, whose 
Another Year was one of the very best films in Cannes.

Lee Chang-dong won the best screenplay prize for his film Poetry, about a 
sixtysomething woman who has been told that she is in the early stages of 
Alzheimer's, and conceives a passionate desire to write a poem about her life, 
before the powers of language and memory desert her utterly. It is, 
intermittently, an affecting film, though in my view clotted with plot strands 
that were clumsily over-dramatic and superfluous.

This was a year in which many felt that the competition list was upstaged by a 
very interesting Un Certain Regard section, dominated by the defiant glitter of 
Jean-Luc Godard's Film Socialism, and by the polemics out of competition from 
Lucy Walker, with her anti-nuke documentary Countdown to Zero, and from Sabina 
Guzzanti with her brilliant attack on Berlusconi: Draquila – Italy Trembles. In 
competition, auteur heavy-hitters like Kiarostami and Loach produced only 
middling work. But there were gems like Uncle Boonmee Who Can Recall His Past 
Lives, Of Men and Gods and Another Year – all demand to be seen when they are 
released in Britain.
 