
The film-maker Abbas Kiarostami today launched an appeal for the release of a 
fellow Iranian who should be judging this year'sCannes film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cannesfilmfestival>.

Kiarostami called the detention of Jafar Panahi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jafar-panahi> an "attack on art", following 
unconfirmed reports that Panahi was on hunger strike.

Panahi was meant to be one of the jurors on the panel chaired by the film 
director Tim Burton deciding the winner of this year's Palme d'Or. Instead, he 
is in jail after being arrested on 1 March, accused of planning to make a film 
about last year's disputed re-election ofMahmoud Ahmadinejad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mahmoud-ahmadinejad> as Iranian president.

Kiarostami was in Cannes for the premiere of his film, Certified Copy, one of 
19 contenders for the festival's top prize. He said Panahi's detention was 
"intolerable".

"When a filmmaker is imprisoned, it is an attack on art as a whole. We need 
explanations. I don't understand how a film can be a crime, particularly when 
that film has not been made," he said.

Journalists were handed copies of an open letter Kiarostami has written to the 
Iranian authorities demanding Panahi's release.

It is Kiarostami's fourth time in competition atCannes, but with a film of 
many firsts. For example, Certified Copy is his first film outsideIran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> and the first in which he uses 
professional actors.

It has had a mixed reaction critically and even at its first screening there 
were a few boos. The film is set in Tuscany and follows a French art gallery 
owner, played by Juliette Binoche, and an English writer, played by the opera 
singer William Shimell, making his film debut.

Binoche had asked Kiarostami for a film in which she could appear, but the 
project was delayed for more than a year by her dance collaboration with the 
choreographer Akram Khan. Kiarostami got Shimell on board after the two worked 
together on Cosi Fan Tutte at Aix-en-Provence.

Another strong contender premiered today was Xavier Beauvois's Of Men and 
Gods, which tells the true story of seven Cistercian monks kidnapped and 
murdered in Algeria in 1996.

Beauvois does not address in the film whether they were killed by the 
fundamentalist kidnappers or by the army in a bungled rescue attempt. But he 
does paint a wonderfully evocative picture of life in a monastery and the need 
for religions to get on.

The lead role of Brother Christian is wonderfully played by Lambert Wilson, 
who appeared in Cannes looking the direct opposite of his austere character, 
wearing sunglasses and a retro red tracksuit top unzipped to his navel. There 
was some confusion when he walked out halfway through the press conference. "I 
went for a cigarette," he said.
 