
When Bruce Dern, 76, stood up and received a 10-minute ovation at Cannes after 
the premiere of his filmNebraska he took the opportunity to praise his 
director. The screen veteran, who surely has the most unnerving glassy blue 
stare in cinema history, hailedAlexander Payne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alexander-payne> as one of the greats.

"I can say I've worked for six geniuses: [Elia] Kazan, Hitchcock, Douglas 
Trumbull – a lot of people ask about that one, but trust me, he's a genius – 
Francis Ford Coppola, Quentin Tarantino, and of course, Alexander Payne," Dern 
said, looking back on 50 years of acting.

His words resonated around Cannes because this weekend the festival has 
celebrated the talents of Hollywood's mavericks: those influential film-makers 
who survive in spite of their struggle with the populist demands of the 
industry. So, to Dern's roll call of brave maestros, we can add three names he 
has yet to work with:Steven Soderbergh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/stevensoderbergh>, Jim Jarmusch and Roman 
Polanski. Like Payne, they are contemporary film-makers with cult followings 
who have walked the rocky path between pleasing their producers and making 
films that illuminate the dark underbelly of life. And all of them premiered 
work in Cannes in the last four days. Beyond the glitter and hype of the red 
carpet, these rebellious souls have demonstrated a love-hate relationship with 
showbusiness that has shaped their careers.

Payne, Dern implied, is in a tradition of subversives who have courted 
Hollywood money yet recoiled from the superficiality and predictability of the 
films that most producers want to finance. The director, 52, from Nebraska, 
made his 2011 hitThe Descendants, starring George Clooney, following the 
critical success of the bleak comediesSideways and Election.

As the star of his latest film, Dern plays a demented father obsessed with 
redeeming the promise of fictitious lottery winnings received in a junk 
mailing. Not a very glamorous role, but then the actor, and father of actress 
Laura Dern, made his name in the 1970s playing odd characters on the edge of 
mainstream life in films such as Trumbull'sSilent Running or Hal Ashby's Coming 
Home. As a result, he has worked with a succession of Hollywood's less 
crowd-pleasing film-makers and appreciates their courage. "I never had much of 
a relationship with my own father, but at the end of this movie I found my 
father – and that's him," an emotional Dern said on Thursday, pointing at 
Payne. "I got that trust to dare to fail."

While Payne has talked publicly of the difficulty of finding stories that he 
can make into feature films, the director with a clearly troubled relationship 
with conventional American cinema is Soderbergh. In Cannes to premiereBehind 
the Candelabra, Soderbergh announced in January that he is leaving film-making 
for good. He has now also revealed that he is selling all his film memorabilia. 
Ephemera and publicity material from his earlier work,Erin Brockovich, Solaris 
andTraffic, will be auctioned for charity as a way of marking his decision to 
quit. "I didn't want to throw this stuff away but I didn't want to keep it 
either, so I figured the smart play was to put it up for auction and donate the 
money to charity," the director from Atlanta said last week.

His acclaimed final film, which stars Michael Douglas and Matt Damon as the 
entertainer Liberace and his boyfriend Scott Thorson, has been received with 
rapture by critics in Cannes and is thought to be in strong contention for the 
Palme d'Or prize awarded on Sunday. It would be a suitable end to a career that 
has swung from the extremes of his fashionable first hit,Sex, Lies and Videotape
, and the commercial success of his starry heist movies,Ocean's Eleven, Twelve 
andThirteen. When Soderbergh threw in the towel early this year he said: "The 
worst development in film-making – particularly in the last five years – is how 
badly directors are treated. It has become absolutely horrible the way the 
people with the money decide they can fart in the kitchen, to put it bluntly. 
It's not just studios – it's who is financing a film. I guess I don't 
understand the assumption that the director is presumptively wrong about what 
the audience wants or needs when they are the first audience, in a way. And 
probably got into making movies because of being in that audience."

His farewell to Hollywood has been in progress for three years now and the 
thrillerSide Effects may prove to have been his last theatrical release. Behind 
the Candelabra will be screened first on the pay-TV network HBO in America, 
which means it will not be eligible for an Oscar. And here lies the clue to his 
plans. Soderbergh is reported to be teaming up with British actor Clive Owen to 
make a costume drama series for TV calledThe Knick, about the staff of New York 
City's Knickerbocker hospital at the turn of the century.

Television, and especially long-form drama, appeals as never before to those 
directors who want to address serious subjects. In Cannes last week another 
veteran American actor from the 1970s, James Caan, 73, expressed this same 
disillusionment with the big screen. Known best for his role as Sonny Corleone 
inThe Godfather, Caan was on the Croisette to promote Guillaume Canet's Blood 
Ties, about a divided family in Brooklyn. "I've become very negative about the 
films of today," said Caan. "I was very fortunate in the 70s to work with the 
best actors, the best directors, the best cinematographers. And [the films] had 
a beginning, a middle and an end, which was something very odd." Nowadays, he 
complained, "it seems like most of the films they're doing, in Hollywood 
anyway, are these franchise films."

At a safe distance from any lucrative franchise offers is the director Jim 
Jarmusch <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jim-jarmusch>, in Cannes this 
weekend for the premiere of his independently financed vampire movieOnly Lovers 
Left Alive. His film stars British talents Tilda Swinton and Tom Hiddleston as 
ancient, blood-sucking lovers, and has a heavy gothic look. Like Soderbergh, 
Jarmusch found financing his film was a challenge until British producer Jeremy 
Thomas stepped in. Jarmusch, who was born in Ohio and is 60, made his name in 
1984 with the enigmaticStranger than Paradise and went on to make Down by Law. 
He last competed in Cannes withBroken Flowers in 2005 and has a famously 
uncommercial outlook. "I'd rather make a movie about a guy walking his dog than 
about the emperor of China," he once said.

Jarmusch describes his film as an unconventional love story between characters 
named Adam and Eve. "My script was partially inspired by the last book 
published by Mark Twain:The Diaries of Adam and Eve," he has said. "These two 
lovers are archetypal outsiders, classic bohemians, extremely intelligent and 
sophisticated – yet still in full possession of their animal instincts. They 
have travelled the world and experienced many remarkable things, always 
inhabiting the shadowed margins of society."

However, the director with probably the most complicated relationship with 
Hollywood is Polanski, whose filmVenus in Fur, screened on Saturday. Lionised 
for the brilliance of his early filmsRepulsion, Rosemary's Baby, Chinatown and, 
more recently, for the Palme d'Or winningThe Pianist, French-born Polanski, 79, 
is a genuine outcast. After the brutal murder of his wife Sharon Tate at the 
hands of Charles Manson's gang, he left California for ever, fleeing a charge 
of sexual assault on a 13-year-old girl which has haunted him for the rest of 
his life. His latest film stars his wife Emmanuelle Seigner, alongside Mathieu 
Amalric, and was filmed in French, making it his first non-English language 
film in 40 years. It is as clear a statement of artistic loyalty as Polanski 
could make.

Hollywood has always had an uneasy relationship with directors who want to 
take risks and tell downbeat stories. Film-making is expensive and producers 
know that these films – even the great ones, that keep on being watched – never 
make much money. They should also know, though, that directors with a truly 
maverick spirit are the lifeblood of the industry.
 