
The festival swings into its final straight and the films go by in a blur. 
There are so many of the things it's hard to keep track of them.Peter Bradshaw 
says his big discovery is Love Like Poison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/may/16/peter-bradshaw-cannes-round-up>, 
but I haven't seen it. Several people waylay me to enthuse about the sheer 
brilliance of an obscure "comedy about goats" and no, I haven't seen that one 
either. Frankly it sounds made up.

What I have seen is Biutiful, Alejandro González Iñárritu's Palme d'Or 
contender, which contains a terrific performance fromJavier Bardem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/javierbardem> as a leather-coated chancer 
with a diagnosis of terminal cancer who comes swooping through Barcelona on a 
mission to wrap up his affairs. Pissing blood into toilet bowls, he seeks one 
last shot at redemption. As you might expect from Iñárritu, it's supple, 
muscular and confident. As you also might expect, it's perhaps a shade too 
self-important and prone to grandstanding – a would-be 
state-of-the-globalised-nation, full of corrupt bosses and embattled immigrant 
labour. Still, it has some bravura set pieces, not least the one in which the 
cops chase the dealers through the city centre, upturning the metal tables at 
the pavement cafes and putting the fear of God into the middle-class diners. 
I'm writing this at a pavement cafe of my own. So far it's quiet.

I also catch the evening showing of Certified Copy (Copie Conforme), a 
Tuscany-set romance from Abbas Kiarostami (Iranian) that starsJuliette Binoche 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/juliette-binoche> (French) and the singer 
William Shimell (British). This seemed to split opinion but I liked it a lot. 
Binoche and Shimell meet for the first time and drive out to a hilltop town 
where they first accept and then furnish the misconception that they are 
actually a couple, married for 15 years and struggling to keep the flame 
alight. Shimell plays an art historian and there is much talk of copies and 
forgeries, what's real and what's fake. But what this quiet, contemplative film 
seems to be suggesting is that we are all forgeries and that we dramatise our 
lives for the benefit of ourselves and those around us. And if that's the human 
condition, who says it's not authentic?

At this year's Cannes film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cannesfilmfestival>, the competition 
directors have reportedly all been asked to sign a petition in favour of Roman 
Polanski, who remains under house arrest in Switzerland. I ask Mike Leigh if 
he's signing or not, and he says he knows nothing about it and is not prepared 
to start discussing Polanski with me in any case. That night I sit down to 
dinner with a group of other festivalgoers where, once the first bottle has 
been consumed, I'm treated to an outlandish Polanski-themed anecdote that 
involves a jigsaw with a missing piece and what can only be described as an 
indecent proposal. We sit there listening, open-mouthed. It's a shame Mike 
Leigh isn't around to hear it too. It might have helped him make up his mind.
 