
The Cape Verde Islands coach, Lúcio Antunes, burst into song after a dramatic 
win over Angola put his team through to the quarter-finals of theAfrica Cup of 
Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> on their first 
appearance in the tournament.

Antunes broke into a few bars of "The Biography of a Crioulo", a Cape Verde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cape-verde> song of joy referring to the 
Portuguese dialect spoken in the islands.

"It is a traditional song. I dedicate it to all the people at home," he said 
after the Group A match.

Cape Verde's team burst into the post-match news conference to chant and dance 
in front of reporters, with Antunes in the middle with the blue flag of his 
country draped across his shoulders.

The coach showed he had a melodic voice and was given a round of applause at 
the end, not just for his singing but also for Cape Verde's stunning 
achievement in reaching the last eight.

After scoring twice in the last 14 minutes, they joined hosts South Africa in 
the quarter-finals. "We achieved our objective, we knew it was going to be 
difficult but we kept at it," Antunes said.

"We knew what was happening in the other match between South Africa and 
Morocco [a 2-2 draw] and that's why I told the team to attack until the end and 
it paid off. It also started raining and that blessed our effort."

Cape Verde scored when Héldon Ramos powered in a shot from a loose ball after 
the clock moved past 90 minutes. Ramos pounced after theAngola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/angola> goalkeeper, Lama, parried a cross 
into his path to set off the chaotic celebrations.

Fernando Neves' own-goal in the 33rd minute put his team behind and on the 
verge of being eliminated. But Fernando Varela headed in after a goalmouth 
scramble in the 82nd to level.

The Angola coach, Gustavo Ferrin, who made five changes to the side who lost 
2-0 to South Africa in their previous match, defended his strategy and his 
attacking substitutions even though his side were eliminated.

"The only option for us was to attack and I did the right thing tactically," 
he said. "It was a very dramatic ending and I am very sorry we lost."
 