
Renting and roaming

Q We own two properties in this country, but are moving overseas in September. 
We have let one of the houses out for the past 16 months while living in the 
other for the same amount of time.

We have heard that after three years we will become liable for capital gains 
tax (CGT). We are therefore trying to decide whether to rent out both 
properties, or sell the one we currently let out, which has equity of about 
£80,000, and invest the money.

We aim to be overseas for at least two years and would then like to get at our 
money as we are planning to build a house in New Zealand.
WT

A Should you decide to sell it there is no CGT liability on the property in 
which you've been living. Under CGT rules your principal private residence is 
one of the main category of assets exempt from CGT. You should have no 
difficulty in proving to Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs that it is your 
principal private residency if you have been living there.

However, married couples can only have one principal private residency. This 
means that the property you have been letting out for the past 16 months would 
be liable for CGT as soon as it is sold. The amount of tax would be based on 
the difference between the purchase and selling price, less the costs involved 
in selling. The three year provision you mention only applies if the property 
was your principal personal residence at one stage.

You should bear in mind that you each have a CGT allowance, which has just 
been raised to £9,200 for the 2007-08 tax year. So if you jointly own the 
property you can make a tax-free capital gain of £18,400 on the disposal of any 
assets in any financial year (April 6 to April 5), provided you have not used 
up any of the allowance by disposing of other assets, such as shares, in the 
same period.

Furthermore, if you live abroad you will not be liable to pay any CGT on the 
disposal of assets unless you return to live in the UK within five years of 
becoming a non-resident.

Even if you are living abroad you are liable to pay income tax (as opposed to 
CGT) on any rent received from the UK properties. However, both your personal 
tax-free income allowances can be used to reduce the amount of tax payable on 
the rental income if the properties are held in joint names.

The basic personal allowance has just been raised to £5,225 for individuals 
under 65, so between you you could earn tax-free rent of £10,450, provided you 
have no other source of UK income such as earnings or pensions. You are also 
able to claim tax relief on legitimate expenses incurred, such as repairs and 
administration costs involved in collecting the rents.

If you do decide to sell the property you've been letting out for the past 16 
months there could be little or no CGT to pay once you've taken into account 
your tax-free allowances. however, you would not qualify for taper relief as 
the asset (the property) has not been held for more than three years, but I 
don't think that would make much difference in this case.

I would advise investing any proceeds from the sale of property into an 
offshore account or fund. UK tax is not deducted at source from an offshore 
investment, and while you are a non-UK resident the money could grow in value 
in a tax-free environment. It could then be transferred directly to New 
Zealand, preferably while you are still resident there.

Two houses, one tax

Q I own two properties, one in London and one in the Midlands. The London 
property has been my main residence for 30 years and I have owned the 
Birmingham house since 1994.

I am thinking of relocating to the Midlands and making that house my main 
residence, with London my second home. If it doesn't work out and I decide to 
sell the Birmingham house, would I have to pay capital gains tax (CGT) on it? 
Is there a time scale after which a previous second home, now a main residence, 
ceases to be liable for CGT?
AL

A Moving to your Birmingham home, even for a limited time, could work out 
quite well for you from a tax point of view. You can elect to make it your 
principal personal residence at any time by formally notifying Her Majesty's 
Revenue and Customs of your intention to move from your London home.

Provided you have lived in a property as your principal personal residence for 
a period of time, the last three years of ownership qualify for relief from 
CGT. This means you would not be liable to pay any tax if you decided to move 
back to the London property and make it your principal personal residence again 
within three years, even if you let it out in the meantime.

There is, however, no time scale for the complete avoidance of CGT. If and 
when you decide to sell the Birmingham home you would still be liable to pay 
some tax for the period from the purchase date in l994 to the date you made it 
your principal personal residence.
 