
How much do you know about energy? How much do you care? I learned about 
electricity at school, and the Victorians and their coal mines. But A level 
history and half a history degree went by without, so far as I remember, a 
single minute’s discussion of the rise of oil.


I have a thrilling memory of candles in the kitchen during one of the power 
cuts of the 1970s, and of course I remember the miners’ strike. I revelled in 
the spectacle of the oil barons’ ball in Dallas. But energy was utterly 
peripheral to my sense of what history, politics and life were really about. 
When it was said that oil was behind the 1990-91 Gulf war, was in fact crucial 
to most of what went on in the Middle East, I didn’t know what to think.


Timothy Mitchell was born in Britain, and got a first in history at Cambridge 
before moving to the US where he is now professor of Middle Eastern studies at 
Columbia. His book Carbon Democracy, published four years ago and shared with 
me, as a 40th birthday present, by the only hedge fund manager I know, advances 
a brilliant, revisionist argument that places oil companies at the heart of 20th
-century history – and of the political and environmental crises we now face.


To summarise: coal gave working-class people and their unions new and 
remarkable power. Because it is bulky and requires many men to move it around, 
coal was a catalyst for democracy and progress. Western elites turned to oil 
partly because they wanted to regain control over energy supplies. The oil 
companies developed a complex system for restricting supply to maximise profits.


In the Middle East, rival companies battled for control and began to define 
their interests as strategic, against a backdrop of political turmoil. As 
empires crumbled, democratic impulses were overwhelmed by a new doctrine of 
self-determination which enabled foreign companies to retain control.


The “energy crisis” of 1973-4 was no such thing: a group of Arab states cut 
the oil supply in protest at US support for Israel, a decision unconnected to a 
rise in oil taxes. The cold war provided the justification for vast spending on 
weapons, as arms as well as oil companies became dependent on alliances in the 
Middle East. Our modern conception of “the economy” is built upon what once 
appeared to be an infinite quantity of oil.


I’m not knowledgeable enough about Arabian history, politics or economics, to 
attempt much in the way of a critique of this account, dense as it is with 
facts, ideas and references. One review,by two anthropology professors 
<http://www.focaalblog.com/2014/08/29/sandy-smith-nonini-donald-m-nonini-fueling-the-neoliberal-turn-why-we-need-to-engage-timothy-mitchells-carbon-democracy/>
, says the book, while brilliant, “leaves gaps” for others to fill in. FT 
energy editor Ed Crooks – the only British journalist, so far as I can 
discover, to have commented on the book – called it “by turns engrossing and 
frustrating 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/2/53504560-6d43-11e1-ab1a-00144feab49a.html>”, while 
Amazon reviewer Simon Barrett asks “Why hasn’t this made more impact?”


Although you wouldn’t know it for the torrent of obfuscation and denial that 
is only now, finally, clearing, the science of climate change – that is, the 
global warming caused by carbon dioxide in the atmosphere – is quite 
straightforward, and any number of books explain it very well (try Bill 
McKibben’s The End of Nature, from 1989) .

Far less simple – though hopefully not incomprehensible - are the political 
and economic arrangements that have made us so dangerously slow to react to 
this manmade, existential threat. Mitchell describes the fossil-fuel era as a 
“strange episode” in history, and one that continues to give rise to strange 
behaviour, namely “ways of living and thinking that treat nature as an infinite 
resource”.


If we’re ever to curb such behaviour, and to regain some comprehension of our 
planet’s preciousness, we need first to understand how it came about. Not a 
book for the season of indulgence, this one. But one that demands to be widely 
shared.


Carbon Democracy by Timothy Mitchell (Verso, 2011)
 