
Record numbers of care home residents are being deprived of their liberty by 
being put in straps, locked in or given behaviour-controlling drugs, fuelling 
fears that some are being mistreated.


Campaigners have voiced concern that some residents, including dementia 
patients, are being wrongly denied their freedom and treated as “second-class 
citizens” – for example, by being locked in their rooms.

In 2015-16, care homes in England asked local councils to approve 195,840 
applications to deprive a resident of their liberty – most of them older people 
– under thedeprivation of liberty safeguards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2012/apr/02/deprivation-liberty-safeguards-improvements>
 (DoLS) legal framework. The figure was the highest since the system began in 
2009 and a big jump on the 137,540 applications in the previous year.


Hospitals occasionally seek permission to keep a patient locked up, but care 
homes make by far the most DoLS applications and have been entering requests 
much more regularly since a supreme court ruling in March 2014. That judgment, 
which clarified the form of an “acid test” for what constitutes a deprivation 
of liberty, sparked an immediate and sustained increase in the number of 
applications.


DoLS requests are usually made to avoid someone harming themselves. Councils 
have to assess if applications have fulfilled six criteria and respond within 
21 days, or within seven days if it is an urgent case. The system is meant to 
ensure independent assessment of decisions to deny the liberty of people deemed 
to lack the mental capacity to consent to the care they receive.

Of last year’s 195,840 applications, councils processed 105,055. They approved 
76,530 (73%) of those and rejected the rest as inappropriate – a big rise on 
the 10,520 rejected in the previous year. However, applications are usually 
considered only after someone has been denied their freedom, which means that 
last year about 28,500 people were restrained, locked in or given medication 
before the move was deemed inappropriate.

Care home company fined £1.6m for letting woman freeze to death
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/28/care-home-maria-mallaband-care-fined-allowing-woman-freeze-death>
Martina Kane, senior policy officer at the Alzheimer’s Society, said: “The 
safeguards granted by deprivation of liberty safeguards are an essential part 
of protecting the right to liberty of people with dementia. It is disgraceful 
that nearly 30,000 people were wrongfully deprived of their liberty, and in 
over a quarter of cases practitioners are still locking people in, sedating 
them, restraining them or otherwise treating them as second-class citizens.

“Depriving someone of their liberty should always be a last resort and only 
ever done in someone’s best interests. It is crucial that the quality of care 
provided to people with dementia is improved to ensure that.”

Understaffing in care homes could lead to every door in an entire premises 
being locked overnight, Kane added.

The latest annual DoLS figures collated by NHS Digital show that applications 
are more likely to be made for older age groups; 44% are for people aged 85 or 
over. Many of these older people suffer from dementia.

The Local Government Association, which represents councils, said the figures 
were of great concern. “These alarming figures are further evidence of the 
significant added pressure facing local government as a result of increased 
DoLS assessments, which is estimated to be costing councils more than £170m a 
year,” a spokeswoman said.

“The government needs to fulfil its promise to overhaul the system as a matter 
of urgency and provide adequate funding so that councils have the time and 
money to do this properly.”
 