
Several years ago, I made the decision to jump into freelancing. To an 
outsider, it may have seemed an odd choice. I had been working in museums for 
16 years, and had managed to climb the greasy pole of curatorship to reach the 
dizzying heights of head of exhibitions for a national museum. I had a 
permanent post and a civil service pension. But I was also ready for a change 
of direction.

Six years and a protracted credit crunch later, I still relish the challenge 
of being independent. I co-foundedThe Exhibitions Team 
<http://www.theexhibitionsteam.com/>, a consortium of museum professionals with 
a track record in developing and delivering displays. I've been extremely lucky 
to weather the storms of recession, financial cuts and austerity, but my nose 
has been permanently strapped to the proverbial grindstone to make things 
happen.

It's surprising how often my employed colleagues ask wistfully about becoming 
a freelancer. So here are my top tips for going solo in the museum and heritage 
sector.

1. It's all in the preparation

Think carefully about your reasons for going it alone and talk to other people 
who have made the change. I sought the advice of a mentor who could tell me 
what it was really like on the other side. Being self-employed was in my blood. 
My parents ran their own business and my aunt was an antiques dealer. I'd often 
worked for them as a student so I was unfazed by hard graft or double-entry 
book-keeping.

Being a freelancer is effectively the same as running your own business. Make 
sure you can cope with the tax and legal implications by checking out the 
brilliant free resourcesoffered by HMRC <http://www.hmrc.gov.uk/selfemployed/>.

2. Know yourself

Ask searching questions about your attitude and flexibility. Do you have a 
financial cushion to see you through the lean times? Are you in good health? 
Can you cope with a heavy workload, early mornings and late nights? Could you 
please several clients at the same time? If you are at all concerned about any 
of your answers, maybe admit that now isn't the right time to go solo.

Also ask yourself what things you are good at doing and why clients should 
offer you work. If you're not sure how to answer these questions, ask someone 
you trust to tell you the truth. Don't dismiss skills such as creating 
spreadsheets, project management and writing exhibition labels. Clients usually 
get in touch when they are struggling with overload. At such times, it can be 
difficult for them to think clearly.

A simple spreadsheet, a succinct report and a quick meeting to get staff on 
board might be all it takes to make a difference. One client apologised when 
she asked me to draw up a risk register for a meeting, but was delighted when I 
was able to reduce an overly complex project into something more manageable.
Heritage <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/heritage> clients are reassured 
by being able to turn to "one of their own", while peripheral skills may offer 
the client a quick way out of a sticky fix.

3. Embrace your weaknesses

There's no IT helpdesk where you're going – so learn to set-up your own 
computer, accept that you will have to pay for someone else to do it, or 
nurture friends who can do it for you.

In my previous life, I could never master Gantt charts. Nobody else in the 
organisation liked them either, so I was allowed to ignore my weakness. Then I 
was offered a freelance opportunity as producer of a series of digital 
interactives for a prestigious new learning centre. The project required a 
Gantt chart to manage a complex range of tasks such as script-writing, 
animations, location filming and editing. More importantly, the chart was 
linked to the client's invoicing procedure.

No Gantt chart, no pay. I swiftly obtained the relevant software and checked 
YouTube for bite-sized training sessions. I also persuaded a friend to give me 
a two-hour master class. My first Gantt chart may have been basic, but it was 
approved by the client and the invoice was cleared. There's nothing like the 
threat of delayed payment to concentrate the mind of a freelancer.

4. Nurture your network

Word of mouth recommendation is one of the most powerful tools in the 
freelancer's cache. Take every opportunity to meet people in the sector and 
keep in touch with them. But always have a good reason to get in touch and make 
yourself useful – never pester them. Perhaps you could send a web link to an 
article associated with their line of work; maybe you have thought of an 
interesting way to solve a knotty problem they mentioned; or you might 
introduce two people who should know each other.

One morning, I received a request to compile a major funding application with 
an urgent deadline. I met the prospective client that afternoon who, after 
telling me all about the project, simply asked when I might be able to start. 
"Don't you want to know more about me?" I enquired. I was told: "There's no 
need. You come highly recommended so I know you can do this." I'm pleased to 
report that the funding application was successful, and I've been invited back 
to manage another project.

5. Stay sharp

As an independent freelancer, you must take charge of your own professional 
development. Use opportunities for solving a client's problems as a challenge 
for sharpening your own skills. In 2013, I became a trustee for the National 
Jazz Archive, a small organisation which has been awarded a handsome Heritage 
Lottery Fund grant to catalogue its collection and raise its profile.

With few paid staff, the archive relies on volunteers to do much of the work, 
most of whom are enthusiasts with no heritage background. The trusteeship has 
been a fantastic way to refresh my knowledge of best practice procedures across 
a wide range of operational and management issues.

This article first appeared on the London Museums Group blog 
<http://www.londonmuseumsgroup.org/2013/10/27/thoughts-going-alone-museum-consultant/>

Maria Blyzinsky is a museum consultant, freelance curator and founding member 
ofthe Exhibitions Team <http://www.theexhibitionsteam.com> – follow her on 
Twitter@MariaBlyzinsky <https://twitter.com/MariaBlyzinsky>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like this 
direct to your inbox, sign up free to become amember of the Culture 
Professionals Network <https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/>.
 