
The media is full of doom and gloom regarding the recession and declining jobs 
market - are there still jobs out there?

Shilpa Mavadia, a senior consultant with the hga Group 
<http://www.hga-group.com/> in London, has positive news: "There is still talk 
of 'a double dip'. Christmas figures are showing poor sales and we are all 
still absorbing the pain of the VAT increase - but putting all this aside, the 
market is buoyant and clients are recruiting. A large proportion of our work is 
retained, and we're currently managing multiple projects including several 
international opportunities. Economic recovery has been quite slow - we are 
seeing a rise in unemployment figures for the first half of the year, however 
according to economic forecasts and private sector investment we should see 
trade pick up in the second half of the year, encouraging the creation of new 
jobs."

Are any particular skills more in demand than others?

Rachel Burr, a senior consultant with London-based talent consultancy, 24 Seven
 <http://www.24seveninc.co.uk/>, outlines what her clients are requesting: "I'm 
always on the lookout for skilled technical candidates, such as garment 
technologists and pattern cutters. Most graduates tend to want to get into 
design rather than the more practical side of fashion so as this filters down 
we're seeing a serious lack of fresh talent emerging in this area of the 
industry."

How can job hunters make themselves stand out from the crowd?

Rachel said: "If you're a designer, a good starting point is great examples of 
work. Presentation is essential. You'd be surprised at how many people come to 
see us with their graduate portfolio (now covered in dust!) and no up-to-date 
work. Fashion is all about what's going to be the next key trend, so even if 
you're not working, it's really important to keep designing and be aware of the 
trends. Self initiated projects go a long way in impressing prospective 
employers."

What makes a good fashion candidate?

Rachel's ideal candidate is: "Someone who is flexible, will listen to ideas 
and then work with their team to create a collection that will sell. Good 
candidates will have grafted in a variety of environments and ended up where 
they are through hard work and enthusiasm for the industry."

It must be a difficult time for graduates. Are there still roles available?

Lauren Dyer, senior design consultant at Denza International 
<http://www.denza.co.uk/index.php/page/show/1> in London, said: "There is no 
doubt it's a difficult time, particularly as some universities have 
dramatically increased their intake of students (some courses have trebled in 
size) yet the volume of jobs available has not followed this same pattern. 
However, students must try to remain upbeat with a positive attitude and must 
work on setting themselves apart from their peers. Ways of doing this would be 
to make sure they have industry work experience (either as part of their course 
or during university holidays), make sure their portfolio is kept up to date 
with new projects after graduating, and by registering with as many agencies as 
possible. They should also keep their options as open as possible in terms of 
company type and location."

Any further advice?

Lauren continues: "Candidates must thoroughly research the brand prior to an 
interview. The more thoroughly this is carried out the better, so they're in a 
position to discuss product during the interview with confidence. Visit stores 
as well as looking at the product within a department store (if applicable) to 
see where it's positioned alongside competitors. Speak to the shop assistants. 
They're the best people to give you information on best sellers. Spend time 
looking at the customers and evaluating their market, and also be aware of 
store layout and visual merchandising. Candidates should also research 
competitors of the brand and look online for articles relating to the brand and 
design/creative director. It's also crucial that they prepare their portfolio 
to make sure it's targeted towards the particular company/product area the job 
involves."

Stephanie Finnan is owner of The Fashion Careers Clinic 
<http://www.fashioncareersclinic.com/>, lecturer, author of How To Prepare For 
A Career In Fashion <http://fashioncareersclinic.myshopify.com/> and is 
currently launching a short fashion course inpartnership with the Fashion & 
Textile Museum <http://www.ftmlondon.org/news/museum/detail/?ID=>
 