
The milk of human kindness does not run freely through Carl Froch's veins but, 
even by the unforgiving standards of his calling, the Nottingham 
super-middleweight delivered a brutal judgment onAudley Harrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/audley-harrison>.

Reflecting on Harrison's deplorable effort against David Haye in Manchester on 
Saturday, Froch cited Ricky Hatton's losing fights against Floyd Mayweather Jr 
and Manny Pacquiao as examples of a fighter giving his all in adversity.

"He got hurt trying, and he was out of his depth but he didn't freeze like a 
deer in the headlights," Froch said. "He wasn't a coward. He didn't come out of 
those fights with people saying 'What a shit bag', like they are doing with 
Audley."

"Coward" is not a word lightly bandied about in the business, especially among 
fighters; even Haye, who ruthlessly dismissed Harrison in the third round in 
defending his WBA heavyweight title, refuses to go that far.

Froch, a close friend of Haye, has no such misgivings. It might be because he 
is in fight mode, preparing to contest the vacant WBC 12-stone title in 
Helsinki on Saturday week against Arthur Abraham – but it is clear he means 
every word.

"I'm quite a ruthless, cold-hearted bastard," he said at his training camp in 
Sheffield. "I always have been. My mum and dad split up when I was five years 
old, and that was quite upsetting. But ever since then, I've been very hard.

"Everyone's different, though. Audley Harrison is quite a soft, gentle guy. He 
gives it all the talk but, when he's in the ring, you can see he's scared to 
death. Your personality comes out when you fight – and when I fight, I mean 
business."

Froch urged armchair fans not to abandon boxing because of Harrison's 
one-punch surrender.

"He could sell sand to the Arabs, that geezer," Froch said. "He's been doing 
it ever since he won the Olympic gold medal 10 years ago. But people shouldn't 
be annoyed or asking for their money back.

"Because he's Audley Harrison, Olympic gold medallist, world-class talker, he 
sold it. He's big, strong, he can punch and everyone got roped in. And, because 
90% of people don't like him, it was justifiably a pay-per-view attraction – 
even though it wasn't a fight that people will rewind and watch again.

"I paid my money to watch it, but I knew it was going to be a whitewash. I had 
no expectations. The non-boxing, armchair fan who tuned in and bought it will 
be put off by the sport, but they need to realise that Audley Harrison has been 
manipulating the press and TV for years. He got people to believe something 
that doesn't exist, and he ruins it for everyone else."

Froch said Haye phoned him after the fight. "He was cracking up, and said: 
'Why haven't you got an Audley Harrison at your weight?' I said: 'Because I'm 
not a lucky bastard like you.'"

Instead, Froch has got Abraham, the freakishly tough German-based Armenian. 
"I'm going to knock him out," he said. He meant that, as well.
 