
In her book Off the Road <http://www.blackspringpress.co.uk/books/otr.html> 
(1990),Carolyn Cassady <http://www.nealcassadyestate.com/carolyn.html>, who has 
died aged 90, charted her extraordinary life with the Beat writers Neal 
Cassady, her husband, and Jack Kerouac, her lover. Carolyn was an unlikely, and 
in many ways an unwilling, Beat icon herself. When she met Neal in Colorado in 
1947, Carolyn was a student of theatre design at the University of Denver, 
having attended a smart east coast ladies' college; he was a car thief, an 
energetic seducer of women and occasionally men, and possessed of a restless, 
manic energy that had already bewitched Kerouac and Allen Ginsberg. He also had 
a teenage bride, LuAnne Henderson. Soon after they had begun their 
relationship, Carolyn crept into Neal's flat one morning to give him a 
surprise, only to find him asleep with LuAnne on one side and Ginsberg on the 
other. After Carolyn relocated to San Francisco, Neal followed her. They 
married in 1948.

Kerouac's novel On the Road (1957) was based on the cross-country dashes he 
made from New York with Neal (who became the wild-man hero Dean Moriarty in the 
novel) and LuAnne (who became Marylou, in the passenger seat in the book). 
Meanwhile, Carolyn – who had stayed at home, raising the first of her and 
Neal's three children – was portrayed as Camille, the symbol of all that was 
stable and decent (or, for the youthful madcaps with an interest in Rimbaud and 
Baudelaire, bourgeois).

Carolyn Elizabeth Robinson was born in Lansing, Michigan, the youngest child 
of five. Her father was a biochemist and her mother was a teacher. She moved 
with her family to Nashville, Tennessee, where she went to school, and then 
went to Bennington College, Vermont, at the time an all-female institution.

Humorous and level-headed about most things, she had a blind spot where Neal 
was concerned. On a gambling kick, Neal persuaded Natalie Jackson, a girl he 
lived with in San Fransisco during the late 1950s, to pose as Carolyn and draw 
out the family savings, which he lost at the racetrack. From almost the moment 
of their meeting, Neal was unfaithful to Carolyn, sometimes more than once a 
day. When his adventures – on the road, or in another's bed – had paled, she 
welcomed his return.

Kerouac, too, she defended against his detractors. Urged on by Neal, she and 
Kerouac had an affair. Neal had played the same game earlier, with Kerouac and 
LuAnne, which Carolyn described fondly in Off the Road. By contrast, Carolyn 
had little liking for Ginsberg whose lifelong claims on Neal (resembling, at 
times, the claims of a thwarted spouse) she resented deeply.

Carolyn claimed that her association with Neal "made my life", and his 
boisterous, carnal presence certainly made her book. Yet her memoir is so 
buoyant even in the darkest troughs of her recollections, or when she is 
excusing the inexcusable, that it seems a pity she did not write more. Her 
artistic interests led her towards the theatre, then to drawing and painting, 
and she took several of the most famous photographs of Neal and Kerouac in the 
1950s.

Neal died in 1968, by which time he and Carolyn had been living apart for 
several years. Her memoirHeart Beat: My Life with Jack and Neal  
<http://www.amazon.com/Heart-Beat-Life-With-Jack/dp/0916870030>was published in 
1976. She wrote the foreword to As Ever: The Collected Correspondence of Allen 
Ginsberg and Neal Cassady (1977). A collection of Kerouac's letters to Carolyn 
was published in 1983, and Carolyn wrote the introduction to Neal Cassady: 
Collected Letters, 1944-67, published in 2005.

In the film Heart Beat <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OhGVgGgtgi0> (1980), 
written and directed by John Byrum, Sissy Spacek played Carolyn and Nick Nolte 
played Neal. Some people encountering Carolyn in later life were surprised to 
discover that she was not more hip, more Beat, more turned-on. By the time I 
met her in the late 1990s, she was based in a cluttered flat in Belsize Park, 
north-west London. A quietly spoken grandmother, she enjoyed the cultural 
aspects of the city and her interest in drugs extended no further than a packet 
of menthol slim cigarettes. She was a follower ofEdgar Cayce 
<http://www.edgarcayce.org.uk/>, a believer in reincarnation, whose homespun 
wisdom – "The stronger you are, the tougher the tests" – provided her with 
support in difficult times.

Cassady later settled in Bracknell, Berkshire. She is survived by her 
children, John, Jami and Cathy; and her grandchildren and greatgrandchildren.

• Carolyn Cassady, writer, born 28 April 1923; died 20 September 2013
 