
Caroline Wozniacki <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/caroline-wozniacki> was 
perplexed by the media rush to downgrade her achievements after Kim Clijsters 
had bundled her out of the Australian Open, simultaneously bringing an end to 
her reign as world No 1. "To be honest," she said, when asked what it meant to 
be dethroned, "I don't really think about it."

Right. Be it a paper crown or not, the ranking matters – especially if it's 
all you've got of consequence. But Wozniacki, smiling weakly, insisted: "I have 
been there for a long time already. I finished No1 two years in a row."

However, that the Dane had ruled for 67 weeks overall and 49 consecutively 
without winning a grand slam title did not sit well with some critics and the 
questions flew sharply after "Aussie Kim", a perennial darling here, got 
through the quarter-finals 6-3, 7-6 in a scrappy hour and 45 minutes under 
blazing skies on Rod Laver Arena. "We are just in January," Wozniacki said. "In 
the end of the year you see who has played the best, most consistently all 
year-round. I will get it back eventually. I'm not worried."

Maybe she should be. In the big moments in the big tournaments, despite 
winning six titles last year, she has lacked the tools to go all the way. Her 
worthy tennis against top-five players has not been enough and, unless she 
finds another gear on serve, or is prepared to leave her comfort zone at the 
back of the court, those opponents will consistently find her out.

There is no one dominant player in the women's game – four different players 
won the majors in 2011 – so this is the time for someone, perhaps Petra 
Kvitova, to step up, as they say in these parts.

One of the semi-finalists will take over from Wozniacki when battle is done 
here, and she might feel aggrieved that she never won the unqualified respect 
of commentators – nor of the all-time and undisputed great Martina Navratilova. 
The expatriate American-Czech reckons her compatriot Kvitova is good enough and 
doubts Wozniacki will ever be.

This was a humdrum affair between the Belgian, hobbled and unable to move 
freely, and Wozniacki, fit but shackled by her reluctance to venture anywhere 
past the T. One player couldn't run, the other wouldn't. Inertia permeated the 
still, smothering air in a stadium filled with indifference.

The earlier quarter-final on the same court didn't exactly catch fire, either. 
Victoria Azarenka screeched and scrapped her way past the ever-improving 
Agnieszka Radwanska, who has the raw talent to move comfortably in this 
company. Her anticipation of her opponent's shot is uncanny but, like 
Wozniacki, she lacks threatening power.

Azarenka, playing well in fits and starts, won 6-7 , 6-0, 6-2 in a little over 
two hours. She hit six aces but 38 unforced errors and her attention span 
dwindled almost out of sight at times in the opening set. Still, she is 
unrecognisable from the player who was up a set and 2-4 against Serena Williams 
at the same stage of this tournament in 2009. The heat killed her that day, and 
she was forced to quit when an upset looked possible if not likely.

She was seeded 13th then. Here she is seeded third and, in a similar furnace, 
she had to come from behind. There would be no quitting here. Was it because 
there was no Serena staring her down, or had she learnt how to get tough when 
it matters?

"That was a completely different match, different situation," she said. "I 
think I am a different player now, especially mentally. Maybe two years ago I 
would be, like, OK, it's not working today – I'm going to try, but we'll see 
how it goes. Today I really tried to forget about the first set and start from 
zero. It was very important to see how I could adjust after not playing well in 
the first set. I completely turned it around."

That she did, as her Polish opponent's game collapsed in the second set and 
was barely revived in the third, which petered out in anticlimax on a day of 
growing torpor. Radwanska is better than this, and potentially better than her 
No8 ranking. "It was very tight in the first set, a lot of breaks," she said, 
"then she started to play very aggressive [tennis]. I was really in trouble."

Later, the gathering had not done with the Wozniacki story. "I have no opinion 
about that," Azarenka stonewalled when asked what she thought of Navratilova's 
criticism of Wozniacki. "The WTA do the ranking. It is how it is. I just have 
to respect that." She will respect it even more if she wins the tournament and 
takes the crown.
 