 The pathologist at the centre of the babies' organ scandal at Alder Hey 
hospital will not face criminal charges, the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) 
announced today.
The CPS advised Merseyside police to investigate Professor Dick van Velzen's 
conduct, dishonesty and falsification of reports as well as taking organs 
without consent.

But Christopher Enzor, head of the CPS casework directorate, confirmed there 
will be no criminal prosecution of the pathologist.

He said the CPS had originally advised the police that there were grounds for 
a criminal investigation over the suggestions of dishonesty, but not for taking 
organs without consent because there was no prospect of being able to establish 
that a criminal offence had been committed.

Despite a thorough police investigation during 2002 and 2003 and the 
production of some further expert evidence this autumn, the CPS has now 
concluded that there was insufficient evidence to prosecute, he confirmed.

One of the chief difficulties in bringing a prosecution was proving that the 
organs in storage had belonged to specific children, he said.

Mr Enzor said: "This factor causes a particular problem in any prosecution as 
we would need to prove beyond reasonable doubt which child's organs we were 
talking about. The police have tried hard to find a solution to this problem, 
but they have been unable to do so.

"As far as any theft and deception charges are concerned, we have considered 
them most carefully, but concluded there is insufficient evidence for a 
realistic prospect of conviction."

The announcement disappointed the support group for families of children 
involved in the Alder Hey scandal.

Paula O'Leary, who discovered the organs of her 11-month-old son Andrew had 
been kept 18 years after his death, said: "As far as the group is concerned he 
has got away with it. He stripped our children of their organs without our 
consent and he has just walked away. I am absolutely gutted by this decision.

"We have been fighting for more than five years for justice for our children. 
Now we have been stabbed in the back again."

Alder Hey children's hospital in Liverpool was unable to comment on the 
findings because it was a matter for the police and the CPS.

The investigation into potential criminal proceedings against Professor van 
Velzen was first recommended by Lord Redfern, the chairman of the official 
inquiry into the scandal whose report in February 2001 claimed he had 
"systematically, illegally and unethically" stripped organs from the bodies of 
thousands of children.

The pathologist was suspended from practising in Britain in February 2001 by 
the General Medical Council pending the outcome of the criminal investigation. 
The GMC will now re-open the case to determine whether he is fit to practise.

Later in 2001 a Canadian court gave the pathologist a conditional discharge 
with 12 months' probation after he pleaded guilty to improperly storing body 
parts removed from a child at a Nova Scotia hospital pathology department where 
he had worked after leaving Liverpool in 1995. That hospital sacked him in 1998.
 