
Wolf Hall, Hilary Mantel, 4th Estate (£18.99), Odds: 11-10 on 

1500: The next blow will be his last. "I'm going to kill you," his blacksmith 
father yells. He rolls away and runs. He is not yet 15 years old.

1527: "How were the Yorkshire slope-heads, Tom?" Wolsey asks. He likes the 
Cardinal, but he likes the third-person historic present better, a reformative 
take on the stream of consciousness that is making the Pope spit blood, though 
no more than the King's ongoing petition to have his marriage to Katherine 
annulled. It's just a shame he doesn't always know precisely to which he each 
he refers.

1529: The cardinal cannot deliver a deal for the King. He is finished. He 
remains loyal in word, less so in deed. He has come a long way since his wife 
and two daughters died of the sweating. Only his son Gregory remains. "Why 
Gregory?" his son asks. "As homage to Philippa," he replies. He is now the most 
powerful lawyer and money-lender in the land, and has the ear of the King.

1530: "Good day, Cromuel," Anne says. He finds Boleyn's Franglais slightly 
grating in dialogue otherwise mercifully free of Zounds, but the minx has the 
king bent round her finger by refusing to bed him till they are wed. Unlike her 
sister Mary, who has already slept with the king and would sleep with him too. 
But that is a secret best kept to himself.

1533: The succession is secure and Anne is with child. It has been a hard 
battle, many bishops have burnt, but he is more than a match for anyone. "It 
does no harm to be thought capable of murder," he tells Gregory playfully, 
"especially when you have a Booker-nominated author going out of her way to 
flesh out your softer side. Talking of revisionism, I must visit that selfish, 
bullying halfwit, Sir Thomas More, whom the English have venerated ever since A 
Man for All Seasons first came out.

1534: The queen has given birth to a girl, and More is refusing to sign the 
Act of Supremacy. He is tired. It is hard work maintaining an interest in the 
narrative of Tudor history when he is only an intermittent observer and he 
spends much time at home having his portrait painted. He remembers the book is 
calledWolf Hall <https://www.theguardian.com/books/wolf-hall> and resolves to 
see Jane Seymour, in whom he has more than a passing interest. But first there 
is More's execution to attend. "Have you any last words?" he asks. "If this is 
but the first volume of a trilogy and there are another 1,300 pages to come," 
More replies, "then I am well out of here."

Digested read, digested: The Other Cromwell Boy.

The Glass Room, Simon Mawer, Little, Brown (£16.99), Odds: 7–2 

Their honeymoon suite was ornate. "This romanticism is everything our new 
house in Mesto won't be!" Viktor Landauer exclaimed. Liesl laughed at the 
exclamation marks! "Let's be modern," she said, "and make love in the 
afternoon."

"I am a modernist architect," a stranger said. "I will build you a glass 
house."

Hana places her hand over Liesl's pregnant belly, enjoying the risque frisson 
of the present tense. "Every Czech woman is bisexual in the 1920s," she says.

The Landauer Glasraum became Mesto's cultural salon. Liesl became pregnant 
again, yet this time she sensed the birth had ended her modernist interest in 
sex.

A woman caught Viktor's eye. "Sex?" Kata asked. Viktor nodded . "I love you," 
he said. "Allow me to give you and your daughter, Marika, some money."

"Don't be shy, you know you want it," Hana murmured, teasing Liesl with a 
caress. "At least in male fantasies."

"I was thinking more that this book was surprisingly readable to end up on the 
shortlist," she replied.

"We'll see what we can do about that," Viktor interrupted, briefly allowing 
himself a moment of better-late-than-never introspection about his affair with 
Kata. Maybe he had some undealt-with trauma that would intrigue that other Jew, 
Sigmund Freud! Which reminded him. The Nazi presence was looming.

"The judges always like the Holocaust," Liesl said.

"Oh Kata," Viktor cried, "you have disappeared."

"I have taken in two Jewish refugees," Liesl said one day. Could it be? Surely 
no novelist would risk such an absurd coincidence? It was. Oh joy.

"I've always suspected you and Viktor were having an affair," Liesl said to 
Kata. "But as I am a modern woman, we must share him."

"We must flee Nazi persecution," Viktor cried, heading for America.

"Help," Kata shouted. "Our passports haven't been recognised and Marika and I 
have been sent to the camps."

The Glasraum sighed with relief. It was glad the Landauers had left. Not that 
they hadn't been good company, but the book was meant to be about it. The 
trouble was, life was just a bit dull without them. Even the rather contrived 
bits when it had been turned into a racial measurement laboratory.

"We are here to categorise people," said Director Stahl.

"It's not that easy," Hana replied, desperate to give the book more gravitas. 
"But while you're about it, you can have sex with me. Oh dear, I seem to be 
pregnant."

Nearly 40 years had passed, the Glasraum was pleased to have been turned into 
a museum, and Liesl was invited to the opening as guest of honour. "I knew you 
would come," said Hana. "I've been meaning to tell you that my child died in a 
concentration camp.

"Hello everyone," whispered Marika, turning up out of nowhere.

Digested read, digested: The Not-Very-Big Shock of the New.

Summertime, JM Coetzee, Harvill Secker (£17.99), Odds: 6–1 

Notebooks 1972-5

Murders followed by bland denials from the South African authorities. 
His father shrugs, while he cements the front drive.

To be expanded on: the blurring of fiction and biography.

Julia

You probably assumed the first set of italics were mine. But now you realise 
they were John Coetzee's own annotations and the structure is more confused 
than you thought; would you tell me about your relationship?

I was sad to hear John had died, but I couldn't believe you were interested in 
writing about just a few years of his life, especially as I always thought his 
writing was a bit rubbish.

To be honest, my real aim is to confuse genres, as it always gives reviewers 
something to chatter about and makes it difficult for them to judge me.

John prodded me in the breast. He was a forgettable, unimpressive man, and at 
first I ignored his autistic advances. He wasn't a great lover, not in my 
league at all. Our relationship didn't last as he couldn't connect. If I cried, 
he offered me a biscuit.

Margot

I have transcribed your tape into the third person, to make the book more 
stylistically varied.

John was my cousin and I hadn't seen him for 15 years. He was nice to his 
father though they never spoke. He was always dull. The car broke down and he 
told me he had always loved me but nothing happened. He sent me a couple of 
love letters thereafter, signing off "Yours sincerely". Says it all really.

Adriana

Here's your opportunity to stick the boot in.

I have nothing but contempt for John Coetzee. He gave my daughter extra 
English tuition and I'm sure he tried it on with her. [Silence]

Obviously I'm thrilled you've got people wondering if I am, sorry, he is, 
a pederast. Can you further diminish him?

He was a man of no substance.

Martin

If John was such a private person and doesn't want people to make simplistic 
parallels with his own life, why has he invited the comparison by writing a 
third volume of thinly disguised biography?

Is that the time?

Sophie

You were his lover while you were teaching at Cape Town. What do you think of 
his writing?

It's as average as his love-making. The reason he keeps rewriting the same 
book as fiction is he thinks that if he carries on for long enough, they'll 
give him a third Booker Prize.

Digested read, digested: And the living ain't easy.

The Little Stranger, Sarah Waters, Virago (£16.99), Odds: 6–1 

I first saw Hundreds Hall after the war, when I was 10-years old. The Ayres 
were big people in the village but after their daughter Susan died, their other 
children, Roderick and Caroline, isolated themselves. When I revisited the 
mansion, I was appalled by the decay.

I had bettered myself in the past 30 years and had returned to be a doctor. 
"You'd better come," Roderick said. "Betty has a stomach ache and you can't let 
a servant die these days."

"Are you a lesbian?" I asked. "Nay, sir," Betty replied. "That's odd," I said, 
"usually everyone's a lesbian in a Sarah Waters book." Betty was terrified by a 
ghostly presence and I mentioned her concerns to Caroline, a plain natural 
spinster. "There's nothing queer going on here," she said tartly. "So you're 
not a lesbian either."

Mrs Ayres decided to have a party, and I was talking to the Baker-Hughes when 
Roddie was refusing to come down. He was in a funk and I concluded he was 
inebriated, so I returned to the party to discover the Ayreses dog had bitten 
off a girl's cheek.

"What makes it so bad is that the girl is upper class," Caroline said as we 
debated the decline of the old social values.. "A prole could cope with 
disfigurement."

Roddie continued to claim the house was possessed by a poltergeist, yet I 
closed off any curiosity about the supernatural that the reader might have had 
with my dogged rationalism. "He is haunted by his inability to cope with a 
Labour government," I ventured, as his room erupted in a mysterious fire.

I began to notice that Caroline was not altogether plain, and I pressed my 
hand against her fearsome breast. "Not now," she cried, kicking me in the 
chest. "Perhaps, then, you will agree to be my wife?" "OK."

"I had hoped Caroline would do better, you ghastly arriviste," said Mrs Ayres, 
"but we all have to compromise these days. In truth, I have never really got 
over Susan's death. Her name keeps magically appearing on the walls."

Two weeks later, Mrs Ayres hanged herself. "The poltergeist has won again," 
Caroline said. "Don't be silly," I replied. "She was haunted by her inability . 
. . blah, blah."

The preparations for our wedding were proceeding apace, with me buying the 
dress, when Caroline declared she did not love me. Luckily, the poltergeist 
pushed her over the banisters.

"The ghost has won," Betty gasped.

"Don't be silly," I said. "She was haunted by her inability to . . . blah, 
blah." Though I couldn't help wondering if she hadn't been a lesbian all along.

Digested read, digested: Everyone gives up the ghost.

The Children's Book, AS Byatt, Chatto & Windus (£18.99), Odds: 8–1 

It was June 1895, and two boys were playing in the Prince Consort Gallery. 
"Now that we've given a detailed history of the South Kensington Museum," said 
Julian Cain, "let's go and take that oik drawing down below to meet my father, 
the director."

"OK," Tom Wellwood replied.

"What's your name?" Prosper Cain enquired. "Phillip Warren," the oik replied. 
"Well, you are a very talented oik," Prosper continued. "So you'd better come 
down to Kent to meet the Wellwoods. They are distinguished Fabians, 
Theosophists and members of the Arts & Crafts movement, so you can look forward 
to endless digressions on the Webbs and William Morris."

"How happy we all are," Humphry declared to his wife Olive. "We've got our 
wonderful children – Tom, Dorothy, Hedda, Florian and one or two others I can't 
remember – and such marvellous relations in Basil and Katharina, their children 
Charles and Griselda and . . .

"Yes, yes," Olive replied. "I've lost track already. I'll go back to writing 
my children's stories, as it's far easier than bothering to relate to them in 
person."

After the English Pastoral, Phillip was sent to the artists' commune to work 
with the potter, Benedict Fludd. "I like to abuse my daughters, Imogen and 
Pomona," Fludd said. "Then you're probably meant to be Eric Gill," Phillip 
observed.

"Hello," said Elsie, Phillip's sister, turning up out of nowhere. "I'm coming 
to live here. Whoops, I'm pregnant already."

It was 1900 and the Victorian era was coming to an end. "Hello", said Oscar 
Wilde. "What are you doing here?" Marie Stopes asked. "No idea." "Me neither." 
Humphry grasped Dorothy's breast. "You can't do that, you're my father," she 
cried. "No I'm not," he grinned. "Your mother shagged a German. But she isn't 
the mother of most of your siblings, as I'm having an ongoing affair with 
Violet. And did I tell you about my other son, Robin, with Mrs Oakeshott?"

"Enough. I'm going to Germany to find my dad." "So am I," said Charles, who 
now called himself Karl as he had become an anarchist."

"Meet all your German relations, Gerd, Wolfgang . . ." Dorothy's father said.

"I'm going to wander about being Pastoral while Julian turns gay," said Tom.

It was 1910 and Antonia realised she had an awful lot to get through; she 
still needed to show off about JM Barrie, Kipling, the Suffragettes . . . "I'm 
getting married to Prosper," said Imogen. "I'm going to kill myself," her 
father added. "Me too," said Tom, "I can't stand my mother's stories."

"Nor me," Olive whispered. "What's more, I can hardly remember who is shagging 
who any more. Let alone care. I'm going to disappear."

It was 1918. Everyone had been killed. Except the ones that hadn't.

Digested read, digested: Suffer the little children.

The Quickening Maze, Adam Foulds, Cape (£12.99), Odds: 12–1 

He'd been sent out into the forest of waking spirits. He was lost. John! 
He heard Nature calling him. The capital N had found him. He was the shortlist 
outsider, the one the judges called "intensely lyrical" and everyone else 
largely ignored.

"Come quickly, Abigail, Margaret, Hannah, Eliza etc," said Dr Matthew Allen. 
"We must leave our patient, John Clare, and greet the Tennysons."

Alfred helped his brother from the carriage. He had been led to believe this 
was a fictional volume based around the short period when his sojourn at the 
private mental asylum overlapped with the poet John Clare's. Yet it now seemed 
the book was o'er-peopled with characters whose narratives would inevitably 
fizzle out.

After observing his penis floating poetically in the bath, John slipped out 
into Epping Forest to join his two wives and the gypsies. "Have some hedgehog 
pie," the old woman said. "Come back, John," said Dr Allen gently. "You don't 
have two wives. Patty is your wife; Mary is the girl, long since passed on, 
whom you fell in love with as a boy."

Alfred was bewildered by the number of inconsequential characters, yet he was 
determined to strive, to seek, to find and not to yield. His features had not 
gone unnoticed by Dr Allen's daughter Hannah, who hoped Alfred might propose.

"What do you think of Keats?" she said. "He's OK," he replied. A betrothal was 
surely imminent.

"I'm sorry to interrupt while you give an enema to a patient who will never 
say another word," said Dr Allen's brother, Oswald. "But the reader must know 
you have been imprisoned for your debts in the past."

"Thank you," Dr Allen replied sharply. "You may go. Mr Tennyson is lending me 
£8,000 to complete the woodcutting device I have commisioned from Mr Rawnsley."

Margaret blessed Him. "I'm Mary," she cried as John dragged her into his nest 
of magpies and marigolds. "No she isn't," said Patty and Dr Allen, placing him 
in the secure facilities, where he could lapse still further into his intensely 
lyrical lunacy.

"Ding dong!" Alfred gasped as Arabella arrived. Hannah realised her attraction 
was not reciprocated. Very well, she would lower her sights. "Pam Ayres?" she 
enquired of Mr Rawnsley. "The business," he gulped. They were to be wed!

"We may be undone though no one will know as the book will end before they 
find out," Dr Allen sobbed. "My invention doesn't work and Mr Tennyson wants 
his money back."

John slipped out into the woods of Nature. "I am Lord Byron," he muttered, 
before being led back to the asylum for the next 25 years.

It had been a curiously insubstantial affair, thought Alfred. His path had 
never crossed with John's, and he was quite glad matters had drawn to a close.

Digested read, digested: The Slowing Pulse.
 