
The former army officer and prominent transgender figure Catherine McGregor 
has had her name stripped from the Australian of the Year honour roll at her 
own request.

McGregor was a finalist last year as the Queensland Australian of the Year. 
She has since become a fierce critic of the awards and of her former boss the 
retired army chief General David Morrison, national recipient of the award.

She wrote Morrison’s celebrated 2013 speech on respect and the treatment of 
women in the armed forces when she was his speechwriter.

Bring Tony Abbott into cabinet to stop destabilisation, Catherine McGregor 
urges
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/01/tony-abbott-cabinet-destabilisation-catherine-mcgregor-says>
But McGregor, now a cricket writer, criticised Morrison’s award, saying he was 
not genuinely committed to diversity and that the awards had been hijacked by 
activists.

She has cited this year’s nomination of the Sudanese former child soldier 
turned lawyer Deng Adut, saying he is being used to attack Liberal party asylum 
seeker policies.

McGregor has also been involved in a spat with gay community newspaper the 
Star Observer.

She tweeted the news on Wednesday, saying: “Feeling satisfied that as 2016 
closes my association with LGBTI and Australian of the Year farce is over.”


Catherine McGregor sorry for 'weak' jibe at David Morrison as Australian of 
the Year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/27/catherine-mcgregor-sorry-for-weak-jibe-at-david-morrison-as-australian-of-the-year>
“I should never have accepted the award in the first place. Glad that in 
future years there will be no record I was involved,” she said in another tweet.

The National Australia Day Council released a statement saying it would not be 
rescinding the award but would remove her name from the honour roll.

“The Australian of the Year awards are all about recognising amazing 
Australian stories and we believe Catherine’s is a story that deserved to be 
told and recognised,” it said. “We wish Catherine all the very best for the 
future.”
 