
Q I am a 55-year-old single woman and have recently sold a property which, 
after capital gains tax, will give me £50,000 that I want to save or invest to 
supplement my pension in my retirement. I do not need the extra income at the 
moment and have no mortgage or other debts. I work full time, but my 
circumstances may change so I am reluctant to tie the money up until a specific 
date.

A I feel that you should consider options other than simply investing the 
£50,000 in an interest-bearing money account. Cash may be "safe", but there are 
many disadvantages. You will have to pay tax on the interest earned - up to 40% 
if you are a top-rate taxpayer.

Alternatively, if you go for investments providing capital growth, you can 
make gains of up to £8,800 a year before any tax is payable. Furthermore, the 
total return could well be considerably higher than just the interest on cash.

Many savers are worried by the prospect of investing in the stock market - 
unsurprisingly in view of the heavy losses suffered at the start of the century 
that highlighted the risks involved.

However, investment risk can be mitigated to a large extent through sensible 
asset allocation. Instead of having all your money in cash, which may not 
provide an adequate return, or in shares where there you risk losing your shirt 
if the markets suffer a downturn, you spread your assets over a number of 
investments that are subject to different influences. In this way you reduce 
risk by diversification.

Apart from cash and shares you can diversify into bonds, including those 
issued by the government that are known as gilts. Another asset class is 
property, over and above your family home. By using a mixture of these, as well 
as National Savings and "guaranteed" equity bonds, you can create a portfolio 
that balances different risks and rewards. You need to bear in mind, however, 
that shares are medium to long-term investments and so are some of the bonds if 
held to maturity to provide a guaranteed known return.

You can achieve further diversification, especially in shares, by including 
foreign-based investments, which are often subject to different influences than 
UK stocks and bonds. The general rule of thumb is that the higher the risk, the 
higher the potential reward. At the top end of the risk scale are venture 
capital trusts, shares in emerging markets and in smaller companies.

Coming down the scale you find shares listed on big foreign stock markets like 
the US and Europe; UK shares included in the FTSE index of the l00 biggest 
companies and bonds where price movements are far less volatile. Finally at the 
lower end, with the least risk, are guaranteed bonds, government securities and 
National Savings products.

If you are not prepared to risk losing any money at all, you have very limited 
options - primarily cash deposit savings where interest rates can vary but your 
original capital is safe. Apart from your attitude to risk, which is the most 
crucial factor, asset allocation should also take into account your age, and 
financial objectives. For example, as you get older the period of time before 
you are likely to want to realise your investment shortens.

There is usually a drastic change in your financial situation when you retire. 
Your pension is likely to provide a lower income than you are used to and it is 
unlikely to match inflation, unless you are one of the fortunate state 
employees due to receive an index-linked pension.

When your salary is replaced by a pension, you will probably want to earn more 
income from your investments to offset the shortfall or possibly cover rising 
health and care costs. Older people also want to safeguard the wealth 
accumulated from earlier savings, so they are advised to increase their 
holdings of "safer" forms of investment, such as cash and bonds.

The financial information group Citywire produces suggested portfolios 
<http://www.citywire.co.uk/RFW/Home.aspx> for six age groups: the under 40s; 40 
to 49; 50 to 59; 60 to 69; 60 to 79; and 80-plus. It also uses three different 
approaches - cautious, moderate and adventurous - for each age group.

Looking at your age group, the cautious option has 52.5% in bonds, 20% in 
cash, 20% in larger UK shares; 2.5% international shares and 5% property. In 
contrast, the adventurous option includes 45% in bonds, 30% in larger UK 
shares, 10% in overseas shares, 5% in smaller UK companies and 5% in both 
property and cash. The moderate option for your age group is 50% in bonds, 10% 
cash, 5% property and the remainder in shares - 25% larger UK shares, 5% each 
in international and smaller UK shares.

These are only model asset allocations, which can be altered to match 
individual circumstances. The first step is to decide whether you want the 
cautious, moderate or adventurous approach. Once you have done that you, have 
the template for investing in unit or investment trusts that provide the 
required exposure to the share, bond and property market.

The Guardian publishes the best interest rates paid by cash accounts. You can 
look at the internet fund "supermarkets" to cover the bond and share markets, 
including property. Or you could get an independent financial adviser to help 
choose the most suitable funds, but watch out for commission charges. Get the 
allocation right and you could look forward to a prosperous old age.
 