
Young people will be hit hardest by a British exit from the EU, according to 
the head of the CBI, who said there would be almost a million fewer jobs by 
2020, with apprenticeships and graduate roles likely to be hit hard.

Carolyn Fairbairn  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/30/cbi-carolyn-fairbairn-british-businesses-brexit-eu-benefits>
said past experience told her that a third of the people hit by a slump in 
employment of 950,000, projected by her group in a study carried out with PWC, 
could be under the age of 34.
Brexit explained: Can I still register to vote? 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/06/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=website_crash>
The director general, who said she felt “emotional” about the potential impact 
on young people, also revealed in an interview with the Guardian that the CBI’s 
partner organisations in Commonwealth countries, including Canada, India, South 
Africa, Singapore, Kenya and Jamaica, had spoken of plans to reduce the amount 
of money the invest in the UK in the event of Brexit.


Chandrajit Banerjee, the director general of the Confederation of Indian 
Industry, said his country invested more into Britain than in the rest ofEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> combined, but that access to 
European markets was a key driver.

“Anything that lessens this attractiveness may have a bearing on future 
investment decisions,” he said. “It is important also to ensure continued 
border-free access to the rest of Europe for the many hundreds of existing 
Indian firms that have manufacturing bases in the UK.”

John Manley, the president and chief executive of the Business Council of 
Canada, said Britain was his country’s second port of call for investment after 
the US, but that was in “large measure because we consider the UK a gateway to 
the rest of Europe”.

EU referendum live: Major and Blair campaign together in Northern Ireland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/09/eu-referendum-live-wollaston-remain-vote-leave-sturgeon-johnson>
A similar message was sent by the equivalent organisations elsewhere. 

“We’ve talked to our Commonwealth partners, in India, New Zealand, Canada and 
South Africa. They are effectively saying they see the UK as an investment 
partner partly because of the cultural links, but partly because we are a 
gateway to Europe,” Fairbairn said.

“What they have said to a man and a woman, is that they would continue to 
invest in the UK, but to a much lesser extent.”

She said much of the investment went into deprived regions with high levels of 
youth unemployment, and that it would be “a huge problem and a sad thought” to 
reduce it.

“What we know from the financial crash is that young people were 
disproportionately affected. Employment rates barely changed [for] over 30s, 
but fell by 4% for under 30s. Real incomes fell two or three times as much for 
the under the 30s. We have history here,” she said.

“The Treasury is projecting a technical recession. In our work with PWC we 
believe that it is very likely there would be a recession. What kind of jobs 
would go? I link it back to the investment into the UK. My feeling is a lot 
will be in the apprenticeship field. I’d worry about apprenticeship and 
graduate opportunities.”

She added, however, that in the very long run Britain would “find its way”, 
returning to almost the same point as if Brexit had not happened.

“I agree we shouldn’t be overstating economic risks. But economic study after 
economic study from organisations that don’t have an axe to grind say there 
will be a short term shock to the economy for a number of years. I absolutely 
believe that and I feel emotional about it because it will affect young 
people,” Fairbairn said, claiming the Treasury assumptions were not outlandish.


“What is clear from what companies are telling us, they will pause decisions 
and they will make decision to go elsewhere while that is going on. The 
adaptation will happen, but we estimate between 500,000 to 1m jobs by 2020, and 
about a third in age group 16 to 34.”

Vote Leave said Fairbairn’s warning did not square with her own statistics. It 
said the PWC study suggested employment would still grow, though by a lower 
amount than in a remain scenario.

The out campaign argued there was little evidence that investment into the UK 
would slow down, giving examples of major deals from China and India in recent 
months.

It also said the car manufacturers Toyota, Nissan and Hitachi had indicated 
that they would continue to invest in Britain whatever the outcome.

John Longworth, the chair of Vote Leave’s business council said the real risk 
to the economy was the unstable EU, dominated by the eurozone, in which Britain 
had little power.

“An unlimited supply of cheap labour from the EU has had a downward pressure 
on wages and disincentivised training for skills and investment for 
productivity,” he said.

“It has been a disaster for working people and we preside over more than half 
a million unemployed under 25s, which is a national scandal. If we stay in the 
EU we are heading for a low wage, low skill, low productivity economy in which 
any growth in GDP is shared among more and more people as living standards fall 
behind.”

The CBI said the assumptions of the PWC model were moderate, and that both 
scenarios of what might happen post-Brexit had living standards, GDP and 
employment significantly reduced compared with staying in.

“By 2020, the overall cost to the economy could be as much as £100bn and 
950,000 jobs. Household income in 2020 could be up to £3,700 lower than it 
would otherwise have been 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/21/brexit-could-cost-100bn-and-nearly-1m-jobs-cbi-warns>
. The economy would slowly recover over time, but never quite track back to 
where it would have been,” said Rain Newton-Smith, the group’s chief economist.
 