
Cecil James Sharp, a 40-year-old music teacher from London, was gazing out 
across the snow-covered drive at his mother-in-law's cottage in Headington, 
Oxfordshire when he saw a bizarre sight. Eight men dressed all in white, their 
shirts decorated with ribbons and bells strapped to their shins, were lining up 
in front of the house. A concertina player struck up a tune and the men leapt 
into the air to perform a dance – Laudanum Bunches.

A mesmerised Sharp rushed to investigate and the dancers apologised, 
explaining that it was customary for them to dance only at Whitsuntide but, as 
times were hard, they thought they'd try to make a few extra coppers over 
Christmas. But Sharp, who'd seen nothing like it before, had eyes and ears only 
for their dances, firing questions at them, asking to see more.

The profound long-term consequences of this strange, chance meeting between 
Cecil Sharp and the Headington Quarry Morris Men have resonated through English 
folk ever since. It triggered in Sharp a passion for folklore which, with 
dogged dedication, he was to pursue and champion for the rest of his life; a 
life that saw him hailed as the founding father – or perhaps more accurately, 
godfather – of modern folk music.

He meticulously notated the five dances Headington Quarry performed for him on 
that Boxing Day morning and became lifelong friends with the side's concertina 
player William Kimber. His subsequent bicycle journeys through the English 
countryside painstakingly gathering songs, tunes and dances in his notebook 
have long become the stuff of folk legend.

The imposing old building at the leafier end of Camden in north London that 
bears Sharp's name and is the home of the English Folk Dance and Song Society 
is its own testament to the genre's most dominant figure. For more than a 
century, Sharp has remained a towering, pervasive yet still somewhat 
contentious presence.

Would we even have heard half the folk songs now in common currency were it 
not for his tireless research, or his books and lectures? Would the folk 
movement have existed at all had Sharp not founded the English Folk Dance 
Society in 1911?

Such questions have been hotly debated ever since. Various books, essays and 
theses have questioned Sharp's practices, accusing him of creating a 
narrow-minded and falsely sanitised impression of rural England by omitting any 
material that offended his sensibilities, while failing to elicit enough 
information about the source of the songs donated to him.

There seems little doubt that Sharp was a highly selective collector, but 
equally the material he assembled – the official figure is 4,977 different 
tunes – provides the solid backbone of the traditional music heard today. The 
folk music world would indisputably be a much sorrier, sparser place without it.

Sharp's second epiphany famously occurred four and a half years after his 
encounter with the Headington Quarry Morris Men when he was visiting his friend 
Charles Marson, the vicar in the Somerset village of Hambridge. It was there he 
overheard the gardener John England singing The Seeds of Love – one of the most 
beautiful songs in the folk canon – firing his inexhaustible quest through the 
West Country to unearth more of the same. Single-minded, determined and 
relentless, Sharp's searches produced remarkably rich pickings: whatever 
Sharp's faults, he clearly forged an empathic relationship with the singers he 
found in village communities, overcoming their suspicions and persuading them 
to share their old songs with him.

His missionary zeal also took him on several self-financed trips to the US, 
where he found another rich harvest of English songs imported by settlers.

One can only conjecture about the discomfort and indignity that Sharp, an 
asthmatic vegan, suffered in his quest, tramping up muddy tracks in the 
Appalachian mountains, where one community tried to convince him chicken was a 
vegetable.

He wasn't the only collector around but, at the very time he was traipsing 
through the Appalachians, other prominent characters in the field, such as 
composer George Butterworth, were being killed in the first world war and 
Sharp emerged as the pre-eminent and most prolific collector of his day.

Sharp's autocratic control of the early folk revival and his heavy-handed 
treatment, in particular, of his first collaborator and former friend Mary Neal 
still inspire lively debate.

A Sister of Mercy, social worker and suffragette, Neal formed the Espérance 
Club with a group of sewing girls she had rescued from London slums. But Sharp 
berated Neal over the perceived inaccuracies of their "hoydenish", boisterous 
dancing, while she in turn accused him of pedantry. It was a bitter fall-out 
and Neal was effectively written out of folk revival history, while – for a 
time at least – Sharp was untouchable.
 