
Oranges Are Not The Only Fruit. Neither are rabbits the only meat. Novelist 
Jeanette Wintersoncaused a kerfuffle this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jun/19/jeanette-winterson-rabbit-truth-beatrix-potter-tarantino>
 when she tweeted: "Rabbit ate my parsley. I am eating the rabbit," complete 
with photos of its carcass on her kitchen counter and her cat scoffing the 
entrails. But how does the bunny-butchering bookworm compare with other famous 
hunters and the backlashes caused by their beastie-slaying?

Die another way


Madonna <https://www.theguardian.com/music/madonna> ruffled feathers during 
the Guy Ritchie years by boasting about hunting pheasant: "I like being one of 
the chaps. Everybody has a huge breakfast, which is a typical English thing. I 
just have my bowl of macrobiotic soup, then go out and shoot some pheasant." 
Madge later had a Kabbalah-inspired change of heart and banned hunting on their 
Wiltshire estate.
Backlash rating 3/5. Loses a point for gratuitous mention of 
"macrobiotic soup".

Bachman hunter overdrive


US TV presenter Melissa Bachman provoked the ire of the internet last year by 
posing next to a lion she'd just "stalked and killed" in South Africa. The 
reaction was foamy mouthed in its fury, with Ricky Gervais joining in. But what 
did people expect from the self-styled "hardcore huntress" who hostsWinchester 
Deadly Passion?
Backlash rating 5/5. A petition calling for Bachman to be banned from South 
Africa gathered 250,000 signatures.

Desperate grouse knife


Actress Eva Longoria revealed that she's a big hunting enthusiast: "I learned 
to shoot aged four and grew up hunting deer, rabbits and turkey. I can skin a 
wild pig or snake, and pluck a quail. You name it, I've done it."
Backlash rating 2/5. No wonder her man-eating Desperate Housewives character 
was so predatory.

Trumped-up charges


In 2012, photos emerged of Donald Jr and Eric Trump, the doofus sons of the 
Shredded Wheat-haired magnate, posing next to "trophy" carcasses of animals 
they'd shot on a big game hunt in Zimbabwe. These included a leopard, buffalo, 
a crocodile and a sawn-off elephant tail. After widespread criticism, Donald Jr 
tweeted: "I have no shame. I hunt and eat game."
Backlash rating 4/5. Sponsors withdrew from Trump Sr's show, Celebrity 
Apprentice.

Licence to Gill


AA Gill <https://www.theguardian.com/media/aa-gill> – food critic, author and 
all-round friend of Clarkson – angered animal rights groups five years ago with 
a column about how he'd gunned down a baboon while on safari in Tanzania. Gill 
claimed he shot the ape to "get a sense of what it might be like to kill 
someone", adding that it was "naughty fun" but "completely inedible".
Backlash rating 3/5. Slightly redeemed himself by describing the baboon as "no 
stupider than Piers Morgan".
 