 Antony Worrall Thompson, celebrity chef, restaurateur and winner of the 
Meilleur Ouvrier de Grande Bretagne - the chef's Oscar - is now the recipient 
of an altogether less enviable accolade.
According to an independent food watchdog, his Snickers pie is one of the 
unhealthiest recipes ever published. A single slice of the pudding, which 
Worrall Thompson recommends as a treat for a children's party, contains at 
least 1,250 calories - more than enough to get Jamie Oliver reaching for his 
sharpest cleaver.

The calorie count is hardly surprising, given that the recipe calls for five 
Snickers bars, eggs, sugar, marscapone and soft cheese and puff pastry.

The Food Commission, which featured the recipe in its Food magazine, found 
that each serving contains the equivalent of 22 teaspoons of fat and 11 
teaspoons of sugar. An article alongside it reads: "Professional chefs know 
only too well that customers often put taste before health when ordering dishes 
in restaurants. Salt, sugar and fats are used in copious quantities to ensure 
that diners get their taste buds well and truly tickled." It continues: "We 
love a decent dessert as much as anyone, but surely this has to be one of the 
most unhealthy recipes ever published?!"

Worrall Thompson, who included the Snickers pie on his Saturday Kitchen 
television show more than two years ago, said the dessert should not be eaten 
every day.

The chef said the pie was intended as a treat for children on special 
occasions. "Kids have to be allowed to be kids from time to time," he said.

The recipe has been removed from the BBC website. Food magazine is asking 
readers to send in recipes that are even more unhealthy than the Snickers pie.

Unhealthiest recipe?

Snickers pie (serves 4)

1 packet puff pastry; 140g/5oz mascarpone; 110g/4oz soft cheese; 50g/2oz 
caster sugar; 3 eggs; 5 Snickers bars, chopped roughly

· Preheat oven to 200C/400F/Gas 6.

· Roll pastry to 3-4mm thick and use to line a 20cm/8in fluted tart tin

· Beat the mascarpone, soft cheese and sugar together in a large bowl, until 
smooth

· Beat in eggs, one at a time

· Add the Snickers bars and fold in.

· Pour into a lined tart tin, and spread to the edges

· Place in the oven for 10 minutes, then lower to 180C/350F/Gas 4 for a 
further 25 minutes until golden and set. Allow to cool before serving
 