
Vaclav Cerny will be the man credited with ending Celtic’s Europa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> campaign but 
recurring failings lie closer to home. Ronny Deila will not even have the 
Champions League’s poor relation to fall back on as evidence of alleged 
progress as this season meanders on. And that is precisely what it will do in 
Glasgow’s East End as Celtic retain the Scottish top flight without credible 
opposition.

Ajax deserved their success, as belatedly as it arrived. For Celtic, it was 
all too familiar. Cerny’s winner compounded a situation that was already 
irretrievable for Deila because of Fenerbahce’s win in Molde. With two points 
from five matches,Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> deserve 
nothing other than elimination.

Deila continually cited “small details” during post-match media duties for 
failings against continental opposition. “We are going to be ready next year,” 
he insisted. The problem is, this all sounds rather predictable. Very little of 
what Deila preaches is backed up by substance.

Deila, after all, entered this match with a record showing only two wins from 
12 Europa League games as Celtic’s manager. There remains a question over 
whether the Norwegian should next summer be handed a third opportunity to guide 
the club towards the Champions League. After two dismal efforts, so there 
should be.

Celtic captain Scott Brown set to miss three months with knee injury
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/25/celtic-captain-scott-brown-knee-injury-ajax>
Such conversation could wait. Celtic hosted Ajax minus the midfield experience 
of Stefan Johansen, Kris Commons, Nir Bitton and Scott Brown, the captain. For 
all that may have triggered trepidation among the home support, Ajax’s 
shortcomings,as exposed by Celtic in Amsterdam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/17/ajax-celtic-europa-league-match-report>
, could not be ignored.

Yet it took Celtic only three minutes to seize initiative. Callum McGregor, a 
beneficiary of Deila’s enforced shuffling, collected the ball after neat 
midfield play involving Stuart Armstrong, Tom Rogic and Gary Mackay-Steven. 
McGregor stepped forward and curled a sublime, right-footed shot past Jasper 
Cillessen from 20 yards.

An errant flag denied Ajax <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ajax> a swift 
equaliser. Amin Younes was wrongly adjudged to be offside before playing the 
ball to Viktor Fischer, who lashed the ball beyond Craig Gordon anyway.

There was to be a route back into proceedings for the visitors though. Sloppy 
Celtic midfield play conceded the ball cheaply, which culminated in a chance 
for Fischer. While he fluffed that, Fischer looped a subsequent header 
goalwards; as Celtic failed to clear their lines, Arkadiusz Milik prodded home.

The equaliser prompted a concerted spell of Ajax possession yet Gordon was 
untroubled. On the rare occasions before the interval in which Celtic did 
attack, they carried a menace of their own. Leigh Griffiths, for example, 
should have done better with a 42nd-minute chance. Wastefulness and selfishness 
were the story of Griffiths’s night.

When second-half football broke out, Ajax played it but were guilty of being 
over-elaborate. The Dutch team also displayed a fondness for attacking via 
Celtic’s right side, which offered both a nod to Mikael Lustig’s perceived 
vulnerability and a respect to the hosts’ teenage left-back, Kieran Tierney. 
Nevertheless, Celtic retained a threat.

One of their substitutes almost triggered a breakthrough. Scott Allan’s first 
act was to play a wonderful through pass to Griffiths, who had time and space 
to beat Cillessen. Instead, the striker snatched at his key moment.

Younes struck Gordon’s post four minutes from time as news filtered through of 
Fenerbahce’s two goals in Norway, precisely the scenario Celtic did not want. 
Worse was to follow.

Allan gifted Ajax the ball from a Celtic corner, allowing the visitors to 
break. Cerny took full, clinical advantage. “We lost because of a couple of 
easy mistakes,” added Deila. There have actually been far, far more.
 