
Guangzhou R&F denied Central Coast a fifth Asian Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/asian-champions-league> berth, defeating 
the Mariners 3-1 in their do-or-die playoff in Gosford.

Jiang Ning and Liu Lin scored a goal in each half at Central Coast Stadium 
with an own-goal from the Mariners’ Joshua Rose securing the result for the 
Chinese Super League side who booked a spot in their maiden ACL campaign.

Substitute Glen Trifiro scored a late consolation for the hapless Central 
Coast in the dying minutes.

Mariners coach Phil Moss was hoping an ACL berth would provide a welcome 
distraction from a dismalA-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> season but things have gone 
from bad to worse at Central Coast, who looked sluggish and lacked any real 
attacking threat on Tuesday.

The Mariners, who have qualified for the past three ACL campaigns, had their 
hopes dashed early when Jiang took advantage of a defence caught napping.

Jiang shook off his marker Storm Roux with his sweet strike putting Guangzhou 
1-0 up in the eighth minute.

Matthew Sim, provided the Mariners’ only shot on target in the opening half, 
forcing a save from keeper Liu Dianzuo.

Poor defence almost cost the hosts another goal when Wang Song cut the ball 
back to the unmarked Jiang who put goalkeeper Liam Reddy to work with a 
powerful shot.

Moroccan international Abderrazak Hamedallah, who has scored 22 goals in as 
many appearances for the Chinese club, was next on the attack keeping Reddy 
busy with another attempt.

Hamedallah continued to terrorise the Mariners in the second half, this time 
with brilliant lead-up work which resulted in a second goal for the visitors.

The Moroccan got past defender Jacob Poscoliero and off-loaded to Jiang who 
set up midfielder Liu for the easy strike in the 59th minute.

Guangzhou could have been 3-0 up in the 70th minute when Jiang had a 
point-blank shot at goal but misfired.

Just when the Mariners thought things couldn’t get any worse, Rose, who was 
attempting to play the ball back to Reddy, sent it into his own goal in the 
89th minute not realising the gloveman had come out of his box.

Trifiro netted from a well-taken free-kick in extra time but it was too 
little, too late.

Guangzhou now join Japan’s Gamba Osaka, South Korean side Seongnam FC, and 
Thai club Buriram United FC in group F with their first game against the 
J-League side in Japan next Tuesday.

The Central Coast, meanwhile will need to quickly re-focus before facing 
Sydney FC on Saturday in the A-League.

Moss remained upbeat but admitted poor defending let them down. “They scored 
two quality goals and that own goal from Josh Rose. I feel for him, he’s 
hurting in the change rooms,” he said.

“At the end of the day we gave ourselves a mountain to climb by giving away 
that early goal. We didn’t defend well. It’s probably the story of our season, 
we give away cheap goals. We had a lot of possession and got in good areas, but 
we lacked that cutting edge.”

Guangzhou coach Cosmin Contra, who took over the side from former England 
manager Sven-Goran Eriksson in December, was elated to have secured a maiden 
ACL berth.

“I think we deserve to get through to the group stage,” the Romanian said. 
“The early goal really changed the game. We also had a lot of space for counter 
attack and had several chances from our quick counter attack. After the second 
goal we had the victory in our hands.”
 