
Last week's select committee review of Channel 4 – hardly noticed amid the 
blizzard of media coverage of the BBC – was a real stinker. The failings that 
its former chief executive Andy Duncan was criticised for include not 
fulfilling a promise to set up a £10m fund for programming aimed at older 
children, spending as much of C4's dwindling resources onProject Kangaroo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/kangaroo> as he did given the likelihood of 
the projected on-demand service being blocked by the Competition Commission, 
and describing losses on his failed digital radio strategy as "modest" and then 
using accounting rules to try to avoid disclosing the actual amount involved – 
£10m, as it turned out. The MPs on the culture, media and sport committee go so 
far as to suggest that the money might well have been better spent maintaining 
public service content on C4's main service.

Even more serious, C4 was criticised for a lack of transparency in how it 
accounted for its digital channels that MPs said could not be justified. The 
stated purpose of those services (Film4, More 4 and E4) has always been to 
generate profits to support the main channel in its broader public service 
purpose. And that is what C4's accounts purport to show them doing – profits of 
£41m on a turnover of £175m in 2008. But further probing produced the rather 
more sobering fact that the channels will not even have paid off the full costs 
of setting them up until at least 2012. In the case of Film4 that is 12 years 
since it started. Added to which, C4's unwillingness to publicly disclose its 
profit and loss channel by channel left MPs with a distinct sense that far from 
the spin-off services generating profits to help the main channel the opposite 
had happened.

Besides wondering how well C4 is managed, the select committee may be 
concerned about how well it is governed, which is much more worrying. The 
broader context for the MPs' deliberations was its campaign for a new remit – 
outlined in "Next on Four", which was developed by Duncan as part of his pitch 
for public financial support. Having heard Duncan talk of C4 as evolving from a 
TV channel into "a truly cross-platform public service network", the government 
duly included a new remit for it in the digital economy bill. The committee has 
now started to ask some much more difficult questions.

As "new" C4 was going to be more like its much larger public service 
counterpart, the BBC, with activities extending into new and emerging markets, 
why should its activities not be subject to some kind of market impact 
assessment? And shouldn't C4's governance and accountability arrangements be 
reformed to mimic some of the features – notably a degree of separation from 
management – of the BBC Trust? Leaving aside the strange twist that this 
suggestion comes from the committee which has been so critical of the selfsame
BBC Trust <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-trust>, a fuller debate about 
C4's governance would seem unavoidable.

To survive and prosper in the emerging converging digital world, C4 needs the 
freedom to act commercially in new markets. Competitors may well not like it, 
but it will be disastrous if its new remit and any new governance arrangements 
that come with it get in the way of that happening.

In a recent article for MediaGuardian 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/organgrinder/2010/feb/08/luke-johnson-channel-4>
, C4's departing chairman, Luke Johnson, said: "We lost the battle for 
contestable funding taken from the licence fee, but as a consolation C4 isn't 
suffocated by the bureaucracy and political correctness asphyxiating the BBC."

The worry is that the policymakers, politicians and regulators have now got 
their hands on C4 and historical precedent suggests they won't want to let go. 
It would be especially calamitous if that became the legacy of his five years 
in charge.
 