
In the summer of 2007, Charlotte Gainsbourg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/charlotte-gainsbourg> had what seemed like 
a minor water-skiing accident. Six months later, after attending a gala 
screening in Venice of Todd Haynes's film,I'm Not There, in which she played 
one of Bob Dylan's wives, she suffered "a seven day headache". Back home in 
Paris, she went to the doctor for a check-up and found out that she was lucky 
to be alive.

"They did an MRI scan and found that my brain had been pushed to the side and 
my head was filled with blood," she says, sounding slightly dazed. "The doctor 
was totally shocked. He told me that I should be dead or paralysed."

Though the subsequent emergency surgery was successful ("It basically 
consisted of drilling a hole in my head"), it took Gainsbourg a long time to 
accept that she was well again. Until the spring of 2008, she insisted on 
undergoing a series of MRI scans convinced that she was going to die. Nothing 
the doctors could do or say convinced her that this was not the case.

"It was a strange and fragile time," she says now, her impeccably modulated 
English delivered in a soft, almost whispered French accent punctuated by long 
pauses while she pursues the right word. "The doctors kept telling me I was 
fine but I had some instinct that I wasn't. It was a kind of post-traumatic 
anxiety, constantly feeling very vulnerable and thinking I was going to die at 
any minute." Did it make her afraid to work? "For a time, yes. It was like I 
needed to be in a cocoon just with my family. I was very surprised to see how 
weak and fragile I was. That was very new. I had always thought I was very 
strong and courageous. I had no idea how scared I was of dying."

Her emotional recuperation began in earnest, she says, when she returned to 
work. In spring 2008 she travelled to Los Angeles not to make a film but to meet
Beck <https://www.theguardian.com/music/beck>, the American songwriter, 
producer and multi-instrumentalist. They had previously been introduced at a 
White Stripes concert and no doubt Gainsbourg had also been intrigued by Beck's 
sampling of a snatch of her father, Serge Gainsbourg's classic song, "Melody 
Nelson", for the track "Paper Tiger" on his albumSea Change.

In Beck's home studio, they began working tentatively on a handful of sketchy 
songs. "It took me out of my small miseries to be immersed in work, to be 
overwhelmed by someone else." One of the first things Gainsbourg did was play 
Beck a recording of the sound of an MRI scanner that she had found on the 
internet. "For me, it was the sound of delirium," she says, breaking into a 
short, nervous laugh that recurs each time she talks about anything personal. 
"That was my first input – the most intimate, revealing sound I could imagine."

One of Beck's early lyrics for the album included the fragment, "drill my head 
full of holes", written, she says, before he knew about her accident. "He 
apologised afterwards," she says, smiling, "but I felt it was some kind of 
connection."

More often than not, the news that an actor has recorded an album sets the 
heart sinking, but somehow this is not the case withIRM – the French 
abbreviation for MRI – Charlotte Gainsbourg's new album. It is, as with 
everything that bears Beck's imprint, an eclectic mix of styles, the single 
unifying factor being Gainsbourg's detached and breathy vocals. (On the dreamy, 
string-laden "'Le Chat du Café des Artistes", she sounds uncannily like 
Françoise Hardy at her most seductive.) A great part of the album's success 
comes from the juxtaposition of Beck's cut-and-paste musical landscapes and 
Gainsbourg's fragile vocal style which echoes her emotional minimalism as an 
actor.

IRM is Gainsbourg's third album, though 20 years separates Charlotte For Ever, 
the album she made as a teenager with her father, and 2006's critically 
acclaimed5:55, which was produced by Nigel Godrich of Radiohead fame and 
featured songs written for her by the likes of Air and Jarvis Cocker. It sold 
respectably here and reached the No 1 spot in her native France where she is 
revered.

Gainsbourg's choice of collaborators, like her choice of directors, has been 
canny.IRM could easily have turned into a Beck album featuring her on vocals 
but it sounds like a proper collaboration, with songs referencing her recent 
traumas as well as her acting. "Beck kept pushing me to write," she says with 
characteristic self-deprecation, "but my father's genius weighs too heavy on 
me."

I ask her what exactly her input was. "Well, he'd start with a rhythm and I'd 
react. Then, he'd gradually build a song. I came up with a few words and 
titles," she says, unabashedly, "but mainly I came to him with ideas and 
directions that I wanted to take. I brought some books: the poetry of 
Apollinaire,Through the Looking-Glass. Just clues for him, really. We didn't 
have profound ideas or discussions. He just guessed what I wanted to sing 
about."

In person, Charlotte Gainsbourg is exactly as I imagined her. Gamine, quietly 
stylish, slightly otherworldly, she epitomises a certain kind of ultra-refined 
contemporary cool that is a world away from the Hollywood ideal of stardom or 
beauty. At 38, she remains an unconventional beauty, and in a certain light is 
a dead ringer for the young Patti Smith as immortalised by Robert Mapplethorpe. 
Someone should cast her soon in the biopic.

Today, in the tea room of this Bayswater hotel, she is chic in jeans and black 
top with a brown leather jacket draped over her shoulders. At first she appears 
shy and awkward, slightly somewhere else; it's that same mixture of 
vulnerability and self-containment she brings to her screen roles. She seems 
inordinately well balanced, though, which is quite something given her 
unconventional background.

Her father, the late singer-actor-director Serge Gainsbourg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/serge-gainsbourg>, was the proto-punk 
provocateur who became France's best loved anti-hero; her mother, Jane Birkin, 
was his muse, a beautiful English actress and singer who, for a time, became 
part of his great amoral misadventure. Together, they recorded "Je t'aime, moi 
non plus" in 1969, a song whose sexual suggestion – it includes a simulated 
female orgasm – was denounced by the Pope and deemed too improper for the 
British public to hear on the radio. Unsurprisingly, it reached No 1 in the 
charts here and in France. (Serge had originally recorded it with France's 
greatest sex symbol, Brigitte Bardot, but, having got married in the interim, 
she successfully pleaded with him not to release their version.)

In 1984, when she was just 13, Charlotte duetted with her father on a single 
called "Lemon Incest", which made "Je t'aime" seem positively quaint. It seemed 
to celebrate both incest and paedophilia, though, when I bring it up, she 
insists it does neither. Despite, or because of, the scandal the song caused, 
it spent 10 weeks in the French top 10 and bestowed on the pre-pubescent 
Gainsbourg an unwelcome notoriety. "Fortunately," she says, "I had just gone to 
boarding school when the song came out. I was totally unaware of this big 
scandal. I was protected from it."

How, though, did she feel singing the song, and then acting coquettishly in 
the accompanying video in which both are sprawled on a double bed, he shirtless 
and she wearing only a shirt and knickers? "Oh, I was not innocent singing it," 
she says, "I knew what I was talking about. But for me, it wasn't a problem. I 
had fun with it. Plus, there was pureness behind it. It's really the love of a 
father and daughter. It says in the song – the love that will never do 
together. And, you know," she adds, smiling, "even then I imagine I was used to 
his excitement about provocation. This is what he was good at."

The only time she felt embarrassed by her father as a child, she says, was 
when he burnt a 500 franc note on live television. "The next day in school, the 
kids burnt my work. It was a stupid kids' thing but it was upsetting. I do 
think I was shy and I had to build a shield, a carapace. But I didn't suffer. 
Ever. I had a good childhood."

Her parents, she insists, were, for all their nocturnal carousing and all her 
father's notoriety, essentially "very modest and normal". They raised her and 
her half-sister, Kate – Birkin's daughter by John Barry, the film composer who 
created the James Bond theme – in typically bourgeois fashion with boarding 
school, piano lessons, classical music and classic novels. Her mother, she 
says, loved the experience of making films and "transmitted" that pleasure to 
her daughter early on. (Her maternal grandmother, Judy Campbell, was also an 
actress and a great beauty and became Noel Coward's muse.)

Charlotte appeared on screen for the first time, aged 13, as Catherine 
Deneuve's daughter in an obscure French film calledParoles et Musiques. In 
1986, aged 15, she won a César award for Most Promising Actress for her role in
L'effrontée. There is a clip of her big moment on YouTube in which she is 
kissed rather too long and passionately on the lips by her proud father and 
then breaks down in childish tears as she attempts a speech. She looks like a 
brooding, pouty little boy and something of that attitude remains faintly 
discernible underneath her detached demeanour.

It was The Cement Garden, though, that first brought her to the attention of a 
British audience in 1993. An adaptation of Ian McEwan's first novel directed by 
her uncle, Andrew Birkin, it remains a powerfully unsettling piece of work, 
where once again, incest, this time between brother and sister, is the theme. 
Like her mother, Gainsbourg seems to have the urge to break with convention and 
provoke the kind of controversy her father thrived on.

Gainsbourg has made around 35 films to date, ranging from the high costume 
drama of Franco Zeffirelli'sJane Eyre in 1996 to the postmodern weirdness of 
Michel Gondry'sThe Science of Sleep. In 2001, she starred opposite her 
real-life husband, the actor Yvan Attal, in Claude Berri's anaemic romantic 
comedyMy Wife Is An Actress. The couple have two children, Ben, aged 12, and 
Alice, aged 7. Apart fromJane Eyre and her appearance alongside Sean Penn and 
Benicio del Toro in21 Grams, she has resisted the lure – and lucre – of 
Hollywood, content to live in and work out of Paris. When I ask her if she is 
satisfied with her CV, the answer is surprising.

"It's very difficult for me to even admit that I am an actress," she says, 
quietly. "Because I began doing this during the school holidays and I never 
went to drama school, I always feel that somehow I am not really a part of it. 
And I don't have a method. Every time, it is like doing my first film all over 
again."

Last year, Gainsbourg found herself at the centre of a media controversy that 
would have made her father proud. When Lars von Trier'sAntichrist debuted at 
the Cannes Film Festival, so shocking were its scenes of sexual violence that 
it was greeted with boos and jeers, as well as scattered applause. In it, her 
character was required to go slowly and spectacularly mad following the death 
of her infant son, her derangement leading her to mutilate her husband, played 
by Willem Dafoe. In one graphic scene, she bores a hole in his leg. In another, 
she slices off her own clitoris.

Antichrist was the first film Gainsbourg acted in after her brain haemorrhage. 
Her performance won her the best actress award at Cannes. I put it to her that 
accepting a role in a Lars von Trier movie might not be the healthiest way to 
deal with one's post-traumatic anxiety. "Oh, but it was!" she says, suddenly 
animated. "He goes so deep into something extreme that you have to forget about 
yourself. Plus, he was very vulnerable also. I saw someone very insecure and 
even more worried about his health than I was about mine. In a way, I felt very 
close as a character to his experience."

What, I ask, did her mother make of the film? "She loved it. She was part of 
the experience because I was texting her every day to tell her what I was 
doing." Did she actually text her mother and say, "Today I had to cut off my 
clitoris?" She cracks up laughing. "Yeah! Something like that. We were laughing 
all the time. It was a release from the intensity of the shoot, to be able to 
step back and make fun of myself a little bit."

Inevitably, the talk turns to her father, whose death of a heart attack in 
1991 prompted mass grieving in Paris with President Mitterand calling him "our 
Baudelaire, our Apollinaire". I had read somewhere that his house on Rue de 
Verneuil in Paris had been left untouched since his death and that she wanted 
to turn it into a museum. She falls silent for a moment and I feel that I have 
maybe crossed a line. "No," she says finally, "I've stopped all that. I spent 
17 years thinking and planning it but then, after my accident, there was a 
moment when I said no to everything for a while. I think this was the turning 
point. I suddenly realised that I did not want people coming to his house to 
know everything about him. They already know everything about him. I need to 
keep something for myself. Be selfish about that. I will just keep it the way 
it is. For me."

Has she ever thought about living in the house herself? "Oh, I couldn't do 
that. It's too heavy emotionally." It transpires, though, that she lives just a 
few streets away from her father's house. She visits it regularly. What, I ask, 
feeling slightly guilty, does she do there? "I just sit there, really. I can't 
go to the cemetery because it is too public and there are always people around. 
It's really the only place I can be alone with my memories of him." She pauses 
for a moment, then says, "In a weird way, the house is very alive, he's very 
present there."

I ask her, maybe a little unkindly, what a psychologist would make of all 
this? "God knows," she says, laughing. "I don't even want to think about it." 
Her father clearly still occupies a big space in her life. "He does," she says 
quietly, "an enormous place. At the beginning, it was like my legs were cut off 
and that feeling lasted for a long time. It was only with my children that I 
could begin to move on. My husband has been very patient. Now, it has been 18 
years and it's still very, very difficult. And, I'm an adult." I realise I am 
interrogating someone who is still in grief. "I miss him a lot," she says, "but 
now that I have had half my life with him, and half without, maybe I will be 
able to grow up a little bit and move on."

For all that, Charlotte Gainsbourg, at 38, seems remarkably content, and 
continues to work at her own speed and on her own terms. She is thinking 
tentatively about touring to promote her new album. "I keep thinking, I didn't 
write the songs, I don't play an instrument, I'm not an extrovert performer, so 
why would people come? What would they see?"

She has made two films in the past year, Persecution, another drama about a 
troubled relationship, directed by Patrice Chéreau, andThe Tree, an Australian 
film about family grief, based on the novelOur Father Who Art in a Tree, by 
Judy Pascoe. "I'm always dissatisfied," she says, in conclusion. "Always. Not 
so much with the work, more with myself. I have so many doubts that they 
constantly pull me down but now I can see that this is my way of working. The 
self-questioning is my method. I've realised that I like being unbalanced. I 
like feeling insecure. To be able to do one take and be crap and then another 
and be great, that's the rollercoaster I like."
 