
It is not often that the name Ken Loach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ken-loach> is used in a sentence that 
includes the phrase "cheerful, feelgood romantic comedy", but that was what he 
delivered today at the world's biggest film festival.

Loach, best known for his often grim and depressing social realism, is 
something of aCannes film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cannesfilmfestival> favourite, taking the 
Palme d'Or three years ago with The Wind That Shakes the Barley.

But today it was all rather more upbeat as Loach appeared alongside one of the 
film's stars, the philosophising footballer turned actor Eric Cantona, and 
declared that Looking for Eric should be a movie that sends audiences away 
feeling happy.

"We had done a couple of films that were really quite tough," he said. "So we 
thought it might be nice to do a film with a smile on our faces," said Loach, 
who admitted that Looking for Eric was attracting more interest from 
distributors than usual for one of his films.

"You can say that a comedy is a tragedy with a happy ending and the story in 
this film could have become a tragedy. I guess we felt we had to play the story 
with truth."

Looking for Eric could prove to be his biggest commercial success. "In the end 
you have to be true to the subject. If it's popular that's great but you just 
have to tell the story as truthfully as you can and hope that it connects with 
people.

"The distributors are showing confidence in the film and we are getting many, 
many more prints in Britain than we've had before, so that's a good sign."

The film, shot in Manchester, tells the story of a football-mad postman – 
played by Steve Evets – whose personal circumstances are spiralling out of 
control. He is depressed, his stepsons are walking all over him and he finds 
his own life in jeopardy from a local gangster. At this low ebb, his hero 
Cantona begins to magically appear to offer him gnomic advice, like an 
aphoristic life coach.

Today, Cantona told journalists that he was a fan of Loach's films and that it 
was his production company that made the first approach to the director.

Asked to compare Loach with his Manchester United manager Sir Alex Ferguson, 
Cantona said: "They are very similar. The way they go about getting 100% out of 
their actors or their players is very similar. They both get me to give every 
bit of myself. They are where they are because they have an enormous amount of 
humility. They are also wonderful people and that is important to me."

In one surprise scene, Cantona gets out his trumpet to pump out a ropey 
Marseillaise. He said he began learning the instrument during his nine-month 
suspension for his kung-fu style kick towards a baying Crystal Palace fan in 
1995. "When I was suspended I had to train more than the other players but I 
couldn't play in the matches, so I needed something to focus on. So I decided 
to take up the trumpet."

Loach batted away one question on the "psychology and sexual release of 
football" to explain his love of the beautiful game: "I've never felt that 
going to a football match was an anthropological exercise. I just want to see 
my team win. It does bring people together and it is an expression of community 
and it's also probably the only time it's permissible to be nationalistic."

"Also it's a time when people can let their feelings be expressed. At the game 
you go from despair to hope to triumph to sadness to elation within an hour and 
three quarters. If a film could achieve that it would be some film, I can tell 
you."

This year's Cannes is packed full of auteur films and while Loach was 
confounding some people's expectations, another director was living up to his 
form as one of the most controversial and provocative directors in Europe.

Lars von Trier's horror movie Antichrist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/129974/antichrist> prompted derisive 
laughter, some boos and lots of "Oh my Gods" during its first screening. 
Starring Willem Dafoe and Charlotte Gainsbourg, the film is unflinchingly 
graphic in its depiction of sex, genital mutilation and breathtakingly brutal 
torture with workshop tools.

Many people were bewildered by what the film's point might have been and some 
journalists at Von Trier's press conference were clearly not amused. But the 
director said he did not have to explain himself. "I don't have to justify 
myself. I make films and I enjoy very much making them. You are all my guests, 
it's not the other way round. I work for myself and I do this little film that 
I'm now kind of fond of and I haven't done it for you or the audience so I 
don't feel I owe anyone an explanation."

Pressed on what the film's message was, the winner of the Palme d'Or for 
Dancer in the Dark in 2000 said he was not trying to say anything in the movie, 
but rather it was a dream put on film.

This year's competition has already seen films from the likes of Jane Campion 
and Ang Lee. The "heavyweight auteur smackdown" continues tomorrow with Pedro 
Almodóvar's Broken Embraces.
 