
One of the trickiest philosophical questions of the modern age has been “why 
Oliver?” Or, more specifically, why didOliver Letwin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/oliverletwin> choose to become a minister 
for the Cabinet Office? Letwin is intelligent, decent, charming and truthful – 
any one of those qualities should have automatically disqualified him for the 
position.

On Thursday the truth was revealed when Letwin appeared before the Commons 
public administration committee to explain why he had carried on doling out 
cash toKids Company <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/kids-company> long 
after everyone else had worked out that the charity hadn’t a clue how to handle 
money.

Letwin has been on a mission. A mission to recreate the life of Saint 
Sebastian. While the rest of the Conservative party had long since abandoned 
the Big Society as a sick joke, Oliver the Good had been observing whole armies 
of invisible little people running around making even littler people’s lives 
better.

“Do your worst,” the would-be St Oliver exclaimed, ripping off his shirt and 
tying himself to a tree. The committee took him at his word, firing arrow after 
arrow into his bare torso.

Trying to catalogue the errors St Oliver has made in his handling of Kids 
Company is a category error. There are simply too many to count. You would be 
better off searching for things he had got right.

Hard as they tried to join St Oliver within the cushioned Arabian tent that 
Camila Batmanghelidjh <https://www.theguardian.com/society/camilabatmanghelidjh>
 had erected for herself inside her Southwark office, no one on the committee 
could quite share his Panglossian view that Kids Company had been a thoroughly 
worthwhile use of a third of the government’s youth-sector spending.

“Oh yes,” St Oliver admitted cheerfully and truthfully, when asked if he had 
been aware the numbers had never quite stacked up. Yes, there was a bit of a 
discrepancy between the 36,000 people the charity said it helped and the 1,909 
it actually had, but that was the whole point of the Big Society. So, 
naturally, despite knowing that Kids Company was financially screwed, you gave 
them £4.265m.

“Oh yes,” St Oliver admitted cheerfully and truthfully. But he had warned them 
that would definitely be the last money they ever got from him unless they 
improved their accounting methods and could show they had actually helped some 
kids. And they had definitely taken all that on board, because he had spoken to
Alan Yentob <https://www.theguardian.com/media/alan-yentob> personally about it 
from his ministerial car.

“But it wasn’t the last money you ever doled out to Kids Company,” the 
committee chairman, Bernard Jenkin observed, as, last July, he had given them 
another £3m, against his own civil servants’ advice, the day before the charity 
folded. “If I may say so, the charity was rather like a profligate maiden aunt 
to whom you handed out money regardless.”


“Oh yes,” St Oliver admitted cheerfully and truthfully, not at all hurt by 
this latest unnecessary unkindness, by now sounding rather more like Mole out 
of Wind in the Willows. This £3m was very different from the last £4.2m because 
he had made Kids company promise to change most of its officers before he 
handed it over even though they hadn’t quite got round to doing it.

And why hadn’t he withheld the money until the promised matched private 
funding had reached Camila’s mitts? “Because if I hadn’t given the money the 
charity would have gone bankrupt,” St Moley admitted cheerfully and truthfully, 
seemingly unaware that the charity did go belly up the very next day. “The 
private money would have come. The donors had given me their word. They 
promised.”

St Moley staggered out, blood pouring from his wounds, a look of transcendent 
ecstasy on his face. His martyrdom was complete. Kids Company had been too good 
to fail. Could the same be said for him?
 