
As we step out of the funicular into Bergamo's Piazza dei Scarpi, I am 
immediately taken by the familiar delights of Old Italy: the dusty, dimly lit 
bars, the narrow cobblestone streets, the paintwork distressed by time and 
sunshine, even the vintage Vespa parked outside an ice-cream parlour. But my 
travelling companion heads directly for a baker's on the right. "Look here. 
Look at the ciabatta, focaccia, the dolci. You can smell the freshness," he 
says, and, pointing to a complicated confection decorated with what look like 
birds' nests, "Those birds in icing commemorate the famous quails which some 
locals still like to eat roasted." We go in for a tasting. My companion prefers 
to smell and eat his way around Italy.

I've been brought to Bergamo's walled, medieval città alta - or high town - by 
Antonio Carluccio <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/antonio-carluccio>, 
the chef and broadcaster who comes as often as he can to this corner of 
Lombardy to source Italy's best polenta, buy wines from nearby Lake Iseo and 
Franciacorta, and stock up on the world-famous Taleggio cheese and Pellegrino 
water for his Neal Street restaurant. Carluccio, who was raised on railway 
platforms - his father was a station master, constantly moving around - knows 
the whole country well, but reveres Bergamo as "a perfect place to come and 
find traditional country food, as well as being one of Italy's proudest comuni 
[city-state] and an art city in its own right".

As he leads me up the Via Gombito, the città alta's main drag, Carluccio is 
effusive about Bergamo's small-town appeal: "Take in all these shops, all run 
by individuals. Look, they have everything: the greengrocer, a real butcher, a 
salumeria (cold meats store), cheeses, coffee, liquor, and even the fashion 
boutiques are run by local women." During a slow meander up to the main square, 
the Piazza Vecchia, we meet some of the doncellas who sell and wear designs 
worthy of Milan's catwalks, but we pay longer visits to all the shops that 
cook, cure, prepare and serve food.

"We should get some courgette flowers to cook up in one of the restaurants," 
suggests Carluccio. "These will be very good from this region, as will the 
figs, lemons, pomegranates and roses. Everything grows in these valleys." We 
found the flower-heads in a friendly little family grocer's, along with some 
subtly sweet wild strawberries.

The carefully tended window displays make you want to try everything - though 
it was a dangerously sweet aroma that drew us into one bustling bakery, where 
we tried honeyed pani and pastries. Standing beneath a halo of musty salamis, 
the butcher introduced us to his finest mortadella and his daughter. The retail 
experience was a dream after Britain's chain-bound high streets, and all the 
banter turned the Via Gombito into something of an opera stage, with each and 
every character singing his or her motif.

The warm welcome everywhere ran somewhat counter to the impression that 
Carluccio used to have of Bergamo when he was growing up. "Being up in the 
Alps, it sees itself as being apart - even aloof. I have a strong image of the 
town not always being seen positively elsewhere in Italy, probably to do with 
the separatist movement of the Lega Lombarda."

In fact, it was all so utterly convivial that I almost forgot to look up and 
about me at the handsome buildings that line the Via Gombito. It was only while 
Carluccio was chatting to a carabiniero that I noticed we were standing beneath 
a magnificent medieval tower, a building I later recognised as one of the 
highest points from down in the modern città bassa (low town).

On the Piazza Vecchia, Carluccio paused to note what some of the town's posher 
restaurants were offering. The main square is a model of urbane perfection, 
admired by the architects and patrons who added structures from the 12th 
through to the 18th centuries but also by modernist visionaries such as Frank 
Lloyd Wright and Le Corbusier. After drinking cool spring water at the central 
fountain, Carluccio pointed to the reliefs of Venetian lions donated in 1780 by 
the Contarini of Venice. "Ah, there you see the influence of Venice," he said. 
"The Bergamasche say they still look east for inspiration, while they show 
their backsides to Milan". The Piazza's handsome Biblioteca Civica is modelled 
on Venice's Sansovino Library, and Bergamo's passion for fine art is also an 
indication of its looking to La Serenissima as a role model. The Galleria 
dell'Accademia Carrara, located just outside the city walls, houses a 
staggering collection of Renaissance masterpieces, including works by Bellini, 
Botticelli and Raphael, and facing it is a serious modern art gallery.

Carluccio comes mainly for the food, but accepts that, with its art, 
architecture and agriculture, Bergamo is far more than a full belly. Locals use 
the phrase "utero materno" to describe the city, saying that "like a big 
mother, it gives you everything". It has all the historic sights you need for a 
weekend, some pretty hotels, a lovely botanic garden, very walkable streets, 
lots of small, stylish shops, and in mid-summer, even though the temperature 
can nudge 30C, it's still cooler than the sweltering Lombardy Plain. Which is 
why every Friday evening, as plane loads of low-cost passengers are being 
bussed towards Milan on the Autostrada 14 from Orio al Serio airport just 
outside Bergamo, the Milanese are heading in the opposite direction for a 
weekend break.

Many come just to chill at the bars dotted around città alta. La Mariana is 
the best and oldest patisseria, located at a spot called the colle aperto or 
"open hill", adjacent to the second funicular line which takes you even higher 
to San Vigilio. From here there are splendid views of città alta below and, in 
the hazy distance, greater Milan.

Over drinks, we took in the view of lush foothills and farm terraces. Across 
the road was a new looking restaurant with an Anglicised name and no terrace 
outside. As elsewhere across Italy, Bergamo has seen the opening of modish, 
"new Italian" restaurants - but Carluccio warned me away from these snazzy 
eateries. "They tend to be a ridiculous combination of some Michelin-led story 
and the fact that, say, footballers dine there. They are targeting the nouveau 
riche and eating in these places tends to be like eating in a chemist's shop. 
Let the stars eat bad food alone."

He also made short shrift of so-called Italian fusions: "Most Italian recipes 
have been evolving for centuries and have been tried and tested - there's no 
good reason to ignore all that heritage." So for lunch we chose a traditional 
but quality eatery. There are several such places in città alta - Da Ornella, 
La Colombina, and the one we opted for, Da Mimmo, back on the Via Gombito. 
Carluccio guided us to the strictly local dishes: "We must eat polenta taragna, 
with butter and cheese. And we should also try casconcelli, the raviolis 
stuffed with sausage meat, sage and more butter. Bergamo people base their diet 
on the fruits of the woods - mushrooms, berries, herbs - and the lake fish, and 
the Valcalepio wines, of course."

Over a serious two-hour session, we had just about all of these at Da Mimmo, a 
lovely restaurant equally popular with families and local grandees. Outstanding 
was a gilt-head fish dish from Bergamo's fish market, one of the most important 
inland markets in Italy; the chef also proudly showed us some bitter, 
40-month-old cheese from Brescia, which Carluccio knew as part of "the region's 
signature dish, stringy polenta bagoss. It is said to stimulate the senses 
because of its pungency, and so bagoss is known as a 'lover's cheese'."

Da Mimmo was hale and hearty, but next door was a true blue-collar eatery 
housed in a former prison building. Part of a cooperative created to provide 
services to Bergamo's senior citizens, students and sometimes forgotten poorer 
residents, the complex boasted a nice little caff, a shaded terrace and a 
traditional menu that rarely rose above five euros an item. There was even an 
al fresco bocha (bowls) alley and tables for cards. In the afternoon it fills 
with old locals playing cards.

Our last meal was at Parietti Piero, a colourfully decorated restaurant 
outside the main action in città alta. With a backdrop of frescoes of bucolic 
harmony, Carluccio quickly selected a local banquet: "We'll start with smoked 
swordfish, mussels and fried, stuffed olives, and then try the polenta dishes 
with rabbit and braised steak." Once again, the atmosphere was family-friendly 
with zero pretence. Carluccio might have become a bit of a media star himself, 
but the restaurants he likes have not surrendered to fads and TV chefs.

Oh, and Milan? Well, of course it's one of the world's great cities, but for a 
weekend of peace, art, easy strolling, wine and food, I don't think it comes 
close.

· Antonio Carluccio's Italia, a celebration of the cultural and culinary 
traditions of regional Italy, will be published next month by Quadrille, priced 
£25.

Carluccio's Polenta Concia

This 'flavoured polenta' makes a delicious accompaniment to a stew of chicken, 
hare or beef, but I must admit that I am often tempted to eat it by itself!
Serves 4

1.7 litres salted water
300g polenta flour, or 1 x 375g packet of bramata or instant polenta
115g butter
115g parmesan, freshly grated
115g fontina cheese, cut into chunks

Bring the salted water to the boil. Very carefully add the polenta flour, 
stirring constantly with a wooden spoon so that no lumps appear. You must 
continue to stir the polenta until you see that it starts to come away from the 
side of the saucepan. This will take only five minutes if you are using instant 
polenta, 30-40 minutes if you are using polenta flour or the classic bramata 
polenta. Now add the butter, the grated Parmesan and the chunks of fontina, 
stirring all the time until you see that all the ingredients have melted and 
are thoroughly mixed with the polenta. Serve directly on to heated plates with 
your own choice of stew.

· From An Invitation to Italian Cooking, published by Headline.

Way to go

Getting there: Ryanair (ryanair.com <http://www.ryanair.com>) flies to Milan 
Orio al Serio from five UK airports for around £70 rtn inc tax.

Where to stay: Capello d'Oro, Viale Giovanni XXIII, stylish hotel, from £52pp 
per night through Citalia (0870 9097554,citalia.com <http://www.citalia.com>). 
Agnello d'Oro, Via Gombito 22 (+035 249 883); the prettiest hotel in the old 
town, built in 1600, but with modern bedrooms, doubles €92.

Where to eat: La Colombina, Borgo Canale 12 (+035 261 402); book a seat on the 
balcony for taleggio-cheese salads and lovely views. Da Ornella, Via Gombito 15 
(+035 232 736); for polenta taragna with rabbit. Da Mimmo (+035 218 535); good 
casconcelli and cold meats. La Bruschetta, Via D'Alzano 1 (+035 221 265); 
exquisite pizza and tender veal dishes. Nessi, Via Gombito 34 (+035 247 073); 
pastries, cakes, breads and sweet polenta creations. Cooperative Città Alta, 
Vicolo S Agata 19 (+035 218 568); bruschette and antipasti. Parietti Piero, Via 
C Beltrami (+035 221 072); moist polenta and succulent swordfish.

Further information: Italian Tourist Board (020-7408 1254, enit.it).

Country code: 00 39.

Flight time Stansted-Milan: 2hrs.

Time difference: +1hr. £1= 1.42 euros.
 