
Moments after Saiful Islam opens the Royal Institution Christmas Lectures 
<http://rigb.org/christmas-lectures> in London this year the theatre will 
plunge into darkness. Deprived of mains power, and left holding a solitary 
candle, the scientist must find energy from elsewhere. Without it, the show 
cannot go on.

Even as a stunt, the prospect of a catastrophic lighting failure in a 
televised lecture is unnerving. But as an expert in materials that store and 
convert energy from one form to another, Islam is better placed than most to 
handle the incident. How he will do it, and whether he will succeed, is not yet 
clear. “What I haven’t worked out is how much power the lecture theatre 
requires,” he says.


For now, Islam has other matters on his mind. Britain’s most prestigious 
public science lectures have a long and revered history. Since 1825, the greats 
of the pursuit, from Michael Faraday and Carl Sagan to Sir David Attenborough 
and Richard Dawkins have presented the demonstration-filled sessions. “I feel 
very privileged, very honoured, and partly terrified to follow in their 
footsteps,” Islam says in his first interview on the lectures. “Hopefully my 
nervous energy will carry me through.”


He was initially reluctant to take the job. The professor of materials 
chemistry at Bath University was so wrapped up in his research that he turned 
down the opportunity to host the lectures. He changed his mind after a little 
persuasion. One colleague warned that should he decline, he would regret the 
decision for the rest of his life.


The wakeup call worked. A “devout atheist”, humanist, and Smiths fan, Islam 
says he is now “raring to go” and deeply focused on the three-part series, 
“Supercharged: Fuelling the Future”, which will be broadcast on BBC4 over the 
Christmas period. During the 4series, he will explore the invisible energy that 
drives everything from our bodies, cars and mobile devices, to all the stars in 
the universe.


The RI Christmas lectures were first televised 80 years ago, an anniversary 
Islam will mark by revisiting historic experiments performed at the 
institution, including Faraday’s seminal breakthrough on electricity generation 
in the building’s basement. To recreate classic demos on the theme of energy, 
chosen to honour Faraday’s life and work, Islam will be joined by the 
presenters of Christmas lectures past.


“People take energy for granted. It is all around us from the moment we are 
born and we assume it will be with us for all time,” he says. “And one thing 
about energy is that it cannot be created or destroyed, only changed from one 
form to another. So the candle is a nice example of chemical energy leading to 
light and heat energy.”


Islam describes himself as a chemist without a white lab coat. Instead of 
mixing brews of dubious content, he uses computer modelling to study materials 
for batteries and renewable energy sources at the level of the atom. When asked 
at parties about his line of work, it is a mouthful, which he distills to 
simply: “I model.”


He was not one of those children who owned a chemistry kit, or who was led 
into science by an inspirational teacher. But his father, a first-generation 
immigrant, was keen for Saiful and his two younger sisters to do well. Though 
encouraged into medicine, Islam veered towards science simply because he was 
good at it. A chemistry degree led to a PhD and a stint at Eastman Kodak in New 
York, before he returned to a research post in Britain. “I’m glad I resisted my 
parents’ push,” he says. “Medicine is a good route out of poverty, but I loved 
chemistry more.”


Islam’s first memory of the RI Christmas lectures was Carl Sagan 
<http://richannel.org/christmas-lectures/1977/1977-carl-sagan>, who in 1977 
spoke about the planets and life elsewhere to an audience resplendent in chunky 
knits and large collars. “I got this sense that scientific knowledge was 
important, that gathering knowledge about the world around us was key,” Islam 
says. “He was so passionate about the subject.”


In his own lecture series, Islam will explore how materials are central to 
solving the world’s rising demand for energy. With fossil fuels unsustainable, 
what can solar and other renewables do? And what role will batteries play in 
the future? How can phones last for a week, and cars run for hundreds of miles, 
on a single charge?


As a British Asian growing up in 1970s London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, Islam witnessed discrimination. He 
sits on the Royal Society’s diversity committee, which aims to gather data and 
then understand why women and ethnic minorities are underrepresented in 
science. “I’m a firm believer that if you want good science and innovation, you 
must exploit the talents of all, regardless of gender, race and background,” he 
says. “I don’t know if I’m a role model, but I’d be very happy if I did 
encourage younger generations from diverse backgrounds to stay in science.”


Despite Britain’s vote to leave the EU, which Islam says has cast doubt over 
science funding, collaborations and the future for thousands of European 
researchers in the UK, he remains an optimist. “It’s a fantastic time to be a 
scientist,” he says. “There are really great opportunities to make 
contributions to scientific advances, whether that is in energy, 
nanotechnology, disease or space exploration.


“Science can be tricky and hard, but there are rewards,” he adds. “I want 
children to understand that the pursuit of science is the proper way to unravel 
the mysteries of the world around us and that it is full of beauty and exciting 
discovery.”
 