
Luisa, the daughter of Haitian immigrants to the Dominican Republic is now an 
elderly woman who has worked as a sugar-cane cutter on a batey (agricultural 
settlement) her entire life. "San papye – nou se kochon nan labou" – "Without 
papers – we are like pigs in mud," she says.

Born-and-bred on the more affluent side of the poverty-stricken Caribbean 
island of Hispaniola, which the Dominican Republic shares with neighbouring 
Haiti, the papers Luisa refers to are birth certificates, cédulas (identity 
cards) and passports routinely refused to the estimated 1,000,000 Haitians and 
Dominicans of Haitian descent living in the Dominican Republic. A large number 
of this sizable but stigmatized population are undocumented residents of the 
Dominican Republic, many of whom have lived there for generations, and many 
others who have never visited the Haitian side of the island.

Under Dominican law, anyone born on Dominican soil – with the exception of 
children born to foreign diplomats and tourists, who are defined as 'in 
transit' – is automatically entitled to Dominican nationality.

However, the front line and first experience of discrimination, prejudice and 
exclusion directed against Dominican-born children of Haitian descent – which 
has deep-seated roots in Dominican history and culture – comes from civil 
registry officials charged with determining whether the newborns brought before 
them are eligible for Dominican nationality. Recent reports by Christian Aid, 
Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch all document the widespread 
practice of refusing to register the births of children of Haitian descent. 
Often judging cases solely based on the skin colour, address or accented 
Spanish of the parents, the offspring of Haitian immigrants are routinely 
refused birth registration certificates, thereby denying these children 
nationality and rendering them legally stateless.

This racist behavior of civil servants is justified by the Dominican 
authorities as a consequence of a 2004 amendment to the Constitution, whereby 
Article 11 expanded its scope to define all 'non-residents' as 'in transit'. 
The new law has therefore created a situation whereby officially 'non-resident' 
Haitian immigrants and their offspring – just like the foreign diplomats and 
Western tourist billeted in the Marriott Hotel's air-conditioned 
replica-hacienda on the sultry seafronts of the country's capital, Santo 
Domingo – are officially 'in transit', thereby not eligible for Dominican 
nationality.

Numerous migrants' rights organizations and Non-Governmental Organizations 
(NGOs), are concerned that the new law deliberately seeks to conflate the 
'non-resident' status with that of 'in transit'. They argue that the amendment 
condemns the offspring of Haitian immigrants to a life of permanent 
'illegality' on the margins of society, where they live a limbo-like existence 
denied access to their fundamental rights of education, employment, housing, 
health care, freedom of movement and personal security.

Changing attitudes 
But recently the plight of Haitians and their descendents became somewhat 
unstuck from the decades-long morass they found themselves forced into. The 
Dominican national press published for the first time the sentence of a 
landmark 2005 ruling by the Inter-American Human Rights Court (IACHR) on the 
rights of those born on Dominican soil.

The case in question refers to that of Dilcia Yean and Violeta Bosico, two 
Dominico-Haitians girls refused birth certificates, but whom the IACHR ruled in 
favour of and ordered the Dominican authorities to end its discriminatory birth 
registration practices. The IACHR found that by denying the girls birth 
certificates – and therefore, all Dominican-born Haitians – the authorities are 
guilty of flaunting Article 11 of their own Constitution, and the IACHR ruling 
has brought unwelcome international attention onto the Dominican authorities.

The traditionally muffled issue of ill-treatment of Haitians is becoming 
increasingly audible at both domestic and international level because of the 
IACHR ruling. Together with heightened international media awareness, it has 
indirectly led to the establishment of a Caribbean Migration Observatory, as 
well as the hosting of prestigious international conferences in Santo Domingo 
on the issue of Haitian migrants.

"There is increased international pressure on the government," says Bridget 
Wooding of the Latin American Faculty of Social Sciences in Santo Domingo. 
"Civil society here, as well as pressure by international groups like the 
Catholic church and the European Union, has effectively cornered the government 
– and regularization is now definitely on the agenda."

But the regularization agenda of Haitians' residency status is not whispered 
about in the cosseted corridors of power in Santo Domingo. Numerous groups at a 
grassroots level are becoming increasing vocal about Haitians' rights.

José Emperador, a development/communications officer working for Progressio, 
aims to initiate widespread debate and disseminate information regarding 
Haitians' rights, advocating for change on the ground.

"Without papers people don't exist," he says. "Shoe-shiners, young boys, who 
work on the streets – they don't know what 'papers' are or why they would need 
them. We need to tell people that they do have rights!"

In the bateyes and beyond, this grassroots advocacy is altering minds and 
outlooks. "I met one man unaware he was eligible for Dominican documents," says 
Emperador. "So we informed him; he gathered his details. He eventually got his 
cédula, he showed it to me, his face beaming with a smile, and it was as if he 
was holding a winning lottery ticket."

This increasing groundswell of support for and awareness of Haitians' rights 
among Haitians themselves and civil society activists is part of what Wooding 
argues is a shift from a "fetishized" focus on the legal framework surrounding 
citizenship to a more inclusive and informal model of membership of "cultural 
citizenship".

"If the Dominico-Haitian population residing in permanent illegality in the DR 
is to integrate peacefully into this insular society," she argues, "then 
increased weight must be given to promoting cultural change."

And it appears that this cultural change is afoot on the ground. In contrast 
to past public protests by Haitians, which were frequently marred by 
ultra-nationalist Dominican groups disrupting demonstrations, a recent vigil 
held by Dominico-Haitian children outside the Palace of Justice in Santo 
Domingo passed off without incident. The most memorable and vivid feature of 
the event was the multi-coloured Dominican flags painted onto the children's 
faces in recognition of their demand and desire for inclusion.

This longlisted article was published on 23 July 2009. It was written for the 
Guardian's International Development Journalism Competition between 1 April and 
22 June 2009.
 