
As more than half a million students puzzle over thousands of courses on Ucas, 
the most important advice, says Karen Pichlmann, head of admissions at 
Bournemouth University, is to choose something you like: "Three or four years 
is a long time if you aren't really interested."

Get it right and you will reap the benefits: 85% of UK students said they were 
were either "definitely" or "mostly" satisfied with the quality of their 
course, according to the latest National Student Survey.

But how to sift between so many joint, combined and unusual options – for 
instance, forensic computing and security, forensic investigation or forensic 
science out of the 132 undergraduate courses at Bournemouth?

The answer is research. Jonathan Tinnacher, head of student recruitment at the 
University of Leicester (165 courses) says: "Be thorough in the research you 
do, making sure the courses you apply for really are what you want to do, and 
that you've done the right subjects at school to get in. And be thorough in 
your application, making sure that everything you say is clear, correct and 
complete." Apply early, adds Karen Pichlmann, if your course admits through 
interviews or if you want a place in halls.

Universities publish entry profiles on the Ucas website, which say exactly 
what they are looking for.Students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> who fit the bill – be it 
academic or non-academic – will be first to receive an offer, says Tinnacher. 
Don't waste choices on wishful thinking. Many universities demand minimum 
criteria, like B or C in English and maths at GCSE: if you don't have these 
grades, don't apply to them.

What do you really want?

Choosing works both ways: are you what they want? And do they offer what you 
want? League tables, internet chat forums and universities' own course 
microsites offer masses of information on everything from teaching methods to 
the best clubbing. Do you want a party town? A country campus? And don't forget 
your best resource – last year's school-leavers, who are already living with 
the results of their research.

Research should include visiting at least three open days, run by universities 
throughout the year. Online league tables and comparison websites are useful, 
too, but nothing beats the real vibe of a visit. Jeremy Jones, 22, studies 
classics at Oxford University and says: "When I went for the open day, we saw a 
class with everyone arguing about their subject and I immediately felt how much 
I wanted to join in."

Parents need to be careful about intervening in this process. They may feel 
that law is a good career, but you will not be keen to swot up on cases when 
you long to be creating computer games. Parents may have been happy at a 
particular institution – but would you thrive?

Even if you start late, don't rush at your online application: writing a 
personal statement is as important as grades; your chance to stand out.

Rob Evans, head of admissions for the University of Sussex, stresses, "The 
best personal statements are personal: honest, genuine and in the applicant's 
own words, which reflect on what the applicant has done rather than merely 
describing it." Draft, leave for a few days, review, draft again, then throw it 
away and redraft.

Finally, vary your level of application, so that you have a real gap between 
your two offers. Your lower offer should be 40-60 points lower than your higher 
offer, because the Ucas "adjustment" period after results means that 
universities may revise an offer 20-40 points down. And if you don't get your 
grades – or anywhere near – there will still be good places in clearing, with 
the best choice for those who act quickly on results day.
 