
There I was, in my early 20s, single, no children, no dog, parents away on 
holiday, atChristmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas>. The 
perfect opportunity, I thought, to have a bit of peace and quiet. I planned to 
stay in, by myself, and have a lovely rest. No visiting or visitors. No panic 
over cooking, shopping and presents. And I like being by myself.

I hadn’t told anyone my plan, because I knew no one would like it. They’d have 
felt sorry for me. However much I said I wanted to be by myself, my friends 
would never have believed it, so I’d told them I was with someone else. Because 
alone, to them, meant lonely.

It’s an easy mistake to make. I’ve done it myself. I went out with a friend 
one Christmas Eve to a cafe. Sitting alone having a cafe Christmas dinner was a 
tatty-looking old man, all by himself. I felt so sorry for him, eating his 
lonely din, that I started blubbing and had to leave. But who knows? Perhaps he 
was perfectly happy. Perhaps he fancied turkey and his family was vegetarian. 
Perhaps he had a choice.

I was lucky, I had one. I didn’t have to be on my own, but I like it. I like 
dim lights, silence, an open fire, fiddling about doing nothing much, perhaps a 
little piano practice, with nobody listening, whatever snacks I fancy whenever 
I like, no talking, no arguments. Just like a retreat, but without the prayers, 
rigid timetable and deprivations. Bliss.

Now here was my chance. And it all started off perfectly. Outside the sky was 
bright blue. The sun was shining and blazing in through the big windows. There 
was wonderful music on the radio. I had a lovely scented bath. I got out of the 
bath. Complete peace. I had toast and coffee, then a little practice, and I was 
just staring blankly at the flames of the fire with some tea when suddenly the 
door bell rang. Who could it be? No one knew I was here. God knows why I 
answered it, but I did – big mistake, and there was an acquaintance of mine, 
holding a red rose.

In that instant, everything changed. Because I had been discovered alone at 
Christmas. I’d become a pitiful figure – friendless, unloved, no family. It 
wasn’t true, but I still felt it, because I knew he probably thought it – and 
worse still, the rose wasn’t even for me. It was for an attractive friend round 
the corner who made lutes, but she wasn’t in; so round he came to my house, his 
second choice, on the off-chance, casually wrecking my magical, secret 
Christmas. I’d felt confident, cheery and almost subversive when I had started 
it, but once I’d been caught out everything crumbled.

It wasn’t that the visitor was going to run out with a loudhailer and tell the 
world he had caught me out, but once he knew, it broke the spell. I was no 
longer sure who wanted what. Did I really need company or did everyone else 
think I needed company? Was I really at ease with my solitude or was I a tragic 
figure pretending I wasn’t? Who was running my life and my choices, me or them? 
Who was right? I hadn’t a clue.

Now, 50 years later, I know I was right. Solitude can be heaven. My ideal 
holiday would be a whole week staying at home alone with the dog. No outings, 
no visitors. I have learned this from half a century of scary and knackering 
holidays and Christmases: the build-up, the great expectations and miserable 
disappointments, the panics, rows, weeping and general palaver, the terrible 
sweat over the dinner, the turkey’s giant corpse, my poor mother collapsed on 
the sofa, weak from sweating over the cooker, nauseated, unable to eat a crumb, 
and all tainted with guilt. Because we are still waiting for the Messiah and 
should have been doing Hanukah instead.

Not all our Christmases have been hellish. We have managed some heavenly, 
laid-back, low-key Christmases, but although I no longer have parents, my 
daughter has been away and I have had my chances to just sit here with the dog 
and stare at a log fire, I’ve never dared try a solitary Christmas again. There 
is such a thing as society, and it doesn’t seem to like people being alone at 
Christmas. Not a bad thing. So I go with it. I’ve even pretended to be Father 
Christmas. I can be an anchorite any other day of the year.
 