
My friend Christine Brock, who has died from cancer aged 61, was a lifelong 
animal rights campaigner, and a biomedical scientist engaged in research to 
expose scientific and ethical flaws in animal experimentation.

Daughter of Karin and Douglas Brock, Chris was born in Exeter. Because of her 
father’s various RAF postings, the family moved around a lot; Chris received 
most of her secondary education at Downer grammar school in Edgware, Middlesex.

She worked for a number of years as head of research for the National 
Anti-Vivisection Society, and wrote about what she considered inhumane 
practices prevalent at medical research facilities in the UK and abroad. Her 
research formed an integral part of the society’s campaigning against animal 
experimentation, which contributed to a recommendation from the House of Lords 
select committee for the establishment of the National Centre for the 
Replacement, Refinement and Reduction of Animals in Research in 2004.

Chris also oversaw scientific grants for the Lord Dowding Fund for Humane 
Research, approving funding for a variety of ethical medical tests, including 
the development of an in vitro model for the study of liver metastasis from 
cancer of the colon, as well as the use of protozoa to model human infection.

She later worked as a senior manager in the NHS, monitoring the ethical 
standards applied in human research, before leaving to pursue her lifelong 
passion for herbal medicine. In 2007, she received a first-class degree in 
herbal medicine from Westminster University, before embarking on a PhD at the 
same institution: her thesis was astudy of the effects of American skullcap (
Scutellaria lateriflora) on healthy volunteers 
<http://westminsterresearch.wmin.ac.uk/12194/1/Christine_BROCK.pdf>.

She opened her own practice in 2007, while continuing to serve as a freelance 
researcher for animal rights organisations. Chris also led a successful 
campaign against the culling of monk parakeets in her home town of Borehamwood, 
Hertfordshire.

No stranger to politics, Chris campaigned for David Miliband’s bid for the 
Labour leadership in 2010. She was also an avid music fan, with a particular 
penchant for Rory Gallagher and New Model Army.

She is survived by her partner, Paul, her son, Vincent (from an earlier 
marriage that ended in divorce), granddaughters, Sofia and Kristiana, her 
mother, brother, Bryan, and sister, Karin.
 