
You're either on the bus, or you're off the bus. And if the vehicle in 
question bears an advert proclaiming the (probable) non-existence of God, one 
churchgoing bus driver would rather not climb aboard.

Ron Heather, 62, an evangelical Christian from Southampton, refused to drive a 
bus bearing an advert from a national campaign aimed at persuading more people 
to "come out" as atheists.

About 800 buses across the country are to carry the adverts, which read: 
"There's probably no God. Now stop worrying and go and enjoy your life." 
Heather said he was "aghast" when he realised last Saturday that he would have 
to drive a double decker emblazoned with the slogan. He walked out of his shift 
in protest.

He said: "I was just about to board and there it was staring me in the face - 
my first reaction was shock horror. I felt that I could not drive that bus, I 
told my managers and they said they had not got another one and I thought I 
better go home, so I did."

Heather said he had been particularly offended by the name of the website 
featured on the ad,atheistcampaign.org <http://www.atheistcampaign.org>. 

He said: "This is a public attack on people's faiths. I have a lot of 
passengers who are over 90 or are seriously ill, and to tell them there is no 
God seems a bit insensitive, when God is probably all they have left in the 
world. Faith is a very important thing in people's lives, and I think [the 
poster] pushes the issue too far."

Heather later agreed to return to work on the condition that he would drive 
buses with the adverts only if no other vehicles were available. "I'm not going 
to let passengers down because of my feelings."

Writer Ariane Sherine, who first suggested the campaign in a Guardian Comment 
is Free blog, said: "Our campaign fully accepts and respects the rights of all 
other belief systems to advertise peaceful messages, and we'd hope that those 
with different viewpoints would extend us the same freedom."

A spokesman for the ASA said it had received 231 complaints about the British 
campaign.
 