 Tales of the City, Armistead Maupin's six-volume chronicle of gay and straight 
life in San Francisco, was hailed yesterday as Britain's favourite lesbian or 
gay novel.
Maupin emerged as the winner of the Big Gay Read, which was launched last 
summer and invited readers across the country to nominate the novels they 
"cherished above all others".

Maupin beat off a strong challenge from Sarah Waters, who has two books in the 
top five of the list. He flew into Britain yesterday and will receive his award 
in Manchester on Saturday at Tales In Our City, a special event at the Big Gay 
Read literature festival, part of the queerupnorth international festival.

"It's wonderful to know that the joy and fulfilment I've found as a gay man 
has somehow contributed to the joy and fulfilment of others," he said. "Books 
have a lovely way of passing from hand to hand, so I'm especially grateful to 
all the British readers - gay, straight and otherwise - who have shared their 
Tales so promiscuously over the years."

Maupin, who came out as gay in 1974, began his stories as a young journalist 
on the San Francisco Chronicle, when he found that no one would allow him to 
use real names as he went to interview singletons looking for love in a 
supermarket.

The stories were the first fiction to appear in the Chronicle for years and 
Maupin claims that he was the first author to write about Aids in fiction. The 
Tales have since sold millions of copies worldwide in many languages, including 
Japanese.

Sarah Waters takes second place in the Big Gay Read with Tipping the Velvet 
and fifth place with Fingersmith. Waters shares fifth place with Stella Duffy's 
Calendar Girl and Jake Arnott's The Long Firm. Jeanette Winterson takes third 
place with her first novel, Oranges Are Not The Only Fruit, based on her 
childhood in Accrington, Lancashire. Jackie Kay's Trumpet, the story of a 
female jazz musician who lives as a man, is fourth and Annie Proulx comes in at 
number seven with Brokeback Mountain, her sparely-written novella, since made 
into a widely praised film. Alan Hollinghurst's The Line Of Beauty, which won 
the Booker prize in 2004 and has been dramatised by Andrew Davies for BBC2, 
takes eighth place.

The list

1 Tales of the City Armistead Maupin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/armisteadmaupin>

2 Tipping the Velvet Sarah Waters

3 Oranges Are Not the Only Fruit Jeanette Winterson

4 Trumpet Jackie Kay

=5 Fingersmith Sarah Waters

=5 Calendar Girl Stella Duffy

=5 The Long Firm Jake Arnott

6 At Swim, Two Boys Jamie O'Neill

7 Brokeback Mountain Annie Proulx

8 The Line of Beauty  Alan Hollinghurst

9 Carol Patricia Highsmith

=10 Rubyfruit Jungle Rita Mae Brown

=10 Desert of the Heart Jane Rule

=10 Rough Music Patrick Gale

=10 Crocodile Soup Julia Darling
 