
"I just think Chuck Berry <https://www.theguardian.com/music/chuck-berry> owns 
rock'n'roll. Guys like him and Jerry Lee, Elvis, Gene Vincent and Buddy Holly, 
they invented rock'n'roll and, in many ways, what they did has never been 
bettered. There's something heroic about them: where they came from, what they 
overcame. They changed the world.

People say the Beatles invented modern pop music because they wrote their own 
songs, but Chuck was writing his own songs in the 50s – School Days, Sweet 
Little Sixteen, Johnny B Goode. Classic pop songs. I think he broke the mould 
in another way, too. In Howlin' Wolf and Muddy Waters, you can still hear the 
plantation. Even with all the amplification and the electricity of the Chicago 
blues, it's still there. Chuck Berry broke with that. There's not a lot of pain 
in his music. What you hear is joy, freedom. His records are just so ecstatic 
and joyous. There's always a big back beat, and that Johnnie Johnson piano, and 
you just have to get up and dance. Chuck's solos are not guitar hero solos, all 
about ego and self, they're an extension of the song. He plays freeform and it 
sounds funky as in messed up and dirty.

"Then there's the songwriting. Those lyrics! So celebratory. It's about the 
birth of mobility, and freedom and movement in that grey postwar period. It's 
teenage music: cars and girls and the frustration of not getting your leg over. 
Sexy music. This is a guy who's banged up in jail for crossing a state line 
with an underage girl and he somehow gets hold of a map in prison – where you 
can get more time just for having a map – and writesPromised Land 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aykoGVMdlSA>. Amazing. Then to come out of 
prison, and come back with songs like Nadine and No Particular Place To Go. 
They couldn't contain him.

"You can hear Chuck Berry in all great rock'n'roll. It's there in the early 
Beatles when they were sexy and didn't take themselves so seriously.It's there 
in the Stones <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PEA6gzAAPfc>. Keef worships 
Chuck. Mick Jagger was once asked who he'd like to be and he said Chuck Berry. 
You can hear him inDylan, too, on Highway 61 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2-xIulyVsG8>. That's Chuck Berry with Beat 
poetry. You can hear him in the early Beach Boys, in the New York Dolls, the 
MC5, T Rex – Marc Bolan wore a Chuck Berry T-shirt. When Chuck Berry sang 
"Hail, hail, rock and roll, deliver me from the days of old", that's exactly 
what the music was doing.Chuck Berry started the global psychic jailbreak that 
is rock'n'roll."

Key recording: Chuck Berry is on Top (Chess, 1959)
 