
A prolific hacker gang that has breached numerous companies by exploiting 
Adobe software has claimed another major hit in the form of car manufacturer 
Citroën, the Guardian has learned.
 
Citroën had one of its German websites hacked to include a backdoor, which is 
a method of bypassing normal authentication systems, and which may have allowed 
the attackers to make off with whatever data was sitting on site’s server.

A Citroën Germany spokesperson said law enforcement were to be contacted about 
the breach as it appeared to be a criminal act. Some customer data was stolen, 
the spokesperson said, but it is unclear how many are affected. Customers have 
been contacted and will be advised to check their bank accounts for any 
suspicious transfers.

The attackers managed to embed the backdoor on shop.citroen.de, a fan site for 
buying Citroën-based gifts. After disclosure by the Guardian and Alex Holden, 
chief information security officer at Hold Security, the backdoor was removed, 
but investigations into the breach continue. The backdoor file was live from at 
least August 2013.
 
According to Holden, it was certain the same actors responsible for breaching 
several sites - including Adobe, PR Newswire and the National White Collar 
Crime Center - were behind the Citroën site breach. Security blogger Brian 
Krebs last yearuncovered a trove of information taken in those attacks 
<http://krebsonsecurity.com/2013/10/breach-at-pr-newswire-tied-to-adobe-hack/>.
 
The hackers have been scanning the internet for weaknesses in a web 
application platform from Adobe known as ColdFusion. “The exploitation was 
targeted across the entire internet looking specifically for ColdFusion 
exploits,” Holden said.
 
If the hackers did decide to pilfer data from the site, they would have had 
access to all information on the server. “To explain the backdoor simply, it 
provides full command line and SQL database access with the rights of the user 
running the web services, which usually means everything on the web server,” 
Holden added.

Citroën was not responsible for running the site. It contracted web design 
company anyMotion to run its main German website and the affected fan site.  
anyMotion said it had fixed the backdoor but was now investigating whether 
hackers had installed further files or taken data. “We are examining the 
machines for known backdoors and unwanted software that someone may have 
installed on the machine,” said anyMotion’s Heinz Brasch.


It is unclear whether credit card information was directly compromised, 
although the advice from Citroën that customers check their bank balances would 
indicate some kind of financial information was taken. Shopping bags and 
shipping addresses of users were also stored on the compromised server.
 
Passwords used to access the website and admin passwords for running it have 
been reset, while shoppers were initially prevented from making purchases as a 
precaution.

The breache has highlighted the risks that face companies through third 
parties. “You can have all the security in the world inside the company’s four 
walls, all you need is a third party supplier that’s connected to you, if 
they’re compromised that compromise has a bridge right into your organisation,” 
said Rocco Grillo, managing director and global leader for incident response 
and forensics investigations at Protiviti, a consultancy. 

“If you’re outsourcing to a third party or relying on a third party, you don’t 
just shut the door and say that is someone else’s problem. You can outsource 
the function but you ultimately own the risk. If that third party doesn’t have 
the same controls in place or the level of controls you need from a risk 
management standpoint there’s obviously an issue. You’re in grave risk if that 
company loses your data.”

The attacks have also proven the need to update exploitable software. The 
vulnerabilities in ColdFusion have now been patched.


• Blackphone: can a mobile ever truly be hack-proof? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/mar/04/blackphone-can-a-mobile-ever-truly-be-hack-proof>
 