
The question: Does civility matter? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2011/jan/17/arizona-shootings-civility>

I am utterly and unashamedly middle-class. I have an outside toilet but you 
can't use it because it's full of badminton stuff. I like my food in a little 
pile in the middle of a big plate. I don't taste the wine when the waiter opens 
the bottle, I just sniff it, and if it smelt dodgy I'd drink it anyway and say 
thank you. So as you might expect I also think that being nice to people is one 
of the most underrated virtues.

We tell children to play nicely, but among ourselves grownups admire bravery, 
passion, honesty, being right, outspokenness, almost everything, more than 
being civil and considerate. And if you don't mind my saying, it seems to me 
the world would work a lot better if adults learned the lessons they teach 
children.

You do hear lots of people saying that niceness is overrated, but obviously 
they're a bunch of dribble-witted Nazi lard brains.

Civility, apart from being, well, nice, works. It makes us communicate better, 
gets us heard and understood. If you have six killer reasons why my sexual 
ethics are dangerous and repressive, I'm more likely to take them in if I'm not 
distracted by your additional point that I'm a nasty moron whose mother was of 
exhaustingly easy virtue and whose father was a venereal parasite.

It's also more persuasive. If the only reason you talk is to let off steam, 
and entertain people who agree with you, then it makes sense to ask your 
opponent why they insist on spouting such total arsecocking crap and fascist 
lies. But I think it's fair to say that no one was ever persuaded of anything 
in that kind of language, other than the desirability of not having this 
conversation any longer. The people who change our opinions are the ones who 
persuade us to listen sympathetically to their ideas, by listening 
sympathetically to ours.

But then, in saying all this, it occurs to me that I must be using a different 
part of my brain to the one with which, for example, I have written that 
creationism is "a bottomless pit of deliberate stupidity" and Catholic policy 
on condoms in Africa is "murderously disingenuous" – if you'll forgive the 
vanity of quoting myself – and which loves to read well-judged and tastily 
worded diatribes, from Jonathan Swift through toCharlie Brooker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/charliebrooker>.

Craven hypocrisy might be one word for it – or more likely two – though I'd 
rather it was me who said so, if that's OK.

Another way of looking at it though is that however much we value civility and 
respect respect, it has to give way sometimes. Reasonable and safe opinions 
deserve civility whatever the context. Even people with dangerously unhinged 
opinions need to treated civilly if you want debate to go anywhere and to 
change people's opinions.

But we also at other times need to give vent to anger at ugly and harmful 
ideas. At times we need to bolster and unify the opposition of right-thinking 
people to them. At times we need every rhetorical trick up our mucky sleeves to 
convince waverers that horrid and stupid ideas are horrid and stupid.

I just think that those times are relatively few, and the times when 
communication, and therefore civility, would achieve more, are far more 
numerous. And I think that we too often use the armoury of abusive brutish 
spleen, when being respectful would achieve more. And just be nicer.
 