
Writer AA Gill has been censured by the press watchdog after he called TV 
presenter Clare Baldinga "dyke on a bike" in his column in the Sunday Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jul/30/clare-balding-lesbian-complaint-gill>
.

Balding complained to the Press Complaints Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/pcc> (PCC) after the comment appeared in 
Gill's review of her BBC4 programme, Britain by Bike.

Balding said the word "dyke" was "too often used as a pejorative and insulting 
term". She said her sexuality was irrelevant to the programme and the hurt had 
been compounded by the columnist's mock apology for previously saying that she 
looked "like a big lesbian".

The newspaper defended its columnist on freedom of expression grounds, saying 
Gill was well known for his acerbic and sometimes tasteless sense of humour. It 
argued the term was no longer offensive and seen as "empowering" by some gay 
groups.

But the PCC today upheld Balding's complaint. It said the use of the word was 
discriminatory and a "pejorative synonym relating to the complainant's 
sexuality".

"Freedom of expression is a key part of an open society and something which 
the commission has defended robustly in the past," said the PCC director, 
Stephen Abell.

"While the commentator is clearly entitled to his opinion about both the 
programme and the complainant, there are restraints placed upon him by the 
terms of the editors' code [of the PCC].  

"Clause 12 is very clear that newspapers must avoid prejudicial, pejorative or 
irrelevant reference to an individual's sexual orientation and the reference to 
Miss Balding plainly breached its terms."

In its defence of the column, published on 25 July this year, the Sunday Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sundaytimes> said Gill was a 
"controversialist who pursues the English tradition of lampooning and 
ridiculing public figures". It said he had been the subject of 62 PCC 
complaints in the last five years which had not been upheld.

Ben Summerskill, chief executive of gay rights group Stonewall, said: "We 
warmly welcome the PCC's ruling. The Sunday Times wouldn't refer to Meera Syal 
as a 'fat Paki' or Vanessa Feltz as a 'fat Jew'. It was just as unacceptable to 
sneer in this way at Clare.

"Expecting civilised treatment isn't, as the editor of the Sunday Times 
claimed offensively in response to this complaint, 'having a special victim 
status'. We hope the Sunday Times will now accept the PCC's ruling and repair 
the damage done to its sales by publication of this article."

Balding had earlier complained to the newspaper's editor, John Witherow. He 
defended his columnist, saying: "A person's sexuality should not give them a 
protected status." Balding said she was "appalled" by the response. The PCC 
said today the paper should have apologised "at the first possible opportunity".

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 