
When I ask Clare Balding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/clare-balding> about her year, she 
starts flicking through her diary and muttering words like "golf" and "racing" 
and "the Winter Olympics" and only finally says: "Oh yes and AA Gill, I 
suppose."

In my mind, the Gill incident, when he reviewed her BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> 2 programme Britain by Bike, and called 
her "a dyke", must have coloured her year. She launched herself on to Twitter, 
complained first to theSunday Times and then to the Press Complaints Commission 
and, in the process, became something of a gay rights hero. But perhaps not?

"Oh yes, well, it was quite stressful at the time," she says although this 
sounds like a classic piece of Baldingesque understatement."It wasn't the first 
time either. He wrote a hateful review of Royal Ascot a couple of years ago, 
and said I look like Biggins. And I love Biggins but I didn't particularly want 
to look like him at Royal Ascot. It was all not very nice, but I remember that 
time I'd read it and I'd been very hurt personally, but you get over it. This 
time, so many other people were hurt, and it was not just on my behalf but on 
their behalf that I went to the PCC." What he wrote was: "Some time ago I made 
a cheap and frankly unnecessary joke about Clare Balding looking like a big 
lesbian. And afterwards somebody tugged my sleeve to point out that she is a 
big lesbian and I felt foolish and guilty. So I'd like to take this opportunity 
to apologise. Sorry. Now back to the dyke on a bike, puffing up the nooks and 
crannies at the bottom end of the nation."

And later in the same piece: "I wonder if the production team noticed that, 
even through three layers of Viyella and Gore-Tex, Clare has heroically 
assertive nipples."

What convinced her to take action was the huge number of followers she picked 
up when she joined Twitter the next day, and even more, a week or so later, 
when she revealed theSunday Times's response to her letter of complaint.

"I hadn't decided what to do until I wrote to John Witherow [the editor of the 
Sunday Times]. But then he replied and basically said, 'It's no worse than 
Jeremy Clarkson, the epitome of the heterosexual male, being mocked for his 
dress sense and some people in gay society should get over the idea that they 
have special victim status.'

"Now, I've never regarded myself as having special victim status. But a lot of 
other people don't necessarily have a public voice… and if you're a nurse or 
teacher or social worker or whatever, you don't deserve to have someone say 
you're good, or you're not good, and you're a dyke. You're either good. Or 
you're not good."

Even five months on, you can still feel her anger. "Just review the programme! 
You can say what you like about my hair, or my fat bum, or my legs or my dress 
sense. Whatever. That's not going to hurt anyone else. But don't point a finger 
at me and say I'm a dyke on a bike. Because frankly that's what kids say in the 
playground. It's not on. Everybody knows it's not on. I was staggered that they 
didn't just say, 'You know what? I'm really sorry.' And the strange thing is 
they still haven't said sorry."

She took it to the Press Complaints Commission and won, the first time that a 
complaint againstAA Gill <https://www.theguardian.com/media/aa-gill> – and he's 
had 63 lodged against him – has been upheld.

"I was thrilled. Absolutely thrilled. The fear was that I was going to look 
like a fool. I can take the personal stuff, I really can, but I really wasn't 
doing it just for me. There's always the fear that you're going to make it 
worse. But in the long run, it can only make things better, it's got to. You 
just think, 'Oh grow up. Grow up.' It's so blindingly obvious to me that it's 
depressing even to have to argue it."

Balding has never made a big deal out of her sexuality. She was "outed" by the 
Mail on Sunday in 2006 when she went to a premiere with her partner, the Radio 
4 announcer Alice Arnold, who she subsequently married in a civil ceremony, but 
by then, she said, all her friends and family knew, "we just weren't about to 
issue a press release". She's never experienced homophobia herself, she says. 
If she hadn't been goaded by Gill, it seems unlikely that she would have become 
any sort of gay rights crusader.

Although, it must be said, she's something of a natural at it. She was head 
girl at Downe House, a public school in Berkshire, where the comedian Miranda 
Hart also went, and who teases her to this day that once a head girl, always a 
head girl. At Cambridge, she was president of the Union. On television, too, 
she has a natural authority. She's the queen of the outside live broadcast, a 
natural interviewer – she manages to get in three questions to me before I've 
managed one – and a cheerful and ebullient presence at a host of BBC sporting 
events.

Except that the BBC failed to renew her contract this year.

'They've what?' I say, genuinely gobsmacked.

"It wasn't my choice. I was terrified. I really got myself in a state about 
it. And you know what? I think that's part of what made me ill, I really do 
think that. I got so wound up I couldn't sleep. I'm not a stressy person, but I 
just really panicked."

The illness she's referring to is thyroid cancer. She was diagnosed last year 
and had two operations and radioactive iodine.

"But you got the all clear?" I say, referring to an article I'd read.

"You never get the all clear."

The illness, and the treatment, has also inevitably had an impact on her year. 
"It's like having your system rebooted. I mean I didn't have any great change 
of character or anything. I really really love my work. And I love my life. And 
I love my partner, I love my dog, I love living in the UK. I mean, I was always 
a very happy person anyway, but I think, if anything, it's just made me more 
like that, just more annoyingly positive."

She'll still do sport for the BBC, but 2011 was looking pretty lean, she says, 
untilChannel 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> rang and offered 
her a job. In January, she'll be co-presenting a new celeb adventure show,
Famous and Fearless, with Chris Evans.

That's quite unusual, isn't it? I ask. Normally, they'd pair him with a 
dollybird in a cocktail dress, wouldn't they?

"Are you saying I'm not ?" she says, mock-insulted. "No, I know what you're 
saying. And the refreshing thing this time around is actually they booked me 
before they confirmed him."

It feels like a breakthrough, of sorts, when most women on TV are evaluated 
for work on the basis of their looks. "And luckily with me, I just don't think 
that's the case. I mean I know that's not the case."

But then she's always been something of a mould-breaker and now she's doing 
prime-time entertainment on Channel 4, "none of which I've ever done before. I 
just hope I don't mess it up." It seems unlikely. After the interview, at the 
Berkshire racing stables where she grew up and which her brother now runs, Andy 
Hall, the photographer, decides wants to take her portrait in a field full of 
frisky young racehorses. The horses paw the ground, try to chew the electric 
cables of the portable lights and peer inquisitively into the lens. I'm holding 
a silver reflector and, at one point, one of them treads on it, rears up and 
nearly sends us all flying. In the middle of it all, perfectly poised, 
oblivious to the swearing (me) and the crashing bits of kit (Andy), is Clare 
Balding, smiling.

I don't think Channel 4 has much to fear. You could douse AA Gill in petrol 
and light him up like a bonfire on live television (we're talking in an ideal 
world here) and I doubt Clare Balding would even blink.
 