
William Nicholson was in his 50s by the time he got around to writing his 
first novel in 2004. Before then he worked in TV drama, and on Hollywood 
screenplays including Gladiator. He also wrote books for children. But adult 
fiction turned out to be harder than expected.

"I wanted to write about my own world and I felt that I couldn't," he says. 
"And I puzzled about this. Why did I feel that my world, which is comfortable, 
middle-class, well-educated people living in the countryside, was illegitimate 
subject-matter for serious fiction?"

Nicholson spoke about his experiences, including his rejection by a publisher 
who said he wasn't interested in women who drive 4x4s, at a festival in Devon 
earlier this week.

Meanwhile, Scottish writer Alan Warner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alan-warner> was making the opposite 
argument. Writing for the Guardian in praise of Ross Raisin's second novel, 
Waterline, which describes the descent into homelessness of a widowed former 
Glasgow shipyard worker, Warner wrote of a "sly, unspoken literary prejudice" 
against working-class lives and characters.

While the upper-classes remain perennially interesting to publishers and 
readers alike, is it affluent middle-class or working-class characters who are 
being squeezed out of literary fiction? Or can both Nicholson and Warner be 
right?

When I phone him, Nicholson is quick to qualify his remarks. "I'm not daft, I 
know the middle classes dominate our culture," he says from his home in Sussex. 
But when he began reading Jonathan Franzen's hugely acclaimed novels about 
American family life, he decided Franzen's compassion for his characters was 
missing from British fiction. It is true that there is no obvious equivalent to 
Franzen's success with The Corrections and Freedom in Britain. The tragic 
grandeur with which he invests the lives of his middle-class Americans does not 
have an obvious counterpart in a modern-day Middlemarch set in Harrogate or 
Morningside. But British fiction has become so diverse it is difficult to 
usefully generalise about it.

Every publisher's list includes American writers, novels from former colonies, 
Scottish and Irish authors. The UK-administered Orange prize just went to the 
Serbian-American first-timer Tea Obreht, while hits of the summer so far range 
from Alan Hollinghurst's country house intrigue The Stranger's Child to Mr Fox 
by Helen Oyeyemi, the Cambridge-educated daughter of Nigerian immigrants who 
now lives in Berlin.

In contrast, while crime and thrillers are international, with writers like 
Stieg Larsson and Dan Brown becoming global bestsellers, there is a strong 
domestic market for home-grown romantic and women's fiction that is very much 
concerned with love and marriage in the shires. Nicholson's frustration is 
partly that his work is corralled for marketing purposes into this bracket. 
Subject-matter, rather than form or style, have caused his books to be 
classified as more commercial than literary.

He has some supporters. Last year Viv Groskop called him "one of our most 
underrated novelists", while fellow novelist Jojo Moyes wrote an article this 
week admitting that she, too, suffers pangs of self-consciousness about her 
privileged characters, and suggesting that perhaps the "drama played out over 
the scrubbed pine table" has had its day.

But looking at the most recent crop of fiction, it seems clear that 
middle-class lives of various kinds still dominate. This week David Nicholls's 
hugely successful comic novel One Day, about young professionals growing into 
older ones, sold its millionth copy, and next month opens as a Hollywood film. 
As Alan Warner suggests, it is Raisin's new novel that is the more unusual work 
than Nicholson's, in dealing with a downwardly mobile unemployed man on the 
brink of disaster. Raisin, who is 31 and trained to be a restaurant manager 
before studying creative writing, says the characters that interest him "do 
tend to be ones who are involved in some kind of struggle, and I'm certainly 
interested in what happens to communities when the fulcrum of that community is 
taken away – like an industry dying."

He suggests the lack of representations of working-class life is an English 
thing, and that Scottish and Irish fiction are broader. There has been no 
equivalent south of the border of James Kelman's powerfully influential use of 
Glasgow vernacular, while Scottish writers including Irvine Welsh and Warner, 
and Irish ones, including Roddy Doyle and William Trevor, have all written 
novels about what it means, and how it feels, to live nearer the bottom than 
the top of society.

There are exceptions. David Peace, who grew up two streets away from the 60s 
writer Stan Barstow in Ossett in the West Riding, has carved out a successful 
niche melding hardboiled American crime fiction with the northern working-class 
tradition with which he grew up. His trilogy about the Yorkshire ripper was 
recently adapted for TV. Nicola Barker won the Impac prize for her weirdly 
wonderful Wide Open, a tale of misfits and missed connections set in Essex.

Those who write about working-class life tend to be working class themselves. 
But as academic Ian Haywood points out, "the term working-class writer has 
always been something of an oxymoron because at the point at which this writer 
gets published, they must have moved away from their original circumstances." 
By the time Alan Sillitoe published his 1960 classic Saturday Night and Sunday 
Morning, he was hanging out in Mallorca with Robert Graves.

Inevitably, as the writer's economic position changes because of their 
education, their life experience changes, too. Livi Michael, who wrote three 
novels based on her experiences growing up on a council estate in 
Ashton-under-Lyne near Manchester, says that once you become an author, "your 
class position is rather peculiar. I don't feel that I could write now with any 
authority about people living on big council estates, so I was looking for 
something a bit different." She gave up adult fiction and began writing for 
children. Similarly, Pat Barker wrote three novels about the gritty northern 
neighbourhood she grew up in, then moved on to write about the first world war.

Just because a writer has a comfortably middle-class life, and writes stories 
set in big, posh houses, does not make them uncritical observers of English 
society. Far from it. But the experience of writers such as Livi Michael, who 
was sent by her publisher on tours with Scottish writers for lack of English 
contemporaries with anything in common, does suggest that the intense draw of 
literary London is not conducive to attracting voices and talents from 
different backgrounds, who might offer alternative perspectives. Michael's 
first novel took years because she didn't want to write it in standard English. 
Catherine O'Flynn, whose 2007 Birmingham shopping centre debut What Was Lost 
became a bestseller, almost didn't find a publisher at all.

London novelist Tim Lott points out that the huge cultural and ethnic opening 
out of English literature over recent decades – with writers such as Andrea 
Levy documenting the struggles of first-generation West Indian immigrants – is 
in contrast to the lack of fresh entrants from white working-class backgrounds. 
"It's not a closed culture but it's a very close-knit culture, and people are 
very highly educated." He suggests a book prize for writers from poor 
backgrounds – the criteria could be that no one in the writer's family has ever 
been to university – and says it is a disgrace that there are so few books 
about ordinary people's lives. Owen Jones, who struggled to find a publisher 
for his recent book, Chavs, points out that as many people now work in call 
centres and supermarkets as once worked in the mines. "Ten million people in 
this country live in social housing and I can't think of one sympathetic 
representation. On TV you get grotesque caricatures. I think we need a 
revolution in literature, a new generation of angry young men and women." Jones 
believes that novels remain important, that what is represented in them 
matters, even though only a tiny fraction will ever have the reach and impact, 
achieved in part via Hollywood, of Nicholls's One Day or Ian McEwan's Atonement.

Whether the novel can become the vehicle for a whole or more rounded view of 
life in Britain seems doubtful. Fewer people than ever can afford to work as 
full-time writers, and many of those who do choose to work in film and 
television.

But perhaps the form of the novel itself is part of the problem? Haywood 
points out that one of the last writers to break through to the Booker prize 
shortlist with working-class credentials, Magnus Mills, did so in 1998 with a 
novel, The Restraint of Beasts, that was "not realistic, but Kafkaesque and 
dystopian … maybe if we're going to rejuvenate the genre, we need to be a bit 
more imaginative about how we define it."

The Golden Hour by William Nicholson is published by Quercus in September. 
Waterline by Ross Raisin is published by Viking this month. See Alan Warner's 
review in Review, page 10.

Classy fiction – the best books, chosen by John Mullan


Posh

Pelham by Edward Bulwer Lytton

You may never have heard of it, but this was one of the best-selling novels of 
the 19th century. Its author was a lord – the owner of Knebworth House – and 
his specimen of "silver fork" fiction made everyone interested in the habits 
and clothes of aristocrats.

The Blandings Castle Saga by PG Wodehouse

This is the title Wodehouse gave to his sequence of comic novels narrating the 
misadventures of the denizens of Blandings Castle in Shropshire. His central 
character, Clarence, Lord Emsworth, an utterly dotty eccentric, bestowed on the 
English aristocracy a new amiability.

Brideshead Revisited by Evelyn Waugh

Waugh's most famous novel is narrated by an outsider, Charles Ryder, wondering 
at the escapades of the toffs who befriend him. Even their disasters – 
alcoholism, marital failure, religious torment – seem fascinating to him.

Middle class

Howard's End by EM Forster

Forster is the tutelary spirit of the middle-class novel, unembarrassed to 
document the crises of faith experienced by well-educated, well-spoken people 
who do feel sorry for the poor.

A Glass of Blessings by Barbara Pym

Most of Pym's elegant, cunning novels went unpublished for years because 
her settings and characters were so genteel. The protagonist of this book, 
Wilmet Forsyth, is a married woman who does not need to work and falls for a 
friend's husband while helping out at the local church.

The Radiant Way by Margaret Drabble

Drabble is the doyenne of the middle-class novel, describing the difficult 
choices faced by (mostly female) characters who might appear to have rather 
insulated lives. In this novel, three friends from Cambridge meet up again 25 
years later to review their disappointed hopes.

Working class

The Ragged Trousered Philanthropists by Robert Tressell

This was once every self-respecting socialist's favourite novel. Tressell was 
the pseudonym of the house painter Robert Noonan, who turned his experiences 
into a tale of working men in the fictional town of Mugsborough.

Sons and Lovers by DH Lawrence

Lawrence's autobiographical novel is the story of Paul Morel, a miner's son 
who wants to better himself. The driving force is his mother, Gertrude, who has 
some of the education that his father lacks. Books will save her boy!

Saturday Night and Sunday Morning by Alan Sillitoe

Sillitoe was the son of a Nottingham labourer and his first novel closely 
observed the life and the frustrations of a young Nottingham factory worker, 
Arthur Seaton. Most of the young rebels of 1950s fiction were lower 
middle-class, but not Arthur.
 