
Clifford Longley has been silly. His complaint to the Advertising Standards 
Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/andrewbrown/2009/jan/08/religion-atheism-longley-advertising>
 aboutthe magic bus <http://uk.youtube.com/watch?v=FTkpnjYO7N8> turns out to 
have been largely cut and pasted from another website. Several readers have 
pointed this out; one wrote to me directly, and I checked the story out with 
Clifford himself, which took some time. I didn't want to publish before doing 
so.

His defence is that the quotes are genuine even if he did not collect them and 
he that he never claimed to have collected them himself. It didn't seem to him 
the important thing about them. Some of them he had in his own library, or 
could remember reading; others were new to him, but all seemed germane to his 
general point, that there are distinguished scientists who take the strong 
anthropic principle seriously as evidence for design in the universe. This was 
the point he wanted to make to the ASA, which offers a web form for complaints 
on its web site into which he cut and pasted what he had found.

At this point he emailed the story around to a number of journalists. I got it 
on my phone as I was sitting on a tube at Edgware Road, read it as the tube 
continued to Kings' Cross, and rang him about it as I walked up the road from 
there to the Guardian's office. I asked whether he minded my publishing it, and 
he said I could do what I liked with it. I have to admit that it didn't occur 
to me then that it wasn't his own work, so I never asked; he didn't feel he was 
working to journalistic standards, so he didn't tell. So now we can both feel 
foolish.

He has been a friend of mine for more than 20 years now, and I hope our 
friendship will continue for as long again. In his defence, I would say that he 
has not spent much time on the web, and was ignorant of the long history of 
viciously argued warfare over creation and evolution on there and of the habit 
of judging content by the site on which it appears. He's not a creationist nor 
a believer in ID. On the other hand, he does take seriously the anthropic 
principle and he believes that his own beliefs about God are probable in the 
light of the scientific evidence, although that is not what led him to them. 
Yes, I know there are people here who disagree with him. But we have argued 
here for long enough to know that whether you find God probable or not is 
largely a function of the questions you ask. It's not clear to me that the ASA 
is the right body to decide what questions we should be asking.
 