
Four directors are leaving the board of the Co-operative Bank, which is being 
revamped ahead of the bank's stockmarket listing later this year.

Len Wardle, former university fellow and chairman of the Co-operative Group, 
which unites pharmacies, groceries and funeral homes,is one of the four 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/co-operative-bank--cpbb-/rns/director-changes/201310090700140481Q/>
 leaving in an attempt to make the board of the troubled bank more independent 
from the wider group.

Other Co-op directors Duncan Bowdler, Peter Harvey and Bob Newton are also 
stepping down from the board of the bank which is to have a stockmarket listing 
as part of its complex £1.5bn capital injection.

But they will continue to sit on the Co-operative Banking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> Group Ltd board, which currently 
unites the bank and the insurance assets. Those assets are being sold as part 
of the fundraising exercise which has been underway since June when the scale 
of the capital shortfall facing the bank first emerged, and it seems likely 
that the division will be disbanded.

The stockmarket listing will take place if bondholders agree to take £500m of 
losses in return for the wider Co-op Group putting £1bn into the bank. But the 
plan is facing opposition from private bondholders as well as a group of hedge 
funds thatlast month forced the bank to set up an independent committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/sep/20/hedge-funds-force-co-op-consider-flotation>
 to consider alternatives to the proposed plan.

The Co-op Group has warned that nationalisation will be needed if bondholders 
refuse to take losses, but the hedge funds, called the LT2 Group because they 
own what are known as lower tier two bonds – think alternative plans are 
possible and that they have a big enough stake to block the current proposals.

Three independent directors are being sought for the board of the bank which 
is chaired by former Alliance & Leicester boss Richard Pym with former HSBC 
banker Niall Booker as chief executive. The Co-op Group, which is expected to 
have a majority stake in the bank after its flotation, will have its chief 
executive Euan Sutherland on the bank board.

The Co-op has been forced to scale back the ambitions for its bank which had 
been hoping to buy the 631 branches that Lloyds Banking Group has to sell as a 
result of its £20bn taxpayer bailout. Those talks collapsed and Lloyds has 
rebranded the branches under the TSB brand ahead of a stock market flotation 
next year.
 