
The next time you hear the weather report, it may be accompanied by a short 
message from your meteorologist about the Abbott government’s thus far 
unsuccessful wage bargaining with the Australian public service.

The CSIRO <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/csiro> started 
industrial action on Thursday and on the same day 93% of staff from the 
Australian Tax Office voted to join it in the lead-up to the budget and the end 
of the financial year.

Action has been planned in departments and agencies including agriculture, 
human services, defence, veterans’ affairs, environment, employment, Geoscience 
Australia, CSIRO, the Australian Institute of Criminology and the Bureau of 
Meteorology.


In short, the atmosphere across 117 government agencies is cloudy with a high 
chance of storms.

At issue is the government’s demand to trade conditions and increased 
productivity for any pay rises for about 160,000 public service workers.


The strategy has sparked a quiet revolution in the commonwealth public service 
but noise levels are rapidly increasing over the crucial budget period.


The national secretary of the Community and Public Sector Union (CPSU), Nadine 
Flood, said with three-quarters of the public service involved, the action 
represents the most widespread dispute in the sector in 25 years.

And she described the Abbott government’s stance as “the nastiest position of 
any major employer in Australia”.

“Not a single worker has got a pay rise because of the government’s 
intransigence in bargaining,” Flood said.

“After the government has slashed public services and jobs to then go after 
workers’ rights and real wages is causing deep anger.

“As a result public service workers will be taking stop-work action and moving 
towards a real effort to talk to community.”

But the employment minister, Eric Abetz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/eric-abetz>, who is responsible for 
the public service, said it would be counterproductive for the CPSU to organise 
industrial action in support of a pay rise that could ultimately cost the jobs 
of 10,000 public servants.

He said most public servants appreciated the need to work with the government 
under current budget conditions and “would prefer a minimal wage rise with job 
security, rather than engage in the CPSU’s outlandish pay claims and its 
industrial actions”.

“Government agencies have been bargaining in good faith to flexibly explore 
bargaining options with their workforces,” Abetz told Guardian Australia.

“The CPSU should stop overestimating support for its industrial action, 
abandon its ridiculous 12.5% wage claim and stop standing between public 
servants and the entirely responsible wage rises on offer.

“The sooner the CPSU adopts a reasonable approach to bargaining, the sooner 
public servants will benefit from affordable deals which don’t endanger their 
own jobs.”

“Protected” or approved strike action at CSIRO will continue throughout May. 
In the Bureau of Meteorology, 95% of staff have voted to take action, including 
reading statements about their claims on air. The Australian Tax Office has 
just voted in favour of taking industrial action.


In the human services department, 1.3m leaflets outlining the staff case will 
shortly be handed out to their clients, who include Centrelink, Medicare and 
child support users. Customs and immigration staff – due to merge into the new
Australian Border Force 
<http://www.canberratimes.com.au/national/public-service/immigration-customs-plan-cull-of-bosses-for-merged-entity-20141022-119wd1.html>
– will be in the Fair Work Commission on Friday asking for permission to ballot 
members to take action.


The bargaining process, which occurs every three years, began soon after the 
Coalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> took office. 
The CPSU delivered its log of claims at the end of 2013 in anticipation of the 
previous agreement expiring in August 2014.


In March last year, Abetz kicked off the formal negotiation process with the 
release of a new “government bargaining framework” which required productivity 
gains in return for wage increases. At the time Abetz said public service 
conditions must be “in line with community expectations ... affordable and 
sustainable”.


The CPSU had asked for 3-4%, following on from the 2011-14 agreement. Last 
year’s wage growth across Australia was 2.6%,the smallest annual increase on 
record 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-02-19/abs-figures-show-annual-wages-growth-slowest-on-record/5269480>
, and so low it slipped below the consumer price index.


Individual agencies and departments are responsible for negotiating with their 
staff. So far, staff at two agencies have voted down management offers out of a 
total of 20 agencies which have offers on the table. With 117 agencies and the 
past agreement already eight months out of date, there is a long way to go.


Abetz’s own employment department was the first to reject its management offer 
which, according to the unions, asked staff to trade conditions for a 0.5% 
annual pay rise. A total of 95% of staff voted it down. The Australian 
Financial Services Agency also rejected the management offer – by a vote of 82% 
against – for a 1.3% annual pay rise.


Unions say the recent management offers include the removal of rights such as 
the right to be consulted about major changes in the workplace and flexible 
working arrangements. Workers could also see reduced hours for part-time 
workers and penalties removed for antisocial shifts.


The CSIRO is just one agency that has already borne the brunt of deep cuts – 
$115m –from last year’s budget. Its staff association spokesman, Sam Popovski, 
said that amounted to a loss of 20% of staff over two years. From a high two 
years ago of 6,500, the organisation will settle at 5,200 jobs this year.

Its industrial action includes not working unpaid overtime, not responding to 
voicemails unless there is a health and safety issue, not attending 
face-to-face meetings with management, and not logging efficiency data which 
requires scientists to record “effort logs”.

Scientists must log their hours for each project they work on, which is on 
average four at any one time. Staff members who do not comply are disciplined. 
Popovski said the industrial action was designed to target management red tape 
(which was a key 2013 election commitment of the Abbott government).


Labor’s employment spokesman, Brendan O’Connor, said the government’s 
“non-negotiating strategy” had left the public service no choice but to take 
action.

“Labor believes in a productive and affordable public service, but Tony 
Abbott’s obsession with axing jobs and cutting wages and conditions does not 
lead to a more effective workforce,” O’Connor said.

“The government’s contempt for the public service and inflexible approach to 
bargaining is stifling real opportunities for improved productivity in the 
public sector.”


The Greens’ Adam Bandt <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adam-bandt> 
urged the Abbott government to support CSIRO staff by reversing last year’s 
budget cuts.


“If Tony Abbott can give our defence personnel a real pay rise without asking 
them to lose conditions, he can do the same for our scientists, too,” Bandt 
said.


“Australia’s future prosperity will rely on science and research. Tony 
Abbott’s upcoming budget needs to save science and respect research.”

 