
Cafe Am Heumarkt is a traditional yet eccentric Viennese coffee house that I 
find fascinating. It serves straightforward Viennese cuisine with no tourist 
extras – schnitzel, pancakes, coffee and beer. Open 9am-11pm Monday to Friday, 
it’s rarely busy, word of mouth being its only advertisement. There’s no sign 
above its door: to find it I had to search for the intriguingly incognito 
exterior of 15 Am Heumarkt, behind the Hotel Intercontinental near the 
Stadtpark.

The staff hide in the kitchen and – locals joke – ensure the cafe is closed on 
weekends for fear of attracting custom

The dark wooden bar and high ceiling supported by thick stone pillars are 
typical of Vienna’s coffee houses, but it’s a far cry from the city’s usual 
chandeliered establishments. The cavernous space is unadorned, sparsely 
furnished, and echoes like an old school hall. In the centre of the expansive 
parquet floor sit two ancient display fridges, which are indeed filled with 
Viennese tarts and cakes, but produce an insistent, noisy buzzing, like 
beleaguered washing machines.

Marble tabletops and 1950s-style red leather booths give you a sense of 
stepping back in time. Elderly men mutter over games of backgammon or read 
newspapers near the always-empty billiard tables. Instead of smart livery, the 
waiters wear lab coats over string vests – a genuinely incongruous and 
perplexing uniform that only accentuates their dour expressions.

Conchita Wurst's guide to Vienna: burlesque, bars and Britney
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/apr/17/conchita-wurst-vienna-eurovison-song-contest>
Friendliness takes the form of dry – extremely dry – humour and a stern 
proprietary concern for patrons. Otherwise, the staff hide in the kitchen and – 
the locals joke – ensure the cafe is closed on weekends and holidays for fear 
of attracting custom.

Though the food is tasty and reasonably priced, it’s not what lures me here 
repeatedly. It’s the curiously charming ambience of anti-cafe: the anomalous 
phenomenon that is Cafe Am Heumarkt.

• Holly Müller’s first novel, My Own Dear Brother, is published this month by 
Bloomsbury Circus (£14.99). To order a copy for £11.99 including UK p&p visit 
theGuardian bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/371190/s/my-own-dear-brother/>
 or call on0330 333 6846
 