
It was actually Louis Theroux 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/louistheroux>, one of Adam Buxton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/adam-buxton>'s closest friends from 
school, who suggested that Adam should cast his delightfully proper father, 
Nigel, onThe Adam And Joe Show 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/the-adam-and-joe-show>, the decidedly 
improper – and extremely funny – cult Channel 4 programme Adam created with 
another school friend,Joe Cornish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/joe-cornish>.

"Joe and Louis used to come to our family home in south London for Christmas, 
and my dad would mainly talk to Louis, because Louis had been to Oxford and so 
was a sensible person – certainly much more sensible than me and Joe, who were 
quite silly people," Adam recalls. Nigel nods at this assessment. "And then one 
year Louis came up with this idea and I thought, I wonder what we could do with 
that…"

What they did was create one of the most beloved features on the show, which 
ran from 1996-2001 and got, at its peak, 1.5m viewers ("Do you mean one and a 
half million people were watching me? Goodness!" Nigel says, eyes wide.)Nigel 
<https://twitter.com/baaaddad> – redubbed BaaadDad – was sent out to review 
various aspects of youth culture, with all the imperiousness one might expect 
from a former Sunday Telegraph travel editor and wine critic. He reviewed pop 
albums ("I'm not sure which of these individuals has a Radio for a Head, but he 
ought to try Classic FM and calm down"); he interviewed Coolio ("Coolio, I'm 
not in the market for any buffoonery," he crossly informed the rapper); he was 
given his first joint by a young woman at Tribal Gathering ("I can't honestly 
say this is doing anything for me," he said, before adding, "You're very 
beautiful. Let me have some more of that").

"I think my wife thought it was rather undignified," Nigel, now 89, admits. "I 
remember when [the show] went to Ibiza, I got a bit pissed off at something 
called Mission."

"Manumission," Adam pipes up. "Joe asked you to lick a naked dancer's bum. You 
weren't having that, and I told you that you were being unprofessional. There 
was a mushroom cloud over Ibiza that night," he adds, his voice wearying at the 
memory.

The father and son have always had what Adam describes as a "relatively formal 
relationship", so working together definitely led to some "uncomfortable 
moments". But the worst of these had nothing to do with an argument between the 
two of them, but rather when Nigel was sent to interview the Stereophonics: 
"They were slightly taking the piss out of my dad. I looked at them and 
thought, 'I hate you,'" Adam recalls, his voice hardening. "It was hard, 
because I was protective of him, but also had to direct him, and he did not 
want to be directed."

Nigel, though, has nothing but fond memories of the experience. "When Adam 
asked me to be in the show, I assumed he was just doing it to make the old man 
feel useful in life. I did! But I very much enjoyed the celebrity: young people 
would recognise me in Sainsbury's, which was very nice. Though I would feel a 
bit of a fraud when they would ask me to sign something of Adam and Joe's," he 
says, fretting that he may have committed an impropriety.

"No, no. You were a big part of the show," his son smiles.
 