
Dozens of award-winning comics and writers, including Anne Fine and Hari 
Kunzru, are to lead a campaign during theEdinburgh festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/edinburghfestival> to free five civil 
rights activists jailed in the Middle East.

More than 70 comedians, novelists and writers have signed up for an Amnesty 
International <https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international> 
campaign during the festival urging the United Arab Emirates to unconditionally 
release five men imprisoned this year for demanding greater democracy.

The campaign, being staged as Amnesty <http://www.amnesty.org.uk/> celebrates 
its 50th year, will ask audiences at Amnesty'sfringe <http://www.edfringe.com/> 
andEdinburgh international book festival <http://www.edbookfest.co.uk/> events 
to add their names to a global petition using text messages or postcards. In 
many cases, audiences will be asked to text during live performances.

John Watson, the director of Amnesty International Scotland, said there was a 
clear and explicit link between theEdinburgh festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/edinburghfestival> and freedom of 
expression, and the human rights group's activities. "It is one of our core 
issues. It's central to all our work," he said.

Fine and Kunzru are among more than 60 writers at the book festival, which is 
sponsored by the Guardian. They will take part in Amnesty's free daily readings 
over 16 days from work by imprisoned and persecuted writers, including death 
row inmates from the US, the Malawian writer Jack Mapanje, the Burmese 
dissident Aung San Suu Kyi and the US civil rights leader Martin Luther King.

Amnesty will ask for a "mass text action" by the 1,200-strong audience at its 
annual fundraising and campaigning comedy event during the fringe, featuring 
comics and fringe veterans including Jenny Eclair, Fred MacAulay, Ed Byrne, 
Russell Kane and Mark Watson.

Byrne said: "If you can get locked up in the UAE for insulting officials, I 
hope no Emirati police ever come to Edinburgh or they'll end up jailing half of 
the festival. People have a right to free speech and for the UAE five that 
right is being denied."

Amnesty believes the case of the five bloggers and activists, all detained in 
Abu Dhabi, is significant because they were arrested for activities before the 
Arab spring revolts erupted across north Africa and the Middle East. They had 
supported a petition circulated in the UAE which challenged its ruling families 
to open up membership of the Emirates' federal council.

In jail since April, Ahmed Mansoor, a blogger and commentator, Nasser bin 
Ghaith, a lecturer, and the online activists Fahad Salim Dalk, Ahmed Abdul 
Khaleq and Hassan Ali al-Khamis face up to five years in prison for breaching 
the UAE's penal code, which prohibits insulting the country's president, its 
unelected supreme council, flag or national emblem.

The charges focus chiefly on their postings on a banned online forum, which 
appears to have been closed down and replaced with a travel advice service.

Amnesty said that since their detention, the activists – particularly the most 
prominent of the five, Mansoor – had been accused on satellite television and 
online of being religious extremists and foreign agents working for Iran.

Mansoor, who is on an advisory panel for the US group Human Rights Watch, 
faces further charges of inciting others to break the law. Before his arrest in 
April, he publicly supported a petition asking for universal direct elections 
to the UAE's consultative federal council, whose members are only partly 
elected, and for the body to be given legislative power.

Drewery Dyke, an Amnesty Middle East researcher, said there was a strong 
suspicion that the trial of the five men was being deliberately delayed until 
after the next elections for the federal council in September, to suppress 
dissent and scare off critics.

Watson said the five men should be released "immediately and unconditionally". 
He added: "They were arrested for alleged statements made long before the calls 
for change in the Arab world surfaced, but their arrests came after they called 
for more democracy and questions were posed, mainly by Ahmed Mansoor and Nasser 
bin Ghaith, about how their country is run.

"Their case is typical of the thousands of people in other countries across 
the Middle East and north Africa – from Egypt to Syria, Libya to Bahrain – 
whose right to freedom of expression has been denied. People have been jailed 
and tortured just for speaking out, or beaten and shot at just for protesting 
peacefully in the streets."

• This article was amended on 8 August 2011 to clarify details of bloggers' 
and activists' arrest. The original also said that Ahmed Mansoor was arrested 
in March. This has been corrected.
 