
“Complete chaos” in communications between customs, the navy and government 
officials in Canberra meant “at least 20 minutes were allowed to pass by” 
before naval vessels were sent to rescue a stricken asylum seeker boat off
Christmas Island <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/christmas-island> 
in 2010, resulting in the deaths of 50 people, the New South Wales supreme 
court has heard.

On the morning of 15 December 2010, an asylum seeker boat – Siev 221 – 
unpowered and drifting off the coast of Christmas Island,was dashed on to the 
island’s cliffs by massive swells 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/dec/15/asylum-seeker-boats-capsizes-australia-christmas-island>
, breaking the vessel up and throwing dozens of the 89 asylum seekers on board 
into the sea. Fifty people, including 15 children, died in Australia’s worst 
civil maritime disaster in more than a century.

Several of the survivors from the boat that day and others who lost relatives 
in the disaster have launched a class action to sue the Australian government, 
alleging that government agents were negligent in failing to respond to the 
unfolding disaster quickly enough.


Christmas Island boat disaster: victims' families sue Australian government
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/17/christmas-island-boat-disaster-victims-families-sue-australian-government>
In the supreme court before Justice Geoffrey Bellew on Monday, counsel for 
both sides paid tribute to naval and customs staff for their “extraordinary 
bravery” in rescuing more than 40 asylum seekers from the boat and the ocean, 
but disputed the speed with which naval crews were dispatched to save the 
stricken vessel.


Siev (“suspected irregular entry vessel”) 221 was first spotted in rough seas 
off Christmas Island at 5.10am by witnesses onshore. It was reported as being 
within 100 metres of the shore at 5.20am. Its engine failed at 6.40am and it 
was forced by waves on to the rocks at 7.10am.

For the plaintiffs, Michael Cranitch SC played to the court a series of videos 
that showed the 30-metre wooden fishing vessel being tossed by waves closer and 
closer to the island’s rocks.


The videos showed the boat dangerously overcrowded, with passengers clinging 
to a mast in the middle of the deck. Those on board can be heard screaming as 
the boat is pushed closer to the rocks, and then overwhelmed by the spray sent 
back from the cliffs.


Watching the boat in severe distress, one person can be heard on the video 
asking: “Where the fuck’s the navy?”


“This is really bad on their part,” another witness says.

In a later video, the first voice says: “I can’t believe it, it’s going to end 
in disaster. Where’s the navy ship to take them under tow?”

In the final video, the boat is thrown violently into the cliff face, the 
screams of those onboard overwhelmed by the sound of the wooden boat smashing 
into the rocks.

For the defence, Dr Andrew Bell SC objected to the “amateur commentary” on the 
videos, but not the footage itself.

A series of phone calls was also played for the court that revealed confusion 
among government officials about where the boat was, and whether it might be 
another asylum seeker boat already intercepted the day before.

Calls between officials on Christmas Island, Canberra, and naval ships in the 
area revealed confusion over where “Rocky Point” was on the north-eastern tip 
of Christmas Island, as well as whether the boat sighted by residents was Siev 
220, already under control of the navy.

As phone calls were made between Christmas Island, the ships offshore, and 
officials in Canberra, initially relaxed communications became more frantic as 
the seriousness of the disaster became apparent.

Initially, those on board the boat were said to “look like they could be in a 
bit of trouble”. A later phone call reports “we’ve got a major catastrophe 
here”, with a witness reporting the boat was “smashing against the cliffs”.

The plaintiffs’ statement of claim to the court argues that Siev 221 entered 
Australia’s contiguous zone at 9pm on 14 December. It sailed into Australian 
territorial waters at 2am and the country’s coastal waters at 5am.

Siev 221 entered Flying Fish Cove – Australian internal waters – at 6.40am, 
and broke apart half an hour later.

The plaintiffs argue that the Australian government knew, or should have 
known, that the boat was unseaworthy, and that it had a duty of care to assist 
those on board, particularly when it became apparent the boat’s distress 
presented a Solas – safety of life at sea – situation.

Two ships, the ACV Triton and HMAS Pirie, were in a position to assist and 
were not dispatched in time to save the stricken vessel, the court was told.

After the alarm was raised about Siev 221’s distress, Cranitch said: “At least 
20 minutes were allowed to pass by, before Pirie responded, for reasons which 
are … obscure.”

There were great acts of bravery and professionalism on the part of naval 
officers
Andrew Bell SC 
He said there had been “complete chaos” in the communications systems the 
government had put in place.

Cranitch told the court that it was important to note that asylum seekers who 
came to Australia by boat seeking protection committed no crime by entering 
Australia.


It was illegal to “people smuggle”, he said, to organise an asylum seeker 
voyage, but that “doesn’t mean that persons who are being transported for the 
purpose of seeking protection are engaged in any criminal activities. In fact, 
quite the contrary.”

Government policy aimed to save lives at sea by imposing significant sanctions 
on those who arranged voyages, Cranitch said. “There are a range of offences 
for people smuggling, but there are no criminal offences for those smuggled,” 
he said.

For the defence, Bell told the court that the events of 15 December 2010 were 
a “great human tragedy” but that nothing could reasonably have been done to 
avert the disaster. “Hindsight is a marvellous thing,” he said. “Difficult 
operational judgments had to be made.”

Bell disputed that government had been negligent in breaching any duty of 
care. He said naval vessels had been dispatched as soon as practicable.


“There is nothing that could have been done in sufficient time to avert any of 
the loss. There were great acts of bravery and professionalism on the part of 
naval officers.”

In 2012, an eight-month inquest by the West Australian coroner into the 
shipwreck criticised the federal government for failing to provide rescue 
vessels on Christmas Island, despite the likelihood a maritime tragedy would 
occur.


Coroner Alastair Hope said the Siev 221 disaster was “generally foreseeable” 
and that a similar disaster remained an “ongoing risk while these boats 
continue to travel to Christmas Island”.


“I cannot accept that it would be beyond the capability of border protection 
command to put in place a surveillance capability that would be more effective 
than island residents coincidentally looking out to sea.”

Indonesia accuses Australia of bribing people smugglers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/17/indonesia-accuses-australia-of-bribing-people-smugglers>
Operation Sovereign Borders, instituted by the Coalition government upon its 
election to power in 2013, has dramatically slowed the rate of asylum seeker 
boats arriving in Australia waters.

The last asylum seeker boat to reach Australian territory was in May this 
year, when a group ofSri Lankan asylum seekers reached the Cocos Islands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/03/asylum-seeker-boat-arrives-in-cocos-islands>
.


A people smuggling kingpin, Abraham Louhenapessy, known as Captain Bram, was 
arrested in Jakarta on Friday after a joint operation by Australian federal 
police and the Indonesian authorities.


It is the third time in a decade Bram has been arrested for people smuggling. 
He has been operating across the archipelago since 1999 and is believed to have 
arranged passage for more than 1,500 asylum seekers to Australia.

Bram is allegedly responsible for organising an asylum seeker boat that was 
intercepted by Australian border officials in May last year and turned back to 
Indonesia,reportedly after Australian government agents paid the crew between 
$5,000 and $6,000 each in US currency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/17/people-smugglers-paid-by-australian-spy-indonesia-police-documents-allege>
.
 