
Banks and accountants that aid tax evasion will face criminal penalties under 
plans unveiled by the government.

A new offence of corporate failure to prevent evasion is being created to 
address those who assist dodging. Such offenders could also be “named and 
shamed” alongside the evaders themselves.

Although crackdowns on tax evasion are a hardy perennial of politicians, Danny 
Alexander <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/danny-alexander>, the Lib Dem 
chief secretary to the Treasury, insisted his proposals represented a 
meaningful new measure.

He told MPs: “We inherited from the previous government a tax system that had 
more holes than a Swiss cheese and was more complex than a Rubik’s cube. The 
opportunities for those who wish to get away without paying were many and 
varied.”

A Treasury document signed by Alexander and the chancellor, George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne>, sets out plans for 
raising an extra £5bn a year from tax dodgers. A consultation will be held on a 
new “strict liability” criminal offence for offshore tax evaders.

“It will no longer be possible to evade large sums of tax and plead ignorance 
in an attempt to avoid criminal prosecution,” the paper says.

Alexander said: “Strict liability will bring an end to the defence of ‘I knew 
nothing, it was my accountant, m’lord’. The Treasury consultation document also 
promises we will also be increasing financial penalties, including a new 
penalty linked to the underlying asset for those who enable evasion; we will 
create a new offence of corporate failure to prevent tax evasion or the 
facilitation of tax evasion.

“This will complement the existing criminal offences for individuals. We will 
also introduce new civil penalties, exposing those who enable evasion to the 
same level of financial penalty as the tax evaded by the evaders themselves.”

 Alexander said: “We will increase financial penalties for offshore evaders, 
including, for the first time, linking the penalty to underlying assets. A 
billionaire evading £5m of tax will not just be liable for that £5m.”

The document says both evaders and enablers of evasion will face penalties. 
“If someone helps someone else evade £1m of tax, they risk a penalty of £1m, or 
even more, themselves,” Alexander said.

The document also “proposes to extend the scope for HMRC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hmrc> to publish their names, exposing 
them to public scrutiny”.

Chris Leslie, the shadow chief secretary to the Treasury, broadly welcomed the 
proposals but expressed scepticism that extra money would be raised without 
extra staff at HMRC. Officials at HMRC have been roundly criticised for failing 
to prosecute anyone in light of the tax allegations involving HSBC’s Swiss bank.

The document claims the coalition raked in an extra £100bn revenue over the 
past five years from tackling tax evasion, avoidance and non-compliance.

The sum included £31bn from big businesses and £1.2bn extra from the UK’s 
6,000 richest people, who each have a net worth of at least £20m.

The Chartered Institute of Taxation said that while tax evasion was a serious 
crime, the government’s proposal that “intent to evade tax” would not be 
necessary for a conviction could catch innocent people.

“UK and international taxation is a minefield of complexity and, while some 
taxpayers do actively seek to hide their income by intentionally failing to 
declare it, there are others who simply make mistakes in their financial 
affairs without intending to act wrongly,” said the institute’s tax policy 
director, Patrick Stevens. “A taxpayer may fall within the ambit of the offence 
without any intention or knowledge on their part.”
 