
Born: 12 May 2005
Place of birth: Lagos University Teaching hospital, Lagos
Birth weight: 3.4kg
Mother: Deborah, 30
Father: Danjuma Martins, 38

"I have confidence that everything will be OK for her; her name will be 
Confidant," smiled Deborah as she looked down at her newborn daughter. From the 
hospital bedside the father, Danjuma Martins, gave a puzzled look - no one had 
discussed this with him.

Despite Confidant's name, her parents did have doubts over the child. With 
three other children, extended family demands and much of their tiny income 
spent on Aids drugs - a disease that Confidant has escaped - they considered an 
abortion.

But Confidant will be their last child. A 42-week pregnancy, three days of 
labour and an expensive caesarean section to prevent Confidant inheriting Aids 
kept Deborah in bed and her husband out searching for money.

Danjuma earns 25,000 niara (£102) a month in a large Lagos hotel, where he has 
worked as a waiter since 1993. The caesarean section cost more than N75,000 and 
he hopes his employer will lend him the money. Once that bill has been paid, 
the priest will be called for the child's naming and friends and family will be 
invited to a party.

"I don't have the money for games and things, so I will have to be the one 
going up and down with her," he explained as he unconsciously began to rock his 
leg.

The family rent two rooms, each about the size of two double mattresses, for 
N500 a month. Neatly stacked against the walls are their belongings, and 
against one wall a TV and VCD player to watch Nigeria's hugely popular home 
movies - the third largest film industry in the world.

The rooms are dark with no electricity from the notoriously corrupt National 
Electric Power Authority (Nepa) - referred to as "No Electric Power Always", 
but their door is often left open without fear of theft.

There are 10 other tenants in the building and about 50 people use the local 
borehole for washing water. For drinking water, they must share a well with the 
local community, paying N20 for 25 litres.

There is little family support in the city and they rely on their neighbour to 
help care for their other children.

To get to work, Danjuma must travel for more than 90 minutes on two buses and 
an okada - on the back of a motorbike.

Only metres down the road from their rooms is the brightly painted school 
attended by Confidant's siblings. It has about 100 pupils, from two to 10 years 
old.

Danjuma would like his children to return to their home village in Kaduna for 
secondary schooling and, maybe, university. "I'd like to get them to see 
Nigeria." Very few people call Lagos home.

Confidant will first go to nursery for about N500 a term until she is four, 
when she will enter primary school. At 10 years old, she will go to secondary 
school costing about N8, 500 a term. Unlike her mother, Confidant will probably 
complete her education. As is typical for women from the Muslim north, 
Deborah's education was minimal, but in Lagos, women are given equal 
opportunities at school.

As Aids sufferers, Danjuma and Deborah, and two of their children, are among a 
worrying trend in Nigeria, Africa's most populous country, with an estimated 
130 million people. Of these, about 5.4% suffer from Aids, claim official 
estimates. "It is a growing problem," said the matron on Deborah's postnatal 
ward, adding that four Aids patients had passed through in the previous two 
weeks.

Confidant will be tested again when she is two. "I don't worry - God will take 
care of her," smiled Danjuma hopefully.

Factfile: Nigeria

Under-5s mortality (per 1,000 births):  110
Population on under $2 a day: 90.8%
Debt per capita:  $248
Life expectancy:  51.5
% children education (F/M):  41/49
 