
Remember when Phil Collins dumped his wife by fax? God we hated him back then. 
I don't think I can remember a time when the British people were so united in 
rage. And he seemed so nice in Buster. Dumping someone is one thing but, in the 
eyes of the British public, there is nothing worse than not having the guts to 
do it in person. The French have got "liberty, equality, fraternity", the 
Americans have got "In God we trust", but if we Brits had our own national 
motto it would surely be: "If you've got something to say, say it to my face."

Which, of course, no one actually does any more. Back when Collins sent what 
many of us still regard as the most unnecessarily cruel communique of the 
facsimile age, most people were still in the general habit of looking you in 
the eye while they screwed you over. These days, we're all too timid. Even the 
army – who you would hope would be pretty relaxed about that sort of thing – 
have found a way of swerving situations that might be deemed "slightly 
awkward". Last week, theMinistry of Defence had to apologise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/feb/15/liam-fox-soldiers-sacked-email>
 for "accidentally" sacking 38 experienced warrant officers via an impersonal 
group email.

We lay people off using email, we dump people by text, and we inform the 
neighbours that a fox ate their cat while they were on holiday via a flippant 
post on their Facebook wall. We are all so scared of confrontation that we have 
lost the ability to deal with even low-level verbal disagreements without 
crying or punching somebody in the face or jumping out of a window. We are 
heartless and cowardly, and technology is to blame.

At least Collins went to the trouble of typing a letter, dialling the number, 
waiting for that weird electronic noise to kick in and standing there for ages 
waiting to see the document chug slowly through the jaws of the machine. It all 
seems quite tender and compassionate in comparison to the casualness with which 
bad news is communicated in 2011.

Some of the soldiers received the news of their lay-offs while still serving 
on the front line in Afghanistan, at least one in the Royal Tank Regiment. 
Jesus, no wonder we're losing out there.

Of course, bad news is bad news, regardless of how you break it. The defence 
secretary Liam Fox himself could have turned up at their barracks with the 
message scrawled on his naked torso in lipstick, or delivered the terms of 
severance in harmonious form as part of a barbershop quartet, and it wouldn't 
have altered the fact that those soldiers needed to find new jobs.

But that's not the point: the point is that confrontation is good for us. It 
can also be fun. Unquestionably the best TV moment of the past year wasAdam 
Boulton's spontaneous combustion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/may/10/adam-boulton-alastair-campbell-transcript?INTCMP=ILCNETTXT3487>
 during his interview with Alastair Campbell on Sky News in the aftermath of 
the general election. A nation of namby-pamby conflict-phobes on the 
Twittersphere immediately called for Boulton's dismissal. But Rupert Murdoch 
didn't get where he is today by not realising the entertainment value of a 
gigantic public tear-up: Boulton got a new show.

The second best TV moment of the year came last Tuesday night, when fiery AC 
Milan footballerGennaro Gattuso went mad and tried to head-butt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/feb/16/championsleague-acmilan> 
Tottenham Hotspur's coach Joe Jordan after a Champions League match. Jordan's 
unflinching reaction to the assault prompted a huge outpouring of public 
admiration. A week ago he was just another touchline functionary glimpsed 
occasionally on Match of the Day; now he's the fearless hardman who has 
captured a nation's hearts and imaginations. In this taciturn Scottish football 
coach we may have at last found our new Princess Diana. And why? Because he 
refused to run from a confrontation, that's why. And that's a quality so rare 
these days that people regard it as almost superhuman.

Think of the ways in which conflict-avoidance makes every day slightly more 
bothersome. You receive a sniffy email of gutlessly implied criticism from a 
co-worker. You sit at your desk, staring at the flickering words on your 
screen, quietly seething. You draft your response, then redraft it with bits 
toned down and a sarcastically upbeat sign-off that you reckon will really 
twist the knife. You're about to send it when, to put your mind at ease, you 
run it past a friend, asking: "How does this sound – have I gone too far?" Like 
the ridiculous and soppy excuse for a human being you've become. Jesus, you're 
not writing an effing screenplay! You're turning a trifling contention into a 
day-long source of pointless anxiety and draining self-indulgence. Just get up, 
walk across the room and have it out with the person using the mouth, tongue 
and larynx God gave you. Eradicate hours, days, possibly years of simmering 
resentments, unanswered questions and destructive internalised frustrations in 
one quick, loud, perhaps slightly angry exchange.

Others may stand around and watch. Good, they'll end up admiring you for it. 
Or at least think twice before getting all up in your inbox next time your 
microwave curry stinks out the office kitchen. Go and get something off your 
chest in person, for crying out loud. After all, if you've not actually written 
anything down you can always deny you ever said it in the first place.
 