
I read with interest your article (Democratic Republic of Congo ‘faces civil 
war’ if president fails to quit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/10/democratic-republic-of-the-congo-faces-civil-war-if-president-fails-to-quit>
, 10 November). The Catholic church in the DRC has been involved in moderating 
negotiations between the electoral commission, the opposition and the 
president’s political party. The church withdrew because the talks failed to be 
inclusive: many major opposition groups and civil society representatives were 
absent. Throughout, the Catholic church’s Conference of Episcopal Bishops in 
Congo stood with the people and urged politicians to renegotiate to ensure that 
presidential elections are held as soon as possible and that the current 
president does not stand for a third term.

The church’s shuttle diplomacy has borne some fruit. At the request of 
President Joseph Kabila, earlier this month the Catholic bishops re-started 
consultations to enable talks with opposition and civil society groups. The 
support over many years from the UK aid agency Cafod for church programmes of 
civil and political education, has been vital. Fifty people have died standing 
up for their democratic rights and hundreds have faced human rights abuses. Our 
deepest hope is that the current unrest won’t descend into civil war: our 
country has seen enough bloodshed.
Father Léonard Santedi
Archdiocese of Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of Congo

• With six weeks left before President Kabila’s second and last mandate 
constitutionally expires on 19 December, I write on behalf of 39 rights and 
peace-building Congolese organisations to call on the UN security council to 
focus its efforts on pushing for a second, credible and inclusive dialogue to 
defuse tensions, save lives and protect the gains made by Monusco, the UN 
stabilisation mission in the DRC, over the past 17 years. So far, the regional 
response – mediated by theAfrican Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africanunion> special envoy, Edem Kodjo, and 
backed by the Southern African Development Community and the International 
Conference on the Great Lakes Region at the UN Great Lakes summit in Luanda 
last month – has failed to protect Congo’s constitution or end the political 
crisis and waves of repression that have accompanied it.

In September, more than 50 pro–democracy protesters were killed by security 
forces in Kinshasa. A preliminary UN joint human rights office report found 
that protesters were shot not in their legs or arms but in their upper chests 
or head. “Shoot to kill” orders may have been given. Over the past four weeks, 
opposition groups and pro–democracy protesters have been targeted across the 
country by security forces. We condemn these acts. Those implicated must be 
held to account, and in the short term this must include UN sanctions to send a 
strong message to intelligence, military and political leaders.

More than words are needed from the UN. To prevent Congo from descending into 
a full-blown street war between Kabila’s private army and the population, the 
security council must at this critical moment push for a process by which 
Kabila can cede power at the end of his mandate and a transitional government 
can be put in place until a new president is elected. This is the only thing 
that could make a difference on the ground. While responsibility for the 
current crisis rests with Kabila and members of his inner circle, the security 
council has a moral obligation to prevent the deaths of hundreds more Congolese 
men, women and children. The security council’s visit to Congo and its 
surrounding region this month is a one-off opportunity to side with the 
Congolese people and support democracy.
Vava Tampa
Founder, Save the Congo!, on behalf of 39 human rights and civil society 
organisations in the DRC:
Save the Congo!
Lutte pour le Changement (LUCHA)
Voix des Sans Voix (VSV)
Friends of the Congo
Justicia
Avocat de Droits de l’Homme (ADH)
Association des Femmes Juristes Congolaises (AFEJUCO)
Association des Femmes Juristes Congolaises (AFEJUCO/MMA)
Reseau des Para Juristes du Maniema (REPAJUMA)
Juristes en action (JURAC)
Observatoire Congolais des Droits Humains (OCDH)
Organisation Pour la Promotion et Protection des Droits Humains (OPPDH)
Réseau de Protection des Défenseurs des Droits de l’Homme (RPDD)
Centre d’Observation des Droits de l’Homme et d’Assistance Sociale (CODHAS)
Action Pour la Protection des Droits Humains et de Développement Communautaire 
(APDHUD)
Ligue de la Zone Africaine pour la Défense des Droits des Elèves (LIZADEEL)
Ligue Nationale Paysanne pour les Droits de l’Homme (LINAPEDHO)
Union Paysanne des Activistes (Défenseurs) des Droits de l’Homme (UPADH)
Ligue des Droits de l’Homme du Kasaï (LIDHOKAS)
Les Amis de Nelson Mandela pour la Défense des Droits Humains (ANMDH)
Comité de Droit Humanitaire (CDH)
Association pour la Justice et le Soutien aux Personnes Opprimée et Vulnérable 
(AJSOV)
Collectif des Jeunes Solidaires de Congo Kinshasa (COJESKI)
Cercle National de Réflexion sur la Jeunesse (CNRJ RDC)
Jeunesse Vivant avec Handicap dans la Protection de Droit de l’Homme (JVHDH)
Voix de l’Handicapé pour le Droit de l’Homme (VHDH)
Commission Diocésaine Justice et Paix (CDJP)
Action Chrétienne Contre la Torture (ACAT)
Ligue des Chrétiens pour la Paix et le Progrès Social (LICPAPROS)
Maniema Libertes (MALI)
Maniema Tuende Mbele (MTM)
Agir pour la Reconstruction de Notre Espace et pour la Convivialite (AGIREC)
Relance pour la Fille de Sion (RFS)
Congolese Children’s Association
Fraternité des Prison (FP)
Wamama Tusimame (WATU)
LAEIS
Société Civile Congolaise de la Diaspora
 Société Civile MondedeTravail (SCIMOTRA)


• Throughout Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, there are 
national leaders monopolising political, military and economic power and 
amassing unseemly wealth while the vast majority of the people wallow in 
dehumanising poverty. Uganda’s Yoweri Museveni, Angola’s José Eduardo dos 
Santos, Zimbabwe’s Robert Mugabe and Cameroon’s Paul Biya have between them 
been in power for 132 years – 33 years each on average.

Unlike in the US, where the dispossessed have just got rid of the 
establishment, the poverty-ridden Africans cannot get rid of their life 
presidents, who are also the supreme institutions of state, personally 
controlling the judiciary, parliament, the army, the police, the civil service 
and the electoral commission. The only recourse is taking up arms, as the 
Congolese are threatening to do in the DRC, or taking a risky journey in search 
of a better life in Europe, as thousands of African, men women and children are 
doing every summer.
Sam Akaki
Director, African Solutions to African Migration

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 