
If he'd been allowed out of his prison cell at Florida's Coleman correctional 
complex, Conrad Black would have loved today'sUS supreme court hearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/dec/08/conrad-black-supreme-court> 
in Washington. The disgraced Anglo-Canadian media baron revels in abstract 
battles of intellect – and in ermine-draped ceremony.

Under ornate marble pillars hung with tasselled red velvet, proceedings kicked 
off with a clerk banging a gavel and bellowing: "Oyez! Oyez! Oyez! All persons 
having business before the honourable, the supreme court of the United States, 
are admonished to draw near and give their attention. God save the United 
States and this honourable court!"

America's nine top judges trooped in and sat on a long, elevated platform. 
Here, finally, was a chamber worthy of pronouncing upon the fate of somebody 
with the stature of the Lord Black of Crossharbour (a lapsed member of 
Britain's Conservative party and still a holder of the Order of Canada).

At least two of Black's children – Alana and James – were in court. I didn't 
spot his wife, Barbara Amiel, although some reports have suggested that she, 
too, was in the public gallery.

Black was convicted by a Chicago jury two years ago on three counts of fraud 
and a single count of obstructing justice. The jurors decided he had criminally 
plundered $6.1m (£3.7m) from shareholders in his Hollinger media empire by 
attaching bogus "non-compete" clauses to contracts selling newspaper titles. 
Getting the supreme court to examine his case is a huge achievement – fewer 
than one in 100 applications to the court result in an oral hearing.

Oddly, though, virtually nothing in the hour-long courtroom argument was about 
what Black did or didn't do. The facts of the case are largely unchallenged. At 
issue is whether or not Black's actions ought to have been illegal.

The honourable justices are worried that a law requiring businessmen, or 
politicians, to provide "honest services" is worded too broadly. The so-called 
"honest services" fraud statute is only 28 words long but has been used to send 
scores of people to jail, ranging from public officials to the boss of Enron 
and, potentially within the next few months, the former governor of Illinois, 
Rod Blagojevich.

Black's appeal lawyer, Miguel Estrada, reckons there should be some 
restricting factors applied to this law. He argued it should be more closely 
defined to bribery or kickbacks.

"We have the trunk of the tree," declared Estrada, at one point. "But then 
there's the question of any limiting structure."

Plus, he argued, people should only be convicted of fraud if they had effected 
tangible economic damage on their victims. Black claims, somewhat dubiously, 
that Hollinger's investors didn't suffer any disadvantage because he'd been a 
stunning entrepreneur up to the point at which he started fiddling them. His 
written brief said: "Black built Hollinger's international newspaper empire 
from a mere $20,000 in equity to market capitalisation in excess of $1bn."

For an hour, the back-and-forth continued in highly conceptual legalese. Was 
it possible, asked judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg, to bribe somebody without 
deceiving anybody, or harming the company handing over the money? Another judge 
wondered whether the "honest services" law was so broadly drawn that it could 
snare somebody bunking off work to go to a baseball game.

It's come a long way from the principles of the original case against Black – 
that he treated Hollinger as a personal empire, largely ignoring the fact that 
shareholders owned the business. This was a man who billed shareholders with 
the $62,000 cost of a birthday party for his wife and for the C$560,000 
(£323,000) cost of a holiday to Bora Bora on Hollinger's corporate jet. Along 
with his co-conspirators, Black orchestrated the insertion of little-noticed 
clauses into contracts handing him six- or seven-figure sums in return for a 
promise not to compete in tiny regional US newspaper markets – such as the town 
of Jamestown, North Dakota – where he had no earthly reason or desire to 
compete anyway.

In prison, Black remains as smug as ever. He's rarely allowed his mask of 
confidence to slip publicly, always maintaining that he will eventually clear 
his name. In the runup to his conviction, he variously described prosecutors as 
Nazis and pygmies and suggested the case was hanging "like a toilet seat" 
around their necks. His imprisonment, Black once opined, amounted to a 
"fleeting moment of brutish triumph" for the US government that he would 
eventually reverse.

Based on the judges' apparent mood today, there's a significant chance that 
Black's three fraud convictions will be either overturned or, more likely, 
referred back to lower courts for consideration under a tighter definition of 
the "honest services" law.

But Black still has the problem of a fourth conviction – for obstructing 
justice by removing 13 boxes of documents from his office, under the tell-tale 
eye of a security camera, in contravention of a court order requiring him to 
leave all possible evidence untouched. That will be a difficult one to get 
around and could still keep him in jail for a good, long stretch – judges take 
a dim view of people ignoring their orders.

An erudite author of biographies of Roosevelt and Nixon, Black would surely 
love the chance to personally get involved in the supreme court's 
philosophising. Let's be very clear, though. If his convictions stumble on the 
grounds that the "honest services" statute is too broad, then he's prevailing 
on a technicality. A jury of 12 men and women still determined that his conduct 
was dishonest. His self-enrichment, even if it wasn't illegal, was far, far 
from ethical.

In a recent column 
<http://network.nationalpost.com/np/blogs/fullcomment/archive/2009/11/14/conrad-black-the-transformative-effect-of-teaching-my-fellow-inmates.aspx>
 from jail for Canada's National Post newspaper, Black wrote of the 
satisfaction he was getting from teaching English literacy to fellow students 
and in helping to overcome "cynicism, skepticism and defeatism" on the part of 
his students: "It is unjust that I am here at all, and I hope not to be here 
much longer, but I have rarely been more delighted than when formerly surly and 
sluggish students embrace me when they learn they have graduated."

His wife, who now lives alone in the couple's $28m Palm Beach mansion, mulled 
on the concept ofloneliness in her column 
<http://www2.macleans.ca/2009/12/03/i%E2%80%99m-hearing-a-lot-about-loneliness/>
, which appears in the business magazine Maclean's, revealing that she spends 
time listening to Wagner and watching the Weather Channel.

Could they be reunited before his six-and-a-half year sentence runs its 
course? It's not beyond the bounds of possibility. But release won't 
necessarily mean vindication. And it seems unthinkable that anybody would allow 
Black to run a large corporation again.

• This article was amended on 9 December 2009. The original stated that Black 
wrote a biography of Churchill. This has been corrected.
 