
Shapla is a serious 12-year old girl who exudes a maturity well beyond her 
tender years. She lives on Holdibari Char, a silt island in middle of the 
Teesta River in north-western Bangladesh. Dark clouds signalling the coming 
monsoon rains gather ominously above her as she stares out across the river. 
"The river brings us pain. When the waters rise, our house floods, our crops 
are destroyed, and we run out of food."

She and her family have been forced to move home 10 times in 4 years as a 
result of floods which are growing increasingly more erratic and severe. Hers 
is an all too familiar story. It is also a testament to the resourcefulness and 
resilience of ordinary Bangladeshis as they come to terms with the challenges 
presented by a changing climate.

The 230 rivers which course like veins through this vast delta cause seasonal 
flooding and erosion along their banks. Vast quantities of alluvial silt are 
washed down from the crumbling Himalayas by these mighty rivers. Some two 
million people, including Shapla and her family, live on the chars, large 
islands formed in all of Bangladeshi rivers.

Each June, immense storm clouds gather in the south. They float in from the 
sea and unleash torrential downpours, turning much of the fertile soil into 
knee-deep muddy slush.

Summer floods are a way of life. About 20% of the country is inundated every 
year, mostly as a result of such rainfall. Rivers routinely burst their banks, 
forging new courses.

Inside her family's one-roomed hut, Shapla points to a bamboo beam near the 
ceiling. "This is where I sat with my little brothers and sisters for a week 
until the waters had gone. We didn't have much to eat and the fear of snakes 
kept us awake some nights."

Some blame climate change for the increasingly frequent and more prolonged 
floods of recent years. Last year alone the floods affected over 9 million 
people. They are predicted to get worse over the next 40 years as the sea level 
rises.

The charity Plan Bangladesh encourages children like Shapla to take an active 
role in the design of disaster risk plans. Since 2007, the Children's 
Participation in Disaster Risk Reduction Programme has trained young people on 
the effects of flooding and shown them how to reduce risks through simple 
precautionary measures.

Shapla stands on her bed to reach a plastic container hung near the ceiling. 
"This is where we store rice in case it floods. There is also earthen jar with 
money set aside to buy more rice once we run out." Dangling from all four 
corners of the house are pieces of carbolic soap to ward away snakes." These 
are all hung up high so the flood waters cannot reach them.

Along with other children on the island, Shapla helped develop an action plan 
to protect their flood-prone community. They drew a 'hazard map' to highlight 
areas at most risk to flooding. "We hope that the work of the group will keep 
children and their families safe," says Shapla.

Although most may not have a name for it, everyone in Bangladesh has noticed 
that the climate is changing. As summers grow hotter, and winters milder, once 
familiar weather patterns grow increasingly extreme and erratic. Many claim 
that there are now only four seasons instead of the usual six, causing havoc 
for farmers. More intense and frequent cyclones, prolonged floods, increased 
river and coastal erosion, droughts and salinity of farmland are all 
environmental problems made worse by climate change.

"Climate change is a misnomer," says Atiq Rahman, a climate expert and a 
member of the UN's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). "What is 
happening now is climate destabilisation which is irreversible and 
catastrophic."

For every uplifting story such as Shapla's, there are countless other tales of 
loss and suffering. While such simple precautions may benefit many, the 
situations of others beg for more drastic solutions. For instance, what is to 
be done about the country's growing numbers of climate refugees? With 17 
million people living at less than 1 metre above sea level, IPCC predictions of 
sea level rises do not bode well for the future. "The refugee crisis has 
already begun," says Atiq Rahman. "People are already on the move."

About 350km downstream from Shapla's home, at the mouth of the Bay of Bengal, 
an extraordinary sight presents itself. A freshwater tube-well, once at the 
heart of a village on Kutubdia island in south-eastern Bangladesh, now 
protrudes from a sandy beach. The mid-morning sun beats down on Gouri Bala 
Jaladas as she walks to the tube-well to fill a jug of water. "This used to be 
a beautiful place just two years ago. There was a road, lined on both sides 
with houses."

Once a 250 square kilometre island, Kutubdia has shrunk to just 37 square 
kilometres over the past century and is predicted to disappear over the next 70 
years. Its' former inhabitants number some of the world's first climate 
refugees.

Mohammad Akaiam recounts the fate that befell him and his family. "All the 
land went into the sea," he says. "We've become landless, homeless."

People have always faced such seasonal loss, but this is set to accelerate 
with global warming. More than 60% of Kutubdia's population has already 
migrated inland, and most of the remaining 150,000 are considering leaving.

Bangladesh is, on average, no more than 10 metres above sea level. A 30-45cm 
sea-level rise will force the migration of about 35 million people living in 
coastal regions. So where are all these climate refugees to go?

Many have no choice but to migrate to Dhaka, and other cities to eke out a 
living, adding to the countless slums which dominate urban landscapes. Dhaka's 
slum population has doubled over the past 10 years and this trend is set to 
continue.

In conference boardrooms across the world, calls for compensation for the 
victims of climate change in Bangladesh are being heard. The UK's International 
Development Secretary Douglas Alexander admits that Western countries have a 
moral obligation to help countries like Bangladesh adapt to climate change.

The Bangladeshi government calculates that it will require £250m to adapt to 
climate change over the next three years. In September 2008, the UK pledged 
£50m to a fund intended to help farmers switch to flood and drought-resistant 
crops, raise embankments and build flood defences to protect homes.

UN talks in Copenhagen this December could deliver essential funds to support 
affected communities, but the current economic climate will no doubt mean that 
securing such promises from Western governments will be an uphill struggle.

This longlisted article was published on 23 July 2009. It was written for the 
Guardian's International Development Journalism Competition between 1 April and 
22 June 2009.
 