
Vegetable vendor in Ashok Vihar, north Delhi, 45

Every week I pay 100 rupees (£1.40) to the police so that they let me put my 
cart in the market. The police constable comes every Saturday to collect the 
cash from all the vendors and if I do not pay then he will not allow me to sell 
my vegetables. I also have to pay the municipal corporation of Delhi whatever 
they ask. It can be any amount from 200 to 500 rupees a month. They also come 
to collect it. If the municipal corporation seizes our cart then to get it 
released from their main office is more troublesome. The man who collects money 
from us informs us beforehand that their vehicle will come today to pick up the 
carts if we are selling somewhere without authorisation.

School teacher, 38

I was beaten up by my husband regularly two years back and whenever I went to 
file a case against him, my husband would bribe the police officers. They even 
changed my witness statements. [So when I went to court] I had no evidence to 
get him behind bars. My husband left me with two kids of seven and 13 years and 
I had to try to go to court to get our maintenance. So far I have had no luck. 
Whenever there is a hearing I have to pay up to 500 rupees to get the written 
orders from the court. They are supposed to cost only a 10th of that. But if I 
wait for the court to give it to me then it will take months. If I want to, I 
can even pay the assistant of the judge to give me an early date of hearing. I 
feel corruption is everywhere. You can even bribe judges to get the judgment in 
your favour. My husband was arrested because he left home with my jewellery, my 
car, and whatever cash I had at that time. But he was released from the court 
after he bribed our lawyer and the judge. Today he boasts that he can buy the 
judge or my lawyers if he wants and is not afraid of any law that can catch him.

Coalmine engineer, 45, based in a remote district of Madhya Pradesh

Generally a contractor or a supplier who supplies goods for the heavy machines 
or any kind of supplies which you need in coalmines has to pay 20% to 30% of 
the total cost to the officials at his client's head office. First he needs to 
pay to get the work and then to get his fees and costs paid from the finance 
departments. Or, as is often the case, he needs to pay to get them to turn a 
blind eye to the substandard materials he is using.

When I needed a passport we had to pay a certain amount to the agent who is in 
hand-in-glove with the passport officers. Next step is when the verification 
reaches the nearest local police station of wherever we live. The officers are 
meant to visit us to verify the application but instead they just call us to 
the police station and – if they know you are at all comfortable in terms of 
money – ask for cash. They just say: "You are earning well. Give us some money 
for tea." This is a regular practice.

Factory worker in north Delhi, 34

I pays 50 rupees whenever I am caught by the police for not having a driving 
licence for the motorbike I ride. The best part is the way the police officers 
negotiate. It's as if they don't get a salary.
 