
Vishal is an ordinary man with an ordinary story of corruption in India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>. He lives in east Delhi, part of the 
traffic-choked sprawl of India's capital. He owns a fried chicken takeaway 
similar to thousands of others that have sprung up in recent years to serve the 
new tastes of the burgeoning middle class.

And he faces an ordinary Indian daily routine of petty corruption. The number 
of people Vishal has to pay off is bewildering. There are the local beat 
constables who take free lunches, and the more senior police officers who can 
cause problems with opening hours. They take 10,000 rupees (£130) on the 10th 
of each month to allow Vishal to stay open late.

Then there are the officials from various local authorities who also receive 
regular payments – around £50 per month – to ensure that health, safety and 
hygiene inspections go smoothly.

"Of the 40,000 rupees (£520) I earn a month from my restaurant, I pay at least 
a third in bribes," Vishal, 26, said. But bribery also extends into his 
personal life. Vishal has two young children and to get the eldest in to the 
best local school he paid a "donation" of 25,000 rupees (£340) in cash to the 
headmaster.

A driving licence needed another bribe. Getting an appointment with a 
competent public doctor cost a substantial amount. And then there are the 
traffic police. Every other week Vishal says he is stopped, told he has 
committed an offence and made to pay 100 rupees (£1.25), the standard fee to 
avoid "too much bother".

"I am so disappointed [about] everything you have to pay," he said. "And no 
one does anything. The politicians won't do anything because they are all 
corrupt too."

Such sentiments are widespread in India and explain the sudden outpouring of 
anger over recent days as tens of thousands of people took to the streets 
across the country to protest about the arrest of anti-corruption campaigner
Anna Hazare <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anna-hazare>.

Though a string of major corruption scandals such as the telecoms licence scam 
that cost the country up to £26bn, and the alleged fraud surrounding the 
high-profile Commonwealth Games in Delhi, has fuelled some of the fury, it is 
the grinding daily routine of petty corruption that is at the root.

"You pay for a birth certificate, a death certificate," said Varun Mishra, a 
30-year-old software engineer and one of thousands who marched in Delhi to 
support Hazare. "All your life you pay. And for what? For things that should be 
free."

Hazare, 74, has harnessed this grassroots frustration to launch a popular 
movement. Having been jailed as a threat to public order, he went on hunger 
strike and refused to leave prison when released. He has finally left jail, 
having been granted permission to hold a 15-day fast in a public park.

His public relations team has run rings around clumsy and slow official 
spokesmen. India's prime minister, Manmohan Singh, has an impeccable reputation 
for personal probity but has looked distant and out of touch.

Hazare is campaigning for a powerful new anti-corruption ombudsman with the 
right to investigate senior politicians, officials and judges. His critics say 
this would be undemocratic, and worry about the division of powers. But for 
people like restaurateur Vishal, Hazare is a hero. "At least he is doing 
something," he said. "No one else is."

Though bribery, or "graft", is a fact of life for more or less everybody in 
India, the demonstrators are largely urban, educated and relatively well-off. 
"What you are seeing on the street is a middle-class rebellion," said Mohan 
Guruswamy, a former senior official in the ministry of finance and founder of 
the Centre for Policy Alternatives thinktank.

There are reports in local media that call centres and other back office 
operations in IT hubs such as Gurgaon, a satellite town of Delhi, and 
Bengaluru, the southern city, have faced staffing problems with up to half of 
workers joining the protests. Teachers, lawyers and medical professionals have 
also featured prominently.

Support for Hazare is particularly strong among those who have benefited most 
from India's recent breakneck economic development but are frustrated by a 
largely unreformed public sector that delivers poor and haphazard services. 
They are often the young.

Many of those who waited outside Tihar jail in Delhi to greet Hazare on his 
triumphant exit were in their teens or even younger. One 12-year-old carried a 
placard saying "save my future".

Tens of millions of school and college-leavers pour into the Indian jobs 
market each year. State institutions have not kept pace with aspirations raised 
by years of rapid economic growth and with skill levels low and good jobs 
scare, unrest could rise.

Senior Congress party politicians this week argued that some level of graft 
was "inevitable" in a developing economy. However, analysts said the extent of 
the problem in India – which ranks at 87 out of 178 on the campaign group 
Transparency International's index of corruption – is unique. "India is 
comparable to China, doing better than Russia, less well than Brazil," said 
Robin Hodess, the group's research director. "But bureaucratic and petty 
corruption is extreme in India."

Some say India's generally patchy law enforcement is to blame. "We are 
politically advanced in terms of institutions," said Guruswamy. "We have 
courts, a parliament and a long tradition of democracy ... but very few people 
are ever held to account." Last week a senior judge faced unprecedented 
impeachment proceedings 25 years after the alleged offence.

Others say those who pay the bribes are to blame too. One supreme court lawyer 
who refused demands for commissions in return for sanctioning payment for work 
he had done for the government, said giving in to corruption could be down to 
"deep powerlessness" or simply a "I just want to get on with my day" type of 
attitude. "As Indians we see corruption as something that permeates our lives, 
like air pollution, but we need to think much more carefully about it," he said.

Raghu Thoniparambil, who runs the website ipaidabribe.com, pointed out that 
corruption in the private sector was just as prevalent. "All these protests are 
very inspiring but will people really change? I don't know," he said.

Less ambitious and spectacular measures could have more impact than the 
ombudsman office Hazare and his followers want to create, Thoniparambil argues.

As well as perceptions of general corruption, Transparency International also 
compiles an index of nations where bribes are paid most frequently, 
particularly in business. India ranks 19 out of 22, above Mexico, Russia and 
China.

Manu Joseph, editor of the news magazine Open, speaks of "hypocrisy". "The 
Indian relationship with corruption is very complex and politicians are 
representative of society as a whole," he said.

But the widespread anger is also due to a sense that modern India not only 
deserves better but needs to at least moderate rampant corruption to compete on 
the world stage.

The most high profile cases have already damaged the nation's image 
sufficiently to slow economic growth. One text message circulating in India 
last week focused on the huge sums of "black money" illegally stashed by 
wealthy Indians in overseas assets and bank accounts. The return of these funds 
could pay for "Oxford-like universities", borders stronger than "the China 
wall" and roads "like in Paris", it said.

"We want a great country, stronger than the US, UK and Australia," said 
18-year-old Sushil Kumar as he waited for the protest march from Hazare's jail 
to start. "India will be great, with its traditions, its culture. But we have 
to beat corruption."

The anti-bribery website

Launched last October, ipaidabribe.com  <http://ipaidabribe.com/>is the 
brainchild of Raghunandan Thoniparambil, a retired official from the elite 
Indian Administrative Service.

By Friday 12,076 people had posted their personal stories of graft for all to 
see. They included businessmen forced to pay 50 rupees (70p) to traffic police, 
300 rupees (£3.20) paid for a passport verification, 40,000 rupees (£540) 
handed over to have property registered, 5,000 rupees (£67) for a birth 
certificate and travellers who had to give 100 rupees (£1.30) to get berths on 
otherwise full express trains. Software takes names off the site.

"The aim is not to identify people but to identify the problem," Thoniparambil 
said. In June, after a BBC report about ipaidabribe.com several similar sites 
opened in China. Within two weeks they were shut down.

"In India we are sometimes a little slow or dysfunctional but civil society, 
simple democracy can make a huge difference," added Thoniparambil.

• This article was amended on 23 August 2011 because the original converted 
25,000 rupees to £3,400. This has been corrected.
 