
In a boost to US efforts to gain intelligence from terrorism suspects before 
prosecuting them, a federal appeals court in New York on Thursday upheld the 
conviction of a former inmate of Guantánamo Bay in the 1998 bombings of two US 
embassies in Africa.

The 2nd US circuit court of appeals rejected arguments that Ahmed Khalfan 
Ghailani's long detention overseas by the CIA violated his constitutional right 
to a speedy trial, concluding thathe was properly convicted and sentenced to 
life in prison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jan/25/ahmed-ghailani-guantanamo-prison-us>
 for his role in the attacks that killed 224 people, including a dozen 
Americans.

Ghailani's lawyer, Peter Quijano, promised a supreme court appeal.

The court seemed to embrace an opportunity to say that evidence necessary to 
prosecute in US civilian courts and the legal rights of a defendant are not 
necessarily spoiled by efforts to obtain intelligence from terrorism suspects.

"This appeal presents a question bound to arise from the government's efforts 
to obtain actionable and time-sensitive intelligence necessary to thwart acts 
of terror, while still bringing those charged with committing crimes of 
terrorism against Americans to justice in an orderly fashion under the laws of 
our country," circuit judge Jose A Cabranes wrote.

The three-judge panel concluded that Ghailani's right to a speedy trial was 
not violated, and rejected his lawyers' arguments that the government may never 
bring a defendant to trial after detaining him for national security purposes. 
Quijano, though, said in an email statement that he never argued that the 
government could never bring a defendant to trial after detaining him for 
national security purposes.

"The government did not act expeditiously to afford Ahmed Ghailani a trial 
after subjecting him to enhanced interrogation techniques and then forcing him 
to languish for years at Guantánamo Bay," Quijano said. "A claim of national 
security does not and cannot suspend and vitiate one's fundamental right to a 
speedy trial. Here, a delay of more than five years — during which the 
defendant was tortured to extract information — was constitutionally excessive."

Last week, Abu Anas al-Libi, also known as Nazih Abdul-Hamed al-Ruqai, pleaded 
not guilty to terrorism chargeswhen he was brought to a Manhattan courtroom 
after he was snatched off the streets of Libya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/14/libyan-terrorist-al-qaida-suspect-charged>
 and subjected to a week of questioning aboard an American warship. He is 
charged in the same embassy attacks. Republicans in Congress have demanded he 
be sent to the US prison in Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, for indefinite interrogation.

In supporting its conclusions in the Ghailani case, the 2nd circuit noted that 
the supreme court "has repeatedly held that the government may purposely delay 
trials for significant periods of time, so long as, on balance, the public and 
private interests render the delay reasonable".

The court also rejected arguments that Ghailani was prejudiced for speedy 
trial purposes by his treatment during his CIA detention.

The sixth amendment's speedy trial clause "protects defendants against 
prejudice caused by delays in their trials, not against the harms of 
interrogation", Cabranes wrote.

Ghailani, 39, served as Osama bin Laden's cook and bodyguard after the 
al-Qaida suicide bombings in Tanzania and Kenya. He was arrested in Pakistan in 
2004, transferred to Guantánamo Bay in 2006 and moved to Manhattan for trial in 
2009.

He was convicted in 2010 of a single count of conspiring to destroy government 
buildings and was acquitted of 280 charges that he took part in the bombings. 
Prosecutors said he helped an al-Qaida cell buy a truck and components for 
explosives for one of the bombings. He is serving life at the United States 
Penitentiary in Florence, Colorado.

Ghailani had claimed he was tortured at a secret CIA detention site after his 
arrest in Pakistan. US district judge Lewis A Kaplan imposed the maximum 
sentence, saying that whatever Ghailani suffered "pales in comparison to the 
suffering and the horror" caused by the nearly simultaneous attacks.
 