 Investigators studying the wreckage of the American Airlines jet that crashed 
in to a New York suburb killing 265 people last month said today that there was 
no sign of a terrorist attack.
However, they asserted that the crash may have been caused by steering 
mechanisms known to have failed before the ill-fated flight.

American Airlines flight 587 crashed just two months after the attacks of 
September 11, shortly after leaving New York for the Dominican Republic.

The crash on November 12 killed all 260 people on board and five people on the 
ground when the Airbus A300-600 jet plunged into a residential neighbourhood.

Investigators from the National Transportation Safety Board said that the tail 
fin, the rudder that was attached to it and both engines fell off the aeroplane 
shortly after takeoff.

The jet's maintenance log showed that before the plane took off, ground crew 
had tried to repair the pitch trim, which helps keep the nose of the plane in 
position, and the yaw damper, which keeps aircraft from swaying from side to 
side.

The NTSB said that the problems had been corrected by a mechanic who reset the 
computers that control the components.

A spokesman for American Airlines said that the company was "cooperating fully 
with the investigation".

The Federal Aviation Administration ordered inspections of the tail section of 
the plane, which is made from lighter-weight, non-metallic composites.

Maintenance records showed that the vertical stabiliser and the rudder were 
last inspected visually in December 1999 and that no problems were reported.

The NTSB said that they had found no evidence that the aeroplane's engines had 
broken up, sending shrapnel into nearby control systems, nor any evidence of a 
collision with a bird.

They said there was no evidence of a fire or a malfunction and no evidence of 
a terrorist attack.

The crash crowned a dark spell for American Airlines, which lost two aircraft 
and several hundred passengers and crew in the September 11 attacks.
 