
Prospects for the tourist industry dimmed considerably in the wake of the New 
York plane crash as fears grew that the disaster would keep people from flying.

The tragic events of September 11 and the foot and mouth crisis have already 
cost the British tourism industry more than £2.5bn, and yesterday's disaster 
looks set to add to that.

The British Tourism Authority had been planning to launch a Come Back to 
Britain campaign in America, backed by a £5m promotional spend in the New Year.

"Clearly anyone thinking twice about travelling following September 11 is 
going to be seriously put off," said one leading leisure commentator.

Hilary Cook, director of investment strategy at Barclays Stockbrokers, said 
the crash would be another blow for the travel and tourist industry.

If the crash was an accident and not terrorism, she thought that although the 
short-term effects would have a big impact on the industry, the long-term 
effect "shouldn't be that significant".

The disaster came at a time when the tourism industry was suffering the dire 
effects of the 11 September attacks.

Tourism officials gathered in London for the World Travel Market hoped that 
the crash would have little further effect on air travel volumes, as long as it 
proves to have been an accident.

But the beleaguered aviation industry can ill afford more bad news: hundreds 
of thousands of jobs have already been lost, and a number of carriers have 
filed for bankruptcy.

Most travel experts expect the number of tourists travelling to America to 
drop by some 15-20% this year.

The past month has also witnessed a litany of bad corporate news from hotel 
companies and tour operators.

Last week the hotel chain Six Continents revealed that September 11 had cost 
the company £17m in lost profits while London hoteliers are experiencing a 20% 
drop in occupancy.

Shares in big hotel groups fell sharply yesterday. 

The stock market knocked nearly 3% off the value of Six Continents over 
concerns that the group's Holiday Inn at JFK airport and its Crown Plaza 
property at La Guardia airport will be hit by the crisis.

In America, there was a slump in the shares of tourism companies. 

The cruise operator Carnival Corporation dropped by 4% while its rival Royal 
Caribbean shed 10% of its value.

Any fall in passenger numbers will have a heavy impact on other industries. 
Earlier yesterday the luxury goods group LVMH, which owns such brands as 
Christian Lacroix and Hennessy cognac, warned that the slump in air travel 
meant that sales from its airport duty free chain were much lower than had been 
anticipated.
 