
When you're paying £27,000 for a degree, it's only natural to think about how 
employable you'll be when you complete it. Will your new qualification help you 
earn enough to pay off the debt?

For students studying creative subjects such as visual arts, graphic design, 
film-making, media studies, dance and theatre, this question can be difficult 
to answer as the route into work following any of these courses has never been 
straightforward.

Being "a creative" essentially means coming up with an idea, executing that 
idea and then persuading others to buy into your personal vision in order to 
get some remuneration for your work – this applies regardless of what your 
product is, whether you are a dancer, a painter, an illustrator, or a games 
designer.

The UK creative industries are booming – a department for culture media and 
sport report <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-25742231> found that 
the number of creative jobs available was up 8.6% last year – but jobs in these 
industries are still fiercely competitive.

Hilary Price, who runs Wolverhampton University's creative employability 
studio, says showcasing work comes naturally to most creatives. Painters want 
to exhibit. Dancers want to perform.Students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> just need a little help to 
learn the lie of the land.

Price uses Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/creativeemployabilitystudio> to 
keep in touch with her students, posting opportunities for work experience, 
freelance and part-time creative work, and student commissions.

She also spends a lot of time hunting out real life opportunities. This year 
Wolverhampton animation students have designed idents for CiTV, while its 
fashion and textiles students met clothes retailers and designed rugs destined 
for a high street store. A business training programme helps graduates set up 
their own small businesses.

Like many other universities, Wolverhampton lets students do work placements 
as a module on their degree. They can even take a whole year out if they wish – 
if they can find themselves a suitable placement.

At University of the Arts London, the focus on finding work begins in freshers 
week and runs throughout the degree. The employability team runs more than 150 
events a year across the six London colleges that make up the university. UAL 
also hosts two major careers events: aCreative Enterprise Week 
<http://creativeenterpriseweek.com/talksandevents> and the careers festival 
Artsmart <http://artsmartlondon.co.uk/>. 

At these, students can attend seminars and have one-to-one sessions with 
existing practitioners to review their plans and portfolios.

Students at Birmingham City University also gain from "learning by doing," 
says Andrew Julman, professor of graphic art at the university. "We value 
offering experiential tasks, which means students sometimes make mistakes along 
the way. That way they're gaining valuable hands-on, real life knowledge.

"Many lecturers are practising artists and designers and they bring their 
work-a-day know how to the lecture rooms and studios. Potential and existing 
students need to understand the value of actually doing what they are 
theorising about," he says.

Norwich University of the Arts <https://www.theguardian.com/education/arts> 
fires its students up with weekly talks by professionals who have the skills 
they will need to use later on in their careers, including accountants, 
lawyers, and marketers.

Late in 2015 Norwich will open the "Hatchery", a digital business centre.
Caroline Bailey, alumni relations and development officer, says: "Graduates 
will be able to rent desk space to get some mentoring and support while they 
are starting their business up. They will have high bandwidth internet and an 
incubation manager who can help them with their start up. There will be meeting 
rooms for hire. It will give them professional facilities without the cost of 
setting all that up for themselves."

Price thinks that students have become wiser to the needs of employers. 
"Students have come to realise that it isn't enough just to study and get a 
good degree – when they write their CV they need experience as well."

All the universities we spoke to say raising student awareness of 
possibilities is key, as well as introducing them to people in the sector who 
might be able to help them, letting them talk to role models, arranging 
mentorships, and getting them to take on commissions.

Being creative is something that you do on your own, and your inspiration 
comes from within. Many arts students are introverted and shy, and getting them 
to turn outward, and actively seek financial opportunities can be hard.

Spending three years honing your craft is a glorious thing, but if you want to 
turn that three years into a lifetime, you've got to make it work commercially.
 