
What is it with those opera types? Beneath their fancy garb and refined 
interval chitchat, their criticism turns out to be no more civil than the noisy 
opprobrium that fills football stadiums.

I'm referring to the ruckus at the Royal Opera House, where fans greeted a 
modern-dress (if dress is indeed the right word) staging ofDvorák's Rusalka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2012/feb/29/rusalka-is-ugly-not-radical>
 with walkouts, jeering and, yes, booing. The opera retells a rather cloying 
little folk tale, so it probably didn't help that the directors set it in a 
brothel replete with warbling hookers.

Yet opera-goers have a loud and proud history of vocalising their displeasure. 
Back in 1875, they even booed Monsieur Bizet out of the theatre when he 
premiered that hum-along hit of his,Carmen. It's not that other genres of music 
are immune. The premiere of Stravinsky's balletThe Rite of Spring always leaps 
first to mind – boos yielding to fistfights and finally a full-blown riot. Then 
there's Britney, Rihanna, Lou Reed – all have been booed in the past 12 months. 
Still, it hasn't become a part of the culture in quite the same way.

Is it just that opera's fatal loves and losses and leaps make us behave – 
well, operatically? Does it have something to do with the giddying price of 
tickets? It's tempting to suggest that the higher the art form, the lower the 
manner in which an audience will express its discontent, but that would be 
failing to take stand-up comedy into account.

Aside from panto, which doesn't count, the only time I've ever booed is at a 
comedy club. It's not that I haven't wanted to boo, but like most, I tend to 
consume my culture as books or on a screen or through earphones. Marginalia, a 
snarky anonymous review on some movie site – they just don't cut it. Nor would 
vandalism in an art gallery. In the theatre, curtain calls offer more scope for 
a full-lunged expression of displeasure, though the rarity of appearances by 
directors and writers mean you risk misdirecting your scorn.

Let's be clear – booing is not pleasant, and having once shared a stage with a 
booed poet, I know as much as I want to about that. And yet booing is also a 
sign of caring, honest: it's a sign of direct and passionate engagement that 
returns us to art's roots.

The practice of booing performers stretches back to ancient Greece, where 
tragedians competed annually at the Dionysia festival. Eventually, audience 
participation became a civic duty. Booing was also part of life – and death – 
in ancient Rome's gladiatorial games, whose audiences helped determine a 
competitor's fate.

As that poet acquaintance of mine will tell you, art is, in its way, a blood 
sport. Likewise, it's our responsibility as an audience to appraise, not merely 
soak up. Applause must be earned. An appropriately placed boo can be a 
rebellion against some of the more waffly ideas circulating in the cultural 
scene – the notion that any book which gets people reading is a good thing, for 
instance, or Brit Art's shoulder-shrugging claim that the artist's sole 
responsibility is to get a response, no matter what.

Though this is a newspaper column and makes zero claims to be anything 
approaching art, I encourage you to treat it as practice. Rather than 
anonymously hitting the comment section, take a deep breath and bellow your boo 
out loud.
 