
An odd sense of loss pervaded Auckland. The champagne corks and bunting from 
New Zealand's victory in March in yachting's greatest prize, the America's Cup, 
were memories.

As if blinking its way through the hazy hangover of a good birthday party, 
Auckland seemed to be having a hard time coming down from its sporting high.

Everyone still talks about it. Wasn't it exciting? Wasn't Team New Zealand 
(the winning crew) bloody great? Then their minds wander and they gaze dreamily 
over the fine, wide harbour of this sea-faring city and sigh as if the two-year 
wait for the next challenge is a lifetime away. The winners always play host.

Important as the win was for sailing-mad Auckland, it was just one brief 
chapter in an illustrious career of ocean taming. The Maritime Museum on the 
harbour front is a must for visitors, even those who couldn't give a fig for 
jibs and mainsails, as it explains why the Kiwis are such proficient sailors.

Everyone sailed here. The Maoris in vast canoes that rode the currents with 
the stars and gods for guidance, then Captain Cook who discovered it for the 
western world on his first Pacific voyage. After him came countless European 
settlers.

In the last century, ocean liners run by the NZ Union Steam Ship Company must 
have had the whole town gawping as they cruised stylishly in from trans-Pacific 
voyages.Now Auckland has joined the hip generation. Who needs to wait two years 
for the next party?

 Cafés

 The America's Cup spotlight also picked out a new side to Auckland, a 
burgeoning café culture to challenge its Pacific rivals, Sydney and Seattle. 
Scores of coffee bars, bistros and restaurants have opened in the past few 
years as part of a rejuvenation that has transformed the city into one of the 
hippest around the Pacific Rim.

Yuppies in expensive knitwear brunch at Gloria under high ceilings and 
minimalist decor. Families stroll down to Mecca on the harbour for big 
breakfasts and fruit juice. A supper of bangers and mash and Black Mac dark ale 
at Deve Brasserie in Kingsland is great value.

In a city where most cafés try so hard to be cool, K Sera manages it with 
seemingly no effort at all. For insomniacs, clubbers and frustrated poets, 
Brazil stays open late into the night. The music is funky, the coffee strong 
and magnificent.

A string of restaurants have replaced the fish- gutting warehouses along the 
harbour front. It seems over the top for a city with only one million people, 
but come the weekend they are packed to the gunwales. Euro is especially 
welcoming and has good venison sausages.

Across the harbour in the suburb of Devonport, more like the English Riviera 
than the outskirts of Polynesia, the cafés along Victoria Road also hum at the 
weekend and are worth the 10-minute ferry trip for lunch.

 Kawhia

 As you drive south from Auckland in comfort, spare a thought for the Maoris, 
who in the Great Migration around 1350 landed here in the famed Tainui canoe.

Before leaving their homeland in the eastern Pacific, their priests had 
prophesied that good fortune would be theirs should they land on the western 
side of New Zealand. Unfortunately, they landed on the east, so they dragged 
their canoe over what are now called the Bombay Hills, inch by inch, then all 
the way down to the South Island and north again until they hit the west coast 
near Kawhia.

Kawhia today plays second fiddle to nearby Raglan, a surf paradise, with some 
of the best waves on the North Island, notably at Whale Beach, and excellent 
fish and chips. The picturesque coastline is lined with tree ferns.

On the road from Auckland, look out for signs to Bridal Veil Falls, a glorious 
150ft waterfall that thunders with deafening force after a good rainfall.

 Rotorua

 Rotorua is not like other towns. Jets of steam blow from pavement drains, and 
clouds billow from beneath the grass in Kurau Park. Sulphur fumes make the 
place smell like a steelworks but, oddly, the pong grows on you after a day or 
two.

It is the powerful scent of inner earth, and Rotorua is one of the most active 
geothermal sites in the world. There are more than 100 tiny earthquakes a day, 
and all over town the ground has split open to belch boiling water and 
sulphurous mud.

For a spell last year, residents woke to find that natural hot springs had 
formed overnight in their back gardens, saving them a fortune in hot-tub 
installation but also threatening to consume their homes. The Pohutu geyser on 
the edge of town set a new record for blowing for more than 80 days without 
pause.

 Coromandel

 The lush greenery of the Coromandel peninsula is startling. Forget Ireland; 
these emerald fields shine much brighter. Coromandel is nature gone mad with a 
paintbrush, so brilliant it looks unreal.

The peninsula has good walking and cycling trails with cabins and 
bed-and-breakfasts in the main centres of Thames, Mercury Bay and Coromandel 
Town.

Hot Water Beach on the east coast is famous for hot springs beneath the sand, 
while the stunning Cathedral Cove boasts a natural rock arch and a stretch of 
salmon-pink sand.
 