
Currency and oil markets saw renewed volatility yesterday as the crash of the 
American Airlines passenger jet in New York pierced already fragile confidence 
among traders.

In the immediate aftermath of the tragedy, the dollar fell against the euro by 
almost one cent while the price of crude increased 25 cents a barrel.

But as speculation grew that the jet had probably been downed by mechanical 
failure rather than terrorism the greenback picked up slightly while oil 
plunged by more than $1 on fears of lower demand.

After a steep decline in the dollar after the World Trade Centre attacks two 
months ago, the US currency had until yesterday been gaining in strength. But 
after the Queens crash the dollar fell as low as 90.16 cents against the euro 
before recovering slightly to 89.52 cents. A week after the September attacks, 
the dollar had slumped sharply to 93 cents to the euro.

The dollar also lost ground yesterday against most other major currencies 
including sterling, which rose by 0.5 cents to almost $1.46. It dropped from 
around ¥120.70 to as low as ¥119.73 before rallying to ¥120.21.

"The plane crash has raised concerns about terrorism again in a manner that 
has been clearly detrimental to the dollar, but now reports that it might not 
be a terrorist attack have let it come back a bit," said Bob Lynch, currency 
strategist at BNP Paribas. "However, I would expect the dollar to remain on the 
defen sive until more clear information comes."

The euro had also been supported by comments at the weekend from European 
Central Bank member Tommaso Padoa Schioppa suggesting that he saw no need for a 
further cut in interest rates.

Confidence in stronger crude oil prices triggered by a Russian commitment to 
cut production along with Opec had been battered by an International Energy 
Agency report that stockpiles of crude were higher than expected.

James Chilcott, energy broker at GNI, said: "All the pressure is now down as 
people realise what effect this is going to have on the struggling airlines."

Brent crude for December delivery was trading down $1.18 per barrel at $20.20.
 