
After five and a half weeks of touring the US, all I wanted when I got back to 
Britain was the love of a good curry. I made the mistake of going to Brick 
Lane, the east end of London's notorious curry mile. I had some astounding and 
exotic meals in the States, but no good Indian food.

It became the vivid taste of homesickness, a distant desire, unattainable. Not 
HP sauce, Tetley tea or Yorkshire puddings, but saag paneer. Within three hours 
of landing at Heathrow, I was being hounded by the curry criers of the Lane, 
touting specials and shouting about why their place is so much better than the 
seemingly identical place next door.

With food, coercion is danger and recommendation is all. Still, I was 
jet-lagged and delirious with happiness at the prospect of a spicy treat. There 
was a voice within, murmuring that I should get the bus up to Stoke Newington 
and go to Rasa on Church Street, where you can taste the love and affection in 
every bite, but it was drowned out by the sound of the balti barkers. The much 
anticipated feast was slightly below mediocre. I was lucky.

Tonight I'm at Mother India's cafe in Glasgow. The prospects are good. In 
1995, Monir Mohammed noticed that the food he liked to eat at home and the food 
served in curry restaurants wasn't the same. At home it was exploding with 
fresh ginger, garlic, cardamom and coriander. In the restaurants it was bright 
with food colouring, but dull, thin and vicious in flavour. Figuring that other 
people might want a bit of what he wanted, he opened Mother India. The cafe 
serves, in a tapas style, small bowls of delicacies to be shared, rather than 
one heavy mound you can't finish, making for a much more sociable experience. 
It's how eating out should be - comparing, sharing and discussing your food, 
rather than the selfish ploughing through the portions which is particular to 
the UK and North America.

Six years ago I worked for Mother India, delivering across the city in an old 
Fiat. The only reliable thing about the car was that the sunroof would leak if 
it rained. It rains quite often in Glasgow. The smells of damp Panda and hot 
spices in brown paper are neighbours in my memory. I gained a cabby's knowledge 
of the city's shortcuts and was paid £10 a night, but the real reason I did it 
was for the free curry at the end of the evening. Something I never got when 
touring the USA in a rock'n'roll band.

· Alex Kapranos is the lead singer of Franz Ferdinand. This column appears 
weekly as the band tour.
 