
Abbas Kiarostami's haunting and mysterious Taste of Cherry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/taste-of-cherry> won the Palme d'Or at Cannes 
in 1997; I first watched it a couple of years after that. A drawn, careworn but 
handsome and elegant Iranian man called Badii, played by the Iranian actor 
Homayoun Ershadi, drives around a stark Beckettian landscape in his Range 
Rover. He is looking for someone to help him take his own life. Badii never 
behaves in an obviously wretched or despairing manner; there are no cries or 
tears, and he never reveals the reason for what he intends to do.

A good deal has happened to the context in which this film must be viewed in 
2012, certainly in the UK. The debate over assisted suicide, and suicide 
generally, has been altered by the opening of the Dignitas clinic in 
Switzerland in 1998, and the subject has over the past 14 years become 
increasingly thinkable, less and less taboo. Press debate periodically attaches 
to legal cases in the UK, though there was almost no outcry in 2009 when the 
conductor Sir Edward Downes and his wife Lady Joan Downes, at the ages of 85 
and 74 respectively,ended their lives together 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2009/jul/14/assisted-suicide-conductor-edward-downes>
 at the Swiss unit. And after 11 September 2001, the concept of jihadi 
terrorism triggered a new debate about suicide. It is absolutely forbidden by 
Islamic law – as one character robustly reminds Badii – but zealots feel that 
suicide bombings are not "suicide" in this sense at all. They had in fact been 
common currency from the early 1980s in the Lebanese civil war.

Maybe it would be too much of a stretch to imply some resonance in Taste of 
Cherry, some kind of inner personal jihad – taking arms against a sea of 
troubles. But certainly Badii insists that there is something justifiable and 
even noble in what he wants to do.

The opening sequence is hypnotic, and unforgettably disturbing. We see Badii 
driving around Tehran's itinerant labour markets, looking for someone, sizing 
up the men he sees on street corners. They crowd round his car, puzzled, 
peering directly into the camera, asking if he wants men. "You want workers? 
Take one! Take two!" But something about these men displeases Badii and he 
drives on, up into the hills, where his ears prick up at the sound of a young 
man arguing on a payphone with his girlfriend about money. Badii starts to 
speak to this man, making small talk, with the slightly curt, coercive tone of 
a police officer.

What on earth does Badii want? Trade? Sex? He has the hunted look of someone 
looking for a prostitute, and this young man clearly suspects as much, telling 
him to be on his way or he will "smash his face in". Bizarrely, ironically, 
this same young man is to make a tiny cameo appearance in Badii's life at the 
very end of the film, a brilliantly understated moment.

Later, Badii will pick up a young soldier, doing his national service; he 
drives him to the shallow grave he has dug in a remote hillside, and reveals to 
this stunned squaddie the awful proposition. The plan is that later that night 
Badii will take a fatal dose of pills and lie in the grave waiting for death. 
The soldier merely has to come back at dawn, check that he's dead, and then 
bury him: just 20 shovelfuls of earth will do it. The man would then find a 
handsome cash payment waiting for him in the car.

The soldier is horrified – perhaps at the possibility of dirty dealing. After 
all: can he be sure that the body will in fact be Badii's? Is he being stitched 
up? Won't the police find this abandoned car near an obviously freshly dug 
grave and possibly connect the soldier to this event, and not believe the 
"suicide" story?

Well, the soldier is horrified mostly at being a party to suicide – and runs 
away. Badii tries vaguely to interest a seminarian and a security guard in his 
plan. That too goes nowhere. And then, in a enigmatic "flash-forward" or 
narrative jump-cut, we find that Badii is talking to a grizzled old man, 
employed to demonstrate dissections and taxidermy to college students. This man 
was suicidal in his own youth; he tries to talk Badii out of it. But finally, 
with a heavy heart, agrees to help.

Part of the importance of Taste of Cherry is that Badii's quest has somehow 
led him to the historical pressure points of the Middle East. One possible 
candidate is from Kurdistan, and Badii instantly talks to him about what he has 
suffered at the hands of Saddam's Iraq, less than 10 years before. The security 
guard is Afghani, and Badii talks to him of what his people have suffered in 
the previous decade. Somehow only the dispossessed, the traumatised and the 
excluded have the right stuff to help him. Badii senses that being a strong 
young labourer or soldier, or someone in need of cash, isn't enough. You have 
to have a kind of sadness in your bones.

There are plenty of miserablist films about suicide. Why does this one have 
such power? It is partly because Badii never invites sympathy or compassion in 
any conventional way: watching Taste of Cherry I feel gripped; I feel scared, 
but I don't feel sad – or not exactly. And it is partly because of the 
implications of what he has in mind. We think of suicidal people as desperate, 
so desperate, that they don't care who finds their body. But Badii does not 
want to be discovered; he wants his body never to be found; he wants his 
suicide to be a secret. He wants utter self-annihilation, and the pathos and 
wretchedness of his self-directed conspiracy are gripping.

Famously, the old man tries to talk him out of it with gentle wisdom, with 
common sense, with a passionate advocacy of the pleasures of life – the taste 
of a cherry. He even tells him a joke. A man goes to the doctor, frantic 
because every inch of his body is in pain: "I touch my head and it hurts! I 
touch my chest and it hurts! I touch my leg and it hurts!" "Your body is fine," 
says the doctor, "but your finger is broken!" Could it be that Badii's 
perception is wrong?

Maybe. Yet interestingly, what the man uses to persuade Badii is the glory of 
the natural world, which will always rise, unchallenged, above his despair. A 
sunset, a sunrise, the taste of fruit. Nothing to do with the pleasures of 
poetry, or philosophy or music – nothing to do with human society. Just nature: 
just that taste. Perhaps, in extremis, this is the only thing that will look 
plausible to the despairing.

I will never know what to think about the final scene of Taste of Cherry. 
Anticlimactic? Evasive? Yes, perhaps. But also incomparably strange, 
self-aware, and somehow very moving.

The film has a remarkable austerity and starkness; watching it is like being 
waylaid by the Ancient Mariner, who grips you with a strange and terrible 
message in his tale. It is Kiarostami's greatest film.
 