
The famous "dabbawallas" who pick up and deliver home-cooked lunch to hundreds 
of thousands of office workers in India's commercial capital Mumbai announced 
the first strike in their long history on Thursday, in solidarity with the 
high-profile anti-corruption campaigner arrested earlier this week.

The couriers are the latest to join protests across India that have seen tens 
of thousands of people taking to the streets to supportAnna Hazare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/anna-hazare>.

The 74-year-old social activist leading the effort to force the government to 
set up a powerful new anti-corruption agency is maintaining his hunger strike 
in a high-security prison, even though he is now free to leave.

The Mumbai dabbawallas – "dabba" refers to the tin box in which the lunch is 
held, "walla" means man – say they have been inspired by Hazare's refusal to 
eat solid food. "We are breaking our 120-year tradition by not providing 
tiffins. This is the least we can do to support Annaji, who has been fasting 
for over 50 hours in inhuman conditions," Kiran Gavande, the secretary of the 
Nutan Dabbalwala Trust told a local television station.

The 5,000 dabbawallas in Mumbai would march on Friday to show their support, 
Gavande said. The lean men with their trays of metal canisters, each filled 
with three or four separate dishes and marked with a code designating the son, 
husband or grandson for whom they are intended, are one of the best-known 
sights of the city.

Elsewhere there is little sign of the protest dying down. Although authorities 
have made a series of concessions, Hazare has refused to leave Tihar prison in 
Delhi, where he was detained earlier this week, until a venue for his public 
fast has been prepared.

Outside the jail, crowds of supporters, including school children and 
students, gathered on Thursday afternoon. One 12-year-old carried a placard 
saying "Save My Future".

Sunny Kumar, a 28-year-old IT consultant, said he backed Hazare's campaign. 
"We need someone who will listen to our problems and eradicate corruption from 
our society."

Kiran Bedi, a respected former senior police officer, said the deal with the 
authorities that would allow Hazare to fast for 15 days at a vast parade ground 
in the city centre big enough to accommodate tens of thousands of supporters 
was not a victory. "We are not playing games. We are doing this to move the 
country forward," said Bedi, who was also briefly arrested this week, told 
reporters.

About 2,500 Hazare followers were arrested earlier this week, provoking 
comparisons with draconian measures employed by British imperial rulers before 
India won independence in 1947. Amnesty International has issued a statement 
calling on authorities inIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> "to 
respect the rights to freedom of expression and of peaceful assembly".

Though few analysts expect the government to fall, in part due to weak 
political opposition, the crisis has increased lack of confidence in the prime 
minister, Manmohan Singh, 78, and the Congress party-led government mid-way 
through its second term. Economic and legal reforms remain blocked in 
parliament, while progress in the delivery of basic services is patchy at best.

Hazare has tapped deep anger in India at the endemic corruption, both petty 
and large scale, that successive administrations have either fuelled or failed 
to tackle, and this has been compounded by the government's mishandling.
 