
I like to think of adoption as parenting-plus. As well as being a friend, 
mentor, playmate, bodyguard, minder, shadow, server, tailor, and teacher to our 
kids, we have to be constantly sensitive to their unique background story – a 
story that is theirs to share, ours to guard.

With that in mind, the introductory period is a real trial of nerves.

When the kids came over to our place for the first time, and for the whole 
day, for the last week of introductions, I was so nervous I didn't know what to 
do with myself. We see them daily now, and at our house each time, but with the 
FM (Foster Mum) gradually fading away. At first it was over at their house, and 
for much shorter periods of time.

DD (Darling Daughter) loved her new room, so much so she found a dolly my 
partner had had as a child too and took it back with her because she was so 
fond of it. DS (Darling Son) ate all the food which I prepared (the start of 
the homemade food thing). Mind you, he would eat just about anything so not 
sure how much of a compliment that is!

They both really loved the house too, and DS especially went on explorations 
to see the new corridor (nice and long so they can play in it), the 
kitchen-diner (nice and big so they can play in it), mummy and daddy's room 
(our bed is nice and big so they can play in it), the garden (they can also 
play there). There seems to be a lot of playing here.

FM is being really patient and generous with the kids, which is great and so 
important for a decent "hand-off". The whole adoption process in this country 
has taken about a year – a lot of paper and a lot of meetings (most really 
handy for any new parent) – so long may this continue.

I should explain here that FM has a hard road. She has to: look after them for 
yonks, give them good care and then hand them over whilst giving permission for 
them to love us and for us to claim them as our own. The transition toys 
(things/toys that are shared in the FM's house and ours to ensure a minute but 
important sense of continuity) have been fully shared now will be in the kids' 
cots for as long as they want.

We are also keen to ensure loads of their existing toys, clothes and cups are 
come over to our house.

"What about the washing" she said.

"We do a wash every couple of days or so now" we replied.

FM gave us a wry look – we wondered if we had said something wrong.

"I will also give you the name of my existing washing powder so you can use 
the same stuff (important for smell continuity), and expect to do a run a bit 
more often …" How right she was.

This afternoon, the kids are having their first walk and then nap here – very 
exciting.Adoption <https://www.theguardian.com/society/adoption> seems to be 
challenging and rewarding in huge measures, much like parenting. I think I 
might enjoy it when they come to live with us …

• This is the first of a series of blogs from Anthony Watt about his 
experiences of being an adoptive father

• National adoption week <http://www.nationaladoptionweek.org.uk/> runs from 
1-7 November 2010
 