
Associated Newspapers <https://www.theguardian.com/media/associated-newspapers>
, publisher of the Daily Mail, has been fined £40,000 after pleading guilty to 
identifying a man who claims to be the victim of a VIP paedophile ring.

The company admitted two offences under the Sexual Offences (Amendment) Act 
which prohibits the revealing of the identity of anyone who has complained to 
police about being the victim of a sexual assault.

In passing sentence at Westminster magistrates’ court, deputy chief magistrate 
Emma Arbuthnot said: “The offence is serious and I am particularly concerned 
about the damage to public confidence that complainants’ identities will be 
protected.”

Arbuthnot also said the article was in the public interest, but that more care 
should have been taken to protect the men’s identity.

The article, published in September last year, was headlined “Nick – victim or 
fantasist?” It concerned the man who alleged that he had been abused by several 
high-profile figures, allegations that resulted in aMetropolitan police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> investigation known as 
Operation Midland.

The Mail’s story, which raised questions about the conduct of that 
investigation, was illustrated with a pixellated photograph of “Nick” and some 
personal details.

Speaking in mitigation for Associated Newspapers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers>, Clare Montgomery QC said: “The 
personal information was not there gratuitously to identify ‘Nick.’” She said 
the article contained information to enable the public to understand the 
context of the claims he was making.

The publisher accepted that detail in an article could have led readers to 
identify the man.

Although the court heard that Nick had told police that no one had identified 
him from the article, he complained that it could have done so.


Operation Midland was abandoned in March with no charges being brought amid 
controversy over its cost and how it was handled.


A spokesman for Associated Newspapers quoted in the Mail’s own article about 
the matter 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/home/article-3585813/Associated-Newspapers-fined-pixelated-photograph.html>
, said: “We believe emphatically in the rule of law, and regret that on this 
occasion we judged incorrectly where the line should be drawn.

“It is an extraordinary irony that the only conviction to result from this 
sorry episode, which caused such pain to Lord Brittan and his widow, and to 
Lord Bramall and his late wife, is against a media organisation which reported 
it with the objectivity so lacking in police inquiries.”
 