
The publisher of the Daily Mail has lost its challenge to a high court ruling 
that authorJK Rowling <https://www.theguardian.com/books/jkrowling> should be 
allowed to read a unilateral statement in open court as part of the settlement 
of a libel claim.

Associated Newspapers <https://www.theguardian.com/media/associated-newspapers>
 did not dispute that she is entitled to such a move – where the claimant alone 
makes a statement – but objected to a number of terms in the proposed draft.

Rowling brought the action over a September 2013 story in the Daily Mail and 
Mail Online <https://www.theguardian.com/media/mail-online> claiming an article 
she had written about her time as a single mother in Scotland was a misleading 
“sob story”.

The Mail printed an apology to Rowling last May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2014/may/07/dailymail-jkrowling> 
in which it accepted that Rowling made no false claims in the article and said 
that it had paid her “substantial damages”, which she was donating to charity.


She was not at the court of appeal in London on Friday to hear the challenge 
dismissed by Lord Justice Longmore, Lord Justice Ryder and Lady Justice Sharp.

 In January, Associated’s counsel, Andrew Caldecott QC, said that Mr Justice 
Tugendhat’s ruling, in April last year, was a “most unsatisfactory precedent” 
and one which, if generally followed, would create difficulties for the offer 
of amends regime.

This procedure provides for a defendant to make an open offer to pay costs and 
damages with an apology – with the aim of bringing a speedy end to litigation 
in cases where a defendant has unintentionally made statements which it admits 
to be untrue.

If the offer is not accepted, the claimant may only recover damages through 
the courts if it can prove malice on the part of the defendant.

Caldecott said: “Although this appeal raises important issues, it in no way 
seeks to dilute or qualify the published apologies to Ms Rowling which she was 
properly and rightly entitled to.”

The apology, which appeared both online and in the hard copy of the newspaper, 
was part of an unqualified offer of amends, which was accepted by Rowling in 
January 2014.

Caldecott said that the whole purpose of a statement in open court was to 
attract wide publicity, which made it the more important that the statement was 
confined to, and accurately reflected, the pleaded claim.

Justin Rushbrooke QC, for Rowling, said that the appeal did not, as claimed, 
raise any important issue of principle or practice in defamation law, but was 
plainly misconceived and an “exercise in nit-picking”.

He said that only rarely should a defendant be permitted to dictate to a 
claimant what she was permitted to say in a statement in open court.

It was primarily a matter between the court and the party wishing to make a 
statement, and the proper arbiter of what was acceptable in a unilateral 
statement was the judge.


 Giving the court of appeal’s decision, Mrs Justice Sharp said that 
Associated’s contention was a narrow one – that the judge was wrong to give his 
approval to a statement which went outside Rowling’s pleaded case in that it 
mischaracterised the meaning complained of and included matters relating to 
aggravation of damages which went beyond those in the particulars of claim.

Rowling had made an open offer not to oppose the appeal in relation to the 
aggravated damages objection and the meaning objection now concerned one word 
only in the draft statement – the word “dishonest”, used in relation to an 
article written by Rowling wrote on the website of Gingerbread, the single 
parents’ charity of which she is the president.

Caldecott said the word did not appear in the pleadings and its inclusion in 
the draft was unfair.

Rejecting that argument as “flawed”, the judge said the allegation complained 
of was that Rowling had given a knowingly false account of her time as a single 
mother in which she falsely and inexcusably accused her fellow churchgoers of 
behaving badly towards her.

This pleaded meaning was accurately and unambiguously set out in the draft 
statement.

It was plain that anyone hearing it could be in no doubt that this was the 
meaning complained of, and that the newspaper’s position was that it accepted 
that the pleaded meaning was “completely false and indefensible”.

The judge said that the one word to which Associated objected did not change 
the position.

“The sentence of which it is a part is no more than the expression in ordinary 
and less formal language of the correctly identified pleaded meaning.

“It is indubitably true that the word ‘dishonest’ is not actually used in the 
pleading, but, as Mr Rushbrooke submits, it is impossible to see how the 
claimant could have given an account which she knew to be false – and which 
contained false and inexcusable allegations against her fellow churchgoers – 
without being dishonest.”

She said that those conclusions were sufficient to dispose of the one live 
point on the appeal.
 