 Investigations into the crash of American Airlines flight 587 in New York on 
Monday have been hampered by damage to the flight recorder, which was recovered 
from the crash site on Tuesday.
"The most significant information will probably be in that data recorder," the 
national transportation safety board (NTSB) spokesman, George Black, said 
yesterday.

"The memory is there. We just can't get to it." 

The damaged memory component of the recorder which has prevented access to the 
data has been shipped to its Florida manufacturer for decoding.

The focus of the inquiry has now shifted from the engines of the Airbus A-300 
to the tail section, which appears to have sheared off first, sending the jet 
into an uncontrollable spiral in which it broke up.

But the damaged data recorder holds the information which should show how the 
7.6m tail fin separated from the plane - an event which US aircraft experts 
consider unprecedented.

The cockpit voice recorder and eyewitness accounts have already revealed 
events consistent with massive structural failure to the aircraft rather than 
an explosion in the engines.

The cockpit tapes revealed a rattling noise from the airframe less than two 
minutes into the flight, followed by a report of turbulence.

Another rattle was followed seconds later by a call from the co-pilot, who was 
at the controls, for maximum power.

The cockpit conversation, which has not been released, shows that the pilots 
struggled to control the doomed jet.

The recording ends 17 seconds later, two minutes and 14 seconds into the 
flight.

The investigators say they cannot explain what caused the rattling in the 
airframe, but witnesses have given similar accounts of seeing the ascending 
aircraft wobble before pieces began to fall away.

A preliminary examination of the tail fin, which was pulled from the sea half 
a mile short of where the fuselage fell, seemed to indicate that it had broken 
away cleanly.

"The pieces of the tail were first in the debris trail, which generally 
indicates they came off very early," Mr Black said.

The investigators said their analysis pointed to a fracture of the metal, not 
the bolts attaching it to the fuselage.

"If the vertical stabiliser broke off as part of the accident sequence, that 
is a whole new problem," a former government air crash investigator commented.

"That is strong structure, like a wing. Those things are never supposed to 
happen.

"If I were American Airlines, I would be inspecting the attachment fitting for 
all the vertical stabilisers."

Structural weaknesses in the Airbus A-300 were the subject of two federal 
aviation administration directives in 1998 and 1999, requiring inspections or 
repairs to the vertical stabiliser or rudder, but they both dealt with rudder 
control mechanisms not structural issues.

The investigators' shift in emphasis does not mean they have ruled out earlier 
theories, including sabotage, a bird strike, or problems caused by "wake 
vortices" from a Japan Airlines plane ahead of Flight 587.

But a former NTSB vice-chairman, Bob Francis, said that while it was 
theoretically possible for another jet's wake to have caused the crash, it 
would be unprecedented.

"Wake effects can give an airplane a good bang. But these planes are very 
strong."
 