
From a deep hole in a derelict site in central London, yards from the traffic 
of the Tottenham Court Road, evidence of an apparently ancient and peculiar 
civilisation has emerged: gods and philosophers, fertility goddesses with 12 
breasts, smashed plaster torsos and a giant bearded head with its features 
almost washed away evidently by millennia of rain or sea water.

On the upper level scores of pieces lie cleaned and sorted. Down below all is 
dank and dripping, and life-sized figures and heads on concrete plinths stand 
in pools of mud and water. All were made by the sculptor Daniel Silver, for 
Dig, aninstallation commissioned by Artangel 
<http://www.artangel.org.uk//projects/2013/dig/about_the_project/about_the_project>
, which opens to the public next Thursday.

Many of his creations could interest a Freudian analyst – the bearded figures 
with many breasts, heads where the mouth has disappeared and the beard become 
sinisterly tongue-like, others with no features except the gouge marks of the 
sculptor's fingers which have scooped away the face and brain.

In fact, Silver was inspired by a visit to the Sigmund Freud museum, and the 
collection of small antiquities including bronzes and marbles from ancient 
Egypt and Greece which Freud kept on his desk. Silver has transformed them: one 
diminutive 3,000-year-old Syrian effigy now stands 6ft tall and threatening.

Artangel, known for spectacular site specific pieces including Roger Hiorns' 
Seizure, an abandoned council flat transformed into a cave of bright blue 
copper sulphate crystals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2008/sep/04/art>, has spent months 
preparing the site for the public, adding lighting, safety fencing, scaffolding 
steps, and water pumps – six inches of water is atmospheric, six feet if the 
threatened torrential rains come would be trickier.

Silver knew the site well, passing it every day when he was a student at the 
nearby Slade, usually pausing to peer in through the fence. Only lumps of 
scarred concrete and a few paint smudges remain of what was once an Odeon 
cinema, with more than 2,500 seats. A huge curved screen was installed in the 
1950s to take the three-projector Cinemiracle films, short lived predecessors 
of 3D: "The screen comes alive!" the publicity for Windjammer promised in 1958, 
"Experience the most exciting adventures on land and sea … all records broken 
in Norway." It broke no records in London: the cinema was demolished in 1960, 
and the site, now owned by UCL hospital, has been derelict ever since.

Silver has been fascinated by archaeology since he was a child living in 
Jerusalem, and regularly brought to see newly discovered sites. "There was 
always the excitement of climbing down into a hole in the ground, and the 
puzzle of time - sometimes I was told this place dated back to the time of 
David or Herod but I could never get my head around that, to me the past was 
something still going on, time was all around us."

"I want people to come and think maybe this was always here, and they just 
missed it before."

Dig, Grafton Way, London, open free Tuesday-Sunday, 12 Sept- 3 November
 