
Danny Talbot said the “heartbreak” of missing out on selection for last year’s 
world championships fired him to victory overAdam Gemili 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-gemili> in the 200 metres at the 
Sainsbury’s British Championships on Saturday – and insisted he could beat 
Gemili to the European title as well.

The 23-year-old finished strongly in the rain at Birmingham’s Alexander 
Stadium to pip his friend and rival to the line in 20.42sec, sealing his place 
in the Great Britain team for the European championships in Zurich in August. 
The pair were room-mates at the London Olympics but, while Gemili went on to 
make last year’s world championship 200m final in Moscow, running 19.98 to get 
there, Talbot failed to make the squad.

“I definitely had a point to prove,” Talbot said. “Last season, missing out on 
the world championships was the most heartbreaking thing that’s happened to me 
in the sport. Me and my coach [Daniel Cossins] went away, set up a plan and 
trained so hard over the winter, so it’s really nice to come back this year and 
prove a point.”

Talbot spent the whole indoor season training as a 400m runner, key to his 
strength down the home straight on Saturday, and is determined to taste more 
success this summer.

“I want to win at the Europeans,” he said. “I’ve just beaten a world-class 
field there with Chris Clarke and James Ellington and Adam. I can’t really get 
much harder than running against a 19-second 200m runner, so if I can beat Adam 
hopefully I can go on and challenge [France’s Christophe] Lemaitre and the rest 
of Europe.”

Gemili’s time of 20.61 was outside the qualifying mark for Zurich but, with 
time to achieve it, he is still likely to be on the plane. Talbot, the European 
bronze medallist two years ago, is confident of beating his compatriot in 
Switzerland too. “When I’m on the start line I’m not going to shy away from 
anything, so, yes, hopefully in the Europeans I can do that,” said Talbot, who 
will also race over 200m for England at the Commonwealth Games in Glasgow.

Gemili, whose heat on Friday was his first 200m of the year, revealed he had 
suffered cramp in a foot, but paid tribute to the victor.

The men’s 100m is the most eagerly anticipated event this weekend and all the 
big guns made it safely through to Sunday’s semi-finals. Chijindu Ujah, who 
heads the British rankings with 9.96, was the fastest qualifier in 10.26, while 
Dwain Chambers (10.34), Richard Kilty (10.40), Harry Aikines-Aryeetey (10.41) 
and James Ellington (10.48) were heat winners.

The British championships double as the trials for the Europeans, with the top 
two finishers in each event sealing their place in the team, provided they have 
the required standard.

Jodie Williams took the women’s 200m title in an impressive 22.79, while 
Bianca Williams (22.88) joined her in securing selection.

Williams, the former world junior 100m champion, has seen her progress 
hampered by injury in recent seasons but, with a 200m personal best this season 
of 22.76, is back on track.

She said: “I am slowly finding my feet again, slowly building my way back up 
into world-class sprinting and hopefully I can show everyone what I’m really 
made of this summer.”

Laura Weightman won a thrilling 1500m final, edging out Laura Muir in the 
final metres, with both athletes booking their place on the plane to Zurich.

The heptathlete Katarina Johnson-Thompson achieved high jump selection but had 
to settle for second place behind Isobel Pooley, who won with 1.90m to her 
rival’s 1.86m.

Elsewhere, Niall Flannery and Tom Burton guaranteed selection in the 400m 
hurdles, Tiffany Porter did so in the 100m hurdles, Tom Farrell booked a 5,000m 
spot, James Wilkinson a 3,000m steeplechase place and JJ Jegede sealed long 
jump selection.
 