
Dario Vidosic steered Western Sydney to their first win of the A-League 
season, striking in the first half to sendPerth Glory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/perthglory> down 1-0 at Pirtek Stadium. 
The patience of Wanderers fans was finally rewarded on Sunday evening, in a 
reversal of last month’s FFA Cup quarter-final loss to the Glory.

It fittingly came on the one-year anniversary of their historic Asian 
Champions League triumph, though it was one of the revamped side’s nine new 
faces who provided the winner.

Luckless Adelaide left scratching their heads as Roar score three | A-League
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/31/luckless-adelaide-left-scratching-their-heads-as-roar-score-three-in-brisbane>
In the shadow of half-time, under cascading rain and flashes of lightning, 
Vidosic sent the crowd – and coach Tony Popovic – into raptures. Spanish 
defender Alberto sent a pass to the edge of the box where Vidosic was waiting.

The marquee signing took a brilliant first touch before driving a powerful 
finish past ex-Wanderers custodian Ante Covic, who was back at his former home 
venue for the first time since being axed by Popovic.

Covic, who was named most valuable player in Western Sydney’s ACL win, worked 
hard the entire match as the dominant Wanderers peppered the Perth goal with 
shots including an earlier on-target effort from Vidosic.

Glory coach Kenny Lowe was a picture of angst on the sideline and his 
gesticulating only increased as his players became more busy in the second 
half, creating some decent chances which they failed to convert.

Recently called-up to the Socceroos, Josh Risdon was menacing on the wing, but 
it was two of his former Perth team-mates, Mitch Nichols and Scott Jamieson, 
who really threatened with pace and accuracy as the red and black held the 
majority of possession.

A sneaky low free-kick from Jamieson after the break gifted Vidosic yet 
another opportunity only for him to dribble wide.

Italian striker Federico Piovaccari’s desperation to score continued when he 
almost latched onto a Mark Bridge rebound. Popovic brought Piovaccari off in 
the 79th minute, replacing him with Brendon Santalab, back following a 
pre-season quad injury after last season’s lengthy spell on the sidelines with 
successive shoulder problems.

Soon after Santalab came on, he slid heavily into the goalpost while 
attempting to poke in a cross. Initially appearing to suffer yet another stroke 
of back luck, he eventually returned to play.

Perth hassled and harried, but the Wanderers took their first clean sheet in 
16 matches.
 