
If intellectual history is more a series of decisions than of developments, an 
interesting, and disturbing, point in the intellectual history of the 
University of London was reached just before Christmas 2003.

On December 10, the full council of the university, chaired by the 
vice-chancellor, sat in the gloomy splendour of Senate House and decided to 
merge the Institute of United States Studies with the Institute of Latin 
American Studies in a new, comparative, "Institute for the Study of the 
Americas".

The Institute of United States Studies is the oldest graduate institute for 
the study the United States in Europe. It has a long and distinguished history. 
It provides not only graduate degrees but also runs a high profile public 
programme of conferences, lectures, recitals and performances covering many 
facets of American life including music, poetry, constitutional issues, 
politics, law and international relations. In March 2003 a major review was 
instituted under the leadership of Professor Tony Badger, master of Clare 
College Cambridge, who convened a distinguished panel of seven senior 
academics. In the course of the review, representations were received from 79 
people, including the heads ofAmerican studies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/americanstudies> departments at eleven 
British universities.

In early November 2003 the report of the panel was submitted. The key findings 
were: first, that there is a national need to support an American studies 
centre in London, since "the opportunities for the study of the United States 
in London are unrivalled anywhere in the country." Second, that American 
studies nationally need a vigorous research presence in London; a national 
clearing house to enable national access to London research resources; a 
visible London presence to give access to government and media, and a high 
profile institute to take advantage of the presence here of Americans in 
academia, politics, the arts, business and financial institutions. Thirdly, it 
argued that the understanding of the United States has never been more 
important, and, that at no time has the academic study of the United States 
been more popular. It concluded that under former director Gary McDowell's 
leadership, "an expanded program of public seminars and conferences has put the 
institute on the map and there is well deserved praise for its programmes of 
public lectures of exceptional quality and diversity."

The review probed the quality of all the institute's programmes, finding some 
outstanding and others lacking. The review commented that the "advisory council 
of the institute had created a remarkable resource for external support of 
which any academic programme would be justifiably envious." The review 
concluded by considering four possible future options: 1) closure; 2) 
continuation in the current form; 3) merging with the Institute of Latin 
American Studies; 4) creating an enlarged, strengthened and transformed 
institute with at least two further academic posts. The first three options 
were rejected and the fourth, which followed from the logic of the review's 
basic premise, was recommended: "a national centre for the study of the United 
States and the creation of a genuine research base for the subject in London is 
essential (and long overdue) if American Studies is to continue to flourish in 
this country."

However, when the report was submitted to the university a curious thing 
happened: its clear recommendation was rejected. Instead a resolution was put 
to the full university council that the third option, rejected by the review 
panel, be accepted and that the institute be merged with the Institute of Latin 
American Studies.

The advice of the institute's own advisory council - this "remarkable resource 
of which any academic program would be justifiably envious" - was not sought. 
Indeed, quite the reverse. When it assembled on November 26 to consider the 
Badger report, it was informed without warning that the university had already 
rejected the review's principal recommendation. Nevertheless, the council 
overwhelmingly supported Professor Badger's review panel, even though it was 
given no time to provide a considered opinion or develop arguments against the 
surprise fait accompli.

What failure of vision could possibly have led the university effectively to 
disband its own institute in the face of a well argued and clear recommendation 
from a distinguished panel that it be renewed and expanded, just at the time in 
history when an understanding of the United States has never been more 
important? Moreover, does not the manner in which this was done call into 
question not only the university's judgement, but its good faith?

Further, what can possibly sustain the curious argument given in support of 
the university's decision that somehow the study of the United States would be 
strengthened by combining it with the study of Latin America? Reinforcement by 
dilution is a dubious principle. The university has embraced the fallacy of 
arguing that if Latin America cannot be understood without an understanding of 
the United States, therefore the United States cannot be understood without the 
study of Latin America. The first may be true, the second is manifestly false. 
The extraordinary phenomenon which is the United States can be well understood 
with scant reference to Central and Latin America. There are, of course, 
overlaps between the two regions, but they are not fundamental. The 
intellectual arguments for combining the two institutes are feeble. The truth 
is that the bureaucratic logic which drove the decision is both prosaic and 
unpersuasive. It appears that the driving force behind the amalgamation was the 
misguided attraction of the hemispheric approach, a conceptual fallacy which 
manifests the true weakness of the university's academic imagination.

The decision concerning the Institute of United States Studies reflects a 
major failure of nerve and vision by the University of London. And the style 
with which its advisory panel was summarily not informed and given no chance to 
advise raises the question of its candour. Perhaps it is true that in the 
current climate of financial stringencies many academic institutions must take 
the rough with the rough, but for those who accept the Badger report's basic 
premise, this is acutely distressing. At a time when anti-Americanism worldwide 
has never been more intense or more ill-informed, the willingness to ignore the 
need for a London-based institute dedicated to the academic study of the United 
States reveals that the university abdicated its responsibilities to itself, 
and in so doing failed both the academic community and the nation.
 