
Jodie Williams, 20

I told her she could run 22.4 sec for the 200m and she was like ‘really?’ – 
and then in the Europeans she did just that to win silver. She is a major 
talent already and the mental toughness she showed to come back from injury 
will serve her well. Her coach is not happy with her arms, so that’s something 
she’ll work on. I’d like to see her running more 100 metres, which will help 
put herself into a better position in the home straight in the 200m. She 
definitely has the talent to make the world championship final in 2015.

Dina Asher-Smith, 18

An absolutely fantastic prospect and technique wise she is very sound and 
relaxed, too. But I wouldn’t put any pressure on her to make worlds or Olympic 
finals just yet. Remember she is only 18 and had hamstring issues in Eugene, 
Oregon, where she won the world 100m junior title, and in Zurich. Her body has 
to get used to the stresses and strains of more load in training, so its about 
being patient, letting her enjoy her athletics and allowing her to flourish.

Bianca Williams, 20

She won 200m silver in Glasgow and, although she was only fourth in Zurich, 
her body wasn’t quite right, so trust me when I say she is going to be special. 
The confidence she has gained this year is huge and, as she is just 20, it 
wouldn’t surprise me if she significantly improves on her PB of 22.58 next 
year. Her technique when she runs is so relaxed, and given her coach is Lloyd 
Cowan, who looks after Christine Ohurougu, expect her to tackle the 400m at 
some point.

James Dasaolu, 26

I was 24 when I won my first major championship, while James is 26, but there 
is still time for him to improve. After his 100m gold medal I asked James what 
he was thinking when the starter said ‘On your marks’. His reply? “Nothing”. 
And that’s right – you’re not supposed to think. It’s 10 seconds! That tells me 
he can deal with nerves. There will always be the question of whether his body 
will stand up but, if it does, he could well go below his PB of 9.91.

Adam Gemili, 20

That 19.98 run into a 1.6 m/s headwind to win 200m gold was the equivalent of 
a 19.7 or 19.8 on a nice day. And do you know what I like about Adam? He is a 
championship performer. I remember once being in a call room and a Nigerian 
sprinter said, ‘Darren’s in the final, that’s one less medal I can go for’ – 
and I thought I’ve half won the battle already. The way Adam is progressing – 
and he is just 20 – he is a serious contender for a medal in Beijing next year 
and Rio in 2016.

Matthew Hudson-Smith, 19

The fact that this is his transitional year, from junior to senior level, and 
he can run 44.75 for 400m tells me there’s a lot more to come. He has the 
speed, strength and a lovely stride length, too. I can see him running low 
44sec without doubt. I wouldn’t put a limit on it.
 