
What, one wonders, would Charles Darwin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/charles-darwin> or indeed his pugnacious 
supporter Thomas Henry Huxley have made of the recent rash of posters aimed at 
those who have nothing better to do than look at the sides of buses? These now 
serve to inform the world at large that, by the way, there may not be a God 
(although if you keep staring at buses you may also read precisely the opposite 
message).

With atheist banners passing him by Darwin, I imagine, would have harrumphed 
and in his characteristic manner passed the problem to his devoted chum. 
Huxley, I further suspect, would have quietly deplored the fact that the lower 
orders might take this sort of thing seriously, but would probably also look on 
it as another useful opportunity to further his secular agenda.

So what's new? Darwinian has reached near saturation and among the customary 
pieties there is little doubt that it will conveniently serve as a love-in, 
with much mutual self-congratulation, for atheism. But perhaps now is the time 
to rejoice not in what Darwin got right, and in demonstrating the reality of 
evolution in the context of entirely unexceptional natural processes there is 
no dispute, but what his inheritance is in terms of unfinished business. Isn't 
it curious how evolution is regarded by some as a total, universe-embracing 
explanation, although those who treat it as a religion might protest and 
sometimes not gently. Don't worry, the science of evolution is certainly 
incomplete. In fact, understanding a process, in this case natural selection 
and adaptation, doesn't automatically mean that you also possess predictive 
powers as to what might (or even must) evolve. Nor is it logical to assume that 
simply because we are a product of evolution, as patently we are, that explains 
our capacity to understand the world. Rather the reverse.

But wait a moment; everybody knows that evolution isn't predictable. Yes, a 
rich and vibrant biosphere to admire, but no end-product any more likely (or 
unlikely) than any other. Received wisdom pours out the usual litany: random 
mutations, catastrophic mass extinctions and other mega-disasters, 
super-virulent microbes all ensure that the drunkard's walk is a linear process 
in comparison to the ceaseless lurching seen in the history of life. So not 
surprisingly nearly all neo-Darwinians insist that the outcomes – and that 
includes you – are complete flukes of circumstance. So to find flying organisms 
on some remote planet might not be a big surprise, but certainly no birds. 
Perhaps all life employs cells, but would anybody dare to predict a mushroom? 
In fact the evidence points in diametrically the opposite direction. Birds 
evolved at least twice, maybe four times. So too with the mushrooms. Both are 
among the less familiar examples of evolutionary convergence.

Convergence? Simply how from very different starting points organisms 
"navigate" to very much the same biological solution. A classic example are our 
camera eyes and those of the squid; astonishingly similar but they evolved 
independently. But let's not just concentrate on the squid eye, from molecules 
to social systems convergence is ubiquitous. Forget also the idea that in 
biology nearly anything is possible, that by and large it is a massive set of 
less than satisfactory compromises. In fact, paradoxically the sheer prevalence 
of convergence strongly indicates that the choices are far more limited, but 
when they do emerge the product is superb. Did you know eyes can detect single 
photons and our noses single molecules?Evolution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/evolution> has reached the limits of what 
is possible on planet Earth. In particular our doors of perception can only be 
extended by scientific instrument, enabling a panorama from the big bang to DNA.

Yet how the former led to the latter, how it was that complexity emerged and 
is sustained even in that near-miracle of a chemical factory we call the cell 
is still largely enigmatic. Self-organisation is certainly involved, but one of 
the puzzles of evolution is the sheer versatility of many molecules, being 
employed in a myriad of different capacities. Indeed it is now legitimate to 
talk of a logic to biology, not a term you will hear on the lips of many 
neo-Darwinians. Nevertheless, evolution is evidently following more fundamental 
rules. Scientific certainly, but ones that transcend Darwinism. What! Darwinism 
not a total explanation? Why should it be? It is after all only a mechanism, 
but if evolution is predictive, indeed possesses a logic, then evidently it is 
being governed by deeper principles. Come to think about it so are all 
sciences; why should Darwinism be any exception?

But there is more. How to explain mind? Darwin fumbled it. Could he trust his 
thoughts any more than those of a dog? Or worse, perhaps here was one point 
(along, as it happens, with the origin of life) that his apparently 
all-embracing theory ran into the buffers? In some ways the former possibility, 
the woof-woof hypothesis, is the more entertaining. After all, being a product 
of evolution gives no warrant at all that what we perceive as rationality, and 
indeed one that science and mathematics employ with almost dizzying success, 
has as its basis anything more than sheer whimsy. If, however, the universe is 
actually the product of a rational Mind and evolution is simply the search 
engine that in leading to sentience and consciousness allows us to discover the 
fundamental architecture of the universe – a point many mathematicians 
intuitively sense when they speak of the unreasonable effectiveness of 
mathematics – then things not only start to make much better sense, but they 
are also much more interesting. Farewell bleak nihilism; the cold assurances 
that all is meaningless. Of course, Darwin told us how to get there and by what 
mechanism, but neither why it is in the first place, nor how on earth we 
actually understand it.

To reiterate: when physicists speak of not only a strange universe, but one 
even stranger than we can possibly imagine, they articulate a sense of 
unfinished business that most neo-Darwinians don't even want to think about. Of 
course our brains are a product of evolution, but does anybody seriously 
believe consciousness itself is material? Well, yes, some argue just as much, 
but their explanations seem to have made no headway. We are indeed dealing with 
unfinished business. God's funeral? I don't think so. Please join me beside the 
coffin markedAtheism <https://www.theguardian.com/world/atheism>. I fear, 
however, there will be very few mourners.
 