
David Moyes has not spoken to Ashley Young following the diving furore, though 
theManchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> 
manager did admit that if there was retrospective action for such incidents and 
the winger had been found guilty, he would have no complaints.

Young faced criticism for going down too easily to win a penalty against Real 
Sociedad <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realsociedad> in Tuesday 
evening's Champions League 0-0 draw. But Moyes pointed to the official, Nicola 
Rizzoli, and said: "I think you should be saying the referee who refereed the 
Champions League final was two yards away from the incident. I was in the 
dugout and thought it looked a penalty kick. So I think the attention should be 
on the referee and not Ashley Young – the referee was as close as anyone could 
be to give the decision and it was his choice to give the penalty kick. And I 
think he could not have been in a better position if he'd tried."

Asked what his view was of the incident, in which Young was tugged by a 
Sociadad defender, Moyes said: "Having seen it again I think that's why I have 
been one of the ones who has quite often said that we should have retrospective 
[action for] diving. We should look at it for that decision. But on this 
occasion you'd have to say the referee could not have been closer. He gets 
tugged and the referee chooses to give a penalty kick.

" I'm saying if it was retrospective and they thought it was worth [action], 
then I'd be the first one to say: 'Fine.' And if we found something happened in 
that way, then we'd accept it."

Regarding whether Young needed to restore his reputation, the manager added: 
"I think you've got it wrong, I don't think it'sAshley Young 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ashley-young>, I think it's the referee."

Moyes also admitted that Marouane Fellaini, the £27.5m summer signing, was 
still way off his best form following a sluggish start to his United career, 
with the midfielder being sent off in the Sociedad game. "I didn't think he 
started slowly but when I had watched him playing I thought he looked a little 
bit behind," the Scot said. "We had to put him in [to the side] a bit earlier 
than I'd have liked, my plan was to put him in much slower and bring him on and 
give him a chance to settle in.

"But we put him in early because he needed it and I didn't think he was quite 
ready. I actually thought he played well in Sociedad. We could have taken him 
off after the booking but again the referee was very close to the incident so 
he must have got it right."
 