
David Haye <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/davidhayeboxing> has been a 
gambler all his life. Now, 11 months out from his self-imposed finishing line, 
the 30-year-old WBA champion finds the odds moving perceptibly his way as he 
seeks to unify the world heavyweight championship for the first time since 
Lennox Lewis held the three major belts 11 years ago.

Haye hopes to go one better, collecting the WBC, WBO and IBF titles to go with 
the WBA version he kept safe in a withering third-round dismissal of Audley 
Harrison's cardboard resistance in the MEN Arena in Manchester on Saturday 
night. It would be an unprecedented and remarkable achievement, even in a 
seriously devalued era. He is determined to do it before he turns 31 next 
October.

If Haye wants his friends to wander into the bookmakers today and back him 
tofulfil the dream he has been chasing since he was a small boy in Bermondsey, 
the odds on offer are 7-1 – not as crazy an investment as it sounds. Haye, a 
small man in a big man's world, has never shirked a challenge.

His explosive battering of Harrison (three stone heavier, three inches taller, 
with an eight-inch reach advantage) after two rounds of peace negotiations will 
have alerted the other title-holders, Wladimir and Vitali Klitschko, to the 
growing threat he poses to their hegemony.

From one perspective, though, it might make business that much harder to do 
than it has already proved in their tortured negotiations over the past 18 
months.

Yesterday the Ukrainian brothers' manager, Bernd Bonte, repeated his mantra 
that there will be no unification fights unless Haye agrees to an even split of 
all worldwide revenues.

Haye's manager, Adam Booth, says he has always been amenable to a 50:50 
division of the money – but Bonte and his clients fear Haye will make a killing 
with Sky and their powerful pay-per-view engine, while they will not earn 
anywhere near as much with their German free-to-air broadcaster, RTL.

But such is the excitement Haye's fights generate compared with the 
sleep-inducing bouts the Klitschkos have been involved in recently, that the 
charismatic Londoner brings more than mere belts to the table. He has 
box-office clout.

"I will do everything in my power to make these fights happen," Haye said 
after putting the finishing touches to Harrison's hugely disappointing 
professional career. He hinted at compromise, also, when he said in answer to 
suggestions he should give a little ground: "It depends on what a smaller purse 
is."

So, there is genuine hope that we will be delivered at least a year of 
dramatic heavyweight action before the boxing business returns to chaos.

Any fall-out from Haye's admission that he advised family and friends to back 
him to win in round three, delaying the execution for that purpose, will be a 
mere distraction to those talks, because these are the fights the sport and the 
fans deserve.

When the boos and cheers faded on Saturday night, Haye embraced Harrison in 
the corridors of the arena, although the latter's woeful performance did not 
warrant sympathy. "What did I say to him?" Haye said. "Nothing like the stuff I 
was saying the past few weeks."
 