
If there is a niggling doubt of impropriety about David Haye's confession that 
he bet on himself to stopAudley Harrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/audley-harrison> in the third round of their 
surreal world heavyweight title fight in Manchester, the greater crime was the 
predictably abject performance of the man who tumbled out of the fight and, for 
his sake and ours, out of boxing in that very round.

There was no evidence of complicity between the combatants to unnecessarily 
prolong the agony beyond what were two of the most peace-riddled rounds in the 
history of the sport, outside mutual recognition of an obvious gulf in their 
commitment to battle.

For third parties – some of them not entirely disinterested – to suggest that 
Haye somehow broke the shining spirit of the fight game by holding up Harrison 
to complete the execution at a moment of his choosing and thus profit from the 
exercise improperly might score a technical point but such mischief-making 
reads unnecessary mystery into a straightforward narrative.

It also ignores the long history of betting in boxing. Frank Warren was loud 
in his criticism. Yet Haye's promotional rival admitted losing a substantial 
amount on his fighter, Enzo Maccarinelli, when Haye stopped him in the second 
round of their world cruiserweight title on his promotion at the O2 Arena in 
Greenwich in March 2008.

The difference, Warren would argue, is that he plainly did not win his bet and 
that he was not in the ring to determine the course of the action. It is a fair 
point but it is not as if Haye bet on himself to lose. He did not fix the 
result in the way the Mob notoriously did in their pomp. Haye brought no shame 
on the sport bar sharing a ring with the most frightened pacifist ever to 
challenge for the world heavyweight title.

It was a side bet, if you like, the very essence of prizefighting when it 
entered the sporting consciousness of this country, bare-knuckled and brazen, 
in Georgian times. Indeed, the sport probably would not exist without gambling 
– a point that could be made about nearly all organised sports, most of which 
started in Britain over the past couple of centuries, from cricket to conkers.

Appearances count for much, though, especially in a sport perceived by some to 
be inhabited by shady characters. The position of the BritishBoxing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> Board of Control is unequivocal. "It 
is not permitted [for boxers to bet on a fight they are in]," the board's 
general secretary, Robert Smith said yesterday. "I've been told about David's 
comments but I did not hear them myself. We will take a look at them and will 
have to talk to Mr Haye and his people about them.

"There are regulations about betting at boxing venues. A promoter has to apply 
for a licence to do so. There was no such application in this case but you can 
place a bet on your mobile phone these days, so it is not particularly 
relevant." In all probability, Haye will get away with a caution.

The last time the board were alerted to the dangers of gambling was in 1992, 
when Lennox Lewis stopped Derek Williams in a British, Commonwealth and 
European title fight in the third round. It was suspected there was heavy 
betting on Williams losing in that very round, at 33-1, but no suggestions the 
fighter was in any way involved.

James DeGale admitted in the heady moments after he won his Olympic gold medal 
in Beijing two years ago that his father had won £11,000 on the fight. No fuss 
was made, no sanction brought to bear.

The promoter Mickey Duff happily admitted to making regular wagers on fights 
he promoted and, good judge though he was, even suffering regularly from his 
belief that Marvin Hagler, one day, would lose.

What is more relevant in terms of Saturday night's fight as a legitimate 
contest is Harrison's complicity in its farcical course.

Some fighters enter the ring subconsciously making arrangements for the least 
complicated way to get out of it: a do-or-die knockout swing, the kindly nod of 
a compassionate referee or a chilling blow by an opponent turned merciful 
executioner.

The suspicion that Harrison had such thoughts swimming in his confused head 
the instant he was caught in a maelstrom of his own making are hard to resist. 
Rarely has fear and apprehension been so vividly painted on a fighter's face.

Harrison made some bizarre excuses later, all delivered with the same 
evangelical zeal and overpowering self-delusion that he brought to his many 
pronouncements about shocking the world in the weeks before the event.

In the seven minutes and 53 seconds it lasted, he threw 32 punches and landed 
one, a jab. Yet he felt justified in sharing blame for his demonstrable flight 
from the fight with the referee and his opponent. "Credit to David, he caught 
me with a good shot. I beat the count, but the referee stopped the fight. I 
have to take it on the chin." That he did.

His inaction spoke louder than his words. In his moment of worst resort, 
Harrison lifted a shaking glove towards his battered mouth and tried to remove 
his gum shield, as poignant a symbol of surrender as exists in boxing.

How far it was from the famous image of Mike Tyson, battered to the floor by 
Buster Douglas in the 10th round in Tokyo 20 years ago, yet pawing about on the 
canvas for his teeth-protecting implement as the referee counted to ten over 
his kneeling body.

There are worse ways to lose. On Saturday night, Harrison found one.
 