
David Hart, who has died aged 66 of motor neurone disease, was one of the more 
colourful figures to be attracted to the anterooms of politics – in his case, 
by the prospect of helping to secure the objectives and legacy ofMargaret 
Thatcher <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher>, along with 
some less clearcut concerns of his own. Such a claim to influence is generally 
a delusion, but Hart's was sufficiently impressive for newspapers to be mildly 
alarmed.

The Daily Mail's headline in September 1994 over the elegant copy of its chief 
commentator, Geoffrey Levy, expressed a general view: "He has a massive 
fortune, two women, the confidence of ministers, and the nickname Spiv. Is he 
the power behind a future rightwing prime minister? Or is he simply all talk?" 
Hart was rich, briefly through his own efforts, putting family-gifted money 
into the undemanding property boom of the 1960s. Later, through an opulent 
inheritance, he was set loose in the speculator's heaven of "development", and 
became rich again.

In between, he lost a fortune – "delusionally" said the official receiver – in 
a tornado of extravagance, going bankrupt in 1975 to the tune of £960,000.

He had owned a grand house in Somerset, and came and went in large 
chauffeur-driven cars. He kept two mistresses, supported an eventual total of 
five children, and smoked vast cigars. When the money came back, he acquired a 
Georgian country house in Suffolk, and later embarked on, though did not 
complete, a "23ft-high ancient Egyptian-style" stone and glass structure with 
room, he claimed, for 34 family tombs.

The core of Hart's money derived from his father, Louis Hart, of the banking 
firm Ansbacher. Louis, his Eton-educated son said, "was a brilliant 
watercolourist, but he repressed his artistic yearnings in order to be a 
financier". His death in 1978 brought David's bankruptcy to an end.

The following year, Thatcher's Conservative government came to power. 
Notoriously, she was sometimes given to short-term political infatuations, and 
for a brief period Hart had her ear. He made himself useful – how useful is not 
quite clear – during the 1984-85 struggle withArthur Scargill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/arthur-scargill> and the miners. With a 
base at Claridge's hotel in central London and making descents upon the East 
Midlands in a chauffeur-driven Mercedes, he went to work on Nottinghamshire NUM 
men, one of whom later became his butler.

Leaders and troops in that highly economic coalfield had never been keen on 
the strike. Understandably angry with Scargill's virulence, they were amenable 
to defection. Defect they did, but precisely how far in response to Hart and 
how much defection did to win the conflict is unknowable.

A serious political operator might have built on such a base and entered 
politics, either in parliament or on the carpeted parts of backstairs, but Hart 
failed to capitalise on the situation. As the Observer revealed 10 years on, an 
intervention late in 1985 had terminated his connections despite a letter 
"grovelling to Thatcher". His unacknowledged newsletter British Briefing, 
intended for a very limited circulation, had lobbied in hysterical and 
offensive terms for a British bid to provide a vast communications system to 
the US: President Ronald Reagan was "not properly in charge in the US", 
"incipient anti-Americanism" threatened Britain and "Thatcher could only just 
keep it in check." The Pentagon's favour toward a French option "threatened the 
special relationship". Similar messages were conveyed to the US ambassador, 
with Hart giving the impression of being an official envoy. However, the 
uncritical admirer of the US quickly found himself unrecognised, as also by the 
Tory conference, for which his ticket was withdrawn. The grovelling letter 
followed – and the US chose the French option.

A natural bombarder with memos, Hart had early set about forming 
organisations. They were rightwing, patriotic or pro-American – not quite 
fascist, just lurid. He ran a Committee for a Free Britain, one of whose 
pamphlets attacked Geoffrey Howe for wrong attitudes in South Africa, soft on 
the Communist Threat. There was a photo of Howe allegedly giving a 
clenched-fist salute in Mozambique. Hart claimed that he had alerted Thatcher 
to the danger, but she needed no encouragement to drag her feet over South 
African liberation.

Hart eventually re-emerged with useful contacts. In 1993 he was appointed as 
personal adviser to Malcolm Rifkind at the Ministry of Defence, but some not 
altogether nonsensical comments on MoD waste made him new enemies. The floated 
message that this character might really be pulling strings at the ministry 
drew fire all round and greatness receded again, with Hart cursing officials, 
civil servants and journalists.

He also advised Rifkind's successor, Michael Portillo, who, in 1995, made his 
sending-fear-up-their-spines conference oration about the SAS. Hart was 
credited with, and of course proclaimed, a hand in that. He had also had a hand 
that summer in the installation of a set of telephone lines in a potential 
Westminster campaign headquarters for Portillo.John Major 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/john-major> demanded his party's 
endorsement in a leadership vote: Portillo was still professing loyalty to him 
when his supporters' over-zealousness came to light, and the cause fizzled out.

Hart had entertained hopes of succeeding Eldon Griffiths as MP for Bury St 
Edmunds. But they came to nothing.

After Labour won in 1997, he wrote novels and plays that explored his 
fascination with power and money. His plays seem, not surprisingly, to have 
been about great men. He thought we sentimentalised God, whose cruelty was an 
essential to be embraced. The bible legend rang false. By not sacrificing 
Isaac, Abraham had let down the Jews. As Hart told a Sunday Telegraph 
interviewer in 2003: "I think God is in and about, and part of, and sustains 
everything – bad things as well as good things. The idea that God would be so 
circumscribed by our paltry view of morals that he has to be the god of love is 
to me astonishing, futile and idiotic."

He is survived by his wife, Christina; by their two sons; by another son and 
two daughters; and by their three respective mothers.

• David Hart, political adviser and property developer, born 5 February 1944; 
died 6 January 2011
 