
David Price retained his British and Commonwealth titles with a brutal 
first-round knockout ofAudley Harrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/audley-harrison> that put the former Olympic 
champion in hospital with a suspected broken nose and mild concussion; it also 
almost certainly sends him into retirement.

By his own admission, Harrison was drinking in the last chance saloon this 
evening – a place he seems to have resided for quite a while – and he said a 
sixth professional loss would end a career of perplexing underachievement. The 
last time Harrison topped the bill in a packed north-west arena he was 
dispatched by David Haye in an embarrassingly timid display in Manchester 
almost two years ago. On that occasion, a countryman operating at a higher 
level allowed him two untroubled rounds before administering the finishing 
touches. Price did not give him the luxury.

A quiet opening unravelled rapidly for Harrison as soon as he tasted the 
fearsome power Price carries in his right hand, and after just 82 second he lay 
prone on the canvas. A national hero when he brought gold home from Sydney 12 
years ago, a stark demonstration of how far the 40-year-old has fallen in the 
public's affections came when he walked to the ring to a chorus of boos and 
chants of "Who are you?" before Liverpool's Echo Arena crowd opted for a 
courser version. By contrast, ardent Liverpool fan Price was afforded a 
spine-tingling reception to the strains ofYou'll Never Walk Alone

The two giant combatants initially came cautiously to the middle of the ring, 
Harrison stalking behind a high guard. The veteran landed the first punch of 
the contest, but his left to the chest was of little consequence. When Price 
finally connected, it was anything but. Finding his range with a jab more 
inquisitive than authoritative, Price detonated a fierce straight right that 
caught Harrison flush on the chin and sent him reeling towards the ropes.

As when Haye had Harrison in trouble, Price scented blood and would not 
relent. Harrison covered up under the inevitable barrage that followed – 
briefly to reasonable effect – but he had nowhere to go. A chopping Price 
right-hook got through, forcing Harrison's head to rock sickeningly back over 
the ropes. It prompted referee Howard Foster to step in as further punishment 
rained down and the defeated fighter slumped flat on the floor.

Price has now knocked out 12 of 14 opponents he has faced in an unblemished 
career to date and looked every inch the heir to the Klitschko brothers. But it 
is questionable how much can be taken out of a win against a man who has so 
squandered his talent and now serves only as a cautionary tale to 2012's golden 
generation.
 