
A really excellent short story is a thing that refuses to be faced head on. It 
folds into itself, circles you back to its beginning and replays endlessly, 
while some part – the maddening, mesmerising part – remains impenetrable. The 
American writerDavid Means <https://www.theguardian.com/books/david-means>, 
whose four collections span 25 years, is the master of this kind of refusal. 
His stories, which evoke lives rather than the neat, lone epiphany that’s 
become the form’s standard, usually operate around an inner concealment, some 
careful reticence that reveals and compels grace.

“What you hope for,” he offers, speaking in Bryant Park 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5616777ee4b00a8347dbb4fb/1786411>, 
behind the New York Public Library, “is that you radiate the past behind the 
story and the future in front of it. You want to end in a way that makes the 
reader go back and reread and pushes them forward into eternity or whatever the 
hell’s out there. With a novel you actually have the opposite – you’ve gotta 
wrap things up.”

Now, at 54, Means is a debut novelist with Hystopia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/21/hystopia-david-means-review>, a 
mind-bending novel within a novel, that both does and does not wrap things up. 
A better word, in fact, than “wrap” might be “enfold”. Within the alternative 
history of the book – in which JFK, having survived multiple assassination 
attempts is serving his third term as president – the word is used to describe 
the process of repressing traumatic memory via a government-issued drug named 
Tripizoid. The government has tasked an agency called Psych Corps to deal with 
traumatised soldiers returning from Vietnam. It does so disastrously: 
bureaucracy and containment thwarting what these men require to become human 
again. Once enfolded, the only way to reverse the procedure is by immersion in 
very cold water or, more appealingly, “fantastic, beautiful, orgasmic sex”. The 
opposite, in other words, of systemising, state control.

Among the unhinged veterans marauding the state of Michigan, enacting and 
re-enacting atrocities on civilians, is the psychotic Rake, who has drugged and 
kidnapped a young woman called Meg. A federal agent called Singleton is sent to 
find him and as he and another agent, Wendy, fall in love, they wonder if they 
are being manipulated by the agency into a forbidden relationship.

This is a world created by Eugene Allen, a young soldier who has returned from 
Vietnam to write a novel calledHystopia, in which national and personal trauma 
fuse and spark. Much as they do for Means, who says he has wanted to write a 
Vietnam novel for 25 years, though the family trauma that inspired the book 
goes back even further. “I used to be sort of reclusive,” he says, “but when my 
dad died I was like, ‘Fuck this, you have a lot of ideas, just start talking – 
it may not be coherent but maybe one out of every 10 sentences will be 
interesting.’”

He talks about the intolerableness of those who speak in long, slow, perfectly 
formed pronouncements, and suggests that “the best speakers about ideas are 
comedians, because they can just make it all into a joke.” In fact, Means has 
something of the stand up comic about him, with a demeanour of conspiratorial 
merriment. Which is not a phrase anyone has ever used about his work. He cares, 
as he puts it, about, “people on the very edge of the human predicament”: the 
homeless, suicidal, destitute and desperate. The quality of this caring, 
however, elevates his stories from the bleak into something sacred. AsJeffrey 
Eugenides <https://www.theguardian.com/books/jeffrey-eugenides> described it, 
Means sees his characters, “and life itself, from somewhere just beyond, in a 
position of maximum understanding and honourable detachment: a semidivine 
vantage point...”

Hystopia by David Means review – the virtuoso short story writer’s tricksy 
first novel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/21/hystopia-david-means-review> 
Jonathan Franzen <https://www.theguardian.com/books/jonathan-franzen>, who 
Means calls his “closest writer friend”, recently described him as, “remarkably 
kind, funny, well adjusted”. Means, who in his own words is, “somewhat 
religious in a hugely problematic way”, believes in grace, both “at the 
theological level but also at the sort of mechanical level too. If you’re aware 
and you’re human and you’re alive and your attention is there, there is some 
moment after [atrocity] of grace.”

He once claimed that “all fiction is about the relation of the small moments 
in time to large ones” and that relation is so often enacted in his work by 
omission. Sometimes the refusal to tell the story straight is literal, as in 
“The Blade”, in which one vagrant in a huddle of men around a campfire 
withholds his “knife story”. WithHystopia, the withholding was a necessity of 
craft, as well as of familial respect. “I had to work around it,” he says, of 
his family story. “And I had to use it as fuel, and I felt – and feel – that if 
I just came out with [it] that I’d use it all up.”

In 2006, Means published “The Spot”, a short story that features characters 
who appear inHystopia: the captive Meg Allen and the soldier Billy-T. It would 
seem then, that the book unravelled itself from this story. In truth, there’s a 
very Meansian chronological warping to the book’s genesis. “I took a year off 
to write a novel, and I chewed nicotine gum and I drank coffee and I wrote a 
manuscript, and I was almost done with the draft of the novel and then I said, 
‘Fuck this, I’m going to write a story,’ so I wrote ‘The Spot’.”

With Vietnam it didn’t take that long to not only ignore the war but act like 
we had actually won the war

Only years later did he return to that manuscript, which eventually became 
Hystopia. “You can’t take a story and just stretch it out – that does not a 
novel make,” he laughs. “And I had done that! – I have written a couple of 
novels that I just couldn’t put my name on. I always just thought it’s better 
to look at the long run.” Nonetheless: “It’s really hard to be a story writer – 
no matter how much acclaim you get – and not write a novel.” He pulls a note 
fromDon DeLillo <https://www.theguardian.com/books/dondelillo> out of his 
backpack – proud and at the same time embarrassed by his pleasure and pride. 
They have been corresponding for years but have only met once, atDavid Foster 
Wallace <https://www.theguardian.com/books/david-foster-wallace>’s funeral in 
2008. “The imperative is to keep doing stories,” wrote DeLillo. “It takes a 
long time before the novel begins to reveal the deeper currents of the writer.’”

Hystopia is prefaced with a quotation from Jonathan Shay, the doctor and 
writer whose work on PTSD Means deeply admires: “Traumatic memory is not 
narrative.” Trauma is not coherent, nor is war, hence, perhaps, our compulsion 
to tell ourselves stories about it. As Means sees it: “With Vietnam it didn’t 
take that long to not only ignore the war but act like we had actually won the 
war. And now we lost the Iraq war, as far as I can tell, and we have people 
...” – he checks himself “ – I don’t even want to say his name. I’m trying to 
quickly guide us away from that.” Five days after we meet, Trump wins the West 
Virginia and Nebraska primaries.

Literary Mixtape: David Means's soundtrack for reflecting on the Vietnam War
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/literary-mixtapes-by-electric-literature/2016/may/04/literary-mixtape-david-meanss-soundtrack-for-reflecting-on-the-vietnam-war>
“History is delusional,” Means says. “Not just an illusion, it’s a delusion. 
America is this giant country, so it has these big delusions, and history is 
where delusions play out. That’s where our delusions of who we are take place – 
not in the present moment, not in the future, but in the past.” In Vietnam, 
this happened on a micro level. As Means recounts with fervid incredulity, US 
generals would write the battle plan after the battle had happened, making 
reality a kind of retroactive fiction. In the novel, Singleton considers 
fictionalising his reports: “He’d been hoping for a way into violence, for an 
apex of all narrative lines leading to Rake.”

“Anything I write,” Means stresses, “is not even close to the absurdity and 
weirdness of Vietnam.”

He was careful to keep the book, for all its thematic and structural 
outlandishness, as straightforward as possible in its language. “I really 
wanted to write the kind of book I wanted to read when I was 20. At some level 
I began to think, ‘Wow I’m writing a Young Adult novel for adults.’ I had to 
realise that certain sentences are just going to move the novel along, and as a 
story writer you’re not used to that, it seems cheap and too easy.”

Means was born in 1961 and grew up in Kalamazoo, Michigan, where the primary 
industry was paper manufacturing. The Kalamazoo river, one of the most polluted 
in the world, snakes through several of his stories, including “The Spot” and 
“Sleeping Bear Lament”, in which the narrator watches, “the failing light 
falling dead on the hardened corrugation of sludge”. Means was too young to 
serve in Vietnam – just two years old when TV news showed what would become one 
of the defining images of the war, the Buddhist monk Thích Quảng Đức, seated at 
a Saigon intersection, burning himself to death. But Means was a teenager when 
his aunt, mother of five and principal of a high school, stopped her car on the 
way to work one morning, poured gasoline over her head and immolated herself. 
Her suicide features in his story “Assorted Fire Events” where again, trauma is 
enfolded, this time within the sentence’s parentheses themselves: she was, he 
writes, a “member of a fine upstanding family with no deep-felt hardships 
(apparent from the outside).”

We’re a quick-fix country and we drive forward and we eat up what we have 
fast, in terms of natural resources and ideas

How does a person, or a family, or a nation, get over such things? The phrase 
“all cures are bogus” is one ofHystopia’s refrains, as in: “the cure was 
actually often effective, so that the claim of its bogus nature was itself 
partly bogus”.

“We believe in cures,” says Means, “we’re a quick-fix country and we drive 
forward and we eat up what we have extremely fast, in terms of natural 
resources and also ideas and intellectual property. We’re kind of wilfully 
stupid a lot of the time, anti-intellectual.”

And then a lighter note strikes him: “‘Bogus’ is a great word that I feel 
hasn’t been used enough lately. There are so many things from the 60s and 70s, 
like ‘cosmic’ and ‘groovy’, that are actually really useful and should probably 
be back in the mix. I mean, it’s sad that we don’t think in that way any more, 
or at that level – that we shut that all down. But I believe that it can be 
brought back round again. That dynamic dreaming that the 60s had. The good side 
of the 60s – we can find it again.”

Only a work as intelligently engaged with trauma as Hystopia is could allow a 
reader to glimpse that kind of optimism. Eugene Allen’s novel ends with a 
section entitled “Rumors”, in which he offers various versions of his 
characters’ fates. Before these though, they are granted a hippie ending, more 
utopia than hystopia, in which the couples go back to the land to seek 
salvation in love and nature. “Like all good delusions,” Means writes as 
Eugene, “it was fuelled by genuine hope and dedication to the truth.”

• To order Hystopia by David Means for £12.99 (RRP £16.99) go to 
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/400251/s/hystopia/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 