
Tyson Fury will not be going to the MEN Arena tomorrow night to watch two 
fighters he claims he could beat already, after only 12 professional bouts. 
Bravado aside, the unbeaten young Manchester heavyweight says he will have £100 
onAudley Harrison <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/audley-harrison> at 12-1 
to knock out David Haye and take the WBA heavyweight title.

There are more than a few casual observers who share the big man's view. The 
reasons are Harrison's size and Haye's chin. Harrison, of course, agrees and 
hopes to grind down the champion with a three-stone pull in the weights and an 
eight-inch reach advantage. But if picking a winner were that straightforward 
bookmakers would soon be out of business. The imponderables make for a more 
interesting scenario.

The fight brings together a 6ft 6in, 39-year-old challenger who weighs more 
than 18st but boxes as if he were a gnat on an elephant's backside, and a 
champion nine years younger, three inches shorter and three stones lighter, who 
fights with the edgy intensity of a recently released lion. It ought to be a 
good mix. But, as Fury points out, it could equally be a "boring chess match" 
if Harrison does not come out of his shell and Haye has to chase.

For the first time since the fight was announced, Harrison today dropped his 
amicable front and stormed away from the weigh-in with the anger and resolve of 
someone nobody seems to be taking seriously. He has as much to prove to himself 
as to his detractors, and that could work for or against him.

If he does throw punches from the start, and if enough of them land to put 
Haye out of his stride, Harrison has a chance. Perversely, however, it could be 
his undoing because the very quality that annoys fans, his ultra-defensive 
attitude and reluctance to engage in heavy exchanges, is the one that may 
frustrate Haye the most.

It is Haye's task to break down that considerable barrier. "I'm going to get 
close to Audley and make him fight every second of the fight," Haye said. To do 
that, he has to get under Harrison's unusually long leading right arm, all 86 
inches of it, and work the body. Once there, he will probably turn southpaw 
himself in the clinches to prevent Harrison chopping down on him with his 
numbing left hand.

Haye is often criticised for boxing with his hands down when, in fact, it is 
one of his defensive strengths, as he explains. "With your hands up," he said, 
"you can't let your good punches go. But some people can't fight with their 
hands low, because that's the way they've learned to box. It's an individual 
thing. I've always found it easier – and my opponents have found it harder – 
when I throw my punches up at them. Also I've got a clear vision. When my hands 
are up I blind myself, I can't see shots coming."

Not guarding his chin with his glove also forces Haye to protect himself with 
lateral movement and, given his trigger-quick reflexes, he gets away with it – 
most of the time. Knockdowns against Carl Thompson and Jean-Marc Mormeck have 
been repeatedly noted, yet there has not been much commentary on those fights 
in which he has taken relatively little punishment.

Harrison reckons he will be too strong for Haye, that the champion comes to 
this second defence of his title a worried man. "My size will take its toll on 
him," Harrison said. "He is so scared of losing, he has trained like a crazy 
man. We did not expect him to come in so light".

Haye says he paid no heed to the scales and just trained to the limit. A few 
pounds either way will make little difference. What will win it for Haye, 
probably inside five rounds, will be his speed – which weighs nothing at all 
but delivers a concussive result.
 