
David Moyes has called for retrospective action to be taken against players 
who dive after admitting the problem is now so widespread that the Manchester 
United manager cannot guaranteewhether Ashley Young will take on board his 
latest warning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/sep/14/david-moyes-ashley-young-dive>
 to eradicate it from his game.

Moyes wants the Football Association's disciplinary panel to be given the 
power to look at alleged diving offences and punish anyone who is guilty of 
trying to deceive the referee.

The idea also has the backing of Rio Ferdinand and comes on the same day that 
the Crystal Palace chairman, Steve Parish, suggested players who were guilty of 
trying to con a penalty for their teams should be automatically sent off. Young 
received a yellow card after a diveagainst Palace on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/sep/15/marouane-fellaini-wayne-rooney-manchester-united>
 and Moyes confirmed he had reprimanded his player, just as Sir Alex Ferguson 
had done when he was manager. "You can never be sure it won't happen again but 
I have had a word with him privately," Moyes said.

Moyes has previously fined players at Everton for diving, including Phil 
Neville, now a member of his backroom staff at Old Trafford, and was outspoken 
in his criticisms of Luis Suárez – like Young, another with a history of diving 
– before the Merseyside derby last season.

"I have said for many years that we should have retrospective video action 
against diving," Moyes, preparing for United's game against Bayer Leverkusen on 
Tuesday and his first experience of managing in the Champions League, said. 
"That would help referees no end. My views haven't changed from when I was at 
Everton to when I was atManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united>."
 David Moyes at Manchester United training in preparation for the Champions 
League game against Bayer Leverkusen. Photograph: Matthew Peters/Man Utd via 
Getty 
Ferdinand spoke out as a centre-half who believes defenders have had to modify 
their game because of the increased willingness of forwards to go to ground 
under any form of contact. "The forwards are cute. They know how to do this 
kind of stuff. It is quite a difficult thing to look at and say: 'He dived.' 
But retrospective viewings and punishments may be the way to go."

The former England international added: "If it happens, it has to happen 
across the board. It has to happen across Europe. We are going into the 
Champions League and, if we are being told we can't dive in our league and then 
you come across people in other countries who simulate … you don't want people 
to feel they can con the referee."

Young's yellow card was followed by the same player being involved for the 
penalty that led to the referee, Jon Moss, sending off Kagisho Dikgacoi. Robin 
van Persie scored from the spot to put United on their way to a 2-0 win.

Parish said: "If preventing a goalscoring opportunity is a straight red then 
trying to create one by cheating should be a straight red. Ashley Young's dive 
and the appeal before [involving Patrice Evra] put pressure on the ref to give 
a subsequent penalty that was certainly outside the area and probably wasn't 
even a foul.

"Ashley Young has a yellow card and three points and we've no points and one 
less player to pick from for the next game. [It] might have cost us a point 
that might keep us up. [We] need to get some momentum behind a straight red for 
a dive."

Young's habit of exaggerated falls has led to widespread criticism of the 
winger, in particular because of the way he jutted out his leg to try to 
initiate contact with Dikgacoi. Ashley Cole, another England international, 
appeared to dive during Chelsea's game at Old Trafford last month and 
Ferdinand, speaking generally, said it was now commonplace. "It's become a part 
of our game that, as defenders we are used to."

Moyes was asked whether he agreed with Parish that the punishment should be 
upgraded to a red card. "We can make up all the punishments we like but the 
rules are there and they are the ones the referees have to abide by," he said. 
"The referee did what he had to do and gave him a yellow card. The referee got 
the decision correct, called it right and gave him what punishment he could."
 