
The life of Abraham Lincoln has been constantly reinterpreted. He has been 
seen as everything from hallowed genius to demented fanatic. This year has been 
Lincoln's bicentennial, bringing further renown for the historian David Herbert 
Donald, who has died aged 88.

Donald's writing about Lincoln spanned nearly 50 years, and his 1995 
biography, Lincoln, is considered the best and most balanced. His Lincoln is a 
determined man struggling to find inner reserves to cope with immense crises.

Although he twice won the Pulitzer prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/pulitzerprize>, neither award honoured his 
work on Lincoln. The first was in 1961 for the opening part of his two-volume 
biography of the abolitionist Charles Sumner, who he presented as a radical 
whose Republican leadership placed Lincoln in an almost untenable position. By 
the time the second volume was published in 1970, influenced by changes brought 
on by the civil rights movement, Donald's Sumner was more of a visionary moral 
leader.

He won his second Pulitzer for Look Homeward, his 1987 biography of the 
novelist Thomas Wolfe, author of the 1929 classic Look Homeward, Angel. It was 
a more personal project because, as Donald put it, "Wolfe told my story". Like 
Wolfe, Donald was a southerner transplanted to the world of Yankee 
intellectuals, and spent his career examining the great divide between north 
and south. He also considered himself a frustrated novelist, saying biographies 
ought to "let the story tell itself and have it as ambiguous, as ambivalent as 
a modern novel".

Donald was born on a farm in Goodman, Mississippi. He graduated from Millsaps 
College, in Jackson, Mississippi, then received his PhD in history in 1946 from 
the University of Illinois, studying under the civil war scholar James G 
Randall. He began teaching at Columbia, in New York, and in 1947 published his 
first book, Lincoln Reconsidered, a collection of essays which was followed in 
1948 by Lincoln's Herndon, a study of William Henry Herndon, Lincoln's Illinois 
law partner and biographer. Although he claimed he originally found Lincoln a 
tedious subject, Donald's studies of Lincoln's relationships to people close to 
him would lead him to conclude that he was ambitious, politically shrewd 
and "much more sensitive and human than I had thought before".

In 1954 Donald edited Inside Lincoln's Cabinet: The Civil War Diaries of 
Salmon P Chase, and in 1960 edited Why the North Won the Civil War and revised 
an edition of his Lincoln essays. He also revised his mentor Randall's key 1937 
study The Civil War and Reconstruction, and followed it with his own The 
Politics of Reconstruction (1965), breaking new ground by using statistical 
analysis to detail how the relative safety of a congressional seat was the 
prime determinant in how fiercely politicians pursued radical policies.

Donald also taught at Smith, Princeton and Johns Hopkins universities before 
joining Harvard as Charles Warren professor of history in 1973, a post he held 
until 1991, when he was made emeritus professor. He was Harmsworth professor of 
American history at Oxford University (1959-60) and also taught at University 
College London. His last book, We Are Lincoln Men, a study of the president's 
friendships, appeared in 2004. At the time of his death, he was working on a 
study of John Quincy Adams.

He is survived by his wife of 53 years, Aida DiPace Donald, and a son, Bruce.

• David Herbert Donald, historian and biographer, born 1 October 1920; died 17 
May 2009
 