
Position

51° 54.0823 S

58° 26.2095 W

Life on board ship is tidy, organised, and packed into ingenious corners. 
We're still in port, but the ship's rhythm is already sinking in. It feels 
familiar and friendly. I'm finding it odd that we're stationary – I'm used to 
this environment moving constantly, and I love being rocked to sleep by the 
waves.

Our two days on board have been spent moving boxes around, unpacking, 
allocating space and, most importantly, finding out where the tea supplies are. 
Our scientific gear left the UK six months ago with the ship, and it's a relief 
to be reunited. But not all reunions are happy. Six months is a long time for a 
lonely cargo box to be lifted up, put down, shoved into corners and rocked 
around. Someone always finds that stuff that worked when they put it in the box 
doesn't work when they take it out. On this occasion, it was me.

Things started well. We got our moment of playing pirate when we climbed the 
mast to install some equipment to measure CO2 and tiny particles in the air. I 
had a safety harness instead of an eyepatch and a bag of spanners instead of a 
cutlass, and it was horribly windy – any parrot daft enough to accompany me 
would have been blown away in no time flat. Still, we now have the means to 
measure the ocean breathing. Eat your heart out, Jack Sparrow.
 This is my workspace, home to all my experimental gear for the next month. It 
isn't glamourous but it does have portholes. Photograph: Helen Czerski 
Later that afternoon, large boxes containing my bubble measurement apparatus 
emerged from the depths of the hold in a cargo net. Underwater bubbles are 
tricky things to monitor, and the usual way to detect them is to use sound. The 
beautiful thing about bubbles is that they vibrate by rapidly expanding and 
contracting (known as a breathing mode, for obvious reasons), and that means 
that bubbles behave like bells. Big bubbles ring with deeper notes, and small 
bubbles ring with higher notes. They also absorb sound at those frequencies. 
The device that I've brought with me, called a resonator, is like a portable 
echo chamber. As bubbles pass through, they change the echoes at different 
frequencies, and so by listening to those echoes, you can count the number of 
bubbles of each size that are getting in the way.

I plugged in all the things that needed to be plugged in, ran a bath in the 
sink for the resonators and switched it all on. And there were no echoes. It 
was a bad moment.

After dinner (food on ships is very punctual and doesn't tend to wait for 
you), I came back and spent two hours problem-solving. It was actually fun, 
even though it probably shouldn't have been. Each small "aha!" moment is very 
rewarding: "Oh, so it works when this is unplugged, but not when it's plugged 
in." The outcome is that I worked out how to get data from one resonator, but 
not both at the same time. That's a considerable improvement on nothing, so I 
was pretty happy. However, it limits my experiments. I've sent some emails for 
advice on whether we might be able to fix it at sea, but I'm reluctant to risk 
my one working resonator by messing with it too much. I'll carry on with what 
I've got for now.
 The Falklands are just like Dartmoor, but with added penguins. Photograph: 
Helen Czerski 
Today was a better day because it included penguins. We went for a walk along 
the coastline and found a huge white isolated beach. Some way along it, small 
black and white figures were waddling from the sea, over the beach, up the 
grassy slope on the other side and along to a large patch of mud next to some 
sheep. It had never occurred to me that I'd ever see sheep and penguins in the 
same place. It looks quite a lot like Dartmoor round here, except that it's got 
ocean and penguins. We could have watched them for hours, and if you were 
judging by the number of photos that we took, you'd probably think that we had.

We got back to the ship to find everyone else pretty much settled in. A few 
people had made a last trip into Stanley to top up their supplies of chocolate, 
and the rest were checking their gear. We sail tomorrow morning, and everything 
must be strapped down by then. It's amazing how anything left loose will find 
its way on to the floor and will often set off down the corridor, even in calm 
weather.
 No penguin shortage here. No penguin photo shortage either. Photograph: Helen 
Czerski 
The weather forecast is for steady winds tomorrow, an easy start to the trip. 
It's still and calm now. I'm eager to get going after all this preparation. 
Tomorrow will be an exciting day.

Helen Czerski <http://www.helenczerski.net/> is a physicist and oceanographer 
based at Southampton University 
<http://www.southampton.ac.uk/engineering/about/staff/hc6e10.page>. She tweets 
@helenczerski <https://twitter.com/#!/helenczerski>

Helen will post her second report next Tuesday. Readers can quiz the 
expedition scientists about their work and experiences at sea in a live 
ship-to-land Q&A session on Tuesday 24 April
 