
"It's Splitsville!" read a headline in the morning's Metro. I leaned over 
someone's shoulder to get a closer look at the story. It was a small piece; she 
didn't warrant front page treatment yet. In the picture, Vic was walking out of 
a hotel late at night, one arm thrown up to protect herself. Her tights were 
laddered, her mascara had run.

I called her when I got into the gallery.
"Do I have to get news about you from the Metro now?" 
There had been more nights of pasta and wine and conversation. It was nice, 
she said, to talk to someone whowasn't in the business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2002/dec/29/artsfeatures.popandrock1>. 
"Oh God," she said, "I haven't seen the papers. What is it?"
"They reckon you broke up with Jean-Michel last night."
She laughed. She'd broken up with Jean-Michel three weeks earlier; they were 
just waiting for the papers to catch up.
"But really, why the ..." I quoted from the paper "'tear-stained midnight 
dash?'"
"I can't talk about it now," she said, "meet me for coffee?"

We sat at the back of a cafe near the Strand. She wore a hat. I got the drinks.
"It's Jules and Frankie," she said, "big arguments. Well, you know, creative 
differences."
"They're jealous," I said.
She laughed, "you sound like my mum." She'd told me about her mother: pushy, a 
little overprotective, proud. She stirred her coffee. "Yeah, though. They 
reckon I'm hogging all the attention."
"It's because you're more talented than them," I said.
She shrugged. "Too late now anyway. The band's breaking up."

As we left, I realised how near we were to the Courtauld Gallery. I begged her 
to come inside with me, just for a few minutes and she, perhaps not wanting to 
go back to her real life just yet, agreed.

She was captivated by a Cézanne – one of his mountain pictures – I wondered if 
it was the image that intrigued her, the symbolic peak to climb, but she 
murmured:
"I've been there."
"Really?"
"When I was nine. My mum won a bit of money off a scratchcard. We chose it 
because of the name of the mountain – my name! It was so beautiful there. We 
joked that at the top of the mountain was heaven, that we were right next to 
heaven. I said one day I'd buy a house next to that mountain."
She rolled her eyes at me. "Long way to go yet, though."
 