
Maybe it is something to do with the maturing process, but I find myself 
increasingly drawn to plants that provide longevity. When I was a student I 
took shrubs for granted. All too often they were banked up in heavy, depressing 
shrubberies like football fans on the terraces, forming a mass with no 
distinguishing features. These amorphous collections were often intended to 
provide screening, and mostly it seemed as if they had been planted to do 
little more than that - lilac blurring into buddleia, potentilla smudging the 
outline of Jerusalem sage, camellia interchangeable with rhododendron. The 
darkened ground beneath was often little more than dust, and as a rule they 
were over by summer solstice - an early flurry of anticipation giving way to a 
deafening anticlimax. But pull those shrubberies apart, take a second look, and 
on closer inspection there's a very different story to be told.

More and more frequently I'm finding that I don't like to see a garden reduced 
to ground level in winter. I want body in a border, and this is where shrubs 
come into their own. I want my eye to be halted, and a sense of intrigue in 
what lies beyond. I like a little dappled light to create some depth and 
provide shelter for those plants that like it cool, and I like a climbing frame 
for those that need something to scramble on. I also love the way a shrub can 
illuminate a garden and eclipse everything around it for a fortnight when it 
comes into bloom or, even better, if it does so and is perfumed, like the 
viburnums or June-flowering Elaeagnus 'Quicksilver'. Growing it on a grand 
scale makes you draw breath and remember.

Ceanothus does this to the exclusion of everything else, for it is hard to 
ignore the sheer intensity of azure and cobalt blue when they erupt in early 
summer. They flower to the point at which you can no longer see the foliage - 
you will need a clear area around them to give the colour the breathing space 
it needs. I rarely use them in this country, because they feel better in the 
dry air and sunshine of Italy or the south of France, but the need to single 
them out is a rule that can be applied to shrubs in general. Take them out of 
the shrubbery so you can see their ankles and knees, see how they fill out when 
given room, and suddenly there is a wealth to choose from. Let the light fall 
around them and allow the more ephemeral perennials, bulbs and annuals to 
spread among them, and they'll take on a levity that will draw you back for 
that second look.

I have been missing my coyote willows since they all mysteriously died last 
year.The garden has not been quite the same without them, but the mass of the 
myrtle and the incense rose, the box mound, the hydrangeas and the tree peonies 
add the necessary volume. The tree peonies are a personal favourite, and I have 
been using Paeonia ludlowii a lot of late, as much for its dramatic deep-cut 
foliage as for its kingcup yellow flowers. What I particularly like about these 
gangly shrubs is the fact that they are deciduous - and the unfurling of the 
foliage from bud to bloom is miraculous. Having a balance of evergreen and 
deciduous is important in a garden, and having the seasons mapped in a shrub is 
key. Two seasons at least should be present, and though lilac epitomises a 
moment in May - nothing is better than a shrub floating in cow parsley - you 
need to have the room to be able to turn your back on it when the moment is 
over. Likewise, a philadelphus blooming in the first weeks of summer is a 
glory, to be sure, but it is deadened by the wealth of more dynamic plants 
around it once it is spent. If it had berries as well as bloom, autumn foliage 
or coloured winter stems, I would use them more, and this is one reason why I 
grow Philadelphus coronarius 'Aureus', as it provides a flash of light with its 
primrose foliage.

It takes three years for shrubs to register in a new planting and about five 
for things to feel settled. So if I am committing to this volume of growth, I 
want to know that I have used my space well. Nothing focuses you more than 
living in a town garden where every inch counts. Choisya 'Aztec Pearl', with 
its musky divided leaf and scented May blossom, is a perfect candidate for the 
smaller garden, and I wouldn't be without my Rosa x odorata. I have written 
about my R 'Mutabilis' many a time because of its myriad ever-changing flowers, 
but R x odorata 'Bengal Crimson' is a new favourite. Perfect scarlet buds fling 
open a spill of single crimson flowers. I love the way they fade to cerise pink 
and continue the succession from April to the first autumn frosts. The shrub is 
evergreen in a warm corner, 6ft high and almost as much across.

I'm always looking for something new and take enforced change as a good thing. 
My beloved Magnolia sinensis also died last year, but a garden without a 
summer-blooming magnolia would not be complete, so M x wieseneri has filled its 
place, because it is always worth trying something new. I know flowers will 
elude me this year, but this time next year I hope to have the scented creamy 
blooms illuminating this shady corner; they smell of pineapple, aniseed and 
vanilla. Under the branches, for I will be using the magnolia to provide my 
shady corner with dappled light, I will have a seat positioned for the first 
flower opening. It is nice to have learned to wait for the good things.

dan.pearson@observer.co.uk <mailto:dan.pearson@observer.co.uk>

· Observer offer Paeonia ludlowii has large yellow flowers and blooms in late 
spring. Readers can buy one plant in an 11cm pot for only £24.95 or two plants 
for £44.90, saving £5. Call0870 836 0909, quoting ref OBDP079, or send a cheque 
made payable to Observer Reader Offers with your order to Observer Paeonia 
Ludlowii Offer, OBDP079, Rookery Farm, Joys Bank, Holbeach St Johns, Spalding 
PE12 8SG. Price includes UK mainland p&p. Dispatch within 28 days
 