
My brother, a Tefl teacher, wants to return to the UK – what are his job 
options?

My brother has been a Tefl teacher for more than a decade and is head of a Tefl
 <https://www.theguardian.com/education/tefl> school for adults in Australia. 
He is also an accomplished musician. After a recent trip back home with his 
wife and children they have decided to come back for a year or two – 
potentially longer. It is all rather dependent on employment, of course, which 
is probably the first factor before location.

My brother is a dedicated and passionate teacher. I feel teachers across the 
spectrum in this country are not valued (I say this as a teacher myself), so 
I’d be really interested in your view and those of Tefl teachers here. Also, 
are there any areas in the UK with a particular need for Tefl teachers?

Jeremy says

This is such a specialised inquiry that I can do little better than refer your 
brother to a good search engine. I’ve surfed a bit myself and it’s clear there 
is demand for experienced Tefl teachers in the UK, though I suspect 
opportunities for someone as senior as your brother may be few and far between.

As far as location is concerned, it seems obvious that demand is most likely 
to be concentrated in the larger metropolitan areas such as London, Birmingham, 
Manchester and so on.

But, as is so often the case, your brother’s questions are most likely to be 
usefully answered by that small army of Guardian readers always so ready to 
share their first-hand knowledge.

Readers say 

• Oxford, Cambridge and Bath have a year-round Tefl offer. Don’t discount 
holiday revision courses too – Oxford is full of them and students are 
increasingly diverse, needing EFL and subject-specific tuition.Green123 

• I was in a similar situation when I moved back from Mexico. Initially the 
options were limited, but when a friend suggested looking at English as an 
additional language (EAL) posts in boarding schools, a whole world opened up. 
Many boarding schools rely on an intake of overseas pupils and a strong EAL 
department is essential to making a success of this strategy.juliafbird

• One option is to work at a summer school for kids. You can find these jobs at
Tefl.com <http://www.tefl.com/>. Another better-paid option is to get a job 
teaching EAP (English for academic purposes) at a university. The best way into 
this is to apply to teach on a pre-sessional summer course. These jobs are on
Jobs.ac.uk <http://www.jobs.ac.uk/>. It’s not uncommon to be taken on for 
teaching work in the academic year following the summer course. You stand more 
of a chance if you have the Delta qualification, or an MA in Tesol and applied 
linguistics.Katy Yelland

• Lots of universities have partnerships with an organisation called Into 
<http://www.intostudy.com/en-gb/about-into>, which helps international students 
brush up on their language skills before they start university.Scrowjane

• It’s pointless teaching English as a foreign language in Britain. The job 
pays better and has more status in eastern Europe or Asia or Latin America. The 
real money is to be made in oil-producing countries.KarlNaylor75

• I’ve worked as and recruited teachers into EAP in a university. The jobs are 
advertised on university websites,Jobs.ac.uk <http://www.jobs.ac.uk/> and 
Baleap.org <http://baleap.org/>. You will need a diploma (Delta) or master’s in 
applied linguistics. The Delta is better and can be studied part-time and more 
cheaply.possumpossum

I’m good at making things. What I need is a job that will allow me to do it

I face a bit of a conundrum. I feel as if I have a million skills but, for 
love nor money, I seem unable/incapable of finding the career I want. I am 32 
and for 16 years have worked in hospitality for a large IT company. I believe I 
am good at it, but my heart’s not in it.

What do I want? To make stuff. Vague, I hear you say. Agreed. All I can say is 
that every non-work moment of my day is spent making things, from robots to 
garden watering systems to gaming consoles. I have looked into the model-making 
and movie prop industries but have come up against the standard excuse for us 
Generation X people – how much experience do you have?

How do I find a job that allows me to make things without the catch-22 of 
in-work experience … of making things?

Jeremy says

If you were a would-be graphic designer you’d have compiled a portfolio and 
would be assiduous in keeping it fresh and contemporary. I wonder if you’ve 
attempted to compile the equivalent of a portfolio of your inventions. If you 
haven’t, as an obsessive maker of things this challenge should appeal to you.

I’ve no idea how you might go about it or what form your “portfolio” might 
take, but you should be able to produce something. I imagine you have 
photographic records of at least some of your constructions or, if not, could 
soon produce them.

The point I’m making is that in the absence of formal employment experience, 
hard physical evidence of your competence could be an excellent substitute. The 
more ingenious and imaginative you can make such an exhibit, the more effective 
it can be. Its very construction proves your abilities.

Then you should see if you can attract a little publicity. You could start a 
blog about your passion, passing on hints to others. And maybe attract a 
mention in your local paper with a photograph of one of your constructions. It 
doesn’t have to be a great feature: just enough for you to add to your 
credentials.

If you can achieve some or all of this, plus any other thoughts that may occur 
to you, you start from a stronger position when you approach model-making or 
film prop companies. You will not be an inexperienced amateur but an 
interesting individual with evident talent, and even something of an 
established reputation.

Readers say 

• Have you thought about doing videos of your model making and putting them on 
YouTube? They should be delivered as if you were demonstrating to an audience – 
you can edit to fast-forward the slower sections. You can then send a link to 
your YouTube channel with your CV as proof of your skills.sojomo 

• Make things you think people might want to buy and put them on eBay. 
Something will sell for a big margin. Make more to check it wasn’t a one-off. 
Next, set up as a sole trader and get a website going. Be unique, sell for good 
margins and take pride in quality and customer service. If and when you get 
bored of working alone you’ll have more than enough skills to get a job you 
want.8rocko

• Think broader: architects need models, training companies need training rigs 
and demo sets, hospitality companies need one-off giveaways, colleges need 
displays …Justabloke

• Your skills may be well used in the engineering sector – I am told it’s 
easier to get into than creative industries. Look for apprenticeships, then 
after some training and experience you could move into something more creative 
and practical.gertrudefeigenbaum
 