
There are many people in England who organise their lives without making any 
reference to a supernatural being. We may or may not call ourselves atheists, 
humanists or non-believers. Names, labels and taxonomies are, to my mind, less 
important than the fact that we lead our lives on the basis that there is no 
being or entity outside of earthly life forms involved in any of our affairs. 
We are born, we grow up, we get up, we eat, we work, we play, we mourn, we 
love, we die, and we do these things without religious worship or religious 
ceremony.

Education secretary made ‘error of law’ on new religious studies GCSE – high 
court
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/25/education-secretary-made-error-of-law-on-new-religious-studies-gcse-high-court>
This is no secret. Many of the people who sit in the House of Commons live 
like this too. Less well known, particularly among young people, is that there 
is a long history of people trying to express this, and struggling for the 
right to be this kind of person. There is evidence for people developing 
atheistical ideas in ancient Greece, China and India. In the face of 
persecution, people in Europe have asserted a range of non-religious viewpoints 
from at least the 16th century onwards. In some parts of the world today, it is 
extremely dangerous to be a secularist, with possible fatal consequences. If 
you thought being anglo-centric about these matters was relevant and important, 
I can assure you that atheism and humanism in England and in the UK as a whole 
have a specific history. In the 19th century, your party succeeded in securing 
the imprisonment of an MP, Charles Bradlaugh, on the basis that he felt he 
wouldn’t take a religious oath when taking his seat. In countries with which 
the UK has had and continues to have important and close ties – in Europe, 
North America and in the former British empire – the writing and dissemination 
of atheist and humanist ideas have a long, fascinating and troubled history.

This thread of ideas and daily living practices has been a vital part in the 
lives of key figures in history, philosophy, politics, science and the arts. As 
a result it has contributed to the world we live in. Small wonder then that the 
Religious Education Council of England and Wales recommended that when students 
study religious education for GCSE, worldviews such as humanism should be 
included. TheirCurriculum Framework [pdf] 
<http://resubjectreview.recouncil.org.uk/media/file/RE_Review_Summary.pdf> 
pointed out that the word “worldviews” should be understood to include humanism 
and consistently referred again and again in its recommendations to “religions 
and worldviews”, as one phrase. It in an enlightened document.

However, when the course of study was published in February 2015, humanism was 
not given parity of esteem and was demoted to a couple of clauses. In response, 
aletter of protest [pdf] 
<https://humanism.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/Open-letter-to-Minister-of-State-for-School-Reform-Nick-Gibb-MP-supporting-Humanism-in-Religious-Studies.pdf>
 signed by a number of people across public life was sent to the schools 
minister, Nick Gibb.

You and your department refused to budge. There it would have rested if it 
hadn’t been for some parents challenging the matter in the high court, 
resulting in a judgment last week that stated that you (not personally, but in 
your capacity as the secretary of state for education) had erred in asserting 
that this GCSE would “fulfil the entirety of the state’s RE duties”.

We can save atheism from the New Atheists like Richard Dawkins | Jeff Sparrow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/30/we-can-save-atheism-from-the-new-atheists>
This assertion was, the judge said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/25/education-secretary-made-error-of-law-on-new-religious-studies-gcse-high-court>
, in breach of the government’s duty to ensure that the job of the wider school 
curriculum is to make sure that knowledge is conveyed “in a pluralistic 
manner”. He suggested that such a course should be giving students information 
about atheism and other non-religious viewpoints.

The response from a Department for Education spokesman is stunning in its 
refusal to respond to the criticism: “Our new RS GCSE ensures pupils understand 
the diversity of religious beliefs in Great Britain through the study of more 
than one religion – an important part of our drive to tackle segregation and 
ensure pupils are properly prepared for life in modern Britain.”

I put it to you: yes indeed, many people do live in “modern Britain” as 
believers, but many of us live as atheists or humanists. This is not the 
behaviour or belief of a tiny group of adherents. It may not be visible in the 
way that state occasions or BBC television and radio slots display the 
practices of believers, but that’s because for most of us our way of being 
atheists or humanists is simply to do life that way, whether we’re going 
shopping or thinking about our dead loved ones. I’m not clear how you can fully 
tackle segregation or prepare for “life in modern Britain” while pretending 
that atheists don’t exist. It looks to me as if your spokesman has erected 
another form of segregation: the one that excludes atheist and humanist history 
and practice from this GCSE.

Yours, Michael Rosen
 