
Two years after he was sacked from Have I Got News For You?, nearly 2 million 
people watched Angus Deayton's return in BBC2's Nighty Night.

The sitcom, described by the Daily Mirror as "dark but evil genius", stars 
Julia Davis as the wife of a cancer sufferer who falls for a doctor, played by 
Deayton, whose own wife has multiple sclerosis. Last night's opening episode 
had 1.9 million viewers, just under one in 10 of the available audience.

Nighty Night, which first aired on BBC3, was warmly received by the critics. 
It was praised by the Sunday Times as a "blistering wall of superbly unredeemed 
cruelty", while the Guardian said it was "pushing at the boundaries of comedy". 
Davies, who also starred in Chris Morris's Jam, made her name in BBC2's dark 
comedy series Human Remains alongside Marion and Geoff star Rob Brydon.

On ITV1, comedy drama Life Begins continued to pull in the viewers. The fifth 
episode of the six-part series, written by Cold Feet creator Mike Bullen and 
starring Caroline Quentin, had 9.3 million viewers, just under four in 10 of 
the audience. Unsurprisingly, it beat the second of BBC1's hospital documentary 
series Your Life In Their Hands, which had 4.3 million, or a fifth of the 
audience.

At the same time on Channel 4, FHM columnist turned TV presenter Grub Smith 
underwent infantry training and learned "how to take a human life" on Channel 
4's The Truth About Killing. The documentary had 1.1 million viewers, or a 5% 
share. It lost out to BBC2's Never Mind the Buzzcocks and Catherine Tate Show, 
which had 2.6 million and 1.9 million viewers respectively.

The second in BBC1's Hollywood Greats series, which last night profiled 
Richard Harris, had 2.8 million at 10.35pm - a fifth of the television 
audience. This was just 100,000 down on last week's series opener, which 
featured Dustin Hoffman.

Channel Five's documentary series about the war in Iraq, The Fight for 
Baghdad, began with 600,000 viewers, or a 2% share at 8pm. But the channel's 
Jean-Claude Van Damme movie, Legionnaire, fared rather better, with 2 million 
viewers - one in 10 of the audience - from 9pm.
 