
Angus Deayton <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/angus-deayton> failed 
to score on his return to prime time TV when his ITV documentary about David 
and Victoria Beckham was beaten by the return of They Think it's All Over.

Posh and Becks: The Reign in Spain focused on the week leading up to David 
Beckham's first league match for Real Madrid.

It had 3.5 million viewers, or fewer than one in five of the audience at 
9.45pm last night.

It was beaten by the second half of BBC1's They Think It's All Over, which 
returned with new team captains Phil Tufnell and David Seaman. It averaged 5 
million viewers, or nearly one in four of the audience.

The Beckhams documentary is the third show Deayton has presented since his 
sacking from Have I Got News For You after revelations about his private life, 
and his first for ITV, for whom he has previously presented the Baftas.

Jamie Oliver cooked up a ratings success for Channel 4 with nearly 4 million 
viewers tuning in to watch an update on his London restaurant venture, Fifteen.

Return to Jamie's Kitchen, a follow-up to the reality show in which Oliver set 
up a restaurant with 15 unemployed youngsters, averaged 3.8 million last night, 
or one in six viewers. The final episode of Jamie's Kitchen last December had 6 
million.

The Channel 4 show had nearly twice as many viewers as the first episode of 
BBC2's new three-part drama, The Key. The Clydeside drama, which traces the 
story of three generations of a family over eight decades, averaged 2 million 
viewers.

The Key was matched by Five's US crime import, CSI: Miami, which had an 
identical 2 million viewers at 9pm.

Manchester United's opening Champions League game against Panathinaikos scored 
with 5.2 million viewers for ITV. Sky's coverage of Beckham's Champions League 
game for Real Madrid had 241,000 on Sky Sports 2.

But ITV's football coverage lost out to another returning series on BBC1, A 
Life of Grime. The docusoap, following the work of environmental health 
officers, had 6.3 million at 9pm last night.

BBC1's first "black" sitcom, The Crouches, held on to most of its audience 
despite a critical mauling for last week's opening episode.

The second instalment had 3 million viewers, or one in five of the audience, 
at 10.35pm, 200,000 down on last week.

It won its slot against the ITV News, which had 2.5 million, and the second 
half of Channel 4's Unarmed and Dangerous.

The documentary, in which the actor Mat Fraser attempted to become an 
"Ultimate Fighter," had 1.3 million viewers, an 8% share.
 