
Angus Deayton <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/angus-deayton> has 
been censured by the BBC for making a "pungently personal" joke about Sir Jimmy 
Savile and his late mother.

Deayton made the remark on BBC1 panel show Would I Lie To You? 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bFQNJOg437A>, his most high-profile job for the 
BBC since he was sacked from Have I Got News For You? five years ago.

"Sir Jimmy is quite keen on seeing how blue mouldy bits develop," said Deayton.

"That's why he stayed with his mum so long after she died. The blue bit in 
cheese is in fact a living fungus that smells slightly off and serves no useful 
purpose - much like Sir Jimmy himself nowadays."

But not all the audience appeared to appreciate the joke. Nor did one of the 
show's two regular team captains, Lee Mack, who told Deayton: "I am sorry but 
that is well out of order."

The BBC's editorial complaints unit intervened following a complaint from a 
viewer who said the joke had exceeded the bounds of acceptability.

"The scripted remarks, which focused on Sir Jimmy's age and stories which had 
been current at the time of his mother's death more than 25 years ago, were out 
of keeping with the tone of the preceding material and more pungently personal 
than warranted by his position in the public eye," the ECU said.

The complaints unit, which deals with serious complaints about breaches of the 
BBC's editorial standards, upheld the viewer's complaint.

Deayton's joke was included in an episode of Would I Lie To You? broadcast on 
BBC1 on July 28 this year.

It followed a part of the show in which guest panellist Claudia Winkleman 
admitted once writing to Jim'll Fix It to ask to meet Abba.

She was offered the chance to find out how the blue bits were made in cheese 
instead.

The ECU said the issue would be discussed with the show's producers - it is 
made by Zeppotron, part of Big Brother producer Endemol - and added the episode 
would not be repeated in its present form.

· To contact the MediaGuardian newsdesk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857. For all other 
inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 7278 2332.

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 