
Angus Deayton <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/angus-deayton> last 
night completed his rehabilitation as a mainstream TV performer, with the ITV1 
comedy drama in which he starred, Heartless, proving far more popular than 
BBC1's swift repeat of BBC3 costume romp Casanova.

It has been a long way back for Deayton, who was sacked as host of BBC1 panel 
show Have I Got News for You in October 2002 after BBC bosses decided 
revelations about his private life made his position untenable.

He survived the original tabloid revelations in May 2001 but was axed after 
further stories appeared the following year. The last straw came when Christine 
Hamilton made fun of him on the show, saying, "If my husband is disgraced, what 
does that make you?".

Since then Deayton has made a number of forays into presenting and acting, 
notably as host of last year's ITV1 reality show Hell's Kitchen.

He also had a role in Julia Davis's award winning BBC3 black comedy, Nighty 
Night; and has successfully hosted BBC2's Celebrity University Challenge on the 
past two Comic Relief nights.

Last night Deayton took the lead role in ITV1's Heartless as a womanising 
divorce lawyer who undergoes a personality transplant when given a new heart.

The Caleb Ranson-scripted single drama attracted 7.5 million viewers - a third 
of the available audience - between 9pm and 10.30pm, according to unofficial 
overnights.

Heartless proved more popular than BBC1's repeat of critically lauded BBC3 
drama Casanova, starring David Tennant as the 18th century philanderer.

Casanova was watched by 3.8 million viewers and attracted a 16% audience share 
between 9pm and 10pm.

Dan Cruickshank's bubbly enthusiasm continued to attract a good audience to 
BBC2's Around the World in 80 Treasures, which was watched by 2.8 million 
viewers between 9pm and 10pm.

Over on Channel 4 from 9pm, documentary Going to Extremes: the Silk Routes 
attracted 1.6 million viewers, while on Five at the same time a repeat of 
Greatest Kids' TV Moments was watched by 1.5 million.

Channel 4's decision to put US import Desperate Housewives at 10pm on 
Wednesday nights has proved hugely successful, with the show garnering acres of 
newspaper column inches and proving the network's biggest new hit of early 2005.

But the show Desperate Housewives displaced, trusty old warhorse ER, is not 
settling in so well in its new home on Monday nights.

The US medical drama has been one of Channel 4's strongest ratings performers 
over the past decade at 9pm or 10pm on Wednesdays, hitting a series average 
high of 4.2 million viewers and a 23% audience share during its third season in 
1997.

Last year the 10th series of ER was still averaging 2.8 million viewers and a 
15% audience share on Wednesday nights.

But this year, on Mondays from 10pm, ER is getting its worst ever ratings on 
Channel 4.

The show began with 2.3 million viewers and a 12% audience share in early 
January. But by last night ER had subsided to just 1.7 million viewers and an 
8% audience share between 10pm and 11pm.

The long-running Channel 4 drama was up against BBC1's 10 O'Clock News, which 
attracted 4.5 million viewers, and BBC2's battle of the sexes documentary He 
Says, She Says, which was watched by 1.7 million.

Over on Five between 10.35pm and 11.50pm, the Make Me a Supermodel Live Final 
attracted 1.3 million viewers and an 11% audience share.

· To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 