
Angus Deayton <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/angus-deayton> should 
have kept his job as host of Have I Got News for You because he has "stood up 
and taken what came to him like a man", one of London's leading showbusiness 
agents said today.

Alex Armitage, who represents Mary Nightingale, Sir David Frost and Richard 
Littlejohn, said although what Deayton did was "undeniably wrong" and "cruel" 
to his girlfriend, he was only the host of a comedy show.

When he was caught out "he showed enormous bravery" and "did not duck out of 
the limelight".

"Deayton never set himself up as the leader of a moral crusade, nor did he 
lecture us on how we should lead our lives," he said.

"He looked bloody uncomfortable - and so he should - but he acted like a big 
man and I admire him for taking such bitter medicine so publicly," Armitage 
added.

"He has added enormously to the gaiety of the nation and a lot of newspapers 
were sold at his expense. He has stood up and taken what came to him like a 
man. He is also a terrific television presenter and we will miss him sorely. I 
hope his exile is a brief one."

Howver, the BBC's controller of entertainment commissioning, Jane Lush, said 
the corporation was forced to sack Deayton because he had "become the news 
himself" as a result of tabloid stories about his private life.

His final appearance on the satirical BBC1 quiz show placed Deayton in an 
"impossible situation" in which he had "no grounds or authority on which to 
defend himself," said Ms Lush, writing in the Sunday Times.

It would have been "total hypocrisy" for the show's team captains, Ian Hislop 
and Paul Merton, to overlook the headlines about Deayton, she added, but as a 
result the programme's ability to maintain its usually high standards was 
"severely affected".

"Once the host of a news quiz becomes the news himself, the show is 
compromised and its impact is inevitably diminished."

Ms Lush referred to an intervention by a member of the audience, asking Hislop 
and Merton to "leave him [Deayton] alone". The person in question turned out to 
be Caroline Martin, the prostitute involved in the initial expose of Deayton, 
who had been slipped into the studio by a Sunday tabloid newspaper.

"I believe that the show would have become increasingly uncomfortable both for 
Angus and the viewing experience. He has become effectively gagged by the 
public perception of his lifestyle," Ms Lush wrote.

She explained Deayton was not sacked when the first stories concerning his 
private life appeared in the press earlier this year because "the first 
programme that followed the revelations provided convincing evidence that the 
integrity of the show had been preserved".

Ms Lush insisted that the programme was the BBC's only concern and there was 
no question of Deayton being "punished" by theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>.

Deayton had to go because guests could have trumped any of his putdowns simply 
by saying the words "coke and hookers", according to Have I Got News for You 
team captain Ian Hislop.

The satirical BBC1 quiz show was "imploding" as a result of continued sex and 
drug allegations being made against the TV presenter in the tabloid press, 
wrote Hislop in his column in the Sunday Telegraph.

"Angus had become the big story rather than someone commenting on more 
important stories. Have I Got News for You was imploding and every subsequent 
revelation in the tabloids made it worse," he said.

"Of course, the gutter press behaved appallingly in setting him up and then 
signing up the various slappers to damn him. But he could no longer point out 
their faults with any sense of conviction.

"The fact that, two weeks ago, he could not even get away with calling 
Christine Hamilton's husband 'disgraced' was telling. This was a perfectly fair 
comment."

Hislop set the record straight about reports that he was "furious" with 
Deayton "out of a sense of self-righteousness", revealing he felt "pretty 
ghastly" when he found himself in a position where he "felt obliged to have a 
go at him yet again".
 