
Angus Deayton <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/angus-deayton>, the 
former host of BBC1's long-running quiz show Have I Got News For You, has 
signed a six-figure deal to present a rival show on ITV1.

The comedian, who was axed as front man of the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> quiz after newspaper revelations that 
he used cocaine and prostitutes two and a half years ago, is understood to have 
agreed a £200,000 deal to present the new show, Bognor or Bust.

While the comedian is understood to have been looking for an exclusive deal 
with ITV, similar to the £100,000 a year contract he had with the BBC, ITV is 
thought to have offered a non-exclusive deal.

The show, which is expected to go out later this year, is a news-style quiz 
where the winner walks away with a trip to the seaside.

Despite being sacked by BBC bosses in October 2002 after revelations about his 
private life, Deayton has continued to work for the BBC.

Two million people watched his performance as a beleaguered doctor in Nighty 
Night, the comedy made by Steve Coogan's production company, Baby Cow. He also 
presented two specials, BBC2's Comic Relief University Challenge and Before 
They Were Famous.

He has also worked for ITV since his departure from Have I Got News For You, 
fronting the documentary Posh and Becks: The Reign in Spain, which focused on 
the week leading up to David Beckham's first league match for Real Madrid.

Last December BBC1's controller, Lorraine Heggessey, said she would welcome 
Deayton's return.

"The opportunity is there for him to present other shows on BBC1 and if we 
come up with the right format or he comes up with the right format then he's 
most welcome back," she said.

However it is understood that the comedian became frustrated that negotiations 
with the BBC had not lead to sizeable primetime projects.

· To contact the MediaGuardian newsdesk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 