
Just five months after he was ignominiously sacked following tabloid sex and 
drugs revelations,Angus Deayton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/angus-deayton> has made a spectacular 
return to the BBC.

Deayton presented BBC2's Comic Relief University Challenge on Friday night, 
which proved a big success, attracting nearly 6 million viewers, according to 
unofficial overnights.

Deayton has not presented a BBC show since he was sacked as host of Have I Got 
News for You in October, after BBC bosses decided revelations about his private 
life made his position untenable.

He survived the original tabloid revelations in May 2001 but was axed after 
further stories appeared last autumn.

The last straw came when Christine Hamilton made fun of him on the show, 
saying, "If my husband is disgraced, what does that make you?".

Now that Deayton has proved he is still popular with audiences, the BBC may be 
planning to bring him back as a presenter, although a return to HIGNFY seems 
unlikely.

However, the BBC has still not found a full-time replacement to present its 
topical panel show and is lining up a series of guest hosts, including former 
Conservative leader William Hague, when the news quiz returns for a new series 
in the spring.

On Friday night 5.9 million watched Deayton's return on BBC2 between 10pm and 
10.35pm as host of Comic Relief University Challenge.

Deayton's comeback more than doubled the channel's average audience share, to 
26%.

Comic Relief University Challenge easily beat Channel 4's V Graham Norton, 
which could muster only 1.3 million viewers.

BBC1's Comic Relief Big Red Nose Night also proved a big ratings winner on 
Friday night, with more than 11 million viewers sticking with the fundraising 
extravaganza for three hours.

The audience for Red Nose Night peaked at 13.9 million viewers at 8.15pm, when 
viewers found out that none of the six contestants taking part in Celebrity 
Driving School had managed to pass their driving test.

Overall BBC1's Comic Relief programme was watched by 11.6 million viewers 
between 7pm and 10pm.

That was 1.6 million up on the audience for Comic Relief two years ago, when 
it was last broadcast.

On Friday night Comic Relief attracted an impressive 46% audience share over 
three hours from 7pm.

BBC1's Comic Relief show undoubtedly put a dent in the audience for the 
denouement of Coronation Street's Richard "Dick Dastardly" Hillman story line.

At the end of the previous episode Hillman had driven his people carrier, 
containing wife Gail and her three children, into a canal.

Friday night's Corrie featured Hillman's body being pulled out of the canal, 
while Gail and her kids survived, and was watched by 14.7 million viewers.

This is still a bigger audience than any other show - including EastEnders - 
gets on a regular basis at the moment.

But by Coronation Street's recent high standards, with previous episodes 
featuring Hillman's murderous antics watched by more than 15 million viewers, 
this was slightly disappointing.

Elsewhere on Friday night all the other channels saw their audiences squeezed 
by BBC1's Red Nose Night.

An ITV1 Midsomer Murders repeat was watched by 5.9 million viewers between 
8.30pm and 10.30pm.

Over on Channel 4 a repeat of the movie Edward Scissorhands was scheduled 
instead of the network's normal Friday night line-up of US comedy imports such 
as Friends.

Edwards Scissorhands attracted just 1.2 million viewers between 8pm and 10pm.
 