
Born: 5am, 12 May 2005
Place of birth: Frepals clinic, Kibera, Nairobi
Birth weight:  3.25 kg
Mother:  Christine Mwongeli, 27
Father:  Joseph Mwololo, 27

In keeping with Kenyan tradition, Joseph Mwololo was not present for the birth 
of his daughter. He came to see her an hour after Christine delivered.

Some things change: the midwife was a man, Moses Rachuonyo, a nurse at the 
Frepals clinic in the giant Nairobi slum of Kibera. There is no mistaking 
Joseph's delight in being a father. He cradles his daughter while his exhausted 
wife lies back on a pile of pillows.

Joseph and Christine are part of the Kenyan generation who abandoned a rural 
life for the opportunities of the city. Their daughter is part of a new 
generation who call Nairobi home.

Nairobi's tree-lined boulevards and leafy suburbs were intended for white 
settlers. Black labour was regarded as a necessary evil and the authorities 
operated a pass system to control its influx. After independence, Nairobi's 
slums mushroomed with vast numbers of jobseekers from the countryside.

Joseph and Christine, both 27, grew up in a rural area near Machakos, central 
Kenya. They left school at 16 because their families could not afford the fees. 
Joseph trained as a carpenter, but could not find a job, so he got work packing 
cakes at a bakery, earning 5,000 Kenyan shillings (£35.60) a month. Christine 
worked at a supermarket, earning 3,300 shillings a month. They met at the Jesus 
Gospel church in Kibera, but got married in a church "up-country", in their 
homeland.

Debrah is their first-born. "We named her for that lady in the Bible," said 
Joseph.

The girl's middle name, Matei, means "the mercy of the Lord". Debrah will need 
the Lord's mercy. The mortality rate for under-fives in Kibera is 186 per 1,000 
live births. Malaria is Kenya's biggest killer, but in Kibera the biggest 
threat is disease such as diarrhoea.

Most babies here are delivered at home by traditional midwives, but the couple 
says it was worth 2,000 shillings for qualified staff at the clinic.

Christine expects to care for the baby until she returns to work. When that 
happens, Debrah will attend a cheap creche.

Home is a single room, in a shared compound in the "Soweto" district of 
Kibera. The room is a square of corrugated metal walls and roof, a space just 
7ft by 8ft. The rent is 650 shillings a month.

Inside, the double bed takes up most of the room. There is a paraffin stove in 
a corner, three chairs and a small table. A sign says: "The Holy Spirit is on 
duty."

Joseph and Christine spend 12 shillings a day [about 8p] buying 80 litres of 
water from a communal tap. With the baby they will need more.

Christine will breast-feed at first, then feed her millet porridge and fruits 
such as pawpaw.

About a third of slum children have stunted growth because of poor nutrition, 
according to Unicef surveys.

Both Joseph and Christine hail from big families: they have seven siblings 
apiece, but Joseph would like to keep his family small. "We want two more, God 
willing."

President Mwai Kibaki's has brought in free primary education, making it 
easier for families such as the Mwololos to send their daughter to study. But 
there are still 1.7 million Kenyan children out of school.

Poverty is the reason. Many do not get a daily meal, and are lured away from 
the classroom – the boys join beggar street gangs, girls work as domestic 
labour.

Factfile: Kenya

Under-5s mortality (per 1,000 births): 79
Population on under $2 a day: 58.6%
Debt per capita: $166
Life expectancy:  44.6
% children in education (F/M): 52/54
 