
The Commons defence select committee today agreed to widen its inquiry into 
the war inAfghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>.

The move came in the wake of allegations of a cover-up of civilian deaths 
highlighted inleaked US documents published by the Guardian this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jul/27/afghanistan-war-logs-tensions-strained>
.

John Woodcock, a Labour MP on the defence select committee and a former 
special adviser to the former defence secretary John Hutton said the committee 
had agreed to look at the way in which the Ministry of Defence reported 
civilian deaths.

Woodcock said he was confident that the armed forces did everything possible 
to minimise civilian casualties in Afghanistan, but that there were issues of 
transparency about how they were reported and investigated.

The decision of the committee to widen its terms of reference into operations 
in Afghanistan is the first tangible indication that the leaks have shaken the 
confidence of politicians in the Afghanistan operation and will lead to a 
further review of operations.

The MoD has already argued that the leaks cover a period before the new 
counter-insurgency programme was fully formed and so are out of date.

Defence sources said today that progress was being made in identifying at 
least 15 of the 21 alleged episodes referred to in the US logs, but the task 
was complicated by discrepancies in some of the dates and details recorded by 
the Americans.

The MoD said it was hoping to produce a response by tomorrow.

Whitehall sources said they expected the widened inquiry to examine the 
realism of the timetable for British troops to be out of Afghanistan in 2015, 
and whether the withdrawal of troops would start next year.

The move comes as Human Rights Watch today called for an immediate 
investigation into the casualties disclosed in the leaked Afghan war logs.

Rachel Reid, the Afghanistan researcher at the New York-based advocacy 
organisation, said: "The leaked documents show that US and Nato officials 
should not rely on initial civilian casualty reports.

"A commitment to investigate civilian casualties is only meaningful if early 
mistakes in the field are corrected and do not become part of the official 
reporting."
 