
The Russian Elena Dementieva reached the semi-final of the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> in style after sweeping 
aside the surprise package of the women's draw, the unseeded SpaniardCarla 
Suarez-Navarro 6-2, 6-2.

The pair competed in blistering conditions, as the heatwave currently 
blighting the tournament showed no sign of abating, with temperatures in the 
city expected to reach 40C during the next few days.

However Dementieva, the fifth seed, started in fine fettle, breaking an 
opponent clearly shocked by the weather early to assume an imposing 3-0 lead in 
the first set. Indeed by the time the fourth game had been played, Dementieva 
had dropped just two points, enough to make anyone give thought to packing it 
all in. With Navarro floundering, and the heat rising, no-one would have 
thought any less of her.

Navarro did at least make a fight of what was left of the set, holding her 
last two service games, but Dementieva never gave her a sniff of a break, 
sealing the set in just over 20 minutes.

With the first obstacle completed, both players understandably opted for a 
time-out, returning to the changing-rooms, presumably for the iciest shower on 
offer, and a change out of sweat-covered clothes.

Although Dementieva was second to emerge, she soon took control of the final 
set, no doubt eager to settle the match as quickly as possible, and stinging 
returns ensured she broke Navarro in the first game, as the outcome of the 
match took on an air of inevitably. Navarro, 20, was far too wasteful to take 
advantage of the opportunities Dementieva did present her, wasting various 
chances to break back, and as Dementieva continued to rattle off the winners, 
she broke Navarro once again, and signed off in fine fashion, winning the match 
with an ace to confirm her place in the last four. Dementieva has never won a 
Grand Slam before, but on this form, she will certainly take some stopping.

Afterwards Dementieva revealed her happiness at taking the match in straight 
sets, thus allowing her to get off court and into the shade as quickly as 
possible. With a semi-final to prepare for, it was a wise move.

"It gets much hotter on the centre court so I'm glad to have won in two sets," 
said Dementieva.

"The key for the match was to have a good start. She's a very solid baseline 
player and the plan was to go to the net, be aggressive and finish the point as 
quick as possible.

"It was a very tough, physical game and I played really well in the important 
points, when it was 4-1 in the first set."
 