
Jean Mtoko Dieumerci doesn't exist any more. Not because he is among the 
one-in-five Congolese babies who never make it to their fifth birthday, but 
because his parents changed his name. He's now called David Lewis, after the 
reporter who found him when he was a healthy baby trapped in a hospital that 
wouldn't release him or his mother until they paid a bill running into hundreds 
of dollars. The Guardian paid the bill.

Today, he and his family live in Bagata, in a sandy clearing in Kinshasa's 
Makala district. Getting there feels more like travelling through a village 
than wandering through a capital city. Tyres, clothes and sandbags poke up 
through the rubbish in an attempt to stop erosion on the pathway, where the 
rainy season has long since gouged out the road. Covered in smouldering refuse, 
cars stick in cloying mud before they are abandoned at the roadside.The 
government, led by President Joseph Kabila, hopes to win re-election next year. 
He points to a social development programme that promised to bring 
Chinese-built roads, jobs, healthcare, homes, electricity and more. Nobody in 
Makala has noticed.

"You can hardly believe that Mercedes cars used to drive down here. Now we 
have nothing and life is getting worse," says Paul Lutumba, David's uncle, 
among the few in the family to have a mobile phone.

In many ways, David's family are among the lucky ones. The British charity War 
Child says more than 2.7 million children under five have died due to the 
effects of Congo's five-year war in 1998.

David has suffered malaria, diarrhoea and typhoid. Hundreds of thousands 
succumb every year. He has a home, unlike an estimated 250,000 street children, 
many of whom are accused of sorcery and turned out of their homes to lighten 
the family's burdens.

Nor is David a child soldier, unlike many in the east of the country, where 
violence has forced 1.45 million people from their homes.

There is beauty amid the squalor of Bagata where a street pedicurist is at 
work. David's mother Ngosia has bright purple toenails, a well spent 14p.

As five-year-old David sits under a tree outside the metal-roofed shack where 
he sleeps, a young man shaves a boy's head, while a young woman threads beads 
into a younger girl's hair. It is a pleasant scene of a family making do in the 
midst of poverty.

But like many of the 79.5% of Congolese who live on less than $2 a day, 
David's family is broke. He doesn't go to school, and his older brother was 
recently taken out of class.

"We don't have enough to send the children to school, even though they have 
the will to learn," says Ngosia. Jean Mtoko hasn't had a regular job since 
before David was born. Ngosia sellschikwangue, a pounded manioc sludge wrapped 
in leaves, and brings in £6.90 a week for the immediate family of six. But the 
owner of the shack is moving back and wants them to leave. Ngosia doesn't know 
where they will go.

"I have no hope any more – I haven't the means to hope," she says. "Now I just 
leave everything to the hands of God."

Like so many Congolese, they can look but they can't touch. Their tiny home, 
with a living room packed with televisions and stereos that don't work, is 
strewn with electric wires that power nothing, the bill long since unpaid and 
the supply cut off. Were it to come back on, the family is not allowed to turn 
on the television unless the landlord's son is there too. David and his 
brothers sleep on a mattress on the floor with their parents. Their older 
sister curls up on the sofa.

David says he'd like to go to school and have a football and a bicycle. 
Instead, he has crafted himself a gun out of wood, and runs around hiding 
playing war games. What does he want to be when he grows up? A soldier.

Factfile: Democratic Republic of Congo

Under-fives mortality (per 1,000 births): 199

Population on under $2 (£1.28) a day: 79.55%

Debt per capita: $144 (£92.16)

Life expectancy: 48

% children in education (F/M): 43.5/62.9
 