
It is an exhibition like no other. Before taking the photographs from which he 
constructs his paintings, artist Toby Brown asks his subjects to describe how 
they feel when they are depressed. “In that split second, they kind of go back 
– and I take my snapshots to work from,” he explained.

On Thursday the Debut Contemporary gallery in Notting Hill, west London, will 
showcase the extraordinary results, almost exclusively featuring sufferers of 
mental ill health.

Care for children with mental health problems is woeful, say GPs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/14/children-mental-health-care-woeful-gps>
The subjects of the portraits include family and friends, but Brown has also 
persuaded a number of well-known sufferers of depression to pose for him, 
including Tony Blair’s former director of communications,Alastair Campbell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/commentisfree/2016/jan/26/mental-illness-physical-health-services>
, and an array of names from stage and screen.

More significantly, however, Brown himself knows all too well how clinical 
depression feels. The former motorcycle courier has been blighted by depression 
on and off since 2008 when, as the recession hit, he found himself with a 
£120,000 mortgage, a £30,000 credit card debt and letters from the bailiffs.

With his life spiralling out of control, Brown started on a cocktail of 
anti-depressants, sleeping pills, the antipyschotic drug Olanzapine and illegal 
drugs. He was admitted to the Priory hospital in west London as his marriage 
collapsed, along with his family business.

But at rock bottom, living in a caravan on an industrial estate, Brown, now 
51, reinvented himself. “Everyone had said to me: ‘Why can’t you just get on 
with your day?’ So I decided to throw some paint,” he said. “I did three self- 
portraits to try to show what was going on underneath. That is where it all 
started.”

Brown’s self-portraits were spotted by Samir Ceric, founder of the Debut 
Contemporary gallery, and an idea was born. “Being married to a designer of 
luxury handbags who has suffered on and off from depression and battles 
anxiety, his subject matter, his personal experience, resonated with me,” said 
Ceric.
 An unfinished portrait of Amy Winehouse by Toby Brown 
It hasn’t been easy. The project – involving 18 portraits, the largest of 
which is six feet by four feet – has been a year in the making. “We approached 
people, but they didn’t want to open up, so that has been quite a difficult 
journey,” Brown admitted. However, with the backing of the mental health 
charity Mind, people were persuaded, and after contacting Campbell through 
Twitter the two met recently to allow the artist to sketch and take snapshots. 
Campbell believes Brown has caught something.

“I was in a really good mood that day,” Campbell said. “The medication was 
working, Burnley had been promoted to the Premier League. All was going well. 
Toby asked me to describe what depression felt like. It is like being dead and 
alive at the same time.”

Campbell, who worked in Downing Street from 1997 to 2003, added: “Fiona 
[Campbell’s partner] thinks the painting is quite good. My daughter, Grace, 
found it more challenging, although she has seen me depressed. I think when I’m 
not active my eyes do go a bit dead. Toby concentrates on the eyes.”

The timing of the exhibition is poignant. Last week Sally Brampton, 60, the 
author, former fashion editor of theObserver and founding editor of British Elle
, took her own life after a battle with depression. The circumstances of her 
death are unclear, but it is thought that she walked into the sea at St 
Leonards-on-Sea in East Sussex, near her home.

“Killing oneself is, anyway, a misnomer,” Brampton had written in her 
acclaimed memoir on depression,Shoot the Damn Dog. “We don’t kill ourselves. We 
are simply defeated by the long, hard struggle to stay alive.”

“I knew her,” Campbell said. “I don’t think I would do what she did. I don’t 
know what was going through her mind. But I know what it is like to feel like 
things can’t be any worse. And I think this cultural space is incredibly 
important – TV, radio, theatre, art. That is what drives the cultural change in 
attitudes [to mental health] that will lead to the political change.”
 Toby Brown 
Among the other famous names who agreed to pose for Brown are the presenter 
and vocal coach Carrie Grant; the lead singer of the indie group Embrace, Danny 
McNamara;This Morning presenter Anna Williamson; former Coronation Street 
actress Georgia Taylor; and singer-songwriter Sandi Thom. All of them are 
fellow sufferers. Brown’s painting of McNamara is set to go on the cover of 
Embrace’s next album.

The artist has also painted the singer Amy Winehouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/amywinehouse>, from a photograph that was 
found on her computer after her death in July 2011. “The photo came on for a 
split second in Asif Kapadia’s movie about her,” Brown said. “I remember saying 
to my girlfriend that it would be amazing to have that in the show. I tracked 
it down. It is a kind of selfie.”

His paintings have a misty quality, Brown added, partly because he was born 
with a squint and with only 35% vision in his left eye.

“Also, I don’t really paint, I scrub the canvas,” he said of his works, which 
will be on sale for prices ranging from about £3,000 to £10,000. “I use quite 
big brushes, often decorators’ brushes. It is quite aggressive.”

Family doctors fear a mental health scandal waiting to happen | Dr Nihara 
Krause
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/14/teenage-mental-health-crisis-doctors>
Brown, who will be donating 20% of Thursday’s takings to Mind, added, however, 
that he uses more delicate brushes for the focus of his work. “The eyes of the 
subject are very detailed,” he said. “The eyes kind of tell you what is going 
on. People who suffer from depression might be smiling, but you just need to 
look at their eyes and it is kind of dead.”
 