
The tides of change must rise if India's dalit community is to be freed from 
intergenerational bondage

Nineteen year old Hasmukhbhai Khorabhai from Gujarat, a western Indian state, 
felt pleased to have been given the job of cleaning out a septic tank for 300 
rupees. It was employment, which would provide essential money for a large 
family in which he was the sole earner. His resultant tragic and premature 
death, as a result of either asphyxiation from the noxious gases or drowning on 
falling through the manhole into liquid human excrement is truly abhorrent.

Such an incident is by no means unprecedented. The boy was a dalit, an 
'outcaste' in the true sense of the word. Four castes constitute the Hindu 
caste system, which defines hereditary groups into social classes. Beneath this 
system lies the realm of the dalits, an invisible, 'untouchable' group 
considered to be less worthy of rights than animals.

Most of us would think it an unfathomable concept to have an unquestioning 
acceptance of one's sub-human standing in society. Surely it is every child's 
birthright to live free from discrimination and punishment, irrespective of 
what his or her parents may have suffered before? This is a fundamental 
principle of human rights.

The issue of caste discrimination is by no means limited to India, although it 
is arguably here that the most severe atrocities occur. For a group of nearly 
300 million human beings in this country the idea of being born "free and equal 
in dignity and rights" (UN Declaration of Human Rights) to their fellow 
countrymen is indeed unfathomable. Dalits will experience not being served 
food, they must drink tea at a distance from other customers, special 
'untouchable' cups will be placed on a shelf outside. At the extreme end, they 
are subjected to murder and rape for small acts of defiance, attempts to assert 
their rights as equal beings. The practice and belief system around 
untouchability of the dalit community is one of the greatest miscarriages of 
justice in our global society, even today.

Known by different names in different states, commonly bhangis, or in South 
India thottis this group's aspirations for life have traditionally been aborted 
even before conception, predetermined as they have been by their caste to the 
most abject of occupations. That occupation consists of handling human waste, 
being cleaners of public dry latrines (toilets without flushing facility), 
disposing of dead bodies (animal and human), termed sweepers, scavengers, those 
responsible for the removal of 'night soil' to use a popular Government 
euphemism, bound to a vocation lacking in dignity and characterised by filth.

Mari Marcel Thekaekara, an active campaigner for the rights of dalits in India 
and author of Endless Filth described to me the practice of headloading (the 
carrying of human waste in baskets on the head), which has long been the daily 
work of Leelaben, from Paliyad village in Gujarat. "The experience is as 
horrific in the rainy season as in the summer. Leelaben tells of how the 
excrement mixes with water and drips from the basket onto her clothes, body, 
face, yet in the summer there is no water to wash her hands before eating." 
Personally conveying the horror of the bhangi's plight borne out of her 
research Mari continued, "Nothing can communicate the effect of the revolting 
stench that assails your nostrils along with the sight of nauseating piles of 
putrid human excrement and urine as you enter a dry latrine."

It was Gujarat, home of Hasmukhbhai Khorabhai and his desperate family, which 
stirred the ire of Gandhi in 1901 when he started to bring attention to the 
abomination and injustice that is manual scavenging. The cause has been 
returned to in India throughout the twentieth century by politicians and 
campaigners, the Barve Committee being of particular note. This was established 
in 1949 to inquire into the living conditions of scavengers and to confer a 
dignity upon the occupation. Yet little change was achieved.

Commissions and committees formed thereafter made staunch statements of intent 
to "abolish this…blot on humanity", yet there is clear recognition that 
abolition is far from a reality. The Indian constitution may have banned 
untouchability 60 years ago, 1993 may have seen the prohibition by law of 
headloading human waste and cleaning of dry latrines, yet until a substantial 
cultural shift and change of mindsets occurs the deeply ingrained attitudes 
which hold these people in subjugation will persevere.

A system of belief and practice introduced to India more than 3000 years ago 
by invading Aryan tribes to ensure their supremacy and prevent pollution of the 
race through intermarriage has become so entrenched that three millennia on, 
two thirds of the dalit population is illiterate, 75% of dalit communities live 
below the poverty line, only 7% have access to safe drinking water, electricity 
and toilets, and the majority of sex workers in the brothels of India are 
dalits.

As Mari observed, "Every single one of us practises untouchability of a sort 
towards this community without even thinking about it – when we employ only 
bhangis to clean our toilets, refuse to let them into our kitchens or 
unconsciously ensure that we never really touch them." It takes courage, 
open-mindedness and humanity to challenge these assumptions and promote a 
different way, and through establishing the Malgudi coffee chop staffed by 
young dalit women in the Karnatakan town of Mysore, Mari and her husband Stan 
are doing just that.

This bold move is breaking timeworn taboos and giving the eleven girls running 
the show and serving "the best cakes, croissants, breads and quiche in Mysore" 
an unprecedented chance to experience life beyond crippling oppression and 
institutional persecution, giving them the chance to hope.

To behold the dignity so evident in these individuals is humbling and 
astonishing in equal measure. That this is reflected back to them from the 
outside world seems a distant goal, but with an upsurge of public, 
organisational and political awareness, activism and will the tide must 
gradually start to turn.

This longlisted article was published on 23 July 2009. It was written for the 
Guardian's International Development Journalism Competition between 1 April and 
22 June 2009.
 