
Could Diageo - the Guinness to Johnnie Walker and Smirnoff drinks group - end 
up merging with a beer business likeSABMiller or AB InBev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/anheuser-busch>?

According to a report just out from analysts at Matrix Corporate Capital - 
following a meeting withDiageo <https://www.theguardian.com/business/diageo> 
this week - it is entirely possible, although it could take a few years if it 
happens at all.

A number of points came from the meeting, according to Matrix, such as 
Diageo's continuing interest in taking full control of Moet-Hennessy and 
picking up José Cuervo if it becomes available. Matrix reckoned the 66% of Moet 
that Diageo doesn't own is valued at around £10.5bn.

But the idea of linking up with a beer business to create a diversified 
alcohol business was also discussed, said Matrix:

We put to Diageo our theory that AB InBev will continue to consolidate the 
industry and that its obvious targets are SABMiller (first) and Diageo 
(second). We also expressed our view that Diageo could try to pre-empt this by 
merging either withSABMiller <https://www.theguardian.com/business/sabmiller> 
or with Heineken.

Diageo's reaction to these comments indicated to us a genuine openness to 
corporate action. As the primary believer in 'total beverage alcohol' Diageo 
sees real revenue synergies from merging with a major brewer: merging with ABI 
or SAB would give its spirits business much more rapid growth in Latin America 
and certain other markets. Meanwhile it could deliver numerous markets in 
Europe and Africa that both ABI and SAB lack.

Our impression is that Diageo's door is open to a deal with either company. 
Following the 1997 creation of Diageo, which was a nil-premium 'merger of 
equals', Diageo sees this as the best route to creating shareholder value in 
the industry.

While a Diageo/SAB combination has the 'merger of equals' attraction, Diageo 
was much more open to an ABI deal than we had anticipated – although it agreed 
that the obvious next target for ABI is SAB (selling MillerCoors on to Molson 
Coors as part of the deal).

Would Diageo merge with Heineken to prevent any of this? The very fact that it 
sees such merit in a deal with ABI or SAB suggests that it would not. Equally, 
it is clear to the market from the structure of the Femsa acquisition that the 
Heineken family's priority is to maintain control. Diageo added that Heineken 
still lacks a broad enough emerging market platform from which its spirits 
brands would benefit if distributed by ABI or SAB – an interesting point. 
Nonetheless, the premium Heineken brand is clearly a great fit for Diageo, 
especially in the USA.

But it appears Diageo is not expecting industry consolidation in the near 
future, mainly because the major companies - SABMiller excepted - have fairly 
stretched balance sheets.

For the record Diageo shares are up 1p to £10.86, valuing the business at 
nearly £27bn, and Matrix has a buy recommendation with a £13 price target. 
SABMiller, down 15.5p at £19.31, is worth £30bn.
 