
When factory chimneys reared up during the Olympic opening ceremony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-2012-olympics-blog/2012/jul/27/london-2012-olympics-opening-ceremony-live>
 I thought at once: "Pandaemonium – he must have read it" – then "Oh nonsense, 
it was published almost 30 years ago and one never sees it around nowadays." But
Danny Boyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jul/27/olympic-opening-ceremony-danny-boyle-father>
had, indeed, read it.Humphrey Jennings's great work 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1985/12/27/books/books-of-the-times-251699.html> did 
inspire an occasion with which nearly everyone in this country was going to 
fall in love.

Jennings is most often remembered for the documentary films he made about 
Britain at war. His daughter Marie-Louise, who (with their friend Charles 
Madge) editedPandaemonium, prefaces a new edition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/literary-criticism/9781848315853/pandaemonium-the-coming-of-the-machine-as-seen-by-contemporary-observers>
 of it with a brief account of his life that shows how many and how various 
were his gifts. Erudite scholar, painter, poet, film-maker – before he died in 
an accident at the age of 43 it must have been hard to know where he was going 
to make his mark, although that he would make it was probably evident. No one, 
however, foresaw that it would be with this book, now republished beautifully 
by Icon Books after years of near-dormancy.

It came about when, as a thankyou to the people of a Welsh village where he 
had been making a film, Jennings gave a series of talks about the industrial 
revolution for which he collected extracts from many sources. From then on he 
never ceased collecting, and his purpose was clear: he was going to make a book 
presenting not the political or the economic history, but the human history of 
the industrial revolution. He would not describe or analyse; rather, people who 
had experienced it would show what it was like. Death intervened. It took the 
devoted work of his daughter and his friend to discipline the material he had 
amassed into that book, which was published 27 years ago by André Deutsch Ltd, 
where I had the luck to be its editor. It received many perceptive and 
enthusiastic reviews, but it has taken Boyle to shift it from academic 
appreciation to the general readership for which it was intended and which it 
deserves.

Jennings sought out voices ranging from those of writers as famous as Milton 
and Pepys, to those of anonymous factory workers, taking in scientists, 
inventors, farm-workers, dukes, amateurs of geology, quakers, actresses … As 
early as 1660 Milton was foreseeing that "Mammon, the least erected spirit that 
fell / From heav'n", was going to misdirect the works of men, but nothing would 
prevent the spread of the scientific spirit that would animate the 18th and 
early 19th century. Intellectual curiosity had come alive; lay people as well 
as specialists were beginning to question and observe; tradesmen were gathering 
together in literary and philosophical societies; ordinary people became 
engaged in the study of geology, zoology, botany, fossil-hunting; and above all 
the development of machinery was thrilling.

Here is Shelley, to a friend who had described the casting of a steam 
cylinder: "One might imagine God when he made the earth, and saw the granite 
mountains and flinty promontories flow into their forms, and the splendour of 
their fusion filling millions of miles of void space, so looking and so 
delighting in his work. God sees his machine spinning round the sun, and 
delights in its success, and has taken out patents to supply all suns in space 
with the same manufactures. Your boat will be to the Ocean of Water what the 
earth is to the Ocean of Aether – a prosperous and swift voyager."

As for the railways: it appears that people then were more excited by the 
steam engine than we in our time were by the aeroplane. Perhaps the most 
winning of all the evidence is Fanny Kemble's letter about travelling with 
George Stephenson on the first railway journey from Liverpool to Manchester, 
standing beside him on the engine's footplate with her hair flying in the wind. 
"No fairy tale" she says "was ever so wonderful", and her detailed description 
does indeed enchant. If she was half as gifted an actress as she was writer, 
she must have been stunning. Much – very much – of the material in this book is 
equally positive; and then, against these images of human triumph, we come to 
those of greed and cruelty.

There is the Peterloo massacre, soberly and precisely described by a man who 
was there (more blood-chilling than Shelley's "Mask of Anarchy", also quoted). 
There is the lad who worked on the land who has nothing to eat but bread and 
lard, lives in a loft unheated even in midwinter, and is puzzled by the notion 
that his bed sheet might sometimes be washed. There are the 14 people lying on 
the pavement outside the locked workhouse because it is full. There are 
children eight years old working 12-hour days in a factory. This sort of thing 
is often recorded by people who think it wrong, so there is some comfort in 
remembering that a great deal of what we are seeing so vividly would eventually 
be remedied; but less in recognising it as evidence of how human nature works, 
has always worked, and will – given the chance – continue to work. At one end 
of the spectrum is the intoxication of discovery and achievement; at the other 
the tragic, sometimes hideous consequences of the orientation towards profit 
resulting from discovery and achievement.

We also see that London's streets were thick with mud and its air with soot, 
even when there was no fog. Thomas Carlyle had a bilious temperament, so it can 
be hoped that the nightmarish pictures of the city he draws so powerfully are 
at least a little exaggerated (other people were loving the place for its 
vitality in spite of the noise and filth). But it is still amazing to be given 
these visions of what used to be.

There is a tremendous variety of subject and tone in these texts, but all have 
two things in common: first, that they are relevant to Jennings's themes, and 
second, that even when the writer's purpose may have been wholly prosaic, he or 
she happened at that moment to have been moved to an intensity of expression, 
often more like that of poetry than of prose. The wonderful quality of the 
texts, and the cumulative building of themes, generate an addictive excitement, 
so that the reader can't easily do what can often be done with an anthology: 
put the book down after a short dip. It is a great work, original in conception 
and astounding in execution, and I am grateful that once I was able to play a 
tiny part in getting it published.
 