
There are few people you meet who are publicly rapturous about Sydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> this year. It goes to bed 
early, won’t let you have a whiskey in a glass at a bar late at night, is 
captive to priggish rules, sells off inner-city public housing, builds casinos, 
is prohibitively expensive, and if you are a Normal – forget about buying a 
house.

Bah! Who would want to hang out in a place that is such a killjoy, such a 
mercenary?

Brigid Delaney's diary | I'll get cross about millennials drifting through 
life. Once I've tidied my bedroom
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/08/diary-ill-get-cross-about-millennials-drifting-through-life-once-ive-tidied-my-bedroom>
Yet, yet … all the ugliness and the expense somehow fails to override the 
sheer gorgeousness of Sydney, particularly in December when the energy of the 
place ratchets up a few notches. Electrical storms and sudden showers, people 
racing from party to cab to party, days in the office that end early, long 
lunches, oysters and chilled wine, evening swims, everyone you’ve ever met 
wanting to catch up for a drink before Christmas.

Some sort of animating force takes over and the stitching of belonging and 
community is raised for all to see in the restaurants, cafes, beaches and 
parks. Parents, colleagues, volunteer groups, all sorts of small clusters in a 
circle under a Moreton Bay fig with their plates and their cakes and their 
bottles of fizz. We do the stuff we failed to do the rest of the time – catch 
up, celebrate projects and achievements, be grateful. And in 2016 toast getting 
through this long, frightening year.

The energy of all these meetings and connections is felt through the city – a 
sort of wired, buzzy, fun sparkle that echoes those last days of school. 
Remember them? Christmas was getting closer; you were marking off each day on 
the Advent calendar, concerts and present buying and half-day excursions to 
beaches or the pool, and the excitement seemed more than you could stand.

I’m from the southwest coast of Victoria – a place of gloomy, dramatic beauty, 
cold seas, green fields and rain. When I first moved to Sydney in 2001 it was 
as exotic as a move to, say, Costa Rica. People swam in the sea before work. 
Strange, enormous and colourful birds would scream at you from 4am, and at 
night, walking home the winds that whipped your skirts were warm and 
desert-like, and blossoms such as frangipani hung deeply over fences and in 
summer it smelt like the whole city was perfumed. Once, after a weekend away, I 
returned to Paddington to the shock of a purple tree in the backyard suddenly 
appeared as if by magic. It was a jacaranda, my housemate explained. To walk 
down certain streets in Woollahra, or Paddington or Newtown would mean being 
showered in lilac confetti, as if nature were bestowing on you a blessing.

I am housesitting for a friend right now in Kirribilli and walking down the 
steep streets late at night, and turning a corner – there it is – all lit up 
across the dark harbour, the opera house. And around another corner – the 
harbour bridge! After so many years, these buildings should be as 
straightforward as facts. Yet, if in a cab, the driver always shows down as we 
approach and we both steal a lingering glance, as if looking at a sleeping baby.

“Ah, isn’t it beautiful,” the driver will say, every time.


Always there

This week has been a horror for readers who form such attachment to our 
favourite authors, that their deaths feel like a death in the family. The 
losses have been accumulating daily.


Shirley Hazzard, internationally acclaimed Australian author, dies at 85
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/14/shirley-hazzard-internationallyacclaimed-australian-author-dies-at-85>
Vale one of the greatest Australia has produced Shirley Hazzard who died this 
week in New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/14/shirley-hazzard-internationallyacclaimed-australian-author-dies-at-85>
. Please read The Great Fire, an elegant, intelligent, perfect novel that took 
Hazzard 20 years to write.

 Good-bye also to Anne Deveson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/13/anne-deveson-writer-and-broadcaster-dies-aged-86>
. Tell Me I’m Here, her memoir of her son’s schizophrenia and later death, had 
a profound impact on readers like me. It was harrowing, yet steadfast depiction 
of the effect on family life of severe mental illness. Amid the chaos and pain, 
Deveson also has to find and fight for access to services. Deveson’s very 
talented daughter Georgia Blain, a novelist, died only days earlier of cancer 
at 51.

And we also lost the incredible English journalist AA Gill, aged 62 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/10/aa-gill-obituary>, also to 
cancer. Pretty much everything Gill wrote was gorgeous and smart. Restaurant 
reviews to Sex and the City tours to refugee camps in Chad, Gill wrote about it 
all. And although he did some massively silly things – like shoot a baboon and 
say that Mary Beard shouldn’t be on telly – his writing often had a deeply 
humanist streak. Like most interesting people, he was a bundle of 
contradictions.

Writers are immortal through their words. On my bookshelf I have Hazzard, 
Deveson, Blain and Gill. And although I am in mourning that there will be no 
new work, the books are still there – to dip into and reread when I feel like 
reconnecting with these old friends.
 