
Consider these two examples of customer service. The day before I was due to 
collect a new car, my wife was admitted to hospital and gave birth to our twin 
girls nine weeks early.

The car dealership, Yeomans of Ferring, near Worthing, is 79 miles from our 
home. However, realising that we had enough to worry about they agreed to 
arrange for a driver to deliver the car to us.

I called my insurer Axa <https://www.theguardian.com/business/axa> to change 
the details on my policy to reflect the fact I had changed cars. It informed me 
that I would have to pay a £30 surcharge to change my policy over the phone, 
but I could do this for free online.

I explained that I had two daughters in intensive care and was virtually 
living at the hospital. I requested that they waive their policy so that this 
could be resolved and take this weight off my mind.

The adviser put me on hold to seek advice from his supervisor. He returned to 
say that the policy couldn't be waived and I would have to either pay the £30 
fee or advise of the changes online.

I therefore completed the transaction online later that day but given this was 
seven weeks before my renewal date, I shall not be using Axa again. Yeomans 
Peugeot of Worthing however deserves immense credit for the excellent service 
at a time when they realised we had enough to worry about.DF, by email

Firstly, congratulations on your new additions. And secondly, a big "well 
done" to the person at the car dealer Yeomans of Ferring. That really is going 
the extra mile and well worthy of comment. That said, we are not sure that Axa 
deserves your wrath. We had a similar letter from another reader complaining 
about a £20 admin fee imposed by another insurer on him, after he similarly 
changed his car.

To be fair to the insurers they do have to change their systems and work out 
any additional – or reduction – in premium that is payable on the new car. Axa 
is a company that makes more than its fair share of appearances in this column, 
but the fact that it offers customers a chance to make the change for free via 
its website is acceptable. The car insurance admin charges that annoy us are 
the ones that you can't avoid. It's not Axa's fault that the timing was 
terrible for you and that you were in a hospital.

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at 
consumer.champions@theguardian.com <mailto:consumer.champions@theguardian.com> 
or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
 