 More tea? … The Limpopo Academy of ­Private Detection. Photograph: Matt Blease 
"I had a dream that I saw a white stranger on the road outside the garage of 
my husband, Mr JLB Maketoni," said Mma Ramotswe, founder of Botswana's No 1 
Ladies' Detective Agency.

"If that's what you dreamed, then that's surely what will happen," replied Mma 
Makutsi, who had been promoted to associate since her marriage to 
Phuti Radiphuti.

"What an exhausting morning we've had, Mma!" said Mma Ramotswe. "Let's have a 
cup of tea."

Later, the patronising portrayal of Africa was interrupted by the arrival of 
Mma Potokwani, matron of the orphan farm. "Please help me Mma. Mr Ditso Ditso 
is planning to ruin the orphanage by building an expensive new building."

"Indeed that is not good, Mma," said Mma Ramotswe. "Can you tell me what sort 
of car Mr Ditso Ditso drives?"

"Indeed Mma, it is a big shiny one."

"Mr JLB Maketoni always says you can judge a man's character by his car. Mr 
Ditso Ditso is indeed a bad man. Let's have a cup of tea while I devise a plan 
of inaction."

While Mma Ramotswe was pondering how much Africa had changed – and not all of 
it for the better – since Mr JLB Maketoni had sold his first oxen, a white 
stranger walked through the door.

"I've been expecting you," replied Mma Ramotswe. "You must be the brilliant 
detective Mr Clovis Andersen who wrote The Principles of Detection. Your book 
is our bible. I've never forgotten your homily, 'First make a cup of tea.'"

Mma Ramotswe went home to make a traditional dinner for her family.

"Oh, Mma," wept her daughter. "I am being bullied at school for being in a 
wheelchair."

"Just say, 'Sticks and stones may break my bones, but words will never hurt 
me' and all will be well."

"Oh thank you Mma, I feel so much better now," her daughter said, smashing her 
head against the wall.

"How I enjoy a traditional evening meal," Mr JLB Maketoni declared. "It is 
indeed not every family who is so blessed in the new Africa. I am indeed a 
fortunate man."

"And I am indeed a fortunate woman to have you as a husband," said Mma 
Ramotswe, "for in the new Africa many men have fancy cars and fancy women. How 
was your day, Rra?"

"It was indeed strange. Fanwell was arrested for working on stolen cars."

Mma Ramotswe made a cup of tea before answering. "Everything will be alright. 
That storyline will fizzle out into a predictable non-event just like the 
hoo-ha over Mr Phuti's house."

Mma Makutsi was extremely agitated when Mma Ramotswe arrived at the agency the 
following morning. "Mma Potokwani has been sacked by the Mr Ditso Ditso and has 
gone to visit her family in the bush."

"Then we must get her, Mma," said Mms Ramotswe.

"Oh, this is terrible," wailed Mma Makutsi, "Our car has got stuck in the sand 
and we will be eaten by lions."

"If only," said the reader.

Just then a friendly stranger appeared from nowhere and took them to Mma 
Potokwani. "Thank heaven there are still good people in the new Africa."

On their return to Gaberone, Mma Ramotswe called on Mr Ditso Ditso. "You are a 
bad man with a shiny car. You must resign from the orphanage and give Mma 
Potokwani her job back."

"That was a very satisfactory ending," said Mr Clovis Andersen. "But I have a 
secret of my own. I was always a rubbish detective."

"Who would have guessed?" gasped Mma Ramotswe. "Would you like some more 
Valium with your tea?'

"No need," said Mr McCall Smith, who had been barely awake himself throughout.

Digested read, digested: Enid Blyton goes to Africa.
 