
The article is no longer the atomic unit of news. It's not dead. I didn't kill 
it. But in the age of online – of "digital first," asthe Guardian defined its 
strategy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jun/16/guardian-observer-digital-first-strategy?intcmp=239>
 this month – we should reconsider the article and its place. No longer do the 
means of production and distribution of media necessitate boxing the world into 
neat, squared-off spaces published once a day and well after the fact. Freed of 
print's strictures, we are finding many new and sometimes better ways to gather 
and share information.

Consider Andy Carvin (@acarvin <http://twitter.com/#!/acarvin>), the National 
Public Radio social strategist who has been tweeting and retweeting news from 
the Arab spring, up to 1,300 times in a day. He adds journalistic value: 
finding witnesses who are on the ground and tapping into their networks; 
vetting facts and debunking rumours; assigning users to translate videos; 
adding context – but writing no articles.

Carvin is not necessary to the flow of news; witnesses are already sharing 
what they know without him. See alsoTexas Tribune <http://www.texastribune.org/>
, where a majority of traffic goes not to articles but to searchable databases 
where readers-cum-users dig up facts. In this way, news mimics the architecture 
of the internet: end-to-end, witness-to-world, without a central gatekeeper. 
Carvin used his crowdto unmask the jailed Syrian lesbian blogger Amina 
<http://mobile.salon.com/news/feature/2011/06/13/gay_girl_damascus/index.html> 
as an American man. "Twitter," he tweeted 
<http://twitter.com/acarvin/status/80000600691060736>, "is the best tool in the 
world for debunking rumours and hoaxes."

Look also to live blogging. In a presentation at South by Southwest in March, 
the Guardian's deputy editor, Ian Katz, said devoting writers to live blogging 
drives much traffic but is expensive to produce. True, I answered, but writing 
articles is also expensive, becoming only more costly as news organisations 
operate with ever-scarcer resources.

So we must question the best use of those resources. I say reporting is our 
highest journalistic priority. Telling stories will always have a role. But 
journalists have more roles to play today. When working in collaboration with 
the public – which can help news become at once more expansive and less 
expensive – it may be useful to help collaborators improve what they do: 
journalist as community organiser, journalism teacher, support system.

At every turn, the question must be where can I add the greatest value? Is 
that necessarily in writing articles? One way to answer that question would be 
to audit the articles we are served today, especially in local papers. How many 
repeat news we already know? How many are rewritten from wire services and 
press releases for the sake of producing a byline? How much space is taken up 
with background paragraphs – which inevitably tell some readers too little and 
the rest too much? Couldn't that need be better served with links to a 
constantly updated archive of recent history and in-depth explainers?

Yes, articles continue. But now I believe they should be treated either as 
valued luxuries that are worth the use of precious resources, or as by-products 
of a news process that can produce them more efficiently.

Postmedia <http://www.postmedia.com/>, the Canadian newspaper company, made 
articles the by-products of its recent national election coverage. The company 
had its reporters on campaign buses feed Twitter and Tumblr and post photos and 
videos all day, increasing the coverage and its currency. A "twin" back at 
Postmedia's news service – like the rewrite man of old (the job description 
died before the job title could be updated to "rewrite person") – turned these 
reports into blog posts and then, at the end of the day, into articles.

Editors tell me (I'm an adviser) that conversion from blog post to print 
article mainly entailed adding background paragraphs. In this example, the 
article no longer drove the process. Now the process was pre-eminent. That's 
digital first.

When I blogged about the article as luxury or by-product, I plucked a nerve 
for sure. Some reaction was constructive. Entrepreneur Jonathan Glick 
celebrated the notion that articles would no longer be captive to delivering 
news nuggets. Freed from that drudgery, articles could aim for greater depth, 
perspective, context (and length – though I quibble with the notion that 
"long-form journalism" is necessarily smarter journalism).

Blogger Amy Gahran <http://www.contentious.com/> suggested we should look at 
news as a collection of pieces of Lego that can be stacked into many shapes. 
She wants to make better use of the "cutting-room floor of journalism" strewn 
with facts, interviews, anecdotes, and insights that don't make it into an 
article, all "missed opportunities to engage readers".

But in other quarters, you'd have thought that by rethinking the article, I 
had kidnapped mom and poisoned her apple pie. BloggerMathew Ingram 
<http://www.mathewingram.com/work/> accused me of trying to replace articles 
with tweets, which I was not. The French media executive Frédéric Filloux 
labelled me a "digital media zealot" who "smokes his own exhaust" and engaged 
in "the collective glorification of approximate journalism". On CBC's national 
show Q, host Jian Ghomeshi asked if I could see that my suggestions were 
"incendiary".I did not understand the emotion and vitriol in the reaction. Then 
I tried to think about these ideas from the perspective of the journalist. "You 
can't have a narrative without a narrator," I think they were telling me. "I 
decide what the story is. I decide what is worth our effort and your attention. 
I decide what goes in and what doesn't. I decide on the beginning and the end. 
Without me, the storyteller, you can't have a story." And without so many 
stories, do we need as many storytellers? That could be their fear.

It's bigger than that, though. Questioning the primacy of the article also 
unravels the organising principle of our information, our thoughts, our 
society. It's the same problem we face with the fall of the book.

In researching my next book, Public Parts, I came across work by academics at 
the University of Southern Denmark who contend that society is emerging from 
what they magnificently call the Gutenberg parenthesis. At the start of the 
parenthesis and before print, information and knowledge were passed around 
orally and copied by scribes, remixed in the process. Inside the parenthesis, 
in five centuries dominated by text, our information like our world-views 
became concrete and serial, with beginnings and ends. Or, as Marshall McLuhan 
wrote: "The line, the continuum – this sentence is a prime example – became the 
organising principle of life." Today, on this side of the parenthesis, we are 
returning to a process orientation as media become malleable and remixed. This, 
the Danes say, affects our cognition of our world.

When people talk fondly of newspapers and books they aren't praising just 
their physical form: the feel and smell, the portability and tangibility. 
Printed text has boundaries and limits; it is a product of scarcity. Print 
feels finite, digital infinite. But print is also limiting while digital is 
freeing. In the transition, abundance is unsettling.

This discussion over the fate of the article has direct relevance to those 
wanting to shift to digital first. Going digital does not mean merely putting 
articles online before the presses roll, as then print still rules the process. 
No – digital first means the net must drive all decisions: how news is covered, 
in what form, by whom, and when. It dictates that when journalists know 
something, they are prepared to share it with their public. They may share what 
they know before their knowledge is complete so the public can help fill in 
blanks.

In this way, digital first resets the journalistic relationship with the 
community, making the news organisation less a producer and more an open 
platform for the public to share what it knows. It is to that process that the 
journalist adds value. She may do so in many forms – reporting, curating people 
and their information, providing applications and tools, gathering data, 
organising effort, educating participants … and writing articles.

John Paton, chief executive of the American newspaper company Journal Register 
<http://www.journalregister.com/>, goes one step further when he sets his path 
as "digital first, print last". That doesn't say print is dead (yet). It says 
that digital is the future and must determine both news process and business 
strategy. Print continues while it still supports itself, if it is less 
expensive to produce (a by-product) or uniquely valuable (a luxury).

In print-as-luxury, the article should be elevated to Economist standards, 
combining reporting with cogent analysis, unique perspective and brilliant 
commentary. Should such a newspaper be published daily? Can it meet that 
standard that often? Perhaps not.

Imagine if a British newspaper with tens of millions of online readers became 
a digital-only brand freed of the leash of the distance its trucks can drive, 
able to become a truly international voice. Imagine then if the once-separate 
Sunday sister title – printed on a more lucrative day of the week than Sunday – 
became a luxurious journal of reporting and commentary likeDie Zeit 
<http://www.zeit.de/index> in Germany (whose print circulation is still 
growing).

That's not a recommendation, only an example of where reconsideration of the 
article could lead. I want to challenge assumptions about the article's role, 
not whether it lives or dies. After all, I just wrote one.
 