
Dinosaurs were in decline long before the asteroid struck that spelt their doom
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/jul/28/dinosaurs-asteroid-bad-timing-killed-off-biodiversity-edinburgh-scientists>
, new research suggests.

Dinosaurs <https://www.theguardian.com/science/dinosaurs> were on the up and 
up from the late Triassic about 220m years ago, with new species arising faster 
than others went extinct. But the study reveals their fortunes had begun to 
change long before the catastrophic six-mile-wide asteroid hit what is now the 
Gulf of Mexico, 66m years ago.

The research, the authors believe, could resolve a longstanding controversy 
among palaeontologists.

Discovery of brainy T rex ancestor sheds light on dinosaur's dominance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/mar/14/iscovery-brainy-t-rex-ancestor-dinosaurs-timurlengia-euotica-uzbekistan>
“One of the things that has been long debated about dinosaur evolution is 
whether they were reigning strong right up until the time of the meteorite 
impact, or whether there was a slow, gradual decrease in [the emergence of new 
species] or an increase in extinction before that time,” said Chris Venditti, 
an evolutionary biologist at the University of Reading and an author of the 
paper.

Writing in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
<http://www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1521478113>, researchers from the 
University of Bristol and the University of Reading describe how they carried 
out a new kind of statistical analysis based on large “family trees” of 
dinosaurs, allowing them to explore the rise and fall of species as time 
marched on. The study looked at the three major groups of dinosaur: the 
ornithischians (beaked herbivores such as Stegosaurus), theropods (flesh-eating 
beasts such as Tyrannosaurus rex) and sauropods (long-necked plant-eaters that 
included Diplodocus).

The results showed that while dinosaurs flourished from about 220m years ago, 
with species arising faster than they went extinct, about 140m years ago their 
success started to stall. Eventually, about 90m years ago, 24m years before the 
asteroid hit, the dinosaurs entered a long-term decline, with species going 
extinct faster than new ones emerged.

That, the authors reveal, could have left the dinosaurs more vulnerable to 
extinction when the six-mile-wide disaster struck. “Because diversity was 
lacking, because species were going extinct and not being replaced, it might 
have made them more susceptible,” said Venditti.

But it was not all doom and gloom. While dinosaurs overall experienced a 
downturn, some were on the up: duck-billed dinosaurs and horn-faced dinosaurs 
appear to have been booming just before the impact occurred. While the study 
does not reveal the reasons for their success, the authors suggest the rise of 
flowering plants could have helped. “They might have been able to exploit new 
plant matter that the others couldn’t,” said Venditti.

Further insights were gleaned when the researchers teased apart the trends for 
each of the three major dinosaur groups. Theropods, they discovered, went into 
decline around 120m years ago, with sauropods following around 6m years later. 
At that timethe ornisthischians – apart from the duck-billed and horn-faced 
dinosaurs – also experienced a downturn.

Asteroid that killed dinosaurs also intensified volcanic eruptions - study
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/oct/01/asteroid-that-killed-dinosaurs-also-intensified-volcanic-eruptions-study>
The research also suggests that rising sea levels could have helped fuel the 
emergence of new species by fragmenting landscapes and isolating creatures. But 
Venditti believes a number of phenomena could have played a part in the loss of 
dinosaur species, from changes in global climate to mammals competing for 
resources and even nibbling at dinosaur eggs. “What is certainly true is that 
the decline of the dinosaurs would have left room for other groups of animals 
like mammals to fare better when that impact hit,” added Venditti.

While the authors stress that the asteroid impact 66m years ago ultimately 
marked the end of the dinosaurs’ reign, Venditti believes their days may 
already have been numbered. “If they continued on that trajectory, even if that 
meteor didn’t hit, they may well have been very species-poor in some millions 
of years or even have gone extinct all together,” he said.

Not that everyone agrees. While palaeontologist Stephen Brusatte from the 
University of Edinburgh describes the decline as “very, very plausible,” he 
believes that doesn’t mean dinosaurs were “wasting away” towards an inevitable 
end. Rather, he says, the fact that the duck-billed and horn-faced dinosaurs 
were doing well suggests that dinosaurs could have bounced back.

“It may be that the effects of the asteroid were a bit worse because you had 
dinosaurs that maybe weren’t as strong in an evolutionary sense as they once 
had been,” he said. “But I think if there was no asteroid you would still have 
dinosaurs around today.”
 