
El-Hadji Diouf is not one of nature's diplomats. Having missed out on World 
Cup qualification, he and Senegal have a point to prove against Ghana this 
afternoon, and the Bolton Wanderers forward is not going to deny it. "I think 
the wrong teams are going to the World Cup," he said. "If you have seen Ghana, 
and then you see Cameroon, Senegal and Nigeria, you know the wrong team is 
going."

Ghana will make their first appearance at the World Cup finals in Germany this 
summer but, having been beaten by Nigeria on Monday, they will be eliminated 
from the African Nations Cup at the group phase if they lose to Senegal in Port 
Said, and Nigeria beat Zimbabwe.

Tunisia, the defending African champions and regular World Cup qualifiers, 
have been highly impressive, but performances from the four teams who will make 
their World Cup debuts in Germany have been mixed. Ghana at least can point to 
the absence of three key players - Michael Essien, Sulley Muntari and Asamoah 
Gyan - through injury, but for the others excuses are harder to find.

Although Ivory Coast, with Didier Drogba to the fore, have secured their place 
in the quarter-finals, Togo, the side who pipped Senegal in the qualifiers, are 
already out. Angola, meanwhile, must beat Togo on Sunday and rely on Cameroon 
beating DR Congo and a superior goal difference if they are to reach the last 
eight. "If you played the World Cup qualifiers over again," Diouf said, "I 
think Senegal would qualify."

His concern, though, is not merely for his own country. "African teams going 
to the World Cup represent Africa," he said. "They are ambassadors for African 
football - Senegal four years ago, Nigeria eight years ago, or Cameroon . . . 
We have only five African teams going to the World Cup, and we don't want to 
lose a place. If we have five teams and they all go out in the first round, 
it's not good for Africa."

Diouf's views were echoed by Senegal's captain, Ferdinand Coly, another member 
of the side that upset France in the opening game of the 2002 World Cup. "It's 
a disappointment for the big teams," Coly said. "It's not good for African 
football. Nigeria, Senegal and Morocco have to play at the World Cup because 
they're the most powerful teams in Africa. This World Cup could be an 
embarrassment for everybody. I hope it's not, because for Togo this is a 
beautiful dream. I just pray they don't go to Germany for a holiday."

Diouf admitted he will not even watch the World Cup on television this summer. 
"I'm going on holiday with my family," he said. "If I watched it I would cry."

In Alexandria yesterday, Pascal Feindouno scored two minutes into injury-time 
as Guinea beat Zambia 2-1 in their Group C game. The win followed their 2-0 
defeat of South Africa and puts Guinea on the cusp of the quarter-finals.

Feindouno delivered the winner with a shot that hit the underside of the bar 
and bounced down just over the line. The St Etienne striker had equalised with 
a 74th-minute penalty after Fode Mansare was brought down by George Kolola.

Zambia took the lead in the 34th minute when their captain Elijah Tana headed 
home from a corner. Feindouno said: "At halftime our coach got us all motivated 
and told us not give up. We had to keep fighting right through to the end."

In last night's other Group C game Tunisia beat South Africa 2-0 with goals 
from Francileudo Santos in the 32 minute and Selim Benachour in the 58th.
 