
Savers should be allowed to access their pensions before retirement in an 
emergency as an alternative to payday loans, a pensions expert has suggested.

The payday loan industry has boomed in recent years, and in 2012 more than 10m 
loans were taken out, each worth an average of £260. Interest on borrowing can 
be steep, with big names such as Wonga charging annual rates of several 
thousand per cent, and debt charities reporting that in some cases loans have 
quickly grown to unmanageable sums.

A survey by the Competition and Markets Authority found that half of borrowers 
had used the loan to cover an unexpected increase in expenses or outgoings.

Investment firm Hargreaves Lansdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/hargreaveslansdown> said offering 
households a cash reserve of a few hundred pounds to draw on in an emergency 
would mean that they wouldn't have to rely on short-term borrowing to fund 
these unexpected expenses.

With millions of workers now being enrolled automatically into pensions by 
their employers, the firm said there was potential to allow them to build a 
cash reserve over as little as two years, which could be drawn on if necessary.

The impact on their retirement provision would be minimal and, depending on 
how the scheme was structured, could reduce the eventual pension payout by as 
little as 2%.

To stop the money being frittered away, the firm suggests that savers would 
have to consult with the Money Advice Service or ThePensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> Advice Service before being 
allowed to withdraw cash, and only be allowed to withdraw more money after 
several years of paying into their retirement fund.

In a paper on the subject, Hargreaves Lansdown outlined three ways that the 
scheme could work:

• Employer contributions over a limited period (eg two years) could be 
channelled into a cash account, before being redirected once again into pension 
saving.

• Government tax relief on the member's contribution could be diverted into a 
cash account for a limited period (eg four years), before being redirected once 
again into a pension.

• Rather than creating a separate cash account, the pension provider could 
simply offer investors an alternative loan option, lending out a capped sum 
from their pension pot.

Under each system, the government, employers and employees would all maintain 
their existing contribution levels. Under the first two, employees would need 
to opt in to the scheme to have the money set aside in the early years, but in 
the third there would be no need to sign up in advance.

For someone earning £20,000 a year, redirecting employers' contributions into 
an account for two years would create an emergency fund of £1,225, while 
collecting the tax payments for four years would provide a fund of £833.

"Given the success of auto-enrolment and the low opt-out rates, we believe now 
is the right moment to look at how the pensions industry can help to solve a 
financial challenge which is particularly relevant to lower-income households," 
said Tom McPhail, head of pensions research at Hargreaves Lansdown.

"For many people, simply having a cash reserve of a few hundred pounds to draw 
on in an emergency would be a huge step forwards in strengthening the country's 
financial resilience. It could be achieved at no extra cost to the savers, and 
with minimal disruption to the pensions system."
 