
New media
C4 takes local action


AudioBoo <http://www.audioboo.com/>, the sound-sharing website and iPhone app 
that launched in March, was last week expected to top more than 1m page views. 
Good news for the startup - but also for Channel 4 and its innovation fund for 
technology projects, 4iP, which provided part-funding of between £25,000 and 
£100,000.
While broadcasters such as Sky, ITV and Channel Five are focusing on improving 
their own businesses, C4 - perhaps surprisingly given the uncertainty 
surrounding its future funding, and recent cuts in budgets and jobs - has £20m 
to spend on partnering projects originating outside C4.

The latest projects on 4iP's books include hundreds of Talk About Local 
micro-community sites (4iP is delivering funding of £100,000, but other bodies, 
including Screen West Midlands and UK Online Centres, are contributing to a 
total budget of £1m) and Help Me Investigate, a project to help the public 
co-ordinate crowd-sourced investigations on local issues.

For Will Perrin, who is behind the Talk About Local idea, the catalyst came 
when 20 teenagers filled a stolen car with fireworks and set light to it 
outside his house. The former government tech adviser began trawling local 
council meetings and mobilising neighbours in King's Cross, London, to try to 
improve the area. Seven years later he co-ordinates the community website
kingscrossenvironment.com <>, which has claimed some major campaign successes - 
including teasing £1m from Network Rail for local improvements.

And while 200-300 users each week may seem a small audience, the site "offers 
a degree of granularity that no local newspaper could match," Perrin says. 
"They don't have that density of eyes and ears on the ground." Relations with 
the local press are solid, however: a reporter on the Islington Gazette says 
the two have a good relationship.

Paul Bradshaw, who is setting up Help Me Investigate 
<http://www.helpmeinvestigate.com/>, which follows the MySociety model of 
successful activism sites, such asTheyWorkForYou 
<http://www.theyworkforyou.com/> and FixMyStreet <http://www.fixmystreet.com/>, 
also thinks local newspapers could benefit from active community sites. "This 
has to be seen to be owned by the community not by journalists because that 
puts off the public. People can contribute their expertise to answer specific 
questions, and journalists with no resources could use the site to call on the 
community for help," he says.

Of 1,250 ideas submitted to 4iP, nearly a dozen have been confirmed for 
funding including the discussion siteYoosk <http://www.yoosk.com/>. Not all 
will be as successful as AudioBoo, however. "On the internet, if you're not 
failing, you're not taking enough risks," says 4iP head Tom Loosemore. "The 
trick is to fail really quickly and cheaply - to fall forward, fast. And we're 
not afraid to drown puppies."
Jemima Kiss

• More about Help Me Investigate, Talk about Local and other projects 
including Mapumentally:theguardian.com/media.pda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/pda> 

Publishing
A Lady finally turns


When I joined the Lady in 1991 it cost just 50p and still looked like a 
magazine from 1951. There was no colour, the editorial department had no fax 
machine, the staff were using typewriters. There were no interviews and no 
designers. With no proper contents pages, the editorial content was sandwiched 
in the middle of the magazine between the classified sections and, despite all 
my efforts, remained that way until this year, when the new management took 
over. It was as if the editorial was an afterthought.
Copy was sent by messengers (at least twice a day) to take material to the 
typesetter, Trutape Setting Systems in Margate, Kent, while the cover and 
editorial illustrations were done by Crown Graphics in London. Any corrections 
had to be sent back to Trutape, who returned them, and then they were sent back 
again after a final read, which we corrected on proofs in pen or pencil.

I was editor of the Lady for 18 years - during which time I tried to get 
through some very necessary changes despite the reluctance of management, who 
had all been at the magazine their entire working lives. Whatever the question, 
the answer was inevitably "no". I asked the owner, Tom Bowles, for colour 
throughout, more pictures, contents pages at the front (instead of on pages 23 
or 24) and the classified advertisements to be made more attractive and put 
together at the back of the magazine.

For 18 years I asked - to no avail. The Lady was not for turning while he was 
in charge, although I had the support of his sister Julia Budworth (her son Ben 
is now running the magazine).

Bit by bit, however, things did change. It was evolution rather than 
revolution but at least the magazine looked more attractive. The popular 
puzzle, the Ladygram, was monthly - eventually I managed to get it in every 
week, much to the delight of the readers. But it took years before I was 
allowed colour - and then only a very limited amount. The display advertising 
manager at that time said it was not necessary (even though I explained he 
might get some colour advertising). I was allowed to use no more than five 
pictures over two pages.

I had the weekly's first word processor, but it took over eight years before I 
could get the management to agree to consider getting computers - we finally 
got PCs years after every other magazine in Britain was being made on new 
technology. At last we could do our own corrections and print our own proofs.

The magazine's editorial content, when I arrived, was almost entirely made up 
of amateur features sent in on spec, and odds and ends by staff. I was 
surprised to find some members of the editorial department could not type.

Eventually, of course, we had commissioned features, interviews, cookery and 
fashion in colour, a wide variety of articles, reviews, special offers and 
puzzles, all adding up to "a good read". We were feminist without being 
strident, we promoted women of achievement, we had a cartoon and a website. We 
had joined the 21st century.
Arline Usden

• The writer stepped down as editor of the Lady last week, but remains 
editor-at-large
 