 Underwater explorers claim they have solved the mystery of the disappearance 
of Antoine de Saint-Exupéry, author of the most popular French book of the 20th 
century, who died when his wartime reconnaissance plane crashed on July 31 
1944. No trace of the aircraft was found at the time.
Part of the tailplane of a P-38 French air force Lightning has been fished 
from the Mediterranean. Final proof is still lacking, in that the piece carries 
no identification numbers, but it was found near the spot where an identity 
bracelet bearing the name of the writer of The Little Prince, and that of his 
wife Consuelo, was recovered 18 months ago by chance.

Since then, a Marseille-based underwater exploration company, Comex, has been 
operating in the area with sounding equipment and mini-submarines in the hope 
of finding the missing aircraft before the 100th anniversary of Saint-Exupéry's 
birth in Lyon on June 29 1900.

The chairman of Comex, Henri-Germain Delauze, an experienced diver, was 
working with another company, Geocean, in connection with a television 
documentary team trying to solve the mystery of the author's last flight.

Mr Delauze said yesterday that part of the tailplane of a P-38 had been found 
within a mile of the spot where the bracelet was discovered by fishermen. 
Twelve other Lightnings of the United States or French air forces were brought 
down or crashed in the same sector, but all the others have been located and 
examined. It is understood that comparisons were made with the other planes and 
none lacked the portion of the tailplane found 40 metres below the 
Mediterranean in an area that corresponds to research done by an historian, 
Philippe Castellano.

"We will be looking for other pieces of the plane carrying identification 
numbers over the next few weeks so that we can say beyond doubt that this 
really was the aircraft of the famous pilot-flyer," said Mr Delauze.

Saint-Exupéry's family has persistently opposed attempts to find the missing 
plane, on the grounds that the discovery could undermine the myth that 
associates his mysterious disappearance with that of the hero of The Little 
Prince.

Friends of the pilot - who also wrote Night Flight and Wind, Sand and Stars - 
are also worried that speculation will be renewed on whether Saint-Exupéry 
crashed the plane deliberately because he was depressed at the prospect of 
being grounded after what was to be his last military mission.

Experts would like to examine the fuselage to see if there is any trace of 
damage through enemy action.

Eyewitnesses in the area between Marseille and Toulon in July 1944 claimed 
that they saw a similar unarmed plane flying well below its prescribed height 
before it crashed into the sea soon after midday.
 