
Ali Dizaei <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ali-dizaei>, the top police officer 
who was jailed for corruption last week, is facing expulsion from the Black 
Police Association, which he once led, the Guardian has learned.

Members of the Metropolitan police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> section of the BPA will 
meet tomorrow to agree his expulsion from the organisation.

Dizaei, a former BPA president, was last week jailed for four years and 
described as "a criminal in uniform".

Senior sources in the BPA said the conviction meant Dizaei – who reached the 
rank of commander in the Metropolitan police – had breached the BPA code of 
conduct.

Once a formal decision to expel him has been made, Dizaei – who is serving his 
sentence at Wandsworth prison in south-west London – will have a right of 
appeal.

The BPA has faced a dilemma over whether to stand by its former leader and 
legal adviser or distance itself from him in an attempt to repair the damage 
the conviction has done to its reputation.

For a decade, Dizaei was the dominant figure in the BPA, and his conviction 
has led to public calls for the group to be wound up. At the time of his 
conviction, he was still a member of the Met BPA's executive.

One senior BPA source said: "You can't have someone on the executive who is 
convicted of a crime.

"He will be expelled for bringing the organisation into disrepute. There isn't 
really a decision to make."

Lawyers for Dizaei have announced that they will appeal against his conviction 
and sentence.

The BPA, in a letter to be sent to him, will say that, if his appeal against 
conviction is successful, he can apply to rejoin the group, which fights to 
stamp out racism within the police.

His ousting from the Met section is expected to lead from his expulsion from 
the national BPA.

Dizaei was convicted last Monday by a jury who decided unanimously that he was 
guilty of abusing his office in a dispute over £600 with a web designer whom he 
falsely arrested and tried to frame for assaulting him.

Leading BPA members met barely 48 hours after the conviction to start the 
process of expulsion.

Dizaei was suspended from duty in September 2008 – a decision that led to a 
boycott of the Met's recruitment efforts by the BPA. The boycott ended earlier 
this year when the BPA and the Met reached a deal.

The Metropolitan police authority has started the process of sacking Dizaei 
from the force. He faces losing his police pension, and could also be hit by a 
demand for costs from the case.

Expulsion from the BPA, whose badge he often wore, would be a symbolic blow to 
the Iranian-born officer, once tipped as a possible future chief of a major 
force.
 