
Her story 

Annie Mac, DJ, 35

The first time I came across Sara was on the radio, same as most people. I was 
19 and listened to her radio show on Sunday evenings while I was at college in 
Belfast. I connected with her. She sounded fun, like someone you would want to 
be friends with.

Shortly after I got my show on Radio 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-1>, we paired up for Glastonbury in 
2007, circumnavigating the festival live on air together. I looked up to her. 
She was loads of fun and had a croaky voice and a Winnebago, which was so 
useful! After that we hung out together at every Glasto. She'd always be there 
with her husband Ben and we'd all chat absolute shit together till the early 
hours. She and Ben are like a double act, and so funny. You don't really need 
to say anything – they just make me and my partner [Toddla T] laugh for hours.

Sara and I both like to let our hair down and be party animals, but she never 
loses control. Her organisational skills are top notch: she's always texting, 
planning, picking you up in a car. She'd call herself a control freak, but I 
could do with being a bit more like that. I'm pretty haphazard at times. More 
last minute.

And as a mum, Sara's someone I really admire. She takes it all in her stride, 
doesn't fuss, talks to the kids as equals and has a proper laugh. I remember 
saying to T once: "If we could be like Sara and Ben as parents, then we'd be 
doing it right." Recently I became a mum, and she's been a really solid advice 
giver. She and Ben are an inspiration on the parenting front: you don't have to 
feel like your life's over, and Sara's always been good at getting the 
work-life balance perfect.

Annie Mac <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/annie-mac>'s AMP 2013 
compilation album will be released on Virgin Records on 14 October

Her story 

Sara Cox, broadcaster, 38

Annie and I have a relaxed friendship which has evolved over the years. She 
went from being my favourite friend at work to one of my best mates to hang out 
with socially. I remember when we took that leap from being party pals to 
chilling at each other's houses, and now we go for Sunday roasts with our 
partners and kids. The four of us have a great dynamic, and it's always great 
banter. Annie's a good role model for young girls: she's super smart, 
individual, with a professional reputation, playing to huge crowds and not 
walking into parties thinking she's Billy Big Boots expecting star treatment. 
It's all about her DJ skills and her music. She's just really cool.

We both loved being pregnant. When I was the size of Cheshire I'd wear 
stretchy Lycra pregnancy clothes, but Annie totally rocked it and always looked 
awesome. She still entertained loads even when she was massive – weeks from her 
due date, she whipped up an amazing spread for all her mates. She didn't let it 
faze her at all. She was wearing this big floaty Grecian gown, drifting around 
on a cloud of serenity. Even when she had her little boy, she was still 
chilled; she'd lay him down on the table during a barbecue.

You can judge a girl by her mates, and Annie's got a really awesome set of 
girlfriends who I get on well with. I've got my bezzies, too, so there's 
no pressure there. You're not looking to make new friends when you're older, so 
when someone comes along who you genuinely like, it's a great thing.

I love Annie to bits. She's a good friend with no baggage. I want her to keep 
doing what she's doing, and I feel like she's there for me. I think we'll be 
mates forever.
Sara Cox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/mar/29/sara-cox-organic-food> 
presentsSounds of the 80s every Saturday night on BBC Radio 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-2> at 10pm

If you'd like to appear in this column, email meandyou@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:meandyou@observer.co.uk>
 