
 The following correction was printed in the Guardian's Corrections and 
Clarifications column, Thursday June 24 2004

In the report below, we quote Catherine Collins, a dietician from St George's 
Hospital in London, as saying that Alok Jha's carbohydrate intake during his 
experiment was higher than that recommended by the rules of the diet. In fact, 
she misread her data and wants to point out that his intake of carbohydrates 
was indeed at the required level. It does not affect her view that his fat 
intake was still far too high.

The Mexican restaurant in downtown Dallas was the low point. Wandering the 
streets for more than an hour, I had peered into countless restaurant windows 
to find a menu that would meet my exacting needs, and ended up on the verge of 
starvation at the noisy cantina. Quickly ordering, I struggled to ignore a 
growling stomach while waiting for the food. Then disaster struck.

A waitress rushed up and set down a bowl of freshly-made tortilla chips. The 
smell was intoxicating and, as if with a life of its own, my hand reached out. 
In slow motion, chip moved towards mouth and stomach growled approval. But this 
was all wrong. Dropping the chip just milliseconds from my mouth, I reached for 
the bitter black coffee at the edge of the table.

A close escape. For the past three months, I have been on Dr Robert Atkins' 
infamous diet. Like millions before me, I have given up the majority of 
carbohydrates and made friends with full-fat mayonnaise, steaks and copious 
amounts of spinach. I threw out all fruit, bread, pasta, potatoes and rice, 
avoided the cakes and biscuits at the local supermarket and slowly forgot the 
taste of a pint of beer.

The Atkins diet has become a western phenomenon while igniting the most 
highly-charged nutritional controversy in history. The death of Atkins at 18 
stone last April hasn't stemmed the flow. More than 30 million people are 
reported to have followed his advice at some stage and bread and potato sales 
have suffered, prompting a fightback: this week bakers launched the Vitality 
diet, which extols bread.

Meanwhile, Atkins Nutritionals continues to tout the many scientific studies 
that, it says, prove the success of its diet. And these keep coming - two 
months ago, researchers at Duke University published evidence that low carb may 
be more beneficial than traditionalists once thought.

We wanted to find out what happens when someone goes on the diet, 
scientifically. We wanted to test the claims made in Atkins' book that not only 
would this counter-intuitive diet make me lose weight, it would make me more 
energetic, satisfied and, crucially, healthier. The experiment saw biological 
chemists monitoring the trace molecules in my blood; dietitians calculating 
exactly how much of what had been eaten; and a psychologist measuring how my 
mood changed.

The standard high-carbohydrate, low-fat diet advice was introduced because of 
research published by professor Philip James of the Rowett Institute in 
Aberdeen in 1983. His work was based on an epidemiological study done in the 
Far East where people on high-carb, low-fat diets seemed to be living very 
healthily.

Scientific thinking behind nutrition was challenged by Atkins, a New York 
cardiologist. He turned it on its head when he published details of his diet 
more than 25 years ago. Fat, he argued, was not the enemy. What was making 
people ever bigger around the waist was not consumption of butter, cream or 
fatty meats but over-consumption of refined flour, sugar and potatoes. 
Carbohydrates were making us fat.

Atkins justified his idea with a compelling account of what happens in the 
body when people eat too many carbs. As levels of carbs (broken down into 
glucose in the bloodstream) rise, so does insulin. Insulin peaks cause sugar to 
be stored in the body as fat: Atkins even called insulin the "fattening 
hormone". Cutting carbs means that there are no surges in insulin, so avoiding 
the production of more fat.

Atkins also claimed that eating more proteins forces the kidneys to work 
harder to get rid of them and that this uses a lot of calories.

Critics were quick to point out that the Atkins diet seemed to be a recipe for 
heart disease. Eating a lot of fat (Atkins even says in his book that a low-fat 
version of his diet will not work) could not be a good thing.

Others said the diet was just a clever way of cutting calories. Textbooks tell 
us that carbohydrates are meant to make up around half our daily calorific 
intake. Take that out and you have a problem - how on Earth do you replace it? 
On average, a man needs 1,250 calories of carbs a day. If you want to replace 
that with, say, sirloin steaks, you need six quarter-pounders to make up the 
loss - a daily gorging found only on Japanese game shows.

Another way that Atkins eases calorie-restriction is to make eating 
inconvenient. There are virtually no snack foods on this diet, and a few weeks 
after starting, a handful of nuts a day or some strawberries or raspberries can 
be included. No crisps, chocolate bars or flapjacks in the middle of the 
afternoon.

What happened when I tried to live this way? New regime; new lifestyle. First, 
I bought more fresh foods from supermarkets - anything vaguely pre-prepared 
such as ready meals is usually sugar-loaded and so disallowed - and began to 
invent Atkins-friendly recipes. My kitchen has never seen so much action: 
unused Tupperware boxes were dusted off to store the masses of food I was 
suddenly cooking.

Monotony was a problem. I knew that I could eat as many chicken breasts, lamb 
steaks and pork chops as I wanted. But after a few days the novelty wore off 
and I stuck to normal portions.

"Most diets create preoccupation with food and subsequent overeating because 
they generate a sense of denial," says Jane Ogden, a psychologist at King's 
College London. "The foods being avoided in most diets are the foods people 
like to eat and the foods at the core of any meal." So we would probably crave 
cream cakes and pastries but wouldn't be so bothered about the core things 
Atkins denies - rice or pasta, for example.

So far, so healthy. But what about all that fat that suddenly has to be eaten? 
The calories I was getting from fat certainly increased during the experiment, 
and saturated fat made up a great part of the increase.

In his book, Atkins puts no limit on fat. But earlier this year, the Atkins 
company was in trouble for apparently changing its advice and saying that its 
diet should contain no more than 25% saturated fat - a far cry from the 
unlimited butter, cream and oils that devotees were apparently allowed to gorge 
on. But Atkins Nutritional quickly countered that none of their advice had 
changed and that proper Atkins dieters would tend to eat only 25% saturated fat.

Whatever the answer, the Atkins diet is not a licence to eat as much fat as 
you want. Cheese and cream are both restricted to around 100g and three 
tablespoons a day, and Atkins advises against eating any trans or hydrogenated 
fats (such as margarine or fats in many pre-prepared foods). And the caveat is 
that this increased fat intake is only all right as long as you cut carbs at 
the same time.

Some of Atkins's positive health claims are less credible. He reckons that 
people following his low-carb regime will see positive effects on their 
cholesterol, for example. The LDL (the bad type), he says, should decrease and 
HDL (the good type) should increase. Having more of the bad than the good kind 
increases the risk of heart disease.

Six weeks into the experiment for me saw the opposite effect to what Atkins 
predicted - my ratio of LDL shot up compared to my HDL cholesterol. My risk of 
heart disease had increased.

Catherine Collins, a clinical dietitian at St George's Hospital in London, 
explains that my rise in LDL cholesterol is entirely predictable from the usual 
dietetic models. "Your body was being saturated with an amount of fat you 
really couldn't process," she tells me.

Cholesterol is produced from the fats we eat because the body can't absorb 
them in their natural state.

"The LDL is the unprocessed cholesterol. The liver will selectively try to 
utilise that LDL and decide what to do with it - whether to make HDL 
cholesterol or offload some of it into things like triglycerides," explains 
Collins.

When I started the diet, my fat intake jumped and my liver struggled to cope. 
"Something like a load of lorries trying to enter a supermarket loading bay," 
Collins says. "Your liver was being overwhelmed by the fact that it couldn't 
process it quickly enough to convert it into HDL or store it."

Sarah Brewer, a doctor and adviser to Atkins Nutritionals UK, says there is no 
scientific evidence that the Atkins diet has a significant negative effect on 
LDL cholesterol. "LDL can either go up, down or stay the same for the first two 
months," she says. "If it goes up, it tends to go down after two months. It's a 
short-term effect."

Jeremy Nicholson, a professor of biological chemistry who heads a 
world-leading metabolic research team at Imperial College London, says the 
results show the problems in prescribing one way of eating to a large and 
varied population. "Even if what Atkins says is true about improvements in 
cholesterol, for you, it went the opposite way to what is regarded as healthy," 
he told me.

This does not prove Atkins' assertion is wrong outright, but outlines the fact 
that individuals react differently. Nicholson says the Atkins diet can be seen 
as an intervention to a person's metabolism, like a drug. Just like a drug, 
some people react differently. "In any population you'll have extremes but, for 
most people, Atkins will probably accelerate heart disease and could negatively 
impact on other organ systems: we just don't know yet," says Nicholson. "A 
large selection of the US and UK populations is engaged in a potentially 
dangerous experiment, the outcome of which we may not know epidemiologically 
for at least 20 years."

Current calorific intake and nutrition advice is based on population 
statistics. Nicholson says we need to move to more individualised advice, as 
researchers are trying to do in pharmacology.

Understanding diet in the future will be a case of finding the genes 
responsible for negative traits (such as obesity) and working out how they 
interact with the stresses in our individual environments. Nicholson's lab at 
Imperial is spearheading the effort. Two decades ago, he devel oped a technique 
where he could assess a person's metabolic status - the combination of genes 
and environment provide a unique fingerprint for an individual. This 
fingerprint gives Nicholson the ability to model how any intervention to 
metabolism, such as a drug or diet, will affect that person.

The Atkins debate will rage for some time. The latest salvo was delivered in 
May with the publication of research from Duke University. During a six-month 
comparison study, people on a low-carb, high-protein diet lost more weight than 
people on a low-fat, low-cholesterol and low-calorie diet. Accompanying 
editorials sang the praises of low-carb routines and even nutrition luminaries 
such as Walter Willets, professor at Harvard medical school, said it was time 
to start taking Atkins-style diets more seriously.

There's a long road to go. There may be many papers published for and against 
low-carb diets but there will be no resolution any time soon. "Just because 
there are published papers doesn't mean something is correct. Everyone can make 
mistakes," says Nicholson. "The recent Harvard publication and the fact that 
Willets is well respected doesn't make him Yoda.

"You need a balance of opinions from eminent experts and a broad scientific 
consensus based on widely gathered evidence over many years. It took almost 
three decades from the first epidemiological studies on smoking before the now 
obvious health risks were widely accepted even by doctors."

My conclusion? The weight loss was great but I felt restricted by the 
compromises I had to make. I learned some good lessons: it is possible to eat 
healthy food without too much effort and vegetables are not the enemy. But, 
according to the data, for the past three months I have put my health at risk 
by eating the Atkins way.

Watching England play in Euro 2004 last week, I sat down to my first pint of 
beer in more than 12 weeks. A friend brought over some crisps and, hesitantly 
at first, I began munching the indulgent, carb-rich junk food once again. It 
might have been the wrong food to celebrate the end of a long experiment - too 
unassuming and simple, perhaps. But it tasted great.


· Alok Jha will discuss his Atkins experiment at the Food x-change: a debate 
on food and the food industry, at the Dana Centre, Queen's Gate, London SW7, on 
Tuesday June 29 at 6.30pm. The event is free, but prior booking is essential on 
020 7019 4940

Further reading
· Read Alok Jha's diary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/life/atkins/page/0,14296,1246422,00.html>, and 
discuss the experiment with him
· The psychology of eating: from healthy to disordered behaviour, by Jane 
Ogden. pub. Blackwell, Oxford, 2003. ISBN 0631233741
· Jeremy Nicholson's company <http://www.metabometrix.com>, which specialises 
in metabonomics
· Atkins Nutritionals UK <http://www.atkins-uk.com>
· Details of the Food x-change event <http://www.danacentre.org.uk>
 