 A doctor lied to the parents of baby boy who had just died over what a 
postmortem examination would involve and the possible retention of the child's 
organs, the General Medical Council (GMC) heard today.
Dr Andrew Selby is believed to be the first doctor to appear before the GMC's 
professional conduct committee charged in connection with the organs scandal at 
Liverpool's Alder Hey hospital.

It was alleged that the consultant in paediatric intensive care told Julie 
Wilkinson and her partner, Nick Williams, that only an "inch-long incision" 
would be needed to find out what had caused the death of their 
four-and-a-half-month-old son, Owen Williams.

On that basis, his parents reluctantly agreed to the procedure in a meeting at 
the children's hospital just hours after their son's death, the GMC in 
Manchester was told.

Only months later did they finally learn that, in fact, most of Owen's organs 
had been removed during the postmortem examination and retained by the hospital.

Dr Selby is accused of giving false information to the couple over the nature 
of a postmortem examination and the replacement of organs prior to their 
child's burial.

He denies serious professional misconduct.

Opening the case against Dr Selby, David Enoch told the committee that Owen 
Williams had been born with serious heart and lung problems in September 1998.

He spent much of his short life at Alder Hey before his health deteriorated 
suddenly and he died on January 29 1999.

Dr Selby then broke the news to her and her partner before raising the subject 
of a postmortem examination.

"Julie Wilkinson's immediate reaction was a blank refusal," Mr Enoch said. 
"Further interference with Owen was a real issue for this family.

"This was a little boy who had been ill all his short life. He had undergone 
many procedures and in their eyes he had been through enough," he added.

However, Dr Selby told them that only an "inch-long incision" would be made in 
his chest and a "slither" of tissue taken from Owen's heart or lung.

After a short discussion in private, the boy's parents agreed.

"Julie Wilkinson specifically asked the doctor whether anything else would be 
removed. Dr Selby assured her that it would not," Mr Enoch added.

Only when the couple saw the examination report some weeks later did they 
learn that some of his organs had been removed to be weighed.

The hospital assured them that all the organs would have been replaced but 
within weeks they were informed that the hospital had retained his heart.

A second funeral was held to bury Owen's heart with his body but weeks later 
they found out more of his organs had been removed.

The casket - supposed to contain only his heart - was exhumed and found to 
contain Owen's brain, tongue, larynx, trachea, thyroid gland, bronchi, lungs, 
kidney and liver.

"For these parents of this little boy, organ removal was a real issue from the 
beginning," Mr Enoch said.

"These people demanded the truth from the beginning. They asked specific 
questions requiring specific answers."

He added: "He [Dr Selby] must have known perfectly well what was done with 
those organs."

A total of sixteen doctors criticised by the report into the Alder Hey 
hospital organ retention scandal are to face investigation.
 