 A pathologist secretly ordered the removal of hundreds of organs from the 
bodies of children without their parents' approval, a medical tribunal heard 
yesterday.
Dick Van Velzen failed to turn up for a hearing set up to decide whether he 
should be struck off the medical register.

An investigation at Alder Hey hospital in Liverpool where Professor Van Velzen 
worked as a paediatric pathologist uncovered more than 200 pots containing 
organs from about 850 post-mortem examinations carried out between 1988 and 
1994.

The scandal was uncovered in 1999 only after a witness giving evidence to the 
inquiry into the deaths of babies at Bristol Royal Infirmary referred to organs 
retained at Alder Hey.

Prof Van Velzen, 55, who resigned in 1995 and returned to his home in the 
Netherlands, faces a long list of charges related to the retention of organs 
from foetuses and children.

He is accused of retaining organs without the consent of parents, failing to 
keep records and failing to complete post-mortem reports in reasonable time. 
Many parents discovered the truth only "many years after [their children] had 
been buried or cremated", according to the six-page list of charges.

An inquiry launched in 2001 was put on hold and reactivated last year when the 
Crown Prosecution Service decided not to take Prof Van Velzen to court.

A GMC panel meeting in Manchester was told that he had been formally notified 
of its hearings in notices delivered by post, courier and a private detective 
to two addresses in the Netherlands.

But in July 2002 Prof Van Velzen told a solicitor acting for the council that 
he was "not the least bit interested in receiving information about GMC 
proceedings". He was not legally represented at yesterday's hearing.

The panel decided that it could go on without him and that further delays 
would benefit no one.

The GMC's counsel, Andrew Collender QC, said Prof Van Velzen was appointed to 
the chair of foetal and infant pathology at the University of Liverpool in 
April 1988 and was responsible for leading research into sudden infant death 
syndrome.

"At the heart of the charges against Dr Van Velzen was his practice, while at 
Alder Hey, of removing and retaining the internal organs of infant patients 
following post-mortem examinations ...

"The parents of those whose organs were retained had not agreed to the 
long-term retention of the organs, only becoming aware of that long-term 
retention many years after their child had been buried or cremated."

Some parents had agreed to minor biopsies but had not agreed that organs 
should be retained. "They were becoming aware of that long-term retention many 
years after their children had been buried or cremated - a circumstance causing 
considerable and understandable distress."

Mr Collender said that as soon as Prof Van Velzen arrived in Liverpool, he 
ordered special techniques to be performed on the samples. This caused a 
backlog and organs retained for examination were stored in pots in a hospital 
store.

Mr Collender also read extracts from a letter sent to Prof Van Velzen by his 
secretary Marjorie Clark, who had noticed an increase in complaints about 
overdue post-mortem reports.

She was dealing with "constant phone requests" and found the issue "sensitive 
and extremely difficult" for women who had had miscarriages or terminations.

The panel heard that on March 30 1989, Prof Van Velzen had written a report on 
a stillborn baby girl (Patient S) and said that her organs had been cut to 
prepare microscopic sections for examination.

But Mr Collender told the panel that a later examination revealed that the 
preserved organs showed that Prof Van Velzen had made a "single block 
dissection from the tongue down to the bladder".

This would not have enabled him to produce the conclusions listed in his 
post-mortem report, which was "misleading and false".

The hearing continues today.
 