
It was in 2012 that Dutch artist Saskia Olde Wolbers, who has lived in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> for 20 years, noticed 87 Hackford Road, 
Brixton, for sale with Savills – on the market for the first time since the 
1940s. She used to cycle past the neatly proportioned, Georgian terraced house 
on her way to work and was excited when she heard that it had not been touched 
for decades. Paint was peeling from its facade, but it still had its beauty 
spot of a blue plaque:

VINCENT VAN GOGH
 1853-1890
Painter
lived here 1873-1874
 A newspaper cutting from 1973, featuring Van Gogh's drawing of the house. 
The house was bought unseen at auction for £575,000 by James Wang, a Chinese 
violinist, businessman and art enthusiast, who remarked with likable spirit: "I 
can't afford aVan Gogh <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/van-gogh> 
painting but I can afford his house."

Saskia Olde Wolbers used to think about the house and its plaque and wonder if 
it might be possible to fill it with voices. Could she devise a haunting, a 
fiction rooted in fact, focusing on how 87 Hackford Road's most famous tenant 
affected the house's subsequent life? It would be an audio piece and a new 
departure (she is a video artist who films short narratives in model sets). 
After the house was sold, she took her proposal toArtangel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/artangel>, London-based commissioners 
of contemporary art, and together they contacted Wang – who proved 
extraordinarily hospitable to her ideas. When she met Wang and his wife, Alice 
Childs (they plan eventually to turn the house into an "arts centre for 
residencies of Chinese artists"), the first thing they did was give her the key 
to the house: "A really generous, trusting gesture." When she met Wang and his 
wife, Alice Childs (they plan eventually to turn the house into an "arts centre 
for residencies of Chinese artists"), the first thing they did was give her the 
key to the house, "a really generous, trusting gesture".

They also handed her a grocery carton/archive discovered in the house. It sits 
on the table in front of us in the cafe off the Brixton Road where we meet 
before visiting No 87. Olde Wolbers is a small, vivid, tentative woman – a 
zealous researcher with a leavening imagination.Martin Bailey's biography Young 
Vincent 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Young-Vincent-Story-Goghs-England/dp/085031965X/ref=sr_1_4?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1398252965&sr=1-4&keywords=young+vincent>
 has been one of the most invaluable of her guides to Van Gogh's Brixton year. 
He moved in with a widowed landlady, Ursula Loyer, (whose husband had been a 
French languages professor) and her 19-year-old daughter, Eugenie. The two 
women ran a school for little boys. And it was in their house that Van Gogh 
fell in love for the first time.

We look at photographs of the Loyers. Ursula has a gaunt face, suffering eyes 
and frivolous ringlets – they look borrowed. Eugenie has a mannish appearance, 
a generous mouth, a possibly over-generous nose and the same steadiness as her 
mother. Neither woman, I suggest, is an obvious choice for a sexual obsession. 
Olde Wolbers protests: "Vincent was 19… and at that age, you are constantly in 
love, aren't you?"

We know nothing of how his love developed or even, definitively, with which of 
the women he was the more involved. His letters from this year are scant and 
tend to be formal. It is possible, Olde Wolbers believes, that the family 
excised telltale correspondence. But in 1914, Van Gogh's sister-in-law, Jo, 
revealed: "Vincent felt great sympathy for the mother, fell in love with the 
daughter, Ursula." This slip of the pen (the daughter, remember, was Eugenie) 
created biographical confusion and partly inspired Nicholas Wright's splendid 
playVincent in Brixton, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jun/12/vincent-in-brixton-review> 
(performed at the National in 2002), in which it is with the mother that 
Vincent has the affair.

There is no evidence that Van Gogh slept with either woman, although he wrote 
boldly to his brother, Theo, during his Brixton year to explain that he 
approved of sex before marriage (in spite of being a pastor's son and becoming, 
after leaving Brixton, a nonconformist preacher in Isleworth). But with 
Eugenie, he was unlucky. While her Dutch admirer was under her roof, she got 
engaged to engineer Samuel Plowman, the house's previous lodger. Was Van Gogh 
heartbroken? Not according to his sister, Anna, who wrote in 1874: "Vincent 
wrote to me that she was engaged with a good-natured youth who would know how 
to appreciate her."

And yet… by 30 March, his 21st birthday, something was wrong. Van Gogh's 
family sent a box to 87 Hackford Road, containing cake, chocolate and six pairs 
of cufflinks, on receipt of which he scribbled uncharacteristically brief 
thanks. The tenancy was ending in mysterious difficulty – Olde Wolbers suspects 
he was "asked to leave". After his departure, his family reported that his mood 
was sombre. His mother told Theo on 15 August 1874: "Vincent will also not have 
had it easy at the Loyers's – I'm glad he's no longer there, there were too 
many secrets there and no family like ordinary people, but he will surely have 
been disappointed by them and his illusions will not have been realised – real 
life is different from what one imagines." His sister goes further, saying that 
whenever people fail to live up to her brother's illusions, he is so 
disappointed that he "throws them away like a bouquet of wilted flowers".

Van Gogh's year with the Loyers might have been the equivalent of a discarded 
bouquet, were it not for the efforts, 100 years later, of 46-year-old London 
postman Paul Chalcroft, determined to pinpoint his Brixton address (which, by 
then, had become uncertain). This part of the story charms Olde Wolbers. 
Chalcroft was a "keen replicator" of Van Gogh postcards – copying sunflowers, 
chairs and French postmen – in his free time. In 1971,, taking advantage of the 
postal strike, he checked the national birth registration records for the 1850s 
and found Eugenie (Loyer is an uncommon name), born 1854. Then he checked the 
1871 census – available for public inspection 100 years on. His timing was good 
– he had mere months to wait. Olde Wolbers reaches into the carton and unfolds 
a copy of that same census. It is unaccountably moving: the copperplate letters 
spell the names conclusively: Ursula and Eugenie.

In 1973, a blue plaque ceremony at 87 Hackford Road was attended by the mayor 
of Lambeth, Mrs Minnie Kidd, Mr Schaapveld, an official from the Dutch embassy 
(who tactfully ignored the domineering union jack on the front of the house), 
descendants of Eugenie's and a swarm of journalists. Olde Wolbers places the 
photographs in front of us: the mayor in hound's-tooth tweed, Chalcroft in his 
best suit, Arthur and Marjorie Smith – the couple who owned the house. The 
Smiths had bought No 87 in 1950 with no notion of its past and Olde Wolbers 
revels in the randomness of their story: "The Smiths lived with Vincent Van 
Gogh more intensely than the Loyers did." She adds: "I am interested in the 
lack of control. Suddenly something happens to their house and… "
 A detail from 87 Hackford Rd. Photograph: Saskia Olde Wolbers 
Arthur Smith coped superlatively. He was "very eloquent". He "enjoyed and was 
amused by the attention" (the gold medal he was awarded by the Van Gogh museum 
still nestles in the carton of goodies). In the photographs, Marjorie Smith 
wears pristine white gloves at the unveiling, as if the house had become an 
exhibit in need of tender handling. Press cuttings were carefully preserved too 
(all in the box in front of us). In one article, Mrs Smith explains: "A man 
comes past here every morning and bows to the plaque." In another, it appears 
that art is catching. Mrs Smith says of her son Mark: "He is quite a good 
artist though he paints some rather weird astrological things and says he can 
only paint in that room [Van Gogh's]. I suppose it's the atmosphere or 
something." Mrs Smith emerges as a nifty DIY curator, corresponding with 
Eugenie's granddaughter and planting respectful sunflowers in her back garden. 
And in 1974, Hackford Road becomes a conservation area, thanks in part to Van 
Gogh, something Olde Wolbers weaves into her narrative. The 1970s press 
clippings show subeditors in gleeful overdrive: "She was only the landlady's 
daughter but she gave Van Gogh the brush… Brush with love that changed Van 
Gogh's life… Landlady's daughter spurns £25,000,000 artist…"

We stroll along Hackford Road: tower block, red-brick Edwardian school, 
Georgian and Victorian houses, blossoming trees. In Van Gogh's day, Brixton 
would have been a predominantly middle-class neighbourhood. Today, there is a 
"Van Gogh walk" opposite the house in which (even though he was a nobody when 
he lived here) he has been improbably appropriated as a Brixton spokesman, 
representative of civic pride.

He would walk to Covent Garden – it took an hour – in his top hat: "You cannot 
be in London without one." His destination was Goupil's gallery in Southampton 
Street where he worked as an art dealer. His words – "I walk here as much as I 
can. It's absolutely beautiful here" – are quoted on a carved stone banner 
beneath black and yellow tulips in Van Gogh Walk.

Saskia unlocks the door to 87 Hackford Road. The house is dark, damp and full 
of "great 40s detailing" – a destination for lino connoisseurs. Saskia enthuses 
over the "pointilliste" designs and points out a sunflower pattern, a recent 
discovery beneath five layers, installed in the 1940s when no one could have 
known its relevance – one of life's teases. There is brick wallpaper above the 
fireplace, bamboo wallpaper on the panels of the door and, on the floor, an 
underlay of 40s magazines. In one room, a wall mirror opens to reveal an empty 
safe. Inside it: a hairpin. Saskia's team are at pains to reveal rather than 
rip out, discreetly wiring the house with 24 hidden speakers and 500m of cable. 
The piece will be recorded and read by professional actors, directed by Lu Kemp 
with support from sound designer Elena Pena. And it will be heard throughout 
the house by visitors, a weave of voices, audible in a "layered way" (not 
unlike the lino). It will include invented correspondence with Lambeth council, 
a chirpy visit from Mr Chalcroft and at the end, a teasing challenge, a rewrite 
of what is known, to take home and ponder.

The place is so busy with detail you have to take a breath to picture Van Gogh 
climbing the narrow stairs. He approved of his bedroom: "I now have a room such 
as I always longed for without a slanting ceiling and without blue paper with a 
green border." Today, there is a skeleton of a bird, or a bat, in the corner 
cupboard. The little grate is dusty. And in the garden, we inspect a privy with 
a museum piece of a lavatory, ivy dangling from the roof and a mirror with a 
curlicued iron frame. In one of the newspaper articles, Mrs Smith giggles: 
"There is still an outside loo… I'm sure that is the seat he used to use."

What are people hoping for when they visit the houses of artists or writers? 
Isn't it a futile way to interpret an artistic life? Olde Wolbers  says: 
"Tourism and blue plaques make houses into biographers. The past is 
irretrievable. All you can do is anthropomorphise a house – like looking at the 
empty shell of an animal."

She believes Van Gogh's despond after leaving Brixton may have been because of 
encountering an "agnostic moment" in Victorian Britain when people were "in 
thrall to spiritualism, evolution, Ruskin – it would have been a culture shock 
for him. I've put this in my fiction." After all, we know he also preached at 
Turnham Green, where church records mention a "Vincent Van Gof" in the pulpit. 
A climate of religious disillusion could have been more significant than the 
tabloid view that Eugenie broke his heart and, as has inevitably been argued, 
was indirectly responsible for his suicide at 37 in 1890.

I stand at the top of the house and try to imagine him immersed in English 
literature as Olde Wolbers tells me he was reading George Eliot and Keats and 
beginning to form his delicately complicated view of love: "What kind of love 
did I feel when I was 20? It is very difficult to define – my physical passions 
were very weak then, perhaps because of a few years of great poverty and hard 
work. But my intellectual passions were strong, meaning that without wanting 
any pity, I wanted only to give, but not to receive. Foolish, wrong, 
exaggerated, proud, rash – for in love one must not only give, but also take." 
It is impossible to know what Van Gogh took from 87 Hackford Road but, as Olde 
Wolbers and her team encourage the walls to speak, it is clear that he is still 
giving.
 