
The federal government is investigating prisons throughout Alabama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alabama> in an inquiry that is “possibly 
unprecedented”. The investigation comes after a series of strikes and riots 
that have revealed the state’s prisons are in turmoil.


“It’s a giant investigation. This is rare,” said Lisa Graybill, a staff 
attorney for the Southern Poverty Law Center, which is conducting an 
investigation of its own. Previously Graybill worked for the federal unit that 
will investigate Alabama, and said the closest comparison in memory was an 
examination of Puerto Rico’s juvenile jails. “Taking on a whole state is 
unusual and possibly unprecedented,” she said.

According to the Department of Justice (DoJ) the investigation will focus on 
whether prisoners are protected from physical and sexual abuse by other 
prisoners and guards, and whether living conditions are sanitary and safe in 
general at men’s prisons.

Alabama’s prisons – particularly the notorious Holman prison – were at the 
forefront of a nationwide call for prisoners to strike from work, last month. 
On 9 September prisoners across the US began a strike that lasted several days, 
in some places. And at Holman, guards joined striking prisoners by staying home 
from work.

Those strikes also came on the heels of two riots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/20/alabama-prison-riots-chaos-and-mayhem>
 at Holman. During the riot inmates had stabbed warden Carter Davenport and 
another guard. They set fire to the dorm and carried prison-made swords. The 
warden and guard survived the attack, and special security squads swept in to 
quash the riot. But a few days later another riot started after one inmate 
stabbed another. Davenport, who declined to speak with the Guardian about the 
unrest, recently resigned his position.

“Our obligation is to protect the civil rights of all citizens, including 
those who are incarcerated,” US attorney Joyce White Vance, of northern 
Alabama, wrote in a press briefing on Thursday.

Her counterpart in southern Alabama, US attorney Kenyen R Brown, said 
prisoners “should expect sanitary conditions of habitation that are free of 
physical harm and sexual abuse”.

Graybill said the uproar has pulled back a veil that previously obscured 
Alabama’s prison conditions. Litigation in California and Arizona have recently 
brought reform but Alabama’s prisons are the most overcrowded, operating at 
about 183% capacity. “There is a national recognition that Alabama is in 
crisis,” Graybill said.

The federal government is stepping in because although prisons are run by 
states, they are beholden to the US constitution.

“The constitution requires that prisons provide humane conditions of 
confinement,” Vanita Gupta, head of the DoJ’s civil rights division, said 
Thursday.

The welfare of prisoners comes under the Civil Rights of Institutionalized 
Persons Act, which grants the DoJ authority to investigate violations of 
prisoners’ constitutional rights that result from a “pattern or practice of 
resistance to the full enjoyment of such rights”. The department has 
investigated other correctional systems previously, but the scope of the 
current inquiry – an entire state – may be unique.

“We hope to work cooperatively with the state of Alabama in conducting our 
inquiry and ensuring that the state’s facilities keep prisoners safe from 
harm,” Gupta said.
 