
Clean-shaven, dressed in jeans and a light blue shirt, Domhnall Gleeson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/domhnall-gleeson> is almost unrecognisable as 
the actor who plays Konstantin Levin, a solemn young landowner with a coppery 
beard, inAnna Karenina. It's his biggest screen role to date, one that comes in 
the wake of accomplished turns in the IRA thrillerShadow Dancer and the new 
Judge Dredd film.

"They sent me the script for Anna Karenina and I thought, 'Oh, this is way out 
of my league in terms of the type of actor who would normally play this part'," 
he says. But he held his own during a five-hour audition in Los Angeles. 
Afterwards, when Wright called to say he had got the part, "I did a little 
dance on the street in Soho. It was wonderful."

Gleeson's career has been gaining momentum for some time. Born in Dublin in 
1983, he is the eldest son of actor Brendan Gleeson, but following in his 
father's footsteps initially didn't appeal to him, until he read the script for 
Martin McDonagh's playThe Lieutenant of Inishmore while studying film-making at 
Dublin Institute of Technology.

"It was just the funniest thing I'd ever read, and I auditioned for it and got 
it. On stage the reception for Martin's stuff was fantastic. I thought, 'If I 
could do this for as long as I live … why not just take a chance and see how it 
goes?'"

That performance in 2006 won him a Tony. Four years later he distinguished 
himself with scene-stealing appearances in the last two Harry Potter films, 
Mark Romanek'sNever Let Me Go and the Coen brothers' True Grit, as well as 
playing a young Bob Geldof in the BBC2 dramaWhen Harvey Met Bob.

In Anna Karenina, Gleeson portrays Levin's struggle to define what he wants 
out of life. Close to his heart is Kitty, played by Swedish actress Alicia 
Vikander. "I knew Alicia a tiny little bit, as we were both named Shooting 
Stars at the Berlin film festival, so that was cool. She's got a fast-track to 
honesty when she performs, when she acts, and I felt very comfortable with her 
on set. We worked very hard to create a truthful relationship, and whenever we 
got to the place where we needed to be in love, I felt like I was totally in 
love."

Their narrative weaves into the main storyline. "Anna, her husband, and 
Vronsky's love triangle is so interesting and sexual and lovely, it could 
easily be its own film, but I think having Levin in the mix is a really good 
move. Tom Stoppard did a fantastic job of working him into the script, 
providing counterpoint to where Anna exists."

Next up, Gleeson is playing the lead in the new Richard Curtis film, About Time
, alongside Rachel McAdams. "I was ready to do something where there was more 
opportunity to look for the laughs. Who better to do that with than Richard 
Curtis? Seeing him rework a gag on the floor has been brilliant."

But for now he is awaiting the reaction when Anna Karenina is released in 
cinemas. "I saw the film after we finished shooting in February and all I could 
think of was how proud I was to be involved."
 