
Li Na will meet Dominika Cibulkova in the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> final after the Slovakian 
continued a tournament of upsets by thrashing Agnieszka Radwanska.

Cibulkova's only previous grand slam semi-final came at the 2009 French Open 
but she appeared nerveless in routing fifth seed Radwanska 6-1, 6-2. The Pole 
played a superb match to beat defending champion Victoria Azarenka in the 
quarter-finals but she was unable to stamp her unique style on the match in the 
face of an onslaught from her opponent. Cibulkova is only 5ft 3in tall but her 
drilled groundstrokes were too much for Radwanska to cope with.

The result will be a major disappointment for Radwanska, who had won five of 
her previous six matches against Cibulkova, including a 6-0, 6-0 victory in the 
final of the WTA Tour event in Sydney last year.

The 24-year-old's only grand slam final came at Wimbledon in 2012, but she was 
the highest-ranked player in the last four at the All England Club last year 
only to lose to Sabine Lisicki.

Cibulkova is the first Slovakian ever to make a grand slam singles final, and 
she said: "The most important game was when I won my serve for 5-2. Then I knew 
I was going to do it. I can't believe this is happening."

Earlier, Li ended Eugenie Bouchard's brilliant run to reach her third 
Australian Open final in four years. The Chinesewoman was the highest seed left 
in the last four and the only one to have won a grand slam title, and her 
experience told in a 6-2, 6-4 victory.

Li will now attempt to go one better than in 2011 and 2013, when she lost to 
Kim Clijsters and Victoria Azarenka respectively.

Twelve months ago she fell twice during the final, twisting her ankle and 
hitting her head, and the 31-year-old said: "Last time was a little bit tough, 
I will try this time to make one more step."

Bouchard has been one of the stars of the tournament. Supported by her 'Genie 
army', a group of local admirers, and with a sense of confidence and calmness 
beyond her years, the 19-year-old had progressed to the verge of a first grand 
slam final.

At her best, Li is almost unplayable, and in the first five games, Bouchard 
managed just three points, none of them on her serve. She dug in to claw two 
games back before Li, the French Open champion in 2011, wrapped up the set.

But the signs were positive for Bouchard heading into the second, and she won 
two long games to move into an early lead. Back came Li, though, and a backhand 
winner drilled cross court put her 3-2 ahead. The five games had already taken 
longer than the first set but, although Bouchard was having success on Li's 
serve, she was struggling on her own.

The Canadian did manage to hold for only the third time in the match to force 
Li to serve it out, but there was no late twist, the fourth seed clinching 
victory with a backhand winner. Li added of her opponent: "Maybe she will be 
the best player in the world."
 