
We, the undersigned, call on London Metropolitan University to review its 
current strategic plan, One Campus, One Community, in light of its consequences 
for theSir John Cass Faculty of Art, Architecture and Design 
<http://www.londonmet.ac.uk/faculties/the-cass/>.

The Cass is a wonderful example of interdisciplinary activity – an outward 
facing community located in London’s East End, making everything from 
architecture to city plans, furniture to film, fine art to precious objects. It 
engages the most up-to-date industries and practitioners; works with local 
partners and communities; hosts an enviable diversity of students from all 
walks of life and travels the world with its work; a model that is successful, 
dynamic and a civic asset. 

Its future is endangered by a homogenised vision of academic education, part 
of a short-sighted national trend in the new universities. As Jonathan Ive, 
Apple’s chief design officer, has said, it is essential to develop the skills 
of making through hands-on learning. It means we need to understand fully the 
national enterprise of educational reform that began in the mid-19th century, 
sponsoring theArts <https://www.theguardian.com/education/arts> and Crafts 
movement and the establishment of colleges and technical institutes, which 
informed the polytechnics as well as Russell Group universities. We should know 
by now that learning is not restricted to the purely academic: making is also 
learning. It can be done well or badly. The Cass does it well.

The Cass is named after Sir John Cass, who established one of London’s oldest 
education charities with a historical mandate to found a polytechnic institute 
at Aldgate to serve the population of east London. The question of place is 
significant. Universities are not silos but play a dynamic role in their 
communities. Threats to move the Cass, dubbed the “Aldgate Bauhaus”, out of 
Aldgate would destroy its rich ecology and diminish the diversity and 
opportunities of its East End location.

The Cass inhabits one of the last architectural assets of London Guildhall 
University, a bold 1960s building opposite the Whitechapel Gallery. The 
building is being sold to help finance London Metropolitan’s vision for One 
Campus, One Community in Holloway. The plan is to deconstruct the schools of 
art, architecture and design, uproot 2,300 students and close courses that 
don’t conform to the new vision. The prestigious silversmithing and jewellery 
and the country’s last musical instrument-making courses were among those 
announced for closure last week. Despite the university’s claims, the most 
recent survey shows the strategic plan does not have student backing.

The issue is not just about changing address and revisiting the menu, it is 
about a failure to respect the integrity of hands-on creative education or 
understand the real skills involved that make it attractive to students and 
their employers and enable it to thrive. Homogenisation is not the way forward.

London Metropolitan as an institution has had a troubled record of senior 
management. But the Cass is successful. It is doing everything a more robust 
institution might hope for in attracting students, improving results, winning 
awards, engaging with commerce and the community, inventing new ways to work. 
Cass graduates helped found Assemble, a collective of architects, artists and 
designers creating projects in tandem with communities, recently nominated for 
the 2015 Turner prize.

We call on London Metropolitan to pursue a two-site solution that keeps the 
education of art, making and design alive and kicking where The Cass began – in 
London’s East End.

Sir Nicholas Serota, director of the Tate; Lord Rogers, architect; Sir Kenneth 
Grange, Royal Designers for Industry; Sir David Chipperfield, architect; 
Rushanara Ali, MP for Bethnal Green and Bow; Earl of Clancarty, crossbencher; 
Lord Baker of Dorking, chairman, Baker-Dearing Educational Trust; Tom Dixon, 
designer; Jasper Morrison, designer; Rohan Silva, entrepreneur; Eric Parry, 
architect; Iwona Blazwick, director of the Whitechapel Art Gallery; Deyan Sudjic
, director of theDesign <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/design> 
Museum;John Kampfner, chief executive, Creative Industries Federation; Anish 
Kapoor, artist, Turner prize winner; Rosy Greenlees, 
executive director, Crafts CouncilJeremy Deller, artist, Turner prize wnner; 
Associate Professor Patrick Brill, artist known as Bob and Roberta Smith; 
Professor Florian Beigel, Diploma architecture tutor, The Cass LMU; 
Associate Professor Philip Christou, Diploma architecture tutor, The Cass LMU; 
Professor Peter Carl, Director of PhD programme in architecture, The Cass LMU; 
Associate Professor Mark Brearley, Head of Cass Cities The Cass LMU; 
Associate Professor Maurice Mitchell, Diploma architecture tutor, The Cass LMU; 
Peter St John,  Partner Caruso St John Architects,  
Visiting Professor, The Cass LMU
 