
Q We believe we were mis-sold our endowment mortgage in 1986. We were told we 
could not have any other type of mortgage, other than an endowment, and that as 
well as repaying the mortgage the endowment would give us a lump sum. The risks 
associated with the policies were not explained. We have complained to the 
company who employed the independent financial adviser (IFA) who sold us the 
policy. It told us we did not have a case, so we approached the Financial 
Ombudsman Service (FOS). It said it could only look at complaints made about 
advice given before April 1988 and suggested that we contact the IFA. Are we 
being fobbed off?

PH

A Technically, no. You have fallen foul of a major flaw in the system for 
compensating the millions of investors who were mis-sold endowment mortgages. 
The 1986 Financial Services Act, which introduced strict regulations governing 
the provision of "best advice" to investors, did not actually come into force 
until April 1988. IFAs can - and do - argue that endowment policies sold before 
that date did not breach the rules because they did not exist at the time. As a 
result any claims made against them cannot be referred to the FOS to impose a 
settlement since it only deals with any breach of the regulations.

To add insult to injury, if the adviser who sold you the policy has gone out 
of business, or is no longer trading, you will also be unable to seek redress 
from the Financial Services Compensation Scheme - the rules don't allow it to 
investigate any potential claims relating to policies sold before August 28 
1988. If the financial adviser who sold you the policy is still in business, 
you can still demand compensation, but without the backing of the ombudsman you 
may have difficulty getting redress.

It is very unfair - particularly as the technical defence against compensation 
claims is, in the main, used only by IFAs. Insurance companies and their agents 
- including banks and building societies - have agreed to consider compensation 
claims for mis-sold endowment policies sold prior to 1988.

They have, though, made it as difficult as possible in some cases. Complicated 
forms and delaying tactics have been the main weapons used to stave off paying 
compensation so far. Now they are bringing into play another defensive weapon: 
a time bar. In theory, policyholders have six years from the date they were 
sold the endowment mortgage or three years from the date they were first told 
they faced a shortfall to complain about mis-selling.

From June 1 2004 rules set out by the Financial Services Authority (FSA) have 
required endowment providers to warn policyholders of the date on which their 
right to complain runs out. The rules state that there should be at least six 
months between the letter warning of the time bar and the deadline date. 
Letters warning of a time bar have led to a surge in complaints to the 
ombudsman, and it has increased its number of adjudicators from 350 to 1,000 in 
the hope of reducing the long delays in dealing with compensation claims. But 
that will not be of much use to you since your claim has already been rejected 
on technical grounds.

If your adviser is still in business you could consider taking legal action 
against him or her. However this could be a costly and there is no guarantee of 
success. Another alternative might be to try one of the many professional 
complaint handlers. These companies, which have mushroomed in recent years, 
handle endowment claims on behalf of investors, many of whom are daunted by the 
paperwork and uncertain of how much compensation they should seek. Most work on 
a "no win, no fee" basis, although you have to be wary of hidden charges.

And the fee is pretty expensive, usually accounting for 25% (plus VAT) of any 
compensation they win on your behalf. The FSA says this is a heavy price to pay 
when you can make your claim for nothing, using guidance on itswebsite 
<http://www.fsa.gov.uk/consumer/01_WARNINGS/endowments/mn_endowment.html>. Free 
advice is also provided by the Which? endowment actionwebsite 
<http://www.which.net/endowmentaction/>, which is very clear and comprehensive.

Nevertheless the fact remains that the paperwork can be confusing to say the 
least and take up a lot of time. The insurance companies will take advantage of 
any opportunity to reject, or delay, compensation claims so the form filling 
has to be exactly right. And working out what compensation is due, once you 
have managed to establish the policy was mis-sold, is also difficult. This is 
where professional complaint handlers are especially useful: they are used to 
dealing with intransigent endowment providers and doing the sums. As an initial 
step they assess what chance of success you might have in making a claim, so 
you don't have to sign up if you think it will not be worth your while.

You may find it difficult to get a complaints handling firm to take up your 
cause as they tend to avoid handling difficult cases. Their record of success 
is primarily based on pursuing "easy" cases. However from your account this a 
very blatant case of mis-selling, whenever it took place, so someone might be 
prepared to help - at a cost.

Special report: endowments 
<http://money.theguardian.com/endowments/0,6453,609053,00.html>
 