
My friend and former boss Dorothy Eagleson, who has died aged 87, had all the 
advantages of a good education – at Richmond Lodge grammar school in Belfast 
and the city's Queen's University – but she had a passion for helping those who 
had not been so lucky.

As a youth employment officer in the 1960s in Belfast, Dorothy noticed that 
parents often sought her advice on how they could get qualifications, find a 
career or improve their literacy and numeracy. In 1967, with support from the 
Northern Ireland Council of Social Service (now theNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> Council for Voluntary Action) 
and funding from the Clement Wilson Trust, she established an independent, 
adult educational counselling unit which became known as EGSA – the Educational 
Guidance Service for Adults. Three years later, the government agreed to 
provide a grant.

EGSA quickly built up a demand from adults who had failed to realise their 
full potential, were working in jobs below their capabilities, had been made 
redundant or whose life plans had been knocked off course. Significant numbers 
of adults whose physical or mental health had suffered – including many victims 
of the Troubles – were referred to EGSA as part of the rehabilitation process.

In 1975, when the BBC broadcast its adult literacy series On the Move, EGSA 
was invited to set up the adult literacy phoneline in Northern Ireland. In the 
first few weeks, there were 430 calls from people in need of help and more than 
140 from people wishing to become volunteer tutors.

In 1978, after the service had established an international reputation for 
high quality, independent guidance, government funding was withdrawn. The 
decision was met with fierce resistance, and following an adjournment debate in 
the House of Commons EGSA's funding was restored. An independent inquiry was 
launched, and its report was the first official document published in the UK to 
support the case for the development of adult educational guidance.

Dorothy's influence extended beyond Northern Ireland. A founder member in 1982 
of the National Association for Educational Guidance for Adults, she served as 
its first president, a position she held well into her retirement.

She was a prolific supporter of charities and attended art appreciation 
courses until shortly before her death. She was also a regular theatregoer and 
patron of Ulster Orchestra concerts. A colleague who shared committee work with 
her remembered her as "a meticulous proofreader – no spelling mistake or 
wandering comma ever escaped her". As a dedicated professional, she was 
pioneering and inspirational. As a friend, she was generous, unconventional, 
funny and truly unforgettable.
 