
Holders Tunisia came from a goal down to beat Zambia 4-1 in Alexandria 
yesterday thanks to a hat-trick from Francileudo dos Santos.

The Brazilian-born striker scored four goals in this competition two years ago 
and quickly picked up where he had left off as the World Cup qualifiers 
outgunned their lightweight opponents in Group C. Captain Riadh Bouazizi, 
playing in his sixth Nations Cup finals, steered home the other goal with a 
header from close range eight minutes into the second half.

Zambia had surprised Tunisia with a ninth-minute goal on the breakaway. The 
speedy James Chamanga got to the ball ahead of Tunisia's 39-year-old goalkeeper 
Ali Boumnijel and placed it into an empty net.

Barcelona striker Samuel Eto'o 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/samuel-etoo> scored the first hat-trick 
of the finals on Saturday, providing all ofCameroon's goals as they overcame 
World Cup qualifiersAngola 3-1 in Group B to go some way towards erasing 
memories of their failure to qualify for Germany.

"This is the same team who were not fortunate enough to go to the World Cup 
finals," Eto'o said. "Football is also about luck and then we didn't have any. 
Today we played really well and won and it should make us feel good about the 
rest of the competition. We're here to go as far as possible."

Elsewhere in Group B, Portsmouth's Lomano LuaLua scored one and made one as DR 
Congo defeated Togo 2-0. After the defeat Arsenal's new signing Emmanuel 
Adebayor said he intended to leave the tournament after falling out with the 
Togo coach Stephen Keshi. Adebayor refused to play and accused Keshi of 
attempting to pressure him into using the coach as his agent.

"I told him no, I don't work that way. Then later on he wanted me to play, but 
I refused," said Adebayor, who trained with his team-mates yesterday despite 
being called a "cry baby" by Keshi.

Dider Drogba's first-half penalty gave Ivory Coast a 1-0 victory over Morocco 
in Group A on Saturday, although the Chelsea striker could miss tomorrow's game 
with Libya due to a long-standing knee injury that forced him to be withdrawn 
after 65 minutes.

"He's been carrying this injury for a while now," said the Ivory Coast coach 
Henri Michel. "He's got three days to recover for the next game and we'll have 
to see what we're going to do."
 