
A proposal to safeguard children who need heart surgery, by concentrating 
expertise in fewer hospitals allowed to do such operations, has been slipped 
out by the government, which admits it is inclined to reject the experts' 
advice.

The proposal comes from a body of consultants and parents set up after the 
Kennedy inquiry into Bristol Royal infirmary, where babies died after heart 
operations by surgeons whose death rates were unacceptably high.

The body, the paediatric and congenital cardiac services review, was asked to 
settle a question at the centre of the Bristol tragedy, and which has been 
raised many times over the years: how many operations should be carried out by 
a children's heart unit each year for the surgeons to be expert in the complex 
techniques?

The review concluded that each surgeon should do at least three operations a 
week, 120 a year, and that there should be at least three surgeons in the unit 
to guarantee care quality and cover for absences.

That would mean, the review report said, that each such hospital unit should 
deal with at least 300 cases a year to be sure that staff had sufficient 
expertise.

There are 14 hospitals carrying out children's heart surgery - all to a high 
standard - but only four have at least 300 cases a year. The review believed 
the permitted number should be cut to seven or eight.

Yesterday Jacqui Smith, the health minister, said the government "is not 
persuaded of the review group's proposals" and was putting forward other 
options for public consultation: a minimum of 100 operations for each hospital, 
and having no set minimum at all.

Members of the review - heart surgeons, cardiologists, and parents from the 
Children's Heart Federation - fear the government might be running scared of 
the "Kidderminster effect". Richard Taylor, the independent MP for Wyre Forest 
in Worcestershire, was elected after a storm in the constituency over the 
downgrading of Kidderminster hospital.

"I can understand their point of view as politicians, that things are working 
well at the moment," said Leslie Hamilton, consultant paediatric cardiac 
surgeon at the Freeman hospital in Newcastle upon Tyne.

"They are saying there is no need for change. But underlying it, I think, is 
the Kidderminster effect."

Sir Ian Kennedy, Mr Hamilton said, had asked for the review to set minimum 
standards in his inquiry report, but the question had been asked for decades.

As early as 1967, the government was advised that children's heart surgery 
should be concentrated. It was not. It had been suggested, before the Bristol 
scandal broke, that this unit was not doing as many cases as it should, but a 
decision was taken to do nothing. The Bristol and Cardiff units have now merged.

"There are not a lot of votes in it," Mr Hamilton said. Nonetheless, it was 
the unanimous view of the review that some hospital units had to be closed or 
merged.

The report was with ministers for several months before it was quietly placed 
on the Department of Health website for consultation, without any press notice 
or public statement.
 