
The type of engine on American Airlines flight 587, that crashed in New York 
yesterday killing 260 people, was last month identified with an "unsafe 
condition".

US federal safety officials concluded a month ago that there was a "need for 
mandatory inspections" of the CF6-80C2 engine that powered the downed 
twin-engine Airbus A300, because "an unsafe condition has been identified."

The federal aviation administration (FAA) issued a safety notice on October 5 
after months of increased scrutiny of the engine, manufactured by General 
Electric, which is used on more than 1,000 aircraft world wide.

Investigators were treating yesterday's crash in New York City as an accident, 
with early evidence pointing to mechanical failure in the engine.

Federal safety officials have been studying the CF6-80C2 engines since the 
spring of 2000, after planes reported engine failures that sent metal fragments 
flying.

After extensive review, the FAA published its notice of "unsafe condition" in 
the Federal Register last month.

It gave the public 60 days, until December 4, to comment before ordering more 
extensive and more frequent inspections.

General Electric, the parent company for the engine maker, said it complied 
with all the government's repair orders and believed the engine was 
"phenomenally reliable."

The company has built 2,954 of the engines - first introduced in 1984 - and 
they are among the best-selling for wide-bodied aircraft.

The left engine that apparently failed in yesterday's crash had been 
overhauled recently, while the right engine was due for an overhaul soon.

One mystery in yesterday's crash was the discovery of the plane's completely 
intact tail in the waters of New York's Jamaica Bay.

Investigators also heard extensive descriptions from eyewitnesses, including a 
commercial pilot on the ground, who reported that one of the plane's engines 
caught fire during takeoff and eventually broke from the wing.

"When you see an engine separate like that and be visibly intact, it seems to 
point to mechanical failure," said aviation lawyer Don Nolan. His firm 
represented victims of United Airlines Flight 232, which crashed in 1989 in 
Sioux City, Iowa, after an earlier version of General Electric's CF6 engine 
came apart in flight.

The October 5 FAA order came after the body had told airlines in June to begin 
other inspections of the same engines for cracks in certain rotor disks, a 
component inside the engines.

In May, a problem with the same type of engine forced the emergency landing of 
a Monarch Airlines passenger jet in Portugal.

Documents from the British air accidents investigation branch said a rotor 
blade had snapped, puncturing the engine's housing with a 3in (8cm) hole and 
causing minor damage to the wing.

The pilots reported dramatic vibration, and British officials reported there 
had been "several similar failures prior to this event."

In September 2000, part of a GE CF6 series engine was ejected and penetrated 
the left wing of a US Airways jet undergoing a maintenance run on the ground at 
Philadelphia International airport. A loud explosion was heard, followed by a 
fire.

"This incident raises serious safety concerns because, if it had occurred 
during flight rather than on the ground during maintenance, the plane might not 
have been able to maintain safe flight," US investigators said in December.

Last year, the FAA ordered airlines to replace a fuel tube within these 
engines to prevent high-pressure leaks, which investigators warned could result 
in an engine fire and damage to the plane.

Also last year, the FAA ordered carriers to replace certain fan shafts earlier 
than planned, to prevent possible catastrophic failure.
 