
Having relinquished most, if not all, sport as an adult, cricket is one 
of those few activities that – especially as an actor – one can take up again 
after a lengthy leave of absence without too much exclamation of "Not the 
face!", so long as you are wearing a helmet. More than, say, rugby. In fact, 
the "can do", or "can probably do", attitude of an actor lends itself quite 
well to the motley, have-a-go nature of a team such as the Authors XI. I can 
ride a horse. I can play the violin. I can't play cricket, but I know how to, 
which is quite different.

What doesn't lend itself quite so well to a delightful, leisurely season 
of cricket such as that lined up for the Authors is the persistently 
unpredictable schedule of an actor. It truly is a pain when work gets in the 
way of cricket. A film set can be a great place to tune into the Test, whiling 
away the hours between takes, especially when one of your fellow actors is 
cricket-mad chairman of Hampstead CC Jim Carter, AKADownton Abbey's Carson the 
Butler. However, very little can ease the frustration of knowing that on 
a gloriously sunny day, while you are trussed up in white tie, repeatedly 
serving yourself stale peas in a dark and stuffy dining room at Highclere 
Castle, the Authors are frolicking at one of the more attractive grounds in the 
country, their progress barely trackable on Twitter. Why on earth don't these 
stately homes have Wi-Fi?

It was on one such interminable afternoon, sweltering into three-piece tweed, 
that I arrived on to the set ofDownton Abbey to discover Carson bristling with 
excitement, those famous eyebrows positively quivering with delight: "Have you 
heard the news?" the authoritarian basso whispered. "Cricket match. Episode 
eight." He mouthed the words so enthusiastically, and yet so hushedly, he could 
barely contain them.

As the series progressed, plot secrecy was heightened to the extent that such 
information arrived and spread with a frisson of forbidden pleasure. At that 
point we were only halfway through filming episode six. To have knowledge of 
anything two episodes ahead felt unnatural – almost illegal. I am speechless. 
Every series contains one or two "community scenes", be it a garden party, 
flower show, picnic or concert, which facilitates most of the principal cast 
being in one location for a grand "Downton display", multiple exchanges and 
plot strand-tying. This is perfect: the gents in the middle, the ladies sipping 
tea, gossiping at the boundary, class divides bridged.

Highclere Castle already boasts a fine cricket ground, in existence since the 
mid-19th century, enclosed by ancient woodland with a beautiful, old pavilion, 
its wooden floors wonderfully gnarled and honed by a century and a half of 
woodworm and aristrocratic spikes.

For weeks this is all we know and conversation churns as to who will play, 
what they will score, how they will be out. Imaginary batting orders are cast 
and mock shots played out among the men. Eventually, a top-secret script 
arrives, high-waisted whites are fitted, and every day the "Promised Land" of 
the cricket match, to be shot in July, looms ever nearer. As the set-piece 
culmination of the main body of the third series, it will be an epic 
undertaking; several pages of dialogue involving almost all the cast and 
specially hired camera cranes; multiple scenes and scenarios woven together and 
resolved. Yet the weather looks set to conspire against us. As if proof were 
needed that God lovesDownton, but, perhaps more so, that God loves cricket, the 
appointed days arrive and turn into three of the only days of sunshine England 
has seen in many months. Marquees are erected around the ground, sheltering the 
dames of Downton, resplendent in their fine cream lace and hats. The boys 
emerge in their whites and cloth caps, ancient pads and brown sausage-fingered 
gloves. As soon as the props department releases the antique-stained bats and 
balls, the realisation dawns that we have before us three whole days of this: 
"knocking about" at work. When padded up I take to the middle at any 
opportunity, whereupon an entire team of "extras" would bowl at me and field, 
and there is no getting out: the most idyllic nets session imaginable. Neil 
Burns, the former Leicestershire and Somerset wicketkeeper/batsman, is on hand 
as our "period style" coach, encouraging a more upright, WG Grace-style 
address, with wider hand positioning on the bat, which, while different from 
the modern technique, improves my batting.

Of course, there is serious work to be done; the script dictates that my 
character, Matthew Crawley, opens the batting with a perfect cover drive. No 
pressure then. Burns explains the history of the community match and the 
different styles that would make up an estate's team. The gentlemen would 
generally favour the offside, seen to be the more upstanding, attractive and 
"correct" side to play the ball. It was recognised, however, that this 
aesthetically pleasing style of play was not always conducive to a high enough 
run rate to beat the locals and hence the big-hitting, burly farmhands were 
recruited, unashamed to tonk the ball legside for considerably more. Far from 
being an elitist sport, cricket became a leveller, and great respect and honour 
could be earned by saving the "Earl's Eleven" with an ugly yet glorious six 
lodged in a 500-year-old oak tree.

As a dramatic device the match serves the show well; all manner of scenes are 
played out on the boundary. As in any real team, the game at Downton allows 
each of the characters to shine through their style at the crease: the 
Irishman, Branson, reluctant, unorthodox but ultimately victorious; "nasty" 
Thomas curiously brilliant and high-scoring; Molesley talking a good game but a 
bag of nerves beneath. And Matthew? Noble, technically elegant but dismissed 
for 14 by those simple letters: lbw. He might have mastered the cover drive but 
not how to drive: RIP.
 