 A brawl in a south Armagh pub several months ago has escalated into a row that 
could threaten to bring down Northern Ireland's fledgling power-sharing 
government. The death of Paul Quinn just across the border in the Irish 
Republic has prompted demands within unionism that Ian Paisley's Democratic 
Unionist party pulls out of the Stormont coalition.
The 21-year-old victim's family and senior Irish police officers believe 
members of the IRA's SouthArmagh <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/armagh> 
brigade were behind the killing. Mr Quinn's parents maintained yesterday that 
the local IRA targeted their son because of a fist fight he was involved in 
several months ago in Crossmaglen.

The Quinns' story is supported by local sources the Guardian spoke to 
yesterday. They and the family believe Mr Quinn was the victim of a 
long-standing grudge held by a senior IRA figure in the area. A local 
republican, who did not want to be named for fear of retaliation, said: "Paul 
Quinn got the better of this guy in a fight and humiliated him. After that the 
Provos tried to force him to leave Ireland but he refused. That is why he lost 
his life."

A dissident unionist, the Independent MEP Jim Allister, said there had to be 
"absolutely clarity" from the Police Service ofNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> and the Irish police about who 
was responsible. "If a gang of 15 IRA men beat a man to death, then it is an 
IRA murder... the police, without fear of political consequences, must 
objectively state their assessment," he said. A spokesman for the Democratic 
Unionists said conclusive IRA involvement "could mean the collapse of the 
political institutions".

A senior Garda police officer said the 15-strong gang behind the attack on 
Saturday night had probably not meant to kill Mr Quinn, who was lured to a 
farmhouse near the village of Oram in Co Monaghan. When he arrived he was set 
upon by 10 men wielding iron bars and wooden bats. Jim McAllister, a veteran 
south Armagh republican and former Sinn Féin assembly member, said he was 
convinced the local IRA was behind the assault.

The future of the power sharing executive hinges on the assessment by police 
on who was behind the killing. If IRA members were involved, will Sinn Féin 
call on them to surrender to the police, or call on the south Armagh community 
to provide information that could lead to convictions? The latter could cost 
Sinn Féin some of their most loyal personnel in this republican stronghold.

Conor Murphy, Sinn Féin MP for Newry and Armagh, insisted yesterday that no 
one from the republican movement was involved. Gerry Adams, the Sinn Féin 
president, denounced the killers as criminals. Speaking at the Northern Ireland 
assembly yesterday, deputy first minister Martin McGuinness described the 
killing as "dastardly" and "disgusting".
 