 In the Dominican neighbourhoods of Washington Heights and South Bronx, where 
New York's latest victims came from, the usual effervescence had turned into a 
tearful silence, punctured only by the murmur of television broadcasts drifting 
on the breeze.
These are burgeoning communities known for their irrepressible dance music and 
a heated passion for baseball, universally liked for the ebullient life force 
that appears wherever they settle.

But yesterday the music that usually blares from cars and tenement windows had 
been switched off. Makeshift shrines with burning candles and vases of flowers 
were laid across the pavements and painted on the brickwork was Estamos de Luto 
- we are in mourning.

In the streets that lead down to the Hudson river and George Washington bridge 
people jammed into shoe-shine parlours, bodegas, bars and restaurants to watch 
the unfolding news.

One woman burst out of an apartment block, wailing her grief. 

On a normal lunchtime in Coogan's bar in Washington Heights, the Dominicans 
and Irish who have for years argued with, accepted and married one another, 
traditionally gather to flick TV channels between the Spanish and English 
language sports services.

Yesterday the only tongue was Spanish, and there was no sport - just the 
replays of crash footage and latest merciless news of the "missing".

Many had bought their air tickets at this time of year - and for the early 
morning flight in particular - because the fare was good, $318 return before 
the Christmas increase.

"Everybody around here will know somebody on that flight," said Dave Hunt, the 
bar manager.

At the social services centre on Amsterdam Avenue, Carlos Loba, 33, said he 
only wanted to find the body of his three-year-old son Karl, who had flown with 
his grandmother.

"I just want to be able to bury him," he said. 

Asked to comment, the Dominican consul general, Luis Eludis Perez, searched 
for words, shrugged and said only: "The pain is too big."

Beyond Washington Heights, New York was wrapped in a glorious day of brilliant 
sun and turning leaves yesterday, but no one really noticed.

The city is like a mighty bull, goaded and wounded in the ring. That 
inimitable New York narcissism has turned - with reason - into a nervous 
persecution complex.

The words on everyone's lips were: "Not again," "How much longer?" and "What 
next?"

"We are all trying to work together, to make this as easy a situation as it 
can be," Mayor Rudy Giuliani said, opening yet another centre at which people 
can find counselling and information about lost relatives.

This has become Mr Guiliani's mantra in a city which is now "nailed down" as a 
matter of course: bridges and tunnels are closed by armed national guardsmen, 
F-16 jets fly "routine" combat patrols, and intelligence officials scramble to 
assure the public that this was "only" an air disaster.

"We have been able to recover several bodies and parts of bodies and so we 
shall be able to reunite families with their loved ones," Mr Giuliani said.

That is a luxury in a city defiled by a mass grave in the financial district 
and now another among the pleasant suburban homes of Rockaway.

To be "reunited" with one's loved ones means to have a body part or piece of 
DNA identified so that you can stop fearing for their safety and start mourning 
their death.

The families entered the centre in various states of grief. Some had not seen 
the manifests and were there to find out whether their lives were shattered or 
saved.

One woman still had the now-wilted flowers she had taken to the airport the 
previous day: her son had not been able to take them because he had too much 
hand baggage.

"They are all she has left of him," her son-in-law said. 

Mr Giuliani said: "I'm not going to hold back on this. People must come to New 
York - we must enjoy ourselves, we must be brave, we must move on. That is the 
lesson of this." He paused a moment. "Maybe that's a lesson for life."

"I think the mayor is right," said the young man accompanying the lady with 
flowers. "What else can we do?"

American Airlines is by far the biggest carrier operating between New York and 
the Caribbean. Its terminal is the site of endless send-off and welcome 
"fiestas" - all tears, exuberance and bunches of flowers.

The first flight out, 587, was especially popular because it was usually the 
cheapest. The passengers and the crew often recognised each other or even knew 
each other well.

Aurora Martinez, 62, a factory worker, was a reluctant flyer on Monday morning.

"After the attacks of September 11, she was a little afraid to fly," her son 
Victor Caceres said. She didn't want to go, but had to sell a property in the 
Dominican Republic.

Mr Caceres kissed his mother goodbye, gave her a hug as she boarded the 
flight, and said: "I'll call you in four or five hours. You should be there by 
then."
 