
Senior management figures at the England and Wales Cricket Board will meet on 
Tuesday to finalise whetherKevin Pietersen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kevin-pietersen> should be included in 
discussions of the squad for the one-day tour of the Caribbean, the World T20 
that follows, and beyond that. It is in effect an extraordinary policy meeting 
to decide once and for all whether Pietersen has any future as an England 
player.

The meeting, just days before the T20 squad is picked, will be chaired at 
Lord's by the new managing director of England cricket, Paul Downton, with the 
national selector James Whitaker joined byAshley Giles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ashley-giles>, also a selector as well as 
head coach of the England one-day teams, on his immediate return from Australia 
with England's Twenty20 squad.

It is not expected that Andy Flower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andy-flower>, the recently departed England 
team director, will attend. Flower remains part of squad selection to maintain 
numbers until such time as a new selector is recruited but as he has resigned 
his post with the England team, it would be inappropriate for him to be party 
to a decision on a player's future. The issue will have been decided one way or 
another by the time his input into squad selection is required.

With Pietersen's England future the subject of leaked stories and opaque 
official statements over the last four weeks, the news that a formal decision 
will now be taken on his selection is the first concrete development in a saga 
that leant a toxic edge to a disastrous tour of Australia, which ended on 
Sunday with an 85-run defeat in the final Twenty20 international as Australia 
took the series 3-0.

Pietersen was England's leading run scorer in the Test series – no great 
achievement in itself – but a difficult relationship with Flower is said to 
have simmered behind the scenes before it emerged at the end of the Sydney Test 
that the team director might have regarded his future position as untenable had 
Pietersen, should it have been against Flower's judgment, stayed as part of the 
future development of the various England teams on the say-so of Downton and 
the other selectors.

It was widely, if inaccurately, interpreted as an ultimatum and drew a terse 
and furiously non-specific statement from Flower via the ECB website denying 
that any such ultimatum had been issued. As it has transpired, Flower himself 
has now resigned his position, citing the impracticability of splitting the 
England coaching roles as his sole reason.

The upshot is that Pietersen's future with England is now decisively in the 
balance. It will be tempting for some to conclude that calling a formal meeting 
is likely to point to his exclusion from the team, with a sense of due process 
being followed. Including Pietersen in any future England team now has enough 
emotional baggage attached to suggest a clear and collective decision on the 
issue is a sensible idea whatever the verdict.

Equally the situation may be fluid. Downton has shown himself to be a patient 
judge of a situation in his brief period in office and there is a chance any 
decision will be affected by the wretched performance of England's short-form 
teams in Australia.

In Pietersen's absence England's openers in three Twenty20s were Alex Hales, 
Michael Lumb and Luke Wright, who in eight combined innings averaged 11 and 
failed to hit a single six. Pietersen's last T20 innings for England was two 
years ago but he is a class above the top order and has the power to score 
quickly on the low slow pitches of Chittagong. It may well be that Giles, 
shellshocked by his team's performances, returns from Australia with a case to 
plead for Pietersen's inclusion.

Against this Pietersen was lucky to survive as an England player in 2012 when 
it emerged, initially via a source close to the South African dressing room, 
that he had been sending derogatory texts to England's opponents about his own 
captain, Andrew Strauss. The relationship with Flower never quite recovered.

Should Pietersen be excluded from England's future plans at Tuesday's meeting 
the issue is unlikely to die away. His form may have dipped – he averages 38 
with four hundreds in the last two years – but Pietersen remains England's most 
explosive middle-order batsman and an extremely popular cricketer with many 
England fans. Should England's middle order and one-day openers continue to 
struggle in his absence, the KP-shaped vacuum will be widely noted.

Either way Pietersen will remain a centrally contracted player with an ECB 
deal until October this year, albeit free to play a full season in the Indian 
Premier League should he now be deselected.

Separately Giles confirmed after England's defeat at Sydney's Olympic Stadium 
that he is keen to become England's overall team director. "I'd be very 
interested in doing the job, definitely," Giles said, having advertised his 
credentials via a 3-0 Twenty20 series defeat and the preceding 4-1 loss in the 
one day internationals. He added: "I'm not going to deny that and I'm sure I 
will be applying for the post."
 