
The England and Wales Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> 
Board was today urged to contact the receiver charged with recouping any 
alleged ill-gotten gains of Allen Stanford's collapsed empire.

It has emerged that the ECB <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ecb> may face 
legal action if it does not pay back Stanford's creditors millions of pounds 
given to them by the American financier, who has been charged with running a 
$7bn (£4.3bn) fraudulent "Ponzi" scheme and is in custody awaiting trial in the 
United States.

Stanford denies the charges, which relate to the sale of certificates of 
deposit in his Antigua-based Stanford International Bank. The ECB openly 
courted Stanford three years ago and received $3.5m as part of a much bigger 
$100m deal for an ill-fated series of Twenty20 matches.

The Stanford receiver, Ralph Janvey, has already commenced legal action 
against other sporting bodies to recoup monies paid to them by the 60-year-old.

A lawyer working for Janvey, Kevin Sadler, told the Press Association: "The 
receiver strongly encourages the ECB to contact the receiver to begin 
discussions concerning the circumstances of the significant payments made by 
Stanford to ECB."

The ECB may be forced to prove they provided "good value" in return for the 
payments and demonstrate they received the money "in good faith". Sadler added 
in a statement released to the Daily Telegraph: "The receiver and his 
professionals are engaged in a process of uncovering and then investigating all 
significant payments made by any of the Stanford entities, and that would 
include payments made to professional sports figures or organisations.

The ECB refused to comment on the matter today but the chairman, Giles Clarke, 
said after Stanford's arrest two years ago: "We entered into the Stanford 
transaction in good faith. Like many sporting bodies, we carried out our side 
of the contract and he carried out his and we were paid. We then passed those 
funds on, to the benefit of the game."

In addition to the ECB, Michael Owen and Kevin Pietersen could see personal 
deals made with Stanford probed by receivers. The Stanford Financial Group 
recruited the Manchester United striker Owen and the England batsman Pietersen 
as ambassadors back in 2008.

Eight former West Indies stars – including Sir Viv Richards, Curtly Ambrose, 
Courtney Walsh and Richie Richardson – were also retained as ambassadors.

Ponzi schemes are similar in some respects to pyramid schemes, though rely on 
a single hub, often one individual, finding new investors to pay returns to 
early investors, rather than requiring participants to find new members 
themselves.

Stanford was last month declared unfit to stand trial by a US federal judge 
until he is treated for an addiction to anti-anxiety medication.
 