
Eddie Jones said he does not care how he is perceived in his native Australia 
and is equally unconcerned about criticism of England’s scrum before the Test 
at Twickenham on Saturday. Jones, instead, has labelled Australia’s set piece 
“so-so” and suggested his coaching rivalMichael Cheika 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/michael-cheika> should not have aired 
details of a private meeting with the match referee during this summer’s series 
win against the Wallabies.

Jones, who has made two anticipated changes by adding Nathan Hughes and 
Marland Yarde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/01/nathan-hughes-two-changes-england-rugby-union-face-australia-team-twickenham>
 to his starting XV, kicked off a lively week by suggesting Australia 
scrummaged illegally and has given short shrift to the Wallabies’ similar
complaints about his own tighthead Dan Cole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/29/england-dan-cole-eddie-jones-australia-michael-chieka-illegal-scrum-rugby-union>
. “The only person who hasn’t spoken about Dan Cole this week is [the former 
Wallaby coach] Bob Dwyer,” Jones said. “I don’t know if Bob is in the country 
but we’ve still got one day to go and I’m sure he can do it from Bowral. It’s 
just constant, isn’t it? Every time Australia plays England it’s about Dan Cole 
but we wouldn’t have any other tighthead in our team.”

Michael Cheika retaliates by accusing Dan Cole of illegal scrummaging
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/29/england-dan-cole-eddie-jones-australia-michael-chieka-illegal-scrum-rugby-union>
While Jones is still planning to meet the South African referee Jaco Peyper on 
Friday he insists it is Australia who are making a mountain out of a front-row 
molehill. “I’ve coached over 100 Tests and had meetings with the ref before 
each of them. It’s just normal procedure. There are always issues. We just 
wanted to make sure we were up front and told the Australians we were having a 
meeting. Last time they whinged and carried on about the fact they didn’t know.

“Some people think it’s being mischievous [but] most people think it’s 
actually productive, because you allow the referee to say what he wants to get 
in the game. That’s why I’ve had meetings with referees for a long time.”

The former Wallaby coach said his successor, Cheika, was in “cuckoo land” if 
he wanted such gatherings banned. “It’s not going to happen. It’s part of the 
game and always has been.”

Jones also remains unimpressed by elements of the local media coverage during 
his team’s tour in June, specifically a provocative Fox Sports promotional 
trailer and a press conference exchange with the former Wallaby Stephen Hoiles. 
“I’ll reinforce again, I found the Australian media very disrespectful. I gave 
Stephen his first cap for Australia, he’s a guy I like but he behaved 
absolutely terribly. We’ve since chatted after that and that’s where it ends.”

He also questioned Cheika’s remarks about Jones storming out of a referee 
meeting in the summer. “I’ve got different codes of behaviour,” he said. “I was 
always brought up that if you have a private meeting it stays private. If 
people choose to have other views then go and talk to them about it. Speak to 
Cheika. He’s been very forthcoming this week. I’m sure he’ll share those things 
with you.”

As for his own legacy in Australia, which Cheika also suggested would be 
tarnished by this week’s off-field spats, Jones was supremely unfazed. “It’s 
not for me to decide what my legacy is. It’s for other people to decide. So why 
would I worry about it?”

He is far more concerned with warding off complacency, as England seek a 14th 
successive victory to equal their record for consecutive wins: “When you win 
how many games we’ve won in a row that’s when you’re at your most vulnerable.”

His instincts also tell him England’s unprecedented 3-0 series win in June 
will make the Wallabies even more determined. “I think it makes us more 
vulnerable and them more hungry. Whenever you get beaten your attention is 
[sharper] and you want it more. When you have had some wins your appetite is 
pretty full. It’s a test of mindset. That is why I am excited. There’s nothing 
better than an Australia‑England rivalry, is there?”
 