
Browned off

Some comments on the Browne review:

As someone said, to have our children paying off the country's debt is such a 
bad thing that we all have to make sacrifices ... But to have our children 
going massively into personal debt to fund their education is a good thing?

dapperdanielle 

• But it's not a debt, it's a tax, which only gets charged while you're 
earning a decent wage, and in a sustainable way. The financial argument is 
almost entirely in favour of getting a degree, so it's saddening that scary 
terms are used which put off students from the surest way to ensure a 
financially stable future.

candy88

• I detest the notion that creating a market in higher education will increase 
standards – how?

danhowells2010

• I was among the first to pay tuition fees and have a loan. At the time you 
may be annoyed, but as you grow up you realise:

1) Why should university be free? Why should the less academically inclined 
pay for the more academic to study?

2) It doesn't disproportionately affect people from poorer backgrounds at all. 
While I was at university, students from poorer households were actually better 
off as they had more money.

3) It is just an extra £70-£120 a month of your salary for life. If you 
believe education is important, look on this as a progressive tax in which the 
older generation pay money to the younger generation for university.

4) Lecturers are highly trained and expect decent salaries. Universities have 
buildings that must be maintained. Someone has to pay. Who should it be?

rabidraccoon

One happy ending

I want to thank Education Guardian for raising awareness about my predicament, 
and that of other students who had not got a place at university (Two As and a 
B and I had failed, 14 September). As a result of your article, King's College 
London contacted me and I was offered a place on their international studies 
foundation degree course.

I can't believe how lucky I have been. However, there are still thousands of 
students who also missed their offer and now face re-application for one of the 
toughest entry years. In addition, future students face the worry of increased 
fees following the Browne review. It infuriates me that students are going to 
be put at a disadvantage in life.

Amy Halsall London

Cruel cuts

We fully endorse the points made by Peter Davies about the threats to adult 
education (The Cruel Sea, 12 October). The prime minister and ministers in the 
Department for Business, Innovation and Skills have all indicated their strong 
understanding of the value of lifelong learning, which provides a second chance 
to succeed for many, offers life changing opportunities for some of the most 
disengaged people, and contributes to economic regeneration, for example by 
moving people off benefits into work and reducing the burden on social care. 
Decisions about savings must ensure that opportunities for affordable adult 
education for the less well-off are not irretrievably damaged and lost.

Richard Bolsin Workers' Educational Association; Ela Piotrowska Morley College;
Ceri WilliamsMary Ward Centre; Satnam Gill  Working Men's College; Audrey 
MullenderRuskin College; June Ireton Hillcroft College; Fiona Larden Fircroft 
College;Jill Westerman Northern College
 