
Edward St Aubyn <https://www.theguardian.com/books/edwardstaubyn>, who laid 
bare the cruelties of his own father in his autobiographical Patrick Melrose 
novels, is due to take on another tyrannical patriarch: King Lear.

The English novelist is the latest to sign up to the Hogarth Shakespeare 
series, in whichauthors from Jeanette Winterson to Gillian Flynn reimagine the 
plays of Shakespeare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jun/27/shakespeare-reworked-jeanette-winterson-anne-tyler>
. St Aubyn, said senior editor Juliet Brooke, is “a master at portraying the 
fault lines in family relationships with caustic precision”, so “who better to 
take on the ultimate family tragedy” of King Lear?

Alexis Washam at Hogarth US added that St Aubyn’s “razor-sharp psychological 
insight and unsparing wit” were “perfectly suited to a retelling of the 
timeless King Lear”. In his five Melrose novels, St Aubyn writes of how, aged 
five, Patrick Melrose was raped by his father, of his years as a drug addict, 
and of the deaths of both his parents. The series was critically acclaimed as a 
whole; the fourth, Mother’s Milk, was shortlisted for the Booker prize.

The Shakespeare series launches this October with Winterson’s take on The 
Winter’s Tale, The Gap of Time. In 2016, Hogarth will release Howard Jacobson’s 
reimagining of The Merchant of Venice, titled A Wilderness of Monkeys, Anne 
Tyler’s version of The Taming of the Shrew, Vinegar Girl, and Margaret Atwood’s 
look at The Tempest.

Shakespeare’s tragedies, meanwhile, have been taken on by a mix of literary 
and thriller authors, with Tracy Chevalier picking up Othello, Gone Girl writer 
Flynn working on Hamlet, and Norwegian bestsellerJo Nesbø 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jo-nesbo> doing Macbeth. Commenting on his 
choice of play last year, Nesbø said: “A thriller about the struggle for power, 
set both in a gloomy, stormy crime noir-like setting and in a dark, paranoid 
human mind. A main character who has the moral code and the corrupted mind, the 
personal strength and the emotional weakness, the ambition and the doubts to go 
either way … No, it does not feel too far from home.” Flynn has said that 
Hamlet has “long been a fascination of mine: murder, betrayal, revenge, deceit, 
madness – all my favourite things”, adding, “What (slightly cheeky) writer 
wouldn’t be tempted to reimagine it?”

With St Aubyn set for Lear, Shakespeare’s tale of a misguided king and father, 
a “man more sinned against than sinning” whose lack of understanding leads to 
disaster, there are now eight authors commissioned to write novels for the 
project. The books, says the publisher, part of the Random House Group, “will 
be true to the spirit of the original plays, while giving authors an exciting 
opportunity to do something new”. They are the latest in a series of 
reimaginings of classic texts, following takes on Jane Austen byauthors 
including Val McDermid and Joanna Trollope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jul/19/jane-austen-northanger-abbey-val-mcdermid>
.
 