
The public spending watchdog has urged the government to step up its efforts 
to tackle Britain's retirement savings crisis.

The National Audit Office <http://www.nao.org.uk/> (NAO) raised concerns that 
there is no single joined-up programme to encourage people to save more for 
their later years.

It warned of the "significant consequences" to the taxpayer of people living 
for longer, which will increase the burden of social and healthcare needs. 
Projections for future spending on state pensions and pensioner benefits as a 
share of GDP may be "too optimistic", it said.

Spending on this sector rose from 5.5% of GDP in 1990 to 6.9% in 2011-12. 
Forecasts from the Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) in 2012 said this 
will rise to 9.5% by 2061-62.

The government expects that state pension reforms and its auto-enrolment 
workplace pension scheme will reduce the potential long-term spending liability.

Around 8 million people are expected to save for the first time or save more 
because of auto-enrolment, which has been rolled out to larger companies.

But in reality the long-term pension costs for government remain "highly 
uncertain", the report warned.

An estimated 10.7 million people, equating to two-fifths of the working age 
population, are not saving enough to get the income they think they need to 
live comfortably in their old age.

But the NAO is concerned that without a "whole system view" there is a lack of 
coherence and accountability – the Treasury leads overall savings strategy and 
the Department for Work andPensions <https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions>
 (DWP) oversees workplace saving. This in turn creates a risk that the 
government's efforts will not do enough to increase people's retirement savings.

The NAO also highlighted a lack of a formal published strategy to help change 
employers' attitudes towards older workers.

Amyas Morse, head of the NAO, said: "What is needed is for the government to 
take a more holistic view of its portfolio of interventions, how they interact 
and their relative costs and benefits.

"It should be more active and effective in influencing citizens to save more 
and plan more effectively for retirement, and in seeking to change the negative 
attitudes of some employers towards older workers."

A government spokesman said: "It is wrong to suggest that the DWP and the 
Treasury are not working effectively together. We are collaborating 
successfully to improve fairness, control costs for the long term and boost 
retirement saving.

"Our reform of the state pension system, changes to state pension age and 
automatic enrolment into workplace pensions are examples of our ongoing 
strategic approach to pensions."

TUC general secretary Frances O'Grady said: "This report shows that Government 
policies on retirement incomes are being mismanaged.

"But there are better ways to respond to an ageing society than cutting the 
state pension and forcing people to work for longer.

"Ministers can start by reforming the £40bn pensions tax relief budget so that 
it is less skewed towards the very wealthy and provides a better savings 
incentive."
 