
Egypt won the right to face Ivory Coast in Friday's final when Amr Zaki scored 
a late winner with his first touch and after coming on in place of a visibly 
annoyed Mido to help the hosts defeat Senegal 2-1.

The Tottenham striker was returning from a groin injury and had a quiet game, 
but he still complained bitterly when he was taken off in the 77th minute. 
Everything changed for Egypt from there on in, however, and as they peppered 
the Senegal goal the 74,000 crowd became more and more animated.

Hassan had scored from the spot in the 36th minute but Mamadou Niang equalised 
with a header for Senegal, lacking their injured captain Ferdinand Coly, after 
the interval. Bolton's El Hadji Diouf began the game on the Senegal bench 
although he replaced Henri Camara of Wigan midway through the second half, and 
in the final minute the visitors had a good shout for a penalty turned down .

Senegal also had early chances through Camara, who tested the reflexes of 
Essam Al Hadari several times although his one-two with Lamine Diatta in the 
22nd minute really should have put them ahead. In the 34th minute, however, 
Frederic Mendy handled from a corner and Hassan opened the scoring, although he 
had to take his penalty twice.

Earlier Didier Drogba had fired Ivory Coast into final as they overcame 
Nigeria 1-0 in Alexandria. The £24m striker was gifted a simple chance in the 
47th minute and made no mistake as the Elephants continued to upset the odds to 
reach only their second final. It was also a third goal of the tournament for 
the Chelsea striker in a match of limited opportunities

The reward for the Ivorians is a first final since they won the trophy in 1992 
and it was thoroughly deserved as they rendered the Super Eagles second best 
for much of a contest in which John Obi Mikel, who has signed Manchester United 
but since expressed a desire to join Drogba at Chelsea, was largely a spectator.

Nigeria even sent on Bolton's Jay-Jay Okocha, making possibly his final 
international appearance, in place of Mikel - the man tipped to succeed him as 
the creative talisman in the side - and within five minutes he struck a 30-yard 
free-kick which was saved by the Ivory Coast goalkeeper Jean-Jacques Tizie.

They still continued to press for an equaliser in the closing stages but the 
Elephants were in tireless mood, led by Drogba, who made a number of timely 
interventions as he helped out in defence.

Nigeria will now contest a third successive third-place play-off - against 
Senegal tomorrow - rather than a third final in 12 years, and Drogba took time 
out of the victory celebrations to console Mikel after the final whistle.

The win was also bad news for Arsenal, who desperately wanted Kolo Touré and 
Emmanuel Eboué back to boost their weakened defence.
 