
Penalty shoot-out 

4-2 Egypt Abo Treka sends the keeper the wrong way to make Egypt African 
champions for a record fifth time!
3-2 Egypt Eboué hits it straight down the middle. 
3-1 Egypt Zaky strikes it low and just beyond Tizié's dive. 
2-1 Egypt Bakary Koné's weak punt is saved easily. 
2-1 Egypt  late substitute Abdelhalim tonks it high and wide! 
2-1 Egypt Kolo Touré holds his nerve. 
2-0 Egypt Wahab converts expertly. 
1-0 Egypt Drogba's shot is saved brilliantly by El Hadary!
1-0 Egypt Hassan slots it home as the keeper dives the wrong way.

 Here's courage: Ahmed Hassan will take the first penalty! 

120+2 mins: The ref blows for full-time. Can the Ivorians win a match on 
penalties for the thrid time in a row? In the quarter-final against Cameroon, 
all 11 players had to take one and all scored! You've got to make them 
favourites. Will Ahmed Hassan dare step up for Egypt after missing one less 
than half an hour ago? Stay tuned, folks. Pints can wait.

120 mins: "Blow me, penalties beckon"" blurts Simon Alpren. "Sod your tenner, 
you're doing us proud and certainly earning you're five pounds an hour tonight! 
What a credit to online journalism!" Indeed, and thank you, Simon, for telling 
me about my raise.

118 mins: Wahab's foraging down the left earns a corner, and some respite, for 
Egypt. Barakt swirls it in, Zaki scuffs his shot, and Touré thumps it clear 
with thanks.

116 mins: The Ivorians are stronger and fitter and their hosts are having to 
chop them down on a regular basis to contain them. Here's another free-kick. 
Boka teases it towards the penalty area, but Drogba fails to connect.

114 mins: Bakary Koné steams forward down the right and works himself into an 
ideal crossing position. And then boots it out for a throw, apparently not on 
purpose.

111 mins: Ali Abdelhalim enters the fray for Egypt. The Zamalek strker 
repalces centre-back Ibrahim Said. A bold move by manager Hassan Shehata!

108 mins: Eboué carries the ball forward a good sixty years before dinking a 
nice pass through to Kalou. The Arsenal defender continues his run into the box 
and is spotted by Kalou, who provides him with a perfect delviery to feet. But 
like so many of his compatriots before him, he smashes the ball over the bar. 
Is it actually contagious?

106 mins: Clive Jerram interrupts the start of the fourth quarter with these 
ramblings: "As I have nothing else to do (except some work of course), I 
thought I'd let you know that the cool bloke in Shalamar was Jeffrey Daniel. 
And there was Jody Whately too, whom I remember as being very cute. Although as 
I was a hormone-riddled, testosterone-ravaged 13 year old at the time, she 
possibly actually looked like a dusky Bella Emberg." All I can tell you for 
sure, Clive, is that Shawki has gone close to opening the score with 30-yard 
blockbuster.

Three-quarter time: Despite the long protests over the penalty decision, the 
referee adds on no extra time in the first period of, um, extra time.

104 mins: Free-kick to Ivory Coast after Mostafa goes over the top on Arouna 
Koné. Eboué's delviery is awful.

102 mins: Kolo Touré, who has had an excellent game in the middle of the 
Ivorian defence, rises high to clear another decent cross from Wahab.

100 mins: Another wonderful save, this time by Egypt's El Hadary! The two 
Konés combined down the right before Bakary thundered a shot from 20 yards, 
which the keeper tipepd jsut over the bar.

97 mins: Drogba has been booked for protesting too much and at last the 
penalty can be taken. Ahmed Hassan steps up ...and Tizié tips it onto the post! 
Magnificent save!

93 mins: Amazing decision! The referere has given Egypt a penalty! Barakat 
tried to control the ball with his chest in the Ivorian box, but he bumped it 
five yards forward and was dispossessed by Kouassi - and the Tunisian blew the 
whistle, sparking several minutes of arguing and finger-wagging!

91 mins: Bakary Koné's first touch is a splendid cross for Drogba at the far 
post. Drogba wisely chooses not to shoot, but instead nods it back to Kalou, 
who from four yards out does an uncanny Drogba impression .. by prodding the 
ball wide!

As Yaya Touré is repalced by Bakaré Koné (an attacking move, that) Steve 
Dahlgren sees the future: "Just clock off now, Paul. We know this is all going 
to end when Drogba finally manages to position his shin, rump, or nose in the 
way of the ball for another completely jammy goal. Totally befitting the best 
player in Africa, of course."

Extra-time

 90+4 mins: 6pm on a Friday evening: it was inevitable this would go to 
extra-time, wasn't it?

90 mins: Desperate defending from Egypt as they struggle to clear a Drogba 
free-kick. None of which prompted Adam Lyne to write: "Strictly speaking this 
isn't relevant, but don't you think Emmanuel Adebayor looks a little like Andre 
2000 out of Outkast? He also looks a little like the bloke out of 80's disco 
outfit Shalamar who could walk backwards, like Michael Jackson." Suppose it's 
possible Adam. After all, some time people think Didier Drogba looks like the 
best player in Africa.

86 mins: The Egyptian disallowed goal was just an interlude in what has 
otherwise been incessant Ivorian pressure in the last half an hour or so. Koné 
and Kalou have gone on to test the stewards' reactions with a seris of 
long-range shots. And Drogba has narrowly failed to turn a Kalou cross into the 
net.

82 mins: Chaos in the Ivorian box! Tizié fumbled a long-range Barakat shot, a 
whole slew of players followed up, most of them falling on top of the 
goalkeeper, who receives a boot in the face from Kolo Touré ... before 
substitute Mostafa taps the ball into the net to send the crowd into delirium! 
But the referee disallows the goal because an Egyptian forward was offside. The 
crowd whistle their discontent ... and the camera pans to Mido, who's shaking 
his fist at the sky and belowing loudly. Much like I was until the ref's 
judicious intervention.

79 mins: Recognising that the visitors have got the upperhand in midfield, 
Egypt have taken off shot-shy striker Moteb and replaced him with industrious 
midfielder Hassan Mostafa. Just before that, of course, Drogba missed another 
decent opening.

74 mins: Unbelievable miss from ... need I tell you? ... Drogba! Fae cut 
brilliantly to the by-line before knocking the ball into Koné, who rolled it 
expertly acorss the face of the goal for Drogba to tap home. Just tap home, I 
tell you. But the best player in Africa somehow ballooned it over the bar. He 
really should wipe that smile of his face.

72 mins: The pace is quickening, but the precision is still lacking from both 
teams. It's the Ivorians who look the more likely to break the deadlock, 
despite their abject failure to test the goalkeeper from any of the excellent 
chances they've created this half. Just to emphasis the poverty of their 
finishing, Kalou shanks the ball into the Nile from just 12 yards. Which I 
suppose is impressive in itself.

70 mins: Egypt give away another free-kick, this time for brutalising Drogba. 
Touré, it's safe to say, will not be allowed anywhere near this. Drogba prods 
it meekly into the wall. Absolute plod from, and forgive me if I've already 
mentioned this, the man who says he's the best player in Africa.

69 mins: It's proper end-to-end stuff now. Before the flow is brutally stemmed 
by Hassan, who chopped Kalou to the ground 30 yards from the Egyptian goal. 
Kolo Touré whacks it to the corner flag.

66 mins:Shawki, of all people, dances past two Ivorian midfielders, pirouettes 
to compound their embarassment, then slips a neat ball through to Moteb. Who 
fails to get on the end of it. Again.

62 mins: Kalou tees up Drogba at the corner of the Egyptian box. Drogba opts 
to hit it first time, and blazes his shot into the side-netting.

59 mins: Intriguing Ivorian substitution: Bonaveture Kalou is on, having left 
the Ivorian camp earlier in the campaign to play uin the Fench Cup final, where 
he scored the winner for PSG. He'll slot in just behind Drogba and Koné, 
suggesting the Ivorians are going to try to win this even before penalties. 
Hurray!

57 mins: The siege of the Ivorian box is lifted by Akalé. who runs deep into 
Egyptian territory before being clobbered by Hassan, who becomes the first home 
player to be booked. Boka whips in the free-kick, but El Sakka soars like a 
freakish sloth to clear bravely.

54 mins: Wahab raids forward down the left, but his charge is brought to an 
end by a superb sliding tackle from Eboué - but the Tunisian ref reckons it was 
a foul .. and books the Arsenal man! Twnety seconds later, he penalises Eboué 
again, this time for being jumped on by Hassan. Highly unusual behaviour from 
the official.

53 mins: We have a much more exciting game now, folks! Or maybe it's just the 
beer goggles ... but it certainly looked like Drogba and Fae performed a 
spellbinding one-two before a heroic last-ditch challenge from Wahab prevented 
Koné from shooting!

50 mins: Wonderful cross from Zaki, which Tizié punches off the head of Moteb. 
It comes back out to Zaki and he delivers yet another excellebnt corss. And 
this time Moteb connects, but butts the ball way over the bar.

Meanwhile, a question and a thinly-veiled plea from Alexander Netherton: "Have 
you seen any Fuller's Vintage Ale about? Maybe if you mention it on your 
world-beating site you might be able to get some news about the bloody thing? 
By the way, I do not have a beard." No beard? That'll where you're going, then.

48 mins: Said dazzles down the line, snakes between Eboué and Touré, then 
swings an excellent cross to the back post. Zaki throws himself at it but can 
only head wide. Promising signs of life in the early stages of ther second half!

47 mins: A straight-froward pass from Kouassi springs the offside trap and 
Drogba is through on goal! But the self-proclaimed best palayer in Africa bangs 
it straight at the keeper. Wo would have thought it? Apart from everyone who's 
watched Chelsea this season?

46 mins: Egypt bounce out for the second half a good two minutes before their 
opponent, givign themselves plenty of time to form a convivial huddle and 
discuss the important issues of the day. Finally, the Ivorians amble out and 
take the tip.

Half-time Non-stop swashbuckling action is possibly going on somewhere else 
today, but not in Cairo. There's been some tidy play and a few tasty tackles, 
but all in all it's been a humdrum final so far. The Ivorians have won both 
their last matches on penalties and it looks like we're headed that way again. 
Which brings me to Neil Pinney's perceptive point: ""How come you're the 
unlucky one who got lumped with the coverage of the final?" he quizzes before 
identifying the problem. "By the time this match finishes you'll have missed 
out on a solid hour of drinking with your fellow hacks down the local 
Wetherspoons." Like a boy scout, Neil, I am always prepared. The three crates 
of London Pride in the corner bear powerful testament to that.

41 mins: Wonderful skill from Akalé, who received the ball ten yards from the 
Egyptian box, spun past Wahab then fizzed a ferocious shot towards goal. El 
Hadary did well to stop it.

38 mins: Another great chance for the Ivorians! Yaya Touré curled in a corner 
and an Egyptian defender, who was presumably attempting to clear, headed the 
ball to his back-post. There stood Kolo Touré in splendid isolation. And he 
blazed the ball high and wide. Must. Try. Harder.

35 mins: There was the chance! The was the devastating counter-attack! There 
was Drogba's chance to prove he's the best player in Africa, as he he's been 
claiming to anyone who'll listen all week. But after a killer long ball out of 
defence from Kolo Touré and a tidy flick on from Koné, Drogba showed the touch 
of an Elephant and hoofed the ball ten yards in front of him - a deft touch or 
a pass to tghe wide-open Akalé would have certainly set Ivory Coast on their 
way.

32 mins: Havoc in the Ivorian box! Tizié flapped at a free-kick from out wide 
and the ball fell to Barakat, whose weak shot rebounded to Zaki, who attempted 
an acrobatic half-volley when something far more hubmle would have done ... and 
the ball flies into the stand.

29 mins: A spell of aimless play from both sides. The Ivorians have the edge 
in midfield but Yaya Touré and Emerse Fae have continually failed to find 
fruitful final balls. Egypt are concentrating their attacks down the wings, but 
full-backs Eboué and Boka have been resolute so far.

26 mins: Powerful burst forward by Wahab, who dangerous cross is cut out 
courageously by Tizié. "Any idea what letters have been cropped from the 
left-hand placard in your photograph?," inquires Luke Shiach. " I'm sure 
there's something rude going on." 'Fraid not, Luke, Im happy to reveal that it 
merely reads "Good luck in the World Cup but not here." The other sad news is 
that the woman who's holding it is a beauty, but there just isn't room for her. 
Sorry.

21 mins: The men in orange win the game's first corner thanks to some juicy 
play from Yaya Touré. Who then squanders the corner.

19 mins: Egyptian substitution: influential defender Wa'el Goma'a has 
sustained an injury in a feeble-looking challenge with Yaya Touré; he's hobbled 
off to be repalced by Ahmed Fathi.

16 mins: Some encouraging pressure from Ivory Coast, with several players 
taking touches as they probed for openigns around the Egypitan box. The move 
breaks down after Arouna Koné needlessly lofted the ball into the keeper's arms 
when Akalé was crying out for a dinky through-ball.

14 mins: Egypt have had most of the possession so far, but that suits the 
Ivorians fine: they're masters of the counter-attack. Though how Drogba is 
going to get on the end of couter-attack when he's tackling in the left-back 
position is not immediately obvious. Come on you Elephants, get it together!

11 mins: Kouassi barges into Hassan to concede a free-kick 25 yards from goal. 
A chance for set-piece kings Barakat or Abo Treka to have a pop, perhaps? 
Tizié, who as in previous games has delegated kick-out duties to his defenders, 
has lined up a four-man wall. Hassan rolls the free-kick to to centre-back El 
Sakka, who unleashes a swirling daisycutter that skims the post on its way 
wide. Fine effort!

7 mins: The camera flashes to Mido for the first time and it turns out 
Eurosport commentators lied to us: he's not on the bench, he's up in the press 
box, looking characteristically. Nice hairband, though.

5 mins: A clear-cut chance for Mido's replacement! Ahmed Hassan slipped a fine 
ball through to Amr Zaki, and the striker shanked it several metres wide.

4 mins: It's a tense affair so far, mostly mired in midfield. The only hint of 
goal-mouth action came when Aklaé let fire from 20 yards ... with a pitiful dud 
that dribbled into the keeper's hands.

1 min: They're off ... and Kanag Akalé immedaitely clatters Mohamed Barakat, 
who hurls himself to the ground likes he's been gorged by a bull, drawing 
chants of "is he Arjen Robben in disguise?" from several of my more boisterous 
GU colleagues. Akalé, meanwhile, gets an early yellow card.

3:57pm: Mystery surrounds MIdo, who publicly apologised to manager Hassah 
Shehata this morning after reacting furiously to being substituted in the 
semi-final. He was banned for six months for his shenanigans agaisnt Senegal .. 
but it seems the Egypitan FA has relented - because the stroppy Spur is on 
bench. What price him coming on to score a sensational winner? Oh please no.

 Doug Stratton pipes up: "I've got a bet on Egypt at 6/1 so I'm definitely 
hoping you lose your bet, Paul! By the way, tell Michael Lowman to move to 
Essex; where I live it's considered de rigeur to throw your rubbish in someone 
else's wheelie bin - or just their garden, if you can't be bothered to lift the 
bin lid."

3:52pm: Simon Thomas is one of many of you to be impressed by my gambling 
skills. But he's not so pleased with one of my colleagues. "If you see Ron Cox 
in the office, give him a smack will you? Tip of the Day? I think its still 
running..." Mr Cox, it should be pointed out, was 2005 newspaper tipster of the 
year. Everyone's allowed an off-day. Except Didier Drogba, who better score 
today or I'll be heading over to Stamford Bridge next week to demand that he 
persoanlly reimburse my stake on the Elephants. Oh, and it was a modest £10 
stake, since you ask, Robert Smithson.

3:40pm A propos of absolutely nothing, Michael Lowman says this: "I'm really 
looking forward to this game ... but what I really want to mention is that 
Hemel Hempstead council wouldn't empty my wheelie bin this week because it 
wasn't on my boundary. What should I do?" Have you considered dumping your 
rotting rubbish into your neighbours' bin, Michael? That's the civil thing to 
do.

Preamble 
 The bookies make the Pharoahs odds-on favourites to win the tournament for a 
record fifth time, but what do they know? After all, they're the chumps who 
gave me 9/1 on Ivory Coast at the start of the tournament and will therefore be 
drowning in their own tears in approximately 90 minutes as I celebrate a 
Friday-evening windfall. Yes, yes, Egypt will have the backing of 74,000 
cacophonous fans and trampled the Elephants 3-1 in the group stages, but the 
more pertinent information is this: the Ivorians fielded a weakened team in the 
group match because they had already qualified for the next round; and in 
qualifying for next summer's World Cup, the Ivorians beat Egypt both home and 
away; and Mido is missing after publicly imploding in the last match.

Having said that, there are a few factors in the Pharoahs favour, not least 
the lingering injury to Ivorian goalkeeper Jean-Jacques Tizié, which has 
prevented him from taking kick-outs in the last two games. Even more worrying, 
however, is the appointment of Mourad Daami as mach referee. After barmy 
refereeing helped the hosts scrape past Senegal in the semi-finals, the 
Ivorians called for the final to be officiated by a man of impeccable repute - 
so why the nod was given to an official who was suspended two years ago for 
trying to influence the decision of another referee is a riddle to outfox any 
sphinx.

Teams:

Egypt: 1-Essam El Hadary; 4-Ibrahim Said, 5-Abdel Zaher El Sakka, 20-Wa'el 
Goma'a, 3-Mohamed Abdel Wahab; 12-Mohamed Barakat, 11-Mohamed Shawki, 
22-Mohamed Abo Treka, 17-Ahmed Hassan (c); 10-Emad Moteb, 19-Amr Zaki

Ivory Coast: 1-Jean-Jacques Tizié; 21-Emmanuel Eboué, 4-Kolo Touré, 6-Blaise 
Kouassi, 3-Arthur Boka; 5-Didier Zokora, 19-Yaya Touré, 7-Emerse Fae, 2-Kanga 
Akalé; 9-Arouna Kone, 11-Didier Drogba (c)

Referee: Mourad Daami (Tunisia)
 