
In accepting the degree of Doctor of Science conferred on him by the 
University of Manchester yesterday, Professor ALBERT EINSTEIN conferred a 
signal honour on Manchester and its University. The compliment was no vain one 
on either side, for theUniversity of Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/universityofmanchester> claims high 
distinction in the scientific field, and Professor EINSTEIN’S visit is in 
itself a very distinct recognition of the University as a home of science.

EINSTEIN himself has become, with amazing rapidity, the hero not only of the 
scientist and the scholar, but also of the populace. The reason is not hard to 
seek. The man in the street, a traveller between life and death, is compact of 
all elements, and is neither wholly devoid of science nor of poetry. He may 
have few ideas in either, but he probably cherishes what he has, and whatever 
touches them nearly is of moment to him.

Professor EINSTEIN’S theory of Relativity, however vaguely he may comprehend 
it, disturbs fundamentally his basic conceptions of the universe and even of 
his own mind. It challenges somehow the absolute nature of his thought. The 
very idea that he can use his mind in a disinterested way is assailed by a 
conception which gives partiality to every perception. And with this keen 
thrust at personal things, the idea of Relativity stretches out to the very 
conceptions of the universe, as can be seen from the mere titles of the closing 
chapters in Professor EINSTEIN’S little book on the subject.

 Definite ideas emerge, even, on the shape of the universe itself, and the 
finite and the infinite are made to lie down comfortably together by deductions 
from the relativity of our daily observations. Everything, it has been said, 
assimilates to the nature of music. Professor EINSTEIN is a musician in his 
leisure moments, and his science seems to bear some relation to that art, in 
which everything is thought of in terms of movement and relation, and the fixed 
only as something arbitrary.

 