
Elderly drivers are no more dangerous behind the wheel than younger motorists, 
despite being more likely to die or be seriously injured in an accident, 
according to researchers.

As of March this year, figures from the UK’s Department for Transport reveal 
that there were 4.5 million people aged 70 or over in the UK who had a full 
driving licence, 236 of whom were aged 100 or over.

With older drivers more likely to have a range of health conditions, together 
with slower reactions times, whether the elderly should take to the roads - and 
at what point they should hang up their driving gloves - has long beendebated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/jul/04/elderly-motorists-driving-safety-roads>
.

But in a presentation at the British Science Festival this week, researchers 
said that recent studies push back against the notion that dangerous driving is 
linked to older age.


“We live in an ageing society - older people are more fit and healthy than 
ever before, so they are much more likely to be mobile,” said Charles 
Musselwhite of Swansea University, who led the work. “The question arises: if 
we are having more and more older people and they are driving a higher number 
of miles, are they safe to do so?”

While older drivers are more likely to be killed or seriously injured in road 
accidents, Musselwhite argues that is most likely down to an increase in 
frailty. But, he said, older drivers do appear more likely to be have an 
accident involving a right hand turn, with 13% of those aged over 70 having 
such a prang, compared to 7% of those under 70 years old.

That, says Musselwhite, could be down to drivers feeling flustered by time 
pressure. “What we find is when you do it on a desktop-based simulator, people 
over the age of 65 do take longer to make the decision to turn right,” he said. 
But, he said, it wasn’t until the participants were put under pressure during 
the computer simulation that they made a mistake, suggesting that it is feeling 
under pressure, that could be behind the problematic right turn.

Currently, motorists in the UK are required to renew their license when they 
turn 70, and every three years after then, confirming to the DVLA that they are 
still able to drive safely.

Some countries go further - in New South Wales, Australia, motorists over the 
age of 85 are required toundergo a re-test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/06/seniors-hit-back-at-incomprehensible-call-for-older-drivers-to-stay-off-road>
. But that approach, says Musselwhite, does little to improve road safety. 
Indeed, some other states havescrapped the rule 
<http://www.watoday.com.au/wa-news/compulsory-driving-tests-for-older-drivers-scrapped-20131121-2xx0o.html>
, saying such measures were potentially discriminatory. “Older people probably 
compensate for their changes in their cognition or changes in physiology as 
they get older,” said Musselwhite.

Musselwhite says his research also shows that older people need to consider 
the possibility of using other modes of transport long before they give up 
their license to avoid becoming housebound, while pedestrian safety should also 
be looked at. “40% of people who are killed are over 60, yet they only make up 
19% of pedestrian activity,” he said.

Philip Gomm of the RAC Foundation said: “Older drivers often get a bad rap, as 
they actually tend to be some of the safest people on the road. They often 
self-regulate and avoid situations where they feel uncomfortable, such as 
driving during the rush hour, at night or on motorways.”


Gomm agrees that high casualty rates for older drivers is likely down to their 
increased frailty, rather than poor driving.

“If you go by the statistics, then it is road users at the other end of the 
age spectrum that society would be better off helping stay safe,” he said, 
adding that driving cannot be looked at in isolation. “Taking away someone’s 
mobility can have profound effects on their physical, mental and social 
wellbeing,” he said.
 