
New Yorkers were rattled Monday morning by an alert from the Wireless 
Emergency Alert system (WEA) on their mobile devices, calling for their aid in 
a manhunt for someone suspected of terrorism, the first time the system has 
been used for such a callout.

The alert, sent to some but not all cellphones in the New York area 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/new-york-and-new-jersey-explosive-devices-what-we-know>
, read: “WANTED: Ahmad Khan Rahami, 28-yr-old male. See media for pic. Call 
9-1-1 if seen.” The alert was sent between 7.30 and 8.30am on Monday. By 
11.25am, officials had announced that Rahamihad been taken into custody 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/new-york-bombing-suspect-ahmad-khan-rahami>
 after a shootout in Linden, New Jersey.

In most cases, the WEA sends alerts to people who might be affected by extreme 
weather. In others, it sends “Amber alert” notifications to aid the location of 
a crime victim, often a kidnapped child, or to tell recipients to avoid the 
area where a violent crime is being committed or from which a suspect is 
fleeing.

New York bombings: Clinton criticizes Trump rhetoric – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/sep/19/us-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates>
But as far as the Guardian could determine, the WEA had never been used to ask 
citizens to help law enforcement hunt for the suspect of a crime committed days 
before.

Elizabeth Joh, a law professor at the University of California, Davis, said 
that while desperate times call for desperate measures, it’s important to weigh 
those measures carefully. “The gravity of the situation is obvious,” she told 
the Guardian. “But that everyone with a camera and immediate access to social 
media should be enlisted by means of the cellphone [WEA] is a different 
question. It’s a difficult balance to strike.”

The FCC says the wireless alerts are only issued by “pre-authorized national, 
state or local government authorities” and that those alerts will only be 
“regarding public safety emergencies, such as evacuation orders or 
shelter–in-place orders due to severe weather, a terrorist threat or chemical 
spill”.

It is not immediately clear which agency sent the alert. The Guardian has 
contacted the FCC for clarification.

A WEA message sent over the weekend warning New Yorkers about the existence of 
a second suspicious package in New York’s Chelsea neighborhood was a 
geo-targeted warning to people who might be in physical danger from something 
they could easily avoid. The message issued to New Yorkers on Monday morning 
refers to a photo of Rahami that has to be viewed on the internet or 
television, rather than in the message itself, and Rahami’s own whereabouts 
were unknown.

Joh said the alert “enlists the entire population in the area at once to help 
the police. Seems somewhat different than hearing on the radio or watching on 
TV, don’t you think?”

Everbridge, the company that makes the enterprise software used to send WEA 
messages, began trading in public markets last Friday. The stock sold better 
than expected during its initial public offering and closed up 27% on day one 
of trading. It was up 16.5% in its first hour on Monday.
 