
In these environment-conscious times the opening of a new airport is not 
normally cause for celebration. But I think the world will forgive tiny Beja 
airport for putting up the bunting and letting the band strike up tomorrow to 
celebrate the inaugural landing of flight BD1234 from Heathrow.

For one thing, we're talking about an Embraer 49-seater, flying just once a 
week to the airport, a former military airbase that is listed as an emergency 
landing site for the Space Shuttle. (The only other flights from here are to 
Cape Verde, used mainly by migrant workers.) For another, if ever there was a 
region in need of the economic shot in the arm that a new airport provides, it 
is the Alentejo – with Beja sitting in its heart – the poorest region of the 
poorest country in western Europe.

The Alentejo, derived from Além-Tejo or Beyond the Tagus, covers almost a 
third of Portugal, from the south bank of the Tagus down to the Algarve, and 
from the Atlantic coast to the Spanish border in the east. But it's home to 
just 7% of the country's population, economic flight having been a fact of life 
here for generations.

To the visitor it feels like undiscovered territory, a sleepy landscape of 
empty roads, pretty white villages, fields of half-naked cork-oak trees (the 
bark harvested from their trunks), vines, olive groves and small towns that 
have remained practically unchanged for centuries – and perfect road trip 
country.

Last weekend, to get a sneak preview of this newly accessible region, we 
picked up a car from Lisbon airport and headed first for the Alentejo coast, 
which starts just south of the capital, and is, with the exception of an 
industrial zone around the town of Sines, one continuous stretch of wild cliffs 
and virginal beaches.

Not that there was anything virginal about Praia do Tonel, near Zambujeira do 
Mar, when we got there the only couple in this beautiful golden sandy bay were 
enjoying some alfresco nookie. The fact that it was a sunny Saturday afternoon 
yet they seemed as surprised to see us as we them, tells you just how deserted 
this coastline is.

This isolation also attracts one of the few colonies (or musters) of storks on 
the Portuguese coast. Getting an eyeful of the domestic life of these huge 
birds half a stone's throw from the cliff path was even more surprising than 
seeing a copulating couple, and we spent two hours watching the storks tend 
their young in their huge basket-like nests as waves crashed against the 
granite cliffs below them.
 The pool at Herdade do Touril. 
We had borrowed bicycles from our guesthouse, Herdade do Touril 
<http://herdadetouril.com/>, a chic and tranquil homestead of whitewashed 
houses scattered over 365 hectares, three miles north of Zambujeira. Our cycle 
ride around the property's perimeter took in the coastal path and fields 
bursting with colourful wild flowers. After a few hours' brisk exercise in the 
warm sun, jumping into Touril's lovely saltwater pool (which has graced the 
cover of Condé Nast Traveller) at the end of the ride was blissful.

Before heading inland we drove up the coast to Vila Nova de Milfontes, a 
pretty town on the beach-fringed estuary of the Mira river, for a lunch of 
barbecued sardines and shellfish at Restaurante A Choupana (Praia do Farol, 
+351 283 996 643). The combination of Portuguese vinho verde and fresh seafood 
is my idea of food heaven (particularly in an open-air restaurant bang on the 
beach with a view of the Atlantic).

It was a wrench to leave, but the rolling plains of the Alentejo are dotted 
with dozens of picturesque medieval towns. We had time to see just one, so we 
headed, via a vineyard or two, to the jewel in its crown, the walled city of 
Évora.

In keeping with the historic splendour of the place, we booked into the 
Pousada de Évora, a converted 14th-century convent wrapped round a series of 
shady courtyards.Pousadas de Portugal <http://www.pousadas.pt> is a state-run 
chain of hotels in historic buildings such as monasteries or castles, similar 
to Spain's paradors.

Like their Spanish counterparts, pousadas offer affordable stays in some of 
the country's most magnificent old buildings (they offer excellentonline deals 
<http://www.pousadas.pt/historic-hotels-portugal/en/promotions/pages/home.aspx>
), many of them in the Alentejo. But, in my experience at least, they also 
share the paradors' weak spot, in that the restaurant was no match for the 
majesty of the surroundings.

When we arrived late (but well before closing) for dinner, the head waiter, 
who had the appearance of Manuel and the manners of Basil Fawlty, couldn't 
disguise his indignation. So angry he could barely speak, he banged cutlery and 
plates down on our table. The food was the most mediocre of our trip, and we 
ate it in silence and without making eye contact in order to avoid an attack of 
the giggles and the wrath of Manuel.

But this was a small grumble. The pousada, like the town itself, is all about 
Portugal's history. Theold town of Évora <http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/361> is 
a Unesco world heritage site, and right outside the front door of the pousada 
stands the 2,000-year-old Templo Romano, one of the finest Roman monuments on 
the Iberian peninsula. There's also a 16th-century aqueduct leading north-west 
out of the city that can be walked for five miles, and the macabre crypt of the 
stunning Capela dos Ossos (Chapel of Bones), where the walls are neatly lined 
with the bones and skulls of around 5,000 former Évora residents.

Nine miles west of the city is the Cromeleque dos Almendres, an oval of almost 
100 granite monoliths that makes up one of the largest megalithic monuments in 
Europe. It's not as spectacular as Stonehenge perhaps, but this fascinating 
site isn't remotely commercial either. It sits, very peacefully, on a hillside 
of olive and cork trees, and access is free.

We had our fill of sightseeing in Évora, but it's a city where it's almost as 
much fun to wander around, get lost and hang out at bars and cafes in the 
numerous squares.

A weekend didn't feel nearly long enough to slow down to the Alentejo's very 
seductive pace of life, or to take in enough of this beautiful, quiet corner of 
Europe. But with the new flights into Beja on Sunday mornings only, staying for 
a week will be the norm. Three days on those gorgeous beaches and another three 
or four pottering around the Alentejo's vineyards and white marble villages ... 
now that sounds just about right.
 