
Recently I was at the Mandarin Hotel for the University of Leicester's summer 
evening reception for alumni in London. As a member of the alumni committee I 
feel it incumbent upon me to go to these types of events, although the 
attraction of free wine, canapés and schmoozing with some of Leicester's old 
guard would probably have pulled me along anyway.

Unlike our last visit to the Mandarin in February, for which a ticket was £65, 
this event was free, with donations to the university encouraged. 
Unsurprisingly, but rather pleasantly, this had the effect of shaping the 
attendees list to include many recent graduates; a group massively 
underrepresented at our event back in winter. Their stories of career searching 
and intense competition for graduate jobs posed a striking paradox: here we 
were celebrating the fruits of a Leicester education, yet some of our newer 
members had not even started their careers yet.

After too many anchovy-laden bruschetta biscuits, I got talking to a fellow 
committee member, Richard Watts, a successful publishing director, who shared 
an observation about the contrasting behaviour of his generation with more 
recent graduates. He was amazed and impressed at just how much more organised, 
seemingly ambitious and earnest today's 21-year-olds are than he and his peers 
were at the same age. Upon introducing himself to this crowd of fresh-faced 
graduates, he said, he found himself dishing out business cards at their behest 
in the hope that he – or one of his professional colleagues – might be able to 
open a door of opportunity. These young people, and so many like them, have 
seen so few doors.

Having relatively recently graduated, I could completely relate to their 
behaviour. We all know the situation: record unemployment levels among young 
people and the trimming of graduate places in top firms has intensified the 
competition for jobs, leaving many scratching around for any scrap of work to 
showcase on the CV. These graduates had recognised the influence our alumni 
have and saw our event, rightly, as a potentially career-opening opportunity to 
grab.

But while it seems perfectly plausible that today's graduates are much more 
career-focused than past generations, I cannot help but think that this 
observable change in behaviour is perhaps less about the changing personalities 
of graduates and more about their adapting natures to external forces beyond 
their control.

Confronted with the type of graduate market we are seeing now, I'd beg to 
differ if any generation of graduates wouldn't have used all available tools to 
get a head start. If LinkedIn had been invented when Patrick Mulvihill, the 
chairman of our committee, had graduated, wouldn't he have added the then 
chairman of the alumni association to his profile, which is what two new 
graduates did the morning after meeting him?

On the face of it, alumni events provide an opportunity to catch up with old 
flames, regale each other with stories of drunken debauchery in the students 
union and learn about what exciting opportunities their alma mater is engaged 
with today. But underneath all this is something more provocative. These events 
are a celebration of the power that education has on people and the debt we owe 
to the institution that empowered us to reach our full potential. Servicing 
this debt need not be expensive (certainly not for older, non-fee-paying 
graduates, anyway); it just requires a willingness to provide some invaluable 
steers or the promise of a CV review to help new graduates starting out on 
their career.

This is why I now believe the responsibility of graduate employability has 
moved beyond the sole jurisdiction of careers departments. The torch has not 
been passed on as such, but it is now being carried by alumni departments too. 
There is too often an unrealised interconnectedness between alumni departments 
and careers services; this is a missed opportunity, and to the detriment of 
both students and the universities.

Our event, bringing together graduates from different years, demonstrated how 
potentially successful exploiting this interconnectedness could be. As the 
calls for more of these types of events roll in, I hope our committee will 
recognise our role in graduate employability and begin to understand how we can 
better serve graduates when they are at the beginning of their careers.

Alex Smith is development manager at Recourse <http://recourse.org.uk/>, a 
support network for post-16 education professionals and a member of the
University of Leicester's Alumni Association 
<http://www2.le.ac.uk/alumni/about/association>.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 