
When, in what proved a Damascene moment and against his normal pragmatism, 
Andy Flower <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andy-flower> jettisoned his 
plans for opening batsmen at the 2010 World Twenty20 and turned them on their 
head, it was seen as the key element in England’s ultimate success in the 
Caribbean.

Michael Lumb and Craig Kieswetter, on the back of some pyrotechnics for the 
England Lions in a practice match against Flower’s squad, injected firepower at 
the start of the innings and Kieswetter went on to take the man of the match 
awardin the final against Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/may/16/england-australia-world-twenty20-final>
 – showing, incidentally, that favourites do not win all the time.

There was another decision, though, taken much closer to the event, that had 
as much impact. The England captain, Paul Collingwood, had just come from 
playing for Rajasthan Royals in the Indian Premier League and had been struck 
by the influence that left-arm pace bowlers were having.

England possessed one such bowler in Ryan Sidebottom, who had been a regular 
in the T20 side during that period when almost singlehandedly he was holding 
the England pace attack together, but was now no longer in the first-choice 
side. Collingwood’s insistence changed that: Jimmy Anderson, who had been 
expected to play, was omitted, Sidebottom came in and sent down a new-ball 
maiden to Graeme Smith in England’s final warm-up match before that tournament 
to set down a marker. His mixture of angle, swing, yorkers, slow-ball bouncers 
and general nous were one of the competition’s successes.

Since then England, while fully cognisant of the need to find a successor to 
Sidebottom, for both limited-overs formats, have been unable to do so.

Harry Gurney has been tried extensively and come up short in his bowling. 
Northamptonshire’s David Willey offered hope but injury has held him back. They 
looked instead at bowlers who might offer skilled variety, such as Jade 
Dernbach, but while he had a box full of toys he rarely understood which one to 
play with at any given time. And so circumstance has forced England to go with 
the best they have, which is a battery of fast-ish and fast-medium 
right-armers, none of whom can lend the variety that will play an important 
part in this World Cup.

If we take the 1987 tournament in India and Pakistan as the first in which 
teams started to come to grips with ODI cricket as an entity in itself rather 
than a shorter form of Test matches – Steve Waugh’s use of slower balls or the 
promotion of Craig McDermott as a pinch-hitter, for example – then it is clear 
that the World Cup has generally been won by a side containing a left-arm pace 
bowler. In the 1987 Australian win it was the lanky Bruce Reid; 1992 was when 
Wasim Akram famously demolished the England middle order; in 1996 Sri Lanka had 
Chaminda Vaas; in 1999 and 2003 Australia won without such benefit but 
possessed an attack of rare talent while their final opponents on both 
occasions, first Pakistan and then India, had Akram and Zaheer Khan 
respectively. In 2007, meanwhile, Nathan Bracken opened the Australian bowling 
against Sri Lanka, who had Vaas once more; and in Mumbai, in the last 
tournament, Zaheer helped India to a famous victory.

The chances are that this World Cup will be won by a side continuing on that 
theme. England have already come up against Mitchell Starc and James Faulkner 
of Australia in the past week, while Trent Boult is fundamental to an excellent 
New Zealand pace attack that could also include Mitchell McClenaghan. South 
Africa will probably go with their three usual right-arm suspects of Dale 
Steyn, Morne Morkel and Vernon Philander but could also include Wayne Parnell 
as a fourth option.

For England, though, it is a mode of attack that has been mystifyingly 
under-represented, not only recently but for the past century. Since 1964, only 
Sidebottom (79), John Lever (73), Allan Mullally (58) and Jeff Jones (44) have 
taken more than 20 Test wickets, bettered since the first world war only by 
Bill Voce’s 98 wickets. In one-day internationals, Gurney’s 11 wickets 
bizarrely make him the fourth most successful England left-armer, behind 
Mullally (63), Sidebottom (29) and Lever (24). By way of comparison, Akram took 
502 in ODIs, Vaas 400, both geniuses admittedly, but there are still 16 
left-arm pace bowlers with more wickets than England’s best.

The curiosity is that England have been fortunate in having a consistent 
supply of high-class left-arm spin bowlers, a line stretching back from Monty 
Panesar, through Ashley Giles, Phil Tufnell, Phil Edmonds, Derek Underwood, 
Tony Lock and back to Hedley Verity and Wilfred Rhodes. The successor to this 
chain has yet to emerge but it is almost as if there is a heritage there. Not 
so with pace.

England have a chance of competing well in the coming weeks but it would take 
a huge leap of faith to see them in a position to win, and the lack of bowling 
variety is a strong reason why. So, when the dust has settled on this World 
Cup, an absolute priority should be to find and nurture left-arm pace bowlers. 
It is not all about thunder-bats. They cannot win without it.
 