


ENGLAND

Mike Brown, full-back 7/10 Struggled with his composure early on, but soon 
rediscovered it. Endless counterattacks to precisely where it hurts and plenty 
of work on end of line as England stretched Aussies.

Marland Yarde, wing 6/10 Looked the most at sea of all when England were being 
carved up at the start. But looked better and better the more ball came his 
way. Finished try well, even if it was close .

Jonathan Joseph, centre 8/10 It’s not just his pace; it’s not just his 
tackling. He just knows where everything is going to be before anyone else 
does. That’s what marks him out above the others. Two tries and a perfect chip 
for Yarde’s.

Owen Farrell, centre 6/10 Looked all over the shop in England’s early period 
of wobbles, but grew into the game. Got a toe to the ball for Joseph’s first 
try and went from there. Oh, and didn’t miss a kick, obviously.

Jonny May, wing 6/10 Couldn’t quite get into things in the first half, but 
upped his workrate in the second and played his part as England stretched 
Australia from side to side.

George Ford, fly-half 7/10 England’s top-tackling back, but it’s for his 
impish string-pulling with ball in hand that we admire him. His heads-up break 
and kick in first half snapped England out of their torpor and was the maestro 
from there.

Ben Youngs, scrum-half 9/10 Our man of the match against South Africa, but 
undisputed this time. What an autumn. Even with a couple of spills, such was 
his influence and accuracy that he gets highest mark of series.

England backs cut loose against Australia to complete their perfect year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/03/england-australia-autumn-internationals-match-report>
Mako Vunipola, prop 7/10 Great match, as usual. Part of a front row that put 
in an inordinate number of tackles and that eventually edged the much-awaited 
scrum battle. And, of course, the hands and carries still there.

Dylan Hartley, hooker, captain 7/10 Progressively better as series has worn 
on, which suggests he might not have been match fit at start. Tackle rate much 
higher and always where the action was. Did foul up one hook though.

Dan Cole, Prop 8/10 Australia tried to rile him off the field; he responded on 
it with by far his best performance of the autumn. Thirteen tackles and won the 
scrum. Still hasn’t touched the ball, though.

Courtney Lawes, lock 8/10 What a match from another whose club form has not 
hinted at this sort of level of performance. High on carries and tackles, main 
target at lineout and stole one to boot.

George Kruis, lock 7/10 His club form has been immaculate for a while, but has 
recovered from surgery as if nothing happened. Top of charts with 16 tackles 
and his carries upheld England momentum.

Chris Robshaw, flanker 6/10 Influential as ever and some timely interventions. 
Reads the game so well. But not involved as much as he has been this autumn. 
Remarkably, only mid-table on the tackle and carry count.

Tom Wood, flanker 7/10 The third guy Northampton will be hoping can carry this 
sort of form back to Franklin’s Gardens. Given a second chance with England and 
better than ever. One high tackle the only blemish.

Nathan Hughes, No8 7/10 Maybe not as powerful as the man he replaced, but 
quicker, and that came into effect pertinently, not least in buildup to 
England’s second. Solid at restart and a playmaker, too.

England see off Australia’s fast start to establish themselves at No2 | Andy 
Bull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/03/england-australia-fast-start-no2>
REPLACEMENTS Jamie George 6 (for Hartley 59) Solid as ever, and one nice gallop
Joe Marler 5(Vunipola 59) Great carry and hit, but beaten by Kepu for try Danny 
Care 6(Youngs 63) Drop goal didn’t come off, but some good defence Ben Te’o 6 
(Farrell 67) Great runKyle Sinckler 6 (Cole 67) Big barrelling run Teimana 
Harrison 5(Robshaw 69) Charlie Ewels 5 (Kruis 73)

AUSTRALIA

Israel Folau, full-back 6/10 Even when he drifts in and out, as he did a bit 
here, he just looks a different class. Not even Joseph could handle him when he 
took his outside shoulder. One day his next try will come.

Dane Haylett-Petty, wing 7/10 Was best player of the first half, cutting 
England up at will, putting players away, brilliant cover defence. A couple of 
big hits on Hughes in second half, but then it went downhill, ending in a harsh 
yellow.

Tevita Kuridrani, centre 7/10 Could so easily have had two tries and how 
differently things might have turned out if he’d managed to ground one. 
Australia’s top-tackling back and a proper handful.

Reece Hodge, centre 6/10 Another to enjoy a fine first half, his passes behind 
the line releasing the outside backs. Crucial tackles foiled England attacks. 
But, like his team, fell away when it mattered.

Sefa Naivalu, wing 5/10 Same again. Looked electric in first half, leading 
Yarde on a merry dance and claiming his first international try. But then he 
disappeared and spilled one of the few passes to come his way.

Bernard Foley, fly-half 6/10 Looked absolutely deadly during Australia’s 
purple patch, darting behind the heavy traffic and pulling England’s defence 
out of shape. But what can you do against the onslaught of that second half?

Unbeaten Eddie Jones says England short of 2003 World Cup vintage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/03/eddie-jones-unbeaten-england-2003-comparisons>
Nick Phipps, scrum-half 3/10 Even during Australia’s dominant period, he 
looked edgy. It was his hesitation and loose pass that allowed England back 
into game. No shame to be in Will Genia’s shadow, but that’s very much where he 
is.

Scott Sio, prop 4/10 Some big carries when Australia were in the ascendancy at 
the start, but his game went south after that. Lucky to win one scrum penalty, 
then banged to rights at another. Cole had him.

Stephen Moore, hooker, captain 6/10 Plenty of industry, he finishes his season 
in better form than he started it. Handling looked sharp, too. Did foul up one 
lineout throw, but by then everything was going wrong for Australia.

Sekope Kepu, prop 6/10 What a turn of pace for his try. He was another held up 
over the line during Australia’s siege at the start of the match. Handled scrum 
better than Sio, but he spilled ball for Joseph’s first.

Kane Douglas, lock 3/10 More or less anonymous. Rory Arnold and Adam Coleman 
are the future at lock for Australia. Douglas is struggling to rediscover his 
form of the World Cup. Penalised twice.

Rob Simmons, lock 7/10 Great game in adversity. Now 70 caps into his career, 
but so much more than the lineout specialist he was in the early years. 
Constantly charging at the heart of England’s defence.

David Pocock, flanker 6/10 Mixed bag in his last match before sabbatical. Good 
was very good, ie defence and breakdown work. But discipline and hands poor. 
Horrible pass for Joseph’s second was final indignity.

Michael Hooper, flanker 8/10 Usual ball of energy in attack and defence. Often 
accused of excess showiness for a flanker, but supplemented that stardust with 
some proper graft at the heart of the action. One Aussie who didn’t fade.

Lopeti Timani, No8 6/10 He’s a big, hard chunk of muscle and enjoyed a good 
ding-dong with the man opposite him. But where Hughes played with his head up, 
the ball too often died with Timani.

REPLACEMENTS Tom Robertson 5 (Sio 58) Couple of little touches Dean Mumm 6 
(Douglas 61) Couple of charges and good lineout workSean McMahon 5 (Timani 68) 
Missed a tackle, but made a coupleNick Frisby 5 (Phipps 69) Did fine Quade 
Cooper 5(Hodge 69) Made one little dart Henry Speight 6 (Naivalu 69) Defended 
wellTolu Latu 5 (for Moore 73) Appeared too late to make real impact James 
Slipper 5(Kepu 58) Like Latu, came on game almost up
 