
Marland Yarde is on standby for a recall to England’s right wing after being 
retained in the matchday squad to play Australia on Saturday. Wasps’ Nathan 
Hughes is also poised to take over at No8 from the injured Billy Vunipola, who 
has had surgery to repair knee cartilage damage.

Yarde, who started the opening November Test win against South Africa, fills 
the squad vacancy leftby Elliot Daly, who has been suspended for three weeks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/england-argentina-autumn-internationals-match-report>
 following his red card for taking out an Argentinian in the air last weekend. 
Bath’s Semesa Rokoduguni has also been named in a 25-man squad but, unless 
injury intervenes, Yarde’s experience of facing the Wallabies on England’s 
summer tour may well prove decisive.

Michael Cheika retaliates by accusing Dan Cole of illegal scrummaging
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/29/england-dan-cole-eddie-jones-australia-michael-chieka-illegal-scrum-rugby-union>
The retention of Rokoduguni, who scored two tries and won the man of the match 
award against Fiji, comes after his club-mates expressed their disbelief at his 
omission for the Pumas game. Eddie Jones will confirm his lineup on Thursday 
but would have to drop either Ben Te’o or Henry Slade from the bench to find 
room for Rokoduguni if he fails to make the starting XV.

Up front the powerful Hughes is the most obvious ball-carrying replacement for 
Vunipola, with Jack Clifford ceasing to be a realistic option once he was 
knocked out playing for Harlequins on Sunday. The Bath flanker Dave Attwood is 
also in the squad and is competing with his club-mate Charlie Ewels for one 
bench spot.

The Australia flanker Dean Mumm will be available after escaping a ban for a 
dangerous tackle against Ireland. A disciplinary panel decided the offence, for 
which Mumm was sent to the sin-bin, would not have warranted a red card and 
imposed no further sanction.

England starting XV v Australia (probable) Brown (Harlequins); Yarde 
(Harlequins), Joseph (Bath), Farrell (Saracens), May (Gloucester); Ford (Bath), 
B Youngs (Leicester); M Vunipola (Saracens), Hartley (Northampton, capt), Cole 
(Leicester), Kruis (Saracens), Lawes (Northampton), Robshaw (Harlequins), Wood 
(Northampton), Hughes (Wasps).
 