
There is something of the night about forests. Even at the height of summer, 
even under the midday sun, they are places of murk and mystery, blotting out 
the light with amille-feuille of foliage. Even the most regimented spruce 
plantation has its shadows and its secrets. At the heart of every forest is a 
darkness that bides its time.

And as the sun goes down, after that lovely hour of slanting golden light, 
this dark spirit reclaims its own, rolling out across bracken and brambles 
towards its still-grey borders. The wood is at its woodiest.

If you are lucky enough to live surrounded by forest – as I once was – you 
feel it recede and fade at sunrise, only to creep back as night falls, a tide 
retaking the beach.

The last crow heads to its roost, the first bats unfold their wings, and 
beneath them the beasts that have hidden all day emerge to feast, fight and 
fornicate. All around you are squeaks and rustles, grunts and barks, cries of 
terror and of lust.

On your first night, you may be tempted to rush back indoors and shoot the 
bolts. But keep calm – that crashing through the undergrowth is probably just a 
deer. That screaming is almost certainly foxes.

Try not to think of The Blair Witch Project, or JRR Tolkien's Mirkwood. 
Nyctohylophobia <http://www.fearofstuff.com/nature/fear-of-forests-at-night/> – 
the fear of forests at night – is what is known as a "learned phobia".

"We learn to fear forests because of movies [and books] that generally involve 
some marauding killer or wild animal that stalks victims," says the 
appropriately named Fear of Stuff website. "We can also learn this fear when 
playing as children and discovering there are far too many hiding places and 
too many opportunities for playmates to jump out and frighten us."

But there are no giant spiders waiting to wrap you in their silk. It's two and 
a half centuries since anyone in Britain had to worry about wolves.

By all means take a torch, but try not to use it. Yes, a sweep of its beam 
will reveal dozens of watching eyes, but the spell will break and you'll wreck 
your night vision. The same goes for checking your mobile.

On all but the darkest nights, it's amazing what you can see once your eyes 
adjust. Wait quietly and patiently where the canopy is thinnest – at the 
forest's edge, in a clearing, by the side of a road – let the stars and the 
moonlight work their magic, and you might see badgers and deer, hedgehogs and 
mice, pine martens and foxes, maybe even a dormouse or a boar.

And don't forget to look up, in case an owl is silently sweeping past. Savour 
the moment.Robert Frost <https://www.theguardian.com/books/robert-frost> knew 
what he was talking about: the woods really are lovely, dark and deep.
 