
When you're in a forest, you don't need to spend £11bn, build a velodrome or 
have creative disputes with Danny Boyle to host your own Woodland Games. Just 
lay in supplies, draw up a schedule of events, and scrabble around for a few 
items on the forest floor. It is, however, probably best to warn the children 
in advance that the Queen is unlikely to be available to parachute in for your 
opening bash.

List of supplies

• Performance-enhancing treats, obviously, and some fizzy drinks to spray over 
the victors.

• The stopwatch app on your phone (if you can find it).

• Paper and pen to keep track of results.

• Medals and prizes for everyone. Make medals the night before: tin foil and 
gold pens for the Very Good Parents out there, cut-out cardboard for the rest 
of us. It goes without saying that the prizes have to be for everyone because 
It's The Taking Part That Matters …

• Finally, add a few plasters for scraped knees and elbows, sunscreen, some 
kind of painkiller (not alcoholic), children, and you're off. Let the games 
begin!

 

Event 1: Obstacle course

Olympic athletes spent the run-up to the London Games on strict diets and in 
rigorous training, supported by a team of psychologists using sophisticated 
techniques to help them achieve their personal best. But we believe the same 
effect can be attained by distributing Penguin bars and demanding the children 
build their own obstacle course, while shouting orders and getting increasingly 
irritable as they regularly stop to fight/eat/moan.

Possible obstacles

Stick slalom: poke a long line of sticks into the ground for competitors to 
weave around.

Picnic rug tunnel: selflessly hand over your rug for the little terrors – 
sorry, brave athletes – to crawl under, just like those netting things they use 
in the Territorial Army.

Hardwood hurdles: balance a thin stick across two logs to create a hurdle to 
jump over, or to crawl or limbo under.

Monkey bar swing: locate a tree with a strong, low branch from which 
competitors can hang for a count of five, or as long as their little arms can 
manage.

How to play

Youngest sets off first; gaps between start times should vary according to age 
and behaviour. Older ones cannot just walk over the slalom. Or the picnic rug. 
Or the younger children.

Event 2: Pine-cone shot put


By now the obstacle course may have been destroyed, after competitor no 3 (no 
names, please) used part of the stick slalom to beat up competitor no 2. Both 
continue to deny accusing the other of having farty breath. Did Mo Farah have 
to deal with this kind of thing? Let's move swiftly on to the pine cone shot 
put.

How to play

Everyone helps collect a stack of pine cones (this may prove tricky if you are 
in a deciduous forest – try tiny logs instead). Now draw a large circle on the 
ground with a stick. Each competitor gets three pine cones: the aim is to throw 
the cones inside the circle from a distance of the judge's choosing.

Note: Any pine cones aimed at another competitor will result in instant 
disqualification and loss of computer time for the next week. In the case of a 
tie, it's perhaps best not to suggest a sudden-death shoot-out.

Event 3: Tree-trunk balance beam


Pine cones redistributed? Everyone still in one piece? It's time for a spot of 
gymnastics, with points for artistic impression awarded at your discretion, so 
you can even the scores up and keep everyone happy.

How to play

Find a fallen tree trunk that can be safely walked along (with a helping hand 
if needed). How far can our brave athletes go without touching the woodland 
floor? Extra points for arms held out straight. Or little jumps. Or a sweet 
song.

Note: Stilts and piggy-backs are banned. Unless piggy-backs are offered in a 
co-operative spirit, in which case well done for working so nicely together, 
kiddywinks! 

Event 4: Pooh sticks


This eternal classic pre-dates agriculture as a human occupation – probably. 
What child can't be distracted for half an hour by the competitive joys of 
racing sticks down a handy forest stream? Just make sure you're in a position 
to ensure they don't throw themselves into the stream, too.

How to play

Do we really have to explain? The classic version should take place on a 
bridge, but if none is handy, ask a kindly passerby to act as judge and 
jury downstream of where the sticks are being launched. You could also take the 
concept a step further by encouraging the kids to make their own sailing boats 
...

How to build a bark boat

Find a dead log with its bark peeling off, and carefully break off a piece. 
Use a splodge of mud to attach a light stick as a mast, then use another 
splodge to attach a leaf, feather or thinner piece of bark as a sail.

Now all you need is a small stream or large puddle to float the boats in: if 
it's not windy, you may have to blow ... If a boat sinks, try moving the 
mast and sail around on the bark; if it still won't float, you have created a 
bark submarine!

Event 5: Leaf long jump


Never mind the kids; by now you must be cream-crackered, with interest in the 
finer points of the competition waning just a little. The perfect time for 
a long, long jump ...

How to play

Summon all your remaining energy reserves to make a gigantic leaf pile. The 
bigger it is, the more time you'll get to sit and rest while your kids jump 
into it and throw handfuls of leaves over each other, before (touch wood) 
descending into fits of giggles while agreeing that it doesn't really matter 
who wins these games, anyway.

Note: Should the time of year, or type of forest, mean that there are not 
enough leaves for the long jump, there's always mud ... But only if the person 
responsible for laundry is first guaranteed a large drink/breakfast in bed 
as compensation.

Event 6: The sprint (back to the car)

Always the most eagerly anticipated event in any Woodland Games. With tempers 
frayed and sugar levels low, there's just time to let competitors know that the 
overall gold medal will go to the child who runs/walks/skips back to the car 
fastest. Anything to get them back quickly, especially as it's starting to rain 
...

Ideas based on the Forestry Commission and Woodland Trust's Nature Detectives 
<http://www.naturedetectives.org.uk/> adventure booklets.
 