
We're in Kent's Bedgebury Forest <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/bedgebury> on 
what is the hottest day of the year so far. Fifty miles away in London SW19, 
Andy Murray is battling the heat of Centre Court as he endeavours to become 
Britain's first Wimbledon men's champion in 77 years. I, on the other hand, am 
dangling 40 feet up in the trees, trussed up in a harness and looking anything 
but heroic. It's on days like this that you realise why Tarzan wore a loincloth 
and little else.

Of course, Tarzan would never be allowed to do Go Ape <http://www.goape.co.uk>
's Tree Top Adventure in his work clothes. Health & Safety just wouldn't allow 
it; might invalidate the public liability insurance policy too. Still, I've 
brought along two of my kids, Betsy (11) and Frank (10), to try an experience 
that's designed to "bring out your inner ape" – not that my kids really need 
any assistance in that area.

Tristram and Rebecca Mayhew launched Go Ape's first site in Thetford Forest, 
Suffolk, a little over a decade ago, and others have been springing up all over 
the country ever since, fromDalby Forest 
<http://www.forestry.gov.uk/dalbyforest> in the North York Moors national park 
down toHaldon <http://www.goape.co.uk/days-out/haldon> in Devon. Last summer, 
Go Ape welcomed its three-millionth visitor up into the trees. Participants 
have to be a minimum of 1.4m tall and at least 10 years old, and if you weigh 
more than 130kg, you'll have to stay on terra firma too. (Smaller explorers can 
enjoy the Tree Top Junior adventure at selected venues.)

The first thing you learn at Go Ape – actually, the first of many terrifying 
things – is that you're going to be left to your own devices. That is to say, 
there is nobody up there among the branches to lend support or expertise along 
the way. Mercifully, the safety briefings and practical demonstrations help to 
take the fear away – well, some of it.

On arrival, for example, you're given a safety sheet to read through to 
familiarise yourself with what you're about to endure. Once you get past the 
bit that says "one in 1,000 people need first aid", you're asked to sign a 
disclaimer (never a good sign) before heading into a small teaching pen, where 
you're fitted with your harness and given the first of two demonstrations with 
the aim of saving you from coming a cropper.

"This," says Joe, our Go Ape instructor, "is a high-risk activity." His face 
is expressionless, his voice worryingly stern. "It's vital that you listen to 
the safety instructions so you can remain safe on the course."

He has a point. After all, some of these treetop challenges are as high as a 
house and, as a parent, the idea that you can relax and enjoy the experience 
while your children are just a small step away from serious injury or worse is, 
initially at least, difficult to get over. For once, though, the kids have 
listened intently and they take to it like proper primates. Fearless, free and 
blessed with nimble limbs and youthful agility, they tackle each stage head-on, 
before taking turns to berate me for my age and/or cowardice.

Sometimes you just have to be a dutiful dad and get stuck in, even if Go Ape 
takes you out of what X-Factor mentors call your "comfort zone". The height of 
some of the challenges is worrying enough (especially to someone who has put 
off clearing out the gutters for months because it involves climbing a ladder), 
but it's my first attempt at the "Tarzan jumps" – when you step off a platform 
into thin air – that has me contemplating making my excuses and easing myself 
back down the rope ladder. Truly, it's a leap of faith.

Once you've learned to trust the harness, however – and discovered you didn't 
end up in a crumpled mess on the forest floor – the trepidation gives way to 
some fantastic fun. The temptation not to launch into a full-on Johnny 
Weissmuller yell as you swing through the air is hard to resist.

At times you find yourself legs akimbo, wondering how on earth you're going to 
make it to the relative safety of the next platform, and what might happen if 
you don't. One slip, one misjudged step, and you can be left dangling 
helplessly in the air like some PR stunt involving Boris Johnson as, beneath 
you, other visitors to the forest look up and laugh. At other times, as you 
attempt to negotiate rickety bridges and awkward rope nets, it's more like a 
task on I'm a Celebrity …Get Me Out of Here!, only without any of the unsavoury 
eating contests.

The best fun, of course, is to be had on the epic zip wires that complete each 
of the five sections; the longest here is a mighty 170m. It's fantastically 
liberating to step off the platform, sit back and let the wire do the work, as 
a welcome breeze licks your face.

Before we'd set off on our adventure, instructor Joe had told us that the best 
way to land at the end of the zip wire was to hit the ground running – 
something I managed to achieve not once on my five rides, preferring instead to 
land in a mangled mess, covered in dust and with wood chip sticking to my 
suntan lotion. On one touchdown, I even got to my feet with my shorts around my 
thighs.

It may have been the heat (it was definitely the heat), but the Tree Top 
Adventure is surprisingly physical, and after three hours of climbing and 
clambering, of slipping, sliding and swinging, the last zip wire comes as 
something of a relief. Frank goes first, then Betsy, both touching down with 
impeccable timing and lightfootedness. I follow, landing like a rhino whose 
parachute has failed.

A short and ultimately fruitless search for my dignity ensues before we return 
to the base-camp cabin, where Joe is waiting, counting us in to make sure none 
of us has perished along the way.

"How was it?" he inquires.

A bead of sweat rolls down my cheek. "Amazing," I reply, picking a lump of 
wood chip out of my ear.

Forest Segways


Acrophobics among you – or perhaps just the downright sensible – may prefer to 
explore the nation's forests at ground level, rather than high up amid the bark 
and the branches.

Eleven Go Ape centres now offer the Forest Segway Experience 
<http://goape.co.uk/forest-segway> where, for £30, riders get to enjoy an 
hour's safari around some of England's most beautiful forests – on a 
self-balancing, all-terrain electric Segway. These may look a trifle odd at 
first, but soon enough you'll be whizzing around, wondering why you've never 
tried one before.

You have to be over 45kg (7 stone) and under 125kg (19.5 stone) to ride a 
Forest Segway, and you will, of course, get a driving lesson and comprehensive 
safety briefing before you're let loose. After that, it's nothing but 
fantastic, free-wheeling fun. And if you're really bitten by the bug, Go Ape 
offersnight-time Segway safaris in Thetford Forest, East Anglia 
<http://goape.co.uk/night-segway>. Two words: satisfyingly spooky.
 