
As a late arrival to England's Ashes tour, it took a while to get into the 
swing of things. The main problem seemed to be an unexpected breaking-in 
period, a fug of jet-lag, sun-shock and general squint-eyed confusion. 
Basically I couldn't really understand what anyone was going on about. In 
particular I couldn't understand what theEngland cricket team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/england-cricket-team> were going on about. 
There were words and phrases, whole sentences spoken. But none of them ever 
seemed to gel into recognisable human statements, leaving instead a feeling of 
being caught up within some closed circle of ritual meaning, like accidentally 
stumbling into a four-hour Syldavian Orthodox church service and feeling 
obliged to sit there mumbling through the incantations and helplessly mouthing 
along with the hymns.

Andy Flower has always seemed pretty straight and to the point but oddly 
enough he was the worst of the lot, every utterance shot through within 
corporate aversion speak, and providing a convincing embodiment of the old 
Catch 22 line about Major Major only ever being available to answer questions 
in his office when he's not in his office to answer questions. There are 
various options, all of which are viable options. It would not be appropriate – 
but why, why? – to comment on any individual. Plus the line of the tour in 
response to a question about whetherAlastair Cook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alastair-cook> is a good captain or not: 
"There are different levels of good."

At first it was tempting to wonder if maybe this was a part of England's 
problems on the field. Perhaps Flower had been sitting the players down and 
giving them not so much a rousing team talk as an instructional face-time 
speak-exchange facilitation. Except, it isn't just him. Even Cook, who with his 
record should have the confidence to speak and be damned, has had the look of a 
man being held hostage against his will and forced by hidden snipers to sit in 
front of a board covered in adverts and talk about hitting good areas and 
executing skill-sets and this not being the moment to discuss matters currently 
under wide-ranging review.

This is not a swipe at Cook, but at a wider sense of systemic obfuscation. Say 
what you like about England cricket's managerial class, but the fact is, like 
Floyd Mayweather, you just can't lay a glove on them. Point at any one of 
England's failings in Australia – the selection of Boyd Rankin, for example, 
who was never really fit and who has bowled in a style reminiscent of a nice 
big friendly horse, if a nice big friendly horse were ever to make it through 
the various levels and earn, through sheer weight of wickets, the chance to 
play international cricket. Then try and work out who was responsible. You 
can't. It's impossible. Instead – and with the exception of the nicely upfront 
bowling coach David Saker – there seems to be some kind of invisible protective 
membrane at managerial level, an ingrained slipperiness. At the end of which 
England have been thrashed like never before. And it appears to be no one's 
fault. It is hard not to conclude that the real agent of confusion is more 
basic – and that it has something to do with the exculpatory plc structure that 
underpins England's management at all levels. This is the way of most sports 
now where business people have imported familiar management structures. The ECB 
itself has a chairman, chief executive, deputy chairman, managing director, 
board, cricket committee, remuneration committee, executive committee, 
commercial committee, nominations committee and – of course – audit and risk 
management committee. And this system of executive power has naturally bled 
downwards into the product itself.

So the England team has a "management group" rather than just a captain and 
coach, and a sense of layers within layers captured best in that photo of the 
one-day team with its 16 (note: several absentees on the day) support staff 
ranged proudly in gleaming blue nylon, from batting coach to masseur, 
chiropodist, nail technician, milliner, medium, backing dancer and the usual 
knot of non-specific beefy-shouldered men in sunglasses.

It is important here to remember what a plc is actually for. The limited 
company, from which England's management take their tone, is basically a device 
for limiting and concealing responsibility when things go wrong. It is a way of 
making sure nobody gets singled out, a blame shield – and in the real working 
world an entirely necessary device for businesses to flourish. The Limited 
Liability Act was passed in 1855 and sparked a Victorian entrepreneurial boom, 
along with plenty of Dickensian-style unease about the idea of responsibilities 
evaded, of a bullet-proof executive class (the ECB chairmanGiles Clarke, 
incidentally, only needs to change his name to something like Lord Grogg-Baron 
of Greater Revenuestream to qualify outright as a brilliantly vivid Dickensian 
powerbroker behind the powerbrokers).

It has been noted that the players themselves seem infantilised within this 
mob-handed structure, unresponsive in adversity, sporting instincts oddly 
blunted. Hence perhaps the insularity of England's blue-nylon machine, with its 
glazed and sealed hotel-room culture, slouching from lobby to breakfast buffet 
to meeting room, nannied by its cortege of wonks and fluffers. And in defeat 
this mob-handed structure of Team ECB plc does start to look jarringly 
defensive, even a little ridiculous.

Not only is there a danger of a genuine disconnect with England's support, the 
poor old fan, already punished repeatedly for the unforgivable consumer 
weakness of liking cricket. But on the current tour we have perhaps seen a 
predictive death mask of what the ECB and its co-conspirators might turn the 
greatest summer game into given a free hand in the freest of markets. There is 
already a sense of saturation, of a collapse of robust sporting competition, 
even of basic semantic sense. The projected ICC takedown is entirely of a piece 
with this. Most things won't happen. This might. And if it does what seems 
clear even now is that it won't – really, what could we do, old boy? – be 
allowed to be anybody's fault.
 