
The wicketkeeper-batsman Jos Buttler believes his team-mates must play without 
fear if they are to avoid being branded as one of the worst England teams ever.

After 90 days without a single success against Australia on their winter tour, 
England are on the verge of their longest losing sequence.

Defeat in the fourth one-day international in Perth on Friday will match their 
worst ever run of 10 defeats, across all formats, suffered in 1993 and 2001.

Unsurprisingly, Buttler revealed an urgency amongst his peers to break their 
winter duck when they take on a weakened Australia at the Waca.

"Obviously we are very desperate to avoid that [losing record]," Buttler said. 
"It's not a tag anyone would like. You go into every game wanting to win it and 
we haven't done that this tour.

"Everyone is very disappointed with that fact, but Friday is another 
opportunity to try and turn that around."

The fact that Australia have inflicted all nine defeats, dating back to last 
summer, means confidence is hardly sky-high in the away dressing room.

Perth is not the ideal destination to turn around fortunes either – England 
have not beaten Australia there in any format since New Year's Day 1987, while 
the Ashes were conceded before Christmas at this venue.

Buttler, however, is determined not to be remembered in such unenviable terms. 
The 23-year-old admits reversing the momentum of a troubled tour will not be 
straightforward, but believes adopting an Australian-styled "no worries" 
approach can net long-awaited success.

"One-day cricket is a tough game to play when your confidence has been 
knocked," he said. "You need to play with that free, open mind. That's 
something we need to do.

"We can't worry about consequences of playing a shot and worrying about 
getting out. You've seen the Australians playing with a good brand of cricket 
and a very confident brand of cricket naturally because they are winning games.

"It's a very tough thing to do when you are losing games not to worry about 
the outcomes of potentially getting out and these sorts of things.

"That's something we have to do – lose that worry – and know what good players 
we are and be confident in that."

Australia moved to the top of the ODI world rankings on Wednesday, after India 
lost in New Zealand, and with an unassailable 3-0 lead in the series have opted 
to rest four of their key names – the captain Michael Clarke, David Warner, 
Shane Watson and Brad Haddin.

The stand-in captain George Bailey on Thursday conceded this was England's 
best chance to snatch a win, although that did not stop Australia naming their 
starting XI a day early.

In it they were still able to call up three Ashes winners, with Bailey, who 
has overcome a hip problem, Mitchell Johnson and Steve Smith joined by the 
wicketkeeper Matthew Wade.

Given the strength of those names Buttler is not expecting an easy afternoon, 
with temperatures also set to soar for the only day game of the series.

"They still have a pretty strong squad," he said."Everyone who comes into 
their squad is obviously full of confidence because they've been winning games 
of cricket.

"It's going to be another tough game here at the Waca as well. I don't think 
playing Australia in any circumstances is going to be easy.

"We've got to put in a complete performance to win a game and that's something 
we haven't be able to do yet."

Teams for fourth one-day international

England (from): AN Cook (capt), GS Ballance, IR Bell, RS Bopara, TT Bresnan, 
SCJ Broad, DR Briggs, JC Buttler (wkt), MA Carberry, CJ Jordan, EJG Morgan, JE 
Root, BA Stokes, JC Tredwell, CR Woakes.

Australia (confirmed): GJ Bailey (capt), AJ Finch, SE Marsh, SPD Smith, GJ 
Maxwell, MS Wade, DT Christian, JP Faulkner, NM Coulter-Nile, MG Johnson, JL 
Pattinson.

Umpires: K Dharmasena (SL) and J Ward (Aus).

Third umpire: R Martinesz (SL)

Match referee: A Pycroft (Zim)
 