
Supposing someone asked you to find a container the size of a thimble in one 
of England's largest forests – you'd think they were mad. But that's what the 
country's growing army of geocachers do every day.

Described as "a game of hi-tech hide and seek", the sport of geocaching takes 
on a different dimension within acres of woodland, as participants try to 
unearth a hidden cache using GPS. With hollow trunks, exposed roots, twisted 
limbs and curling branches, trees make perfect hiding places for treasure. 
Among dense foliage, it takes a keen eye to discover the spot harbouring a 
robust container, inside which are quirky items left by previous visitors.

For young adventurers, a treasure hunt in a forest fires the imagination. You 
could be Robin Hood or Snow White. What price the sight of a child feeling 
around in a knot hole, the look on their face one of wonder tinged with terror 
as they imagine what might be waiting to meet their probing fingers?

To minimise interference in the natural world, some forests set a maximum 
number of caches – 200, for example, across the New Forest. Others, like Dalby 
in North Yorkshire, offer virtual caches, which is about discovering a location 
rather than a container. The requirements for recording your "visit" may 
involve taking a photograph or completing a set task.

Rules for placing caches in forests vary. In most cases, you can't simply 
tramp in and stick one in a tree stump. Forests must be respected as sensitive 
ecosystems. If you wantto place a cache in Forestry Commission woodland 
<http://www.forestry.gov.uk/forestry/infd-7tabvs>, you'll need to agree the 
location in advance: seebit.ly/18vXpkX <http://www.bit.ly/18vXpkX> for more 
details.

"Geocaching is an activity that all the family can enjoy, so the Forestry 
Commission welcomes responsible geocachers," says Paddy Harrop, the 
commission's recreation and public affairs manager. "Our foresters know the 
areas to avoid, so we ask that people contact their local Forestry Commission 
office before placing a cache. If done without permission, the cache may have 
to be removed."

As well as being respectful of wildlife and plants, geocachers must not 
interrupt other recreational or working activities, and caches must be in a 
safe place for hunters to search. Those looking for caches must respect the 
forest byelaws, but these are pretty much common sense.

For many locations, detailed descriptions of cache sites can be found online. 
Caches vary in size but, whether large or small, finding them is always fun – 
and quite a feat among thousands of trees.
 