
Some people are at home in the countryside: they own walking boots, camping 
gear and waterproofs. That is not me. I like cities: the noisier, the better. 
Unfortunately, not everyone in my family feels the same way – especially my 
young cousins, aged eight and 11, who are learning about the alleged joys of 
the countryside at school.

Before I can argue, we find ourselves sardined into the car one Saturday 
morning (my mum and aunt too), along with borrowed camping gear, packed lunches 
and a giant map, on our way to a campsite in a forest in the middle of East 
Anglia – which sounds like nowhere to me.

At least the weather forecast is for unbroken sunshine. At a service station, 
I double-check I've packed enough antibacterial hand gel and rolls of toilet 
paper. I'm already missing my beloved south London.

The High Lodge centre in Thetford Forest <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/highlodge>
 could hardly offer more of a contrast. Arriving in early afternoon, we head 
straight for the bike rental station. As we get measured up by the lovely team 
at Bike Art, I joke that it's just like a spin class in my local gym. Our bike 
guy smiles and suggests we should probably try the easiest cycle trail. Touché.

Keeping a firm grip on our map of the five-mile Shepherd Trail, we set off – 
and I have to admit, it's blissful. The wind is in my hair, the sunlight's on 
my back, and for once I don't have to worry about cars, lorries and engine 
smoke in my face. I race alongside cousin Mya, who is in her element.

We come to a crossroads. Pointing confidently at the map, I lead us on. The 
trouble is, I haven't got a clue where we are, and we end up near what appears 
to be an army rifle range. I am reduced to using my mobile to call Bike Art 
headquarters, pleading for directions. Thankfully you still get mobile 
reception in the middle of nowhere.

Our not-so-easy ride completed, we drop off our bikes (me shamefacedly) and 
scoff therapeutic ice-creams and lollies. Next up: archery. Whoever knew the 
countryside could be so hectic?

After dishing out protective fingerwear and a quick lesson, our archery guy 
helps Mya and Mikai get their positioning right and take aim ... But while Mya 
was the queen of cycling, it's Mikai who hits the bull's-eye on repeat. 
Nintendo, be proud!

You can also "Go Ape" at High Lodge <http://goape.co.uk/days-out/thetford> on 
a Tree Top Adventure trail, but we restrict ourselves to a quick mess-around on 
the Go ApeForest Segways <http://goape.co.uk/forest-segway>. These 
funny-looking upright machines turn out to be surprisingly easy and fun to use 
– once I realise you have to lean forward to make them go faster.

The young ones still have heaps of energy, but I'm exhausted and demand we 
drive to the nearest fish and chip shop. My appetite is hampered, though, by a 
dread of what's ahead: not so much sleeping in a forest, but putting up our 
tent amid the seasoned campers ofThorpe campsite 
<http://www.campingintheforest.co.uk/england/thorpe-campsite>, on the banks of 
the river Thet.

This Camping in the Forest <http://www.campingintheforest.co.uk/> site 
certainly keeps it real. I'd already been told by Michele Coombes, the site 
manager, to arrive before dusk, as it has no lights. Michele meets us in the 
on-site shop, a quaint place selling basic maps, toilet rolls and sweets. 
There's also the portable toilet that she has put aside for us. We drive 
through to the campsite and start the hilarious task of putting up our tent.

We get the camping rods out and try in vain to figure out where they go, 
feeling increasingly silly at our ignorance. Michele sweetly offers to help, 
but I am too embarrassed to accept (oh, the joy of being English). Between the 
five of us, it takes more than an hour of huffs, puffs and shouting at the 
instructions to get the tent upright. It's not exactly sturdy, but it will do.

Tent stress has worn my mum out; she heads off in search of the nearest hotel. 
We lay out the sleeping bags, have some more snacks, then drop in on Michele 
for a tour of the campsite: she has lived here for four years.

"I love waking up in the morning to the sound of the birds," she says, adding 
that we can expect to see owls, bats, deer and even a kingfisher. (The kids 
jump for joy at this, while I dream of a soft bed and a hot shower.)

"Because it has no facilities," Michele adds, smiling at my discomfort, 
"people come here for the real love of camping, to enjoy nature and the 
wildlife, to explore the woodland and cycle around. The campers are fantastic 
people because they really love the outdoors." And she's right: we've had 
nothing but friendly waves from the other campers, even though we stick out 
like sore thumbs.

Under the disappearing sun, having raced around the open-plan campsite in 
their bare feet, my cousins have finally tired themselves out. They've got 
twigs in their hair and have never looked happier.

We settle in for the night. It's chilly and I'm wishing I'd taken a friend's 
advice about packing pillows. I'm also too afraid to leave the tent in search 
of the nearby portable loo.

I peek outside, and am greeted by a wonderful sight: stars sparkling all 
across the big night sky. I've never seen anything like it in London, and the 
beauty takes my breath away. It's so peaceful too. If only I could bottle up 
all this fresh, clean air and take it back to the city with me.

Camping in the Forest

Camping in the Forest offers a range of pitch types in beautiful Forestry 
Commission locations all over England. Thorpe campsite in Thetford Forest is 
open year round, and theHigh Lodge centre <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/highlodge>
 is open from 9am to 7pm in August.Bike Art <http://www.bikeartthetford.co.uk> 
hires out bikes for all ages and abilities from High Lodge.

www.campingintheforest.co.uk <http://www.campingintheforest.co.uk>
 