
M y two little girls read about forests in their storybooks. We go walking and 
play at Goldilocks. But we're not exactly living off-grid in urban Chester and, 
while we enjoy days out in the forest, we know little about the woodland 
ecosystem. Let's just say that Bear Grylls is not exactly watching his back yet 
for the Atkinson clan.

That's why, with school holidays kicking in, Maya (seven), Olivia (three) and 
I have come toWhinlatter Forest <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/whinlatter> in the 
Lake District, which has healthy communities of red squirrels, roe deer and 
nesting ospreys, for a back-to-nature weekend of forest trails, Lakeland views 
and heaps of fresh air.

Whinlatter, England's only true mountain forest, opened a group of 
family-friendly trails a few years ago to introduce children to basic 
navigational skills, giving them an opportunity to learn about the forest and 
the animals that live in it. By looking for clues or collecting answers along 
the trails, even very young children can interact with their environment and 
find their own way from one interpretation panel to another.

On a sunny day in July, we opt for the Squirrel Scurry trail, a moderate, 
one-mile hike around eight interpretation points. The girls have to read the 
panels and answer questions along the way, writing their answers on the trail 
map to win a squirrel badge. The route is suitable for easily tired toddler 
legs, as well as being accessible by buggy.

Adrian Jones, the Forestry Commission's recreation manager at Whinlatter, 
meets us at the visitor centre for a crash course in map-reading and compass 
points. "I feel free in the forest," he says, leading us towards a trailhead 
marker showing a carved red squirrel. "I started going to the woods with my 
father and grandfather – that's how I became hooked."

As we delve into the deep, dark coniferous forest, Olivia decides we're going 
on a bear hunt. After all, we are walking through a shaded woodland glade 
straight out of a story by Anthony Browne or Michael Rosen. "We can't go over 
it. We can't go under it," she sings. "We've got to go through it."

Maya, meanwhile, is taking charge of directions, folding out the map and 
scouring the horizon for waymarking posts as we head north. "This way," she 
says. "Follow me."

The woodland copse feels deliciously cool, away from the glare of the 
mid-afternoon sun. We savour this sensory forest feast, with pine cones 
crunching under foot, birdlife in the trees and wafts of wildflowers drifting 
by tantalisingly on the summer breeze. As we climb towards panel three, a 
viewpoint known as the Comb, the full panorama opens out before us. From our 
vantage point some 300m above sea level, we gaze out across Keswick and 
Derwentwater below us, and Helvellyn to the south.

Maya locates the panel and makes light work of the questions while Olivia 
busies herself collecting daisies and buttercups from beside the scrunchy, 
gravelly trail. By the time we move on, we've all learned that grey squirrels 
were brought to England from America in the 1870s and that baby squirrels are 
called kittens.

We head towards an intersection of walking and mountain-biking trails, where 
Tarbarrell Moss, one of the more remote sections of Whinlatter, leads deeper 
into the forest. Maya decides we need to turn left, dropping down through 
western red cedars, to duck under a squirrel rope bridge between the treetops.

She confidently leads the way, map in hand, along the final stretch. Even 
Olivia is finding her bearings as I carry her for a higher-level view of forest 
life, attempting to point out species of trees along the way and revealing my 
decidedly patchy knowledge in the process. Memo to self: download the Forestry 
Commission'sForestXplorer <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/mobileapp> app before the 
next trip.

By this point I'm ready for a slap-up dinner and a pint of Jennings Cocker 
Hoop, but the girls have other ideas. After a round of ice-creams at Siskins 
cafe next to the visitor centre, we head back to the WildPlay trail, Olivia 
making a beeline for the Fairy Kingdom section.

We finish the afternoon leaping between toadstools, opening concealed doors in 
the tree stumps, and playing in a tree house, Olivia having set up an alfresco 
cafe to sell Maya's foraged ferns, leaves and berries.

Bear Grylls shouldn't start sweating just yet. But, after a weekend of 
squirrel trails and fairy dust at Whinlatter, we've come to appreciate the 
fragile beauty of the forest and the time we spend together exploring it.

A break in the Lakes

Whinlatter Forest <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/whinlatter> offers a plethora of 
attractions, including miles of walking trails with stunning views across 
Bassenthwaite Lake, Derwent­water and Keswick, plus the longest purpose-built 
mountain-bike trails in the Lake District.

David Atkinson and family stayed at Packhorse Cottage 
<http://www.packhorse-cottage.co.uk> in Low Lorton, three miles from 
Whinlatter; bookings via neighbouringWinder Hall <http://www.winderhall.co.uk>. 
Formerly an inn for pack­horse drivers crossing Whinlatter Pass, it is now 
converted into self-catering accomm­odation and sleeps five.

golakes.co.uk <http://www.golakes.co.uk>
 