
Not since the late 1960s has the gap between imaginative and practical 
politics – the politics of the soul and the politics of the brain – been as 
great as it is today. Most attempts to bridge the gap, as in the 1960s, are 
fantasies, doomed to fail in the short run. Yet the gap is a reprimand. It 
wounds our shared life.

Britain faces this divide in a particularly difficult way. In one part of the 
country,Scotland, the gap between imaginative and practical has narrowed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/11/third-scotland-referendum-radical-left-politics>
. Many Scots feel close to living the political dream. Elsewhere, and in much 
of England in particular, the gap remains immense. The implications of this 
divide for the British project are very threatening.

Faced with the continuing rise of Scottish radical feeling in the old year, 
how should the English progressive respond in sustained ways in the new one? 
The most important answer as 2015 dawns is to respond a lot better than in 
2014. A more romantic answer, stimulated by a visit this week to the current
William Blake exhibition in Oxford’s Ashmolean museum 
<http://www.ashmolean.org/exhibitions/williamblake/>, is for English politics 
to somehow reawaken the spirit of Albion.

This may seem a quixotic suggestion for a country facing a tough and gritty 
general election year. But the 2015 election will be tough and gritty, in part, 
because such questions have been much neglected. The political wing of the 
progressive project in England has become almost wholly detached from the 
imaginative wing. The prospects for a sustained revival of the progressive 
cause in British politics will remain hugely handicapped until the two are 
brought into closer harmony again.

Let us get rid of one issue right away. The rise of Ukip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/may/13/ukip-rise-more-than-blip>
 is not the English equivalent of the rise of the SNP in Scotland.The two 
parties have flourished for some related reasons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jan/01/ukip-snp-greens-labour-conservatives-2015-general-election>
, but no English radical or progressive identifies with Ukip in the same way 
that so many Scottish radicals and progressives have currently embraced the 
SNP. Those who pretend that Ukip is in some sense the true voice of English 
feeling and of the English disadvantaged are deluding themselves, and us.

How, though, does a distinctively English radicalism find an authentic voice 
which can simultaneously offer a coherent alternative account to Ukip south of 
the border,reanimate the English progressive movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/may/15/nationalism-scotland-redefine-englishness-britain-england>
 from liberal across to labour in the way that nationalism has done in 
Scotland, but at the same time speak across the border to Scotland in 
non-nationalist terms which make shared sense within a working British state?

This is a big question, largely unaddressed by civic England, insofar as such 
a thing can be said to exist. Getting the answer right matters enormously for 
the future of shared English life. But it also matters because the English 
progressive tradition urgently needs to find a way of communicating 
convincingly withScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> – and Wales 
and both parts of Ireland too – in shared not confrontational terms. Without 
this, the nationalist fantasy – that Scotland’s problems will be solved by 
throwing off the English yoke – will only prosper.

English progressivism has failed to find a true and consistent voice of its 
own for two main reasons. The first is because too many now see thesolution to 
the UK’s disjunctions in purely instrumental terms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/21/guardian-view-devolution-parliament-for-england>
. Give England its own parliament, say some. Regional devolution is the answer, 
say others. Revive local government. Cap it with a federal upper house at 
Westminster. Once this is done, the argument runs, the current constitutional 
and democratic asymmetries — and the grievances to which they give rise — will 
have been dealt with.

This isn’t wholly wrong. A version of it is largely right. But the problem 
facing English life is not primarily constitutional. It will not be solved even 
by the most perfectly designed systems of government. The larger problem facing 
civic England is cultural and imaginative. It is about better articulating 
English feeling in a progressive, open and modern yet vernacular way – if such 
a thing can be done – and then reuniting it with practical, achievable politics.

English progressivism is confused about this. It fears that English feeling 
is, not very deep down, reactionary and supremacist. It fears that attempts to 
give England a national voice will be eclipsed by dark forms of Englishness 
that are marked by racism and xenophobia, and by post-imperial and triumphalist 
nationalism. Progressivism fears the lordly and the lumpen alike. But it also 
fears the rural and parochial.

These issues cannot be merely wished away. But the choice facing English 
progressives is whether to bow the knee, and accept that the English people are 
part of the problem; or whether, bit by bit and by an imaginative effort, to 
promote a different better and richer national feeling in which the English 
people are part of the answer. Which is where Blake and the spirit of Albion 
come in.

Blake himself does not provide the whole answer. But he stands, in this 
argument, for a tradition that matters. He possessed in spades the things 
without which any progressive project will always eventually founder. He had an 
imagination. He was a dreamer. He was impassioned. He loved the land as well as 
the city. The injustices of the world caused him to weep and made him eloquent. 
He was a rooted and historically aware English radical. And yet politics was 
not the focus of his rich life.

True, Blake was a man of his times, not ours. True, he was a one-off. True, 
his visionary world was expressed in myriad ways that were wholly his own. He 
was as far from being a practical politician as it is possible to be. You would 
never want him to run the railways or the NHS. Yet he had a vision of humanity 
that still connects to the digital age. What Blake embodies more than anything 
else is politics as a form of religious faith, not politics as system or 
science.

We inhabit a world in which politics is calculated, targeted and practical, 
constrained by the possible, fearful of failure and inevitably modest in its 
goals. Blake stands for a completely different, idealised vision of politics. 
He is the poet of that part of the progressive organism that dreams of heaven 
on Earth, building the new Jerusalem, the new moral world and a restored Albion 
of free and equal imaginations.

In one sense, well articulated by Tony Blair this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/dec/30/tony-blair-ed-miliband-general-election-labour>
, all this has nothing whatever to do with success in practical politics. 
Blake’s visions won’t win the election. Yet without some form of that vision, 
practical politics is as dry and distant as so many now believe. Without the 
dream of Albion, how can England arise and Britain come together again in the 
common cause?
 