
We humans may have come down from the trees to walk upright across the 
savannah, but we've been aching to get back up into them ever since. It's so 
deep-rooted in our DNA that it's useless to fight it. I know this from my own 
experience.

At the age of 15 months, I was abandoned under a damson tree (by accident, so 
my mother contends). When rescued some while later, I was apparently the soul 
of contentment, gazing up into the branches with a wistful look on my face. I 
was clearly thinking, "Now, if I put my left foot in that little crookthere, 
and my right foot on that branchthere, I could pull myself up and get right up 
there! A pity my arms are all podgy and I have no real upper-body strength to 
speak of. I must work on that."

So began a childhood of summertime tree climbing – in parks, woods, forests, 
the back gardens of friends' houses, if there was a tree I was up it. And not 
just me – there can hardly be an adult in England today who hasn't had a go at 
some time or other.

Trees are, after all, nature's ladders into the sky. Climb one and you enter 
not only a whole new world, where bark and branches and leaves are suddenly in 
your face, but also an excitingly alien environment to which you must quickly 
adapt. There's no walking or swimming here, so you must learn to move 
differently, to plan your route up (and, perhaps more importantly, down) – and 
to remember to stop occasionally, to revel in the completely different 
perspective on the world that being in a tree gives you.

There's also an element of danger, of course, but getting the adrenaline 
fizzing around is all part of the fun. When he was 11, my brother came a 
cropper while on a family outing and, as he tells it, "hurtled directly 
earthwards, pausing only to lacerate myself as best I could on the sharpest 
bits of the tree through which I plummeted".

But he lived to tell the tale and, in our risk-averse society, it's 
nonetheless refreshing to go out on a limb occasionally. What better way to do 
that than by literally going out on a limb?

Now that I'm a boring old grown-up, I've become a little less daring than in 
my agile, devil-may-care youth. I'm rather more prone to test branches first to 
see if they're rotten or liable to snap beneath my weight. I'm also more 
content to sit quietly in a lower branch with a good book, particularly if 
there's a splashing stream underneath and some sunshine to dapple my skin.

But then, that's another great thing about tree climbing: it's not a 
competition, it's just you and the tree. And if Earth can supply a greater joy 
than that of catching the shocked look in a squirrel's eyes when he sees you up 
in the branches, I've yet to discover it.

How to climb safely


When in deciduous woods, seek out oaks, sycamores and, while we still have 
them, ashes. These are all sturdy trees when mature, and have branches at close 
enough intervals to allow safe passage up them. Avoid poplars, horse chestnuts 
and willows.

As a rule of thumb, fast-growing trees produce weaker branches. As for 
evergreens, some – like the monkey puzzle tree – positively scream out, "Don't 
climb me!" Conifers with weedy branches and sharp needles make for short-lived 
sport too. However, cedars of Lebanon, with their thick-spreading boughs, can 
often be good for horizontal as well as vertical climbing.

The Forest of Dean <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/forestofdean> in 
Gloucestershire is England's largest oak forest, while down south, theNew Forest
 <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/forestry/infd-6a5kvg> boasts some of the most 
famous old oaks in the country. Woodland in the north of England is often 
dominated by conifers, but North Yorkshire'sDalby Forest 
<http://www.forestry.gov.uk/dalbyforest> also prides itself on its plentiful 
ashes and oaks.

You could do worse than check out the grounds of stately homes for cedars of 
Lebanon, whereas you'll find sycamore trees pretty much anywhere (so much so, 
in fact, that some regard them as "weeds" that need to be removed). All I know 
is, if you spot their helicopter-like seeds, you should be in for some good 
climbing.

Have fun – and remember: it's almost always easier to climb up than to climb 
down. Ask any cat.
 