
There is a particularly good bit in John Updike's stories about Henry Bech 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Henry_Bech>, a fictional New York novelist who 
writes a great first book and then spends the decades that follow in a state of 
grand creative paralysis, strolling from glamorous literary event to TV 
talk-show couch. Eventually Bech is shipped off to a Caribbean resort to sign 
thousands of collector copies of the novel he wrote 30 years ago.

After spending hours inscribing case after case of hardbacks, Bech begins to 
fade. His "b" disintegrates. Then his "e" goes. Finally, pen dangling from his 
cramped and rheumatic fingers, Bech realises, with a sigh of satisfaction, that 
he has finally reached the logical end point of the blocked writer. He cannot 
even write his own name.

On the face of it this does not have a lot to do with the specialised 
mechanical discipline that is fast bowling, or indeed the career of Steven 
Finn, England's own talented, statistically prodigious 
man-of-the-moment-before-last, whose falling away from the front rank is one of 
the more puzzling base notes of a generally puzzling tour of Australia. The 
ballad ofSteven Finn <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/steven-finn> is, in 
outline, a narrative of disappearance.

Two years ago he made a spectacular breakthrough, bowling with effortless 
menace against Pakistan in the Emirates, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2012/feb/14/alastair-cook-england-pakistan>
 looking like one of the best young fast bowlers in the world and seeming set 
inexorably on an upward sporting trajectory.

Or not, as it turned out. On the present tour 13 Englishmen have sent down 
5,368 deliveries to Australia's batsmen – and Finn has not bowled a single one.

Last week at practice in Melbourne he could be seen sidling in to bowl at 
three-quarter speed in an empty net. A bit later Finn and Alastair Cook spent a 
few minutes running though the basic business of turning the bowling arm over 
in a straight-arm arc.

Sport moves in cycles, and form and technical issues come and go but it is not 
supposed to look like this. Finn is 6ft 7in tall and can bowl at 90mph but now 
he appears to be an athlete drained of all joy and certainty, providing more 
evidence that not only does the wheel crush the butterfly, it can also flatten 
beneath its year-round rolling juggernaut the likeable north London beanpole 
pace bowler.

There has been a rush to blame somebody for this. The most widely rehearsed 
version of events has Finn as a kind of fast-bowling Helen of Troy, tossed back 
and forth between the conflicting authorities of England's bowling coach David 
Saker and Angus Fraser at Middlesex.

And yet somehow this does not quite ring true. These are good men who know an 
awful lot about bowling. It is hard to see how this – an excess of expert 
independent advice – should add up to such a profound professional derailing. 
It is also tempting to consider the wider human question of why this sort of 
thing doesn't happen more often. It is a sign of how startlingly streamlined 
and resilient sports people are that they are able to run in and keep doing 
this stuff, not only on their best days but even in humiliating adversity, even 
when, as with Henry Bech, a normal human being might be drained into a state of 
stage-struck flaccidity. This has been part of the brilliant surprise of Ben 
Stokes in Australia, the sense that here is someone utterly immersed in the 
moment, hurling in to bowl in an Ashes Test the same way he might if he was 
alone in a forest clearing hurling a peach at a tree stump. Successful sports 
people are like this: preternaturally tough, stitched together out of shark 
hide and flameproof nylon weave. It is when they are no longer slightly mad in 
this way that they start to look troublingly human and frail.

At times like these there is usually whispered talk about the dreaded yips, a 
phrase coined by Scottish golfer Tommy Armour to describe the sudden inability 
to perform previously automatic fine motor skills. The word on Finn is that he 
simply has a specific technical problem to resolve with his bowling action but 
perhaps he might be better treating this as a case of the yips, if only because 
one treatment for this mystifying condition is just to do everything 
differently, to chuck it all out of the window and to rebel completely.

Finn is an intelligent man but there is a suspicion he has been too receptive 
to influence, that a bowler who was not really broken – Finn was dropped most 
recently after taking 40 wickets in his past 11 Test matches – has been broken 
by being needlessly fixed many times over. As with so many others, Finn has 
worn the sacred blue nylon of the ECB ranks every year at various levels since 
the age of 16.

The fear is that players of his generation can become infantilised, as 
mechanically dependant as infuriatingly over-dressed modern cars, with their 
electronically variable valve-timing, their six months in the workshop to 
recalibrate the flux capacitor that powers the wing mirror hinge. For now, the 
expert advice has not worked. So how about some non-expert advice: let's not 
have any more advice. None of this lasts for ever. Finn will be 25 before 
England's next Test series starts.

These prime years of strength and flexibility are a precious commodity. Maybe 
he simply needs to let it all go for a bit, to listen to three hours of 
Norwegian speed metal, take his run-up back to the sight screen and run in and 
bowl as fast as he can, however he can, just asBob Willis did at Headingly in 
1981 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/01/20-great-ashes-moments-edgbaston-1981>
when Mike Brearley suggested he forget about bowling no-balls, just run in and 
whang it down.

Who knows, it might just do for now, or at least it might do better than lying 
around looking like a sad, gangly lion being forced to sit down to tea with a 
ruff around its neck. There is no doubt that Finn can cast off his leg irons 
and come again.

Bowlers come again, as James Anderson and Mitchell Johnson both did. Finn has 
the physical gifts and the brains but he appears to have been frazzled and worn 
down, shunted into a siding by circumstance.

For now, he looks in his frozen state – and this is the only real comparison 
with writing and poor old Henry Bech – a man with too many voices in his head.
 