
Volunteers and local communities are the life blood of our forests. Some of 
the remarkable projects initiated at Forestry Commission sites in the past few 
years – from the reopening of the 16-mileBlue Man Walk 
<http://www.forestry.gov.uk/forestry/englandnorthyorkshirenoforestbroxareastybankthebluemanwalk>
 through the forests of Dalby, Broxa and Langdale, to the inspiringCannock Chase
 <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/cannockforest> Route To Health – have been the 
direct outcome of partnerships between the commission, the local authority and 
members of the public.

Following in the footsteps of medieval rabbit keepers? "Greening" walls? 
Designing and building your own forest benches? Getting involved in the forest 
can take many shapes and forms.

Most volunteering programmes are directed at local communities: "It's 
important to us that local people feel it's their forest, here for them," says 
the Forestry Commission's Frances Evershed at Thetford Forest in Norfolk. "They 
can contribute so much, and the more they are involved, the healthier the 
forest itself."

Local support might take the form of a "friends of" group, such as the Friends 
of Dalby Forest, which raises money and has regular volunteer days. At Dalby, 
volunteers have repainted bird hides and installed willow tunnels. In May they 
spent a day cutting back vegetation as part of a project to restore the Blue 
Man Walk across the North Yorkshire moors between Reasty Bank and Allerston.

The areas where volunteers can get involved range from archaeology through 
mountain-bike trail-building to conservation. In Thetford there is a 
long-running project to recover as much as possible of the medieval warren 
lodges; these were the homes in which so-called warreners lived as they carried 
out their daily work of protecting nearby rabbit warrens.

"You've got to imagine in those days, with no supermarket up the road, rabbits 
would have been such a valuable product," Frances explains.

There are plenty of projects that would be delighted to welcome another pair 
of hands on their volunteer days. If mountain biking is your thing and you 
fancy having a go at helping to build a course, then you might want to contact 
the Hamsterley Trailblazers in County Durham. This local group was formed with 
the purpose of making Hamsterley "a magnet for MTB riders of all abilities"; 
members meet at least once a month to improve old trails and plan new ones.

If you're more interested in conservation, then the Woodland Workout 
<http://www.forestry.gov.uk/forestry/INFD-7XQF9M> in Lincolnshire may be for 
you. It involves activities such as restoring heathland, burning brash – 
cuttings left over from wood management – digging ditches, path widening, 
coppicing, scrub clearance, fence removal and pond maintenance. Volunteers meet 
in Osgodby Wood near Market Rasen and at Great West Wood near Wragby a few 
times a month.

Other volunteer-focused projects have explored the link between the forests 
and our mental wellbeing. To develop the Route To Health at Cannock Chase, the 
Forestry Commission collaborated with the local district council and primary 
care trust. Participants included members of a local youth group which was 
targeted at children excluded from school, residents from an adult 
mental-health rehab centre, and a young offenders group.

They designed and built their own artworks along a one-mile community arts 
trail. Several groups were asked to design benches so that the trail could be 
accessible for as many people as possible. The hard work put in by these 
volunteers has resulted in a tenfold increase in visitors to the area since the 
project began.

Get people into the forest, and it will begin to work its magic. That's the 
philosophy.
 