
In 1660, the Stuart court that returned from the continent with Charles II 
brought more than restoration, merriment and a yearning for the old ways. It 
brought a taste for Dutch and French architecture. The English Renaissance, 
begun haltingly under Queen Elizabeth, reborn under Inigo Jones but repressed 
during the interregnum, now found its feet.

It was not easy. The mannerist classicism of the Jacobean era was still 
associated with "old England", largely in decoration. Medieval halls and gabled 
roofs were still being erected or adapted by landed gentry into the 1660s. But 
people who had spent two decades in the palaces of Paris and The Hague returned 
to estates that had seen little renewal in half a century. The zest for the new 
was irresistible.

First off the blocks was the Earl of Craven, who built ostentatious Ashdown 
House in the Berkshire Downs for Charles I's sister. A tall, symmetrical 
building, with wide eaves and a cupola – utterly Dutch. It was a style that 
came to be known variously as Restoration, William-and-Mary and Queen Anne.

Charles II was determined to match his French counterpart, Louis XIV, in 
extravagant ambition. In addition to royal palaces already built or under 
construction at Richmond, Whitehall and Greenwich, new ones were planned for 
Kensington and, Charles's answer to Versailles, Winchester. Where the king 
built, his court expected to follow.

Charles's presiding genius was the mathematician, scientist and polymath Sir 
Christopher Wren. Wren was already planning the rebuilding of the gothic St 
Paul's Cathedral when, in 1666, it was destroyed in the Great Fire of London. 
His design for its replacement illustrates the ambivalence of the English 
Restoration: a classical Renaissance base topped by mildly baroque west towers 
and dome, designed to float across the rooftops of London.

By then, sumptuous court mansions were dotting the English countryside, either 
new (such as those at Belton, Dyrham, Eltham and Uppark) or conversions (such 
as Ham on the Thames near Richmond). These houses, while big, were domestic in 
character. They respected the understatement of their Dutch models. It was as 
if the Restoration could not quite shake off the puritanism of the Commonwealth.

Greater flamboyance came from France. At Boughton (1678) in Northamptonshire, 
the Duke of Montagu converted a medieval hall house into a grand Parisian 
chateau set in splendid grounds. At Petworth (1682) in Sussex the Duke of 
Somerset created a similarly elongated facade, more appropriate for the banks 
of the Loire.

The toppling of James I in 1688 and the arrival of William of Orange increased 
the tempo of continental imports. For all his supposed modesty, William was a 
frantic builder, extending both Kensington Palace and Hampton Court, the latter 
with twin sets of stairs and state rooms for himself and his joint-monarch, 
Mary.

Under Queen Anne this imported classicism broke free, to emerge as a 
distinctly English baroque. Its masters were the elderly Wren, John Vanbrugh 
and Nicholas Hawksmoor. Wren's extension of Greenwich Palace, begun in 1664 by 
John Webb and then continued by Hawksmoor as the new naval hospital, gave the 
river approach to London a truly baroquecoup de theatre. Vanbrugh's palace for 
the Duke of Marlborough at Blenheim was equalled in splendour only by 
Hawksmoor's Castle Howard in Yorkshire. It was England's princes rather than 
kings who were to mimic the French Sun King.

Ecclesiastical building in this period was modest. The Tudors had built 
churches aplenty, so much so that a century later the Church of England needed 
no more capacity, and was anyway under assault from rising nonconformity. Only 
in the post-fire City did Wren and his colleagues produce a series of miniature 
essays in confined architecture. St Magnus Martyr, St Bride's and St Stephen 
Walbrook rivalled the churches of Rome, while to the west, James Gibbs's St 
Mary le Strand and St Martin-in-the-Fields maintained the standard. So did the 
so-called churches of Queen Anne's bounty, such as Hawksmoor's majestic Christ 
Church at Spitalfields.

No sooner was a glimmer of English flamboyance displayed than it was 
extinguished. Wren and his contemporaries were soon being ridiculed by 
stylistic young turks back from the Grand Tour, led by Lord Burlington and his 
proteges William Kent and Colen Campbell. Eager to re-establish the canons of 
Italianate taste, they fashioned the Georgian house, terrace and church from 
the Renaissance rather than the baroque. The hour of Blenheim had passed.

• Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnist and the author of England's Thousand 
Best Houses. He has been the chairman of the National Trust since 2008

Three era-defining events


1660: Restoration of the monarchy

Charles II ascends to the throne and a new wave of baroque architecture 
follows in the aftermath of the Great Fire of London of 1666.

1687: Isaac Newton's Philisophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica 

The publication of this world-changing book advances science by explaining 
gravity and the three laws of motion.

1694: Birth of the Bank of England 

Britain's economic grasp reaches out to the world as London's population tops 
500,000. The Bank's first role is to rebuild the  Royal Navy.
 