
W hen I was a boy, Bedgebury Forest <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/bedgebury> was 
nothing less than the wild, wild west of Jesse James, Doc Holliday and Colonel 
Custer. It was also home to King Arthur's Knights of the Round Table, Robin 
Hood and his Merry Men, and the dashing D'Artagnan, friend of the Three 
Musketeers.

In truth, Bedgebury is a 1,000-hectare forest sprawling along the borders of 
Kent and East Sussex, known as one of the "seven wonders of the Weald". I grew 
up barely a mile away in the early 1970s, and it was a rare day during the 
holidays that I didn't find myself trotting up Delmonden Lane on my grey 
Connemara pony, Winter Magic, anxious for adventure in the ancient woodland.

Living deep in the country, and as an only child who went away to boarding 
school, I had few local friends and so often relied on our rescue dog, Lucy, 
and (before he disgraced himself) our knackered, flatulent old donkey, Ned 
Kelly, for company. We were a motley crew: me – only just 12 – on Magic, with 
Ned behind on a leading rein and Lucy in front, barely under control. 
Occasionally Mabel the tortoiseshell cat would join us, although she rarely 
made it to the forest, peeling off to chase mice or chat to the tom at the top 
of the lane. And just in case we fell among the Cheyenne or the Sheriff of 
Nottingham's men, I would be tooled up with my air pistol ("If you shoot your 
mother, I'll take it away from you," warned my father) and trusty catapult.

Only the A268 Flimwell-Hawkhurst road stood between the end of the lane and 
the start of the forest, but it was a serious challenge getting us all across. 
On one ghastly occasion, Lucy scampered over safely and Magic and I almost made 
it when Ned decided to have a bit of a lie down. He drew in three enormous 
breaths, paused, then let out three loud and noxious farts before collapsing in 
a heap, slap bang in the middle of the road.

I had to dismount, catch Lucy, tether Magic and abase myself in front of 
motorists before beseeching Ned to shift his scabby arse. It was a full 20 
minutes before the wretched animal decided he'd had enough, whereupon he got up 
and ambled to the verge as if nothing had happened. I never took him with me 
again.

Magic, Lucy and I, however, continued our daily visits. The forest belonged to 
us, and I never tired of trotting and cantering (strictly forbidden) along its 
many paths and bridleways. We hardly ever saw anyone else except the occasional 
dog walker, and were left completely alone to re-enact the Charge of the Light 
Brigade or Custer's Last Stand.

Sometimes I simply enjoyed being in the forest. There were bluebells to admire 
in spring and mushrooms to pick in autumn; there were pheasants and woodpeckers 
to spot and (utterly, utterly forbidden) gates to be jumped. For a 12-year-old 
boy temporarily free of parental rule, it was sheer bliss.

You can still ride in Bedgebury today, albeit under slightly stricter control 
and with aTrot permit <http://www.tollrides.org.uk/>, available from the Toll 
Rides (Off-Road) Trust. Nor is there any shortage of other Forestry Commission 
sites in which to saddle up and move on out. The West Country is particularly 
blessed, with Cookworthy Forest near Bude,Haldon Forest Park 
<http://www.forestry.gov.uk/haldonforestpark> near Exeter and Great Wood 
<http://www.forestry.gov.uk/website/wildwoods.nsf/LUWebDocsByKey/EnglandSomersetNoForestGreatWood>
 in the Quantock Hills. No permits are needed for any of these. In Cheshire,
Delamere Forest Park 
<http://www.forestry.gov.uk/forestry/EnglandCheshireNoForestDelamereForestPark> 
boasts a fine 22-mile route, whileHamsterley Forest 
<http://www.forestry.gov.uk/hamsterleyforest> in County Durham is also well 
worth exploring on horseback.

I'm a true townie now and my equestrian skills are somewhat rusty, but without 
Magic and Bedgebury I would not have ridden with gauchos in Patagonia, cowboys 
in Missouri, shepherds in New Zealand and – most bizarrely – Rastafarians in St 
Lucia. For real, not just in my forest-induced imagination.
 