
"He is one of my favourites... he is a class act." When Viv Richards rates a 
batsman, it's fair to say that he may have something, and it's hard to argue 
with the great man when considering the extraordinary hand-eye talents of Jos 
Buttler. Richards was one of the first players to walk outside his off stump to 
the faster bowlers and flick the ball from his toes to the fine leg boundary. 
Buttler plays a new-age, supercharged version of the same shot, and perhaps 
Richards recognises his fearlessness. Buttler, in this early phase of his 
international career, either dominates or gets out.

In the generational turnover of talent England are in a downward cycle, and 
it's compounded by their rigid perception of what that talent should look like. 
A new way is coming, and it's only natural that players will make themselves 
known in a different manner – David Warner and Steve Smith are at the leading 
edge of the phenomenon.

England cannot afford to waste Jos Buttler, and by encouraging him to keep 
wicket they are not adding to his value but confining it. He should give it up. 
Anyone wanting to bat seriously in the top order in Test cricket can't keep 
wicket too. The matches are too close together, the series condensed by the 
demands of other formats. Even the masterly AB De Villiers can get no higher 
than five with the gloves, and, like Kumar Sangakkara, he's surely going to 
jettison them soon.

Buttler is a long way removed from such company but there is a glint of 
something special, as Richards has said. England have tacitly acknowledged an 
impending future of prosaic batting in their urge to haveEoin Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/eoin-morgan> play Test cricket again. A top 
order that one day contains him and Buttler crackles in a different way.

The only prosaic part of Buttler's game is his keeping. It's painful to watch 
his unsuitable physique put through its stresses and his restrained character 
forced into its cheerleader role. The real giveaway though, is the sound. The 
ball whispers its way into the gloves of a natural keeper. In the West Indies, 
outfield throws smacked into Buttler's and then shivered uncomfortably down the 
stump mics.

England have an odd attitude to keepers. For a side that believes in the 
advantage of marginal gains, they don't see them as coming from behind the 
sticks (I have an alternative theory 
<http://theoldbatsman.blogspot.co.uk/2013/01/taylor-bates-and-future-of-keeping.html>
). Graeme Swann, just out of the dressing room, probably gave away the current 
view on Buttler's position when he said on radio last week: "Jos Buttler is not 
ready for the Test side as a keeper or a batsman. Jos needs two or three years 
with Lancashire. I think it could set him back to throw him in now."

This at least is true. He should be offered the chance to fulfill his 
potential as a batsman, starting with a season of opportunity in first class 
cricket along with his international white ball commitments. England need to 
look again at Craig Kieswetter and also Steve Davies, who might become 
genuinely effective at seven in Test cricket and who are far superior keepers.

Most of all, Andy Flower <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andy-flower>, in 
his position of almost unprecedented influence over coaching and theory, could 
think hard about exactly how the new generation of batsman are going to 
manifest themselves. It will almost certainly be in T20 cricket and the 
criteria for judging Test match potential should shift along with that.

There will always be the likes of de Villiers, Virat Kohli, Sangakkara and 
Cheteshwar Pujara, who are to the manor born. But the last decade has brought
Kevin Pietersen <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kevin-pietersen>, Warner, 
Steve Smith, Morgan, Shikhar Dhawan and others that began far less 
conventionally.

When the notion of Warner wearing the baggy green was inducing not only 
ridicule but indignance, Virender Sehwag, avatar of modern batsmanship, said 
that he'd be a better Test player than he was a T20 hitter. "All the fielders 
are around the bat," Sehwag told Warner. "If the ball's there in your zone, 
you're still going to hit it. You're going to have ample opportunities to score 
runs. You've always got to respect the good ball, but you've got to punish the 
ball you always punish."

He wasn't far wrong, was he? It's not a bad place for Buttler and Flower to 
begin.

• This blog first appeared on The Old Batsman 
<http://theoldbatsman.blogspot.co.uk/>
• Follow The Old Batsman on Twitter <https://twitter.com/theoldbatsman>
• Follow Guardian Sport on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiansport>
 