
Fifty years ago, an obscure historian working in the extra-mural department at 
the University of Leeds delivered a manuscript, overdue and over-length, to 
Victor Gollancz – a publishing house then specialising in socialist and 
internationalist non-fiction. No one could have foreseen the book's reception.
EP Thompson 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-e-p-thompson-1464255.html>'s 
The Making of the English Working Class 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/history/9780140136036/the-making-of-the-english-working-class>
 became a runaway commercial and critical success. The demand for this 800-page 
doorstop was nothing short of remarkable. In 1968, Pelican Books bought the 
rights toThe Making and published a revised version as the 1,000th book on 
their list. In less than a decade, it had gone through a further five reprints. 
Fifty years on, it is still in print, widely revered as a canonical work 
of social history.

It was not Thompson's first book. A history of William Morris had appeared in 
1955, and had been met with the indifference that is the fate of most academic 
monographs. AfterThe Making came Whigs & Hunters, a book on the Black Acts – 
the notorious Georgian legislation that criminalised not only the killing of 
deer, but also any suspicious activity that might hint at the intention to kill 
deer. This was followed by a series of colourful essays on diverse themes, 
including time and industrial capitalism, food riots, and wife sales (yes, in 
the 18th century men really did take their wives to market and "sell" them). 
Time and again, Thompson proved himself capable of taking on new topics and 
revisiting old ones in new ways, creating a body of work that was original and 
hugely influential.

And yet Thompson was never a conventional historian. His many years at Leeds 
were spent not in the history department, but in adult education. His tenure at 
the newly created University of Warwick was brief: he resigned just six years 
after taking up the post, disgusted at the commercial turn it was taking. Ever 
the man of letters, his resignation was accompanied by a lengthy pamphlet 
outlining his intellectual objections. The rest of his life was devoted to a 
range of political causes. Thompson was an active member of the Communist party 
in the 40s and 50s, and founder of the Communist Party Historians Group in 
1946. He was part of the mass exodus from the party in the 1950s following the 
Soviet invasion of Hungary, but remained closely allied with a range of 
leftwing movements. By the end of the 1970s, Thompson was playing a key role, 
as both tireless organiser and intellectual figurehead, in the nascent peace 
movement, a cause to which he remained devoted until his death in 1993. It was 
a life of activism no less than of scholarship.

But towering above it all remains The Making 
<http://www.historyworkshop.org.uk/the-making-of-the-english-working-class-fifty-years-on/>
, with its preface so memorably declaring the book's intention "to rescue the 
poor stockinger, the Luddite cropper, the 'obsolete' hand-loom weaver, the 
'Utopian' artisan, and even the deluded follower of Joanna Southcott, from the 
enormous condescension of posterity". The book's mythic status should not 
distract us from the raw originality of the work. In 1963, weavers and artisans 
were not the stuff of history books. Pioneering social historians had been 
studying working people since the early 20th century, but the focus remained 
squarely on the tangible, the measurable, the "significant" – wages, living 
conditions, unions, strikes, Chartists. Thompson touched on the trade unions 
and the real wage, of course, but most of his book was devoted to something 
that he referred to as "experience". Through a patient and extensive 
examination of local as well as national archives, Thompson had uncovered 
details about workshop customs and rituals, failed conspiracies, threatening 
letters, popular songs, and union club cards. He took what others had regarded 
as scraps from the archive and interrogated them for what they told us about 
the beliefs and aims of those who were not on the winning side. Here, then, was 
a book that rambled over aspects of human experience that had never before had 
their historian. And the timing of its appearance could scarcely have been more 
fortunate. The 1960s saw unprecedented upheaval and expansion in the university 
sector, with the creation of new universities filled with lecturers and 
students whose families had not traditionally had access to the privileged 
world of higher education. Little wonder, then, that so many felt a natural 
affinity with Thompson's outsiders and underdogs.

And there was something more. Running through The Making was a searing anger 
about economic exploitation and a robust commentary on his capitalist times. 
Thompson rejected the notion that capitalism was inherently superior to the 
alternative model of economic organisation it replaced. He refused to accept 
that artisans had become obsolete, or that their distress was a painful but 
necessary adjustment to the market economy. It was an argument that resonated 
widely in the 1960s, when Marxist intellectuals could still believe that 
a realistic alternative to capitalism existed, could still argue that "true" 
Marxism hadn't been tried properly.

Appearing in the heyday of Marxist scholarship, The Making's political 
framework lay at the heart of the book's success. Perhaps its greatest 
achievement, however, is how it has managed to weather Marxism's subsequent 
fall from academic grace. By the 1980s, Marxist history no longer held a 
significant place in academic history departments. It has been on the defensive 
ever since. Surveying the literary spat between Thompson and the Polish 
philosopher, Leszek Kołakowski – who, after years of living under Communism, 
had had the temerity to desert the Marxist banner –Tony Judt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/tony-judt> observed: "No one who reads it 
will ever take EP Thompson seriously again." And yet we do still take Thompson 
seriously. More than any of his books,The Making continues to delight and 
inspire new readers. Of course, Thompson's scholarship was partial and driven 
by his politics. But the originality, vigour and iconoclasm of his book make 
certain that it will endure.

• Emma Griffin's Liberty's Dawn: A People's History of the Industrial 
Revolution <http://yalebooks.co.uk/display.asp?K=9780300151800> will be 
published by Yale later this month.

• This article was amended on 6 March 2013. The original said Stalin invaded 
Hungary. This has been corrected.
 