
As with so much in science, this story owes a lot to mice. The tale begins 
with a pregnant mouse in a laboratory in Boston, Massachusetts. Such is the 
unfortunate lot of a lab rodent that she was kept on a near-starvation diet 
when she was close to giving birth. As scientists expected, her babies were 
born smaller than usual. When they were raised normally, they later developed 
diabetes.

Now comes the twist. Even though these mice were well fed, their own young 
were also born unusually small and with a higher risk of diabetes. This was 
strange, because nothing had changed genetically and they hadn't suffered any 
problems in the womb or after they were born. They should have been perfectly 
healthy.

This puzzling study, published last month, echoes many performed on mice, 
worms and plants in the past few years in the name of a relatively young branch 
of science calledepigenetics <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Epigenetics>. In 
seeking to answer that eternal question of nature versus nurture – does our 
upbringing shape us or do our genes? – this field has radically introduced a 
mysterious third element into the mix: the life experience of previous 
generations.

There are many definitions of epigenetics, but simply put, says Professor 
Marcus Pembrey 
<http://www.bris.ac.uk/social-community-medicine/people/marcus-e-pembrey/index.html>
, a geneticist at University College London and the University of Bristol, it 
is a change in our genetic activity without changing our genetic code. It is a 
process that happens throughout our lives and is normal to development. 
Chemical tags get attached to our genetic code, like bookmarks in the pages of 
a book, signalling to our bodies which genes to ignore and which to use.

For decades, we have thought of our offspring as blank slates. Now, 
epigeneticists are asking whether in fact our environment, from smoking and 
diet to pollution and war, can leave "epigenetic marks" on our DNA that could 
get passed on to subsequent generations. They call the phenomenon epigenetic 
inheritance.

Until recently, most scientists assumed that whatever epigenetic marks we 
accrued during our lives were erased in our children. Embryos are known to be 
reprogrammed in the womb. "For something to be transmitted epigenetically from 
one generation to the next, it would have to resist this reprogramming," says
Professor Anne Ferguson-Smith 
<http://www.neuroscience.cam.ac.uk/directory/profile.php?afsmith>, a geneticist 
at the University of Cambridge who ran the pregnant mouse study with her 
colleagues in Boston.

The notion that babies may retain some parental baggage has enormous 
repercussions for child development and evolution. Parents could suddenly find 
themselves responsible for passing on not only their poor genes, but also their 
poor lifestyles. And instead of adapting to our environments slowly over many 
generations, we may be doing it much, much faster. Some have even breathlessly 
suggested that Charles Darwin's theories will need to be rewritten.

Before you throw out your biology textbooks, however, Ferguson-Smith warns 
that transgenerational epigenetic experiments are difficult to perform and can 
be misinterpreted. "Journals are very excited about this. They want to publish 
this stuff. But we must be more cautious," she says. The basic problem is that 
researchers, including herself, still don't understand the scientific mechanism 
behind epigenetic inheritance, which would explain exactly how it happens.

Professor Azim Surani <http://www.gurdon.cam.ac.uk/research/surani>, a leading 
developmental biologist and geneticist at the University of Cambridge, adds 
that while there is good evidence that epigenetic inheritance happens in plants 
and worms, mammals have very different biology. Surani's lab carried out 
thorough studies on how epigenetic information was erased in developing mouse 
embryos and found that "surprisingly little gets through" the reprogramming 
process.

Professor Timothy Bestor 
<http://asp.cumc.columbia.edu/facdb/profile_list.asp?DepAffil=Genetics&uni=thb12>
, a geneticist at Columbia University in New York, is far more damning, 
claiming that the entire field has been grossly overhyped. "It's an extremely 
fashionable topic right now. It's very easy to get studies on transgenerational 
epigenetic inheritance published," he says, adding that all this excitement 
has lowered critical standards.
 Illustration by Dale Edwin Murray. 
Although many epigeneticists insist that they are slowly building up solid 
evidence in mice, when it comes to humans, the case is even more unclear. Among 
the very few sources of data are long-term medical studies over multiple 
generations. One that is often quotedtracked families following the Dutch 
famine of 1944 <http://www.hongerwinter.nl/item.php?id=32&language=EN>, showing 
that starvation in one generation had health repercussions on grandchildren.

More recently, Pembrey, who has spent the last 15 years looking for proof of 
epigenetic inheritance in people, mined theAvon Longitudinal Study 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/apr/08/children-90s-project-lifestyle-health>
, which has monitored 14,000 new mothers and their children since the early 
1990s. Pembrey and his colleagues found that men who had started smoking before 
they were 11 had sons who were more likely to be obese by the time they were 
teenagers. Meanwhile, the grandsons of grandmothers who smoked, even if their 
mothers didn't, were bigger.

Some epidemiologists have questioned these correlations, but Pembrey is 
convinced that epigenetic inheritance is well placed to explain his 
observations. "The remarkable thing is, whatever study we've planned so far, we 
have seen results," he adds. "This is a phenomenon."

Psychiatrists have also pinpointed anomalies that might be explained by 
epigenetics.Rachel Yehuda <http://www.mountsinai.org/profiles/rachel-yehuda>, a 
psychiatrist and neuroscientist at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York, discovered 
thatpregnant survivors of the 9/11 World Trade Centre attacks who suffered 
post-traumatic stress disorder had offspring with lower levels of cortisol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/neurophilosophy/2011/sep/09/pregnant-911-survivors-transmitted-trauma>
. This is a hormone associated with a heightened state of alarm. Her research 
has shown that the same applies to the offspring of Holocaust survivors.

Epigenetics may even answer the question of why mental disorders, including 
autism and schizophrenia, run in families.Grainne McAlonan 
<https://kclpure.kcl.ac.uk/portal/en/persons/grainne-mcalonan%287bbd53e5-4eab-48c8-9b6f-466f2553759b%29/biography.html>
, clinical senior lecturer in neurodevelopmental disorders at King's College 
London, says that studying the DNA of these patients has not provided enough 
answers. "We're not fully explaining autism as a fully genetic disorder," she 
says.

Ultimately, critics complain, the problem with all this is that human life is 
messy. Thousands of different factors could explain health patterns in 
generations of the same family. This is the main reason why, to understand our 
basic biology without being clouded by our genetics, complicated upbringings 
and varied environments, perfectly uniform lab mice are the next best thing. 
"You can't experiment on humans as you do on animals," says Pembrey. Such is 
the rodent's importance to epigenetics that the University of Utah even has an
online game allowing you to "lick a rat pup" 
<http://learn.genetics.utah.edu/content/epigenetics/rats/> virtually to find 
out how this affects its epigenome.

And so we turn to another tale of mice, this time traumatised mice. In a 
widely covered study 
<http://www.nature.com/news/fearful-memories-haunt-mouse-descendants-1.14272> 
published at the end of last year, researchersKerry Ressler and Brian Dias 
<http://resslerlab.com/site/?page_id=8> at Emory University 
<http://www.emory.edu/home/index.html> in Atlanta, Georgia, gave male lab mice 
electric shocks every time they were exposed to the smell of acetophenone, a 
chemical used in perfumes because of its sweet fragrance, such as cherries and 
orange blossom. The eventual Pavlovian result was that the mice shuddered at 
the mere scent of acetophenone.

The surprise was that their children feared the smell, too, even though they 
hadn't received any shocks. So did their grandchildren. "It was a beautifully 
controlled experiment," says Pembrey. The results suggest that the fear of the 
smell of acetophenone passes into the sperm of the mice through some kind of 
chemical process, leaving epigenetic marks that aren't erased in the womb. Some 
reporters have likened it to a "memory" being passed down the generations.

Dias says they have since received emails from people who are convinced that 
they have experienced their own transgenerational "memories". Sometimes these 
are behaviours, such as abuse or addiction. Other times, they are phobias. One 
person told him: "I detest the smell of eggs and my great-great-grandmother 
didn't like eggs."

But Ressler's and Dias's experiment has also raised eyebrows. Ferguson-Smith 
says their work was "poorly presented", with a lack of detail that makes it 
difficult to interpret the results. Bestor adds that they failed to explain how 
a response associated with the nose managed to pass all the way into sperm. 
Like all other epigenetic inheritance studies, he says: "There is a total lack 
of plausible mechanism."

The researchers admit that, although they believe their mouse experiment is 
correct, the results remain largely a mystery. "How are they escaping 
reprogramming?" asks Dias. "This is beyond the expertise of a single 
individual, a single lab, a single field."

The questions don't end there. Prime among them is how long epigenetic effects 
such as these might last. Early findings hint that they may wear off within two 
generations, which would suggest that human evolution is not much affected. 
Surani says there is only a slight possibility that grandchildren are affected 
and that he has seen no evidence in generations beyond that.

More worryingly, Surani says that researchers who are not getting positive 
results are finding their work more difficult to publish, which is feeding hype 
around the field. "There have been people who have tried to replicate some of 
this stuff and it doesn't work," he says. Even different strains of mice can 
produce different results.

With so many opposing views, scientists have found themselves taking sides. 
"The weight of evidence is building up", says Pembrey. Dias adds: "There's a 
traditional dogma where this cannot occur. But this dogma is now being 
challenged."

Indeed, Dias believes that we are yet to appreciate just how much human 
biology is affected by epigenetic inheritance. "It's more prevalent than we can 
actually wrap our heads around," he says. Just as genetics promised to reveal 
so much about ourselves, the same could happen with epigenetics.

There may be medical benefits in knowing that epigenetic marks exist and how 
our lifestyles affect them, adds Dias. "You can imagine a scenario where the 
die is not completely cast… You could possibly mask the gene expression effects 
of your ancestral experiences," he says. Knowing that you may be at greater 
risk of obesity because your father smoked as a boy, for instance, may prompt 
you to change your diet. Similarly, parents might become more careful about 
their lifestyles to protect future generations.

The danger, until then, is that the enthusiasm around epigenetics outpaces 
what scientists actually know. Bestor warns that science can be as faddish as 
journalism. In response to criticisms such as these, Dias agrees that 
epigenetic inheritance is a make-or-break idea: "It's either going to come a 
cropper or it's going to revolutionise the way we think about inheritance."
 