
The proposed acquisition of the Anglo-Dutch steelmaker Corus by India's Tata 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tata> group for over £4bn is unique in 
several ways.

It is the biggest overseas acquisition by an Indian company and clearly 
demonstrates their emergence as major players on the global scene.

This year Indian companies have made over 130 acquisitions exceeding $18bn 
(£9.5bn) in value. Indian firms have invested more overseas than foreign firms 
have in India this year.

Corus was the result of a union between British Steel and Koninklijke 
Hoogovens of the Netherlands in 1999, and has not been able to move beyond the 
middle sector of the high-cost European environment: precisely the kind of 
company that has become a takeover target.

While the Corus board has accepted the bid, the situation is not yet settled, 
as market rumours persist that the Brazilian steelmaker CSN, which has shown 
interest in Corus in the past, may step in with a higher bid. Nonetheless it 
reinforces the trend towards consolidation in the steel industry.

Of importance to Britain's European neighbours is the maturity with which the 
British government responded to the takeover, unlike the reaction of France and 
Luxembourg, when Mittal Steel took over Arcelor earlier this year.

For Tata, this is a big deal: Tata is a diversified conglomerate with 
interests ranging from steel, hotels, tea, telecom, automobiles, textiles, 
chemicals, information technology, and power, and Tata Steel is the biggest 
private sector steelmaker in India.

If the deal goes ahead, it will catapult Tata from the world's 56th biggest 
steelmaker to the fifth largest.

Not only is Tata a well-known brand in India, it is a group most investment 
bankers instinctively respect, because its corporate governance and ethical 
standards are high.

Like almost every business group, Tata has been touched by controversies, but 
observers of the Indian corporate scene say those were exceptions.

Tata's labour relations policies have often been superior to prevailing legal 
standards, and some of its practices preceded some of the conventions of the 
International Labour Organisation.

Tata now controls Tetley Tea and is the largest seller of whole coffee beans 
in the US. It recently acquired a 30% stake in Glaceau, an American company 
that makes "enhanced" water, flavoured with fruit and containing added vitamins.

Its software arm, Tata Consultancy Services, may lack the glamour of 
Bangalore-based Infosys and Wipro, but it raked in more export revenues than 
the other two in 2005. Tata's car, the Indica, was marketed in Britain as the 
City Rover.

It is conceivable that the Tata group's businesses touch some aspect of every 
Indian's life at least once in a week, if not daily.

Unruffled and pragmatic

What has been notable is the pragmatic, unruffled way the British government 
has reacted to the Tata bid. When Mittal Steel sought to take over Arcelor, the 
bid became a major political issue almost immediately, with prominent European 
politicians and businessmen predicting the end of European civilisation as we 
know it.

In contrast, in London, the government shrugged off questions about the Tata 
bid, which is the way it should be. Money has no colour, and investment flows 
in directions where returns are greatest.

Those who fear economic globalisation will have genuine worries. What if Tata 
closes its plants here and ships production to India? Will this lead to a 
complete hollowing out of Britain's industrial base?

The rational response to such questions is this: whether or not an overseas 
investor takes a stake in a local firm, if the local firm is not competitive in 
the global market, it will have to readjust.

At a broader level, this is a Europe-wide concern. When Chinese manufacturers 
are able to make clothes and shoes at substantially lower costs, and if they 
meet the quality standard European consumers take for granted, should Europe 
build a fence around itself, and force its consumers to pay more? Or should it 
think of ways in which its labour market can be retrained and redeployed, so 
that costs fall for everyone?

When an investor snaps up a British company, essentially it means he sees 
value in a British asset, and wants to put his good money where his mouth is. 
Inevitably, a change in ownership can lead to some changes: some jobs could get 
lost, and workers would need retraining.

Avoiding that tough choice will not make Britain more competitive. That will 
keep costs high in Britain, and make it harder for foreigners to buy 
British-made products. If Britain ends up selling less abroad, it will have 
less money to buy products made abroad. That's a vicious, not a virtuous circle.

Writing in the Observer earlier this year, Will Hutton said: "Britain is being 
sold off at a rate unprecedented in modern times. If (all) foreign takeover 
bids ... go through, airports, ships, banks, gas pipelines, stock exchanges, 
chemical plants and glass factories will fall into foreign ownership. Yet there 
is no debate; scarcely an eyebrow is raised. In any other country, there would 
be uproar.... British staff, British assets and British brands, built up over 
decades, are to become part of somebody else's story. And nobody gives a damn."

Let us be grateful for that. It tells us why Britain remains more dynamic than 
many other economies, and reflects its instinctive, uncanny understanding of 
the fluid nature of capital, letting investments seek the highest return. It 
also explains why the British economy is more flexible, and often outperforms 
European economies of a similar size.

Salil Tripathi is a former regional economics correspondent at the Far Eastern 
Economic Review in Singapore. In his undergraduate years in India, he was a 
Dorab Tata scholar.
 