
4.13am GMT 

Second Set. Eugenie Bouchard 4 Li Na 5. First set was won by Li Na 6-2

Here we go, people bludging at work on a Thursday, it's Li Na to serve for the 
semi-final of thisAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> tennis tournament. She's 
been the better player, the Chinese gal, and will deserve it should she hold 
her nerve and serve.

Bouchard? Lot to like. Just been out-muscled, perhaps, a tad here, and was 
blown off the court in the first set, it would've lasted 24 minutes, 
thereabouts. It's been competitive since with both players breaking serve. But 
one fancies Li Na to end the Canuck's golden run.

It's 30-0 Li Na. 

And now 30-15 after a groundstroke does not stay between the lines. Rules of 
tennis? Simple. Hit between the lines, over the net. Scoring method in tennis? 
Crazier than Kim Jong Il on the drink.

Something like it. It's 30-all.

And now 40-30. And what tennis people will call: Match Point. The big one: 
Match pooint. Not game, or break or set point.

Match point. It comes down to this...

and THIS - ha! - is the best rally of the match. Both players stretching to 
breaking point, sprinting round court, ball whacking off the net and flying 
into the air before Li Na, the Wuhan Typhoon, smokes a volley cross-court and 
into the final of the Australian Open. Good for her.

Well played, too, Eugenie The Genie Bouchard, we'll see more of you and your 
silly army. 

And that, fans, is that. Thankyou linesman, ball boys, sundry officials, hot 
dog vendors, merchandising, PR, media, spectators, people bludging at work, my 
mate Henry, Vicky courtside and his supreme holiness the Dalai Lama a man 
considered a terrorist by Chinese politicians though the Dalai Lama wouldn't 
hurt a bullant that had sunk its little fangs into the fleshy part of his inner 
thigh because it's against his religion, that is that.

And bye for now.

4.03am GMT 

Second Set. Eugenie Bouchard 3 Li Na 5. First set was won by Li Na 6-2

Bouchard, now, serving to stay in this match and, if she's very lucky, contest 
the final of the Australian Open tennis tournament. 

Beccause it is not looking good for the wombat-loving Quebecois with the Army 
of Aussie kids with nothing better to do, they should be given jobs and 
haircuts, and put in the real army. I think.

30-all now. Bouchard serving. Still. They haven't changed the rules of tennis. 
And now it's 40-30. Oop - net cord and the ball spits out, and that's game 
Bouchard. 

Na will serve for the semi-final.

4.00am GMT 

Second Set. Eugenie Bouchard 3 Li Na 4. First set was won by Li Na 6-2

Li Na, now, to serve. Wonder is her nickname "Jude", after that song by the 
Beatles, Hey Jude, which goes, Naaa, naaaa naaaa Na-Na-Na-Naaa..etc, Hey-ey 
Jude."

Probably not. They didn't have the Beatles in China in when The Beatles were 
The Beatles, they just had ping pong and Forrest Gump playing ping-pong. 

My I do go on.

Now - what is it ... 40-love Li Na! She's smoking poor old Genie Bouchard, 
whose "Army" aren't saying much according to Vicky Frost, courtside:

"Great relief that Bouchard took the long deuce game. Her supporters are being 
just vocal enough that they're fun - and not so vocal they're annoying. 
Bouchard does look a bit dejected in person. (More so now of course). Maybe 
that's why we're all backing her so much!"

So there you go. It's 5-3 Li Na. She will receive for the match, if you can do 
that. I say: you can.

3.56am GMT 

Second Set. Eugenie Bouchard 3 Li Na 3. First set was won by Li Na 6-2

Bouchard to serve. Which she does. Several times. Occasionally poorly. And 
goes down 0-40. And then 0-50, or whatever's next - whatever, that's the game, 
another break in this see-sawing and quite silly second set, and that's 4-3 Li 
Na, Li Na to serve.

3.54am GMT 

Second Set. Eugenie Bouchard 2 Li Na 3. First set was won by Li Na 6-2

Li Na to serve and take an Amazonian python-like stranglehold on this major 
semi-final.

But The Genie Bouchard is hanging on, and takes this game to deuce a time or 
two. Just 19, lot of game, something of a good sort, I'm predicting a Big 
Future. Ha. Oh yeah - Nostradamus. Y'think? I do. I think it.

Break point, Bouchard. And with a forthright smash that ends up in Row ZZ, 
Bouchard levels it 3-all in the second. 

3.44am GMT 

Second Set. Eugenie Bouchard 2 Li Na 2. First set was won by Li Na 6-2

Bouchard to serve. Oh - fine rally, and fine point won by Li Na, she clenches 
a fist and yells "C'mon!" in Chinese. She's up 0-30. And now 0-40 and three 
break points after a super cross-court double-fisted backhand ... what a shot. 
She wants this game like a sugar addict wants half-a-dozen cinnamon donuts.

Oh yeah - another fierce double-fisted cross-court backhand and that, fans, is 
game. It's 3-2 Na with a break.

3.41am GMT 

Second Set. Eugenie Bouchard 2 Li Na 1. First set was won by Li Na 6-2

Li Na to serve. Evenly matched ... match here at Rod Laver, tennis types, the 
31-year-old Li Na of the People's Republic of China versus the 19-year-old 
Quebecois Eugenie Bouchard from an actual Republic, of sorts, Canada. What is a 
republic, anyway? North Korea says they have one yet the magic of Google tells 
us that: "a republic is a state in which supreme power is held by the people 
and their elected representatives, and which has an elected or nominated 
president rather than a monarch."

Don't think North Korea really has that, nor for that matter China. 

Whatevs - Bouchard has a break-point. But not for long. Li Na whacks a 
backhand cross-court that nips the paint and we go to deuce.

Nice serve Li Na ... called out ... and was - good call middle-line-judge. 
Regardless it's advantage Li Na. And then an ace, and she wins the game. It's 
2-all in the second, and anyone's.

3.34am GMT 

Second Set. Eugenie Bouchard 2 Li Na 0. First set was won by Li Na 6-2

Bouchard to serve with a break.

And serve she does, quite poorly, tightening up some, perhaps, and being 
immediately broken back mountain by the Wuhan Typhoon, Li Na. It's 2-1 
Bouchard, second set. 

3.31am GMT 

Second Set. Eugenie Bouchard 1 Li Na 0. First set was won by Li Na 6-2

Li Na to serve, now, the People's Republic of China army behind her, a force 
which numbers a thousand million billion, something like it, a lot anyway, 
versus Bouchard's "Genie Army" which numbers a dozen dudes without girlfriends 
in white T-shirts, my they annoy me, could be getting old.

Double-fault from Li Na. It's 15-all. My she's fit, Li Na, she's like Ivan 
Drago describing Rocky in Rocky IV, He is like a piece of iron. Li Na's not 
like iron, but she is quite fit. Wish I was fit. But you'd have to exercise and 
eat sprouts, and aint nobody got time for that.

Two break points for Bouchard, who has game, it is plain. 

Li Na's saved one of them. And another. Fine middle serve and dominant 
forehand. It's deuce. Li Na, the people's champion of China, they love her in 
China. Went there once, China. Good country.

Advantage Na. And now not advantage Na, but rather deuce. Who devised this 
system of scoring were they on medieval mushrooms? 

Advantage Na. But no longer, again. After a fine rally of crisp hitting, Li Na 
just about shanks one out of court. Pressure play from Bouchard, Li Na knows 
she's got to hit a good one to beat this feisty Canuck.

Advantage Na. But no longer once again. Stick a fork in this game, it's done 
like a dinner. Something like it. 

Advantage Na.But no longer once again, again. Bouchard can hit this fluffy 
green paint pellet, people. She hits them where they need to go at speed. Lot 
to like. It's deuce. And now ...

Advantage Bouchard. Well - she's a hard-head, The Genie Bouchard. She's moving 
nicely and hitting cleanly, and Li Na, good as she is, is under the pump, one 
fancies. And that be game, a break to the Canadian, strong stuff.

It's 2-blot Bouchard, second set. 

3.20am GMT 

Second Set. Eugenie Bouchard 0 Li Na 0. First set was won by Li Na 6-2

Bouchard serving but normal transmission resuming here in the second set, Li 
Na is hitting the ball really cleanly and pure, the ball's zinging off her 
strings like a fluffy green paintball pellet. Paintball pellet? I'm goin with 
it. It's deuce here in the first game of the second set, three terms singular 
to tennis and which make one wonder how they came up with them.

Break point, Li Na now ... that Bouchard holds off. Nice rally, both players 
hitting clean and crisp cross-court ground strokes and stretching each other, 
this is quality tennis. Deuce. And now advantage Bouchard, she won't go away 
this girl, she likes it here.

It's deuce again, now, after a fine forehand evades Bouchard.

Ace! Bouchard throws out a wide swinging stinger, a fine serve. Advantage her. 
And now game. Well done. 

3.14am GMT 

First Set. Eugenie Boucard 2 Li Na 5

And here's Li Na, serving for the set. She's dominated the match thus-far, 
winning the first five games and the vast majority of the points. It's been an 
ambush and no argument, but the Canuck of Quebec has steadied the ship and won 
the last two games. 

Nice day in Melbourne. Give it 20 minutes it'll be dancing on ice by the 
Baltic Sea. But for the moment, perfect. It's 15-all. 

Li Na's sent one upstairs to God ... and has been proven correct. It's set 
point Li Na.

Bouchard hangs in, takes it to deuce. She keeps on comin, The Genie. You could 
run over her with a Bobcat driven by Bobcat Ryan and she'd still get up and 
whack back a backhand. 

Advantage Li Na, however. Set point again. And this time, it's set. that's the 
set. It's over. Whatever. 

3.04am GMT 

First Set. Eugenie Bouchard 1 Li Na 5.

Bouchard to serve, she's down by plenty, but fighting it out, duking it out. 
She's quickly to 30-0. And now 40-0. And now 40-15 after Li Na smokes a 
floating dud volley mid-court and hard. 

But there's the game, a Li Na return drifts long. It's 5-2 China, China to 
serve.

3.02am GMT 

First Set. Eugenie Bouchard 0 Li Na 5

Fightback from the Canadian, she gets it to 0-40 and three break points. But 
my - she's down 5-blot. The game's going fast. If Bouchard was a cannier, older 
and more cynical type she might call a time-out for injury to try and slow the 
rampant momentum of the Wuhan Typhoon, Li Na.

But she's won herself a game without resorting to said tactics, and the 
soldiers of this man's Genie Army sing her a song. Which is nice.

2.59am GMT 

First Set. Eugenie Bouchard 0 Li Na 4.

Bouchard to serve. But she's being blown away. Wow. Li Na is eating this 
semi-final, eating it like a birthday pavlova. She’s hitting super-solid ground 
strokes that are stretching her opponent into submission. It’s about to be 
5-love, and she’ll be serving for the set, a set that’s taken … by my 
calculations … not very long at all. Maybe 20 minutes? Smokin. It's 5-love Li 
Na. Wow.

2.58am GMT 

First Set. Eugenie Bouchard 0 Li Na 3.

Li Na to serve. She's looking good. Genie’s Army thankfully silent, they have 
little choice, it appears, as they’ve been taken out the back by security and 
subjected to the stings of many bees. That or their girl’s now down 4-love and 
they’re not feeling the love. Li Na doesn’t have an army unless you count the 
people’s republic of China army. Which I reckon I will. It's 4-blot Li Na. The 
Canadian gal's been ambushed. Li Na is hot like the sun.

2.55am GMT 

First Set. Eugenie Bouchard 0 Li Na 2.

Bouchard serving now to stay in this set if not match, it's quite early, she's 
dressed in an olive green singlet and grey skirt, and goes down 0-40 early 
against a rampant-early Li Na. Four break points? It proves plenty for Li Na 
who smokes Bouchard's second-serve back at the Canadian, and it proves 
un-get-backable. That's a double-break for the Wuhan Wonder and it's 3-blot Na.

2.49am GMT 

First Set. Eugenie Bouchard 0 Li Na 1.

Li Na to serve after an early break. She's wearing a pink visor and white 
singlet, pink skirt and white shoes and is apparently one of the richest sports 
folk in the world, wonder how much she has to give the people in the People's 
Republic of China, would've been heaps a few years ago when everyone lived 
agrarian style on farms, but it's changed a bit China, and they're into money 
and ipads and tennis shoes, and good luck to them, there are lots.

Li Na holds serve, and it's 2-blot the girl from Wuhan.

2.45am GMT 

First Set. Eugenie Bouchard 0 Li Na 0.

And we're away on the darkish blue Rebound Ace of Rod Laver, and it's a fine 
day here in Melbourne Town.

Serving? Bouchard. And after a series of short baseline rallies we have a 
very-early break. Li Na's won each of the four points available in tennis's 
silly scoring system and Bouchard's won none, or love, as they, for no reason.

2.42am GMT 

Players have tossed (a coin) and Li Na has won the toss and will serve. And as 
the players warm up now it gives me a chance to relay a story of apres-golf at 
Manly Golf Club yesterday. This is what happened: Post-round, enjoying a 
delicious schooner or two of Coopers Pale Ale I fell into conversation with a 
couple of types watching the tennis on the television. One of them, Mick, 
opines, "Tennis? Hate tennis. Low game." I say to him, "Have you seen it live? 
Have you seen a major live? It's bloody good." This Mick's mate laughs, "Ha - 
seen one? Yeah, up close!" Mick then tells me he was on the ATP Tour for 10 
years from 1997, played at Wimbledon, Flushing Meadow and partnered with tennis 
crazy man Jeff Tarango to reach the French Open semi-finals in doubles in 2001. 
His name'sMichael Hill like the jeweller, and he's a nice fellah and no doubt 
sick of being known less than a bloody jeweller. And good day to you, sir, if 
you're reading, hope you are enjoying the tennis.

We're about to start here. It's Li Na to receive.

2.31am GMT 

Greetings people and welcome to Rod Laver (Arena) in Magical Melbourne Town 
for the Big One: wombat-loving Canadian teenEugenie "The Genie" Bouchard
 versus the greatest tennis player to emerge from the mighty (if 
erroneously-named) People's Republic of China, the dual-syllable, 
double-fisted, net-harrier,Li Na. Should be a good one.

Bouchard lost the first set against Australia's Casey Dellacqua before wiping 
the floor clean with the brave, out-gunned girl from Woodvale in WA. Next 
match, a quarter-final, she out-lasted and eventually out-played fellow 
spunkerella,Ana Ivanovic.

Li Na? Has smoked a series of nuffies, losing just one set and not a heck of a 
lot of games in her tilt at this year's Australian Open championship. She's 
31-years-old (Bouchard is 19) but is fitter than a trout into body-building, 
protein supplements and general good-health. That fit. Fitter than a Chinese 
Mallee bull.

So yes. Should be a good one. Back in 5 minutes or to get into it. 

1.44am GMT 

Matt will be here shortly, in the meantime here's news on Roger Federer and 
Andy Murray's clash:

So, Andy Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> is out, Roger 
Federer <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer> looks reborn and 
Rafael Nadal is next … and he looks worried. There is no denying the staying 
power of the established elite as the 2014Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> builds towards another 
semi-final clash between the two players who have defined the modern era, 
Federer and Nadal.

Nobody can be sure if these two are capable of recapturing the intensity of 
some of their epic encounters among the 32 matches they have played against 
each other since 2004, because Federer – a four set-winner against Murray on 
Wednesday – is 32 and Nadal's serving hand has a blister as red and raw as a 
lobster.

Nadal – 22-10 up on Federer overall – hit through the discomfort of the ripped 
skin on the palm of his left hand to beat the classy Grigor Dimitrov 3-6, 7-6, 
7-6, 6-2 and revealed: "With the tape [on his wound] I can lose the racket when 
I am serving. That's a terrible feeling, because you are not able to accelerate 
at the right moment. That's a big deal. When you lose confidence in that one 
important shot, you are not able to play with calm. If it does not improve, I 
won't have a chance to play in the final."
 