
What makes a good biking road? Well, there's a saying among motorcyclists that 
driving a car is like watching a movie, whereas riding a motorbike is like 
being in one. And I guess it can all distil down to that: open to the elements 
and without a metal box around you, the feeling of vulnerability and danger 
merely serving to heighten the senses, you really do feel part of the world 
around you. A great biking road should have twists and turns so you can get 
your knee down and your heart rate up, certainly. If it's got a smooth surface 
and has good visibility, all the better. Add in an epic landscape and a real 
sense of adventure and you've got biking nirvana.

1. The Cat and Fiddle run - A537, Buxton-Macclesfield, England

This 11km-long strip of tarmac in the Peak District is a rite of passage for 
bikers - but beware: the RAC have labelled it in the past as Britain's Most 
Dangerous Road. A 50mph speed restriction has helped with the spills, but one 
ride of it will tell you why bikers keep coming back. Depart at the 
Macclesfield end, but watch the early section. Concentration is key as the 
corners just keep coming, getting progressively tighter. Up on to the moors and 
the bends open up, low stonewalls giving great views and good visibility for 
hazards ahead. The road hugs the hillside and dives left and right before 
ending up at the Cat and Fiddle pub for coffee and a note-swapping chat with 
the hundreds of bikers who flock there.

2. The Amalfi Coast Road - Naples to Salerno, Italy

Never attempt this ride in summer as you'll spend most of your time stuck in 
the tourist traffic that chokes the narrow road. Leaving behind the vehicular 
anarchy of Naples and sweeping round the bay, you'll soon pass Sorrento and be 
firmly into the Rat Pack songsheet: past the Isle of Capri, and gliding through 
Positano, Ravello and Amalfi itself. The 50km-long corniche twists and turns, 
dives and climbs (it's not called The Road of a Thousand Bends for nothing), 
inducing paroxysms of whooping at every ancient Moorish town, every vertical 
crag plunging into the cobalt sea and each fingernail of beach nestling below.

3. The Transfagarasan Highway - Sibiu to Curtea de Arges, Transylvania, Romania

Constructed at Nicolae Ceaucescu's behest in the 1970s as part of his 
megalomanic zeal to conquer nature, the Transfagarasan runs across the highest 
mountains in Romania for 35kms. Do it in summer (it's closed in winter) and 
you'll leave the baking plains of Transylvania and, 20 minutes and dozens of 
razor sharp hairpins later, be riding across a rocky lunar landscape before 
emerging on to the snow-covered plateau. Plunge through an unlit tunnel at the 
pass and come out at the top of the lush, verdant Arges Valley, where 
monasteries and gothic castles line the route. Here, you'll look down at the 
Transfagarasan, snaking its way in sweeping, fast bends and drool at the 
prospect of living out your Valentino Rossi fantasies. Beware oxen-drawn carts 
and ancient Dacias. The best biking road I've ever ridden.

4. Bergen to Geiranger, Norway

Probably best done in a couple of days, to better appreciate the mind-blowing 
scenery. Head north out of Bergen on the E39, and soon you'll be rolling your 
bike on and off the ferries that act as floating bridges across the myriad 
fjords. All around is a landscape of drowned glacial valleys, with sheer 1,000m 
cliffs plunging into inky depths. Cross the Sognefjorden, Norway's longest and 
deepest fjord, then continue past glaciers and through tunnels that go on for 
miles, until you arrive above the Unesco-listed Geirangerfjord, a vast 
axe-wound of a fjord. Make your way down the Trollstigen, an intestinal tract 
of road that zigzags down to the water and put your bike on the ferry that 
plies the Geirangerfjord, watching in awe as you slide past the giant foaming 
slashes of the Seven Sisters and Bridal Veil waterfalls.

5. Trabzon to Savsat, Eastern Turkey

Head east along the coast road. At Hopa, on the Georgian border (you'll 
recognise it: all the women will be wearing vivid red and maroon striped 
shawls), head inland and upwards, through lush tea plantations reminiscent of 
Darjeeling. Once over the pass, the difference is instant and dramatic; in the 
space of 100 metres the cool, damp air gives way to the furnace of Eastern 
Anatolia and green becomes brown as far as the eye can see. Drop into the town 
of Artvin - romantically called "one large brothel" by my guidebook - then 
climb the loose-gravel road out of the dust bowl, twisting in between the 
overladen trucks. At the next pass, all becomes green and cool once more, with 
lush meadows filled with Alpine flowers and Swiss-style timber chalets. Only 
300kms, but it feels like you've crossed several continents.

6. Furka Pass, between Gletsch and Andermatt, Switzerland

Some Turks reckon this looks just like parts of Eastern Anatolia. A road made 
to order for the boy racers. And I like to think it's named after what bikers 
generally utter when they first see the ribbon of tarmac snaking its way up the 
near-vertical mountainside. To add spice, there are few crash barriers. To add 
extra spice, since 1982, when a tunnel was built at 2,100 metres, bikers have 
the top section almost to themselves. Many high-speed sections, but beware of 
ice on the road. Pause at the 2,431m pass and admire the glacier at the summit. 
Then gaze ahead to the Grimsel Pass in the distance and, if your nerves are 
still intact, open that throttle again.

7. A2, the Antrim coast road, Northern Ireland

At 60 miles long, this is a frontrunner for the best biking road in the world. 
It's certainly the most biker-friendly place in the world: the legend that was 
Joey Dunlop cut his teeth on this road, the NW200 race is staged in the area, 
and the locals revere all things biking. Head north out of Larne on to the A2. 
The road twists in and out of pretty fishing villages, often skimming so close 
to the sea's edge you feel like you're floating on it. Across the North 
Channel, just 24 miles away, is the Mull of Kintyre. But the views can act as 
Sirens, as the turns get tighter and the drops tumble into the breakers 
pounding the cliffs below. At the end? The Giant's Causeway and, after that, 
the Bushmills distillery. Biking Mecca, Irish whiskey. What's not to love?

8. Bar in Montenegro to Sarajevo in Bosnia

Only about 400km, but a tough day's riding because of the terrain and the road 
surfaces, and you'll need an enduro bike. Lovely in autumn, when the trees on 
the slopes of Montenegro's Black Mountains are as colourful as a paint box. At 
the Bobotov Kuk ski resort, turn left into Durmitor National Park. The road 
soon becomes a gravel track, threading its way across a vast treeless, 
boulder-strewn plateau. Take plenty of water for this section - I didn't see a 
single soul for hours. After the plateau comes the Tara Canyon, at a mile deep 
and 50 miles long, the second longest in the world. The road clings to the side 
of the gorge, burrowing through rough-hewn tunnels before expelling you across 
it on narrow bridges. Finally, you're into Bosnia, passing fields and villages, 
until, with the light fading, the tungsten glow of Sarajevo will reach out to 
embrace you.

9. Saranda to Vlora, Albania

Riding a motorcycle in Albania can make you feel like Indiana Jones. In the 
space of this day's ride, I was attacked by snakes, chased by dogs, had the 
hairiest near-miss of my life, and got threatened by two youths with AK47s. But 
what biking country! From the resort town of Saranda in the deep south, make 
your way (slowly - it is hideously potholed) along the coast road, through 
olive groves and orchards, from whence ghoulish dummies hang to ward off evil 
spirits. To your left, there's mile after mile of utterly deserted beach, save 
for the ubiquitous concrete bunkers Enver Hodza had built to repel all-comers. 
To your right, jagged peaks trailing snagged clouds. The road meanders through 
remote Ottoman villages and past abandoned and flyblown submarine bases. Then 
begins the Longhera Pass, like a Disney ride, taking you from sea level to over 
1,000 metres in just a few ear-popping minutes for the best view of the Ionian 
you'll ever see.

10. Cabo de Gata to Granada, Spain

Another ride covering extreme cultural and climatic changes within its 130 
miles. From the heat and stark, volcanic cliffs of Cabo de Gata, through the 
plastic polybagged fields and greasy-spoon country of Almeria, to the gentle 
foothills and cleaner, thinner air of Las Alpujarras. Around you now, you enter 
a hauntingly beautiful canyon land, with giant mesas like molars that'll put 
you in mind of a spaghetti western - no surprise as The Good, the Bad, and the 
Ugly was filmed here. On the hilltops stand white Moorish villages and, 
continuing upwards, immense wind turbines start to appear, standing sentinel on 
the rocky outcrops. Finally, there are the high peaks of the Sierra Nevada, 
stretching up to over 3,000m, dusted with white. After all that, even the 
Alhambra feels like an anticlimax.

· Uneasy Rider 
<http://www.eburypublishing.co.uk/viewbook.asp?isbn=0091923263&searchtxt=uneasy%20rider&searchopt=>
 by Mike Carter is published by Ebury Pres, £7.99
 