
Some of the companies that have complained loudest about the European Union's 
environmental measures are using the EU'semissions trading scheme (ETS) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/jun/07/ets-emissions-trading> to 
give money to rivals in other countries instead of cutting their own greenhouse 
gas emissions, it has emerged.

A report by Sandbag <http://www.sandbag.org.uk/>, a non-governmental 
organisation that examines carbon trading, found that some of the biggest steel 
and cement companies in the EU have been buying cheap carbon credits from steel 
makers in developing and eastern European countries as a way of reducing their 
need to cut or pay for emissions under the EU's emissions trading scheme. This 
effectively means they have been subsidising overseas rivals.

Baroness Bryony Worthington, founder of Sandbag, said: "A close look at the 
use of offsetting reveals that the steel sector is making great use of 
international offsets – to cover 45% of its emissions in 2011 … The fact that 
they are voluntarily sending money to rivals rather undermines their claims 
that their top concern about the ETS is its damage to their international 
competitiveness. It is clear from their use of offsetting that they know how to 
use the scheme to turn a profit and that their competitiveness complaints are 
overblown."

Many of the same companies have been vocal in their complaints, or involved in 
behind-the-scenes lobbying to water down the emissions trading scheme, under 
which they have to pay for their emissions or buy carbon "offsets". These are 
carbon credits issued to developments overseas that reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions.

However, these credits vary in quality and some may offer less carbon 
reduction than first appears. There is now such a glut of them on the market 
that their price is very low – in some cases less than €1 per credit, which is 
supposed to represent a tonne of carbon saved. This means there is little 
financial incentive for EU-based companies to cut emissions, by increasing 
efficiency or investing in technology such as renewable energy.

Some of Europe's biggest emitters have bought cheap credits from their own 
sector, which means paying overseas rivals to cut their emissions. ThyssenKrupp 
was the biggest buyer of overseas credits in the steel sector, acquiring more 
than half a million in the past four years. ArcelorMittal followed close behind 
with more than 460,000 purchases.Tata 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tata> Steel has bought nearly 72,000 
carbon offsets from steel projects. In the cement sector, France's Lafarge 
bought more than 180,000 supplementary credits last year.

Rob Elsworth, policy officer at Sandbag, said: "Offsetting was supposed to be 
a price containment measure to ensure that carbon prices didn't rise too high, 
but carbon prices have remained low due to excess supply in the market. Offsets 
are contributing significantly to this oversupply and are now depressing prices 
so low that the EU ETS almost ceases to have a function."

There has been a frenzy of buying cheap carbon credits in recent months, by 
companies covered by the EU's emissions trading scheme. That is because some of 
the very cheapest come from companies – mostly sited in China or other rapidly 
emerging economies – that install cheap equipment to cut their emissions of 
certain industrial gases. As these gases are many times more potent in warming 
the atmosphere than carbon dioxide, companies can receive tens of millions of 
carbon credits for an outlay of just a few million dollars or less on the 
scrubbing equipment.

But these projects have become highly controversial because of allegations 
that factories that would otherwise have been closed have been kept open and in 
some cases ramped up production of the greenhouse gases, because they gain so 
many carbon credits for doing so. For these reasons, the EU has decided to stop 
accepting credits from these sources from next year, prompting companies to 
stock up on them now while they are still allowed.

Elsworth said: "Europe can afford to be much more selective in the offsets it 
allows and must now increase its climate ambition."

By buying cheap credits from overseas, EU companies have helped to vastly 
reduce the price of carbon within the EU. Another factor has been an 
overgenerous number of EU carbon permits issued to companies that needed fewer 
after the financial crisis and European crisis. Some companies have argued that 
the latter was only fair, as their expected emissions were much lower. But last 
year about 13% of Europe's emissions were covered by cheap credits from abroad. 
These credits were only ever meant to be a "safety valve" that companies could 
purchase if carbon permits within the EU's scheme rose to a very high price. 
With prices as low as €7 this year for permits issued by the EU, the scheme is 
having very little effect on companies' behaviour.

Sandbag urged the EU to put more restrictions on buying in carbon credits, and 
to put in place tougher carbon targets for its own member states.
 