
Berlin's gaslights, an Italian Renaissance monastery and a historic Turkish 
city don't have much in common on the face of it, but all three are under 
threat and have been placed on a list of threatened European landmarks.

A total of 14 archaeological sites, religious buildings, historic city 
centres, and military fortifications have been shortlisted byEuropa Nostra for 
7 Most Endangered <http://www.europanostra.org/7-most-endangered/>, a European 
heritage initiative devised to help save some of Europe's most threatened 
places.

The 14, selected by experts from a total of 40 nominations submitted by public 
bodies and organisations across 21 countries, will be whittled down to seven 
for the final list, to be announced at Europa Nostra's 50th Anniversary 
Congress in Athens on 16 June.

Here' the full list of places. What do you think of the list? And is there 
anywhere you think should be on it?

Roman Amphitheatre in Durrës, Albania
 Roman amphitheatre, Albania 
This early-second-century Roman amphitheatre once hosted over 15,000 
spectators and yet remained unknown to the modern world until the 1960s 
(allegedly when a local noticed a tree sinking in his garden). Restoration 
poses a major challenge: it is currently only partially unearthed and modern 
housing has been constructed on top of one section.

Church of St Peter and St Paul, Aragatsotn, Armenia
 St Paul and Peter church, Armenia 
This small, isolated and dishevelled chapel is one of the world's earliest 
Christian structures, dating back to the fifth century AD. It is also seriously 
endangered by regular flooding and needs urgent action if it is to be saved.

Buffer zone in the historic centre of Nicosia, Cyprus
 Nicosia, Cyprus 
Conservationists from the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot communities have 
worked together with the UN to produce a master plan for the revitalisation of 
the lifeless 1.5 km corridor that crosses the historic city of Nicosia.

Vauban's Fortifications in Briançon, France
 Vauban’s fortifications in Briancon, France 
Designed in the 17th century to guard the city, these mountain fortifications 
have already been givenUnesco <https://www.theguardian.com/world/unesco> world 
heritage status, but they now need further attention to protect them from decay.

Gaslights and gas lamps in Berlin, Germany

These romantic, historically valuable and perfectly functioning gas street 
lights have been part of Berlin's cityscape for almost 200 years. Today no 
other city in the world has preserved gas lights to such a scale. The proposed 
replacement of gas lights with electric lighting is opposed by the local 
community and numerous tourists who are strongly attached to the existing lamps.

Former royal estate of Tatoi, near Athens, Greece

This grand estate was acquired by the Greek royal family in 1871 as a summer 
palace, and over the years it has exchanged hands between the state and the 
monarchy on numerous occasions, earning it a special place in the country's 
history. Various royal figures are buried in the adjoining cemetery. Last 
September, it was reported that the government would beselling it off as part 
of a "firesale" of valuable buildings 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/sep/19/debt-ridden-greece-firesale> in a 
bid to save the devastated economy.

Citadel of Alessandria, northern Italy

Said to be one of the greatest remaining 18th-century military fortifications 
in Europe, this citadel has a rich history linked to the Napoleonic times and 
the unification of Italy. It is on Unesco's tentative list of heritage sites.

Renaissance monastery of San Benedetto Po, near Mantua, Italy
 San Benedetto Po monastery, Italy 
This monastery (circa 15th to 16th century) was heavily damaged by the May 
2012 earthquake. Given the historic and artistic importance of this renaissance 
building, and its impact on cultural tourism in the wider region, the hope is 
that public authorities will give a higher priority to rescue measures.

Manueline-style monastery and church of Jesus in Setúbal, Portugal

Recognised as a symbolic location in the history Europe, this was the site of 
the 1494 signing of the Treaty of Tordesillas between Spain and Portugal, which 
paved the way for Europe's expansion to the Americas and Far East. The 
monastery and church are in an advanced state of decay. It is hoped that 
reparation of the site could become a catalyst for revitalisation of the whole 
historic city of Setúbal.

Rosia Montana mining landscape in Transylvania, Romania
 Rosia Montana mining landscape, Romania 
The landscape of Rosia Montana and its surrounding villages has been 
transformed by mining over three millennia. However, the present open-cast gold 
mining project would seriously threaten its unique heritage and environment, 
which includes in situ Roman mining machinery.

Neolithic site of Vinca-Belo Brdo, near Belgrade, Serbia

This prehistoric site is threatened not only by lack of funds but also by its 
proximity to the Danube. The site's basic infrastructure needs to be improved 
to allow continued excavations, access for tourists and enhanced interaction 
with the local community.

Neighbourhood of El Cabanyal-Canyamelar in Valencia, Spain
 Colourful facades in Valencia's Cabanyal district. Photograph: Jason Webster 
The inhabitants of El Cabanyal-Canyamelar 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2010/may/08/valencia-el-cabanyal-neighbourhood-spain>
, the old fishermen's quarter near the port of Valencia, are campaigning to 
save their homes – some of which have beautifully ornate and character-filled 
frontages – from destruction caused by a proposed new road project.

St George Armenian Church, Mardin, Turkey

This derelict church in the ancient town of Mardin has foundations going back 
to the fifth century.

Historic city of Hasankeyf and its surroundings, Turkey

If the construction of the Ilısu hydroelectric dam continues as foreseen, 80% 
of Hasankeyf's historic monuments will be flooded within the next decade, yet 
there is no internationally recognised scheme for their conservation, 
preservation or relocation.
 