
Wisla Krakow gave themselves hope of advancing to the Europa League's knockout 
stage at the expense of Fulham with a 2-1 win overOdense in Denmark. Dudu Biton 
and Patryk Malecki scored for the Poles, who must now beat Twente in their 
final game and hope Fulham slip up.Fulham were beaten 1-0 at Twente 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/dec/01/twente-fulham-europa-league>.

Anderlecht stretched their 100% record at the top of Group L to five games 
with a 2-1 win at pointlessAEK Athens, while their group rivals Lokomotiv Moscow
 also did enough to secure qualification.

Guillaume Gillet scored both goals for Anderlecht 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/anderlecht> either side of an effort from 
Dimitris Sialmas for the Greeks, who had long since given up hope of 
qualification.

Lokomotiv eased past Sturm Graz 3-1 in Moscow. Maicon's opener was cancelled 
out by Florian Kainz for the Austrians before late goals from Dmitri Sychev and 
Denis Glushakov took the home side through.

Schalke confirmed qualification as Group J winners with a 2-1 home win against 
Steaua Bucharest, while AEK Larnaca opened up the race for the runners-up spot 
by beatingMaccabi Haifa.

Schalke <https://www.theguardian.com/football/schalke> went ahead in the 25th 
minute through Kiriakos Papadopoulos and, despite Raul Rusescu's quick 
equaliser, the Germans clinched victory early in the second half when Raúl put 
away a Klaas-Jan Huntelaar pass.

Goals from the Spanish pair Gonzalo García and Gorka Pintado gave Larnaca a 
2-1 home win against their Israeli opponents, a result that moved them level 
with Steaua on five points, one point behind Maccabi.

Haifa host Schalke in their final group game knowing victory will be enough to 
send them through but, if they slip up, the winners of Steaua's clash with AEK 
in Bucharest will grab second place.

Kenwyne Jones scored a priceless 81st-minute equaliser for Stoke at home to 
Dynamo Kyiv 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/dec/01/stoke-city-dynamo-kyiv-stoke-city>
 which was enough to send the Premier League side through to the knockout 
stages as Group D winners.

Ricardo Quaresma struck a dramatic injury-time winner for Besiktas whose 3-2 
win overMaccabi Tel Aviv in Israel means they will join Stoke in the next stage 
if they win their final match.

Quaresma and Ibrahim Toreman had put the Turkish side 2-0 up either side of 
half-time but Shiran Yeini and Moshe Lugasi looked to have grabbed a vital 
point for Maccabi until Quaresma struck with his second.

Romanians Vaslui fought a fine rearguard action to claim a goalless draw at 
home to the Serie A giantsLazio and leave themselves a fine chance of 
progressing as runners-up from Group D.

Sporting Lisbon wrapped up their place as group winners after a 2-0 win over 
Zurich, goals from Ricky van Wolfswinkel and Valeri Bojinov seeing the 
Portuguese side home in comfortable fashion.

Vaslui's point leaves them locked together with Lazio heading into the final 
set of games - with the Romanians away to rock-bottom Zurich and Lazio at home 
to the group winners.

Athletic Bilbao's 2-1 win over Slovan Bratislava earned their qualification 
from Group F butParis St-Germain's surprise 2-0 defeat by Salzburg gave the 
Austrians a glimmer of hope.

Oscar de Marcos and Markel Susaeta scored for Bilbao, who will win the group 
unless the French side beat them by more than two goals in their final group 
match next month.

But Paris have other immediate concerns, with goals from Jakob Jantscher and 
Dusan Svento meaning they can still sneak second place if Paris lose their 
final match and the Austrians win in Bratislava.
 