
Italy's Lazio were fortunate to escape with a 2-2 draw against the Romanian 
sideVaslui in their Europa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> Group D clash at 
Stadio Olimpico.

Edy Reja's side played the last half-hour with 10 men following the dismissal 
of the defender Luciano Zauri and had to rely on Giuseppe Sculli's 71st-minute 
goal to avoid deeper embarrassment.

Djibril Cisse's 35th-minute penalty had given the hosts the lead but two goals 
from the Brazilian Wesley early in the second half gave Vaslui the scent of a 
win before Sculli came to the rescue.

In the same pool, Sporting Lisbon made a more impressive start with a 2-0 win 
overFC Zürich in Switzerland. Emiliano Insúa opened the scoring after four 
minutes and Ricky van Wolfswinkel added a second.

The 1988 European Cup winners PSV Eindhoven relied on a piece of magic from 
Dries Mertens to nudge past their visitors,Legia Warsaw, 1-0 in Group C. The 
Belgium winger lashed home the only goal after 21 minutes.

Besiktas strolled to the top of Group E, which they share with Stoke and 
Dynamo Kyiv 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/sep/15/dynamo-kyiv-stoke-city-europa-league>
, with a 5-1 triumph overMaccabi Tel-Aviv in a highly-charged atmosphere in 
Istanbul.

Paris St-Germain got their Group F campaign off to a strong start with a 3-1 
win overSalzburg while in the same group, Athletic Bilbao grabbed a 2-1 victory 
atSlovan Bratislava.

Hannover and Standard Liège played out an uninspiring goalless draw in their 
Group B opener in Germany, while Morten Nordstrand's second-half penalty 
settled a low-key encounter inFC Copenhagen's favour as they edged the 
Ukrainian sideVorskla 1-0 in Denmark.

In Group I, a late winner by Pablo Armero helped Udinese get over their 
Champions League elimination by Arsenal with a 2-1 win overStade Rennes, who 
had taken an early lead through Youssouf Hadji.

Matías Suárez hit a hat-trick as Anderlecht thrashed AEK Athens 4-1 in their 
Group L opener in Belgium, whileSchalke could not break through a resolute 
Steaua Bucharest defence and had to settle for a goalless draw in Group J.

In Group G, goals from Jozy Altidore, Rasmus Elm, Adam Maher and Brett Holman 
earnedAZ Alkmaar a crushing 4-1 win over Malmö, whose consolation came from a 
72nd-minute Daniel Larsson penalty.

Also in Group G, the Ukrainians Metalist Kharkiv hit back from a goal behind 
to win 2-1 atAustria Vienna. Second-half goals from Papa Gueye and Cleiton 
Xavier from the spot did the job following Tomas Jun's early effort.

In Group H Club Brugge beat Maribor 2-0 with early goals from Vadis 
Odjidja-Ofoe and Nabil Dirar, whileMaccabi Haifa shrugged off a poor domestic 
campaign to edgeAEK Larnaca thanks to Mohammad Ghadir's only goal in Group J.

The Danish side Odense swept to a surprise 3-1 win over Wisla Krakow in Poland 
and in Group L,Lokomotiv Moscow came from behind to win 2-1 at Sturm Graz with 
goals from Victor Obinna and Dimtri Sychev.
 