
London, 1822. There was a new poet in town: John Clare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/john-clare>, up from the countryside. He had 
visited once before, two years earlier, when his first volume was published. 
Then he had been overwhelmed, ill at ease, and embarrassed by his rough country 
clothing and clumping hobnail boots. He had been heard muttering to himself at 
each new shocking sight, "Oh, Christ", and had been frequently mystified. He 
didn't understand, for example, why so many finely dressed ladies seemed to be 
walking the streets alone, until it was explained to him that they were 
prostitutes at work. A fine and insightful portrait painted by William Hilton 
during this first visit (now hanging in the National Portrait Gallery) shows a 
man both ordinary and otherworldly, both present and absent. His lips are 
parted as though about to speak or in order to breathe more easily. In 
three-quarter profile, his upward gaze is away from the viewer, fastened on 
something out of the frame, some unseen source of light. Praised at the time 
for having captured the look of active inspiration, it now seems equally the 
face of a man displaced and trying to hold his connection to things elsewhere, 
a man passing through.

But in 1822 Clare returned better prepared, more confident and more adjusted 
to the need to inhabit a public persona. He was a peasant poet, a role 
established in readers' imaginations by his admired predecessors Robert Burns 
and Robert Bloomfield. Clare now dressed to match city expectations of such a 
figure - in a long "grass-coloured" coat, yellow waistcoat and silk cravat. 
Chaperoned by his publisher, John Taylor, he was introduced to his fellow 
contributors to the London Magazine. These were the so-called Cockneys. Keats, 
who had died the previous year, had been among them. They were reviled by a 
large section of the conservative literary establishment who deemed them 
parvenus, cultural gate-crashers from the lower orders, given to uncouth 
extravagances in their writing, and dangerously radical.

Clare, a Northamptonshire farm labourer, was certainly no Cockney, nor was he 
ever truly a radical, despite his unhesitating expressions of solidarity with 
the rural poor. Nevertheless, he later suffered critically from the 
association. The Cockneys were men of talent and even, in some cases, genius. 
Leigh Hunt, William Hazlitt and Charles Lamb all wrote for the London. They 
were a dandified set, distinctly Regency in their taste for pleasures that 
would not weather well in the more determinedly respectable Victorian period: 
prize-fighting, late nights, drink, theatre, games. Clare struggled to keep up 
with the punning repartee (a good deal of which he suspected had been rehearsed 
at home beforehand), but could more than keep up with the drinking. They dined 
and whored and saw shows together. They were, in Clare's words, "the merriest 
set of fellows I ever met with".

On this visit, then, Clare was happy, enjoying - as much as he ever could - 
his fame and inhabiting the clothes and manners of a defined and recognisable 
role without too much sense of distortion or constriction. In a profound sense, 
Clare could never go home. Metaphorically, this is true for all of us - our 
first home, our childhood world, vanishes behind us - and this is one reason 
why Clare's poems are so compelling to so many. But his own sense of home was 
more than usually agonising and unachievable. For him, home had been doubly 
abolished, in part by the alienation brought by literary achievement, and in 
part because it simply no longer existed. The rural world Clare grew up in had 
been dismantled around him. His fate was to be everywhere an exile.

The countryside of Clare's childhood was differently owned, differently 
shaped, differently peopled. It might be pictured as a set of intricate 
concentric and adjacent circles: villages, each with their common, their pub 
and church and green, surrounded by fields divided into strips, the use of 
which was portioned out with some effort at equitable distribution of the best 
land. Then came the enclosure acts and the land's dismemberment with maps and 
theodolites and fences. New boundaries were drawn; for the first time ever, the 
common land was owned, leaving the Gypsies homeless and poor cottagers without 
grazing. The transformation of Clare's circular, centred, largely unbounded 
world into the brutal geometry of big fields and howling motorways that we know 
today had begun.

The enclosure acts can be said to have begun a denuding of the environment, a 
stripping out of habitat and human diversity that subsequently became a global 
phenomenon and clearly now represents a potential ecological and cultural 
catastrophe. As a member of the lowest class of rural labourer, Clare was 
particularly vulnerable to these changes. His preoccupation with them, 
articulated in poems of piercing lament, has made him a key figure of 
ecological literature.

Clare's earliest poem published in his lifetime was just such a lament. Titled 
"Helpstone", after his home village, it rhapsodises the life he knew there 
before the change, in terms perhaps immaturely sunny and simple:

The day gone by left no pursuit undone,
Nor one vain wish, save that it went too soon;
Each sport, each pastime, ready at their call,
As soon as wanted they possess'd them all - 
These joys, all known in happy infancy,
And all I ever knew, were spent in thee.

It continues: "But now, alas, those scenes exist no more; / The pride of life 
with thee, like mine, is o'er". The poem ends by addressing the "happy Eden of 
those golden years": "May it be mine to meet my end in thee; / And, as reward 
for all my troubles past, / Find one hope true: to die at home at last."

These are plangent lines and, placed within the context of Clare's biography, 
they are tragic. Clare could never find his home to die in. He would die out of 
time, out of place and out of fashion, pretty much forgotten, in Northampton 
General Lunatic Asylum after more than 25 years spent in institutions. But 
these lines are also rather stereotyped and flat, never quite rising clear of 
his 18th-century models, Goldsmith's "The Deserted Village" being the most 
obvious. The lines in the poem that ratify the reality of its experience are 
different, particular:

Where once the brook, for now the brook is gone, 
O'er pebbles dimpling sweet went whimpering on, 
Oft on whose oaken plank I've wondering stood [. . .] 
To see the beetles their wild mazes run
With jetty jackets glittering in the sun.

This feels immediately, undeniably real. The poet's senses are open and acute 
- that water "whimpering" over pebbles - his noticings natural, unconventional, 
products of a countryman's detailed knowledge. Those glittering black water 
beetles are not the usual stuff of pastoral poetry. But then Clare isn't (or 
isn't really) a pastoral poet. The pastoral is an urban form, one that stylises 
and simplifies rural experience for a sophisticated audience, to provide them 
with a brief imaginative holiday and clear moral lessons. Clare uses the 
standard rhetorical hooks of the pastoral mode (although less so as he grows 
more sure of his true subject and voice), but his most distinctive achievements 
sing out of a different, immersive experience of the countryside. Our great 
poet of the present tense, he articulates in poems of quiet rapture the living 
moment. His poems connect things by seeing them, unhierarchically, one after 
the other, those beetles as much as trees or cattle or people, the 
traditionally "significant" elements of a landscape. From this emerges a light, 
highly mobile poetry of great delicacy but robust integrity that celebrates as 
it records complex environmental interconnectedness and endlessly unfolding 
natural process.

The opening phrase of "Summer Moods" - "I love at even-tide to walk alone" - 
is typical. An index of Clare's first lines reveals many such, and the phrase 
abounds throughout his work. His attachment to the natural world is immediate 
and profound - it is love - and his response to it is poetry. At his happiest 
he seems, in his early years, to have enjoyed a marvellously untrammelled flow 
of experience - in through his senses, out through his words. He describes 
wandering outdoors, chanting or muttering newly forming poems under his breath 
as he does so. This image of Clare at work, revealing as it is, should not 
tempt us, however, into a non sequitur that has dogged his reputation: that he 
was naive and unliterary, a sort of autistic savant of descriptive poetry.

His poems reveal a subtle kind of alertness, an elastic intelligence finding 
its way through the world, finding objects that gather and contain complexes of 
thought and feeling. A passionate egg collector as a boy, Clare wrote a number 
of poems about birds' nests. Overtly they are descriptive, notational, often 
sounding like entries in a naturalist's notebook, as in "The Nightingale's 
Nest":

How curious is the nest: no other bird 
Uses such loose materials or weaves
Its dwelling in such spots - dead oaken leaves 
Are placed without and velvet moss within 
And little scraps of grass and, scant and spare, 
What scarcely seem materials, down and hair.

But the observations seem to me to be charged and illuminated by what was most 
alive and unresolved in Clare's psyche. Homeless as he was, each nest offered a 
compelling image of a centre. The poems become, in a sense, experiments in a 
possible self-portraiture. We hear it, I think, in those lines in the poet's 
fascination that a structure so seemingly fragile can withstand the world.

The affinities of bird and poet are clearly strong in this poem, both man and 
nightingale famous for their singing: "I've heard her many a merry year - / At 
morn, at eve, nay, all the livelong day, / As though she lived on song". Which 
is what Clare found he could not do after literary fashion had turned against 
him and living as a peasant poet had become impossible. When he writes, "and 
her renown / Hath made me marvel that so famed a bird / Should have no better 
dress than russet brown", it is hard not to remember Clare on that first visit 
to London, famous himself, and embarrassed at his dowdy dress. The poem ends 
with a scientifically cool description of the nightingale's eggs that is 
minutely accurate - what an adjective for a colour "deadened" is, and how 
brilliantly is subtlety of colour evoked by implying a precise shade that 
exists between the two verbal equivalents - then continues with lines that 
quietly, heartbreakingly summon the spectre of all possible hurt while 
promising to safeguard the eggs in their nest, standing now for the continuity 
of the forest and its song and more:

Snug lie her curious eggs in number five
Of deadened green or rather olive-brown, 
And the old prickly thorn-bush guards them well. 
So here we'll leave them, still unknown to wrong, 
As the old woodland's legacy of song.

In such poems, the sharp, knowledgeable eye and the whole reacting person are 
integrated and inseparable. It is the fusion of these qualities that makes him 
both our greatest ecological poet and a great poet of the human condition.

• Adam Foulds's The Quickening Maze is published by Jonathan Cape. To order a 
copy for £11.99 go to theGuardian bookshop 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780224087469>
 