
One of England's biggest exam boards has been forced to apologise after pupils 
were set an impossible question in an AS-level maths paper.

OCR promised to take the error into account when marking the exam, amid 
students' concerns that the mistake could affect their university places.

The question, which was worth eight marks and 11% of the paper, was impossible 
to solve due to a miscalculation of an equation.

Students <https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> were presented with 
a diagram showing a network of tracks in a forest. The distances between points 
on the network were also set out.

Students were then asked to find the shortest route to walk along every track, 
starting and ending at the same point. The given length was supposed to be 
equal to an equation set out in the paper.

But OCR admitted that it failed to calculate the length properly – meaning the 
shortest route failed to match the mathematical equation.

A total of 6,790 sixth-formers sat the paper on Thursday 26 May. Since then, 
many have been posting messages on social networking sites calling for a resit, 
and expressing fears that the mix-up may harm their university chances.

One student wrote on thestudentroom.co.uk <http://www.thestudentroom.co.uk/>: 
"Can we not all or the majority of us write to OCR and demand a resit?"

Another said: "I agree, there is no fair way to mark it and loads of us need 
certain grades for uni."

Grades from AS-levels <https://www.theguardian.com/education/aslevels> are 
used by students when applying for university places.

One poster suggested that students could attempt to bring legal action if they 
missed their grade, and therefore university places as a result of the error.

"On a teaching website, a head of maths has proposed that a no win, no fee 
solicitor could bring a class action to represent anyone who fails to make 
their university offers because of this and ends up paying £9,000 per annum 
university fees instead of £3,000 per annum," wrote the poster.

In a statement, an OCR spokesman said the exam board "very much regretted" the 
mistake.

"We would like to assure teachers, parents and students that we have several 
measures in place to ensure that candidates are not unfairly disadvantaged as a 
result of this unfortunate error.

"Because we have been alerted to this so early, we are able to take this error 
into account when marking the paper.

"We will also take it into account when setting the grade boundaries. We have 
sent a letter to all schools and colleges explaining in more detail what we 
shall do.

"We do apologise again that this has happened. To help us understand how this 
occurred and to minimise the chance of such an error happening again, we will 
be undertaking a thorough review of our quality assurance procedures."
 