
Arkansas can execute eight death-row inmates, a split state supreme court 
ruled on Thursday in upholding a state law that keeps information about its 
lethal injection drugs confidential.

However, the state has only seven days before one of the drugs needed for the 
three-drug protocol expires, and it isn’t clear when Arkansas will be able to 
resume its first executions since 2005.

Arkansas’ attorney general, Leslie Rutledge, said she would request new 
execution dates once the stays were lifted on the eight inmate executions. For 
the stays to be lifted before the drugs expire, Rutledge must ask the court to 
expedite the certification process, one which usually puts the ruling into 
effect 18 days after it is issued.

“I will notify the governor once the stays of executions have been lifted so 
that he may set execution dates. I know that victims’ families want to see 
justice carried out, and that is exactly what I will continue to work toward as 
attorney general,” she wrote in an emailed statement.

How Oklahoma’s execution protocol led to errors – and horrific consequences
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/20/oklahoma-death-penalty-botched-execution-report-charles-warner>
If no request to speed up the certification timetable happens, the decision 
becomes final on 11 July. A paralytic drug, vecuronium bromide, expires on 30 
June, and the supplier has said it will not sell the state more.

A group of death-row inmates had argued that Arkansas’ execution secrecy law, 
which requires the state to conceal the maker, seller and other information 
about the drugs, could lead to cruel and unusual punishment and that the state 
reneged on a pledge to share information.

But the high court said in its four-three majority opinion that a lower court 
“erred in ruling that public access to the identity of the supplier of the 
three drugs [that the Arkansas Department of Correction] has obtained would 
positively enhance the functioning of executions in Arkansas. As has been well 
documented, disclosing the information is actually detrimental to the process.”

Jeff Rosenzweig, an attorney representing the inmates, said he was 
disappointed by the court’s ruling. “We are studying the decision and 
anticipate filing a petition for rehearing,” he said.

Three justices wrote full or partial dissents, including Associate Justice 
Robin Wynne, who wrote that he believed the inmates proved their claim that the 
law violated the state constitution’s prohibition on cruel or unusual 
punishment and that the secrecy requirements were unconstitutional. Justice 
Josephine Linker Hart wrote that the dismissal of the complaint was premature 
and that she would have ordered disclosure of the drug information.

In asking for the high court to overturn Pulaski county circuit court judge 
Wendell Griffen’s December ruling that the secrecy provisions of the execution 
law were unconstitutional, attorneys for the state said at least five other 
courts have ruled that the three drugs used in Arkansas’ protocol were 
acceptable, including the sedative midazolam. The US supreme court upheld 
Oklahoma’s use of midazolam last year.

Arkansas Department of Correction spokesman Solomon Graves would neither 
comment on the ruling nor say whether the agency would try to move forward with 
the executions.

Rutledge said the decision protected drug manufacturers “from intimidation and 
harassment”.

For more than 10 years, Arkansas’ executions have been stalled because of 
multiple court challenges over different drug protocols and problems obtaining 
those drugs. Arkansas governor Asa Hutchinson set execution dates last 
September that were later stayed by the high court until the inmates’ challenge 
could be heard.

Hutchinson “believes Judge Griffen overstepped his authority and is pleased 
the Arkansas supreme court reversed his ruling upholding the law protecting the 
confidentiality of the supplier,” spokesman J R Davis said, adding that 
Hutchinson was reviewing the decision and talking with Rutledge regarding “the 
appropriate next steps to take”.

The inmates had argued that without disclosure of the source and other 
information they had no way to determine whether the midazolam, vecuronium 
bromide or potassium chloride would lead to cruel and unusual punishment.

The inmates also argued that the secrecy law violated a settlement in an 
earlier lawsuit that guaranteed inmates would be given the information. The 
state has said that agreement was not a binding contract, and the court agreed 
on Thursday.

Several other issues remain before the state can complete the eight pending 
executions in the seven days before the paralytic drug expires. A handful of 
the inmates have not been given a chance to have clemency hearings, and for 
those who already had them, it was unclear on Thursday whether they would be 
required to be given another opportunity to apply for clemency because a new 
date of execution would have to be set.



 