
Dieters who have managed to shed their excess weight need to do 90 minutes of 
exercise a day to keep the pounds off in the long term, according to a study. 
The finding comes as a leading nutritional researcher called on world leaders 
to tackle obesity with the same urgency as global efforts to tackle climate 
change.

Rena Wing, professor of psychiatry and human behaviour at Brown University, 
told the American Association for the Advancement of Science meeting in Boston 
yesterday that exercising 60 to 90 minutes a day was essential to long term 
weight loss. By studying data on more than 5,000 men and women who have, on 
average, lost 70 pounds and kept the weight off for six years, she found that 
successful dieters had high levels of physical activity and consciously 
controlled their eating habits. This meant frequent weighing, following a 
consistent diet across the week and taking quick remedial action at the first 
sign of weight gain.

"There's no way around it," Wing said. "If you want to lose weight and keep it 
off you need to really change your lifestyle, particularly if you're overweight 
or have a family history of obesity. The obesity epidemic won't go away simply 
because people switch from whole to skimmed milk. They need to substantially 
cut their calories and boost their physical activity to get to a healthy weight 
- and keep minding the scale once they do."

In Britain more than one-fifth of adults are obese and, of the remainder, half 
of men and a third of women are overweight. Obesity is linked to heart disease, 
diabetes and premature death. By 2015, 2.3 billion adults are forecast to be 
overweight, including 700 million obese.

Philip James, of the International Obesity Taskforce, told the seminar urgent 
steps were needed to transform the environment that makes people fat. James, 
who chaired the UN Commission on the Nutritional Challenges of the 21st 
Century, said obesity was a problem for all of society, arguing that blaming 
individuals for their vulnerability to gain weight was no longer acceptable 
when the "environment in which we live is the overwhelming factor amplifying 
the epidemic".

He added: "It is even more naive to tell people that they just need to make a 
little change in their eating habits or their daily activity and suddenly the 
obesity problem will be remarkably easily solved."

A big challenge for the food sector would be to transform its products to 
reduce the promotion and abundant array of high energy foods, he said.
 