
Bridge Inn

"Not so much a pub, more a museum with beer," is how its owners describe the 
Bridge. It has been in landlady Caroline Cheffers-Heard's family since 1897, 
and, in many ways, little has changed over time. Beer is still 
gravity-dispensed from the barrel (from £2.80), mobile phones are discouraged 
("The Bridge is a place of conversation between people and not machines", reads 
a sign) and its rooms are decorated with the sort of antique bric-a-brac - 
grandfather clocks, mounted butterflies, rifles, tattered union flag bunting – 
that might have once cluttered up a Victorian gentlemen's club. Food is served 
lunch-only, midday-2pm, and the menu is as simple as it is sound. There are 
three ploughman's lunches, including one that uses smoked chicken from the 
renownedMike's Smokehouse <http://www.mikes-smokehouse.co.uk/> in nearby 
Loddiswell; pasties and pork pies from local favourites Chunk; and sandwiches. 
A sample sandwich of the pub's own home-cooked ham with elderflower and 
gooseberry chutney and salad sounds a little toppy, at £4.70, but every element 
of it was very good. The thick layer of moist baked ham came apart in 
substantial piggy strands, the chutney was nicely tart, if perhaps a shade too 
sweet, the salad was fresh, and the granary bread first-rate. On a sunny day, 
you can enjoy fine views of the river Clyst and the surrounding countryside, 
sat in the car park, but beer enthusiasts may prefer to linger inside and 
earwig on the enthusiastic, informed commentary between bar staff and drinkers 
on that day's beers (beer menu updated regularly on the pub'sFacebook page 
<http://www.facebook.com/thebridgeinntopsham?sk=wall>). Naturally, the focus is 
on Devon and West Country breweries, such as Jollyboat and Branscombe Vale, 
although I enjoyed a beautifully dry pint of North Cotswold's pale Shag Weaver 
(£3).
• Snacks and meals, £3.20-£7, Bridge Hill, Topsham, 01392 873862, 
cheffers.co.uk/bridge.html <http://www.cheffers.co.uk/bridge.html>

The Exploding Bakery 
 The Exploding Bakery , Devon 
Primarily, the Exploding Bakery works wholesale, supplying local restaurants 
and delicatessens. Savvy punters, however, can also drop in at its central 
Exeter unit and sample its stellar baking, at bargain prices. Each day, the 
bakery has a small selection of items available to go: a fresh soup with 
sourdough bread, lush-topped foccacia slices, perhaps a quivering cheddar and 
rosemary quiche, and several gorgeous cakes. All this is accompanied by great 
coffee, using beans from premium London roaster Monmouth. A sample slice of 
pistachio-topped lemon polenta cake oozed class. It was moist, superbly fresh, 
light, not overly sweet nor confrontationally lemony, the grains falling apart 
easily. There are a few seats outside, which the bakery has made the best of, 
decorating the space with pot plants and herbs, but you're still eating on a 
busy main road outside Exeter's main train station. If you want a little peace 
and quiet in which to savour your haul, wander around the corner into 
Northernhay Gardens.
• Takeaway items £1.50-£2.50. 1B Central Station Buildings, Queen St, 01392 
427900,explodingbakery.com 
<http://www.explodingbakery.com/The_Exploding_Bakery.html> 

Real Food Store
 real food store, exeter 
A novel community project, Real Food is owned by 300 local shareholders. 
Collectively, they wanted to create a showcase for Devonian produce in Exeter 
city centre. The shop fulfils that brief, and how. Its shelves are stacked with 
everything from clotted cream fudge and Ashridge organic cider to handmade pork 
pies by Chunk of Devon and locally smoked duck. Upstairs, a colourful, airy 
utilitarian cafe continues the theme across simple breakfast dishes, gourmet 
sandwiches and specials, such as smoked trout and salmon fishcakes with salad 
and sweet chilli dipping sauce (£6.45). The star of the Real Food show is 
on-site artisan bakery Emma's Bread, whose creations are available to eat in or 
take away. Its lightly cheesy spelt scones are nice, but Emma Parkin's savoury 
flapjacks are unmissable. A moreish mix of mushrooms, for umami depth, carrots, 
onions, cheese, oats and sesame seeds, they are grand and, for £1.95 
(takeaway), you get a substantial slice.
• Takeaway snacks and sandwiches £1-£3.75, eat in £1.25-£6.45, 11-13 Paris 
Street, 01392 681234,realfoodexeter.co.uk <http://www.realfoodexeter.co.uk/>

Boston Tea Party
 the boston tea party, exeter 
Born in Bristol, this is a multiple with soul. Not for Boston Tea Party the 
bland, functional roll-out. It claims its nine West Country venues (with a new 
site due to open in Ringwood in November) are individual spaces, where the 
proper cooking of real ingredients is emphasised. The Exeter branch bears this 
out. There are banks of handsome homemade cakes, freshly squeezed juices and 
lemonades, and packaged sandwiches prepared each morning on local artisan 
breads. Boston also prides itself on its coffee (it uses a blend from Bristol 
roasters Extract) and a sample flat white is, for once, exemplary. Properly 
stretched and textured – rather than simply frothed – warm milk is mixed with a 
short double ristretto to create a genuinely velvety smooth, full-flavoured 
drink. A plate of eggs Florentine (£5.95) is also sound. The hollandaise could 
have been a touch lighter and sharper, but it is, otherwise, a thoroughly 
decent breakfast. Regulars rate Boston's cheeseburger (£6.95), and its new lamb 
kofta wrap (£6.25), with apricot and toasted seed couscous, sounds appetising.
• Breakfast £1.75-£6.75, sandwiches and meals £3.85-£6.75, 84 Queen Street, 
01392 201181,bostonteaparty.co.uk <http://www.bostonteaparty.co.uk/>

Petit Mange
 Photograph: Joe Willcocks 
Magdalen Road is Exeter's foodie enclave. Along one short stretch of tarmac, 
you will find a fishmonger (remember them?), wine shop, the butchery outlet for 
award-winning Devon farm Piper's, the old school Village Bakery, as well as Bon 
Goût (45 Magdalen Road, 01392 435521,bongoutdeli.co.uk 
<http://www.bongoutdeli.co.uk/>) and Belgreen (25 Magdalen Road, 01392 271190, 
belgreen.co.uk 
<http://www.facebook.com/pages/Belgreen-Shop-and-Cafe/109818355788444>), a 
couple of interesting budget eating options. The former deals in sandwiches, 
loaded pizza slices, cakes, homemade pies, pasties and novel chorizo or Devon 
scrumpy scotch eggs. Meanwhile, the brand new Belgreen textile shop and cafe – 
which I didn't get a chance to test – delivers such slick-sounding mains as 
Exmouth mussel and crab linguine or confit duck, Toulouse sausage and flageolet 
beans, at around £9 a plate.

Petit Mange – a pleasant split-level bistro, decorated with splashy action 
paintings – is another good reason to visit Magdalen Road. Chef Adam Page's 
keenly priced daytime menu includes snacky dishes, say a daily soup or devilled 
whitebait and aïoli, as well as more substantive dishes, such as a tempting ham 
hock and pea pie, new potatoes, green beans and red cabbage (£7). Annoyingly, 
on this visit, the latter was one of four courses from the short menu that was 
off, so it was left to Petit Mange's 5oz burger (£8) to save the day. Pink, 
liberally scattered with herbs, properly seasoned, it was long on juicy, beefy 
flavour and it came with a zippy tomato and courgette chutney. Chunky chips in 
a Jenga-style stack are, of course, wrong, but these (skin-on, and accurately 
cooked) were as good as misguided chips get.
• Dishes £4.50-£8, 29 Magdalen Road, 01392 435883

Oliva Kitchen Deli

This delicatessen and sandwich shop is a spin-off from the Mediterranean 
restaurant next door. Many of its products, such as its seriously good looking 
tortilla (£1.50 a slice) or its sensational, grown-up white chocolate and whole 
nut brownies (£1.60), are made in chef Tim Golder's kitchen, with others 
sourced from a key network of Devon producers. The homity pies, made locally, 
are filling comfort food of the first order, particularly the ham version 
(£2.85). It's a liberally seasoned pillow of real muscular ham, soft potato, 
leeks and herbs, bound in a rich cheese sauce. Take your lunch down to Topsham 
Quay, which – the view stretching out for miles from the muddy banks of the Exe 
estuary – is a lovely spot in the late afternoon sun.
• Snack items, £1-£2.50, sandwiches £3.75-£4.25, 5 Fore Street, Topsham, 01392 
877878,olivarestaurant.co.uk <http://www.olivarestaurant.co.uk/>

Georgian Tea Room
 broadway house, topsham 
As a nation, we are in the midst of a tea room boom. Trendy cafes focused on 
baking, brewing and the ritual of afternoon tea proliferate. Topsham's Georgian 
Tea Room, however, is an original. There are no cup cakes or whoopie pies on 
the menu, no designer wallpapers in the hall, no eye-watering prices. Instead, 
Heather Knee's unselfconsciously retro tea room has been doing all the right 
things (baking 'n' making everything from scratch, using local and kitchen 
garden ingredients) since long before it was fashionable, and will, no doubt, 
be doing so for many more years to come. The menu includes a full array of 
honest, home-cooked meals and sandwiches, from the likes of a cheddar and 
courgette soup to pork loin with sage and onion stuffing, roasties and seasonal 
veg, but most people are here for Knee's scones with homemade jam and clotted 
cream. Said scones arrive still warm from the oven, air-light and moist, the 
jam farmhouse-style, the clotted cream something you carve rather than spoon. 
Taken together, it makes for an ambrosially good mouthful, a wholesome hit of 
sweet, creamy biscuity goodness. One warning: if you sit in the garden, be 
prepared to do battle with the wasps. They love Knee's jam.
•Tea and scones, from £3.95, full meals £4.60-£8, Broadway House, 35 High 
Street, Topsham, 01392 873465,broadwayhouse.com <http://www.broadwayhouse.com/>

Avocet Café 
 avocet cafe, topsham 
There are other good cafes in Topsham. Route 2, for instance, is a great 
little spot (meals £4.25-£8.50, 1 Monmouth Hill, Topsham, 01392 875085,
route2topsham.co.uk <http://www.route2topsham.co.uk/>). It's open later than 
Avocet and there's a bit more of a lively buzz about it – it's particularly 
useful if you're a cyclist (it doubles as a cycle hire/ repair shop). Its 
populist menu includes an all-day full breakfast that uses sausages from 
Topsham butcher Arthur's, and a creditable homemade beef and sage burger. If 
you are starving and need to fill up, it is probably the better option.

In terms of pure food quality, however, Avocet shades it. Its bacon sandwich 
uses rare breed Gloucester Old Spot rashers (£5). The soup of the day could be 
sweet potato and leek with dukkah spices. Clearly, this is an exacting 
operation. There is a quiet ambition to the kitchen's cooking. A plate of Devon 
rarebit, laced with a slight cidery tang, is well-executed, the topping a 
correct mustard 'n' milk paste, using a proper, punchy mature cheddar. Avocet's 
cakes look fantastic, too, and its West Country cheese plates (£5/£6.90) are a 
good way of eating your way around the region. One thing that needs work, 
though, is Avocet's coffee. A sample flat white was too hot, too frothy and 
lacked creamy body.
• Breakfast £1.75-£6.90, snacks and light meals £1.50-£4.20, lunch meals 
£5-£8.50, 86 Fore Street, Topsham, 01392 877887,avocetcafe.co.uk 
<http://www.avocetcafe.co.uk/> 

The Fish Shed
 Fish Shed, Topsham 
Is the Fish Shed Britain's best chippy? Quite possibly. It is certainly worth 
a detour from wherever you are in Devon. Much less the 15-minute walk from the 
centre of Topsham. Originally inspired by the combined chip shop/fishmonger 
operations which he had seen in Australia, owner Dave Kerley has taken this 
traditional British institution, stripped out all the rubbish (burgers, kebabs, 
vegetable oil, bulk-frying), worked back to the basics and built a chippy fit 
for the 21st century. A one-time scallop diver, Kerley only sources fish from 
local day-boats. This means that he knows who caught what and where, and that 
his customers get to eat their fish within 36 hours of it being plucked from 
the sea. Likewise, the Shed's well-seasoned beer batter is prepared daily and 
it fries in high-temperature beef dripping, although you can also have your 
fish grilled. The menu usually includes a wide choice of, for instance, 
monkfish, brill, eel, John Dory, scallops, even lobster and river Exe mussels. 
Thus, a series of small decisions and conscientiously completed chores leads 
inexorably to the perfect serving of fish 'n' chips. The golden brown chips 
have a crunchy, glassy exterior, yet are fluffy within. The pearly haddock is 
steamed (not fried, you'll note) within a delicate batter casing, its flavour 
not overwhelmed, as it sometimes is in Yorkshire, by beefy savour. Mushy peas 
and tartare sauce sparkle. Rarely is such simple food rendered with such 
precision.
• Fish 'n' chips, £5.50-£10, Darts Farm, Clyst St George, Topsham, 01392 
878206,dartsfarm.co.uk <http://www.dartsfarm.co.uk/fish-shed/fish-shed.html>

The Plant Cafe-Deli
 Photograph: David Emery 
The Plant has the edge on many of its right-on veggie competitors in two 
obvious ways. First, you'll find it on Cathedral Green, which, on a sunny day, 
is Exeter's prettiest alfresco lunch spot. Second, its food shimmers with 
flavour. You can have all the ethical local ingredients in the world, but if 
your food tastes like an obligation, the project is doomed. With its "lovingly 
handmade" food, Plant seduces your tastebuds, rather than appealing to your 
conscience. Breakfast runs from simple croissants to Persian baked eggs, the 
deli-counter thereafter serving up a variety of interesting, bright-eyed salads 
(for instance, chickpea, marinated artichokes, dill and lemon); thick, glossy 
frittata; individual vegetable tarts; and comely cakes. The risotto layer 
(Fri/Sat only, £3.95 or £3.30 takeaway) is fantastic: dense, fragrant, a 
veritable vegetable bingo, topped with grilled goat's cheese and olives. Plant 
has a second night site at the Bike Shed Theatre (162-3 Fore Street, 01392 
434169,bikeshedtheatre.co.uk <http://www.bikeshedtheatre.co.uk/>).
• Snacks £1-£3, meals £3.40-£7.95. 1 Cathedral Yard, 01392 428144

Tony travelled with Cross Country trains (crosscountrytrains.co.uk 
<http://www.crosscountrytrains.co.uk/>) – visit the website for fares from 
Manchester, Birmingham and Bristol to Exeter. St Olave's Hotel (Mary Arches 
Street, Exeter, 01392 217736,olaves.co.uk <http://www.olaves.co.uk/>) is 
centrally located and has rooms from £85 a night. For more visitor information 
on Exeter, Topsham and wider Devon, visit Heart of Devon (heartofdevon.com 
<http://www.heartofdevon.com/>) 

This article was updated on 11 May 2012
 