
Jennet Thomas, London

A comicbook hero-cum-evangelist named the Purple Preacher, blessed with the 
power of persuasion, works some unusual seduction techniques in Jennet Thomas's 
debut film installation at Matt's Gallery. Rubber Adam and Eve dolls, garage 
gigs and an outing to a model village are all part of his charm offensive. This 
blend of dream logic, bizarre shaggy-dog-story repetitions and anarchic fizz is 
typical territory for the London-based artist who co-founded the pioneering 
Exploding Cinema Collective in the early 90s. Her interests are grounded in 
regular human foibles and the everyday pitfalls of belief systems, so as much 
as a wild plunge into the absurd, Thomas shows just how bizarre ordinary life 
can be.

Matt's Gallery, E3, Wed to 6 Jun

Skye Sherwin

Eleanor Moreton, Liverpool

Eleanor Moreton's portrait paintings appear deliberately awkward, both in the 
demeanour of her subjects and in the manner of their depiction. Moreton paints 
from photographs of historical figures, often of Austrian authority, whether it 
be in politics (Emperor Franz Joseph) or in culture (architect Adolf Loos), 
exaggerating poses with deceptively cack-handed daubing. Facial features are 
dislocated, proportions warped. The clown-like absurdity of authoritative 
posturing and stately dress is on show here, and the subjects take on the aura 
of fairytale grotesques in colours that tend towards the pallid, the insipid 
and the downright unwell. Why the artist is so fixated by the Austro-Hungarian 
Empire is never clarified, all of which adds up to a body of work that is 
convincing for being so distinctively peculiar.

Ceri Hand Gallery, to 22 May

Robert Clark

Naori Priestly, Portsmouth

Naori Priestly may do clever things with crochet, knitting and embroidery, but 
she is more of a domestic witch than a goddess. "Who is the fairest of them 
all?" reads the weaving of a giant teabag. One might think twice before 
challenging this artist, in case, as with Philip the teenage iron, you're 
transformed into a household appliance/bristling gremlin covered in punky pink 
felt spikes. Indeed, Priestly's work suggests that home isn't always the safest 
place. The back of her Yellow Jacket is embroidered in retro 70s brown with a 
tree bearing skulls, beneath which two housewives have knives ready for the 
roosters hiding in its branches. Inspired by nursery rhymes and fairytales, 
this is sweetly subversive work that charms as much as it alarms.

Aspex Gallery, to 9 May

Skye Sherwin

Pioneering Painters, Glasgow

A major look back at the work of the Glasgow Boys, a group of intrepid young 
Scottish painters who were infatuated by their European impressionist and 
post-impressionist contemporaries and bandied together during the late-19th 
century. James Guthrie's typical To Pastures New translates the airy joie de 
vivre of Monet into a slightly sentimentalised Scottish farmyard scene, replete 
with cutesy bonneted maiden. Similarly, The Druids – Bringing in the Mistletoe 
by George Henry and EA Hornel transports the mythical boldness of Gauguin's 
Tahiti into a scene of Celtic fancy.

Kelvingrove Art <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Gallery, to 27 
Sep

Robert Clark

Cerith Wyn Evans, London

In recent years, Cerith Wyn Evans has worked a glamorous, less-is-more brand 
of conceptualism, full of secret signs and brief decadent flashes. Chandeliers 
and disco balls have blinked messages in Morse code and Latin palindromes have 
been realised in neon. This show is named after Steely Dan's 1975 track 
Everyone's Gone to the Movies, Now We're Alone at Last, whose bubbly music 
masks sinister lyrics, setting the tone for riffs on form and content through 
neon text pieces, sound works and light installations.

White Cube at Mason's Yard, SW1, Wed to 22 May

Skye Sherwin

Confrontation, Edinburgh

This, the first in the National Gallery Complex's new series of revealing 
confrontations between paintings on similar themes from different historical 
periods, sets Lucas Cranach's 1537 Venus and Cupid against Otto Dix's 1932 Nude 
Girl On a Fur, just to see what artistic and sexual sparks might be ignited. 
The curled locks and diaphanous shawl of Cranach's Venus levitate airily as if 
they cannot help but pay homage to her revelatory sensuality. Her gaze is a 
mischievous, spirited come-on. The blonde tresses of Dix's nude merge with the 
fur to created a nest-like intimacy. Her dilated pupils lift towards her 
eyelids in a self-engrossed swoon. Both images are masterpieces of teasing 
eroticism, yet neither bear the slightest resemblance to the anodyne 
conventions of today's centerfold tradition. And how stunningly beautiful they 
both are.

National Gallery Complex, to 18 Jul

Robert Clark

Anthony Caro, London

One of the original heavy metal boys, Anthony Caro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/caro> may now be in his late 80s, but 
his work's as muscular as ever – as this exhibition of new "upright sculptures" 
in rusted steel, wood and brass demonstrates. In the 1960s, he revolutionised 
sculpture, kicking away the plinth and ditching the smooth surfaces of his 
former employer, Henry Moore, in favour of rusted or glossily painted, welded 
steel abstractions. Having long worn the title of Britain's greatest living 
sculptor, Caro cuts a less radical figure these days; but he's no less 
prolific: this selection comes from 43 works created in the past 18 months 
alone.

Annely Juda Fine Art, W1, Wed to 2 Jul

Skye Sherwin

Global Studio, Liverpool

Operating as an arts centre with an international reputation for more than 100 
years, the Bluecoat has a closer relationship with the ongoing atmosphere of 
studio life than most formal galleries. Now, it is host to more than 30 artists 
from Austria, France, Germany, Japan and Pakistan (as well as Merseyside) in a 
series of collaborations that treat the galleries as actively changing studio 
spaces. Wuon-Gean Ho, James Quin and Jemma Egan are among the artists sharing 
their enthusiasms and a peep at the peculiarities of the studio struggle.

The Bluecoat, to 20 Jun

Robert Clark
 