
Last-line antibiotics against serious pneumonia and bloodstream infections are 
under real threat inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> as 
resistant strains of bacteria emerge, experts are warning.

A new report from the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control 
<http://ecdc.europa.eu/en/Pages/home.aspx> (ECDC) reveals that resistance has 
continued to increase across Europe in spite of attempts to raise global 
awareness of the danger to the fundamentally important antibiotic class of 
drugs. Without them, some infectious diseases could become untreatable and some 
forms of major surgery would again become perilous.

The report shows that antibiotic resistance continued to increase between 2012 
and 2015 across the EU for most of the bacteria and drugs that are being 
monitored.

Antibiotic resistance: the race to stop the 'silent tsunami' facing modern 
medicine
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/blog/2015/aug/21/antibiotic-resistance-the-race-to-stop-the-silent-tsunami-facing-modern-medicine>
Particularly worrying is the increase in resistance to antibiotics considered 
the last line, where there are no new drugs to treat patients with certain 
serious infections.

In the Klebsiella bacteria, which is responsible for dangerous pneumonia 
infections, resistance to the antibiotic class called the carbapenems increased 
from 6.2% in 2012 to 8.1% in 2015. Combined resistance to carbapenems and 
polymyxins, such as the antibiotic colistin, was reported in some countries.

Antibiotic use went up in hospitals across the EU, although it went down in 
community settings in six countries.

Vytenis Andriukaitis, the European commissioner for health and food safety, 
said: “Antibiotic resistance is one of the most pressing public health issues 
of our time. If we don’t tackle it, we can go back to a time when even the 
simplest medical operations were not possible and organ transplants, cancer 
chemotherapy or intensive care even less so.

“The European commission will launch a new action plan next year so that we 
can, together with our partners in the EU member states and internationally, 
continue to ensure that the prevention and control of antibiotic resistance is 
strengthened within a one-health approach.”

There are concerns about the rise of strains of E coli that are resistant to 
antibiotics. The bacteria is a frequent cause of infections to the bloodstream 
and urinary tract, which could become harder to treat.

Widespread publicity about the dangers of the “superbug” MRSA 
(methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus) and efforts to increase hygiene 
in hospitals brought the levels down between 2012 and 2015, but eight out of 30 
countries still have levels of resistance of 25%, making it a public health 
priority.

Resistance isn’t futile – how to tackle drug-resistant superbugs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jul/19/antibiotics-new-research-end-of-drug-resistant-superbugs>
Dr Andrea Ammon, the acting director of the ECDC, said there was a lot of 
variation in the picture around Europe, but generally the proportions of 
resistant bacteria were higher in the southern and southeastern European 
countries.

“Multidrug resistance is worrying,” she said. “We also have some reports of 
combined resistance against so-called last line antibiotics.”

These drugs, which include the carbapenems and colistin, are usually kept in 
reserve for infections that other drugs can no longer treat.

There have been single reports of resistance to the last-line antibiotic 
colistin in the Czech Republic, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Poland and 
Romania.

“It is not a large problem but it exists. Whenever we have something like this 
and don’t take good care, it spreads,” she said.

New classes of antibiotic drug are needed, butAmmon said: “We know what can be 
done and what should be done right now regardless of what new drugs come along. 
We must try to do the utmost to make the current antibiotics last as long as 
possible.”

That meant using them prudently and only when necessary and at the right 
dosage, as well as careful hand hygiene control, especially in hospitals.
 