
There is simply no way around it; finding a fulfilling job in the arts sector 
is hard. Finding one if you are disabled or suffer from mental health problems 
is even harder. But now, disabled professionals in the arts sector are shedding 
light on the positive steps being taken towards integration and confidence 
building in some of London's unlikeliest forums.

Paula Garfield, artistic director of Deafinitely Theatre 
<http://www.deafinitelytheatre.co.uk/>, a deaf-led company based in London, is 
honest about the bewilderment deaf people feel when looking to forge a career. 
When I asked her for a positive message to send to young deaf people looking to 
become as successful as she is, she refused outright to adopt any false 
optimism: "It's very, very difficult. I can't say, 'oh, go to college and learn 
to be a director,' because it just isn't accessible to deaf people."

Garfield is acutely aware of the social claustrophobia faced by the deaf 
community - each play at Deafinitely Theatre features a deaf perspective 
because these are so infrequently 'put to paper'. Slowly but surely, her 
company is finding ways to loosen up further constrictions deaf actors feel 
suffocated by. She integrates her cast with hearing actors to synthesise a 
positive deaf identity as far as possible, and a new "Hub" platform, where her 
cast can benefit from the knowledge of guest speakers, is in its inception 
stages.

Deafinitely's youth theatre, running from October 28 to 30 March 2013, 
includes sessions at RADA and networking opportunities at the National 
Theatre's Connection Festival. Garfield also highlights the deaf community's 
heightened levels of visual creativity, and recommends those with an eye for 
film to visit television channel BSLBT's recent Zoom Short Film Scheme, an 
enterprise linking new talents to professional production companies.

Moreover, for those wishing to pursue a theatrical career along formal 
academic lines, options such as Reading University's BA in theatre arts, 
education and deaf studies are now available as full degree courses.

There is no point in denying the sad fact that deaf artists are frequently 
relegated to a 'deaf artists' niche, but it is a niche that is perpetually 
blossoming, and one that might be profited from in much the same way as any 
other - experience, contacts and hard work.

If finding an arts career the old fashioned way, scrolling endlessly through 
websites and scouring newspaper listings, is proving daunting, particularly for 
those who suffer from any kind of mental distress, a charitable support 
organisation might be a better place to get started.

Cooltan Arts <http://www.cooltanarts.org.uk/> doesn't describe itself as a 
careers service, but it does offer a broad selection of classes in art, 
textiles, fashion, poetry, writing, and digital arts for members across all 
boroughs.

Despite the charity's promotion of peaceful and therapeutic artwork, it is 
entirely plugged into the modern art scene, encouraging its members to promote 
their work in new and innovative ways. A number of participants have created 
their own websites after attending digital arts classes, and have exhibited at 
the Tate Modern and on arts agency Outside In's website.

Cooltan also offers unique courses in self advocacy; a program offering 
instruction in communication skills, self-esteem, debt management and promoting 
rights listed under the Mental Health Act. Somewhere like Cooltan would be an 
excellent ground for anyone concerned about how their mental health problems 
might be received in the wider world of employment, offering chances to discuss 
'labeling' problems in environments as refreshing as sponsored walks, as well 
as plenty of "creative jogging", as one member puts it.

As the Paralympics approaches, now is an especially good networking time for 
deaf and disabled people - even if you don't fancy taking to track and field.
Southwark Arts Forum <http://www.southwarkartsforum.org/>, a charity supporting 
artists and creative industries in south London since 1987, is holding 
Boundless Arts in conjunction with the Paralympics, a day celebrating disabled 
arts and guaranteeing interesting professional conversation. Blind 
singer-storyteller and music teacher at Morley college, Kate Portal, hopes this 
kind of event will elevate London's thriving disabled arts from a subculture 
status.

Ultimately job hunting is difficult for anyone, whether deaf, blind, hearing, 
disabled, mentally unwell or not. But now is the time to feel most exhilarated 
about ever-emerging opportunities and to find new professional footing. When I 
asked Kate Portal about the progression of her career, she said: "You make it 
sound very formal, like there came a point where there was a career in the bag 
and you open it up and you set it up like putting a flat-pack piece of 
furniture together."

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 