
For David Haye, life will only get better. For Audley Harrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/audley-harrison> there is unremitting 
grimness ahead of him after his abject surrender to the WBA world heavyweight 
champion in Manchester tonight.

Haye was so confident of obliterating Harrison that he told friends to put all 
their money on the third round and their plan worked out perfectly, against a 
backdrop of boos from the packed MEN Arena that soon turned to roars of 
approval. At 1min 53sec of round three, Harrison lay sagging in the arms of the 
Puerto Rican referee Luis Pabon, having already been dumped for a count of nine 
under a quite bewildering barrage of head shots from the champion.

"I told my friends I would knock him out in the third round," Haye said. 
"That's why the first two rounds were so quiet. I knew the boos would turn to 
cheers. After I looked him in the eyes at the weigh-in, I knew I would do that 
to him." Harrison, clearly still dazed and hardly thinking straight, refused 
later to take in the enormity of his defeat, maintaining his plan to take Haye 
deeper into the fight had simply been derailed.

"But credit to David, he caught me with some great shots. I beat the count but 
I was not allowed to carry on."

Harrison landed a single punch in 32 attempts, a woeful description of his 
timidity. On the most embarrassing night of his life, the former Olympic gold 
medallist made what was surely his exit from the sport at 39 with a body honed 
to near perfection after 12 weeks in training camp, and a mind and spirit 
utterly shattered.

He reckoned they would fight like "cats and dogs" but the opening was more cat 
and mouse. Not a blow worth the name was landed by either combatant in round 
one. Haye appeared every bit as cautious as his infamously wary opponent, a 
study in mutual fear. Haye tried a wide left hook. It missed. Then a right. It 
missed. Finally one landed and Audley looked confused, perhaps because the pact 
had been broken. After six minutes, Harrison had still not ventured to hurt his 
opponent.

Pabon warned them for their passivity; he was probably the most popular man in 
the building. In the third round, Haye finally exploded, with full-blooded 
shots to head and ribcage that Harrison could neither see nor resist. His giant 
frame wilted then collapsed after a barrage that left him bewildered. The 
referee rescued him from his delusion as his big brown eyes glazed over and his 
legs were drained of the will to stand. It was the saddest of endings for a 
decent man but reluctant fighter. He had entered the ring wearing a T-shirt 
that bore the slogan "Keep Stonebridge Adventure Playground Open", a nod 
towards his north London roots.

But sentiment plays no part in boxing and is less in evidence among the 
heavyweights than the smaller divisions, where faint hearts can sometimes find 
a hiding place. No such refuge offered itself for Harrison once Haye let his 
punches go.

There was malice in every blow, a release of frustration after weeks of hard 
training that had brought him down to half a pound over 15 stone, the lightest 
at which he has fought since he was the world cruiserweight champion. Haye is 
moving among the big boys now, however, and his targets are Klitschko, Wladimir 
and Vitali, who between them own the other three versions of the world title. 
Haye, provisionally, has a mandatory defence of his WBA belt against Ruslan 
Chagaev in February or March although his health is said to be suspect.

"I guarantee those fights against the Klitschkos will happen next year and I 
guarantee I will give them the same treatment Audley Harrison got," Haye said.

This was the most curious of evenings, a world title fight in name, certainly, 
but a contest devalued by both the challenger's long history of underperforming 
in big fights and his clear reluctance to put anything on the line in what he 
knew would be his first, last and only chance at boxing redemption.

Audley weighed a touch over 18 stone. A couple of pounds of that, surely, was 
the perspiration of anxiety. He had promised with unequivocal certainty that he 
would shock the world, in echo of Muhammad Ali's boast against Sonny Liston. It 
was blasphemy of the highest order. The friendship that had supposedly been 
under strain for several years between Haye and Harrison can now be restored, 
given their feud had actually served its purpose in ramping up considerable 
interest in this fight.

Haye, so strident in recent weeks, had a final warm word for Harrison, who 
once was his mentor: "I've known him for many years and I'd like to take him 
out for a drink later."

It was not a sentiment that would find much resonance among the 20,000 
customers watching.
 