
I could not agree more with Andrew Wilton on the travesty of film-makers’ lack 
of understanding of what it takes to make great art (G2, 27 October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/oct/27/films-about-painting-mr-turner>
). Whatever Turner may have appeared as a man to his peers and the general 
public, any observation of the paintings, watercolours and drawings he made 
will reward the viewer with an astounding appreciation of his sensitivity, 
dedication and care of application. He was capable of painting fast, but many 
of his paintings show applications of carefully laid layers of glazes, each of 
which might take three days to dry, and into which he has worked various 
textures and brush strokes. This type of painting can take months to complete. 
Thus to see Timothy Spall in Mr Turner mindlessly attacking a badly painted oil 
sketch was a painful experience for those that love and study art, spoiling for 
me what otherwise was a beautifully shot and constructed film.
Peter Nahum
Leicester Galleries, London

• If the Vatican had not removed the shadows which Michelangelo had painted on 
to and around his depicted figures (after he had studied the shadows cast by 
the small clay or wax models he made of his figures) during the so-called 
restoration of the Sistine Chapel ceiling in the 1980s, it would not have been 
necessary to install over 7,000 LEDs in an attempt to recover those very 
three-dimensional effects today (Sistine Chapel goes digital to cap tourist 
surge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/29/sistine-chapel-lighting-air-conditioning-michelangelo-vatican>
, 30 October). It was claimed during the restoration that removing the 
ceiling’s glue-painted shading was necessary to liberate the brilliant colours 
originally used to cut through the gloom of a large candlelit space. If that 
rationale had been correct (and not, as is demonstrable, misguided), why should 
it now be necessary, only two decades later, to flood the chapel with permanent 
artificial light? Why does it look, from all photographs of the chapel today, 
as if the garish “liberated” 1980s colours that were left exposed – for the 
first time in their history – to the chapel’s notorious airborne pollutants are 
already fading?
Michael Daley
Director, ArtWatch UK

• So yet again the Arts Council gives an important painting to Oxford’s 
Ashmolean, where it “would be permanently located” (Constable work settles £1m 
tax bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/oct/28/john-constable-painting-transferred-public-ownership-lieu-1-million-tax>
, 28 October). This follows a series of presentations to the Ashmolean, 
including Millais’s portrait of Ruskin in 2013. Once more the English disease 
of giving to him that hath, particularly in London or the golden triangle.
Daniel McDowell
Ludlow, Shropshire 
 