
Ian McLagan, the London-born keyboardist who wrote his name into rock history 
as a member of the Small Faces and the Faces and as a collaborator with other 
groups including the Rolling Stones, has died in Texas at the age of 69.

McLagan, who co-wrote Faces songs including Cindy Incidentally, You’re So 
Rude, Bad’n’Ruin and Three Button Hand Me Down, was also behind the distinctive 
Wurlitzer electric piano heard on tracks including the Faces’ Stay With Me and 
the Stones’ Miss You.

He died on Wednesday in Austin <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/austin>, 
Texas, where he had lived for 20 years, after what local reports said was a 
stroke.

Born in Hounslow in May 1945, McLagan began his music music career in the 
early 1960s, when he took up the Wurlitzer and the Hammond organ. Don Arden, 
manager of the Small Faces, hired him in 1965 to replace Jimmy Winston in the 
band, which changed its name to the Faces in 1969 after Rod Stewart and Ronnie 
Wood joined.

McLagan, known to friends and fans as “Mac”, worked with the Rolling Stones 
after the Faces split in 1975 and was a session musician for artists including 
Joe Cocker, Bob Dylan, Chuck Berry and Bruce Springsteen. Rod Stewart, who paid 
tribute to the musician in a statement, said that McLagan embodied “the true 
spirit of the Faces”.

He added: “Last night I was at a charity do, Mick Hucknall was singing I’d 
Rather Go Blind and Ron Wood texted to say Ian had passed. It was as if his 
spirit was in the room. I’ll miss you mate.”

A debut solo album, Troublemaker, was released in 1979, and McLagan continued 
to make music in his own right with his own group, the Bump Band.

Ken Kushnick, his manager, was quoted by US news outlet KXAN as saying: “He 
was a beloved friend to so many people and a true rock’n’roll spirit. His 
persona and gift of song impacted the music across oceans and generations.

“Ian’s artistry, generosity and warmth of spirit touched countless other 
musicians and music fans around the world. His loss will be felt by so many.”

McLagan had earlier this year sketched out plans for reunions in 2015 by the 
Faces and Small Faces, suggesting that both groups could re-form. Despite a 
recent argument about which project should take precedence, McLagan said it was 
“looking very healthy” for a full Faces lineup in 2015.

Fans should expect “big news any day”, he told ABC News Radio: “It’s a plan. I 
hope it all comes together. It sounds like it will this time.”

Among those paying tribute to McLagan was Billy Bragg, who tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/billybragg/status/540258435934486528>: “I have lost a dear 
friend and British rock has lost one of its greatest players. RIP Ian McLagan.”

Others included Steve Jones, guitarist with the Sex Pistols, who tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/JonesysJukebox/status/540277844207616000>: “Sorry to hear 
Ian McLagan died today, he and the faces was a big part of my teens.”

McLagan was surrounded by family and friends at the time of his death.
 