


Digital Sky Technologies, the Russian firm behind Goldman Sachs's $450m 
(£290m) investment in Facebook, boasts an eye-catching set of relationships of 
its own – including close ties with the investment bank, billionaire Arsenal 
suitorAlisher Usmanov <https://www.theguardian.com/business/alisher-usmanov> 
and the Kremlin.

Three well known Goldman bankers have joined DST over the past three years: 
Alexander Tamas in 2008; Verdi Israelian in 2009; and John Lindfors last June, 
while Goldman led November's $5.7bn flotation of Russian internet business 
Mail.ru, which was spun out of DST last year.

DST was founded by Yuri Milner, pictured right, and Gregory Finger in 2005 and 
the company initially bought 2% ofFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> for £200m in 2009. That stake 
is now owned by Mail.ru but some estimates now put DST's stake at almost 10%. 
DST will pick up $50m of Goldman's $450m investment, which will be held through 
its DST Global division along with other internet investments including Zynga 
and Groupon.

Usmanov, the Uzbek oligarch who owns 27% of Arsenal football club, has an 
undisclosed stake in DST Global. He also owns 27% of Mail.ru, which entitles 
him to two representatives – Vladimir Streshinsky and Matthew Hammond – on the 
company's nine-strong board. DST has admitted that its association with a man 
who spent a spell in Soviet prison during the 1980s [see footnote] initially 
caused "a lot of reservations" in Silicon Valley, although the company appears 
to have few such problems in Russia.

A Moscow source said: "DST has the backing of the big boys at the top in the 
Kremlin, which is why it will go from strength to strength."

A DST spokesman said: "Yuri Milner in his personal capacity is a member of the 
president's commission on modernisation. In this capacity he acts as an adviser 
on the promotion of broadband development and electronic government in Russia. 
However, there is no substance to the suggestion that DST receives any formal 
support from the Kremlin."

•This article was amended on Friday, 14 January 2011. We have removed the 
phrase :"albeit on charges he claims were trumped up". Furthermore Mr Alisher 
Usmanov has asked us to point out that all charges in relation to the six years 
he spent in prison were dismissed by the Supreme Court of the Republic of 
Uzbekistan and he was fully exonerated in 2000. His criminal record was 
expunged.

 