
Fairy stories such as Beauty and the Beast and Rumpelstiltskin can be traced 
back thousands of years to prehistoric times, with one tale originating from 
the bronze age, academics have revealed.

Using techniques normally employed by biologists, they studied 
<http://rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/3/1/150645#F4> common links 
between 275 Indo-European fairy tales from around the world and found some have 
roots that are far older than previously known, and “long before the emergence 
of the literary record”.

While stories such as Beauty and the Beast and Rumplestiltskin were first 
written down in the 17th and 18th century, the researchers found they 
originated “significantly earlier”. “Both tales can be securely traced back to 
the emergence of the major western Indo-European subfamilies as distinct 
lineages between 2,500 and 6,000 years ago,” they write.

Durham University anthropologist Dr Jamie Tehrani, who worked with folklorist 
Sara Graça da Silva, from New University of Lisbon, believed the research –
published in the Royal Society Open Science journal 
<http://rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/3/1/150645> – has answered a 
question about our cultural heritage.

These stories have been told since before even English, French and Italian 
existed
Dr Jamie Tehrani 
In the 19th century Wilhelm Grimm, of the Brothers Grimm, believed many of the 
fairy stories they popularised were rooted in a shared cultural history dating 
back to the birth of the Indo-European language family.

But later thinkers challenged that view, saying some stories were much 
younger, and passed into oral tradition having first been written down by 
writers from the 16th and 17th centuries.

Da Silva told the Guardian that the origin of folk tales was one of the 
“biggest mysteries” in folk tale studies, with its reconstruction “often 
frustrated not only by difficulties in defining the genre but also as a result 
of the rich interplay between oral and written traditions”. The new method of 
mapping the stories through common languages and geographical proximity worked, 
“because in oral tradition, folk tales are transmitted through spoken language, 
so a correlation might be expected; and also because both languages and folk 
tales are transmitted from generation to generation.”

Tehrani said their study agreed with Grimm’s theory: “Some of these stories go 
back much further than the earliest literary record and indeed further back 
than classical mythology – some versions of these stories appear in Latin and 
Greek texts – but our findings suggest they are much older than that.”

Analysis showed Jack and the Beanstalk was rooted in a group of stories 
classified as The Boy Who Stole Ogre’s Treasure, and could be traced back to 
when eastern and western Indo-European languages split – more than 5,000 years 
ago. Beauty and the Beast and Rumpelstiltskin to be about 4,000 years old. A 
folk tale called The Smith and the Devil was estimated to date back 6,000 years 
to the bronze age.

Forgotten fairytales slay the Cinderella stereotype | Philip Oltermann
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/dec/26/fairytale-ending-forgotten-folklorist-schonwerth>
The story, which involves a blacksmith selling his soul in a pact with the 
devil in order to gain supernatural ability, then tricking the evil power, is 
not so well known today, but its theme of a Faustian pact is familiar to many.


The study employed phylogenetic analysis, which was developed to investigate 
evolutionary relationships between species, and used a tree of Indo-European 
languages to trace the descent of shared tales on it, to see how far they could 
be demonstrated to go back in time.

Tehrani said: “We find it pretty remarkable these stories have survived 
without being written. They have been told since before even English, French 
and Italian existed. They were probably told in an extinct Indo-European 
language.”

Da Silva believes the stories endure thanks to “the power of storytelling and 
magic from time immemorial”.

“Besides, the motifs present in fairytales are timeless and fairly universal, 
comprising dichotomies such as good and evil; right and wrong, punishment and 
reward, moral and immoral, male and female,” she added. “Ultimately, despite 
being often disregarded as fictitious, and even as a lesser form of narrative, 
folk tales are excellent case studies for cross-cultural comparisons and 
studies on human behaviour, including cooperation, decision making, [and so 
on].”

The author and academic Marina Warner, who has written a history of 
fairytales, called the paper “fascinating”. “What’s interesting to me is it 
shows how deeply this creative power of the imagination lies in the human 
being, how it’s about making sense of your world by inventing narratives that 
resist its difficulties,” she said. “In the case of The Smith and the Devil, 
it’s a cunning tale – the trickster tricked, showing a very ancient version of 
that defiance of difficulty. That capricious chance will play tricks on you, 
but you, with cunning, will be able to resist that. It’s a kind of joke the 
audience shares to feel a little better.”

Beauty and the Beast, or The Animal Bride, shows a similar kind of imagining, 
she added. “It’s making sense of our relationship with the natural world - 
eliminating the threat. A beast figure marries a woman, and then the stories 
take different turns; in one she kills him, in one she finds he turns into a 
man when she kisses him.”

Press Association contributed to this report.
 