
Peel off your Knope We Can bumper stickers, and put your bottle of Tommy Fresh 
back in the sock drawer. Parks And Recreation will soon be no more. Yet, as 
well as sadness at its passing, the show’s final season (which begins tonight 
on NBC, 8pm EST) provides an opportunity to celebrate its longevity. Parks And 
Recreation is TV’s great survivor, the series they couldn’t cancel. At the end 
of its current run the sitcom about a can-do governmental department in the 
fictional Indiana town of Pawnee will reach 125 episodes, surpassing not only 
the golden 100 number for syndication but also established comedy greats like 
Taxi, The Larry Sanders Show and Arrested Development.

Which is remarkable when you consider that it could quite easily have ended 
after six. The show’s truncated first season tested disastrously with focus 
groups. Critical reaction was, if anything, even worse. “Parks and Recreation: 
Less funny than Joey? 
<http://featuresblogs.chicagotribune.com/entertainment_tv/2009/05/parks-recreation-amy-poehler-nbc.html>
” ran the headline of a scathing review from the Chicago Tribune’s Maureen 
Ryan, comparing the show unfavourably with NBC’s botched attempts at a Friends 
spin-off. Others, meanwhile, openly questioned the wisdom of renewing such a 
patently flawed series.

Looking back, it’s not hard to see why the show’s first run received such a 
frosty response. The pace is sludgy. The gag rate is low. The cinéma vérité 
style looks hopelessly derivative of The Office (which Parks And Rec was 
initially intended to be a sister show to). Most noticeably the lead character, 
Amy Poehler’s pollyanna-ish deputy parks director Leslie Knope seems small, sad 
and impossible to root for: mocked by her co-workers, browbeaten by her mother 
(a character we thankfully saw a lot less of in later seasons) and thwarted in 
her grand ambitions for her home town.

Then, suddenly, something changed. The show shook its cynical outlook. Leslie 
became likeable, her Panglossian energy coming off as noble rather than futile. 
Meanwhile, the formidable supporting cast began to assert themselves, from Nick 
Offerman’s gruff libertarian Ron – “Any dog under 50 pounds is a cat and cats 
are useless” – to Aubrey Plaza’s deadpan office assistant April and Aziz 
Ansari’s cheeky, wannabe-entrepreneur Tom. (Let’s also not ignore those two 
latecomersAdam Scott <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/adam-scott> and Rob 
Lowe, who as Ben and Chris added a sense of direction to the show.)

At its best, when all of these chaotic forces were bouncing off each other – 
as in the terrific season two episode Telethon (Leslie binges on energy snacks 
and tries to marshal the graveyard shift of the Pawnee telethon) – the show was 
as zippy and fun as any comedy on television, network or cable. It became a 
mainstay in critics’ end-of-year lists. Poehler, Ansari, Offerman, Plaza and 
Chris Pratt became recognisable stars.

Yet, despite all this the show’s ratings remained frustratingly small, and you 
suspect that at a more stable network than NBC, Parks And Rec would have been 
cancelled long ago. Then again, perhaps a more stable network than NBC would 
have had a better idea of what to do with the show, providing it with a 
stronger lead-in than, say, the brilliant but decidedly niche Community. TV 
critic and avowed Parks And Rec fan Alan Sepinwall has suggested that the show 
might, like Arrested Development before it, prove more popular after it has 
concluded. Certainly you get the sense that the show could and should be able 
to get a larger audience than the one NBC found for it.

As it is, the delivery method of Parks And Rec’s final season perhaps sums up 
NBC’s attitude towards the show: it’s respectful enough to allow a 16-episode 
farewell run, but equally happy to burn those episodes off in double-bills on a 
Tuesday night, far away from the network’s once-vaunted (and now dead) 
Thursday-night Must See TV block. Still, let’s apply some Knope-style 
positivity to the situation: double-bills means an hour of Parks a week, rather 
than the usual half-hour. What’s more, those episodes look like being a fitting 
send-off, with guest appearances from departed cast members Lowe and Rashida 
Jones and an unusually bold storyline set two years in the future. As a 
slightly naive deputy Parks director once put it: go big or go home.
 