
Brymore academy in Somerset recently welcomed a new arrival by the name of 
Forrester Woolcombe. It's a bit unusual to join a school midway through term, 
but an exception was made for Forrester, who is a glossy-coated two-year-old 
roan shorthorn bull. While many schools have gardens or keep animals, Brymore 
has a full-scale, 110-acre working farm and a market garden. The school, an 
academy since September, prides itself on an impressive improvement in academic 
standards which saw 2013's year-11 pupils achieve the school's best GCSE 
results ever; but its curriculum extends far beyond the classroom. The boys 
here look after cows, sheep and pigs, grow vegetables and fruit for the school 
kitchens and farm shop – and learn how to drive the school tractor.

Virtually all the boys here (there are now 146 and but that will rise to 183 
next year as it expands to accept pupils from 11) study for BTec national 
diplomas in either agriculture or horticulture and around 50% study both. 
Brymore's emphasis on practical, land-based skills makes this state boarding 
and day school unique – but also means it is particularly affected by changes 
to the rules aboutwhich qualifications count as equivalent to GCSEs 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/277366/KS4_performance_tables_-_inclusion_of_14-16_qualifications_in_2014.pdf>
. BTecs in horticulture and agriculture, for example, will no longer be 
accredited.

"Last year 88% of boys here achieved 5A*-C grades, whereas this year the 
prediction is 54%, which would rise to 81% if agriculture and horticulture were 
still included," says the headteacher, Mark Thomas. "Last year we were in the 
top 3% of schools nationally for progress – I've no idea where we will be this 
year, but much lower.

"Schools such as Brymore are being forced to consider their options – or risk 
being labelled as unsuccessful," he says. "Rigour is the term that is always 
used, but you can have rigour in practical and vocational subjects as well as 
academic. We teach to industry standards and have a reputation for turning out 
boys who know what they're doing. What the government seems to mean by rigour 
is a written test and, if there was one, we would embrace it – but there 
isn't." The content of the agriculture and horticulture BTecs is currently 
being rewritten; meanwhile, says Thomas, "we have no option but to say 'OK, 
we'll go down in the league tables' – and what headteacher wants to make that 
decision?"
 Brymore is also strong on engineering and has moved from a BTec course to EAL 
Level 2 certificate in engineering technology, which is equal to a GCSE, for 
the sake of the league tables. Photograph: Jim Wileman 
The school launched a petition 
<http://www.change.org/en-GB/petitions/uk-government-department-for-education-keep-land-based-studies-in-the-school-performance-tables-from-2015>
 asking David Cameron and Michael Gove to reconsider the downgrading of the 
land-based BTec subjects. "I was hoping that, at the stage where there was 
supposedly still some consultation, that somebody would listen," says Thomas.

Brymore is also strong on engineering – it is equipped with machine rooms, 
workshops and even a foundry – and its engineering GCSE is also affected by the 
change of rules. The school has had to change its engineering course from BTec 
to EAL Level 2 certificate in engineering technology, which is equal to a GCSE, 
for the sake of the league tables.

There are 109 school farms in the UK, 64 of them in secondary schools, 
according to the School Farms Network. Ian Egginton-Metters, the network's 
co-ordinator, says the loss or downgrading of land-based and practical 
qualifications will mean heads may decide to channel resources elsewhere. 
"Schools increasingly have to justify expenditure on lots of different 
grounds," he says. "These vocational subjects are gradually being demoted, 
which implies they are considered inferior, but we need people with these 
skills." The horticulture and farming industries need new entrants, he points 
out – and the skills that are learned on all the land-based GCSE courses are 
transferable.
 Brymore has a market garden and pupils grow fruit and vegetables for the 
school canteen and farm shop. Photograph: Jim Wileman 
At Brymore boys' enthusiasm for the land-based subjects is abundantly clear. 
David Lukins and Tom Vining, both 16, have completed their BTec courses. Both 
say that what they have learned will stand them in good stead whatever they 
choose to do in the future. "You learn about different ways of doing things, 
from rearing cattle to growing plants," says Tom.

Owen King and Harry Taylor-Page, both 14, and George Packham, 13, had been to 
pick up eight British Lop piglets – and successfully corralled an escapee who 
wasn't keen on getting into the trailer. Now they are attending to Forrester, 
under the watchful eye of farm technician Kate Whyte.

"He's actually quite shy," says Owen.

"When you're feeding the bull, you keep talking to him, and don't make any 
sudden movements," says Harry. The cattle, they all agree, are more fun to deal 
with than the sheep.

Harry thinks he might like to work on a farm. George is also keen on farming 
but thinks he might become a thatcher like his father, while Owen would like to 
go to college to take A-levels and perhaps eventually study law.
 Pupils at Brymore also learn to drive the school tractor. Photograph: Jim 
Wileman 
Last month, Ofqual published its proposals for some GCSE and A-level subjects 
to be discontinued in 2017. The environmental and land-based science (ELBS) 
GCSE is on the list, on the grounds that it overlaps with the proposed new 
specification for GCSE science – which has no practical element of plant or 
animal care.

Thomas says. "The values instilled in agriculture, horticulture and other 
land-based subjects, such as hard work, resilience, responsibility and 
long-term planning, are precisely the skills employers want.Schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> like us, who have been 
delivering vocational excellence since 1952, are being penalised because our 
area of expertise happens to be in a sector that the government does not 
recognise."
 