
Selling an exotic island on the strength of its flowers is a bit like 
recommending a city as a weekend break destination because of its fantastic 
libraries. Clearly a good thing, but it doesn't hold out much promise of a 
rocking holiday.

And yet flora is all I heard about before going to the Azores. My guide book 
devotes pages, a big fat appendix in fact, to the sport of identifying them.

Friends who had been to the islands - an archipelago of volcanic 
protruberances in the middle of the Atlantic - enthused over the wondrous 
colours sprouting from every verge.

I am no expert, but within moments of arriving I definitely spotted some pink 
ones, blue ones and a host of lovely yellow ones. I felt edified and inspired. 
Now, what to do with the remaining 23 hours, 45 minutes of the day?

The Azores are sleepy. With only 243,000 people to share across nine islands 
they are as sleepy a place as you'd expect to get if you broke off a few chunks 
of rural Portugal, floated them 1,500km into the Atlantic and left them to 
their own devices. Technically the Azores are Portuguese territory, which is 
great from a practical point of view: no visa requirements, they use the euro, 
they get access to European Union subsidies to build lovely smooth roads, they 
do a good line in custard-related pastries etc.

But they are distinctly Azorean. Every island has its own characteristic vibe, 
albeit on a scale ranging from tranquil to eerily calm.

The main Azore (I never established whether or not that is a legitimate 
singular form) is São Miguel. It holds the capital Ponta Delgada, which is a 
pastel-coloured, low-rise stone town, the main focus of which is the harbour. 
It seems a cross between a Caribbean colonial settlement and a Por tuguese 
suburb, which, geographically at least, is pretty much what it is.

Ponta Delgada is a pleasant enough place to fritter away time on coffee and 
cakes but, for tourists, its main function is as a launch pad for forays into 
the surrounding wonders of nature. Landward there are long-extinct volcanoes - 
lush mossy hills and aggressively blue and green lakes. And abundant flora, of 
course.

Seaward there is fauna, Ponta Delgada is home to a range of companies offering 
boat trips to go whale spotting - an inexact science that depends on the 
mammal's mysterious seasonal migrations and the availability of a cliff-top for 
lookouts to point boats in the right direction. No sooner were we out at sea 
than a long thin arm of metallic grey cloud like a bathroom shower-head reached 
out from the middle of the ocean to the highest point on the island, and 
started spraying misty rain.

As it happened, the peak being hosed down was the lookout point for our whale 
scout, whose view was now obscured. So we just sailed around the ocean hoping, 
on the off chance, to bump into a spectacular cetacean.

Without Captain Ahab on board this is a long-odds business, and scouring the 
horizon for evidence of life soon generates a feeling of frustrated 
concentration akin to driving around looking for a parking space.

We did see some dolphins, which were beautiful. They swam alongside, they swam 
in formation, they checked us out checking them out, they swam off. Back to 
riding around the Atlantic in a cross between a D-Day landing craft and a 
bouncy castle, searching in vain for the White Whale.

I am reliably informed that there are many species of giant sea mammal that 
pass through the Azores, and to judge by some of the pictures on the walls of 
excursion HQ you can get some spectacular encounters. Maybe I was just unlucky.

Anyway, I don't really blame the whales for keeping their distance. For 
generations we slaughtered their ancestors for money and sport - now can we 
take pictures of you mating? It's not a win-win proposition.

But even if I hadn't spotted so much as a lost, fat scuba diver on the 
expedition it would have still been worth it. The perspective on the islands 
from the water is a good reminder as to just how isolated they are.

The Azores are basically an accidental bubbling up of molten lava that 
happened to breach the surface long enough for life to take hold.

They could so easily have been underwater. In 1811, for example, a new Azore, 
around 1.5km long and 100m high, appeared off the coast of São Miguel. When it 
was still fresh out of the volcanic oven, barely set firm, an ambitious British 
sailor climbed aboard and claimed it for His Majesty. Unfortunately for Captain 
Tillard, Sabrina - as his putative fiefdom was called - got washed away by the 
sea before he could colonise it. Fickle stuff, magma.

It all gives you a sense of what the discovery of the Azores must have been 
like: imagine the surprise of some 15th-century Portuguese sailor, cruising 
across the Atlantic in his three-masted caravel, with the top down, early 
Renaissance music blasting out. Not a hint of land in sight. He takes his eye 
off the waves for a second to adjust the volume on his poop deck band of 
minstrels, looks up, swerves, but it's too late ... he's pranged into a lump of 
rock.

Fortunately for subsequent generations of settlers and tourists, the rock 
turned out to be fertile. The volcanic roots are only really in evidence in the 
gritty, fag-ash grey sand of the various beaches tucked between steep, stone 
outcrops.

The rest of the landscape is lush and verdant, stuffed with hearty, 
rosy-cheeked cows. These produce an abundance of milk - the national export - 
and tangy cheeses (various flavours of which also constitute one of the nuanced 
cultural differences between the islands.)

On the island of Terceira, the cows outnumber people by two-to-one. Terceira's 
other claim to fame is that it plays host to a large US Air Force base. It was 
here that Tony Blair, George Bush, former Spanish Prime Minister José María 
Aznar met for a mini-summit before ordering the invasion of Iraq last year. But 
the only evidence of an American military presence I could see was the snazzier 
than expected runway at Lajes 'international' airport (to accommodate, 
presumably, an emergency fleet of B-52s), and a greater than expected incidence 
of anthemic soft-rock ballads in the local cafes and bars (to accommodate, 
presumably, the tastes of marines).

The island's main town, Angra do Heroísmo is another charming stone labyrinth 
built around a harbour. It is a Unesco World Heritage site, preserving what was 
once a hub of transatlantic sea-trade.

Like Ponta Delgada, Angra is good for excursions into nature - this time the 
wild and sparsely populated interior of the island where lurk volcanoes, yet 
more limpid lakes, caves, rare birds ... and, of course, flowers.

The only other Azore I managed to visit was Santa Maria, another floral haven 
at the catatonic end of the sleepiness scale. I took a day-long taxi tour which 
had exhausted what could tenuously be spun as sights of the island - churches, 
breathtaking-view-affording promontories, my driver's mate's house - within a 
couple of hours. We then happily diverted to the driver's home for a slap-up 
lunch of recently executed Azorean livestock and a chat.

There I was told of future plans to install a golf course to occupy future 
tourists, which in local measures of activeness seems equivalent to setting up 
bungee jumps over shark-infested waters.

That may be a disservice to Santa Maria, which has some stunning beaches and 
rolling hills that would lend themselves to a fantastic walking or cycling 
holiday.

But on my return, Ponta Delgada (population: hardly anyone) felt like a 
thronging metropolis. I almost missed the deserted villages inland that feel 
like the set from a particularly slow-moving spaghetti Western, complete with 
blankly staring, gnarled old men (minus the guns and tumbleweeds).

Maybe it's the unpredictable climate that breeds a resigned, laissez-faire 
mood. The Azores lie on a climatic sweet spot where temperate but changeable 
weather is thrown up before being served into Europe. So rather than four 
seasons in one day, you get a couple of seasons - a hot sunny one and a muggy 
rainy one - every few minutes.

Quite often you are experiencing one weather formation while seeing an 
entirely different one coming around the corner. If you don't like the 
temperature at any given moment you can probably get a taxi to another climate 
over the nearest hill.

It makes planning in advance, or being active in any way, seem like a very 
risky affair. It's beautiful now, but it could rain. Better sit around doing 
nothing, just to be on the safe side.

Go to the Azores, catch up on some reading and some sleep. Or make like a 
flower: look pretty and sway aimlessly in the breeze.

Factfile

Rafael Behr travelled with Sunvil Discovery (020 8758 4747; www.sunvil.co.uk 
<http://www.sunvil.co.uk>), which has launched a dedicated Azores programme, 
using the new weekly direct flights from Gatwick to Ponta Delgada with SATA 
International, the Azorean airline.

The price of a seven-night stay at the Hotel Vila Nova on Sao Miguel is from 
£442pp (two sharing) and includes flights, bed and breakfast accommodation and 
transfers.
 