
The Financial Conduct Authority 
<http://www.fca.org.uk/your-fca/documents/final-notices/2013/axa-wealth-services-ltd>
 has finedAxa Wealth Services <http://www.axawealth.co.uk/> £1.8m after 
uncovering potentially widespread mis-selling of stocks and shares Isas in 
branches of Clydesdale Bank, Yorkshire Bank and the West Bromwich building 
society.

Commission-hungry sales staff acting for Axa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/axa> and earning as much as £75,000 a 
year pushed risky stock market investments to elderly customers of the banks 
and building society.

In total, 26,000 people were sold investments totalling £440m in value, 
pocketing £25.7m for Axa in fees and charges. The FCA found that the sales 
process used in branches "put a significant number of customers at risk of 
buying unsuitable products".

Axa will now contact all affected customers, although its compensation bill is 
likely to be low. The investments were sold during the period from September 
2010 to April 2012, and a rise in the stock market since then means that most 
people who bought are now better off.

However the FCA said with more than half of the investments sold to people 
over 60, the levels of risk were unacceptably high.

"Currently, customer losses due to Axa's failings may be low due to movements 
in the stock market since the advice was given. The FCA has acted pre-emptively 
to ensure customers are provided with an opportunity to avoid potential losses 
during future stock market downturns," the FCA said.

Sales advisers asked customers to risk-rate themselves from "very cautious" to 
"highly adventurous", but Axa did not offer any products in the "very cautious" 
category.

Although nearly half (47%) of the customers spoken to by Axa's sales advisers 
were retired, a disproportionate number were put into stock market-based 
investments which earned the advisers a commission.

An Aax spokesperson said: "Axa UK has fully co-operated with the FCA and 
accepts the findings within its report.  

"We take regulatory compliance very seriously and regret that the customer 
advice provided by the bancassurance division between September 2010 and April 
2012 did not meet the high standards expected by the FCA.

"As the FCA has noted, customer detriment may currently be low as was the 
number of complaints Axa has received. We will be writing to our affected 
retail banking customers and will review the advice provided to them during 
that period should they wish us to do so."
 