The following correction was printed in the Guardian's Corrections and 
clarifications column, Monday April 30 2007 

 Gaudi's unfinished masterpiece, the Sagrada Familia in Barcelona, is not a 
cathedral, although it is often described as such. Barcelona cathedral is in 
the city's Gothic Quarter.



The chief architect working on the Sagrada Familia Cathedral in Barcelona 
yesterday condemned a plan to build a bullet-train tunnel less than two metres 
from Gaudi's unfinished masterpiece.

Backed by local civic groups, the advisers to Unesco in Spain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain>, and architects and engineers from 50 
universities around the world, Jordi Bonet i Armengol, who has worked on 
Gaudi's daring cathedral for 40 years, said yesterday: "I am astounded by this 
brutality. This is an attack on culture of the highest order, something one 
would only expect of a third-world country."

In a protest letter, an engineer from the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology called the railway plan a "thoughtless act of vandalism", while the 
president of the cathedral board of directors, Joan Rigol, said it was "the 
kiss of death".

Last week, the mayor of Barcelona, the Catalan premier and the public works 
ministry approved the plan, which awaits an environmental impact review by the 
national government, according to a city spokesman.

The city of Barcelona wants to build the rail tunnel to provide a high-speed 
link between Madrid and Barcelona, and on to France.

The mayor, Jordi Hereu, has promised the project will "meet the highest 
technical standards" to guarantee "the safety of the surroundings".

However, during an emotional press conference yesterday, Mr Bonet outlined 
what he sees as the dangers to the cathedral's foundation and structure.

He also attacked the "arrogance" of the civil engineers working on the 
project. He said they had assured him that, with modern building materials, the 
daring architectural feat Gaudi began 120 years ago would be safe.

"They also said the Titanic couldn't sink," he said yesterday.

Mr Bonet said the building, a Unesco world heritage site visited by about 
10,000 people a day, was threatened initially by the construction of an 
underground protective barrier, which begins less than two metres (7ft) from 
the building's foundations. Any accidental contact during the project could 
cause cracks in the foundations. Eventually, chunks of the vaulted ceiling 
could fall on someone, he said.

The construction of the tunnel, which would pass below the water level only 10 
metres beneath the 20,000-tonne cathedral, could cause the ground to shift or 
compress, destabilising the building, he added.

"The whole thing could crack and it would start to crumble," he said.

The Spanish branch of the International Council on Monuments and Sites 
(Icomos), which advises Unesco, has launched a campaign to block the plan. It 
has sent letters and reports to local and national authorities, said the Icomos 
spokeswoman in Spain, María Rosa Suárez-Inclán. "They are just laughing in the 
face of international conventions on world heritage," she said.

The high-speed Ave line is expected to link Madrid and Barcelona by 2007. The 
tunnel to France is due to be completed by 2009.
 