
Amy Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/amy-williams> made it all the 
way to the medal ceremony before her unbroken run of success at Vancouver came 
to an end. "Don't blub," Britain's Winter Games' gold medallist told herself 
before she got to the podium. But blub she did, though none would blame her for 
that.

The sight of her proud parents, Ian and Jan, in the crowd was one thing. So, 
too, was the fact that the timing of the ­ceremony meant she could not fulfil a 
promise to be by the side of her boyfriend, Slovak bobsleigher Petr Narovec, 
while he took part in his event, as he had been there for her. But most of all 
perhaps, was the realisation that all the hard work and ­sacrifices, both her 
own and of those around her, had been worth it.

The view from the top of the medal podium is a wondrous thing, not least 
because it endows those privileged enough to enjoy it with the opportunity to 
show their true selves to the country whose flag they represent. This was, and 
will be, Williams' chance. Her moment in the spotlight.

Skeleton slider being some way down in the celebrity athlete pecking order 
than libidinous Premier League footballers, Britain did not know Williams 
before her triumph on the infamous Whistler sliding track. But it will now, and 
the chances are the nation will not be disappointed.

The daughter of a chemistry professor and former midwife, as well as a twin, 
she is that quintessential Winter Olympic creation – the steely professional 
wrapped in the skin of guileless amateur. Williams may also be bubbly, 
fresh-faced and friendly in person, but she is also the ­consummate competitor, 
able to the block out the rest of the world – a trait that served her well in 
the aftermath of the tragedy that cost the life of the Nodar Kumaritashvili on 
the same Whistler track.

"The athletes probably had an increase in nerves because of the whole drama 
but to be honest I was not much more than I would have been. Once the first day 
of training was over I thought, 'I'm fine, get on with it'," she said 
yesterday, looking back. "I am probably pretty fearless compared with most 
people but I am always nervous first day of training on any track. But once I 
have been down the first time I settle down to it and get on with the job."

Williams did more than that.Despite her second-place finish in last year's 
world championships few had identified her as a potential British success, with 
most of attention being focused on the 2006 silver medallist Shelley Rudman.

That changed as soon as the training runs for the women's skeleton started. 
Rudman struggled, complaining that she was finding it difficult to get used to 
the track. Williams, meanwhile, surprised everyone, including one suspects 
herself, with a succession of strong runs. "I always seem to have better 
results on fast tracks," she said. "Maybe I just let it ­happen. I think lots 
of people were scared here of the speed and you tense up too much and your sled 
doesn't work."

Williams carried that approach into the event itself, which quickly became a 
­procession rather than a competition. Two track records in her first three 
runs made her fourth and final trip down the track a formality. If she stayed 
on the tray the gold would be hers. "I felt I didn't have anything to lose. I 
was nervous because my legs and ­muscles felt really tense on the run but once 
I was on the sled I felt really happy," she recalled.

Waiting for her at the bottom of the run were her parents and a small gaggle 
of ­British fans, not to mention a world that will never be the same again. 
"The prime minister sent me a message," she said, genuinely thrilled to have 
been contacted by Gordon Brown.

Still, she will learn there are even greater advantages to being a national 
sporting heroine than messages of support from No10. She has already benefited 
from financial support from UK Sport, but you get the sense that interest of 
any kind from sponsors would be gratefully received. The life of a female 
skeleton slider is not a lucrative one, clearly.

"UK Sport have been very good to us. They have supported us once we achieved 
certain results but it has still been very hard over the years," she said. "I 
have to count my pennies every month to see that I have enough. It is tough but 
every athlete, however tough it is, finds ways with family support and friends. 
I didn't want to get a full-time job because I wanted to train hard and my 
parents luckily didn't kick me out, I lived at home to save money so I could 
play the sport."

If that sounded like a sales pitch or litany of complaint, it wasn't meant to 
be so. Williams was simply being herself – grateful for what she has and 
grateful to those who have helped her fulfil her dream.

"She is punctual, nice, kind," said Nickey Gruenberger, coach of the British 
skeleton team, when asked to described Britain's newest gold medallist. "She is 
not at all selfish. She is a team player. She is really, really special."
 