
When Andy Roddick beat Roger Federer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer> for only the second time in 
his life in Miami last year, he suggested that the law of statistics had 
finally worked in his favour: "Roger hadn't missed a ball against me for about 
six years." He missed very few again in the Rod Laver Arena against the 
American, winning 6-2, 7-5, 7-5 to reach his 18th grand slam final and set 
himself up to equal Pete Sampras's all-time record of 14 major titles.

Federer has beaten Roddick more times than any other player – this was his 
16th victory out of 18. "I came in under a bit of pressure having lost to Andy 
last time, and he was playing well," Federer said. "Maybe I was a step slower 
last year, but I feel great again now."

The only time that Federer has looked vulnerable over the last 11 days was 
when Tomas Berdych applied the hammer for a couple of sets before the Czech 
gulped for air and Federer throttled him. It remains strange to talk about the 
Swiss as the world No2, given his quite extraordinary record. On Sunday evening 
he will play in his 14th slam final out of the last 15, of which he has won 
nine.

The only glitch, the aberrant major, was here last year when he lost in the 
semi-finals against Serbia's Novak Djokovic. The tennis world stood still at 
that point, and when it moved on it seemed that the great man was just a shade 
less great. He was demolished by Rafa Nadal in the French Open final, a brutal 
defeat, and then lost his most prized possession, the Wimbledon crown, to the 
Spaniard.

A lot of players, including Roddick, have spoken about the lack of respect 
shown in suggesting that Federer was in some way a fading force. This is to 
miss the point. The Swiss was simply being judged by his own incredible 
standards, and judging by his last two wins over Argentina's Juan Martín del 
Potro and Roddick he appears to be back to his dominant best. A meeting with 
Nadal would be the true test; Federer has eight hard court slam titles; Nadal 
none.

"I'm still surprised how quickly the mood swings with the media, fans, and 
everybody. If I lose a set or two sets, as against Berdych, then everybody is 
like 'oh my god, he's not the same anymore', " said Federer after beating 
Roddick. "And then I beat del Potro and everything is back to normal. It's not 
the way it's supposed to be, I don't think." But it is, for that is sport, 
though clearly Federer, should he never win another major, will always be 
regarded as one of the greats – perhaps the greatest.

Federer is well aware of the past, particularly in Australia. "I'm one of the 
players who is most thankful to those such as Rod Laver and Ken Rosewall. I 
know that by beating Sampras's record of 14 slams I could maybe become the 
greatest of all time in the Open era, but never of all time."

As a 21-year-old Roddick made his name on the hard courts, winning the US Open 
in 2003 in what was only his 12th slam. That same year he beat Federer for the 
first time and could hardly have imagined he would have to wait another five 
years before he managed it again. And Roddick has never beaten Federer in a 
slam in seven tries including three finals. It might drive a man to drink, but 
Roddick has somehow managed to remain, in public at least, remarkably sanguine.

Certainly he has never stopped trying to fathom the unfathomable. He may be a 
one-slam wonder, and as such is not regarded with a high degree of honour in 
his homeland, but he has been in the top 10 for the last seven years, won 26 
titles, and remains well respected among his fellow professionals. However he 
must, from time to time, wish that Federer had never been born. He would not be 
human otherwise.

Roddick was around when Sampras achieved the record. "Everybody was saying 
what a lofty achievement it was. Little did we realise Roger was about to start 
to go after it. It feels like my childhood was Pete and my grown-up life is 
Roger. He plays effortlessly, he moves effortlessly. I'm not going to say 
anything new or revolutionary by saying how talented and what an incredible 
player he is."
 