
Pete Sampras says he does not get to see a lot of tennis these days. Indeed, 
he had never seen Roger Federer, whom he knows well, and Rafael Nadal, a 
virtual stranger to him, play each other live until thesemi-final of the 
Australian Open <http:> on Friday night.

It was a match of eddying winds and slowly ebbing fortunes for his friend 
Federer, the only player of the modern era to surpass the American's total of 
14 slam titles. Nadal won in straight sets – only the second time he has done 
that in their 11 slam encounters – to reach Sunday'sfinal against Stanislas 
Wawrinka, and victory would draw him level with Sampras in total majors.

So Pistol Pete had much to take in on Friday , sitting not far from another 
legend of the game, Rod Laver.

Sampras was Federer's age, 32, when he quit tennis after winning the US Open 
in 2003, the sort of ending only geniuses and fools can dream of. But he found 
the grind of the game too much in his early 30s, even though recognised as the 
best player since Laver. He reckoned, however, that Federer could play on for 
"another four or five years".

Federer – who might yet add to his total of 17 slams, although the likelihood 
diminishes with each major defeat – is no fool, and his genius is undisputed. 
Like Sampras, whom he admires immensely, the Swiss is deaf to whispers that 
accompany any dominant player in the autumn of his career but, not only has he 
politely turned away questions about his future, he has devoted his energies to 
extending his playing days for at least another 18 months.

Whether he can go beyond that – and the 2016 Olympics – is too distant a 
prospect to judge sensibly, although Sampras, who has spoken with him in 
Melbourne, thinks he might.

"I felt as I hit 30, 31 that the grind of the Tour, the travel, the 
international jetlag, all that just wore on me," he said. "It tired me. It 
affected my motivation. That's why I've been so impressed with Roger, that he 
keeps going. Seems like he wants to play on for another four or five years. I 
don't know how he does it."

Sampras said the rivalry between Federer and Nadal was "one of" the game's 
greatest. "You have [Bjorn] Borg and [John] McEnroe, myself and Andre [Agassi]. 
You have Rafa and Roger. You have [Jimmy] Connors and [Ivan] Lendl.

"It gets tougher as you get older. Roger is 32. Rafa is in his prime, 27. So, 
sure, it's not going to last forever. You have to just sit back and enjoy it. 
These are two of the greatest players of all time playing in the same decade. 
But everybody gets older, and we all retire at some time. It's nice to see 
Roger playing well. He's got his confidence back."

Sampras said separating one great player from another was impossible. "When 
you look at the history of the game, each decade has their player. Obviously 
Rod was the best in his time. I certainly had my moments in the 90s. Rafa and 
Roger are having their moments now.

"Is there one greatest player of all time? I don't know. If you look at the 
numbers, you have to look at Roger: 17 majors, been No1. He's had a tough 
record against Rafa [who went into the semi-final leading 22-10].

"You can talk about it for 20 minutes, on the different comparisons: what Rod 
did back in the 60s; five years he didn't play any majors, when he was in his 
prime, so he could have had over 20 majors. I feel like every decade there's 
the guy. Certainly, Roger has been the best player for the last 10 years. Rafa 
is up there with him. [Novak] Djokovic is pushing. So it's hard to say.

"There's not one greatest player. When you look at the numbers, Roger has been 
so dominant. He's won on all surfaces. He's a phenomenal player. It's nice that 
he's playing well. He lost some of those matches [against Nadal] on clay, which 
is Rafa's best surface; there is that argument – whereas Rafa has won all the 
majors, been No1. You could argue that he's well up there. If he plays the next 
four or five years, he could have 17, 18 majors. That's up to him.

"Let's just appreciate what we're watching. It's hard to compare the numbers 
and the eras, where we all did our thing."

When Sampras retired in front of his own fans in New York, it was not because 
he fell out of love with playing – he still appears in exhibitions – but he was 
not prepared to make the physical commitment to staying in the shape needed to 
compete.

The game has moved on since his time, to a point where players are regularly 
pitched into five-hour slugging matches towards the end of majors, sometimes 
earlier. And that is the wonder of Federer. He has not only survived in this 
physically toughest of eras without appearing to break sweat, he has played 
tennis only a few of his contemporaries have been able to match.

It did not work out for him on Friday night, but Nadal paid tribute to him 
afterwards, pointing out how tough it was to break him down. Nobody knows how 
long he can keep going at the highest level, not even the man himself. But 
Sampras is sure of one thing: Federer still wants to do it.
 