
We had two films this weekend: Dragonfly with Kevin Costner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/kevin-costner>, and The Queen of the Damned, 
from the Anne Rice novel. Both sought to chill our blood, but since they were 
entirely tepid moviegoing experiences they scarcely succeeded in bringing it 
down to room temperature. The first is a romantic ghost story dripping with 
what Universal Studios is no doubt pleased to call "prestige", meaning a sort 
of gauzy, vacant, middlebrow classiness; the second wants to be some 
hell-spawned blood feast of a vampire movie but lacks both the blood and, 
frankly, the bite to pull it off.

Dragonfly comes from Tom Shadyac, director of the emetic Robin Williams 
cancer-ward comedy Patch Adams, so consider yourselves well warned. To this 
already unappetising recipe is added the stodgy, indigestible ingredient known 
as Kevin Costner, who brings to the film the deflating colourlessness that's 
his only trademark as an actor. He's on the long road back from the twin 
disasters of Waterworld and The Postman - or do I mean the twin disasters of 
For Love of the Game and 3000 Miles to Graceland? Either way it's an uphill 
struggle and Dragonfly - Kevin's bid for the M Night Shyamalan audience - isn't 
about to improve his long-term prospects.

Kev plays Dr Joe Darrow, an embittered ER surgeon who can't get over the death 
of his paediatrician wife Emily (Susanna Thompson) in a Venezuelan mudslide. 
He's mean to his patients, he's annoying his hospital administrator (Joe 
Morton), and he's alienating his friends.

Racked with guilt, he starts looking in on his wife's former patients. When a 
boy dies on the operating table, then comes back to life speaking Joe's name, 
Joe feels he's being haunted by Emily. This boy and another who has had a 
near-death experience both draw the same squiggly-cross symbol, which he spends 
the movie trying to decipher.

Shadyac is a practised manipulator, subduing the proceedings in a depressive 
gloom similar to the one that overhung Shyamalan's truly creepy The Sixth 
Sense, and throwing in a series of cheap jolts until you can feel each one 
building like a wave. A legion of classy bit-players - Kathy Bates, Linda Hunt, 
Morton - is on hand to shore up the fading, fattening Costner, but they can't 
overcome the script's lack of conviction or Shadyac's insipid direction.

The bad news about The Queen of the Damned is that Anne Rice likes it. You may 
remember that the novelist, highly proprietorial when it comes to adaptations 
of her bloodsoaked potboilers, got all hot and bothered about Interview With 
the Vampire. She loudly denounced the casting of Tom Cruise, whom she described 
as about as close to her vampire Lestat "as Edward G Robinson is to Rhett 
Butler". (She later made a well publicised and, I hope, very humiliating 
retraction.)

Well, Interview With the Vampire had plenty of flaws but it's three times the 
movie this is. This time Lestat is played by Irish actor Stuart Townsend, who's 
relatively unknown this side of the pond. An 18th-century nobleman who has been 
asleep for a century, he shows up in 2002 and hijacks a naff Linkin Park-like 
hard rock band whose members like pierced cheeks and nipples but really aren't 
ready for pierced throats. Overnight he's on the cover of Rolling Stone, 
proclaiming himself the first vampire rocker, much to the fury of other 
vampires who prefer, so to speak, to remain in the shadows, and who vow to kill 
him.

Meanwhile his rocking sounds (written by Jonathan Davis of bozo rap-rockers 
Korn) literally wake the dead, in the form of 4,000-year-old Egyptian vampire 
Akasha, played by the late R&B singer Aaliyah. Akasha's determined to rain all 
manner of ruin and death down on us "normals" and the unnervingly beautiful
Aaliyah <https://www.theguardian.com/music/aaliyah> makes the most of what 
little the script gives her. Likewise Townsend, who gamely gives his all to a 
film that's so incoherent and confused it barely deserves 10% of it.

As consolation there is some pleasing set design - though it just lies there 
on the screen instead of functioning as part of director Michael Rymer's 
stylistics. Occasionally there's a single great image, such as Lestat dozing in 
a satellite dish atop a skyscraper overlooking the City of Night. But finally 
The Queen of The Damned just makes you wish you were home watching a Buffy 
marathon or Kathryn Bigelow's Near Dark. Count Dracula can thus rest easy in 
his crypt until Blade II comes along.
 