
My friend and former colleague Felix Pirani, who has died aged 87, was a man 
of many talents. Primarily he was a prominent contributor to the post-1945 
renaissance in research into Einstein’s theory of general relativity.

The son of two musicians from Australia, the pianist Max Pirani and his wife 
Leila (nee Doubleday), a violinist, Felix was born in London and educated at 
schools in England, Australia, New Zealand and Canada. At 14 he was the 
youngest student on theUniversity of British Columbia <https://www.ubc.ca/> 
campus in Canada, and he co-authored his first scientific paper while still an 
undergraduate at the University of Western Ontario.

He was introduced to general relativity while studying for a master’s degree 
at the University of Toronto. In gaining a doctorate from the Carnegie 
Institute of Technology, Pittsburgh (1951), he contributed to one of the 
earliest attempts to formulate a quantum theory of general relativity. He then 
undertook a second doctorate, supervised byHermann Bondi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2005/sep/13/obituaries.highereducation> at 
the University of Cambridge, in cosmology and general relativity.

Einstein’s theory of general relativity predicted the existence of 
gravitational waves, ripples in the fabric of space-time caused by, for 
instance, the merging of two black holes. This was a matter on which Einstein 
and others developed doubts and during a year spent at theDublin Institute for 
Advanced Studies <https://www.dias.ie/index.php?lang=en> Felix began addressing 
them;physicists are still seeking direct confirmation of the waves’ existence 
<http://www.nature.com/news/gravitational-wave-rumours-in-overdrive-1.19161>.

In 1955 Felix joined the outstanding research group being formed at King’s 
College London by Bondi, who became a friend. Felix continued to produce 
breakthrough research, including a highly original application to gravitational 
radiation theory of work by the Soviet physicist Aleksei Zinovyevich Petrov 
and, with Bondi and Ivor Robinson, a very influential study of gravitational 
wave solutions of Einstein’s equations.

When Bondi left King’s in 1967 Felix became head of the group and supervised a 
large number of research students, on whom he had a deep and lasting influence. 
In 1983 Felix became emeritus professor of the University of London and a 
visiting senior research fellow in the mathematics department at King’s. In 
retirement he delighted in writing and reviewing books for children and young 
adults, making mosaics and continuing his commitment to left-leaning political 
activity. He liked people and he had a great capacity for friendship.

Felix is survived by his partner, Julia Vellacott; his children, Abigail, 
Simon, Daniel and Adam, from a marriage that ended in divorce; seven 
grandchildren; and two great-grandchildren. A second marriage also ended in 
divorce. Subsequently he had a long relationship with Marta Monteleoni, who 
died in 2005. He treated her sons, Michele and Angelo, as stepsons, and they 
also survive him.
 