
Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> who binge drink are 
portrayed more negatively by the media than men who do the same, according to a 
study.

Researchers at the University of Glasgow and Glasgow Caledonian University 
examined how the media report women’s and men’s drinking habits.

The study, published in BMJ Open 
<http://bmjopen.bmj.com/content/6/12/e013124.short>, analysed 308 articles 
published over two years in seven UK national newspapers and found women’s 
binge drinking was given more coverage, despite men drinking more in reality.

It also found that as well as misrepresenting differences in the amount each 
gender drinks, articles depicted women’s and men’s binge drinking in different 
ways.

Academics say the articles typically linked women’s binge drinking to how it 
affected their appearance and presented them as haggard, vulnerable, socially 
transgressive and a burden to their male drinking companions.

Binge-drinking women are Britain's litmus test
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/she-said/2014/mar/25/binge-drinking-women-are-britains-litmus-test>
Researchers suggest these portrayals could give readers an inaccurate 
understanding of what binge drinking is and what its effects are, and how to 
lower their own health risks.

Chris Patterson, from the public health sciences unit at the University of 
Glasgow, said: “Media coverage of women’s binge drinking isn’t just about 
health or public disorder; it also performs a moralising, paternalistic role, 
reflecting broader social expectations about women’s public behaviour.

“As well as unfairly stigmatising women, media coverage of binge drinking is 
problematic in terms of communication information about a serious health issue 
to the public.

“Evidence suggests that the public view binge drinking as a masculine activity 
and statistics tell us that men do drink more than women in reality, but the 
media are depicting a different story.”

Dr Carol Emslie, from the school of health and life sciences at Glasgow 
Caledonian University, added: “In the UK, men still drink more than women and 
are more likely to die from alcohol-related causes.

“However, the media’s disproportionate focus on women’s drinking, including 
the headlines and images used, may lead the public to think that it is 
primarily young females who are the problem drinkers.

“Alcohol is more freely available, more affordable and more heavily marketed 
today than it has been for decades, and excessive drinking affects all sections 
of the population.”
 