
The Mail on Sunday <https://www.theguardian.com/media/mailonsunday> has said 
that it stands by its story about conditions at a factory where the Fawcett 
Society’s “this is what a feminist looks like” T-shirts are made after the 
women’s rights charity rejected the claim that the garments were made in a 
sweatshop.

Responding after an outcry was sparked following the original report, the 
Fawcett Society said it had seen “expansive and current evidence” from the 
retailer Whistles that aMauritius <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mauritius> 
factory which made the T-shirts, worn by politicians including Harriet Harman 
and Ed Miliband, conformed to ethical standards.

However, the Mail on Sunday has hit back. A spokesman said: “The statements 
from the Fawcett Society and Whistles do not contradict a single fact that was 
published in the Mail on Sunday last weekend following observations, interviews 
and pictures obtained by our journalists who visited the factory last week.”

He said workers at the factory, owned on the island nation by Compagnie 
Mauricienne de Textile (CMT), are paid 62p per hour, earn the equivalent of one 
quarter of the country’s average monthly wage and sleep in bunk bed 
dormitories, 16 to a room.

“We spoke to one worker who sends all her money home to Bangladesh and has 
been too poor to return to see her family for four years,” he said.

“The president of the International Textile, Garment and Leather Workers Union 
described these conditions as ‘sweatshop’. We are advised that the government 
minimum wage in Mauritius is particularly low and that unions prefer to compare 
salaries to a ‘living wage’ which is more than double the pay offered by CMT. 
We are standing by our story 100%.”

Eva Neitzert, the deputy chief executive of the Fawcett Society, said the 
charity had seen evidence which “categorically refutes” the assertion that the 
T-shirts were made in a sweatshop. She said an audit into the CMT factory was 
carried out in October 2014 by an independent not-for-profit organisation and 
did not reveal any material concerns on the working conditions, the welfare or 
the health and safety of workers.

However, Fawcett was working with an international trade union body to examine 
the evidence so they could be “absolutely assured of its provenance, 
authenticity and that all findings are robust and factual”.

Whistles said it was committed to ethical sourcing policies and demanded the 
highest standards from its suppliers, carrying out regular audits of them, 
including unannounced visits and independent audits.
 