
Four out of five Asian girls speak at least two languages before starting 
school but very few go on to study languages at university, according to a 
study of West Midlands schools by Aston University.

Family anxiety about the compulsory year abroad was seen as one factor putting 
off sixth-formers from applying to study language degrees, but researchers 
found that parents steering their children towards science and more vocational 
subjects was more significant.

Studying languages was not seen by Asian girls as a route to a successful and 
lucrative career, even though 78% expected to work abroad and more than half 
were prepared to work in a language other than English, reported Annie 
Bannerman, of Aston's school of languages and European studies.

She also interviewed Aston modern language students and graduates and hopes to 
use video footage of them on a website and CD-rom for schools to promote the 
idea of doing language degrees among pupils.

More than 200 girls in years nine to 12 (aged 13 to 17) took part in the study 
from schools with a high proportion of Asian pupils and where modern languages 
were being "taught with enthusiasm". Just under half were Indian, with 36% 
Pakistani, 9% Bangladeshi and 7% from other Asian groups. The most widely 
spoken community language was Punjabi.

Ms Bannerman said that, while nearly 80% of the girls surveyed spoke at least 
two languages when they started school, it was only in some schools this early 
bilingualism was used by teachers in a positive manner when introducing a 
European language. "Some girls were surprised by the idea that the ability to 
handle more than one language from an early age might help them to learn 
further languages at school," she said. One teacher told her this discussion of 
community languages in a positive light was the "first time anyone has 
suggested such an idea to them".

The report concluded that the idea of the year abroad being the most serious 
obstacle to recruiting students from ethnic minorities onto language degrees 
was not borne out by the research. "It would seem rather that the study of 
languages is not perceived as a route to successful and lucrative career 
paths," said Ms Bannerman, who hopes the enthusiastic students and graduates 
from Aston University will act as role models to encourage young women to 
follow in their footsteps.

A copy of the report can be obtained from a.bannerman@aston.ac.uk
 