
Fresh fighting and splits in the coalition that brought Alassane Ouattara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alassane-ouattara> to power could derail 
Ivory Coast's recovery.

Gunfire and explosions returned to Abidjan this week as Ouattara's army takes 
on two separate militias resisting his control in the country's commercial 
capital.

Reports of infighting in the port city of San Pedro, a polio outbreak and 
humanitarian emergency in the west indicate that the west African country's 
return to normality will be far from smooth.

The violence in Abidjan, the worst since defeated president Laurent Gbagbo was 
toppled last week, is concentrated in two pockets: the northern suburb of Abobo 
and the western district of Yopougon.

Abobo is dominated by the "Invisible Commando", a 5,000-strong force that took 
up arms against Gbagbo during the political stalemate.

But now the militia's renegade leader, Ibrahim "IB" Coulibaly, is demanding 
recognition of his role in overthrowing Gbagbo. His forces, seen during the 
conflict as men in balaclavas policing makeshift checkpoints, are accused of 
widespread looting of vehicles and from businesses during the past week – and 
of ignoring a deadline to join the Republican Forces, Ouattara's national army.

In response the national army has turned its guns on the former ally. 
Residents said Abobo shook with the sound of heavy machine-gun fire on 
Wednesday near Coulibaly's headquarters. People scattered and ran to lock 
themselves into their homes.

"The fighting continues and we can hear vehicles moving through the streets, 
but we can't go outside to find out what's going on," Amara Touré told Reuters.

Military sources said the Republican Forces' attack on Coulibaly's 
headquarters was met with resistance that lasted more than an hour. A fighter 
in Coulibaly's militia, known as Capt Meyo Aka, told Associated Press that they 
drove government troops back and they left.

Coulibaly had pledged allegiance on Sunday to Ouattara, saying he regards the 
former prime minister as a father. Coulibaly protected Ouattara's wife from 
1990 to 1993 when he was head of her bodyguard corps.

The Invisible Commando and the northern New Forces, which were incorporated 
into the Republican Forces, have little in common beside their hatred of 
Gbagbo; disagreements between them have at times been violent.

Coulibaly, who led a failed coup against Gbagbo in 2002, is a longtime rival 
of Ouattara's prime minister and military commander, Guillaume Soro. Without an 
enemy to unite against, factionalism in the Ouattara camp is being exposed.

Apollinaire Yapi, a spokesman for Soro, said last night: "Right from the 
beginning the Invisible Commando distinguished itself from the Republican 
Forces. Ouattara created the Republican Forces by decree to gather all groups 
of soldiers who were fighting in the field.

"From that moment every soldier had to join the new army, but we noticed 
General 'IB' continued to claim the Invisible Commando are distinct from the 
Republican Forces. He was expected to join the Republican Forces but he did not 
do that.

"The other day he said he was at the disposal of Mr Ouattara, but no one 
trusts him and that's the problem. There's a lack of confidence and I don't 
know what is going to be done. It may need a military action again if they fail 
to solve it by negotiation."

Meanwhile, across the city in Yopougon, where the UN mission maintains 24-hour 
patrols, fighting also continues in an offensive to "mop up" pro-Gbagbo 
loyalists.

Yapi added: "In Yopougon the militiamen and mercenaries loyal to Gbagbo are 
still operating. Three high-ranking pro-Gbagbo soldiers are still at large. We 
don't know if they are planning anything."

He warned: "Militiamen loyal to Gbagbo had confided they could create a rebel 
group if Gbagbo was to be captured, but there are some measures being taken to 
prevent such a group being organised."

Infighting among Ouattara's forces erupted in the southwestern cocoa port of 
San Pedro on Wednesday. One source said the shooting started when one group of 
soldiers tried to stop another from looting. UN peacekeepers intervened after 
Ivorian fighters started launching mortars and rockets downtown.

The continued fighting has set back hopes of quickly restoring security and 
reviving the economy; the post-election struggle dragged on for more than four 
months.

Richard Moncrieff, at the South African Institute for International Affairs, 
said Ouattara does not have command and control over troops who entered Abidjan 
to oust Gbagbo. "This could have serious repercussions for what is to come," he 
told AP.

A million people have fled Abidjan and another million are displaced in the 
country or have fled to neighbours. Thousands have been killed and wounded.

The World Health Organisation said on Thursday that polio has broken out, with 
three cases confirmed in children. The UN agency warned that it may spread 
withinIvory Coast <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ivory-coast>, where 
disease surveillance is poor, and to other parts of west Africa.

"The outbreak response may be constrained by the current security situation in 
Côte d'Ivoire," the WHO said.

Médecins Sans Frontières has reported a "dire" situation in the west of the 
country, where divisions between communities are the deepest and some of the 
worst atrocities have taken place.
 