
Nothing says "Who needs Koh Samui?" quite like a few days' isolation in a poky 
bedsit on the outskirts of town, right? Which is why you've wisely plumped to 
spend your holiday abiding by the rules of the gritty British kitchen-sink 
drama. And why not? As Joy says at the beginning of Ken Loach's Poor Cow: "The 
world was our oyster … and we chose Ruislip."

Now, the good news is that you don't have to go to Ruislip. However, the bad 
news is that you do have to go somewhere that's not exactly known for sun, sand 
and surf. The east Midlands (Look Back in Anger, Saturday Night and Sunday 
Morning), Yorkshire (Billy Liar, This Sporting Life) and Lancashire (A Kind of 
Loving, A Taste of Honey) are all decent choices.

What's important is that you find somewhere with lots of caffs, bookies and 
pubs where old men still sing along to the piano. It's also important that you 
take no money on this holiday and that you have no easy mode of transport – 
kitchen-sink dramas are all about being trapped in a grim situation with only 
dreams of escape.
 Keep it reel … in an old-fashioned cinema like Manchester's Cornerhouse. 
Photograph: Christopher Thomond 
A Taste of Honey is a good film to base your holiday on. Stroll down to the 
Manchester ship canal where sailor Jimmy bandages Jo's grazed knee, and later 
waves goodbye on Barton Road Swing Bridge; have a night out in Manchester after 
picking up a new GBF on Canal Street (to recreate the Jo/Geoffrey dynamic); or 
visitSalford Lads Club 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2010/aug/23/twitrip-manchester-verdict> and 
learn how Morrissey was a massive fan of Shelagh Delaney's play-turned-film (so 
much so he nicked half her lines for lyrics: "I dreamt of you last night, and I 
fell out of bed twice").

Cheap thrills really are your best bet in kitchen-sink world – find a date and 
visit a fairground or go to an old-fashioned cinema like the one where Vic 
snogs Ingrid in A Kind of Loving (although any man who thinks a decent date 
involves making out in Heaton Park probably shouldn't be looked to for any sort 
of advice).

And don't get depressed when you find yourself sitting lonely in yet another 
decrepit pub – simply imagine that the puddle of stale lager and wee on the 
floor is really the warm Pacific lapping against your flip-flopped toes. After 
all, it's what Billy Liar would have done.
 