
He spent his life in the shadow of one of France's most celebrated authors and 
in death has become a mere footnote in literary history. Despite having 
co-written some of the most popular tales in the French language, Auguste 
Maquet has been forgotten by all but the most erudite of scholars.

Now, however, the quietly creative ghostwriter whose crucial role in the 
production of some of Alexandre Dumas's most famous novels has gone 
unacknowledged for more than 150 years is finally having his moment in the 
limelight. A film released in French cinemas tomorrow seeks to shed new light 
on the man who fans say was the true genius behind The Three Musketeers and The 
Count of Monte Cristo.

Starring Gérard Depardieu as the colourful Dumas and Belgian actor Benoît 
Poelvoorde as his downtrodden employee, L'Autre Dumas (The Other Dumas) mixes 
fiction with fact as it traces Maquet's attempts to outshine his master in the 
public eye. Through its retelling of the collaboration, the film has reignited 
a vigorous debate in Parisian literary circles about the real nature of the 
duo's professional teamwork.

Devotees of Dumas, one of the stars of 19th-century French literature, whose 
remains were transferred amid great pomp to the hallowed tomb of the Panthéon 
in 2002, insist Maquet was merely a dogsbody whose capacity for hard work was 
his greatest talent. They claim his only role as one of the great man's many 
assistants was to provide the basics on which Dumas could then build his 
masterpieces.

Others, however, insist that without Maquet's creativity and precision of 
thought the erratic and uncontrollable Dumas would have been lost. "There is a 
tendency to dismiss [Maquet] as a drudge and that's just wrong," said Bernard 
Fillaire, a novelist who has written an essay in support of the ghostwriter's 
rehabilitation. "Of course he wasn't a Balzac or a Dickens … but he definitely 
had talent."

The pair began working together in the 1840s, when Maquet provided the already 
illustrious Dumas with a manuscript which would go on to be published – under 
Dumas's name – as the novel Le Chevalier d'Harmental. Over the next decade, the 
two men would go on to produce dozens of novels and plays together, with 
mystery always surrounding the extent of Maquet's involvement.

In 1858, frustrated with his lack of recognition, the assistant turned on his 
master and took him to court in an attempt to gain the joint rights to their 
body of work. Maquet was awarded financial damages for unpaid fees, but Dumas 
retained his sole ownership of their output. While he admitted that he had been 
helped in his efforts, Dumas insisted he was the one true creator.

For loyal Dumasiens, this was a just ruling which vindicated their idol's 
brilliance. Theirs is a view shared by Safy Nebbou, director of L'Autre Dumas, 
for whom Maquet was an able accomplice but little more. "Maquet did not have 
the genius of Dumas; he could spend hours and hours writing but it didn't 
change anything. You can't learn genius," he said.

But many, including Nebbou, believe Maquet was an essential component of 
Dumas's success, if not his equal in terms of flair. And supporters of Maquet, 
who after the acrimonious split with his master wrote a series of moderately 
successful novels under his own name, agree. "There was this extraordinary 
alchemy between them," said Fillaire. "They needed each other. When Maquet left 
Dumas, neither did anything else that was really excellent. But Dumas did 
nothing more of any note, while Maquet went on to write a lot."

Later in life, once he had earned enough money from his own writings, Maquet 
bought himself a chateau in the French countryside. Literary legend has it 
that, in his library, he had a copy of The Three Musketeers rebound and 
retitled: "By A Dumas and A Maquet."
 