
A fire alarm sounded in the Rod Laver Arena just a few seconds after the 
fourth and lastAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> men's quarter-final. Rafa 
Nadal was on fire. The world No1 has not dropped a set so far, and the 
under-swell of confidence, the riptide of self-belief, appears to be rushing 
the reigning French Open and Wimbledon champion towards his first hard-court 
slam final on Sunday evening.

His opponent, the Frenchman Gilles Simon, a surprise entry into the top 10 
last year, had snaffled victory from Nadal in front of his home fans in the 
Madrid Masters towards the end of last year, and with the centre-court roof 
firmly shut because of the scorching day-time temperatures, well in excess of 
40°c, there was half an inkling that he might spring an upset.

Simon, despite climbing into the tennis elite, had never managed to get past 
the third round of any slam before. He is a lightweight in a land of giants, 
nicknamedpoussin by the French because of his thin legs. Yet Nadal knew only 
too well that he could not afford to take him in the least lightly. "I have to 
run for five hours to win. I have no choice," said Simon before this match. He 
managed just under 2½, Nadal winning 6–2, 7–5, 7–5.

This set up the Australian Open's first-ever men's all-Spanish semi-final, 
with Nadal up against his fellow left-hander and Davis Cup team-mate, Fernando 
Verdasco, who in the previous round dispatchedAndy Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray>. Nadal has a 6–0 head-to-head 
record, which would incline most bookmakers – the ones which made Murray 
favourite for this tournament – not to offer serious odds on a Verdasco win. 
But the joy of the Australian Open, set as it is at the beginning of the 
season, is that you never know what might happen.

Verdasco pretty much continued where he had left off against Murray, beating 
last year's surprise finalist, Jo-Wilfried Tsonga of France 7–6, 3–6, 6–3, 6–2. 
Having the roof closed ought to have favoured the Frenchman, who finished last 
season by winning the Paris Indoor Masters. This was to underestimate the form 
of Verdasco who prior to this tournament had won only a couple of small events 
on clay, and never progressed beyond the last 16 of a slam in 22 attempts. So 
much for statistics.

The 25-year-old, born and bred in Madrid, finished last year in the top 20, a 
rise based on consistency rather than the coruscating brilliance of Nadal, but 
it was Nadal's absence that was to provide the most significant moment of his 
career, in Buenos Aires at the end of last year.

Nadal missed the Davis Cup final because of injury, leaving Verdasco to play a 
key third-day singles against José Acasuso. The pressure was enormous, and 
Verdasco won, clinching the trophy for his country, and filling him with a new 
self-belief.

He had invariably been in the small interview room during previous slams, 
chatting away to the Spanish journalists. Here he has been in the main 
interview room, reflecting his new stature. A rather anxious Spanish reporter, 
knowing that time can be limited when the international press are present, 
tried a little feverishly to get a couple of extra questions. Verdasco turned 
to him, smiled, and said: "Don't worry, I haven't turned into Serena Williams."

Murray had previously beaten Verdasco five times out of five, only to discover 
that this was a different Fernando altogether. Tsonga had not played the 
Spaniard before, and simply could not reproduce the penetration and power that 
swept Nadal away in last year's semi-finals. For which the world No1 was 
grateful: he would much rather play his countryman for a place in his first 
Australian Open final.

All the Spaniards work immensely hard on the physical side of their game, and 
Verdasco, sensing he could become even fitter, took himself off to Las Vegas to 
train with Gil Reyes, Andre Agassi's former trainer. He also spoke to Agassi, 
four times the Australian Open champion. "We talked about organising my year, 
and which weeks I needed to practise. He was also giving me advice about 
tactics, and my game. We spoke for two hours, and I was so happy," said 
Verdasco.

So can the Agassi-Reyes effect pay off against Rafa? "I have never played 
Fernandez when he was at this level, beating Murray and Tsonga. He was very 
focused all the time," said Nadal, who added he had never known heat like it 
when he was preparing for the match against Simon. "He is my friend, but it 
will be very tough."

Few believe Verdasco has a realistic chance. Rafa is the Big Heat.
 