
In the beginning, there was Movember. Then there was Stoptober. Now prepare 
yourself for Veganuary.

Those who have overindulged this festive period may be tempted to turn vegan 
for January. If so, they will not be alone. Organisers of Veganuary, now in its 
third year, predict that 50,000 people will take part this month, of whom 
around half will stay vegan.

About 3,000 people participated in the first Veganuary. Last year the figure 
rose to 12,800. But eschewing meat, fish and dairy products is now becoming 
increasingly fashionable thanks to a number of high-profile advocates.

Famous names who have tried vegan diets in the past include Bill Clinton and 
actor Anne Hathaway. Committed vegans include Brad Pitt, Ellie Goulding and 
Gwyneth Paltrow. Kat Von D, an American tattoo artist and model, crashed the
Veganuary website <http://www.veganuary.com/> earlier this year when she 
encouraged people to register.

Among the celebrities taking part this month are comedians Romesh Ranganathan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/romesh-ranganathan> and Sara Pascoe. Actor 
Peter Egan ofDownton Abbey fame and designer Vivienne Westwood have also signed 
up.

Organisers of the event claim the surge in support for veganism reflects a 
growing awareness that it can help alleviate the world’s food crisis.

Rearing animals for consumption and dairy production produces significantly 
more carbon dioxide than plant-based food. In addition, animal farming is the 
leading producer of methane gas, a major contributor to global warming. 
However, organisers said that a concern for animals was still the primary 
motivation for people becoming vegan.

“We ask about motivation when people sign up to Veganuary and, for the past 
two years, animals are the primary reason by a large majority, with health 
coming second, and the environment third,” said Clea Grady, marketing manager 
of Veganuary.

“There is an increasing awareness and concern at how we treat, use and abuse 
animals, and this is growing year on year. Anecdotally, we know that, for 
whatever reason an individual approaches veganism, the lines begin to blur once 
education has taken place.”

The business world is now waking up to the growing vegan market. Companies 
such asVBites <http://www.vbitesfoods.com/>, Violife <http://www.violife.gr/> 
andFry’s <http://www.frysvegetarian.co.uk/> market products such as vegan 
cheese, ice-cream, “fish” fingers, burgers, sausages, schnitzels and “chicken” 
nuggets.

Pret a Manger has been expanding its range of vegan sandwiches; Caffè Nero 
labels its mince pies as vegan; and Pizza Express has a vegan pizza on its 
regular menu. Both Yo! Sushi and the Handmade Burger Company are doing special 
promotions in support of Veganuary.

“There has been a marked increase in enthusiasm in the UK over the past 12 to 
18 months, and that’s extremely exciting to see,” Grady said.

“This has resulted in more media coverage, many more vegan products on our 
shelves, and ever-increasing numbers of Veganuary participants. We are starting 
to catch up with the States, but they continue to pave the way.”

Some nutritionists argue that humans cannot derive all the minerals and 
vitamins they need from a pure vegan diet. Both Clinton and Hathaway famously 
turned their backs on veganism. “I just didn’t feel good or healthy,” Hathaway 
once explained.

However, Grady said veganism could provide a balanced diet. “All it requires 
is a little knowledge and guidance, and that’s what Veganuary specialises in,” 
she said. “The Health and Nutrition sections ofVeganuary.com 
<http://www.veganuary.com/> were co-authored by a GP and a qualified 
nutritionist, so we are confident in the information we provide. We follow this 
up with practical guides on what to eat, and what to replace, demonstrating how 
easy getting the right nutrition can be.”
 