
Andrew Motion


Poems Before And After (Bloodaxe 1990) contains the collected English 
translations of poems by Miroslav Holub. It's a magnificently surprising, 
varied, disciplined and abundant book - at once scintillatingly witty and 
profoundly thoughtful.

Melvyn Bragg


Euripides's Alcestis and Aeschylus's  The Oresteia, both translated by Ted 
Hughes. Something marvellous happened to the writing of Ted Hughes in the last 
two or three years of his life. Whatever it was, After Ovid, Birthday Letters 
and these two thrilling translations show Hughes - the poetic dramatist - at 
his finest. InAlmost Like a Whale: The Origin of Species Updated, Steve Jones 
does just that in an extraordinary ride through Darwinism, yesterday and today. 
Jones is in the premier league of what appears to be a new breed - brilliant 
scientists able and eager to share their written erudition with the rest of us. 
Adam Phillips brilliantly takes on - ie, further on - Darwin and Freud and the 
big themes in Darwin's Worms. Ideally this should be read after Steve Jones. 
Phillips has developed a style which combines wit and learning, based on his 
deep understanding of literature and the library of Analysis.

Matt Ridley


A rattling good yarn with improbable characters and real suspense comes along 
all too rarely. But two had me gripped this year: Samantha Weinberg'sA Fish 
Caught in Time about the discovery and rediscovery of a gigantic fish (the 
coelacanth) that was supposed to have died out 200 million years ago; andThe 
Arcanum, Janet Gleeson's history of the Meissen porcelain factory. A book that 
changed my mind (always refreshing) was Sue Blackmore'sThe Meme Machine. 

Craig Raine


The Husbands, Christopher Logue's versions of books 3 and 4 of Homer's Iliad, 
is partly syntactic magic - the dynamic of long, clear sentences effortlessly 
extending like clean-cut marble staircases, set beside single words which are 
radioactive in their isolation. And it is partly the conflation of the iambic 
pentameter and the candidly contemporary, which, together with Logue's 
narrative and pictorial gifts, make this one of the great works of our time, 
not just the decade.

Alex Garland


I feel I've read a lot of good books this year, but two stand out for me, both 
of which were shortlisted for the Guardian First Book Award. The first is David 
Mitchell's highly imaginative intercontinental novelGhostwritten, and the 
second is Philip Gourevitch's analysis of the genocide in Rwanda,We Wish To 
Inform You That Tomorrow We Will Be Killed With Our Families, which is amongst 
the best journalism I have ever read.

Emily Perkins 


The Onion: Our Dumb Century  is the book I've had most fun reading this year: 
social and political satire with a serrated edge. The most interesting first 
novel has been Bill Broady'sSwimmer - a dark and shiny little account of the 
butterfly stroke, competitive sports and madness. And fromNew Writing 8, Dan 
Rhodes's sharp and sad pieces - somewhere between a short story and a long joke 
- stand out. I look forward to reading whatever he publishes next.

John Mortimer


The most important book for me this year was God's Funeral by AN Wilson. 
Written with great eloquence, erudition and humour, it recounts a gradual 
realisation, over the last couple of centuries, that God was probably created 
by man and not the other way round. What is touching is the almost universal 
regret at having to bury what Carlyle called "the Great Perhaps". Sue Townsend 
inAdrian Mole: The Cappuccino Years uniquely satirised the shallow end of the 
millennium, only Adrian's Pandora has become a Blair Babe. Simon Schama's 
magisterialRembrandt's Eyes is a beautiful, as well as a beautifully written 
book.

Mavis Cheek


Thackeray's Bildungsroman - dauntingly long, sharply funny - was worth the 
haul.Women in Early Modern England (1550-1720) by Sarah Mendelsohn and Patricia 
Crawford: scrupulously researched, giving women a real - often highly 
subversive - voice, with lively contemporary illustrations fuelling their 
findings. Finally, slow I may be, but I rattled through Michael Frayn'sHeadlong
. The dark side of Breughel's world mixed with a gorgeous satire of 
contemporary values, obsession, and the enduring goodness of love.

Jilly Cooper


I thoroughly enjoyed Nigel Jones's iconoclastic, often riotously funny 
biography:Rupert Brooke: Life, Death and Myth. Brooke emerges as quite awful - 
but his untimely death still makes one weep. Having had huge joy from adopting 
two children myself, I was very moved byIthaka by Sarah Saffian. Sarah, 
beautiful, talented and adopted, was a reporter for the New York Daily News, 
when her world was upended by her natural parents suddenly making contact. 
Three years of letters and deliberations later, a meeting finally took place, 
which happily brought Sarah closer to both sets of parents. Wonderfully 
exciting.

David Hare


John Naughton's wonderful new book, A Brief History of the Internet, throws a 
rope-bridge across the chasm between science and art. Naughton tells the story 
of the net's development so lucidly and so poetically that you end up finally 
able to appreciate and understand the scale of the idealism and invention which 
went into the fallible pile of plastic junk on your desk. Graham McCain's 
expert biographyMorecambe and Wise  shows how a good writer can make 
fascinating the lives of two people who, effectively, did nothing but work and 
die. Once again, the book's practical idealism about the potential of pubic 
service television to be both excellent and popular is intensely moving.

Ludovic Kennedy


What impressed me most about Stalingrad by Anthony Beevor was the sheer 
bravado of the enterprise: an Englishman mastering the military technicalities 
of two different foreign languages to write an authoritative account of one of 
the great pivotal battles of history. A few longeurs but ultimately a tour de 
force.Fortitude by Roger Hesketh tells how we tricked the Germans into 
believing that the D-Day landings in Normandy were a feint and they could soon 
expect another more powerful attack in the Pas de Calais. Lastly,Godless 
Morality by Richard Holloway, Bishop of Edinburgh, its theme being that 
morality is a human not divine construct. At the Edinburgh Book Festival I 
asked him if he agreed with me that God also was a human construct, and he said 
he did.

Geordie Greig


Undue Influence by Anita Brookner was one of the most memorable and evocative 
novels written last year; elegant, clever with a genuinely disturbing twist in 
the final pages. What also stands out is the verse translation of Beowulf by 
Seamus Heaney which is destined for classic status as he miraculously 
transforms the rough rigour and rhythm of the original into fine contemporary 
verse. I found Simon Schama's Rembrandt's Eyes  complex and compelling, and 
without doubt it is the last word on the world's greatest painter. Finally, the 
book which has not strayed from my bedside and brings constant pleasure and 
surprises is John Carey'sThe Faber Book of Utopias. 

Zachary Leader


My book of the year is a biography: Jean Strouse's Morgan: American Financier, 
which renders the milieu of Edith Wharton and Henry James whole, no longer 
shorn of its economic base. Though long, it's shrewd, elegantly written and 
clear, even for a reader largely ignorant of stocks and bonds. Less strenuous 
pleasures are afforded by two books much praised in the States but available 
here only on Amazon: Erik Tarloff'sFace Time (Crown), a funny, fast-paced novel 
of White House adultery and alpha-maledom, and Wendy Lesser'sThe Amateur 
(Pantheon), a memoir by the remarkable founding editor of the West Coast 
literary journal The Threepenny Review.
 