
Introducing a new category for this year, you voted the Peruvian ruins your 
top overseas tourist attraction. Here we also list the four runners up, along 
with new ways to discover them all.

1. Machu Picchu

A new way to reach the Inca ruins: it's now possible to trek between four 
different mountain lodges on an old Inca route, walking from Salkantay and 
ending at Aguas Calientes near Machu Picchu, via smaller Inca sites, glacial 
lake swims and gourmet picnics. It's a four-day trek, but the trip takes seven 
days, beginning and ending in Cusco.

• Mountainlodgesofperu.com <http://www.Mountainlodgesofperu.com>, from around 
£1,200pp full-board.

2. Great Barrier Reef

Some of Australia's best surfing waves lie not off the coast of Bondi but 
above the kinks, bends and gaps of the Great Barrier Reef. Breaks near the 
Capricorn-Bunker group of reefs and islands are accessible on a live-aboard 
surfing boat trip with MV James Cook.

• 1770 Environmental Tours (1770jamescook.com.au 
<http://www.1770jamescook.com.au>). Charter the boat, with crew, fishing 
equipment and all meals, for A$2,150 per day for up to 10 people (minimum four 
days).

3. Iguazu Falls

A new hotel, Posada Puerto Bemberg, has opened 30mins from the Iguazu national 
park, making a perfect base for a tour of the falls, the Jesuit missions of San 
Ignacio and a boat trip to Paraguay. It has 14 rooms, a wine cave, terraces 
overlooking the Parana River and a natural pool.

• Last Frontiers (01296 653000, lastfrontiers.com 
<http://www.lastfrontiers.com>), from £1,932pp for six days inc flights to 
Buenos Aires from UK, internal flights, hotel in Buenos Aires and most meals.

4. Grand Canyon national park

Mules carry travellers into the canyon on an overnight trip along the Inner 
Gorge, across the Colorado river on the suspension bridge and up Bright Angel 
Canyon to Phantom Ranch, which lies at the bottom surrounded by trees, and has 
rustic cabins and dorms. The ranch is only accessible this way, or by river.

• Xanterra.com <http://www.Xanterra.com>. From $420pp, or $743 for two, 
full-board.

5. Angkor temple complex 

After you've seen Angkor Wat, book this new 4x4 safari trip to the other 
farther flung temples of the complex, including Koh Ker and Beng Mealea. The 
hordes never make it this far, but the ruins are just as spectacular and 
reached by bumpy trails through rural villages and forest wilderness.

• Experience South East Asia (0845 680 0638, experiencesoutheastasia.com 
<http://www.experiencesoutheastasia.com>). 4x4 day trip for £150pp, or an 
overnight trip including a luxury tented camp stay for £210pp. Three people per 
4x4.
 