
If you want to see all of Britain's great baroque buildings before you die, 
then congratulations, you have picked a very manageable ambition. This, after 
all, was a style that began as an ambitious advertising campaign for the Roman 
Catholic church at a time when it hoped to reassert its authority over apostate 
countries such as this one.

Hugely ambitious, wildly theatrical, alive with feeling and movement, no 
upstart Protestant regime could afford to build such nonsense. Which was 
precisely the point: when displaying power, it is the showy gestures that mean 
the most, as only the richest can afford to make them.

In Oliver Cromwell's Puritan England, of course, this way of thinking was 
regarded as almost pornographically decadent. And no doubt this partly explains 
why it became so popular, despite its Catholic overtones, after the 
Restoration. Nevertheless, Britain came late to the style, just as tastes were 
changing at the beginning of the Enlightenment. But in Catholic Europe, many of 
the great surviving marvels are from this period. And for as long as the world 
still associates the Vatican with the majesty of St Peter's, their ad campaign 
has done its job.

1. Chapel of the Holy Shroud, Turin, Italy

Purpose-built to house one of the most sacred relics in Christendom, the Turin 
Shroud – the burial cloth of Jesus – the building took more than 200 years to 
reach its present form. But Guarino Guarini's dome begun in 1667, in 
particular, has become famous throughout the world for its fabulously intricate 
lacework of stone arches.

2. Santa Maria della Salute, Venice, Italy

A dazzlingly ornate octagon of limestone, brick and marble, with two domes and 
an army of statues on the roof. The church was built in the hope of mercy 
during an outbreak of the plague.

3. Zwinger, Dresden, Germany

Almost totally destroyed by allied bombing raids during the war, but since 
restored, this huge complex of pavilions, galleries and gardens was built to 
rival the glory of Versailles. And it does.

4. National Palace, Mafra, Portugal

So gigantic is this palace and monastery that it makes the city around it seem 
like an afterthought. More than 50,000 people from all over Portugal were 
involved in its 13-year construction, which included the building of a hospital 
to treat their injuries.

5. Piazza del Popolo, Rome, Italy

This "square of poplars" centres on an ancient Egyptian obelisk watched over 
by two churches that appear to mirror one another, but possess, on closer 
inspection, many subtle and exquisite differences.
 