
1 Judging each Davis Cup tie on its merits

Ever since the retirement of Tim Henman and Greg Rusedski, Britain's Davis Cup 
hopes have relied almost entirely on Murray. The Scot has been a willing 
participant for the most part, winning 10 of his 11 singles matches and 
generally doing everything he can to get Britain into the world group. 
Unfortunately for him, the support has not been up to scratch and unless Murray 
played all three matches of a tie – two singles and the doubles – Britain had 
little chance of victory. Four weeks ago, Murray announced that he would be 
unavailable for the tie in Lithuania in March and that he would judge each 
future match on its merits, allowing himself breaks from competition in weeks 
set aside for the Davis Cup. Murray drew criticism when he pulled out of a tie 
in Argentina at the last minute in February 2008, claiming that a change in 
surfaces from hard court to clay and back again was not good for his aching 
body. He also missed a tie against Ukraine in March 2009 and after playing 
through the pain of a wrist injury as Britain were relegated to Europe/Africa 
Zone 2 in September, – the third level of the competition – he made his 
decision. "It would be a bit unfair to single me out," Murray said. "[Roger] 
Federer has missed Davis Cup matches, Rafa [Nadal] has missed Davis Cup 
matches, as have [Novak] Djokovic, [Pete] Sampras and [Andre] Agassi. A lot 
better players than me have missed Davis Cup matches."

2 Easing off on gym work during grand slams

After Murray was beaten by Marin Cilic in the fourth round of the US Open last 
September, the Scot revealed that he had been struggling with an injury to his 
left wrist. He played through it in a Davis Cup tie against Poland but was 
forced to take six weeks off soon after. Until that point Murray had gone to 
the gym on off-days at grand slams, but the injury convinced him that something 
had to change if he was to be as well-prepared as possible. "I always went to 
the gym for 20 minutes, just to do something," he said. "But [he and his 
coaching team] spoke about that a little bit. I'd been going to the gym every 
week of the year. I was just tired. There's a few things I'll do differently 
but I think you kind of learn that as you go along." Darren Cahill, who coached 
Lleyton Hewitt and Andre Agassi to the world No1 ranking, said training during 
grand slams was probably not the best idea. "Playing best of five sets in the 
conditions we have down here at theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>, most of the time you're 
worrying about the recovering," he said.

3 Putting more attacking shots into his armoury

Murray reached the heady heights of the world No2 spot with his natural style, 
as a brilliant counter-puncher with the ability to change tack during matches 
to suit the opponent. At times in 2009, however – notably at the Australian 
Open against Fernando Verdasco and at Wimbledon in the semi-final against Andy 
Roddick – he got caught being a little too defensive as his opponents played 
blinders. Murray has often argued that most points in any match are played on 
his own terms but in the off-season he seems to have realised that he needed to 
develop more attacking shots. He has always been able to do them in practice, 
but repeating them in matches, under pressure, has not been quite so easy. At 
this Australian Open, his second serve has been much improved, a heavier 
forehand has been a real revelation and his willingness to come to the net when 
the time is right has surprised his opponents. It all depends who he's playing, 
though, and the situation in the match. He said: "It's time to start practising 
things I've worked on in matches, so that when I get to the slams it's not like 
I haven't done this before."

4 Slimming down his entourage on tour

Everyone likes to have plenty of support but at times the demand for passes to 
sit in Murray's player box has been quite something. That he has a larger than 
usual team of coaches, trainers, physios and agents means that the number has 
been in double figures. Here at the Australian Open, there has been a subtle 
change. After Murray split from his girlfriend, Kim Sears, before Christmas, 
the group was one down. But Alex Corretja, part of his coaching team, and Matt 
Little, one of his two fitness trainers, are not here either. Little and Jez 
Green have alternated at ATP Tour events (Little goes to Europe and Green to 
the United States), but they have both been in evidence at grand slams. Rob 
Stewart, who runs Murray's website and occasionally travels with him, has also 
stayed at home. "I spoke with a lot of the guys about it and I like having 
everyone around," Murray said. "I get on great with all of them but I have to 
make sure everyone who is here has a job to do. It is just one or two people 
[fewer] and when we go out for dinner it is not tables for 10, it is tables for 
five or six. It is just a little calmer and maybe we are not spending as much 
time together."

5 Making Melbourne a home from home

High on the list of a tennis player's gripes is the routine of traipsing from 
airport to airport and hotel to hotel, stuck in a world of restaurant food and 
one-room existence. The top players can afford luxury hotels that ease the 
homesickness but Murray has always espoused the importance of being able to 
stay at home during Wimbledon, away from prying eyes and pressure. To that end, 
in Melbourne he and Team Murray have been staying in an apartment with a 
lounge, bedrooms and even a kitchen. Ross Hutchins was entrusted with the 
cooking, and though it was rudimentary – usually pasta with chicken and a 
bottle of ready-made sauce – it has made Murray feel more at home. That is all 
that matters. After Hutchins flew home this week, the coach Miles Maclagan took 
over the reins. As Murray tweeted: "Miles cooked dinner for us tonight, but so 
far everyone feels OK."
 