
2006 Davis Cup, Montenegro

Great Britain are fined £1,434 after Murray swears at the umpire during a 
doubles match against Serbia’s Nenad Zimonjic and Ilia Bozoljac. The 
18-year-old was incensed by a call made by Adel Aref during the match, which 
Murray and Greg Rusedksi lost. “We got a shocker and I told the umpire how bad 
he was,” Murray said. “I would have preferred everyone not to hear it but 
that’s what happens in sport when you get angry.”

2009 Monte Carlo Masters

Murray goes into volcanic mode when an umpire goes to check a line call during 
his semi-final against Nikolay Davydenko. Even though the umpire ruled the ball 
out, Murray thought he was pointing to the wrong ball mark and shouted: “No 
way. Oh my God.” The umpire reassured him the “ball is out” but Murray had 
trouble calming down. He won in straight sets.

2013 Wimbledon

The tournament may have been a glorious one for Murray but that did not stop 
him losing his rag, most notably in his semi-final against Jerzy Janowicz when 
the eventual champion reacted furiously to the decision to close the roof owing 
to fading light, thereby halting his momentum. “This is ridiculous, it’s not 
even dark,” Murray said. “I don’t understand the rules, it’s not fair.”

2013 US Open

Aware the US Open title was slipping form his grasp in meek fashion, Murray 
decided to smash his racket on the ground and slap his forehead during his 
quarter-final against Stanislas Wawrinkaat Flushing Meadows. He lost in 
straight sets and earned a code violation for racket abuse. “It was a tough day 
for me,” he said.

2014 Wimbledon

“Five minutes before the fucking match!” shouted Murray in the direction of 
the players’ box, where his coach Amélie Mauresmo, girlfriend Kim Sears and 
mother Judy were sitting, during his quarter-final defeat to Grigor Dimitrov. 
The deposed champion explained his rant was to do with the early-than-expected 
start of his match, although why he also shouted “shut the fuck up!” at the 
players’ box remains unclear. All in all, not a good day for the 27-year-old.
 