
The story of the disappearance of flight MH370, falling from the sky into the 
sea, is the opposite of the one that held the world's attention in 2010: the 
survival and reappearance, from the depths of the earth, of thetrapped Chilean 
miners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/aug/23/trapped-miners-alive-chile>. 
While it has been established beyond doubt that the plane crashed into the 
ocean, with no survivors, the families of the dead understandably refuse to 
accept this conclusion. In the aftermath of a natural disaster, people are 
pulled from the wreckage of a collapsed building after the search and rescue 
efforts have given way to the grim duty of recovery. The loss a vessel with all 
hands, a mass death from which no one escapes, is not inconceivable, but the 
idea of such a thing being incommunicable is so dreadful that we cling to the 
hope of a survivor long after it is plausible. Hence the power and reassurance 
of the lines from Job quoted by Herman Melville in the epilogue toMoby-Dick. 
"And I only am escaped alone to tell thee." The black box embodies this idea of 
the survivor's story and testimony even in a situation where the loss of life 
has been total. Face to face with his fate, one of the last things Robert 
Redford's unnamed sailor does in the filmAll Is Lost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155232/all-is-lost> is to write a brief 
message, put it in a bottle and throw it overboard. All may be lost – but the 
hope is that this hand-scrawled version of the black box, will be found. If it 
is not … We have seen in the last few weeks the speed with which theories and 
conspiracies whoosh into the information vacuum. In the absence of reliable 
facts we are left with the lines repeated hypnotically by Conrad at the end of
The Secret Agent: "An impenetrable mystery seems destined to hang forever over 
this act of madness or despair." In a post-post-religious age the inexplicable 
has retreated, like some endangered animal, to the wild and dangerous places of 
the imagination. The flipside of this is an increasing hunger for such 
sightings, a thirst for stories of inexplicable survival.

An extreme example occurred shortly before MH370 went missing, when the 
Mexican fishermanJosé Salvador Alvarenga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/12/homecoming-for-pacific-castaway-jos-salvador-alvarenga>
 was found after drifting at sea for 13 months. Amazement that he had survived 
for so long on a diet of raw turtles and rain water soon turned to suspicion. 
This is hardly surprising given a history of fictional tales passing themselves 
off as fact – or of fact being turned into fiction – so lengthy that it reaches 
back to the dawn of the English novel. The real-life castaway Alexander Selkirk 
was the basis for Robinson Crusoe, whose adventures, the first edition claimed, 
were "written by himself", not by Daniel Defoe. Meticulously itemised byWilliam 
Golding <https://www.theguardian.com/books/williamgolding> in the novel Pincher 
Martin, the survival of the eponymous hero on a bare rock in the ocean is 
revealed, in the last lines, to have been not only a fiction – we knew that 
from the outset – but a parable. Even the fiction turns out to have been a 
fiction. Paradoxically, the more strictly stories of survival are stripped to 
their practical essentials the more readily they accumulate larger resonances. 
In his struggle to stay afloat Redford is like Sisyphus who, Camus insisted, we 
must imagine "happy". At one point, as one bit of ill-fortune is followed by 
another, Redford seems about to scream "Fuck". It never becomes a word, just a 
long howl of anguish: "Fffwwuuuh…" Apart from this moment, he is in his 
element. This is what he came to sea for. And it would be wrong, as we hear 
those fateful words, "All is lost", to take this as an admission of regret. It 
would be just as accurate to say that he has achieved his destination.

Compared with All Is Lost, Cast Away with Tom Hanks is a lavishly stranded 
epic. The aircraft in which Hanks and his colleagues are flying crashes into 
the sea, forced far from its presumed course by a storm. The search is called 
off, there are no survivors. But Hanks has survived, washed up on an island 
where he lives for four emaciated and bearded years on crabs, coconut milk and 
rain water. Various items from the plane float to the shore and prove useful – 
a pair of ice-skates is essential for sorting out his dental problems. But the 
best discovery, perhaps because it has no use value, is a Wilson volleyball. 
Hanks paints eyes and a mouth on it. Over the years, as it decays, it sprouts a 
tuft of hair and there develops, between man and ball, one of the great 
relationships in the history of cinema. In one scene, Hanks throws the ball 
away; afterwards there's a lovely post-row make-up with him on charming best 
behaviour – "I know you, I know you!" – as Wilson's usual silence acquires an 
impossible suggestion of hurt and sulk. This, of course, is not a relationship 
between equals. Wilson is not just Hanks's companion: he is also an altar and a 
god. A god created by the castaway's need. Eventually, after the two of them 
have left the island on a cobbled-together raft, Wilson is washed away. Hanks 
swims after him, reaches out his hand only to watch him drift from sight on 
what may or may not be Matthew Arnold's "sea of faith". Hanks, at that point, 
is so physically and psychically shattered as to be beyond hope and faith.

For most of All Is Lost the focus is so tight as to avoid the undertow of 
symbolic, religious or allegorical meaning – and is, as a result, unusually 
vulnerable to them. (Hamlet didn't call it a sea of troubles for nothing.) 
Redford is constantly trying to mend his boat. Unable to repair it he 
concentrates on slowing the rate of its deterioration. Even when he has only 
the brightness of his teeth to see by he's still trying something. That howl – 
"Fffwwuuuh …" – is the nearest he comes to prayer, after which he resumes the 
doomed chores of patching, pumping, fixing, plotting.

Shortly after seeing All Is Lost I saw the film adaptation of the stage play 
Charlie Victor Romeo 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/29/movies/charlie-victor-romeo-depicts-doomed-flights.html?_r=0>
. Set in the cramped confines of the flight decks of aircraft as various 
real-life emergencies unfold, the dialogue – both between the crew and between 
crew and air traffic control – is derived entirely from transcripts from 
cockpit voice recorders. Some of the incidents end with the plane landing 
safely, others with the deaths of everyone onboard. During a Q&A after the 
screening a member of the audience expressed surprise that there were no 
prayers, no mention of religion or god. The reason, it was explained, is that 
there's no time. In emergencies, as we have heard repeatedly in the last few 
weeks, pilots abide by the priorities of the abbreviation ANC: Aviate, 
Navigate, Communicate. According to Tom Wolfe, test pilots such as Chuck Yeager 
who possess "the right stuff" are distinguished by the ability to think quickly 
and logically in suddenly catastrophic situations: "I've tried A – I've tried B 
– I've tried C." The Chilean miners did a lot of praying, partly because they 
had so much time on their hands.

Which brings us back to where we began, to the hopes and prayers of families 
who had loved ones aboard MH370 and – spoiler alert – to the end ofAll Is Lost. 
Is the hand following a beam of light through the ocean and reaching down, 
Michelangelo-like, to the drowning Redford, an implausible cop-out or a 
religious salvation? Since these are, in a way, synonyms, it is both.

It is also strangely reminiscent of DH Lawrence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/dhlawrence>'s great long poem "The Ship of 
Death". Few people can have lived their lives with such a consciousness of 
death as Lawrence – though this often manifested itself as a wilful refusal to 
attribute his ill-health to the tuberculosis that would kill him. Even when he 
was forced to go to a sanatorium, the aptly-named Ad Astra, Lawrence grumbled, 
in one of his last letters, "this place no good". It's as though, having 
exhausted all other options, he could at least express chronic dissatisfaction 
with this world. But in the posthumously published poem he confronted his death 
directly, through the image of a boat sailing slowly into deeper and deeper 
darkness until it is completely enveloped by it:

And everything is gone, the body is gone 
completely under, gone,
entirely gone. 
The upper darkness is heavy as the lower,
between them the little ship
is gone 
she is gone.
It is the end, it is oblivion.

Few pieces of writing bring the reader this close to the incommunicable 
experience of death, of nonexistence. The end is as uncompromising and absolute 
as the verdict that flight MH370 went into the water, that there are no 
survivors. But the poem is not at an end. It continues:

And yet out of eternity a thread 
separates itself on the blackness, 
a horizontal thread
that fumes a little with pallor upon the dark. 
Is it illusion? or does the pallor fume 
A little higher? 
Ah wait, wait, for there's the dawn, 
the cruel dawn of coming back to life
out of oblivion.

• Geoff Dyer's new book, Another Great Day at Sea, about life aboard an 
American aircraft carrier, will be published in May.
 