
 The summer sun was at its zenith in a cloudless sky when Antoine de 
Saint-Exupéry's French air force reconnaissance plane tumbled into the 
Mediterranean in July 1944, killing the author of The Little Prince, and 
creating a necessary hero in a country humbled by defeat and collaboration.

 As the centenary of his birth on June 29 approaches, the mystery of his final 
moments has yet to be solved - no body nor plane was found - but his reputation 
as the greatest cultural figure to die "pour la France" in the second world war 
has spiralled far beyond the sun to orbit alongside The Little Prince's 
asteroid.

The Panthéon in Paris has a six-month exhibition to commemorate his exploits 
as a pioneer pilot, and his reputation as a humanist author of five slim books 
plus the philosophical-religious message published posthumously as Wisdom Of 
The Sands. He was born in south-eastern Lyon and the city's airport will be 
named after him during forthcoming months of intense national commemorations 
that coincide with a flood of books, broadcasts and conferences.

 The chateau at Saint-Maurice de Reméns, central to his idyllic recollections 
of childhood, will become the seat of an international foundation to complement 
another institute in Paris and a rash of renamed avenues, schools and public 
buildings. Saint-Exupéry is the only 20th-century writer to figure on a French 
banknote and will soon have his own set of stamps.

Some may feel that all this is a little extravagant for an author who had not 
the intellectual capacity of Jean-Paul Sartre, nor the story-telling skill of 
François Mauriac, nor the charisma of André Malraux: three of the many rivals 
trailing behind in the glory stakes. Adulation for Saint-Exupéry, the repentant 
supporter of the wartime Vichy regime [which operated during the Nazi 
occupation], who sacrificed his life to regain his honour, arouses extravagant 
homage. To his great-niece, Nathalie des Vallières, who runs the Paris 
institute, he is "the archangel". To his mistress, Nelly de Vogüé, now 92, he 
remains "Christ-like", and as far as his literary executor, Frédéric d'Agay, is 
concerned:

"You will never understand Saint-Exupéry unless you see him as a modern 
knight-errant of the highest moral principles." So far so good. Except there is 
a ghost hovering over this canoni sation ceremony. His widow, the exuberant 
Latin-American Consuelo Suncin, who died in 1979, is attracting almost as much 
attention with the posthumous publication of her vitriolic memoirs and the 
first biography tracing the transformation of an amoral woman into 
Saint-Exupéry's idealised representation of femininity, the Rose, in the 
classic children's book, The Little Prince (1943).

 "My greatest regret is not dedicating the book to you," Saint-Exupéry wrote 
after completing his fable while in American exile, during a reconciliation 
with his estranged wife. Decoded, the central theme of the allegory parallels 
Saint-Exupéry's own wanderlust, his contempt for the consumer age, his meeting 
with other "roses", and his recognition that he had made a commitment to take 
care of the unique flower on asteroid B-612, for all her vanity.

 "I should have judged her by her deeds not her words," he writes in the book, 
which is less a childlike fantasy than a parable about the obligations of 
conjugal love. "Tonio" and Consuelo, a literary groupie who saw herself as the 
Alma Mahler of Central America, met in 1930 in Buenos Aires. He was a 
mail-service pilot living out the adventures that inspired his 1931 novel, 
Night Flight, and she was there to collect the widow's pension for her second 
husband, Enrique Gomez Carrillo, a Guatemalan writer and Argentina's 
consul-general in Paris.

She was nearly 30 and Saint-Exupéry was nine months older. Both had led 
reckless lives. Antoine, who was three when his father died, had been 
fascinated by aviation since his first flight at the age of 12 and had 
qualified as a pilot during national service. In 1926, he joined the 
Aéropostale service, and between then and his marriage in April 1931, he 
survived spectacular crashes, desert storms, rebel attacks and pioneered the 
airline route from Buenos Aires to Patagonia, all of which provided material 
for his 1938 collection of newspaper articles, Wind, Sand and Stars. Consuelo, 
daughter of a Pipil Indian coffee planter in El Salvador, was 19 years old when 
she abandoned a 60-year-old poet-lawyer fiance, before marrying a dashing 
Mexican captain in the US.

 She was widowed a few months later during the civil war with Pancho Villa: 
then dumped another lover to become the mistress of Jose Vasconcelos, a Mexican 
intellectual and failed presidential candidate who nicknamed her a "tropical 
Scheherazade". During an exile in Paris where Consuelo joined him, Vasconcelos 
assembled the notes for the middle volume of his autobiography, The Torment, in 
which he describes his passion for a woman "with a viper's tongue and a musical 
body" who drove him wild with jealousy.

 After she left him for the bisexual Gomez Carrillo, Vasconcelos, in revenge, 
immortalised her under the nickname of Charito, Spain's most notorious 
striptease artist. Only after Consuelo had assuaged another passion with the 
erotically supercharged Italian author, Gabriele d'Annunzio, did she marry 
Tonio on the recommendation of the Belgian writer, Maurice Maeterlinck.

 He saw the aristocratic pilot as potentially "the best French writer of the 
20th century". This was remarkable prescience. Saint-Ex still tops the all-time 
national best seller list with The Little Prince, which has been translated 
into about 100 languages, and has a million international sales a year; it was 
voted France's most popular 20th-century book in a millennium media poll. Three 
of his books are in French all-time top 20.

André Gide, Saint-Exupéry's literary godfather, had no time for Consuelo, who 
was also dismissed by one of her in-laws, Simone de Saint-Exupéry, as a "tart" 
and a "Comtesse du cinéma". The denigration has not decreased 20 years after 
her death. "Marrying a foreigner was considered worse than marrying a Jew," one 
of Saint-Exupéry's family told me, summing up the monarchist, anti-semitic and 
fiercely xenophobic family whose nobility dates back to the 12th century.

 Saint-Exupéry broke away from many of its suffocating principles, not least 
the anti-semitism: his wartime work, Flight To Arras, was banned by both the 
Nazis and the Vichy government because he had praised the courage of a Jewish 
officer. Marrying Consuelo, after a coup de foudre while he was taking her for 
a spin over Buenos Aires, was another break from convention.

 Family embarrassment at his defiance of aristocratic tradition can be 
inferred from the first biography, written by Nelly de Vogüé in 1949 under the 
pen-name Pierre Chevrier. Nelly, one of France's richest women, dismisses 
Consuelo in a dozen words, and Consuelo disappeared from subsequent books on 
Saint-Exupéry's life until I "rehabilitated" her in my 1993 biography. To 
Saint-Exupéry purists, that book was iconclastic. Mentioning some of his weaker 
characteristics, including compulsive womanising, unimpressive aviation skills, 
childishness and egoism, often causes a rumpus during public debates where 
Saint-Ex fans are as zealous as religious fundamentalists. But a frank 
assessment of character caused less reaction then revelations about his 
attachment to the wartime Vichy regime and his hatred for De Gaulle, whom he 
described as a "new Hitler", thus offending the Free French leader so deeply 
that De Gaulle joined the Nazis and Vichy in banning Saint-Exupéry's writings.

 The author's distant support for Vichy in the first three years of the war 
still enrages both Gaullists and the left, who consider Saint-Exupéry little 
more than a outmoded sentimental reactionary. But the debate has been eclipsed 
by accusations of hypocrisy: he preached solidarity among men while treating 
women with contempt.

 "Why can't you be here to wipe my brow and make me tea?" he complained in a 
letter to Consuelo; he accused her of wrecking his life by constant 
party-going. It seems that Consuelo's belated answer has come with the 
publication of a long-forgotten manuscript - now published as The Rose's Memoir 
- giving her view of the 13-year marriage. In this, she accuses her husband of 
making her suffer all the evils of absences and love affairs that she was 
supposed to have inflicted on him.

According to the typescript, finished in 1947, he was cruel, negligent, 
greedy, self-centred and wasteful. He abandoned her in a psychiatric hospital; 
and, when they were living separately, tricked her into letting him sleep in 
her house to scupper divorce proceedings, because he depended on the fortune 
she inherited from Gomez Carrillo. The work is an ugly account by a very 
embittered widow. She had second thoughts about releasing it, and never showed 
it to a publisher; but 21 years after her death, her heirs have the 
satisfaction of seeing at the top of the non-fiction list.

 It has begun a feud with the Saint-Exupéry family, which feels justified in 
excluding Consuelo's photo from bookshop centenary exhibitions and conferences 
sponsored by the family. Almost at the last minute, the Saint-Exupéry 
supporters have been given a remarkable weapon - the accusation that Consuelo 
did not, in fact, write the book. At best, it is argued, she dictated the work 
to her lover, Denis de Rougement, the Swiss author of L'Amour Et L'Occident 
(Consuelo rejected his offers of marriage because he was "too Protestant").

He is the voice of the wise Fox in The Little Prince. Curtis Cate, an American 
biographer who knew Consuelo, is among those who believe that the book is a 
really a fiction, recalling that she was a "born liar" who constantly rewrote 
her life story to make herself out a victim. Even more damaging for the book's 
credibility is an investigation by a Swiss journalist, Christian Campich, who 
published a police analysis showing that a page of the manuscript released as a 
proof that Consuelo was the author was in the handwriting of De Rougement.

 There are enough inconsistencies and fabricated sequences in the memoirs to 
make them merely interesting documents rather than true accounts, but from a 
literary point of view there is a worse betrayal than that of the disgruntled 
rose. De Rougemont was a close friend of Saint-Exupéry, helping him create The 
Little Prince, and yet he seems to have collaborated in the writing of these 
275 pages of character assassination.

 The centenary celebrations will probably play down the conjugal row until 
June 29, when the pres ident and poets will join in a panegyric to 
Saint-Exupéry. But after, Consuelo's own centenary will be celebrated with a 
French film of her life, scheduled to begin shooting in the autumn. There are 
many twists in the plot, including her decision to take her revenge on 
Saint-Exupéry's haughty family by leaving her half-share of all the writer's 
royalties (as well as her house) to her gardener-chauffeur, Jose Fructuoso 
Martinez, who owns a mass of documents that can only be published when the 
quarrelling heirs come to some agreement.

 Among them are at least 500 love letters. Meanwhile, the battle to extinguish 
her memory continues. Reference to her has been expunged from all the 
ceremonies organised by Saint-Exupéry supporters, including the three days of 
celebrations in Lyon. "We just don't want anything to do with Consuelo," D'Agay 
says.

 The boycott is justified by Nathalie des Vallières, bywho says that Consuelo 
was "not a Saint-Exupéry". There are many reasons to believe that 
Saint-Exupéry, missing in action, would not approve of the boycott of his 
wife's memory. An underwater search for his plane led to the recent discovery 
of part of the missing P-38 Lightning aircraft and recovered a silver identity 
bracelet engraved with the names Antoine and Consuelo. Romantics see the 
bracelet as Saint-Exupéry's last sign of devotion, a message from the deep to 
discredit the anti-Consuelo lobby.

 Even more eloquent is this extract from one of his last love letters, written 
from a North African airforce base: "Consuelo, thank you from the bottom of my 
heart for being my wife. If I am wounded, I have the one who will take care of 
me. If I am killed I will have the one I want to wait for in eternity. 
Consuelo, all our legal wranglings, all our disputes are dead." Or so he 
thought.
 