
Fancy a degree in Rooney studies? How about a course on Tottenham Hotspur? As 
the Premier League consolidates its position as the richest in world football, 
the beautiful game is becoming a serious subject of study in the UK’s 
universities.

Scores of institutions are now offering students the chance to study a range 
of football-related courses from foundation level up to MBA. What was once the 
preserve of a few niche institutions is now spreading across academia as 
universities seek to cash in on the enduring appeal of the nation’s favourite 
sport.

Universities offering a BA in football studies include Bedfordshire and 
Southampton Solent. Undergraduates can study for a BA in football business and 
marketing at Buckinghamshire New University, while the higher education centre 
UCFB Wembley promotes several courses, including a BA in football, business and 
finance.

The Universities of Greenwich, Anglia Ruskin, Suffolk and South Wales all 
provide BSc degrees in sports science courses with a football focus. Birkbeck 
University of London promotes an MSc in sports management and the business of 
football, and the University of Liverpool offers an MA in football industry 
studies.

Students looking to do a foundation course have a range of options, including 
the Arsenal football and community sports coaching foundation degree, 
accredited by London Metropolitan University, and the applied football coaching 
and performance course run by Middlesex University London with Tottenham 
Hotspur FC.

Some will doubt the value of such courses but Ellis Cashmore, author of 
Studying Football 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/380108/>and visiting 
professor of sociology at Aston University, said they had a place on campus. 
“If you gauge the value of academic study by the impact on culture, politics, 
the economy and society generally over a sustained period, then football 
deserves to be studied,” he said. “If you take a more pragmatic approach, you’d 
argue that there are about 600,000 jobs in football and analogous industries 
and that puts it among the likes of engineering and the NHS as one of the key 
employment sectors.”

Want to work in football? There are degrees for that at Wembley Stadium
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-agony-and-the-ecstasy/2016/feb/04/work-in-football-sport-wembley-etihad-ucfb>
Cashmore, who in 2000 was instrumental in launching one of the first football 
courses, quickly dubbed “Beckham studies”, said universities were responding to 
changing interests.

“Many people loathe the so-called “marketisation,” but that’s the world we 
live in and universities have to adapt,” Cashmore said. “Football studies are 
part of that adaptation: they might seem faddish, but think of how football 
today intersects with so many other issues like globalisation, racism, gender, 
violence, and, of course, the international media. These are all vital 
constituents of an education.”

He suggested that football had undergone a transition from sport to 
entertainment that was comparable to the changeover from silent movies to 
talkies. “Like it or not, football is a staple part of contemporary society 
and, as such, demands that we study it.”

Cashmore acknowledged the subject was still in its infancy. “There is bound to 
be a convergence and this will signal the arrival of a bona fide subject. I 
doubt if scholars who were sold on the value of Dickens agreed unanimously on 
what features of his work should make the proper subject matter for study. 
Agreement came over time.”
 