
The Mill has never paid much attention to Ángel Di María’s tattoos and nor, 
presumably has Louis van Gaal. And that might just be where we’re both going 
wrong. Because suspicions have been aroused this morning that there is more to 
the Argentinian’s inkwork than meets the eye, which is just as well because all 
that meets the eye is a collection of stars, numbers and smudges that look 
awfully like nearly everyone else’s tattoos. But here’s the thing: when Di 
María is placed under a special infra-red light, his body art actually contains 
coded clues to the location of an unimaginably vast treasure stash that hunters 
have been seeking for centuries.

That, at any rate, is what the Mill has deduced from reports that Bayern Munich
 have grown so desperate to get their clutches on Di María that, in return, 
they are willing to offerManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> a large sum of cash, 
Arjen Robben and Thomas Müller! And some reports go so far as to claim that the 
German club may even throwBastian Schweinsteiger into the deal, too! Heck, if 
United stand their ground they may even be able to get Bayern to add Manuel 
Neuer, Pep Guardiola, a fleet of BMWs and the Hofbräuhaus.

Manchester City, meanwhile, are going to have to fork out a small treasure 
stash of their own if they are to landKevin De Bruyne, especially now that 
Paris Saint-Germain have made the Belgian their No1 target. PSG are also 
complicating City’s quiet pursuit ofHachim Mastour, with the French club now 
the favourite to prise the 17-year-old Moroccan from Milan. But City aren’t 
going to dwell on that disappointment, instead they’re going to engage in more 
retail therapy and return to Anfield to giveLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> the £50m they want for Raheem 
Sterling. Better batten down the hatches, Southampton.

Chelsea, Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> and Real 
Madrid are all linked with the Napoli left-backFaouzi Ghoulam, who has shown 
the skills he learned at the ever popular Footballer Media Training course by 
giving a textbook recital of the “flattered to hear about it, but just 
concentrating on my job” response to such speculation.

Question: if Ryan Mason is as good as some fans claim, how come Spurs are 
plotting a bid of £20m plus Aaron Lennon forEverton’s James McCarthy? And 
here’s another question: is the Mill right to be utterly bemused by reports 
that at least five clubs are preparing bids of up to £15m forAndros Townsend? 
Explanations have yet to be provided by West Ham, Aston Villa, Swansea, 
Newcastle or Sunderland. One report this morning has gone so far as to claim 
that Spurs are unwilling to let the winger go for so little. The Mill has 
obviously drunk too much. Or not enough.

Everton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton>, meanwhile, fancy the 
Juventus centre-backAngelo Ogbonna, but will have to do battle with West Ham to 
get him.

That David De Gea-Hugo Lloris chain reaction might be about to kick in, as 
Iker Casillas is poised to leave Real Madrid for Porto. Lyon are lining up 
another offer for the Marseille centre-back Nicolas N’koulou. West Ham’s 
Stewart Downing is heading northwards, either to Sunderland or Middlesbrough.

Esteban Cambiasso, who has yet to sign a new deal with Leicester, could soon 
be part of Mark Hughes’s Stoke revamp. And so could Reading’s Ali al-Habsi, who 
will be drafted in as Jack Butland’s deputy ifAsmir Begovic gets his dream move 
to become Thibaut Courtois’ deputy atChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea>.

Finally, goodbye.
 