
Ford <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ford> has called a meeting of trade 
union officials in the UK this morning amid speculation that its Southampton 
plant is at risk of closure with the loss of 500 jobs.

The continuing crisis in the eurozone has forced the US car maker to 
restructure its European operations and yesterday it announced the shutting of 
a Belgian factory with 4,300 redundancies.

Ford declined to comment on reports that it is preparing to close its 
Southampton site, which employs 500 people and makes Transit vans - the only 
vehicle that Ford makes in the UK. However, it has taken the unusual step of 
calling its British trade union representatives to a meeting at its Basildon 
technical centre at 10am on Thursday.

The staff representatives will be addressed by Stephen Odell, head of Ford's 
European operations, who said on Wednesday that Ford had to address a capacity 
glut caused by a 20% fall in demand in western Europe since 2007. Announcing 
the closure of the Genk site inBelgium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/belgium>, he said: "The proposed 
restructuring of our European manufacturing operations is a fundamental part of 
our plan to strengthen Ford's business in Europe and to return to profitable 
growth."

Tony Burke, assistant general secretary at Unite, which represents 7,500 Ford 
staff, said management had given no indication about the reason for the 
meeting. "This is a very worrying time for the UK workforce. Unite is currently 
working hard alongside its European colleagues to get clarity about Ford's 
plans," he said.

However, an industry source said that the last time Ford called a meeting of 
all UK shop stewards was in 2007, when it announced the closure of its 
Leamington foundry site with the loss of 450 jobs.

Ford refused to confirm whether there will be a statement about the company's 
UK operations. Ford's Dagenham plant in Essex, which makes diesel engines and 
panels, is its biggest UK outlet with 4,000 employees, followed by its nearby 
technical centre in Basildon which has 3,000 employees and Bridgend in Wales, 
where 2,000 people make petrol engines.

However, the company did confirm that a restructuring of its European 
operations is under way, as the continent's carmakers grapple with excess 
factory capacity and falling sales. Ford's Genk plant will close in 2014 with 
the loss of 4,300 jobs, the company said. Production of the Mondeo, S-Max and 
Galaxy vehicles will move to Valencia in Spain. Ford said it had to address a 
capacity glut caused by a 20% fall in demand in westernEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> since 2007. Sales in Ford's 
main European markets have fallen 12% in the year to date, to 861,000 vehicles.

The Southampton plant, in Swaythling, made 28,000 engines last year. Unite 
warned in September that 1,000 jobs could be lost if manufacturing of the 
next-generation Transit van engine moves from Dagenham to Romania.

Meanwhile, François Hollande risked a backlash from European carmakers and 
governments byrescuing France's Peugeot Citroën with a €7bn (£5.66bn) 
state-financing package 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/oct/24/francois-hollande-backlash-peugeot-citroen-rescue>
 on Wednesday.

The German state of Lower Saxony, the second largest investor in Volkswagen, 
has already expressed opposition to the financing plan and Peugeot must also 
seek European Union approval for the deal. The European competition 
commissioner, Joaquin Almunia, said Brussels would have to conduct a "very 
careful assessment" of the deal. The French government is offering €7bn in 
refinancing guarantees for Peugeot's financing arm, Banque PSA Finance, which 
underpins Peugeot and Citroën dealer networks and car loans.

Peugeot has no French state shareholding and is 25%-owned by the Peugeot 
family. But it will have to submit to political oversight as a condition of the 
deal, a caveat made explicit by the French prime minister, Jean-Marc Ayrault, 
who said the government has "no intention of handing out gifts like this 
without return commitments." Peugeot will not pay dividends, launch share 
buybacks or grant share options to senior executives while the state guarantee 
is in place. The company will also revisit plans to close its Aulnay plant near 
Paris and axe 6,500 jobs, according to reports.

It is France's biggest intervention in its car industry since 2009, when it 
gave Peugeot and Renault €6bn in low-interest loans. Peugeot said this morning 
that third-quarter sales fell 4% to €12.9bn in the three months to September. 
"The competitive environment is getting tougher, with increased pricing 
pressure and ongoing deterioration in the markets of southern Europe," the 
company said.

Volvo, the Gothenburg-based truck maker, said on Wednesday it expected no 
growth in the European and US markets next year after third-quarter orders fell 
by a quarter compared with the same period last year.
 