
The Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) has tendered for a framework 
contract to support and develop Firecrest, the desktop infrastructure that 
underpins its global operations. The framework is valued at between £65m and 
£350m.

The framework will deliver a range of ICT services to the FCO's 270 offices in 
the UK and overseas, covering more than 18,000 users, according to a notice in 
the Official Journal of the European Union.

The four-year framework includes a desktop infrastructure lot, which includes 
the ongoing support and maintenance of the existing Microsoft-based legacy 
Firecrest infrastructure and related systems to ensure service continuity for 
the FCO and its partner organisations.

In addition to a number of core upgrades, the framework may also be extended 
to cover additional Firecrest development, support and maintenance requirements 
involving end-user and network hardware, email and internet services, 
datacentre management and applications hosting.

The framework suppliers will also be required to offer business continuity and 
disaster recovery services.

The FCO's reprocurement of Firecrest services is part of its plan to cut up to 
40% from its ICT budget between 2011 and 2015.

In addition to desktop services, the tender covers service management and 
integration (SMI) services for the FCO, including the end-to-end service 
management of its ICT suppliers, along with service integration and change 
management. It's expected that the management of the department's desktop 
infrastructure and Oracle-based ERP system, together with the provision of a 
service desk, will be the initial requirement under the SMI lot.

The FCO's partner organisations, such as the UK Border Agency, the British 
Council and the Department for International Development, will be able to use 
the framework, along with central government departments and non-departmental 
public bodies.

"We're seeking to make what we do for ourselves as well suited to what others 
want as possible. The choice the of whether they join us is theirs," FCO CIO 
David Meyer told Guardian Government Computing recently.

This article is published by Guardian Professional. For weekly updates on 
news, debate and best practice on public sector IT,join the Guardian Government 
Computing network here. 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/gov-computing/start.php>
 