
What do we have to look forward to in 2011? The past twelve months have been a 
defining period for the digital industries, saysAudioboo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/audioboo> chief executive Mark Rock, 
but there's plenty to come next year as, he predicts, Mark Thompson will stand 
down and Flickr will be sold.


Photo by Chinwag <http://www.flickr.com/photos/chinwagcom/4006478341/> on 
Flickr.Some rights reserved 
<http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.0/deed.en_GB>.

• What will 2010 be remembered for? 
"Overall, 2010 was a defining year for so many things - digital, politics, 
data, mobile. Wikileaks cracked open what hopes to be a better discussion 
around open data next year and the role of digital in that.

"We learnt that manifestos aren't worth the paper they're (increasingly not) 
printed on as the government used the excuse that nobody voted for them so 
there was nothing to honour.

"Mobile is (finally) huge thanks to Apple and Google and not the telcos. The 
BBC was forced to face up to the fact that it can no longer operate like an 
extension of the civil service and expect us to pay for its inefficiencies.

"We learnt that (sorry) print will not be saved by the iPad. Governments don't 
necessarily have to be elected to govern and honey traps are not something to 
do with bees. Spotify is losing an awful lot of money, the iPhone is still a 
great computer even if it's a terrible phone, The government seems to think the 
digerati in Shoreditch will happily move to Stratford (no). DAB radio is still 
the floppy disk equivalent of the internet."

• What was your best and worst moment?
"The best was the surprise at personally ranking so highly in the top 100 tech 
people in the UK. At least my dad was impressed. The worst? Too personal to say.

"Worst work moment? The BBC taking 14 months to finally state officially they 
were too busy to work constructively with us on a professional basis because 
they were too busy. We're used loads by individual reporters and departments 
there but their audio is not allowed onto the BBC site. Bizarre."

• What's your hot tip for 2011? 
"Mobile, mobile, mobile. Apps, apple, android, advertising, tablets and the 
mobile internet. Fewer apps and more HTML 5 loveliness. Flash will not have a 
good year and ActionScript developers will soon be seen in the same way Java 
developers are today. Near field communications technology will be worth 
watching in terms of payment mechanisms.

"A Twitter IPO in the fall (as they lovingly call it). Arrington will leave 
TechCrunch <https://www.theguardian.com/media/techcrunch>. Traditional TV set 
top box manufacturers will move to Android as an OS for increased user 
interaction and lower development costs. Mark Thompson will gracefully stand 
down from the BBC. Microsoft will release a poor cousin to the iPad.

"I'm looking forward to Blackberry getting their shit together to face up to 
Apple and Google, and Windows Phone 7 taking off - it's quite good. Audioboo 
raising some more cash to go truly global. Android Marketplace getting less 
techy and more consumer friendly. Flickr being sold to a company that actually 
cares about it. And no more packed lunches as the twins start proper school..."
 