
The chief executive held responsible for driving HBOS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/hbos> to the brink of financial collapse 
has been appointed to the top job at one of Britain's best known high street 
names, Boots.

Andy Hornby – who attracted the wrath of shareholders, MPs and unions for his 
role in the demise of HBOS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/dan-roberts-on-business-blog/2009/feb/10/mps-grill-bank-bosses>
 – has been appointed chief executive of Alliance Boots and will take up his 
new job on 1 July.

The decision has infuriated critics of the City, who say one of the figures 
blamed for failings leading up to the credit crunch is now being rewarded with 
another well-paid job.

The retailer declined to comment on Hornby's past performance but, announcing 
the appointment today, stressed his "wealth of experience."

Hornby worked in retail before joining HBOS in 1999, spending many years at 
Asda. His appointment represents a coup for the retailer which tried to poach 
him for the role in 2003.

Since 2007 Alliance Boots <https://www.theguardian.com/business/allianceboots> 
has been owned by US private equity group Kohlberg Kravis Roberts, and is not 
listed on the stock exchange, giving Hornby the chance for a lower profile. He 
is a non-executive at the Home Retail Group, owner of Argos and Homebase.

Stefano Pessina, who remains executive chairman at Alliance Boots, said: "Both 
KKR and I are very pleased that Andy is joining the Group.

"We, together with our executive colleagues, believe that his collaborative 
management approach aligns with our values, culture and team spirit. Whilst the 
existing management structure will continue unchanged, his appointment will 
enable me to dedicate even more of my time and energy to the development and 
growth of Alliance Boots.

"Andy's wealth of retail and marketing experience will be an invaluable asset 
for the company, complementing our existing skills and expertise."

Hornby was chief executive of HBOS for two years and was at the helm when it 
teetered on the brink of collapse last autumn. It was rescued by Lloyds TSB in 
a controversial merger and has since revealed losses of £10.8bn for 2008.

Hornby admitted to MPs on the Treasury select committee this year that HBOS, a 
merger between Halifax and Bank of Scotland, had been made more vulnerable 
because of its strategy of expanding corporate lending to commercial and 
residential property sectors.

Following the Lloyds takeover, Hornby left as chief executive but stayed as a 
consultant earning £60,000 a month advising Lloyds chief executive, Eric 
Daniels.

There was criticism of the appointment last night from the Lib Dem Treasury 
spokesman Lord Oakeshott, who said: "Private equity asset strippers have taken 
over Boots and loaded it up to the eyeballs with debt. They should learn the 
lessons of HBOS's collapse under Mr Hornby and pay off their borrowings to make 
Boots strong again."
 