
Sir James Crosby <https://www.theguardian.com/business/james-crosby>, the 
former chief executive of HBOS, was forced to admit the bank's lending in the 
runup to the financial crisis was "incompetent", as a top Bank of England 
official warned that the fallout from that crisis was as bad for the economy as 
a world war.

Crosby also apologised for his role at HBOS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/hbos>, acknowledging the damage to his 
reputation and admitting he did not expect to be allowed ever to run a bank 
again, as he gave evidence to the parliamentary banking standards committee.

He was addressing MPs and peers as Andy Haldane, executive director for 
financial stability at the Bank of England, said of the banking crisis: "In 
terms of the loss of incomes and outputs, this is as bad as a world war."

Haldane told the BBC: "If we are fortunate the cost of the crisis will be paid 
for by our children. More likely it will still be paid for by our 
grandchildren."

Crosby said he had not handed back any of his £572,000 a year pension as he 
had lost money after the bank's collapse even though he sold two thirds of his 
shares before the bank nearly collapsed.

Crosby said he was "horrified and deeply upset by what happened" in 2008, when 
Lloyds was forced to rescue HBOS and the enlarged bank had to be bailed out 
with £20bn of taxpayers' cash.

Crosby, who handed the helm to Andy Hornby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/andy-hornby> in June 2006, said: "I am 
very sorry for what happened at the bank. I am apologising. I played a major 
part in building a business that subsequently failed."

Under repeated questioning by Andrew Tyrie, the Conservative MP who chairs the 
committee, Crosby conceded that lending by the corporate arm of HBOS – which 
led to losses of £26bn – had been "incompetent" and caused the bank's near 
collapse. In often heated exchanges with MPs and peers, Crosby was asked if he 
had considered giving back his knighthood, awarded when he left the bank. Fred 
Goodwin, the former boss of Royal Bank of Scotland, was stripped of his title 
this year.

Crosby said he was "completely realistic" about the effect on his reputation. 
"I am in no doubt my reputation and achievements will never again be seen in 
the same light."

Asked if he expected to be approved by the Financial Services Authority to run 
a bank again, Crosby said: "I don't expect that if I applied I would be 
approved, no, given my history."

Asking questions for the committee, Rory Phillips QC told Crosby he was being 
questioned because "the seeds for what went wrong" were the result of plans and 
strategy he devised before his departure.

Crosby insisted he had not sacked Paul Moore, the whistleblower who warned 
about risks being taken by the bank. He said Moore had not been made redundant 
because of any challenges he had made to the bank's practices and had only 
raised the concerns once he had been made redundant.

Crosby could not recall going "ballistic" when told by Hornby, then running 
the retail bank, about concerns being raised by the FSA about the bank's 
lending.

Hornby, who was chief executive until Lloyds completed its rescue takeover in 
early 2009, said: "I bitterly regret that we did not foresee the possibility of 
wholesale markets closing for a whole year."

Peter Cummings, the HBOS corporate banker whose division lent billions of 
pounds to property developers – and whose activities Crosby admitted yesterday 
were "incompetent" – was given a lifetime ban and fined £500,000 by the 
watchdog for his role in the banking crisis. He is the only former HBOS banker 
to be penalised by the FSA as a result of the bank's near collapse.

Hornby admitted to his own lack of experience in corporate banking and said he 
had put experienced bankers at the helm of corporate and banking divisions of 
HBOS, which was formed in 2001 by the merger of Halifax and Bank of Scotland.
 