
The former Scotland Yard commander Ali Dizaei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ali-dizaei> has lost his appeal against a 
conviction that ended his career.

The court of appeal on Thursday upheld a jury's decision last year that Dizaei 
had framed a man, Waad al-Baghdadi, in a row over money.

Last February a jury at Southwark crown court convicted Dizaei of the offences 
after deciding unanimously that he was lying when he claimed Baghdadi had 
threatened him and assaulted him outside a westLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> restaurant in July 2008.

The decision upholding Dizaei's convictions for misconduct and perverting the 
course of justice was made by the lord chief justice, Lord Judge, and two other 
judges at the court of appeal in London.

Dizaei, 50, has been tried and convicted twice over the charges. The first 
conviction was overturned by an earlier court of appeal judgment after it 
emerged Baghdadi was a serial benefits fraudster. After the first conviction in 
2010 Dizaei was jailed for three years.

In the latest appeal, Dizaei's QC, Stephen Riordan, argued that the conviction 
was "unsafe", submitting that the judge at the second trial had made an "error 
of law" when he refused to admit certain "bad character" evidence relating to 
Baghdadi.

Riordan said the judge's decision to reject the application meant the jury 
"did not have all the material that it should have done". He told the court: 
"We submit simply that that decision was wrong – that the reasons he gave for 
refusing to allow this material to be deployed were matters which more properly 
should have been considered by the jury."

Opposing the appeal, Peter Wright QC, for the crown, told the court: "Here 
there was no error by the judge in the exercise he undertook. The decision was 
not wrong in law. We submit that in the context of the fairness of this trial, 
that this trial remained entirely fair and that the conviction was not unsafe."

In the second trial the jury took 11 hours to decide against Dizaei. He was 
convicted of misconduct in public office for abusing his powers to falsely 
arrest Baghdadi, and perverting the course of justice for filing false accounts 
of the incident.

In July 2008 Dizaei clashed with Baghdadi, who claimed the police commander 
owed him £600 for a website he had designed. Dizaei then arrested Baghdadi and 
claimed to have been assaulted and poked in the stomach with the mouthpiece of 
a shisha pipe.

Baghdadi spent 24 hours in a cell and six weeks on bail before it was decided 
he would not face charges. Dizaei's 27-year police career ended with him being 
drummed out of the force in disgrace.

At the first trial it was claimed Baghdadi was an honest man and of good 
character. But the jury in the second trial heard that Baghdadi had been 
convicted in September 2011 of committing benefit fraud by claiming £27,000 in 
the name of his dead father, from 2007 to 2010, and sentenced to eight months' 
imprisonment.

The jury also heard that Baghdadi gave false details in the first trial about 
his name, age and date of birth, and was accused of glassing a man in the 
street outside a London nightclub in September 2009, according to two witnesses 
who testified in court.

The clash with Baghdadi was during the summer of 2008 when Scotland Yard was 
engulfed in a race row. Dizaei was the main adviser to the assistant 
commissioner Tarique Ghaffur, who accused his bosses of racially discriminating 
against him.

The Met had previously spent at least £4m investigating Dizaei over a series 
of separate allegations, but that ended in 2003 with his acquittal, after which 
he returned to work where he won promotions and commendations.
 