
A public inquiry should examine the way Margaret Thatcher’s government used 
the police to occupy communities during the 1980s miners’ strike, a former 
chief constable has said.


Sir Peter Fahy said the police attitudes that caused public outrage last week, 
following the Hillsborough inquest verdicts, were fostered by events such as 
the government using officers to crush one of Britain’s bitterest industrial 
disputes.

Fahy retired in 2015 as chief constable of Greater Manchester police, one of 
Britain’s biggest forces. He said the use of police to serve a political agenda 
in the 1980s created a “them and us” culture, evident in the police response at 
Hillsborough. The legacy was still causing damage to the reputation of the 
police today as well as grief to families on the receiving end, he said.

Seumas Milne: A generation on, the miners' strike can speak to our time
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/mar/12/miners-strike> 
Fahy said: “It’s time for a public inquiry into the policing of the miners’ 
strike, not just Orgreave and the role of the police, but also the role of 
politicians. We need to look at the wider context of the way the police were 
used and the agenda set for them by government. Clearly it was about, in 
effect, national control of the police, in pursuit of a political agenda at the 
time.

“We need to look at the way police in those communities were used as an army 
of occupation, created a culture of them and us – which people are concerned 
about at Hillsborough. The way the police force was used at that time helped to 
create a damaging culture.

“The concern about Hillsborough is that the police saw it as an enforcement 
role and not public safety. If you are wondering how that came about, it’s 
about the culture created in the 1980s, from the inner city riots, to the 
policing of the miners’ strike, where the police then saw it as about 
enforcement and controlling role rather than a public safety role. Where did 
those attitudes [at Orgreave] come from? If you want to look at Orgreave you 
need to look at the wider context.”

Fahy’s comments came as critics of the police action confronting workers at 
the Orgreave steel production coking plant in 1984 called on the new interim 
chief constable of South Yorkshire police to open up the force’s archives.

Theresa May to heed campaigners' call for inquiry into battle of Orgreave
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/15/theresa-may-to-heed-campaigners-call-for-inquiry-into-battle-of-orgreave>
The challenge from the Orgreave Truth and Justice Campaign 
<http://otjc.org.uk/> came the day after Dave Jones, chief constable of North 
Yorkshire police, marked the moment he took over temporary control of the South 
Yorkshire force by offering to listen to activists, as well as to the families 
of the 96 people who died in theHillsborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hillsborough-disaster> football stadium 
disaster.

Barbara Jackson, secretary for the campaign, said campaigners would take up 
the offer from Jones but said they did not want it to be a token gesture. She 
said they wanted the chief constable to intervene in their legal effort to 
persuade the home secretary, Theresa May, to hold a public inquiry into the 
events at Orgreave 32 years ago.

Arthur Scargill <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/arthur-scargill>, the 
politician and trade unionist who led the National Union of Mineworkers in the 
1984-85 miners’ strike, and was arrested during the disturbances, has also 
called for a public inquiry into the events.

The rare public intervention by Scargill, 78, came as the Yorkshire Post said 
it had seen redacted sections of an IndependentPolice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Complaints Commission report that the 
paper said revealed that the same senior officers and solicitor were involved 
both in the aftermath of Orgreave and Hillsborough in 1989.

South Yorkshire police referred itself to the IPCC in 2012 over allegations 
that officers colluded to write court statements relating to Orgreave.

The IPCC later said the passage of time prevented a formal investigation but 
said there was support for the allegation that senior police exaggerated 
pickets’ use of violence. The commission said on Tuesday it was now considering 
whether an unredacted version of the report could be made public.

Jackson said: “We would be prepared to meet with Dave Jones if it’s going to 
be a productive meeting, and not just a token gesture.”

The events of the “Battle of Orgreave” at the coking plant on the borders of 
Rotherham and Sheffield came to symbolise the miners’ strike. Large numbers of 
pickets were confronted by about 6,000 police from across the UK. Police 
charged 95 miners following the disturbances but the workers’ trial collapsed. 
Virtually all traces of the coking plant and the pit next to it have since been 
eradicated.


Andy Burnham <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andyburnham>, the shadow 
home secretary, said: “As I’ve always said, we won’t have the truth about 
Hillsborough until we have the full truth about Orgreave. Finally, this report 
provides proof of what has long been suspected – that underhand tactics were 
used first against South Yorkshire miners, before being deployed to much more 
deadly effect against Liverpool supporters.”

Burnham added: “Like the people of Liverpool, the mining communities of South 
Yorkshire now need to be told the truth about their police force and the 
policing of the miners’ strike. On the back of these revelations Theresa May 
must now order a disclosure process not just on Orgreave but on the policing of 
the miners’ strike.”

The appointment of Jones follows the suspension of the South Yorkshire chief 
constable David Crompton, following the Hillsborough inquests, and the 
short-lived tenure of his deputy, Dawn Copley, who stood down from the 
temporary role after it emerged she was under investigation by her previous 
force for alleged misconduct.

The Home Office said: “These powers are only to be used once an individual has 
been arrested on suspicion of having committed a criminal offence. They are 
reactive in nature and should not negatively impact community relations.”
 