
The former chief minister Adam Giles, his former deputy Willem Westra Van 
Holthe and deputy Labor leader Lynne Walker have all lost their seats in close 
counts in theNorthern Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/northern-territory> election.

The deadline for postal votes passed at lunchtime Friday, two weeks after 
Labor’s resounding election victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/27/its-a-thumping-labor-wins-northern-territory-election>
, and the final count found Walker lost her remote seat of Nhulunbuy by just 
seven votes to independent Mark Yingiya Guyula.

The final split was 50.1% to 49.9% and Labor is considering a legal challenge 
due to some “irregularities”.

In Giles’ seat of Braitling the split was similarly close, with Labor 
candidate Dale Wakefield winning by 23, taking 50.3% of the 
two-candidate-preferred vote despite Giles gaining more first preference votes.

'It's a thumping': Labor wins Northern Territory election
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/27/its-a-thumping-labor-wins-northern-territory-election>
Giles said he had expected to lose after the Four Corners broadcast on 
juvenile detention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/30/nt-juvenile-detention-centre-treatment-snap-protests-called-across-australia>
, and would not be challenging the result. He said he had left a legacy of 
fixing tourism and the economy, and reducing crime.

“I feel a bit worried for Alice Springs, I think most certainly Alice Springs 
will go backwards,” he said.

“I was elected to do a job, I think I did a job over the last eight years, the 
voters have decided they want someone else to do the job now so it’s up to 
them.”

Wakefield earlier on Friday told ABC Alice Springs they needed to focus on 
growing the economy in the town.

Westra Van Holthe lost Katherine – which had never been out of CLP hands – to 
Labor’s Sandra Nelson by 28 votes.

Nelson said Katherine – ordinarily a CLP stronghold – had begun to feel taken 
for granted and overlooked.

“It’s been 27 years of CLP representation and people were really ready for 
something different,” Nelson told Guardian Australia.

“And secondly I think the contrast between the candidate and myself and the 
other candidate is what Katherine was looking for. I’m always happy and very 
positive, and I use positive language and [believe] no obstacle is too big, 
there’s no hurdle you can’t overcome working together. It’s always been about 
community with me and I think that’s what Katherine was looking for.”

The former governing Country Liberal party has now been left with just two 
seats in the new parliament – Gary Higgins and Lia Finocchiaro – who have 
formed an opposition despite objection from within the larger group of 
independent candidates.

The chief minister, Michael Gunner, declined to answer questions, but 
congratulated Wakefield and Nelson on their wins, and paid tribute to Walker 
who is to be deputy chief minister.

“This is obviously a hard time for Lynne and her family, particularly having 
had to wait almost two weeks for this result,” said Gunner.

“I want to pay tribute to Lynne’s tireless work for her community and as my 
deputy leader. Labor’s election success is in no small part the result of her 
work ethic, passion and integrity.”

Walker had previously flagged a legal challenge if the result went against 
her, a plan confirmed byLabor party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> NT president Syd 
Stirling.

Stirling told media on Friday Labor would take legal advice and discuss over 
the weekend whether to take the result to the court of disputed returns due to 
some “significant” irregularities.

On Thursday the NT Electoral Commission confirmed there were about 20 postal 
votes for Nhulunbuy which had arrived unsigned, and were therefore deemed 
invalid.

“If a person’s won by 250 votes it doesn’t matter, the will of the people has 
been expressed,” he said.

“When the difference is just seven, I think it is incumbent to ensure it has 
been played out to the fullest properly”.

He anticipated claims of “sour grapes” would be made but said there was a 
responsibility to ensure the will of the people was accurately expressed.

Gunner pledged to work constructively with the independent MP who ousted his 
deputy. Guyula, a Liya-dhälinymirr Djambarrpuyŋu man, former pilot, and former 
lecturer at Charles Darwin University on Yolngu studies, ran on a campaign 
which included calls for a treaty between the NT government and Indigenous 
groups, and greater self-governance for Indigenous people.


Guyula had spoken out about a lack of funding and resources reaching remote 
Indigenous communities, particularly in Arnhem Land, which contains the seat of 
Nhulunbuy.

He has served as spokesman for the Yolngu Nations Assembly group, pushing for 
a treaty.

“Everyone knows we have sought a treaty from Australian governments since the 
Barunga Statement of 1988, and with two later petitions in 1998 and 2008,” he 
said prior to the election.

“Governments have largely ignored these diplomatic gestures, so we decided to 
stop waiting and get started.”

Gunner criticised Guyula last week over comments he made to the NT News 
<http://www.ntnews.com.au/news/northern-territory/customary-law-push-from-likely-seat-winner/news-story/1a4ddb07207a06d134b0ea60c91b017b>
 that domestic violence orders broke up families and the legal system favoured 
women.

“I’m not saying anything against women but it needs to be fair because a lot 
of the time, women start the fighting and men end up in jail,” Guyula had said.

Gunner said he couldn’t agree. “It’s not the way it’s been put to me by the 
men and women working with the scourge of family violence,” he said.

Walker, who held the seat since 2008, on Wednesday said Guyula’s Yolngu 
background may have helped in the predominantly Indigenous electorate, but 
refuted that she could not represent her Yolngu constituents.

“I’m not Yolngu, I know that, I can’t be Yolngu, but over the years I’ve 
worked really hard to engage with Yolngu community and I’ve spent a lot of time 
with Yolngu,”she told the ABC 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-09-07/lynne-walker-nhulunbuy-seat-could-lead-to-challenge/7820448>
.

The federal Labor member for Lingiari, Warren Snowdon, congratulated the two 
new Labor members, Wakefield and Nelson, calling the result “historic”.

“It is a credit to their stamina, their determination and commitment that 
voters in Braitling and Katherine had a valid alternative to the indifferent, 
scandal-ridden representation offered by the CLP.”

 