
A former Royal Australian Air Force cadet has accused the federal government 
and thechild abuse royal commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/royal-commission-into-institutional-responses-to-child-sexual-abuse>
 of covering up sex abuse in the Australian defence force.

Robert Mcjannett interrupted the opening address of the commission’s lawyer at 
a hearing in Sydney on Tuesday to yell: “This is a cover-up, you’re covering up 
nine jurisdictions and you know it.”

About 15 minutes into the two-week hearing into the abuse of children in ADF 
establishments, Mcjannett was asked to leave as he shouted to Justice Peter 
McClellan: “You are selling us down the road, Mr Chairman.”

McClellan asked: “Would you please leave the hearing room?”

Mcjannett responded that the hearing was “the biggest cover-up in the century 
and you know it”.

“We’re just rubbish for you to flush down the toilet … You want to cover up 
the nine jurisdictions.”

His outburst came as Angus Stewart SC, counsel assisting the commission, said 
that the hearing would concentrate on historical abuse at the former navy 
training base HMAS Leeuwin in Perth, the army apprentice school at Balcombe, 
Victoria, and abuse of ADF cadets.

Mcjannett left the hearing room and met with a royal commission counsellor.


Outside the commission, he said the inquiry should be examining what happened 
to high school cadets throughout Australia under the Australian Services Cadet 
Scheme.

He alleged he was molested at Clontarf beach state high school in the RAAF 
12th flight Air Training Corp.

Mcjannett said there had been a “panic restructure” of the school cadet scheme 
under the government of John Howard and school cadets were no longer under the 
jurisdiction of the commonwealth. He claimed this was an attempt to avoid 
vicarious liability for abuse in nine Australian jurisdictions.

In a media release he distributed outside the commission, Mcjannett said 
former high school military cadets who had come forward with stories of alleged 
sexual abuse that took place before 2000 were being “stonewalled”.

He accused the royal commission of being a corporate “farce”.

 