
A former bodyguard for Osama bin Laden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/osamabinladen> was today sentenced to life 
in prison for his role in blowing up US embassies in East Africa – and became 
the first former Guantánamo Bay detainee to be tried and jailed by a civilian 
American court.

Ahmed Ghailani, 36, was captured in 2004 in Pakistan after a fierce battle 
with government troops. He was later found guilty of being part of the plot in 
which 224 people were killed in twin bombings in Kenya and Tanzania in 1998. 
Ghailani had been held inGuantánamo Bay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/guantanamo-bay>, but was later transferred 
to the US in what was widely seen as a test case for whether high-profile 
terror suspects could be effectively tried in the US judicial system.
 FBI pictures show Ahmed Khalfan Ghailani, accused in the 1998 US embassy 
bombings in Africa. Photograph: Reuters 
Some conservative critics, especially Republicans in Congress, had said it was 
too much of a risk to try such cases in a civilian court rather than military 
commissions. They expressed concerns that the use of waterboarding in some 
cases might lead to acquittals if key evidence was found to have been obtained 
via torture.

But the Obama administration has argued publicly that a civilian court was the 
right place for terror suspects who had attacked US targets and killed American 
civilians. The success in securing a full life term for Ghailani, who was
convicted on a single conspiracy count yet acquitted on 280 other charges 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/nov/18/guantanamo-detainee-ahmed-khalfan-ghailani>
, might pave the way for further such trials, including alleged 9/11 mastermind 
Khalid Sheikh Mohammed.

Civil liberties groups, who have long been critical of Guantánamo Bay, 
welcomed the New York court's decision, saying it proved the White House should 
not listen to proponents of the military commissionsto reverse its course on 
pursuing civilian trials.

"The Ghailani trial … should put to rest any unfounded fears that our federal 
justice system cannot conduct fair, safe and effective trials in terrorism 
cases, including when torture is an issue," said Hina Shamsi, a director at the 
American Civil Liberties Union.

Ghailani will now almost certainly be sent to a "supermax" high security 
prison in Colorado, where other defendants convicted in the bombings are being 
held. His sentence includes no prospect of ever getting parole.

Evidence presented at the trial showed how Ghailani, a Tanzanian, helped to 
purchase key components used in the bombs, including gas tanks and a vehicle 
used as one of the bombs. His defence had argued that he had been tortured in 
custody, but Judge Lewis Kaplan said that did not weigh against him getting a 
heavy sentence or being found guilty. "This crime was so horrible … the impact 
on him pales in comparison to the suffering and the horror he and his 
confederates caused," the judge said.

Ghailani's trial also provided a platform for victims of the bombings 12 years 
ago to voice their anguish. Today they were allowed to give testimony in the 
Manhattan courtroom where the sentence was handed down. Sue Bartley, whose 
diplomat husband Julian died in Kenya, said the attacks had never ceased to 
cause pain to herself and her family. "What remains is a lingering, unsettling 
feeling that is compounded by grief, deep sadness and anger. The pain is with 
me every day. Often times it is unthinkable," she told the court.
 