
I first came across Barthelme at university, as I am sure is the case with 
many others. Like most people, I didn’t actually read him. His name was 
something to drop into conversation – a signifier of postmodern cool, a wink to 
the stalls. His fiction wasn’t actually discussed in seminars either: it was 
merely alluded to. But having now taken the plunge and read both of the most 
popular collections of his work, I cannot sing the author’s praises highly 
enough. I urge others to get stuck in, too.

I had read Sixty Stories <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/sixty-stories.html>
, the first volume of his greatest hits, last year, so this year I took on 
Forty Stories. I say: “took on” because Barthelme is not an easy writer. 
Despite being best known for short stories that seldom extend beyond five 
pages, he is a high-minded artist who can be difficult to digest. His fictions 
are dense, surreal affairs that eschew conventional narrative and skip giddily 
between genres. Those looking for plot, character, linearity or any other 
hallmarks of creative writing workshops should look away now.

It is a cliche (but true nonetheless) that in 246 pages, the book covers more 
fictional ground than other authors could hope to in entire careers. This is 
slightly unfair given that it was a selection of his best stories, but even 
fêted contemporaries of his, such as Thomas Pynchon and Robert Coover, struggle 
to mach the furious, joyous mélange of styles. Just the titles – in stark and 
arch contrast to the collection itself – are a source of great enjoyment. As 
Dave Eggers points out in his introduction to the Penguin Modern Classics 
edition: “these 40 titles are among the best assemblages of titles ever 
assembled”. Eggers goes on to mention Porcupines at the University andSome of 
Us Had Been Threatening Our Friend Colby 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/sixty-stories.html>, but they are the tip of 
the iceberg.

Part of the greatness of Forty Stories derives from its vertiginous variety. 
In reading these tales, the reader is exposed to – among other things – a story 
composed of one long, slithering sentence; another composed almost entirely of 
questions; and yet more that are composed entirely of dialogue. There are 
legends, there are letters, there are fables, there are essays. Of course, the 
narrative does occasionally lapse into classical storytelling, but the majority 
of the stories are studied attempts to avoid the staid Chekhovian/Joycean, 
small-epiphany-delivering style that was and is so prevalent. The long shadows 
of Beckett, Kafka, Borges and Nabokov do hang low over the work, yet Barthelme 
nearly always sounds fresh.

Twenty-eight years since its publication, and 26 since Barthelme’s death in 
1989, the book remains essential reading. Firstly, because its author is 
grossly under-appreciated and secondly, because reading him will give one fresh 
insights into recent short story greats such as George Saunders and David 
Foster Wallace. People should also read the book because Barthelme is a relic 
of a time long since passed: an author willing to take stylistic risks, an 
author who manages to be frivolous and intellectually serious at the same time. 
He is a writer who is not afraid to make the the reader roar with laughter – or 
to be wilfully difficult. He wanted his readers to work but was ready to reward 
them every step of the way.

What’s more, few writers have ever believed in the power of words as much as 
Barthelme, and even fewer have demonstrated the same conjurer’s deftness with 
them. His self-described artistic “project of restoring freshness to language” 
is one to be appreciated and applauded. I understand that these stories can 
seem dated to some or cold to others, but Barthelme’s genre-bending flash 
fiction, with its offbeat tone and surreal imagery, is just as relevant for the 
YouTube generation as it was for the Baby Boomers. To read him is to refresh 
your sense of fiction’s possibilities.
 