
Four Liberal Democrat MPs were ordered today to apologise to the House of 
Commons <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons> and repay money 
after an inquiry into cash they received from the landlord of taxpayer-funded 
second homes in Westminster.

John Barrett, Sandra Gidley, Paul Holmes and Richard Younger-Ross showed 
"serious misjudgment",the House of Commons standards and privileges committee 
said 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200910/cmselect/cmstnprv/491/49103.htm>
.

The party's former leader, Sir Menzies Campbell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sirmenziescampbell>, and Sir Alan Beith 
were found to have committed lesser "misjudgments" and no action against them 
was recommended.

The six – all tenants of Dolphin Square near parliament, which houses many 
MPs' flats – had referred themselves to the parliamentary commissioner for 
standards aftera report in the Daily Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newstopics/mps-expenses/5410887/MPs-expenses-13-received-payments-to-give-up-cheap-rent-deals.html>
 alleging that at least 13 MPs had received "windfalls worth thousands of 
pounds to give up their right to cheap rent, in a deal that led to taxpayers 
paying substantially more for their second homes".

The paper said that a number of those who took the money, offered by the new 
owners in exchange for less favourable terms, then stayed on in the block – 
which was previously owned by a non-profit-making trust – leaving the taxpayer 
to pick up the cost of the higher rentals.

The commissioner, John Lyons, concluded that because the payments resulted 
from use of public funds to pay part or all of the rents on the MPs' flats, 
"the public purse should have been the beneficiary of the payments".

"We consider that members should have sought official advice at the time the 
offers were made, and we are surprised that none of the six who referred 
themselves did so," the committee said.

"If members had sought advice in writing, they should have been advised to 
recognise the contribution made from public funds to the position they were in 
and to have paid a proportion of any windfall payment to the house.

"However, those who kept the payment and achieved a saving to public funds 
are, in our judgment, in a different position from those who kept it but did 
not achieve a saving, or who added to public expenditure."

Barrett was ordered to pay half the £11,234 he received from the new owners of 
Dolphin Square, less any capital gains tax he paid. Younger-Ross was told to 
pay half the £8,031 which he received, less capital gains tax. Gidley was 
ordered to pay a quarter of the £18,751 she received, less capital gains tax. 
And Holmes was told to pay a quarter of the £9,440 which he received, less 
capital gains tax.

Beith and Campbell each accepted £5,000 to give up succession rights, refusing 
more lucrative offers to relinquish their protected tenancies and rent. Beith 
used the money to pay for the costs of redecorating the flat, instead of 
claiming through allowances, while Campbell used the cash to offset costs he 
had incurred in respect of his parliamentary duties.

Nick Clegg <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nickclegg>, the Lib Dem 
leader, said the six had acted "promptly and correctly" by referring themselves 
to the commissioner. He urged Gordon Brown and David Cameron to order their MPs 
with second homes in the apartment block to follow their example.

"If they want to be taken at their word on clearing up the system of expenses 
and allowances, Gordon Brown and David Cameron must instruct all their MPs who 
accepted these payments to immediately refer themselves to the parliamentary 
commissioner for standards, and cooperate fully with him over this matter," he 
said.
 