
Four of Rembrandt’s earliest paintings, depicting sight, hearing, touch and 
smell, are being reunited and going on public display for the first time.

In something of a coup, on Friday the Ashmolean museum in Oxford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/ashmolean-museum> will unveil the four 
surviving panels from a series on the five senses, which the teenage Rembrandt 
created around 1624-25.

“It is the first time these paintings will ever be on show together so it is 
an amazing thing,” said the gallery’s curator of northern European art, An Van 
Camp. “As a curator, this is the stuff you dream of … a world first. Even the 
owners of the paintings have never seen them together.”

It came about because the gallery is planning a show in 2019-20 on young 
Rembrandt <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/rembrandt>. “We thought it 
would be nice to have a sort of teaser,” said Van Camp.

The display is all the more remarkable because one of the paintings, Smell, 
was rediscovered only last year 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-new-jersey-rembrandt-idUSKCN0Y226R>, in the 
basement of a house in New Jersey. The painting’s owners had no idea what it 
was, and nor did the auction house that offered it as a minor 19th-century 
painting with an estimate of $500-$800.

Word of its existence reached Paris dealers and some keen-eyed experts in 
European auction houses, each of whom had a suspicion that it could be a 
Rembrandt. A bidding war ensued and the painting was sold for $870,000 (then 
worth about £565,000).

It was then sold for an undisclosed sum to the New York financier Thomas 
Kaplan, whose Leiden Collection is one of the world’s largest private 
collections of art from the Dutch golden age.

The work has now been fully authenticated as a Rembrandt, which means the 
Leiden Collection – which Van Camp said was a good friend to the Ashmolean – 
has three of the five. Sight is being lent by theMuseum de Lakenhal in Leiden 
<http://www.lakenhal.nl/en>. The fifth in the series, Taste, is still missing.

The small works, each no bigger than A4, are remarkable not just for who the 
artist was but also for the subject matter, which brings to the fore 
Rembrandt’s sense of humour.

In The Stone Operation (Touch), the young Rembrandt seems to mock the bizarre 
practice of the time of trying to cure bad headaches by using a scalpel to 
remove a stone from the skull.

A Pedlar Selling Spectacles (Sight) has a salesman of dubious honour selling 
to a squinting couple who are clearly blind as bats. The Unconscious Patient 
(Smell) has a wizened crone and probably quack doctor reviving a patient after 
he fainted during a blood-letting procedure.

The Three Singers (Hearing) seems to be the most innocent of the four; Van 
Camp theorises that the old woman is not singing well because she can’t really 
read the songbook.

At first glance, the works may not immediately cry out Rembrandt – he was only 
17 or 18 – but Van Camp said it was possible to see glimpses of the great 
painter he would become in the bright colours, broad brushwork, experimental 
treatment of light and the ability to capture human expression.

“The paintings show that at the age of just 18, Rembrandt has a genius for 
representing human character and emotion and for packing in amazing amounts of 
detail into the briefest of brushstrokes – skills that would see him become one 
of the most celebrated artists of all time,” Van Camp said.

In lieu of the fifth painting, the Ashmolean will display an empty frame and 
will invite people to describe, draw, paint or Photoshop what they think the 
painting might look like. The submissions can be tweeted using the hashtag 
#MissingRembrandt.

“Who knows, maybe we’ll find it,” Van Camp added. “That would be the best 
outcome.”

• Sensation: Rembrandt’s First Paintings, at the Ashmolean until 27 November.
 