
The promoter Frank Warren believes boxers should not be able to pick the round 
in which they win if they have bet on such an outcome after David Haye admitted 
he had done so in winning last night's WBA heavyweight showdown withAudley 
Harrison <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/audley-harrison>.

Harrison's performance drew criticism but it was Haye's claim on TV after the 
fight that he had backed himself to win in the third which has angered fans and 
boxing personalities alike.

Warren believes fighters who are also promoters, as Haye was for last night's 
bout, said: "For a fighter promoting it who is in the ring I think it is 
unacceptable.

"It just shouldn't be allowed to happen. It's not like they are not getting a 
fortune to fight in the first place," Warren told BBC's Sportsweek programme.

"I don't think it looks good for the game or David Haye 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/davidhayeboxing> if he has had a bet."

But Warren's rival promoter Frank Maloney believes there is nothing to stop 
boxers like Haye picking the round they will win in and betting on it.

Maloney said: "[If] he can earn some more money and he believes in his ability 
that's up to him.

"Sportsmen bet on themselves. I don't think there's anything to stop them 
[doing that]."

Maloney admitted his disappointment after the fight but added: "I never 
changed my views that Haye would win within three rounds, I don't think 
Harrison should have been allowed to fight.

"The British public got what they demanded. They have only got themselves to 
blame."

The former WBC super-middleweight champion Carl Froch believes Haye backing 
himself to win in a particular round could have backfired.

"You can't predict which round you are going to beat somebody," said Froch.

"If you say 'I will beat somebody in round three' that can be your undoing. It 
might have just been a publicity stunt after the fight."

Froch focused on the performance of Haye and praised him for waiting for his 
opportunity to win in the third.

"He was very composed, he was cool. He wasn't doing anything too risky because 
Audley has got a punch. He waited his time and in round three he stuck it on 
Audley.

"[It was] a great performance from David Haye, he did what he had to do, what 
he said he would do."

Warren echoed the views of Maloney that Harrison should not have been allowed 
to face Haye.

He said: "I thought Audley Harrison was disgraceful. One person turned up, 
took his purse and that was it.

"He did not try in any shape or form and that's a disgrace to any fighter who 
gets an opportunity like that."

Warren also revealed that fans had been drawn into believing Harrison had a 
chance by the pre-fight hype.

"It got a life of it's own, it crossed over from being boxing to the general 
public. It was always a mismatch from the start but the two guys made a lot of 
money out of it."
 