
When a British male last won the Australian Open title, 76 years ago, he wore 
long trousers and streaks of white from his painted wooden racket transferred 
to his face making him look "like a Red Indian on the warpath". The Manchester 
Guardian wrote a leader suggesting that Fred Perry's success "should do much to 
explode the popular fallacy that England has degenerated athletically".

The past maybe a foreign country where they do things differently but British 
tennis fans – and many for whom the sport normally means diddly-squat – will 
hope this morning that Andy Murray can repeat what Perry achieved in the 1934 
final at Rushcutters Bay in Sydney. If he does upset the rampant Roger Federer, 
though, it is highly unlikely to be as comfortably as Perry disposed of the 
Australian Jack Crawford, who won only nine games in the title match.

Perry set sail for Australia from America in the autumn of 1933, having won 
the US title at Forest Hills, New York, in September to secure the first of his 
eight grand slam titles. Few sportsmen have embraced foreign travel quite as 
enthusiastically as Perry and his first trans-Pacific passage, with stop-offs 
at Tahiti and the Cook Islands, made a lasting impression. "I do not mind how 
often I repeat that glorious voyage across the Pacific," he wrote.

By now Perry, 25, the precocious, working-class boy from Stockport who so 
spectacularly gate-crashed the predominantly genteel world of tennis, was the 
outstanding amateur player in the world. He was supremely fit, having trained 
hard with the successful Arsenal sides of that time in defiance of tennis's dim 
view of extra-curricular physical exercise; he also had a supremely competitive 
game whose defining stroke was a devastating, whipped forehand taken soon after 
the ball bounced.

Perry received an early warning on his first visit to Australia about howthe 
locals expected people to behave. When he and his doubles partner, Pat Hughes, 
wore white dinner jackets that they had had made in the United States to a 
reception in Melbourne they were panned by the press. Ostentation went down as 
well then with the Aussies as it does now.

At another function the mayor of Sydney referred to the recent bodyline Test 
cricket series, which had caused a diplomatic crisis between Britain and 
Australia when the England fast bowler Harold Larwood, following orders, 
targeted batsmen rather than the stumps. The mayor asked Hughes, who was 
captain of the British contingent, whether he too had arrived with a secret 
weapon. Hughes said he had: Fred Perry.

They were prophetic words. Perry's only meaningful challenge in the Australian 
championships came in his semi-final against Vivian McGrath, who was described 
by one local sportswriter as "Australia's Don Bradman of tennis". Perry raced 
through the first three rounds, playing particularly well against Australia's 
No2 Harry Hopman, before coming up against McGrath, who was only 17 but had 
beaten the great American Ellsworth Vines a year earlier. McGrath, one of the 
first exponents of the two-fisted backhand, won the first two sets before 
Perry's champion's instinct for survival saw him through. McGrath passed out at 
the end, overcome by exhaustion.

Remarkably Perry played 98 games on the day before the singles final, winning 
the doubles with Hughes over the full distance in addition to his long 
semi-final against McGrath.

He used this to have what was almost certainly a psychological dig at Crawford 
after dominating the final. He commented that fatigue had almost certainly 
affected Crawford's concentration, knowing full well that he had far more cause 
than the Australian to be fatigued after his marathon Friday. It was typical of 
Perry's tireless mental campaigning against his main rivals that he shoulduse 
this device to point up his ownfitness.

Two peripheral incidents, rather than the play itself, differentiated that 
1934 Australian men's final. One was Perry's ploy, thought up with Jim Hines, 
the Slazenger sales manager, to paint his racket white, a piece of showmanship, 
designed to upstage Crawford, that rebounded on Perry when the paint ran and 
Hines sent out his "Red Indian" message.

The other involved barracking, which has always been a staple of Australian 
sporting events. Niggled by applause when he made a mistake, Perry turned to 
the crowd after Crawford netted a forehand in the final game and asked: "Why 
don't you applaud that one?" This caused a furore that prompted Perry to ask 
the umpire: "Is this a cricket or a tennis match?" A spectator then called out: 
"You asked for it and you got it." The uproar took a while for the umpire to 
quell.

It was as if Perry and the crowd both needed something to energise them after 
a disappointingly one-sided match.

What Murray would give for such a match in his favour today.

The Last Champion: The Life of Fred Perry, by Jon Henderson, is published this 
week in paperback (Yellow Jersey Press; £8.99)
 