
You could be forgiven for believing that British students have resigned 
themselves to a future of monolingualism, given the flood of news articles 
reporting a slump in young people studying languages.

The number taking European languages at A-level is in decline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/aug/16/alevel-foreign-languages-decline>
, with applications to study French falling by a third since 2000, while the 
number studying German has halved in just over a decade.

When a rise in tuition fees prompted a drop in university applications last 
year, language degrees bore the brunt, with applications to non-European 
languages falling by 21.5%, the sharpest decline of all subjects 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/jan/30/uk-university-applications-drop-ucas>
.

But don't be fooled: students still have an appetite for languages – something 
universities are finding new ways to accommodate, according to Prof Patrick 
McGhee, vice-chancellor of theUniversity of East London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/universityofeastlondon> (UEL).

UEL is one of a growing number of institutions to run free weekly language 
classes. Spurred on by a desire to enhance their cultural awareness – and plump 
up their CVs – students have been quick to take up the university's offer.

"We were blown away by the demand. At first we were offering courses in four 
languages. We received 1,200 applications in just four days, and were able to 
support 200 students," says McGhee.

The university is now offering three-hour weekly classes in nine languages and 
has more than doubled the number of places available.

Why are students so keen to learn languages? "There are all sorts of reasons," 
says McGhee, "community reasons, family reasons, because they want to become 
more employable or prepare themselves for trips abroad."

Martina Hahnel, a second-year marketing student, is one of those enrolled. She 
hopes the classes will help her to secure work after graduating: "I chose 
Chinese because China has such an interesting culture and, in terms of work, 
the country is a big marketplace for graduates."

Learning isn't easy, but it is rewarding, she says. "Right now we're focusing 
on pronunciation. Sounds which to western ears appear very similar can in fact 
have several different meanings – one sound might mean anything from horse to 
mother. It's hard work, but I'm enjoying it."

At the end of the course, students produce coursework and sit an oral and 
written exam – those who pass (and around 90% did last year) receive extra 
credits on their degree transcript.

For Hahnel, the main attraction is that UEL – just like Leeds Metropolitan, 
the University of Central Lancashire and Aston University – provides the 
courses free of charge.Students <https://www.theguardian.com/education/students>
 are, as Rebecca Weightman, a first-year sociology student at Leeds Met, puts 
it, "keen to get more for their money, especially now tuition fees have risen".

But the complementary languages also tap into student demand for a flexible 
and varied education. Weightman says that, while she enjoyed languages at GCSE, 
she was daunted by the prospect of continuing her studies on to A-level: "It 
seemed like such a big commitment and I thought, if I get bored or if it turns 
out that I'm not very good at the language I've picked, I'll be stuck."

Her Italian classes are two hours long and take place in the evening, which 
means she can easily fit them in with her degree. "It adds a bit of variety – I 
do enjoy sociology, but I like doing something different alongside it as well. 
I'm learning a lot from the classes, which is satisfying. It's nice when you 
realise, actually, I'm quite good at this."

Unlike schools, universities also have plenty of specialist resources, says 
Carol Marley, associate dean of undergraduate programmes at Aston University. 
"As well as spending two hours in class speaking with tutors and classmates, we 
also have great language-learning facilities with audio recordings."

It isn't just French and Spanish on offer: "At the moment Spanish, Mandarin 
and Arabic are the most popular – with French and German not far behind."

The courses provide more than nuggets for students to put on their CV. 
"Learning a language doesn't just make you more employable, it allows you to 
explore a culture, and that can be a real eye-opener," says Marley.

"A lot of our students have gone on to do short placements working or studying 
abroad – languages open doors."

There is, McGhee admits, a widely held belief that British students don't want 
to go abroad or learn other languages."

But that's not true, he says. "We've just got to tailor the teaching on offer."
 