
The federal government has responded to reports the French company that won 
the $50bn contract to build Australia’s submarines has suffered a big leak of 
information, claiming it will not affect Australia’s submarine program.

According to a report in the Australian 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/defence/our-french-submarine-builder-in-massive-leak-scandal/news-story/3fe0d25b7733873c44aaa0a4d42db39e>
, 22,400 pages of documents have leaked from French shipbuilder DCNS which 
detail the ­secret combat capability of the six Scorpene-class submarines it 
has designed for the Indian navy.

In April DCNS won the $50bn contract to build and maintain Barracuda-class 
submarines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/26/france-to-build-australias-new-submarine-fleet-as-50bn-contract-awarded>
 to Australian specifications in South Australia.

France to build Australia’s new submarine fleet as $50bn contract awarded
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/26/france-to-build-australias-new-submarine-fleet-as-50bn-contract-awarded>
The leak has raised concerns that if DCNS were to suffer a similar security 
breach for the Barracuda class then Australia may lose the stealth advantage of 
the submarines and have its performance capabilities revealed.

On Channel Seven’s Sunrise on Wednesday Malcolm Turnbull said the leak of 
classified information was of concern and it was a reminder that cyber security 
is of critical importance.

But the prime minister stressed that “the submarine that [DCNS] are building 
for India is not the submarine they are building for Australia, it is a 
different model”.

“The information is some years old now.

“We have the highest security protections on all of our defence information, 
weather it is in partnership with other countries or entirely within Australia.”

The defence industry minister, Christopher Pyne, said he had received advice 
from the defence department that the reported leak in regards to the DCNS 
project in India has “no bearing” on the Australian government’s submarine 
program.

“The [submarine program] operates under stringent security requirements that 
govern the manner in which all information and technical data is managed now 
and into the future,” he said in a statement on Wednesday.

“The same requirements apply to the protection of all sensitive information 
and technical data for the Collins-class submarines, and have operated 
successfully for decades.”

Senator Nick Xenophon said he was “very concerned” about the reported leak.

“This is a very serious development – it must be investigated at the highest 
levels; there must be a public disclosure of what that investigation brings 
out; it’s something I want to explore in the Senate estimates process,” he said 
on Radio National.

Xenophon said the implications of the leak were massive and called on DCNS and 
the Australian government to explain what those implications are.

“This is really quite disastrous to have thousands of pages of your combat 
system leaked in this way.”

In a statement DCNS said: “As a serious matter pertaining to the Indian 
Scorpene program, French national authorities for defence security will 
formally investigate and determine the exact nature of the leaked documents.”

“The matters in connection to India have no bearing on the Australian 
submarine program which operates under the Australian government’s arrangements 
for the protection of sensitive data.”
 