
France's industry minister has accused the world's largest steel-maker, 
ArcelorMittal, of "lying" and urged it to leave the country.

In an extraordinary attack, Arnaud Montebourg also threatened the company with 
temporary nationalisation.

"We no longer want Mittal in France because they don't respect France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>," Montebourg said in an interview 
with the financial newspaper Les Echos.

In a broadside directed at Lakshmi Mittal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lakshmi-mittal>, the Indian-born British 
billionaire who heads the company, he added: "Mittal's lies since 2006 are 
overwhelming … he's never kept his word".

The outburst came after ArcelorMittal announced it had postponed the 
relighting of a blast furnace at a plant in Dunkirk. The furnace, one of four, 
was shut down for maintenance in August but was due to be restarted next week. 
The site produces 7m tonnes of steel and is often described as the company's 
"jewel".

ArcelorMittal had already announced the closure of two blast furnaces at 
Florange, in the former steel-making heartland of Lorraine, with the loss of 
629 jobs.

The French government has until Saturday 1 December to find a buyer for the 
Florange furnaces and had contacted 117 steel-makers, of whom five had showed 
an interest. However, talks were said to have stalled because the furnaces and 
coke-plant Mittal has agreed to sell are not considered profitable enough 
without the rest of the Florange site, which supplies steel to the German car 
industry.

Montebourg told Les Echos: "The problem of the blast furnaces at Florange [is] 
not the blast furnaces in Florange, it's Mittal."

French ministers who vehemently opposed Mittal's hostile takeover of the 
Luxembourg-based Arcelor in 2006 say the steel magnate has broken promises made 
at the time about his commitment to France's steel industry.

On Monday Mittal, whose company employs 20,000 people in France, was said to 
be "extremely shocked" by Montebourg's outburst. His advisers said the 
businessman, worth an estimated £10bn, would meet President François Hollande 
on Tuesday. Montebourg will meet the unions at the Florange plant on Wednesday.

The Russian steel-maker Severstal is believed to have expressed an interest in 
the site, as well as the Indian company Tata Steel, the Italian Riva, South 
Korean Posco and French Ascometal.

Edouard Martin, who represents the CFDT union at Florange, said he "applauded 
with both hands" Montebourg's attack. "Mr Mittal is a predator, but at last we 
have a government and a minister who dares stand up to him. We are very happy 
that Arnaud Montebourg has shown the courage to go into battle and try to wrest 
Florange from Mittal's claws," he said.

"We hope it is not a bluff. If anyone thinks Mr Mittal will stop at closing 
Florange they are dreaming. We have said from the start that it is Florange 
today and tomorrow it will be someone else's turn."

The CGT, France's biggest union, sounded a note of caution. "It's not with 
shocking words that it will survive. Once it's been said, what do we do. We 
want a real industrial policy," said Yves Fabbri.

It is not the first time Montebourg, the minister for industrial renewal and 
considered to be on the left of Hollande's Socialist government, has railed 
against a high-profile company boss. In July, after the car-maker PSA Peugeot 
Citroen announced the closure of a production line near Paris with the loss of 
8,000 French jobs, he accused the Peugeot family, which holds a quarter of the 
company's shares, of not living up to its responsibilities.

In September he announced legislation to force companies planning to close 
factories to find buyers for any viable sites. Hollande also pledged to halt 
factory closures on a visit to Florange during his successful election campaign 
in May.

Montebourg's threats, however, may be little more than hot air: legal experts 
say a compulsory takeover by the French government is likely to be 
unconstitutional and against European Union laws.

On Monday Montebourg defended his plan to temporarily nationalise the 
steelworks at Florange as "reasonable".

However, he attempted to row back on his interview with Les Echos. "When I 
said 'We no longer want Mittal in France', I meant that we no longer want 
Mittal's methods in France, methods which do not respect agreements and which 
are blackmail and threats," he said, visiting a Duralex factory near Orléans.

He said he was not "questioning the industrial presence of ArcelorMittal in 
France".
 