
In a valley lashed by wind and rain in the industrial heartland of north-east 
France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>, steelworkers blockading the 
local foundry see their action as a last stand to save their jobs, their 
factory, their region's economy – even the entire French steel industry.

As thunderstorms raged in the area this week, the symbolism was potent: the 
picket-line bonfire hissed and went out. The tent where protesters had taken 
refuge from the elements ditched its concrete anchors and threatened to blow 
away. "Let go of nothing," someone shouted as men grabbed tent poles. The 
others laughed.

There is little humour to be had these days outside the ArcelorMittal 
steelworks in Florange, where the"temporary" closure of two blast furnaces was 
declared permanent on Monday, with the loss of 629 jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/oct/01/arcelormittal-shut-florange-furnaces-france>
. Bitter jokes and anger are directed at the Indian-born, British-based Lakshmi 
Mittal, owner of the world's largest steelmaking company. "That man is a 
predator," said Edouard Martin, head of the CFDT union at Florange where he has 
worked for 32 years. "He's not an industrialist, he's a financier."

Martin, whose father worked at Gandrange, a neighbouring steelworks bought by 
Mittal in 1999 and closed in 2009, added: "I'm sick of hearing people say: you 
are a historic industry but one from the past, you have to move on, do 
something else.

"I say: you don't need cars or washing machines or TGV trains? Try driving a 
microchip down the motorway."

The ArcelorMittal plant at Florange has become the symbol of France's 
industrial decline and a litmus test for the future of steelmaking inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

In the Vallée de la Fensch in the Moselle, whose rich iron-ore fields once 
made it the jewel of France's industrial crown, and where – for this reason – 
the earth is soaked with German and French blood spilled in conflicts over the 
last 140 years, Florange is the last steelworks standing. It's an industrial 
crisis that has echoes of the privatisations and plant closures that all but 
wiped out British steelmaking and coalmining in the 1980s and 90s. Unemployment 
in this area of France is already above the 10% national average, and the 
Florange plant, which supplies the car industry, has been hit by a fall in 
demand for new cars. Peugeot Citroën caused outrage in July when it announced 
it was cutting 8,000 jobs and closing a production line in suburban Paris, but 
it followed a first-half loss of €700m (£560m) and a 20% fall in sales in 
Europe in the first quarter.

Mittal is not shutting the entire site, but the so-called "hot line", the 
blast furnaces, where the iron ore is melted to produce steel, and the 
neighbouring coke plant.

Today the two furnaces, closed "temporarily" last year, are idle. The nearby 
heating stoves are on hold, emitting wisps of smoke into the grey sky. "It's a 
sad sight," says Maurice Nicotra, 47, surveying the abandoned plant. "It's dead 
here now. Mittal told us he would put money into our steel industry, but look 
where we are."

France's Socialist president, François Hollande, who visited Florange during 
his election campaign this year, and Arnaud Montebourg, the minister for 
industrial renewal, have taken up arms on behalf of the steelworkers and 
pledged to find a buyer for Florange's furnaces. However, Mittal, who blames 
falling global demand for steel and high production costs for the closure, has 
given them just two months to do so, at a time when Hollande is grappling to 
reduce the public deficit by €30m and reverse rising unemployment that has 
topped three million.

"We're all afraid. Over the years all the plants have closed here. If this one 
goes it won't be easy to find work," said Cyril Colpin, 31, a third-generation 
steelworker employed at Florange since 1999. "It's not that we don't make money 
here, it's that we don't make enough money for Mr Mittal. It's about maximum 
profit, not people."

Colleague Ben Khachei, 38, employed at Florange for 15 years, agreed.

"We're attached to steelmaking in this region. We identify with the industry. 
There are people here whose family have worked in steel for three or four 
generations. When Mittal took over the plant he promised he'd invest and 
preserve our jobs. We just want him to keep that promise. What can I say to a 
man motivated by money? I can only say, behind this steelworks are workers, 
families, a whole region. I can also say we will always need steel." While 
agreed on the need to save Florange, the plant's main unions, the CFDT and 
Force Ouvrière, disagree over how.

Walter Broccoli, the local Force Ouvrière secretary general, "doesn't believe 
for one minute" that the Hollande government will find a buyer and wants the 
plant nationalised. "We want the government to declare steel a strategic asset 
for the country like electricity and petrol and requisition it," he said. "Oh, 
and not give a penny to Mittal."

He added: "They call us dinosaurs but the steel industry here has always been 
at the forefront of new technology. I'm not optimistic. I think we're already 
condemned, but we have to fight to save Florange because if we don't the whole 
valley will suffer the consequences."

Back in the leaking tent, Martin says protesters will maintain the blockade. 
"All eyes are on Florange. People are watching our battle to see what happens. 
They know if we lose, there are no guarantees for anyone. We're a historic 
industrial area, but for 40 years they've treated us like sheep as they shut 
our factories. This used to be the jewel of French industry. We had crises but 
survived them because we were willing to adapt to the market and we produced 
good quality steel.

"If we lose this battle, it's a bad sign for the rest of Europe's steelworks 
and will boost the multinationalists who will think they can do anything they 
want."

He added: "People say we are more expensive than Chinese workers. It's true. 
But those same people forget they're also more expensive.

"Everything and everyone is more expensive in France than in China, so what 
are we to do – close down Europe and go elsewhere where everyone is paid $80 a 
month? It's not about pay, it's about the society we live in. Go tell that to 
Mittal."

Henri Blaffard, a vice-president of ArcelorMittal Europe, told the local 
Républicain Lorrain newspaper the closure was due to a "serious crisis in 
Europe" that had led to a 25% reduction in demand for steel.

"We cannot produce when there are no orders," he said. "The overcapacity in 
Europe is recognised by everyone the markets expect us to adapt."

He said the steel company had invested €2bn in other French plants at Dunkirk 
and Fos "because they were more competitive".
 