 Amelia Earhart once said that preparation was two-thirds of any venture. But 
on the morning of July 2 1937, even the best prepared flight ended in tragedy 
when Earhart and her navigator, Fred Noonan, vanished as they approached a tiny 
Pacific island on one of the last legs of a ground-breaking round-the-world 
flight.
Now, almost 70 years later, a team of marine explorers is launching a fresh 
attempt to find the wreckage of her twin-engine Lockheed Electra.

"Things tend to last a time in the deep ocean," said David Jourdan of 
Nauticos, a company based in Maine. "Our expectation is that the plane will be 
largely - if not completely - intact."

Mr Jourdan plans to begin an expedition in the spring to explore a 
1,000-square-mile area of the seabed west of Howland island, half way between 
Australia and Hawaii, where the waters are up to 5,000 metres (17,000ft) deep.

Others have tried in vain to find the remains of Earhart's plane. Mr Jourdan 
was involved in one such mission two years ago.

The US navy mounted a massive search immediately after Earhart disappeared.

She died just before her 40th birthday, a true heroine in depression-era 
America. The first woman to receive a pilot's licence from the Federal Aviation 
Institute, she established a series of altitude, distance and endurance records.

Earhart was known for her colourful personality as well as her flying prowess.

She refused to wear what she termed "high-bred aviation togs" - instead 
wearing a suit or dress and tight-fitting hat inside the cockpit, and only put 
on goggles for takeoff and landing.

She became friends with the then US first lady, Eleanor Roosevelt, and planned 
to teach her to fly. The press dubbed her "Lady Lindy" because of her 
resemblance to the aviator Charles Lindbergh.

"I have a feeling that there is just about one more good flight left in my 
system, and I hope this trip is it," she said as she prepared for her final 
29,000-mile flight.

Earhart and Noonan left Miami on June 1 1937. By June 29, they had only 7,000 
miles remaining, but the fateful leg from New Guinea to tiny Howland island was 
the most challenging.

Adverse weather caused the plane to use more fuel than had been anticipated.

At 7.42am on the morning of July 2, in one of her last radio communications, 
Earhart reported: "One half-hour fuel and no landfall." After a few more 
sporadic communications, nothing was ever heard of Earhart and Noonan again.

While most accepted that they had run out of fuel and crashed, conspiracy 
theories emerged. Some speculated that she had landed on a desert island, but 
had then died; others that she had been captured and eventually killed by the 
Japanese. Another unlikely theory had it that she lived out the rest of her 
life as a New Jersey housewife.

In a letter she left for her husband, George Putnam, in the event of her 
death, she wrote: "Please know I am quite aware of the hazards. I want to do it 
because I want to do it. Women must try to do things as men have tried. When 
they fail, their failure must be but a challenge to others."
 