
While Fresh Off the Boat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/feb/04/fresh-off-the-boat-new-perspective-race-with-laughs>
 takes place in the mid-90s, the ABC sitcom, which returns on Tuesday, has 
plenty to say about Asian American identity in the present day. In the second 
season finale, Eddie Huang wants to see Chris Rock’s searing standup special 
Bring the Pain. Younger brothers Emery and Evan interfere because their mother 
told him he wasn’t allowed. But after days of bickering, they stop fighting to 
watch the show together.

Why is Hollywood still using 'yellowface' in 2016?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/05/yellowface-hollywood-asian-stereotypes-birth-of-a-dragon>
Months later, while hosting this year’s Oscars, and after asking whether 
Hollywood is racist, present-day Rock brought out three Asian children wielding 
briefcases and introduced them as accountants. That actually happened. To make 
things even worse, the academy had reportedly known about the skit for months.
Yes, Hollywood is racist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/29/chris-rock-at-the-oscars-youre-damn-right-hollywoods-racist>
. So, thankfully, Fresh Off the Boat remains a safe haven for viewers who want 
to see how Asians and Asian Americans can be depicted without being the butt of 
the joke.


To understand the importance of Fresh Off the Boat, start with the 2016 Emmys, 
during which Master of None won outstanding comedy series. “There’s 17 million 
Asian Americans in this country and 17 million Italian Americans,” said the 
show’s co-creator Alan Yang. “They have The Godfather, Goodfellas, Rocky, The 
Sopranos. We’ve got Long Duk Dong.” Then, catch up with the recent 
whitewashing, from Cameron Crowe casting Emma Stone as a woman named Allison 
Ng, to Scarlett Johansson starring in a live-action remake of Ghost in the 
Shell, an anime set in Japan’s dystopian future. More than 13 years after he 
appeared in the then indie director Justin Lin’s Better Luck Tomorrow, 
#StarringJohnCho is still only a fantasy.

For as long as Fresh Off the Boat exists, Hollywood doesn’t have an excuse for 
getting it wrong. The industry frets over how Asian actors can’t be “bankable” 
stars, but the show has thrived because of how its family – the second Asian 
American family to get a sitcom since 1994’s All-American Girl – is at the 
emotional heart of it all. The Huangs may be the only non-white family living 
in that Orlando, Florida, cul-de-sac, but the show is solely concerned with 
their perspective. Home truths are presented in an honest and frank way, from 
the moment that Eddie (Hudson Yang) makes an earnest plea to his mother about 
his school dinner (“I need white people lunch”) to when he finally introduces 
her to his white girlfriend Allison, after being told his whole life to “date a 
Chinese girl”.

No one is characterized into neat stereotypes. After Eddie’s father, Louis 
(Randall Park), does Donald Duck impressions on a morning talkshow to promote 
his steakhouse restaurant, Eddie’s mother, Jessica (Constance Wu), lectures 
him: “You know what it reminded me of? Your favorite character from Sixteen 
Candles.” As Fresh Off the Boat develops, so does our understanding of the 
family’s diverse taste in American culture.During season one 
<http://abc.go.com/shows/fresh-off-the-boat/video/most-recent/VDKA0_f31rrefe>, 
Jessica doesn’t understand Eddie’s idolization of rappers like the Notorious 
BIG: “Why do all your shirts have black men on them?” By season two, though, 
she has a full-on crush on Denzel Washington.

Fresh Off the Boat is about how an Asian American family reckons with their 
dueling racial identities. This story is about to get even more specific. For 
this season, the Huangs have traveled to Taipei, Taiwan, for Louis’s brother’s 
wedding. In that sense, the premise actually bears a striking resemblance to 
that of Double Cup Love, Eddie Huang’s follow-up to the 2013 memoir that 
inspired the TV series. “The first book was, this is how I felt in America. But 
who am I in China?” he has said. (Huang has actually distanced himself from the 
show because of how it told a “cornstarch” version of his story.)

Meanwhile, all three Huang boys are all supposed to be in bed when they watch 
Bring the Pain. Eight-year-old Evan, the youngest and most obedient sibling, is 
engrossed because he finds this HBO special as educational as his daytime kids 
show fare. “I’m just glad he doesn’t do lame Asian jokes,” he says. If only 
Hollywood would do the same.
 