
Look, if you can’t see what’s so irresistible about Clark “Jug Ears” Gable of 
the Jack o’ Lantern grin, then much of the appeal ofGone With the Wind goes out 
the window. Furthermore, if Vivien Leigh’s anorexic, over-dressed Scarlett 
O’Hara seems to you one of the least credible of Hollywoodfemmes fatales, most 
of whose petulant squeaks are, to boot, audible only to bats…

And, finally, if you can’t see anything romantic at all about the more than 
feudal darkness of the old south, then you are left alone with the naked sexual 
ideology of the most famous movie ever made in all its factitious simplicity. 
Macho violence versus female guile, bull v bitch.

The first time I saw this meretricious epic, it was the 1950s, when they 
dusted off the reels and sent it on the road again to warp the minds of a new 
generation. Though I was but a kid then, with zilch consciousness, truly I 
thought it stank. But – I was of that generation whose sexual fantasies were 
moulded by Elvis Presley and James Dean.

Presley, white trash with black style, in his chubby, epicene and gyrating 
person himself the barbarian at the gates of Tara - talk about irresistible., 
how could even Scarlett have resisted had Elvis pleaded with her to let him be 
her teddy bear? As for Dean - impossible to imagine James Dean carrying a girl 
upstairs. I used to fantasise about doing that tohim. Fifty-six was, perhaps, 
the best year in which to viewGone With the Wind.

But why did the BBC choose to empty out Gone With the Wind, that hoary sackful 
of compulsive trash, at this point in time? at the fag-end of Christmas, when, 
softened up by grub and booze, the nation might be vulnerable? Impossible not 
to smell a rat.

I still think it stinks, this movie that reduces the American civil war to the 
status of spectacle; that advertises the masochistic pleasures of tight-lacing 
– did you notice how often Mammy is depicted brutally compressing Scarlett into 
her corset? But, goodness me, how enjoyable it is! I curled up in my armchair, 
giggling helplessly, weakly muttering “Break his kneecaps” about every five 
minutes. It’s Rhett Butler’s kneecaps that seem ripest for the treatment. Him 
and his travelling salesman’s lines: “You need to be kissed often, by somebody 
who knows how to do it.” This is the authentic language of a sexually 
incompetent man whistling in the dark.

Give GWTW its due, implicit in the script is just how ill at ease Scarlett is 
with the role in which the plot has cast her. Given any other option than that 
of the southern belle, she grasps it with both hands. Her sexual manipulations 
seem to spring from sheer boredom rather than actual malice. After all, as soon 
as she gets her hands on that lumber mill, she starts coming on like the 
Godmother and Rhett can’t think of a way to stop her.

Yet all this is going on in the gaps of the overt ideology of the movie. Which 
is no more thanThe Taming of the Shrew in hooped skirts. The viewer has ample 
time to ponder the socially determined nature of the shrew, which is often that 
of a woman forced to live for love when she really isn’t interested in love at 
all, and why should she be, dammit.

This is an edited extract
 