
Anita Brookner <https://www.theguardian.com/books/anita-brookner> writes sad 
novels; it was nice to see her happy, winning the Booker McConnell fiction 
prize on Thursday. It's the sort of thing that would never be allowed in one of 
her books, where all the heroines are losers. Brookner's sombre, lonely, 
self-concealing ladies watch from corners, while nastier, more attractive 
people have a good time, exude sexual ferocity and win all the prizes.

I greatly admire Hotel du Lac and, because of the prize, lots of people will 
now read it and love it. All the same, I think the wrong book was chosen this 
year and that wrong choice raises some interesting questions about what a big 
fiction prize like this should be for.

The 1984 judges' point of view was officially represented by their chairman, 
Richard Cobb, former Oxford professor of modern history, in the speech he made 
after LWT's cameras had gone. Cobb's blithe dismissal of "a Proust or a Joyce" 
as a suitable winner ("Not that I would know about that, having never read 
either") could be put down to lovable English philistinism, but his defence of 
the selection process raised hackles: "We have gone for sobriety, elegance, 
restraint, clarity of style and… steered clear of flamboyance, the lush and the 
torrid, pretentious and unremittingly depressing. We have also succeeded in 
avoiding political novels."

He went on to express his horror at the sort of things they'd had to read: 
"Novels about drink, sex, violence, novels with 'ugly' words, even one written 
entirely in what appeared to be Glaswegian". (How barbaric!) The speech made 
the winning novel sound smaller, safer and simpler than is really the case. 
Cobb said he wouldn't mind his panel being called unadventurous. But why 
shouldn't the general public want to read outrageous, peculiar novels? Or even 
political novels?

The Booker prize <https://www.theguardian.com/books/booker-prize> sells books 
and, in the last few years, it has become an Event. Of course, the gossip and 
razzmatazz that go with this can be a bit silly. But it's not just a 
publishers' beanfeast or an occasion for London literati to indulge in 
back-slapping. Because it has become more conspicuous, the prize can do more 
for writers – so it can afford to take risks.

The more ambitious choice this year would have been JG Ballard's Empire of the 
Sun. It wasn't just hype that made this the universal favourite. The novel is 
brilliant and extraordinary: an eerie vision of a Japanese prisoner-of-war camp 
seen through the matter-of-fact, anxious eyes of a boy, a sort of Huckleberry 
Finn in Shanghai. The word "important" always sounds pompous and windy; still, 
I think it is an important novel and will last.

Perhaps committees of judges are bound to get it wrong: the Nobel and the 
Goncourt have goofed often enough. Perhaps it's enough that a good writer won. 
But I think our biggest national book prize ought to celebrate what's 
troublesome, flamboyant and marginal as well as what's restrained, classical 
and good mannered. Is it time for an Alternative Booker?

This is an edited extract
 