
A woman, flying alone, has crossed the Atlantic. Miss Amelia Earhart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/amelia-earhart>, an American airwoman, 
landed near Londonderry on Saturday afternoon, having flown the two thousand 
miles from Harbour Grace, Newfoundland, in the record time of some fourteen 
hours.

It is a splendid achievement in itself, but one made all the more notable by 
circumstances. Many have said that the last great spectacular feat of this sort 
which remained in aviation would be a solitary Atlantic crossing by a woman. 
Whether this is so or not – and it is perhaps rather a large statement – Miss 
Earhart has certainly satisfied the particular account. Without male or other 
assistance, but relying on her own ability as a pilot, her own skill in the 
extremely difficult navigation which the Atlantic demands, she has succeeded in 
proving that the flight is not beyond the knowledge and the capacity for 
sustained endurance which a woman can acquire.

America may well be proud of Miss Earhart and her achievement. Nor will our 
own women pilots, those who, like Miss Johnson, have several difficult 
long-distance flights to their credit, and our men flyers, who have their own 
experiences of the Atlantic and its dangers, be backward in adding their 
congratulations. Miss Earhart has now the unique distinction of being the only 
person who has twice crossed the Atlantic by aeroplane.

It is a unique distinction, and many will think it might well remain unique 
for some time to come. If it were not a piece of advice which is offered after 
almost every air achievement, we would hope that Miss Earhart would be content 
with these laurels. The odds on the Atlantic crossing in the present state of 
air equipment are too heavily on failure. And the price of failure is almost 
unvarying: the Atlantic exacts its toll with utter certainty. The number of 
those who have found a ship able to pick them up in time is negligible in 
comparison with those who have flown off east or west into a silence which no 
word of them has ever broken.

If Atlantic flying were able to add any important experience to our knowledge, 
any suggestions for improvement in design of aircraft, in meteorological 
services, or in altered routes the risk might be worth taking and the world 
might be content that some of its best airmen (and airwomen) should have to pay 
the occasional price. But the crossing of the Atlantic to-day is a gamble, a 
sporting feat, and little more. Expert aeronautical opinion is almost 
unanimously opposed to attempts upon it, and ­certainly condemns Atlantic 
flying in land aeroplanes – which have no intended reserve of buoyancy in the 
event of a forced landing.

[Five years after her historic Atlantic crossing Amelia Earhart's plane 
disappeared over the Pacific.]
 