
Even in 1933, when the allotment movement was at a low ebb, it is estimated 
that one-third of all the vegetables consumed in this country were grown in 
private gardens or allotments. In this war, as in the last, a vast demand for 
cultivable plots has arisen among people who are not gardeners by inclination, 
and the spare-time digger for victory must by now have become responsible for 
well over half of our reduced supplies of greenstuffs. The inevitable 
falling-off in this dutiful productivity came prematurely, as many 
potato-hungry households now realise. Indeed, it will be several years yet 
before we can afford to abandon any source of food production without 
appreciable loss either to ourselves or to the European countries which have 
first claim on overseas surpluses. A warning to this effect takes proper 
precedence in the report of theNational Allotments Society 
<http://www.nsalg.org.uk/> for the years 1943-4. In the main, however, this 
document is concerned with the future of allotments in the light of the 
desperate housing shortage.

The history of the movement gives ample cause for this preoccupation. Over a 
hundred years ago allotments were much in favour among big landowners and 
political economists - and equally disliked by farmers - as a means of freeing 
the farm labourer from his dependence on depressed wages, Poor Law relief, and 
the untender mercies of middlemen. They were the first rung on the ladder by 
which the thrifty and industrious rural poor might attain a small holding and 
eventually a farm. It was not until the last war applied the spur of stark 
necessity that their wider potentialities as antidotes to the artificial 
strains of urban work (and to the worst effects of urban idleness) began to be 
recognised.

While their numbers grew slowly in the villages they soared to over a million 
in the towns, and this relative trend was maintained after the war until three 
freeholders out of four were townsmen. But the urban movement lost more than 
its foul-weather friends in the years between the wars. Shortsighted 
“development” left a large unsatisfied demand, for building was always regarded 
as more important than convenient access to cultivable land. Throughout that 
period the allotment societies fought a losing rearguard battle.

Will they face the same odds after this war? The record of the N.A.S. strongly 
supports its case for better treatment. The social value of its work in 
alleviating urban distress, enlarging the town-dweller’s horizon, and promoting 
co-operative effort is undeniable. But in the last resort the only real 
assurance of the security of tenure on which the movement depends lies in 
balanced, detailed, and effective town planning. The Manchester proposals, 
which are cited with approval in the society’s report, provide for one 
allotment to every twenty dwellings, in addition to worthwhile gardens for the 
great majority of households. The N.A.S., like many other specialised 
movements, will get the best results by throwing its weight against the 
obstacles to good town planning.
 