
My big brother gave me a copy of Michael Lewis's Liar's Poker for my 18th 
birthday. I read it, was hooked and read it again. It was the early 1990s, and 
this racy account of the excesses of the financial world lit a fire. From then 
on, all I wanted to be was an investment banker. Somehow though, 20 years 
later, I've become an artist.

A summer internship at the investment management firm Barings in 1994 should, 
perhaps, have been a warning, coming just months before Nick Leeson blew the 
house up. But I ploughed on, got a respectable degree in economics and, within 
months, had my feet firmly under the desk as a fresh young graduate at Barclays 
Capital.

Corporate finance became the only career I knew. Ironically, I was helping my 
employer pursue a path which, industry wide, would bring about the 
circumstances where I could actually become an artist. I could not have 
imagined that 12 years later I would be taking my first steps into a new life 
as a professional painter.

I wasn't even that good at art at secondary school. But I liked it enough 
that, on a whim, I bought a watercolour set on holiday in San Francisco. I was 
22. Perhaps it was there that, unbeknown to me, my nascent creative career also 
sprung its first, but dormant, root.

Meanwhile, the City treated me quite well (though I'll admit, I didn't think 
that at the time). After a couple of promotions and a year out to do an MBA in 
Dublin, I made a long-planned move into the hallowed world of private equity. 
Now part of the fast-growing, newly listed Australian finance house Babcock & 
Brown, I was not looking back. And though I'd started sketching again by this 
stage, I was far more sharp-dressed art collector than paint-spattered artist.

If I had to pick one moment where I felt I'd become an artist, it would be my 
last official day working in the City. It was May last year, and my 37th 
birthday. But more importantly, it was the day I sold my first painting – of 
Westminster Abbey. The four-figure sum I made, modest though it was by 
comparison to my regular salary, felt like the only money I'd properly earned 
since a student job at the local abattoir.

The painting was a substantial view of the interior of the abbey. My third 
attempt, it was based on a postcard on my fridge of the same view. And how did 
I come to have so much time on my hands to paint it? Well, this is not the 
place to describe how Babcock & Brown met its downfall. Suffice to say that 
within 18 months of the credit crunch, the company went from being worth some 
$12bn to being broken up, overwhelmed by debt. I was busy; many weren't and 
lost their jobs.

The empire was broken up in 2009. I was one of the lucky ones, and hung on to 
a piece of it for another two years, working for my old boss. As the banking 
sector refused to recover, I began to feel less secure and more worried; the 
threat of redundancies was becoming real.

And then the redundancies came. Long days stretched ahead, waiting for 
interviews. The meetings were alluring but proved infrequent – and the results 
disappointing. Painting proved a thoroughly absorbing, inexpensive, and 
profitable way to pass the time. And when people saw my work, loved it – and I 
believed them – it felt fantastic.

At the time I wasn't considering art as a potential career. It seemed too off 
the wall to be a serious option. Certain members of my family were becoming 
worried and would vainly ask "When will William get a proper job?" or suggest 
"Why don't you go into teaching?".

As summer went on, things gathered pace and started to feel really exciting. 
My young nephew built me a website. Friends introduced me to the Pepper Gallery 
in London, which now represents me. The Chisholm Gallery in New York got to 
hear of me, too, and it promotes my art. In November, two of my paintings were 
selected for the Westminster Arts Exhibition. How many art school graduates are 
in a similar position – even years after graduating?

The moment when I felt like I was really taking the plunge was signing the 
licence for my wonderful new studio space. On hearing of a vacancy in a large 
shared room at the Clockwork Studios near me in Camberwell, I jumped at it. 
Used to the early start of a City job, I'm often first at my desk. And being 
among other established artists and craftspeople working hard day-to-day is 
fantastic. Each of us inspires the others, and being so diverse, no one 
competes. There's also always someone to have lunch with.

It's now 10 months since my first painting sold. It's still early days, and 
other work – home tutoring south London children in maths some afternoons, and 
the odd cooking job – provides day-to-day income. But this year is already 
looking exciting, with three exhibitions in the pipeline and a programme of 
competitions to enter.

Finally, some advice for anyone inspired to do something similar. 

• First, set aside plenty of creative time. Be disciplined, work quickly and 
turn your phone off when you are at your art.

• Second, experiment, try things out you've seen other do and recognise that 
you will go down blind alleys from time to time.

• Finally, and most important, create a community around your art: go to 
exhibition openings, tell people that you are an artist (not an "aspiring 
artist"), explain your ideas clearly and simply: tell and show a story that 
will keep people interested. Even if you don't feel ready, start the story and 
follow up on opportunities to exhibit, so people in the art world can see for 
themselves what you can do."

So am I really becoming a professional artist mid-career without the normal 
training? Well, so far so good. I can now confirm: art is far more fun than 
banking; and being at the centre of contemporary art, there is no doubt London 
is the city in which to do it.

To see more of William's work, visit his website 
<http://www.williamsavage.co.uk/image/27> or Facebook page 
<http://www.facebook.com/WilliamSavageArt>. You can also find him on Twitter: 
@WilliamSavageLN <https://twitter.com/#!/WilliamSavageLN>

• This article was amended on 12 April 2012. The original used the phrase 
"cooking up investments" instead of "corporate finance". An inaccurate sentence 
has also been removed. These items have been corrected.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 