
The single most depressing thing about the shootings in Aurora 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/blog/2012/jul/20/denver-batman-premiere-shooting-live>
 is that we've seen all this before. Whether it's Columbine, or Virginia Tech, 
or the attack on Congresswoman Gabby Giffords of Arizona, the progress of mass 
death in modern America has a tendency to follow the same basic script: an 
unhinged person gains easy access to firearms and the consequences are 
devastating.

By now, there's a pattern – both to the events themselves, and to the way they 
are reported in the media – that illustrates, sadly, how little seems to be 
learned from one to the next. Here are some things to watch for as the story 
unfolds over the coming hours and days and weeks:

1. Almost everything reported in the immediate aftermath of the incident turns 
out to be distorted or wrong

After Columbine, everything we thought we knew in the first few days, from the 
number of shooters, to their motivation, to their affiliations at school, was 
based on overhasty information-gathering – some instances the fault of the 
media, and others the fault of the inexperienced local police.

The 24-hour news stations have an insatiable appetite on a story like this, 
and fact-checking goes out the window. Watch out for armchair psychologists, 
profilers and detectives who know nothing and can only speculate – often wildly.

2. Everyone wants to use incidents like these to promote their own agenda

It took the rightwing blogosphere crazies two minutes to blame the shootings 
on Middle Easterners, or see some dark political plot by President Obama to 
bolster his re-election campaign.

We can expect people to blame Hollywood, as they did after Columbine, and 
perhaps even the filmmakers of The Dark Knight Rises (whose villain, after all, 
wears a mask, just as James Holmes, the man named as the suspect shooter, 
appears to have done). Back in 1972, Stanley Kubrick himself withdrew A 
Clockwork Orange from distribution in Britain because of a string of copycat 
attacks. In the US, in 2012, expect the filmmakers to adopt a strictly 
defensive posture.

3. These incidents tend to occur to predominantly white, suburban communities 
previously thought of as all-American, safe and friendly

Columbine was a classic example of this. But so were the shootings in a school 
in West Paducah, Kentucky (1997), and at a Baptist church on the outskirts of 
Fort Worth, Texas (1999).

4. Because of saturation media coverage, one mass shooting tends to trigger 
another

The criminal profiler Park Dietz <http://www.parkdietzassociates.com/> has 
studied this, and shown that one attack tends to spawn another (usually less 
serious) within two weeks. There are a lot of unstable people out there with 
guns, and the power of suggestion is considerable.

5. Whatever people say about guns, or gun control, in the wake of these 
horrific episodes, little or nothing ever changes

It will be interesting to see if Aurora is an exception to this rule. The 
controversy over "stand your ground" laws in many states, and the related 
shooting of Trayvon Martin in Florida earlier this year, have generated the 
first serious conversation about gun control in years. The scandal over the 
Bureau of Alcohol Tobacco and Firearms' "Fast and Furious" gun-monitoring 
operation on the Mexican border has had a similar effect.

In the past, though, mass shootings have led to token reform of gun laws, at 
best. And, in some instances, it has led to even laxer regulation – the 
thinking being that the more citizens are armed, the faster they can stop a 
killer by putting a bullet in his brain. However, after the Trayvon Martin 
case, which involved a Neighborhood Watch operation run amok, this argument may 
be harder to make.

6. Everyone talks about healing, but the healing can't start until the media 
leaves town

Victims and their friends and families are inclined to talk to the media in 
the first flush of shock after the shootings, but they are barely in control of 
their emotions and the experience sometimes serves to traumatize them still 
further. Psychologists and veterans of school shootings say mourning has to 
occur in privacy, not on national television.

After a student killed two classmates and himself in Springfield, Oregon in 
1998, the school principal banned the media from his campus, and never let them 
back in. It will be a while before the dead of Aurora can truly rest in peace.
 