
Anita Brookner <https://www.theguardian.com/books/anita-brookner>, a Cambridge 
University art historian, was the surprise winner of the £15,000 Booker Prize 
for fiction last night. The judges described her fourth novel Hotel du Lac as 
"a work of perfect artifice." Their choice was unexpected for bookmakers as 
well as book people. She was rated a 6-1 outsider. J. G. Ballard was considered 
such a runaway favourite for his prison camp story Empire of the Sun that 
Ladbrokes stopped taking bets on him yesterday when he stood at 6-4 on.

Dr. Brookner's win continues the fashion for novels about the difficulties of 
writers. Dr Brookner, aged 46, has been Reader at the Courtauld Institute since 
1977, and is a fellow of New Hall, Cambridge. In 1967 she became the first 
woman to be appointed Slade Professor of Art. Her parents were Poles who 
changed their name from Bruckner – "like calling yourself Batehoven," she said 
in a Guardian interview in which she confessed to feeling socially invisible. 
"I am used as a listener by a great many people," she said.

The Booker judges' chairman, Professor Richard Cobb, said her novel was 
"written with dry humour, minutely observed and always at a very low key". This 
gave it the "elegance and apparent simplicity of the 18th century".

W. L. Webb writes: Hotel du Lac is an elegant and fashionable, though not 
untroubled, comedy which deposits "a writer of romantic fiction under a more 
thrusting name" among the rum guests of a lakeside Swiss hotel.

Dr Brookner is an accomplished arrival on the scene. Full of talent of a 
rarefied kind, she has been widely reviewed. This is not, however, a novel of 
unique and original vision, as is Ballard's Empire of the Sun. Nor was Dr 
Brookner's novel likely to have been considered as brilliantly inventive as 
Small World, or the mix of fiction and literary biography which Julian Barnes 
produced in Flaubert's Parrot. As Penelope Lively, one of the other runners-up, 
said in a recent interview, we British "like the light and satirical way." Ah, 
we do, we do.

From the Diary…

Doris Lessing <https://www.theguardian.com/books/dorislessing>, a follower of 
Sufi Idris Shah, and, in her own words, "a very practical sort of mystic" 
delivered the manuscripts of her latest book on Friday, the day of the Brighton 
bombing. Fellow mystics will be interested to learn it is called The Terrorist 
and concerns the bombing of a hotel.
Alan Rusbridger

JG Ballard never won the Booker prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booker-prize> – 1984 was the only year he 
was shortlisted. The Good Terrorist by Doris Lessing was shortlisted for the 
prize in 1985.
 