
 SPRING 1999

I'm making my first film, Ratcatcher, when Alan Warner's novel Morvern Callar 
is recommended to me. I'm attracted to the title character because she is so 
subversive. [Her boyfriend dies suddenly, leaving behind a finished novel which 
she sends to a publishers in her name before going on holiday with her best 
friend.]

Warner had actually written a couple of draft scripts before giving up, so 
after I finished editing Ratcatcher I spent eight months working on the script 
with my co-writer Liana Dognini. It was an arduous task, trying to distil the 
essence of a book that reads as one long existential monologue in which she 
never attempts to explain her motivation.

 SPRING 2001: CASTING 

 I cast Samantha Morton as Morvern on the strength of a photograph. I saw her 
in Under the Skin but don't recognise her now. She looks like a girl sitting on 
a train, very lost and alone, but there is something about her that draws you 
in. For the role of Lanna, Morvern's best friend, I hire an actor called Des 
Hamilton to help casting. He finds hairdresser Kathleen McDermott out shopping 
in Glasgow. She has no acting experience and is taken aback at first by his 
approach but calls him a few days later and comes to an audition. McDermott is 
funny and natural in front of camera. I don't think she knows who Morton is or 
even cares, but they quickly became friends which is vital for the film.

 MAY-JULY 2001: FILMING 

 The novel begins in an unspecified location, but Warner had lived in Oban, so 
it feels right to film the Scottish section here. All the places are real [the 
port, Morvern's flat, the Mantrap bar]. For the party scene, we throw a huge 
party for the locals and film around them. The second half of the film takes 
place in Spain where Morvern and Lanna go on holiday. Almería was perfect 
because there is a large tourist resort and an amazing desert. For the scene 
where the pair go to a local festival, the villagers of Ohanes are really 
excited about being on camera and offer to stage their annual religious 
festival a couple of months early so we can film it.

 NOVEMBER 2001: FIRST SCREENING 

 It's nerve-wracking but rewarding to show it to an audience outside the film 
industry. A group of Warp Records staff [who are releasing the sound track] see 
it first, and like it. Someone says it's like a modern day Easy Rider - I'm not 
sure I agree but am pleased with the comparison.

 MAY 2002: CANNES FILM FESTIVAL 

 Disappointed not be included in the main competition but feel the Director's 
Fortnight sidebar is the right place for us. In the past, I've found the 
festival too surreal, but enjoy it this time. The Cannes premiere is very 
important: if it doesn't do well here, it probably won't do well anywhere, but 
the response is good and we will eventually win the Young Audience award. I am 
almost sitting under my seat during the film. Every little noise drives me 
insane; I feel like punching the culprit.

Getting married to my boyfriend Rory is a last-minute thing. We have a 
fantastic French publicist who arranges everything. We hire an old sailing 
boat, invite a handful of close friends and the captain does the honours. You 
are legally required to be 12 miles out in international water, but I'm not 
sure we go that far. During the ceremony we hear screaming coming from an 
island and think that someone is being murdered. We look over and see a couple 
of naked ladies and a camera crew making a porn film: we have to ring the 
boat's bell to get them to shut up. It is absurd, straight out of a Fellini 
film. I've been so busy since then that we haven't had our honeymoon yet.

 AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 2002: TELLURIDE AND TORONTO FILM FESTIVALS 

 Since Cannes I've been travelling around the world showing Morvern Callar at 
various festivals: Edinburgh, San Sebastián, Telluride and Toronto. Telluride 
was special. They only pick 27 films from around the world and the audiences 
are eclectic, ranging from OAPs to cowboys. I wonder how the film will go down 
but it's a success. I particularly enjoyed Toronto because people queue round 
the block to see everything. A lot of people stay for the Q&A, which is 
something I normally don't like doing, but this time the conversation is lively.

 OCTOBER 2002 

 It's interesting to go to Cannes and all the other festivals but the real 
response comes when the film opens so I'm anticipating that. I'm also involved 
with the next project [an adaptation of Alice Sebold's Lovely Bones ] so it 
feels like time to move on. After living with a film for a couple of years, 
it's a relief to go on to something else.

· Lynne Ramsay <https://www.theguardian.com/film/lynne-ramsay> was talking to 
Akin Ojumu.

· Morvern Callar opens on 1 November
 