
Having never considered a career in higher education, I was more than a little 
surprised to find myself on a train heading to London from north Northumberland 
to interview for the position of head of development and alumni relations atSoas
 <http:// www.soas.ac.uk/> - just four days before my wedding no less. In 
reality, Soas was the only place that could have drawn me out of the NGO 
sector. It is a place obsessed with the world and I had wonderful memories of 
my the masters in violence, conflict and development that I had completed there 
a few years earlier.

I was hoping that my status as an alumnus, my fundraising track record with 
Amref <http://www.amref.org/> (African Medical & Research Foundation) and the 
fact that I had bravely faced pre-marital wrath to take the interview, would 
outweigh my woeful knowledge of the higher education sector. The gamble worked 
as two days into my honeymoon with Loretta, I got offered the job. But I 
started with what felt like a dark secret.

Six years earlier, at the end of a very wet and windy three peaks challenge 
<http://www.thethreepeakschallenge.co.uk/>, a friend had innocently asked "what 
next?" and without hesitation I had said: "Let's cycle from London to Cape 
Town." Over the following years I had backed myself into a corner; either I 
became one of those people who talked about doing things from the comfort of 
their home, or I became one who actually did them.

Outside of work I spent every hour researching and planning the route, talking 
to everyone I knew who could possibly help, setting up the charity, engaging 
potential charity partners, designing a website, approaching potential 
equipment sponsors, being knocked back day after day and then seeking regular 
encouragement from my mentors, my friends and family. Loretta agreed that it 
was either now or never and together we formally set upCycle Africa 
<http://www.cycleafrica.org/>, a dozen friends and family members firmly 
committed to joining us for all or part of journey. The juggernaut had started 
to roll.

Back in the office, and also against all of the odds, the Soas alumni 
relations programme was taking off and fundraising was flourishing. From very 
modest roots (raising less than £500,000 a year), we were on target to raise 
over £11 million in the 2011/12 academic year and maximise ourTier 3 Matched 
Funding Scheme <http://www.hefce.ac.uk/pubs/year/2012/cl142012/> status. It 
seemed like a good time to have quiet word with my boss about my plans. 
Thankfully she expressed the perfect balance of regret at my leaving and 
delight at the opportunity that this could present for Soas in engaging their 
Africa-based alumni and those supporters who felt passionate about the region.

And so it was that the Soas network of alumni and supporters came on board 
with Cycle Africa. Michael Palin, Mia Farrow and Tom Stoppard gave their 
support and joined Charley Boorman and Gordon Brown in endorsing Cycle Africa. 
Vaude, the outdoor gear retailer based in Alnwick, where I went to school, and 
where we got married, gave the team tents and panniers and suddenly other 
companies started to give us vital equipment and our house was filling up with 
outdoorsy stuff. We had formally partnered with four street children charities; 
Street Action, Retrak, Street Child Africa and Railway Children then Soas 
alumni and friends ofSoas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/school-of-oriental-and-african-studies> 
started to make donations towards the charity. The juggernaut was now moving 
too fast to step off without a horrible mess. We strapped on our panniers for 
the first time (the night before departure) and wobbled around the streets, my 
overriding emotion was absolute, all-consuming and unmitigated terror.

The next day we joined 100 friends and charity supporters in the Soas precinct 
for our first day to Brighton. The following morning the six Cycle Africa team 
members gathered by the pier and waved goodbye to a much smaller windswept 
group of loved ones. The journey had officially begun.

As I write this, in Maputo, 9,000 miles down the road and eleven months later, 
it is amazing to think how far we have come and the memories and stories we 
have created: the early days of meandering along the gentle Danube river, our 
first Soas alumni event in Istanbul, being shot with pellet guns by 
over-excited children on Eid in Jordan, arriving in Cairo on election day and 
having the pyramids all to ourselves, randomly meeting a former Soas student 
now election monitor in the Nile valley, the kindness of strangers bringing us 
tea in the burning Nubian desert of Sudan, the mountains of Ethiopia, the 
rolling hills, awful drivers and sweltering heat of Uganda, the man who sang us 
a song at the top of a hill in Rwanda, sadly waving goodbye to a group of four 
and five year olds as they skipped back towards another night on the streets of 
Bujumbura, 500 miles of sand and mud roads in Tanzania, the relative calm and 
anonymity of Zambia and Zimbabwe, lovely receptions by alumni groups and 
British high commissioners (most with a Soas background!) in cities along the 
route, and most recently, the charm and beaches of Mozambique.

What next? This was the question asked at the end of the three peak challenge 
that resulted in this outrageous expedition so I'm loathe to answer it. 
However, after having a year away from our families and friends, we think that 
it would be good to spend some time at home. It's been a really tough year for 
me. Apart organising and executing an expedition and committing to cycling 
10,000 miles through the most challenging terrain on earth, I've also 
encountered personal tragedy.

Still, we've had an incredible year and as the finish line approaches in a few 
weeks time I find myself looking back to that day of the interview, pondering 
the impact that Soas has had along the way and wondering if my dream would ever 
have taken flight had that day gone differently.

Follow Craig and Loretta's last few weeks to Cape Town on Twitter @cycleafrica 
<https://twitter.com/cycleafrica>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 