
It's quite a lifestyle change – from renting a $32,000-a-month mansion from 
Donald Trump to driving around in a Winnebago-style recreational vehicle with 
the US marshals service in hot pursuit.

The plot is thickening by the day around Samuel Israel, founder of a hedge 
fund called Bayou Group who went on the run on June 9 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/jun/18/suicide.fraudster.wanted> – 
the day he was supposed to report to prison for fiddling investors out of $450m 
(£225m).

Israel's car was found on a bridge in upstate New York with the keys in the 
ignition and the name of the MASH theme tune, "suicide is painless", etched in 
dust on the bonnet.

All too aware of Israel's trickster past, the Feds never bought the idea that 
he had jumped. After initially claiming she had found a suicide note, his 
girlfriend, Debra Ryan, this week cracked under questioning and admitted that 
she helped him pack a load of belongings – including a motor scooter - into a 
recreational vehicle ready for an extended road trip.

With echoes of the chase for Dr Richard Kimble in "The Fugitive", the US 
marshals service has issued a picture of a huge white Freelander camper van 
with a dent on its rear passenger side.

"Israel may be at RV [recreational vehicle] parks, camp grounds or highway 
rest areas," said the marshals' wanted notice. "Suspect should be considered 
armed and dangerous."

When he was sentenced to a 20-year prison sentence in April, Israel became one 
of the most villainous names to emerge from the lightly regulated hedge funds 
industry.

He was accused of operating a Ponzi-style scheme, inventing fake investments 
to satisfy clients as his fund's value wobbled. The fund used a phony auditing 
firm and issued untruthful results to its investors. In court, Israel told his 
former customers: "I lied to you and I cheated you and I cannot put into words 
how sorry I am."

Not sorry enough, based on his subsequent conduct. Israel's lawyers convinced 
judge Colleen McMahon that he had an addiction to painkillers, a dicky ticker 
and severe back problems. She allowed him to stay out on bail pending medical 
treatment.

It seems that rather than having a back operation, Israel was making elaborate 
plans for a Thelma and Louise-style jaunt around the country. His girlfriend 
has revealed that he woke her the morning of his disappearance and persuaded 
her to help him move his RV to an interstate rest stop before giving him a lift 
home. She has been charged with aiding a fugitive and faces up to 10 years 
inside.

The situation is provoking a few sniggers. Israel's pseudonyms, according to 
US marshals, include Sam Ryan and David S Clapp. A presenter on one morning 
news program wondered aloud why anybody would choose the name "Clapp".

It does, however, highlight ongoing questions about America's ferocious 
punishment of white-collar criminals. Israel's sentence rivals the 24-year 
stretch handed to Enron's boss Jeffrey Skilling and the 25-year punishment 
given to the WorldCom fraudster Bernard Ebbers.

For Israel, a man of 48 in questionable health, the prospect of two decades in 
prison provides little hope of rehabilitation.

"Twenty years for a defendant like this is basically a life sentence," Evan 
Barr, a former federal prosecutor, told the New York Times. "So Mr Israel may 
well have concluded it was worth the risk of trying to flee given that the 
maximum additional penalty for bail jumping would only tack on another 10 years 
of jail time."

Attitudes are harder towards corporate crime in the US than in Europe – partly 
because Americans tend to be more engaged in the markets. About half of 
Americans are invested in the stockmarket, compared to a third of British 
people, and a higher proportion actively manage their retirement arrangements 
rather than relying on corporate plans.

With a paunch and a bald dome, Israel makes for an unlikely fugitive. His 
disappearance is a considerable embarrassment to his defence lawyers from a 
firm called Morvillo, Abramowitz, Grand, Iason, Anello and Bohrer. It'sthe 
second client this firm has mislaid in high-profile circumstances 
<http://cityroom.blogs.nytimes.com/2008/06/13/a-lawyer-with-two-clients-at-large/>
 – its attorneys also defended Comverse Technologies boss Kobi Alexander who 
did a moonlight flit to Namibia and is resisting extradition attempts.

Naturally, Israel's flit has left his victims unimpressed. Lee Hennessee, an 
investment adviser whose clients lost big-time on Bayou Group, told the Wall 
Street Journal: "I believe he's dead as far as I can throw him."

Ross Intelisano, a lawyer for others who lost money, told the New York Post 
<http://www.nypost.com/seven/06112008/news/regionalnews/suicide_is_brainless_115003.htm>
: "Unless they find a body, I think he's on the lam."

· This article was amended on Tuesday June 24 2008. Dr Richard Kimble was The 
Fugitive, not Jack Ryan. This has been corrected.
 