
To most, it would be an unimaginable fortune. To Lakshmi Mittal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lakshmi-mittal>, it probably feels like 
pocket change.

Britain's richest man, the steel magnate at the helm of ArcelorMittal, 
disclosed yesterday that he had made another £1bn or so during 2007; the result 
of returning cash to shareholders through special dividends and a share 
buyback. The world's leading steel group posted record earnings of almost $20bn 
(£10.17bn) last year. ArcelorMittal said sales rose last year to $105.2bn. Its 
results reflect not only the continued booming global demand for steel but an 
ability to pass on price increases caused by huge rises in commodity costs.

Mittal is ranked the world's fifth richest man by Forbes, with a personal 
fortune of $51bn, and his family owns 43% of the steel group. The company said 
it returned $4.4bn to shareholders last year, including $1.8bn in cash 
dividends and $2.6bn in share buybacks.

The Mittal fortune will swell still further this year. The company said the 
payout in 2008 would be $3.1bn, including $2.1bn in cash dividends and $1bn in 
share buybacks. Officials said Mittal would gain another £900m or so.

Mittal was typically unassuming and even downbeat during the results 
presentation at the company headquarters in Luxembourg, playing down the recent 
award of a Spanish honour as one for the entire group. But the steel baron, 
born to a poor family in Rajasthan in 1950, is renowned for an immodest 
lifestyle. Five years ago, the entrepreneur, who moved to London in 1995, left 
his Hampstead home after paying £70m for formula one chief Bernie Ecclestone's 
lavish neo-Palladian house in Kensington Palace Gardens.

Known as the Taj Mittal, the house, said to be the world's most expensive 
private home, contains marble imported from the quarry mined to build the Taj 
Mahal as well as a Turkish baths, a ballroom, a bejewelled swimming pool and 
oak-panelled picture gallery. Mittal reportedly spent more than £30m on the 
wedding of his daughter, Vanisha, at the Vaux le Vicomte chateau in France, in 
June 2004, with an engagement party staged at Versailles two days earlier.

A regular donor to the Labour party, Mittal ran into controversy in 2001 when 
he gave the party £125,000 just before the general election - allegedly in 
exchange for a letter from Tony Blair to the Romanian government supporting 
Mittal's bid for the country's steel industry. Both denied the charge.

Often criticised for lack of investment in steel plants he has bought in 
former communist countries, Mittal again apologised for last month's accident 
in a Kazakh mine, which cost 30 lives and brought a $70m fresh injection of 
capital. He also faced questioning over his plans to cut 600 jobs at a steel 
mill in Lorraine, France, where the government supported his appointment to the 
board of EADS, the group that owns Airbus.

The wealth for the man credited with creating the world's first 100m-tonne 
steel company will continue to accrue. Mittal said in Luxembourg that the 
group, forged last year from the merger between his eponymous company and 
Arcelor after a bitter takeover battle, would earn a further $5bn in the 
current quarter despite the global economic slowdown and credit crunch. But 
shares in the group fell by about 4% despite his reassuring words about 
continued growth in "favourable conditions", with any decline in the US more 
than offset by strong demand in China and other emerging markets.

Emerging markets now account for 60% of global consumption. Mittal said just 
2% growth in Chinese demand would compensate for an 8% decline in US volumes. 
"In spite of the US potential recession and the credit crisis the steel 
industry has been able to differentiate itself from the industrial 
environment," he said. "There will be a better 2008."

One reason for this, he indicated, is that China had taken action to cut 
exports, close environmentally unfriendly or non-viable plants, and raise 
domestic consumption. This would enable steelmakers to raise prices in the US 
and Europe. Mittal said it had also generated $1.4bn of synergies by the end of 
2007 and would reach the 2008 target of $1.6bn by the end of the current 
quarter. He said the group had made 35 acquisitions last year and saw 20m 
tonnes of organic growth potential on top.

ArcelorMittal said it had shipped 110m tonnes of steel during the year, 
virtually the same as in 2006. Net earnings in the final quarter were flat, at 
$2.4bn, compared with the last three months of 2006.

A fortune in figures

The amount to which ArcelorMittal's sales increased last year $105.2bn

Lakshmi Mittal's personal fortune. He is ranked the world's fifth richest man 
$51bn

The sum Mittal paid the F1 boss Bernie Ecclestone for his Kensington mansion 
£70m

The reported cost of Vanisha Mittal's French wedding, paid for by her father 
£30m
 