
The River Cafe, London

The grower Simon Hewitt The chef Ruth Rogers
Some of our best known chefs, including Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall, Jamie 
Oliver, Sam Clark, Stevie Parle and April Bloomfield worked at the River Cafe. 
The garden is crucial, and this is as much about its fresh produce and 
seasonality as it is about creating an aesthetically pleasing environment. Ruth 
Rogers and the lateRose Gray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/feb/28/rose-gray-obituary> 
created it soon after starting the restaurant in 1987. Most of the staff work 
in the garden in their spare time, from chefs to the team in the office.

Simon and Ruth's kitchen garden secrets

Hazel tipis: Train indeterminate tomatoes up hazel tipis, growing four plants 
against each tipi. Simon allows the first side shoot of each plant to grow, 
tying it against the main shoot. This way he gets eight productive shoots from 
four plants.
Sun and shade: Shade can often inhibit flowering in some plants, but it does 
not stop them trying to develop leaves. So plant fruiting crops in the sun and 
place salad leaves in the shadier parts of your plot.
Sowing deadline: Winter crops such as cavolo nero should be started in early 
summer. Sowing any later than midsummer is pointless as plants do not have time 
to reach a worthwhile size before the chills of autumn curtail their growth. 
Big cavolo nero plants in autumn will provide plenty of big healthy leaves for 
ribollita in winter.
Three crops from the same plant: Sow autumn broad beans in late summer, so you 
can then harvest the tips of already sturdy plants for a warm, mid-autumn day's 
salad. The chefs at the River Cafe also serve the growing tips of broad beans 
in early summer, followed by the beans.

The River Cafe Sorrel frittata recipe
 Sorrel frittata. Photograph: Jason Ingram for Observer Food Monthly 
This frittata is a welcome addition to antipasti or on its own, and the sorrel 
in the recipe gives this dish a vibrant lemony flavour and is very fresh.

Serves 2

sorrel leaves a large handful, tough stalks removed
organic free-range eggs 4 large
olive oil 4 tbsp, plus some to drizzle
butter 20g
mascarpone cheese 150g
parmesan cheese 50g, freshly grated

Preheat the oven to 230C/gas mark 8. Roughly chop the sorrel. Break the eggs 
into a bowl and lightly beat.

Season the eggs with salt and pepper, then add half the sorrel. Heat the olive 
oil and butter in a medium-sized, ovenproof frying pan, tilting the pan to coat 
the surface. Add the egg mixture and, almost immediately, half the mascarpone, 
pushing the it into the thickening egg mixture with a wooden spoon.

When the frittata is almost set, add the remaining sorrel leaves and 
mascarpone. Scatter with 1 tablespoon parmesan and drizzle with a little olive 
oil. Season with salt and pepper and place in the oven for 1-2 minutes.

Remove from the oven when the frittata is crisp on the edges and slightly 
runny in the centre. Loosen the frittata from the pan with a spatula and serve 
on a warm plate. Scatter over the remaining parmesan.

Albion, London, and Hampshire

Jonathan Chidsey started as a trainee with Sir Terence Conran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/terence-conran> in 1980. Jonathan speaks 
to the chef at Albion in Shoreditch at the start of each week to let him know 
what is ready in Conran's Barton Court kitchen garden in Hampshire.

Jonathan and Sir Terence's kitchen garden secrets
 Sir Terence Conran and Jonathan Chidsey in the Barton Court kitchen garden. 
Photograph: Jason Ingram for Observer Food Monthly 
Vertical courgettes: If you are short of space in your garden sow climbing 
courgettes. The Black Forest variety will reach 1.75m. Vertically grown 
courgettes are much easier to pick than those on bushy plants, so you will not 
end up overlooking some of the fruits.
Double duty: A good example of companion planting is placing nasturtiums (
Tropaeolum majus) next to your brassicas. Not only does this look colourful but 
the nasturtiums also attract cabbage white butterflies, and hopefully they will 
lay their eggs on the flowers and not on your precious cabbages.
Confine roots: Grow chillies, sweet peppers and aubergines in 25cm/10in pots 
rather than in open ground, as a restricted root space will encourage plants to 
produce a heavier and healthier crop.
Baby leeks: A nice summer alternative to spring onions. Sow as normal but do 
not thin out.

Albion ratatouille recipe
 Albion ratatouille recipe Photograph: Jason Ingram 
A classic summer vegetable stew that has many variations. Should the 
vegetables be cooked separately and be mixed only at the final stage? Should 
you use red or green peppers? Do you cook ratatouille on the top of the stove 
or in the oven? This ratatouille is best left for 24 hours before eating, to 
give it a nice firm texture.

Serves 4
olive oil 200ml
courgettes 6, sliced
onions 3, sliced
red peppers 2, cored, deseeded and sliced
aubergines 2, quartered and thickly sliced
garlic cloves 4, finely sliced
tomatoes 8, skinned, deseeded and quartered
thyme large sprig
bay leaf

Preheat the oven to 180C/gas mark 4. Heat half the oil in a large frying pan 
and sauté the courgettes gently. When softened and turning golden, transfer 
them to an ovenproof casserole, leaving as much oil as possible in the frying 
pan.

Cook the onions gently in the frying pan, until wilted, then add to the 
courgettes in the casserole. Sauté the red peppers in the frying pan until 
softened, and add them to the casserole. Add more oil to the frying pan if 
required and cook the aubergines until they are just turning golden. Transfer 
them to the casserole.

Gently sauté the garlic until it just turns transparent, then add the tomatoes 
to the frying pan. Season with salt and pepper, and cook until the tomatoes are 
very soft. Together with the thyme and bay leaf, tip the garlic and tomatoes 
into the casserole, stirring gently to distribute the tomatoes among the other 
vegetables.

Cover with a lid and cook in the oven for 20 minutes. Take off the lid and 
cook for a further 35 minutes.

Add the remaining olive oil and allow to cool completely. Then cover the 
casserole again and keep the contents for 24 hours before serving at room 
temperature.

Leeks vinaigrette recipe
 Leeks vinaigrette recipe. Photograph: Jason Ingram 
When they are young and slender, leeks make an ideal light starter or 
vegetable accompaniment. Very thin leeks can be hard to come by, so if you 
cannot source them use larger ones, split lengthways – this dish will still 
work well. The intense flavour of the vinaigrette (yes, two tablespoons of 
Dijon mustard!) really lifts the whole dish perfectly.

Serves 4
slender leeks 8, trimmed and cleaned
hard-boiled eggs 2, coarsely chopped or put through a potato ricer, to garnish

For the vinaigrette
red wine vinegar 2 tbsp
olive oil 14 tsp
Dijon mustard 2 tbsp

Put the leeks into a large shallow saucepan of slightly salted, boiling water; 
cook for 7-10 minutes. Remove the cooked leeks and drain thoroughly.

For the vinaigrette, mix the vinegar, olive oil and mustard together. Season 
with salt and pepper.

Arrange the leeks on a shallow dish and drizzle with lots of vinaigrette.

Scatter the chopped eggs over the leeks and pour the rest of the vinaigrette 
over the finished dish.

Le Manoir Aux Quat' Saisons, Oxfordshire
 Le Manoir with Raymond Blanc. Photograph: Jason Ingram 
The garden is open to hotel guests and tours, yet is also a vital working 
element of Le Manoir. It is part trial area (where up to 50 varieties of a 
single vegetable will be cultivated) and part laboratory (where chefs taste 
each variety to see which will make it to the menu).

Anne-Marie Owens and Raymond Blanc's kitchen garden secrets

 Choosing a variety: Look out for nurseries' specialist vegetable days around 
the country – they often provide tastings of different varieties.
Tomatoes: Raymond's favourite tomatoes are Roma, Marmande, Costoluto 
Fiorentino, Coeur de Boeuf and San Marzano. Anne-Marie gives them as much space 
as possible as this helps develop a healthy bushy plant as opposed to a leggy 
specimen. She supports plants with canes and pinches out the growing tip of 
each plant when it reaches 1.75m tall. To aid pollination, she taps the plants 
when in flower.
Two is company: Dill is planted next to brassicas and left to flower and 
attract hoverflies. Geraniums (Pelargonium) also attract beneficial insects.
Successional sowing: Sow spinach and radish every 10 days or so from mid‑spring 
to midsummer. Replace summer radishes with the winter variety from then onwards.

Le Manoir's assiette Anne‑Marie recipe
 Le Manoir's assiette Anne‑Marie recipe Photograph: Jason Ingram 
This is a true "garden to plate" dish, and very simple to create.

Serves 4
For the stuffed courgette flowers
garden peas 120g, blanched, refreshed and crushed
mint a sprig, chopped
sea salt 2 pinches
pepper a pinch
extra-virgin olive oil 2 tbsp
whole courgette flowers 4, stigmas and stamens removed

To serve
water 75ml
butter 25g
sea salt a pinch
baby courgettes 2, cut into 1cm pieces
green asparagus spears 8, cut into quarters
baby carrots 8, sliced
purple sprouting broccoli 12 florets
broad beans 30g
garden peas 10g
fresh chervil ½ small bunch, finely chopped
pea shoots 12 sprigs, to garnish

For the stuffed courgette flowers, in a small bowl, mix together the crushed 
peas, mint, salt, pepper and olive oil. Taste, correct the seasoning and put 
some stuffing inside each courgette flower. Place on a steamer tray or in 
a colander over a pan of boiling water covered with a lid, and steam for 
8 minutes.

In a medium-sized saucepan on a high heat, bring the water, butter and salt to 
the boil. Add all the vegetables, cover with a lid and simmer for 3 minutes, 
until tender, then stir in the chervil. Place a hot stuffed courgette flower in 
one corner of each plate and fan out the baby courgettes in the opposite corner.

Spoon the remaining vegetables around the plate and garnish with the pea 
shoots.

River Cottage, Devon

The grower: Craig Rudman
The chef: Gill Meller
The kitchen garden supplies 60% of the produce for Hugh 
Fearnley-Whittingstall's River Cottage in high season.

Craig and Gill's kitchen garden secrets
Perfect soil: 
To grow plants successfully you must look after your soil. For most plants in 
the veg patch, aim towards the holy grail of a free-draining, 
moisture-retentive soil of pH 6.5–7.0.
Water sparingly: Water only when absolutely necessary. If needed, water very 
heavily but infrequently.
Grow hard: Plants given little extra water or nutrition are able to withstand 
pests and diseases better than soft pampered ones. Make the soil and the plants 
do the work.
Take stock: View the garden, plants, soil and the animals within it as an 
interconnected ecosystem. Learn the life cycles of your plants, about 
beneficial insects and pests, and discover how to grow well in an 
environmentally responsible way.

River Cottage peas with ham and cheese recipe


At River Cottage, Gill likes to place bowls of peas in the pod down the supper 
tables, carefully arranged next to bowls of salty pork crackling. This is more 
of an assembly than a recipe. A few simple foods – such as peas and ham; mint 
and peas; ham and cheese – go beautifully well together.

Serves 2-3 as a starter
for the labneh
whole milk yoghurt 1 litre plain
fine sea salt 1 tsp

to serve

podded garden peas handfuls 
ham good-quality, air-dried, 8 slices 
tender pea tops handful, plus any with nice flowers 
mint leaves small 12-16
small nasturtium leaves a few
extra-virgin olive oil
sourdough bread toasted

For the labneh, put the yoghurt in a bowl, add the salt and mix well. Line a 
sieve with a square of scalded muslin or a thin cotton cloth, and place it over 
a bowl. Spoon the yoghurt into the muslin, then flip the sides over the yoghurt 
to enclose it. Transfer to the refrigerator and leave for at least 24 hours and 
up to two or three days. Lots of liquid will drain into the bowl, but you need 
to turn the yoghurt over in the sieve every so often, to encourage it to do 
this evenly. Eventually the yoghurt should end up looking like a soft cheese.

To serve, add the peas to a small saucepan of lightly salted boiling water and 
cook for 1–2 minutes, until just tender. Drain, and refresh in iced water to 
stop the cooking process and help to keep the pea colour. Divide the slices of 
ham between four plates, followed by a spoonful of labneh. Scatter over the 
peas, their tops and flowers, the mint and nasturtium leaves. Trickle with good 
olive oil. Season and serve with toasted sourdough bread.

Jekka McVicar's herb farm, Gloucestershire
 Jekka McVicar. Photograph: Jason Ingram 
Jekka McVicar has grown more than 650 varieties of herbs on her farm near 
Bristol over the last 27 years. Among Jekka's clients is theCompany of Cooks 
<http://www.companyofcooks.com/> – a catering company for venues including the 
Royal Opera House, and RHS Garden Wisley.

Jekka's kitchen garden secrets

Play safe: Use seed compost for container sowing – potting or multipurpose 
compost is too rich in nutrients, and makes the seedlings develop too fast.
Water first: Always water your seed trays and modules before sowing, allowing 
the water to soak through and completely moisten the compost.
Start small: Plant just a few herbs that you are going to use in the kitchen. 
This way you will be able to maintain them and harvest them regularly.
Cut back: Trim thyme, sage, lavender, mint, oregano, hyssop and savoury after 
flowering to encourage the plants to put on new growth for late season 
pickings. It also helps to protect the plants from heavy rain, gales and snow.

The Company of Cooks' grilled mackerel with beetroot recipe
 Grilled mackerel with beetroot. Photograph: Jason Ingram 
Grilled mackerel makes a striking partnership with sweet beetroot and the 
aromatic, aniseed-like notes of fennel tops. Fennel pollen has a sweet and 
intense character .

Serves 4 as a starter
candy-striped beetroot 100g
golden beetroot 100g
red beetroot 100g
sherry vinegar 2 tbsp
lemon oil 6 tbsp
mackerel fillets 4, in 3cm wide slices
extra-virgin olive oil 2 tsp

To serve
fennel tops
fennel pollen 1 tsp to garnish
bergamot flowers to garnish

Dice half the raw beetroot. Bring three small saucepans of salted water to the 
boil and add each beetroot variety to a separate saucepan. Return the water to 
the boil and after 5 seconds drain the beetroot and leave on one side.

Whisk the vinegar with the lemon oil and stir it into the diced beetroot, to 
marinate. Finely slice the remaining beetroot on a mandolin or use a sharp 
knife to cut them into wafer-thin rounds. Sprinkle the mackerel slices with 
salt and pepper, and brush with olive oil. Cook, skin-side facing upwards, 
under a very hot grill for 3 minutes on one side only – until crisp.

To serve, put some fennel tops on each plate and then fold the beetroot slices 
in half and arrange around the fronds. Add a mackerel piece to each plate 
skin-side facing upwards, and scatter with the marinated diced beetroot. 
Drizzle around the marinated beetroot dressing. Sprinkle fennel pollen over the 
mackerel, and finish with more fennel tops and bergamot flowers.

Extracted from Kitchen Garden Experts  
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780711234963>
by Cinead McTernan (Frances Lincoln, RRP £20)
 