
Protests in Hong Kong and continuing worries about UK supermarkets have 
combined to sent leading shares lower once more.

Police in Hong Kong fired tear gas at pro-democracy protestors over the 
weekend, leading to a 2% fall in the Hang Seng index. Financial firms have 
advised staff to work from home on Monday following the unrest.Standard 
Chartered, which said certain services would be temporarily suspended, is down 
20p at 1154.5p whileHSBC is 8.2p lower at 642p.

Meanwhile investors are awaiting J Sainsbury's second quarter results this 
week with some trepidation in the wake ofTesco's shock accounting problems 
revealed last Monday. Analysts fear Sainsbury sales could be down by 3% to 4%, 
as discounters continue to take market share. Sainsbury last week unveiled 
price cuts on 1,200 items as the war between grocers continues to escalate.

Sainsbury is down 3.9p to 246.2p, Tesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> is down 3.4p at 188.15 as Morgan 
Stanley cut its price target from 230p to 190p, andMorrisons is 2.2p lower at 
168.8p.

Overall the FTSE 100 is down 6.33 points at 6643.06, ahead of the European 
Central Bank meeting on Thursday when more details on its plans to stimulate 
the flagging eurozone economy should be unveiled. Investors will also be 
cautious ahead of Friday's US non-farm payroll numbers.

Elsewhere Balfour Beatty has slumped 22% to 175.6p after its fifth profit 
warning in two years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/sep/29/balfour-beatty-shares-plunge-25-percent>
. Not good timing forFriday's raised recommendation from Deutsche Bank. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2014/sep/26/balfour-beatty-buy-note-lifts-shares>

But Petrofac has put on 30p to £10.40 after Credit Suisse moved from neutral 
to outperform, saying:
 Petrofac shares have been too heavily de-rated and at close to 1000p (a 4 
year low) we feel they offer compelling value, with a robust balance of risk 
versus reward.

Valuation is the main driver. But other factors are material - backlog and 
tendering outlook are strong, and Petrofac is more defensive than many 
engineering and construction peers by having limited offshore exposure, a 
significant proportion of national oil company clients, and an excellent record 
for winning and executing onshore lump sum projects. Recent director dealing is 
also supportive, and the chief executive's 18% stake plus a solid balance sheet 
underpin sustained dividend payout.

Among the mid-caps Micro Focus International has been lifted 41p to £10.72 as 
UBS raised its rating from neutral to buy with a £11.40 price target in the 
wake of its planned purchase of US rival Attachmate Group. UBS said:
 Attachmate should lift Micro Focus into the middleweight league of system 
software vendors ($1.3bn), albeit still some way below the likes of IBM 
($28.7bn), HP ($5.0bn) and CA ($4.3bn) in terms of scale. The assets being 
bought are of decidedly mixed quality, ranging from SUSE, the No 2 Linux 
business tracking a market growing at high single- digits, to the NetWare PC 
operating system which is in terminal decline.

While the current financial owners have significantly boosted profits at the 
Attachmate group (reducing headcount by at least 40% since making their 
original purchases), Micro Focus's management has a good record of optimising 
cost structures and we note that its revenue per employee run-rate is 27% 
higher than that of Attachmate. Management is also heavily incentivised to 
deliver returns; at least a further 200p of returns is needed by November 2017 
before any of the newly-created executive option schemes can vest.

Back in the FTSE 100, Aberdeen Asset Management has added 8.9p to 408.4p as it 
reported a rise in assets from £322.5bn at the end of June to £331.2bn, helped 
by an improvement in sentiment and a slowdown in money leaving its funds. 
Stuart Duncan at Peel Hunt said:
 Today's trading update reported growth in assets under management over the 
two months to end of August, albeit this was driven by market movements. Flows 
are still negative, but vastly improved over the previous quarter. We retain 
our hold recommendation, with the yield remaining an important attraction.

Aberdeen has been relatively weak recently, albeit performance has been 
relatively comparable with Henderson over the last three months. The shares now 
trade...broadly in line with the sector. The yield also now stands at 4.4%, 
rising to 4.9%, and this looks increasingly attractive given the potential for 
upside surprise arising from the underlying cash generation from the business. 
Our recommendation remains hold for now, although our inclination is to turn 
more positive on any further weakness.  