
Leading shares have recovered some ground after their falls at the end of last 
week, after inital disappointment with the Euroepean Central Bank’s latest 
stimulus measures.

Comments from ECB president Mario Draghi over the weekend seem to have been 
taken more positively, as he reassured investors that the central bank would 
take whatever measures were necessary to support the eurozone economy.

Meanwhile better than expected US jobs data on Friday, while reinforcing the 
view that the Federal Reserve will raise US rates this month, also provided 
some comfort about the state of the world’s second largest economy.

Insurers are among the gainers after the Bank of England gave the green light 
to 19 institutions on their internal models on solvency levels.

Prudential has put on 24.5p to £15.30 as it said it would be the first insurer 
to update on its capital position under new EU solvency rules. It plans an 
update on 19 January, while others will issue statements alongside annual 
results a month or so later. The optimism in the sector has lifted Legal & 
Generalby 3p to 270.3p and Aviva 6p to 513.5p. Eamonn Flanagan at Shore Capital 
said:

At that stage, all focus is likely to be on the actual headroom, the coverage 
ratios and the expected implications, if any, on dividend policies. No doubt, 
we will have an increasing level of commentary on the companies as the 
respective announcement dates approach…our view remains, that any dividend 
policies that have been elucidated to date, think Legal & General, will remain 
intact (bearing in mind the various speeches made on the subject by the PRA in 
recent months).

Elsewhere ITV has added 5.2p to 273.1p after the Guardian reported an expected 
bumper advertising spend for broadcasters over Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/07/christmas-tv-ad-spend-record-black-friday-cyber-monday>
. In a buy note Ian Whittaker at Liberum said:


ITV <https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv> said it expected December ad 
spend to be up 4% at its interim management statement last month so - at least 
- they should meet that target and probably exceed it.

Overall the FTSE 100 is currently up 45.59 points at 6283.88.

But with Opec deciding not to cut oil production, crude is under pressure 
again, with Brent down 0.8% at $42.63 a barrel. SoRoyal Dutch Shell B shares 
are leading the FTSE 100 fallers, down 28.5p at £15.71 whileBP is close behind, 
6.05p lower at 353.65.

BG, which Shell is in the throes of buying, has fallen 7p to £10.18. Tony 
Cross, market analyst at Trustnet Direct, said:

The idea of $20 oil is being tabled once again and this could well see those 
questions being repeated as to exact value that sits in theBG 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bggroup> Group acquisition.

Outsourcing group Serco has slid nearly 8% to 105.6p after it warned on 2016 
revenues and profits, due to the sale of an offshore call centre business and 
the loss of a number of contracts.
 