
Weakness in the mining sector pulled leading shares back from recent record 
highs, but insurerAviva bucked the market’s downward trend.

Its shares rose 6.5p to 561.5p as a number of brokers began coverage again 
following the completion of its deal to buy Friends Life. Barclays, Morgan 
Stanley and JP Morgan all issued overweight ratings, on the prospect of a 
stronger balance sheet and dividend increases after the acquisition. Barclays 
said:

The Friends Life acquisition is a transformational deal for Aviva. Prior to 
suspension, we were underweight on Aviva with a view that its balance sheet was 
weaker than the market believed, and would have taken several years to fix. 
Along with significantly strengthening the balance sheet immediately, Friends 
significantly improves the group’s cash generation. Furthermore, we had 
believed Friends to be an underappreciated highly cash generative asset with an 
over- capitalized balance sheet, and little gearing. We believe investors’ 
focus in 2015 will increasingly be on capital resilience given the 
implementation of Solvency 2, and also on income.Aviva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/avivabusiness> now offers both a strong, 
well diversified balance sheet and a very attractive dividend profile coupled 
with restructuring opportunities.

Aviva’s last three chief executives have all cut the dividend, but we believe 
the acquisition of the cash generative Friends will make Aviva a dividend stock 
again. We forecast a dividend of 29.5p in 2017 (5.3% yield), in line with 
Aviva’s 50% payout target.


We see no reason why Aviva could not pay out 100% of its net cash generation 
of £1.6bn or 40.7p a share, equivalent to a 7.3% yield, by 2017. In this 
scenario, if the yield dropped to 5%, the stock would be trading on 812p, 
offering a potential 46% upside in this scenario.


Morgan Stanley was also positive:


Following the completion of the Friends transaction, we believe Aviva shares 
can re-rate as cost synergies are delivered and the dividend is increased. Our 
new price target of 633p offers 15% upside potential.

And JP Morgan Cazenove said:


Following a period of restriction, we are moving to an overweight 
recommendation and December 2016 622p target price as we see Aviva to be well 
placed in the UK life insurance market following the acquisition of Friends 
Life. Key points we flag are: 1) high free cash flow yield (free cash flow 
yield of 5.6% versus UK life insurer average of 4.4% in 2016), 2) better 
capitalized business as the Friends Life acquisition has reduced the risk in 
the business with complementary risk profiles and also helped reduce the 
leverage to around 36% by 2015 and 3) growth prospects in UK life business and 
asset management have increased due to the increased scale, albeit, it could 
take couple of years for growth to be visible in IFRS earnings we believe.

But the rise in Aviva was not enough to keep the FTSE 100 in positive 
territory, with the index closing down 25.47 points at 7064.30 ahead of 
Tuesday’s UK inflation data and amid uncertainty over the outcome of the 
forthcoming election after conflicting poll results.


A major factor was disappointing trade data from China which renewed doubts 
about the country’s future economic growth, hitting the commodities sector. A 
series of downgrades from Citigroup and the prospect of Standard & Poor’s 
cutting its ratings on a number of miners to reflect falling iron ore prices 
did not help sentiment. SoBHP Billiton lost 47.5p to £14.16, Antofagasta fell 
18.5p to 722p andAnglo American dropped 23.3p to 998.7p.

Rio Tinto was 23p lower at £28.14 despite analysts at Bernstein renewing the 
suggestion thatGlencore, down 4.5p at 285.15p, might return to bid for the 
mining group:

We still believe that the logic behind the combination is compelling, despite 
the fact that the deal cannot be justified at spot commodity prices. If Rio 
falls further on the crashing iron ore price, or the iron ore price recovers,
Glencore <https://www.theguardian.com/business/glencore> could pounce.

Miners were not the only companies hit by the weak Chinese figures. Burberry 
lost 28p to £17.78 on concerns of a luxury goods slowdown in the region.


Retailers also suffered from concerns that Tuesday’s UK inflation figures 
could see a negative figure. SoTesco fell 6.7p to 244.30p and Marks & Spencer 
ended down 8.5p at 567p.

But banks were in favour, with HSBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/hsbcholdings> 5.9p higher at 618p as 
Morgan Stanley raised its recommendation:

Challenges remain on revenue, capital, and complexity, but with the stock now 
close to our price target and upside broadly in line with the sector, we 
upgrade HSBC to equal weight [from underweight], noting that the stock has 
underperformed the STOXX Europe 600 Bank Index by around 17% year to date.

Lower down the market Epistem Holdings jumped nearly 21% to 320p after its 
molecular diagnostic device, Genedrive, received regulatory approval from the 
Indian Drug Authority. The approval allows the company to commercialise 
Genedrive as part of the tuberculosis eradication programme being undertaken in 
India.


Finally three oil explorers active in the Falklands shelved plans to drill a 
second well in the south and east of the region following the sharp drop in 
crude prices. Analysts were generally positive on the news, since it allowed 
the companies to concentrate on other parts of the Falklands.

Of the three, Falklands Oil & Gas was unchanged at 29p, while Noble Energy and 
Edison International saw their US shares slip back. On Falklands Oil & Gas, 
analysts at SP Angel said:

While some observers might point towards today’s news as a negative for the 
company, we believe that the fact that the management team is managing its risk 
profile on a portfolio basis and not becoming too attached to any one 
individual asset is a strong, positive statement.
 