
Ahead of UK inflation figures, which could fall into negative territory, 
leading shares are edging higher.

Banks and mining shares are leading the way, the latter recovering from 
Monday’s China-induced falls.Rio Tinto has risen 46.5p to 2860.5p while BHP 
Billitonis 21p better at £14.37.

Among the financials, Barclays is up 4.45p at 263.90 and Royal Bank of Scotland
has climbed 5p to 358.2p.Barclays <https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay>
 benefited from analysts at Credit Suisse putting it as its second favourite 
European investment bank behind UBS, although they warned further restructuring 
and litigation issues were possible.

Overall there is still caution around, with continuing worries about Greece 
running out of cash before it can reach a deal with its eurozone creditors, the 
uncertainty over the UK election, as well as concerns about when the US will 
raise interest rates. The US reporting season will also be in focus.

Rebecca O’Keeffe at Interactive Investor said:

US earnings look set to drive markets over the next week, as investors hope 
that company results don’t disappoint. Dollar strength and the oil price slump 
have subdued expectations. Companies with overseas earnings will earn less in 
dollar terms. Companies competing in international markets (either at home or 
abroad) are likely to have struggled with lower prices or reduced sales 
volumes. To make matters worse, low oil prices will have affected energy 
companies significantly, while the unexpected cold snap in March will have 
hampered sales more generally.

But for the moment the FTSE 100 is up 13.03 points at 7077.33.

Missing out is Aberdeen Asset Management, down 10.4p at 496.1p after RBC moved 
from sector perform to underperform and cut its target price from 475p to 455p. 
It said:

We reduce our earnings per share forecasts by 8% in 2015, 4% in 2016 and 5% in 
2017. Our forecasts now incorporate higher net outflows and a lower revenue 
yield than we previously anticipated. We reduce our price target by 4% to 455p; 
the decline in our price target is solely the result of the reductions to our 
forecasts.

We see better opportunities elsewhere in our coverage universe after the 
recent share price outperformance. We further believe that a company that is 
experiencing downgrades in an upgrade environment and has a cautious outlook 
(especially compared to the more positive outlooks of its peers) should at 
least trade at a 15% discount to sector averages. Aberdeen’s discount to sector 
averages is too tight in our opinion given its Emerging Market bias and likely 
increase in US interest rates.

Among the mid-caps Tullow Oil has added22.5p to 362p after Citigroup raised 
its recommendation from neutral to buy. The business is seen as a potential bid 
target after recent share price falls and a lowly rating.
 