
Leading shares are heading lower after uninspiring manufacturing data for May, 
worries about Brexit and a US rate rise, as well as caution ahead of the week’s 
US non-farm payroll figures and European Central Bank meeting.

Heading the fallers is building materials group Wolseley, down nearly 6% to 
£38.09. The company has reported reasonable third quarter numbers but cautioned 
on the outlook. Revenues for the three months rose by 10.8% with trading profit 
of £230m up 12.2% and it said full year profts would be in line with analyst 
expectations, before restructuring costs. But it said:

Recent revenue growth trends have been weaker...Demand in several of the 
group’s markets remains subdued and we continue to experience the adverse 
impact of commodity deflation, particularly in the US. Like for like revenue 
growth since the end of the quarter has been 1%.

Canaccord Genuity said:

Third quarter numbers look good with trading profit of £230m ahead of our 
around £215m forecast and the group confirms that it is on track to deliver 
results in line with consensus expectations for the full year.

However, the key focus will be on the outlook comments which state that like 
for like revenue growth in the weeks since the end of the quarter has been only 
1%, which implies a significant slowdown in the US like for like growth 
performance. Consensus is likely to be broadly similar for this year but may be 
shaved a touch to reflect higher restructuring costs.

The key issue is more the outlook for the next financial year and we would 
expect consensus to edge on the side of caution and edge numbers down. The 
shares have enjoyed a good bounce recently and given the current valuation and 
weaker trading in the US recently, they are likely to edge back until there is 
more visibility over the outlook into the next financial year.

Liberum added:


Wolseley <https://www.theguardian.com/business/wolseley> has announced strong 
third quarter figures with like for like sales growth of 2.8% and margins 
improving from 5.9% to 6.3%. However, the strength of the third quarter will 
not feed into improving consensus expectations for the full year because 
management has given lacklustre guidance for the fourth quarter, citing a slow 
start with like for likes slipping to +1%, and management flagging that it 
expects more top line restructuring costs in the fourth quarter. We see the 
shares as close to fair value and believe that the market may be disappointed 
by the slow start to the final quarter.

Stifel said:


A soft update with group like-for-like growth of 2.8% in the third quarter of 
2016 (3 months end April) and commentary that growth in the weeks since the end 
of the quarter has been just 1%. Commodity price deflation remains a headache, 
impacting group growth by 1.4% in the third quarter. The outlook for the full 
year is maintained at current exchange rates. We expect the shares to come 
under some pressure today.

Overall the FTSE 100 is currently down 23.61 points at 6207.18, with news that 
Europe’s manufacturing base slowed to its slowest rate since February, 
stagnation in China, and barely any growth in the UK. On top of that the OECD 
has cut its US and UK growth forecasts.

Worries about a global slowdown have hit the mining sector, as normal. The 
strength of the dollar is also have its usual effect by pushing metal prices 
lower.Anglo American is down 23.6p at 576.5p while Antofagasta has fallen 16.1p 
to 412.9p.

Halfords is another business to unveil a disappointing update. Its shares are 
down 22.5p at 416.1p as the bicycle and car parts group said 2017 were expected 
to be flat, before any adverse foreign exchange movements.

Housebuilders have been hit by concerns over a possible Brexit after Tuesday’s 
Guardian/ICM poll, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/31/uk-voters-leaning-towards-brexit-guardian-poll-reveals>
 withTaylor Wimpey down 5.1p at 200.3p and Persimmon 52p lower at £20.50.
 