
Leading shares have slipped back from record highs, with mining shares under 
pressure after poor Chinese data.

China’s exports fell 15% in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/blog/live/2015/apr/13/chinese-export-fall-raises-growth-fears-live#block-552b6066e4b0acaf1f59be3f>
, while imports fell at their fastest rate since the 2009 financial crisis, 
prompting renewed talk of further central bank stimulus to help boost the 
flagging economy.

But the worries about the country’s growth has sent commodity companies lower, 
withBHP Billiton down 29.5p to £14.34, Anglo American 16p lower £10.06 and 
Antofagasta falling 9.5p to 731p.

The sector has not been helped by a series of downgrades by Citigroup. The 
bank’s analysts have moved from buy to neutral on BHP, from neutral to sell on 
Anglo and have cut Antofagasta’s price target from 690p to 630p with a sell 
rating.

Investec also issued a sell note on BHP ahead of the demerger of some of its 
assets into a new company, South32:

BHP Billiton’s spin-off of South32 is imminent with the shareholder vote just 
over three weeks away. Unfortunately, the divestment process has been 
progressing steadily into an increasingly bearish commodity price market, such 
that our potential valuation for the spin-off has been in continual decline 
throughout. With our latest commodity price deck, our earnings outlook for 
South32 is now flat at best, with growth now dependent on meaningful cost 
reductions, commodity price appreciation or accretive M&A.

Meanwhile analysts at Bernstein have looked at the prospect of a renewed bid 
fromRio Tinto, down 32.5p at 2804.5p, from Glencore, off 2.05p at 287.60p:

Last week, Glencore reached the end of the “put-up or shut-up” period that had 
restricted it from coming back to make a renewed approach to take overRio Tinto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/rio-tinto>. We return to the subject of 
“Glentinto” to see how the deal looks six months on.Under the same structural 
assumptions that we made previously, we still see the deal as accretive for 
Glencore shareholders at consensus commodity price expectations though the deal 
is not as attractive as it was six months ago.We still believe that the logic 
behind the combination is compelling, despite the fact that the deal cannot be 
justified at spot commodity prices. If Rio falls further on the crashing iron 
ore price, or the iron ore price recovers, Glencore could pounce.

 * Overall the FTSE 100 has fallen 22.45 points to 7067.32, with Michael 
Hewson, chief market analyst at CMC Markets, saying:

A bigger than expected slide in both March exports and imports have raised 
concerns about the prospects of the Chinese economy hitting its 7% GDP target 
later this week. Not only did we see exports slide 15%, missing expectations of 
a 10% gain by a large margin, but imports also came in lower, dropping 12.7% 
outside expectations of a 10% slide.

 These data misses raise concerns that not only is the Chinese economy failing 
to rebalance with demand remaining low, but also the global economy’s demand 
for Chinese exports is also falling back raising concerns about the state of 
the global recovery as well.

On a quiet day for corporate news, broker comments are driving many of the 
share price movements. Publishing groupPearson has lost 37p to £14.34 after 
Jefferies moved from buy to underperform, saying:

Be it constraints around public spending, controversy surrounding educational 
change through to the emergence of fundamentally free digital technologies, 
together with the increasing availability of the highest quality, absolutely 
free digital content...execution forPearson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/pearson> as it emerges from restructuring 
will be tough.

Among the risers, Aviva <https://www.theguardian.com/business/avivabusiness> 
has added 12p to 567p as a blackout on much broker research while its purchase 
of Friends Life was completed came to an end. JP Morgan issued an overweight 
rating, as did Morgan Stanley and Barclays.

Meanwhile Merlin Entertainments celebrated its first day in the FTSE 100 - it 
has replaced Friends Life - with a 1.6p rise to 456.7p.
 