
With leading shares edging lower, an exception is Aberdeen Asset Management.

The fund management group is up 15.1p at 366.5p after a report that the 
company’s chief executive Martin Gilbert was courting possible buyers, to help 
halt asset outflows and prevent key staff from leaving.

But a spokesman for Aberdeen denied the story. He told Reuters: “In his 32 
years running Aberdeen, Martin Gilbert has never approached anyone, formally or 
informally, about buying the business.”

Mike van Dulken, head of research at Accendo Markets, said:

While the shares were already rebounding with the wider market on easy 
money/stimulus hopes in October, getting back to 330-350p, the speculation has 
seen the shares break out and gap up to levels last seen in late July. A denial 
is not yet... putting pressure on the shares just yet. Short sellers have 
likely been squeezed out on the recent 20% rebound and don’t fancy another go, 
recent bottom pickers are holding on hoping their proves to be substance in the 
speculation while momentum traders are jumping on board in the hope of a quick 
return to 400p. Will further denial scupper takeover hopes or simply lead to 
claims of the ‘laddie doth protest too much’.

Overall the FTSE 100 has paused for breathe after last week’s rises, which 
were prompted by hints from the European Central Bank about further possible 
action to boost the eurozone economy and a surprise interest rate cut on Friday 
by China’s central bank.

The leading index is currently down 15.23 points at 6428.85, with WPP among 
the leading fallers. The advertising group is 27p lower at £14.53 aftera 
cautious third quarter trading update 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/oct/26/wpp-uk-growth-global-sales-sir-martin-sorrell>
, despite saying it expected to meet its full year target.

Mining shares have edged higher following Friday’s rate cut in China, despite 
the country saying over the weekend thatits 7% growth target was not set in 
stone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/25/chinese-premier-7-percent-growth-target>
.

Antofagasta has added 7.5p at 582p, while Rio Tinto has risen 15p at 2521.5p.
 