
Leading shares are edging higher despite a fall in the oil price and renewed 
fears that the UK may vote to leave the European Union.

But retailers are under pressure as analysts at UBS warned of a more cautious 
outlook for the high street, with uncertainty over Brexit and slower wage 
inflation, as well as foreign exchange effects and the growing impact of 
Amazon. It said:

We take a more cautious view on the UK general retail sector over the next 12 
months as short-term uncertainty over Brexit and wage inflation is compounded 
by foreign exchange issues and the increasing impact of Amazon on the sector. 
The most important transactional currency for UK general retail is the 
pound/dollar and, with a range of 1.55 to 1.25, we calculate that theoretical 
sector earnings impact for 2017 could be between +20% and -40% from current 
spot rates before any mitigation or price increase. History suggests a 
significant degree of mitigation is possible but, in our view, given the 
significantly net importing nature of UK retail, the uncertainty will weigh on 
valuation. After four years of outperformance we believe that the above-average 
sector valuation may normalise as earnings growth slows in the face of the 
above headwinds.

Halfords has dropped more than 6% to 396.6p as UBS downgraded to sell from 
neutral. It said:

Cheaper online competition is not something new for Halfords 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/halfordsgroup> and the focus on service 
and fitting has provided a degree of insulation from this threat. Amazon may be 
able to further penetrate some of these categories especially with same-day 
delivery, but we think on balance there will be larger problems at other 
retailers. The foreign exchange issue however is significant and the prices 
will likely have to be passed through to the consumer to maintain margins and 
with the threat of increased competition this may be hard. On costs the company 
has been quite open on the impact of minimum wages but it is constraining 
earnings growth.

Marks & Spencer is down 2.6p to 414.7p as the bank cut its price target from 
575p to 490p, although it kept its buy recommendation:

Given more challenging conditions over the next few years (pureplay capacity, 
sterling weakness, wage pressures), we are downgrading.. estimates. We now 
assume -1% General Merchandise like for like in 2017 and flat in 2018, and cut 
gross margin estimates by 25 basis points in 2017 and 50 basis points in 2018 
given some increase in supply chain costs. The industry may seek to pass this 
through (as it did successfully five years ago), but the recent value/volume 
data for the sector suggest less pricing power. As per the last comments from 
M&S, we assume that Living Wage costs can be absorbed in 2017 although there 
may be some risk further out. 2017 estimated earnings per share declines by 5% 
and 2018 by 9%.

Next is 30p lower at £66.05 and home shopping specialist N. Brown is down 
14.2p at 345.8p after the bank’s comments.

But Sainsbury’s is up 6.7p at 279.9p as Nomura lifted its target price from 
250p to 280p.

Miners are also among the fallers as the US dollar recovers some lost ground, 
and oil prices slip again. Brent crude is down 1% at $40.79 a barrel in the 
wake of Friday’s news of an increase in US rig counts, albeit a small one, 
which raised renewed fears of a continuing supply glut.

A dearer US currency makes commodities more expensive for dollar holders, 
helping to undermine the sector, while investors are also unsetteld by some 
mixed signals from China. There has been another attempt at economic stimulus, 
with Beijing again offering cheap loans to stock brokerages, which they can 
pass onto traders looking to invest in Chinese companies. But over the weekend 
Zhou Xiaochuan, governor of the People’s Bank of China, warned that corporate 
debt levels are too high.

So Anglo American is down 12.6p at 542.8p and Antofagasta has fallen 10p to 
504.5p.

But overall the FTSE 100 is up 20.07 points at 6209.71, even though concerns 
of a Brexit have grown following the resignation of Ian Duncan Smith as UK work 
and pensions minister, exposing a split in the Conservatives which could give 
the advantage to the anti-EU camp.

Pharmaceuticals group Shire is leading the risers, up as analysts at Exane BNP 
Paribas said the stock looked too cheap after falling since unveiling its plans 
to take over US business Baxalta.
 