
Pharmaceutical deals were in focus, in a market which drifted lower amid 
continuing geopolitical tensions.

Reckitt Benckiser rose 135p to £52.05 as the company behind Cillit Bang and 
Durex condoms reported a 3% rise in second quarter revenues and said it planned 
to spin off its pharmaceutical business.

Meanwhile GlaxoSmithKline dipped 8.5p to 1414.5p despite chief executive Sir 
Andrew Witty telling the Financial Times he was open to the idea of demerging 
its consumer healthcare business. The company lost early gains after analysts 
at Bank of America Merrill Lynch moved their recommendation from buy to neutral.

AstraZeneca slipped 31p to £43.61 even though it unveiled deals with Roche and 
Qiagen to develop two separate diagnostic tests to identify patients who would 
benefit from its lung cancer treatments. The Qiagen agreement involves a test 
to accompany AstraZeneca's established lung cancer pill tressa, while the 
arrangement with Roche relates to tressa's experimental successor known as 
AZD9291. Savvas Neophytou at Panmure Gordon said:
 AstraZeneca is progressing rapidly with its plans of creating AZD9291 into a 
mega blockbuster with news this morning of a ground breaking peer-to-peer 
interaction with Roche. The plans are to develop companion diagnostics for 
AZD9291 which we find reassuring given Roche's leadership position in 
diagnostics. Developing a companion diagnostic for AZD9291 is critical towards 
precipitous commercialisation of the product which remains one of the great 
white hope's of AstraZeneca's oncology pipeline with some $3bn peak year 
revenue slated in the company's defence documents [against the bid from Pfizer] 
in May. 
Overall the FTSE 100 struggled for direction for much of the day before 
finishing 3.48 points lower at 6788.07, as Wall Street moved lower in early 
trading after disappointing US pending home sales. The prospect of further 
sanctions against Russia over the situation in Ukraine also dampened sentiment. 
Later in the week come eurozone confidence figures and US GDP data, as well as 
the monthly US non-farm payroll numbers.

BSkyB was 30p better at 904.5p after analysts at Nomura raised their rating on 
the satellite broadcaster from reduce to neutral with a target price raised 
from 870p to 900p. An upbeat trading statement from Ryanair helped rivaleasyJet 
climb 12p to £13.44.

But Aberdeen Asset Management dropped 24.4p to 435p as it reported a fall in 
funds under management after a series of client withdrawals.

Among the banks, Lloyds Banking Group showed little reaction to the £226m 
fines levied for rigging libor rates and manipulating the fees it paid the Bank 
of England for emergency funding during the financial crisis. Lloyds edged up 
0.03p to 74.84p.

Meanwhile Royal Bank of Scotland gave up some of the gains made on Friday when 
it released better than expected results, ahead of schedule. It closed 12.2p 
lower at 352p.

Among the mid-caps Ophir Energy rose 8.4p to 207.1p as traders said the 
current share price undervalued the company's assets.

Petra Diamonds was in sparkling form, up 5.6p to 216.6p after full revenues 
reached a record £278m, up 17%, on record production of 3.1m carats, also up 
17%. Numis said:
 Overall another solid result. The growth programme remains on track and the 
diamond market firm. We adjust our forecasts ahead of new guidance next month, 
expecting higher prices, offset by lower forecast production and higher costs 
over the next few years. We increase our target price to 240p, from 220p, but 
downgrade to an add recommendation [from buy] on price appreciation. We 
continue to like the stock and see it as a good investment in the diamond space.
Home Retail was 4.5p weaker at 165.7p. Weekend reports suggested the company 
was considering spinning off its DIY business Homebase from the Argos 
operations. Traders believe such a move is unlikely in the immediate future, 
but analyst Freddie George at Cantor Fitzgerald said a disposal of Homebase 
would be viewed positively by the market:
 There is, in our view, now limited overlap with the core Argos business which 
as part of its new strategy is looking to transform from being a catalogue to 
digital retailer. Although the disposal of Homebase is likely to be dilutary to 
earnings, any transaction is likely to highlight the attractions of the core 
business, Argos, as a potential private equity bid.

We are, however, retaining our hold recommendation and reducing our target 
price to 185p from 215p. Hence, we still need to be convinced that the new 
Argos strategy is working and that the encouraging results from the new Argos 
format initiative are maintained.

Lower down the market, ULS Technology, which provides an online comparison 
site for finding the best deal for residential conveyancing solicitors, made a 
bright start to life on Aim. The company raised £12 from institutional 
investors at 40p a share, valuing the business at more than £25m. It closed at 
43.5p.

Finally electronics manufacture Stadium added 7p to 73p after the £8m cash and 
share purchase of US group United Wireless. House broker N+1 Singer said the 
deal would add £1m to pre-tax profits with their 2015 forecasts raised to £4.2m 
from £3.2m.
 