
A revival in the mining sector helped push the FTSE 100 close to its record 
high again but with investors still facing a number of uncertainties, it ended 
up falling short.

On the positive side, the UK avoided falling into deflation with the latest 
CPI figures showing zero for the second month in a row. But with the election 
campaign now well underway, the impact was limited.

In the US retail sales rebounded, but not by as much as analysts had expected, 
adding to the doubts about when the Federal Reserve will raise interest rates.

And as usual, there was Greece to contend with, as the country struggles to 
agree a deal with its creditors before it runs out of cash.

But with miners providing support, the UK market outpaced its European peers, 
with theFTSE 100 finishing 10.96 points higher at 7075.26, around 15 points shy 
of last Friday’s peak.

The commodities sector recovered from Monday’s falls, lifted by hopes that 
Chinese GDP figures later in the week may dispel some of the concerns about the 
country’s future growth.

Anglo American added 40.8p to 1039.5, BHP Billiton was 43.5p better at 1459.5p 
andRio Tinto rose 78.5p to 2892.5p.

A rally in the oil price - Brent crude was around 1% higher at $58.57 a barrel 
by the time the London market closed - helped liftWeir, which supplies 
equipment to the oil industry, by 91p to £18.80.

Banks were helped by better than expected figures from US groups JP Morgan 
Chase and Wells Fargo.Barclays, which also received a positive recommendation 
from Credit Suisse analysts, added 2.7p to 262.15 whileLloyds Banking Group 
climbed 0.5p to 79.90p.

But Aberdeen Asset Management fell 12.7p to 493.8p after RBC moved from sector 
perform to underperform and the company received an unexpected tax bill from 
India.

Pubs group Enterprise Inns jumped 6.2p to 116.7p after a buy note from 
Deutsche Bank:

Recent legislative changes that introduce a free-of-tie option for licensees 
change the commercial basis of the tenanted and leased pub market. Our analysis 
suggests that Enterprise should be able to offset any negative profit 
pressures, and that [its] evolving strategic responses will lead to eventual 
profit upgrades. We think that the potential changes should convert Enterprise 
into a more proactive, commercially minded property manager that could also 
encompass a partially owned REIT and a managed pub division alongside the 
traditional tenanted estate. We have tweaked up our price target by 5% to 215p, 
and remain confident that the share price should double from here.

But lower down the market Gulfsands Petroleum dropped 4% to 20.5p after it 
removed Mahdi Sajjad from his role as chief executive and appointed Alastair 
Beardsall, a nominee of its top shareholder Waterford Finance, as executive 
chairman with immediate effect.


Finally, after their recent troubles, there could be better times ahead for 
the UK’s supermarkets, according to Shore Capital’s Clive Black and Darren 
Shirley. They have a neutral rating on the sector, withMorrisons, down 1.2p at 
199p, a buy andTesco, 0.1p lower at 244.2p, a hold. They have sell 
recommendations on bothSainsbury, up 0.1p at 275p, and Ocado, off 2.4p at 364p. 
The Shore Capital team said:

The British supermarkets fell asleep at the wheel and crashed into the wall at 
great speed, resulting in considerable collateral damage for shareholders. 
Earnings and returns collapsed, assets written down and debt mushroomed. 
Management and strategies have had to change.

There are still challenges facing the major British supermarkets; the 
discounters, deflation, rebalancing to mention just three. However, we feel 
that heavy lifting has been undertaken and that better strategies are being 
applied by superior management. With favourable comparatives in tow, a rising 
population and economic growth could drive sustained improvement in sales 
densities and cash generation, progress that could have a ‘Bookeresque’ feel in 
time. Indeed, returns may even rise with asset values bolstered.

Many institutions have been correctly underweight on the sector. We feel that 
a neutral position is more appropriate. Within the sector we prefer Morrison’s 
due to its freehold and pension position plus especially favourable 
comparatives. We also like Dave Lewis’s immediate strategy for Tesco albeit 
near-term benefits are priced in to us; will there yet be a rights issue? We 
worry about Sainsbury as it appears particularly exposed to recovering 
competitors and management guidance is very cautious. Finally, now profitable
Ocado <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ocado> has still to prove its worth.
 