
US congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gabrielle-giffords> is well enough to be 
moved to a rehabilitation centre this week, her family has said, as she 
prepares to for an arduous programme of intensive mental and physical 
rehabilitation.

Giffords, who was shot in the forehead in a mass shooting in Arizona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arizona> on 8 January, is now able to 
stand on her feet with assistance from medical staff in another significant 
milestone in her recovery, according to Janet Stark, a spokeswoman at the 
University Medical Centre in Tucson.

Since being taken off sedation, Giffords has been alert and is opening her 
eyes more often. She has started physical therapy, dangling her legs over her 
bedside to exercise her muscles and sitting in a chair.

It is unclear if she is able to speak, how well she can see and how much 
strength she has on her right side.

Giffords' family hopes to move the Arizona congresswoman on Friday to TIRR 
Memorial Hermann hospital in Houston, where her husband Mark Kelly lives and 
works as an astronaut.

"I am extremely hopeful at the signs of recovery that my wife has made since 
the shooting," Kelly said in a statement released by Giffords' congressional 
office. The staff at the hospital in Tucson "has stabilised her to the point of 
being ready to move to the rehabilitation phase".

Dr John Holcomb, a retired army colonel and a trauma surgeon at the Houston 
hospital, praised the care Giffords was receiving in Tucson and said she would 
"move quickly toward a tailored and comprehensive rehab plan".

Kelly said the Houston hospital "has a national reputation for treating 
serious penetrating brain injuries and is also in a community where I have 
family and a strong support network".

Meanwhile, a federal grand jury has indicted Jared Loughner, accusing him of 
attempting to assassinate Giffords and trying to kill two of her aides.

Loughner, 22, is accused of shooting the Democratic politician in the forehead 
while she was meeting with constituents outside a grocery store in Tucson. The 
gunman shot 18 other people, killing six.

The indictment does not include two murder charges included in an earlier 
criminal complaint concerning the deaths of a Giffords aide and a federal judge.

The US attorney for Arizona, Dennis Burke, said the initial indictment was 
just the beginning of federal legal action against Loughner.

Authorities in Arizona said Loughner would return to court next week. A 
preliminary hearing on Monday will be held in a large federal courtroom in 
Phoenix.
 