
This was the first women's issue the Party decided to campaign against. It had 
to be handled delicately, with surgical tools. In 1986 it set up the Adivasi 
Mahila Sanghathana (AMS) which evolved into the Krantikari Adivasi Mahila 
Sangathan (KAMS) and now has 90,000 enrolled members. It could well be the 
largest women's organization in the country. (They're all Maoists by the way, 
all 90,000 of them. Are they going to be 'wiped out'? And what about the 10,000 
members of CNM? Them too?) The KAMS campaigns against the adivasi traditions of 
forced marriage and abduction. Against the custom of making menstruating women 
live outside the village in a hut in the forest. Against bigamy and domestic 
violence. It hasn't won all its battles, but then which feminists have? For 
instance, in Dandakaranya even today, women are not allowed to sow seeds. In 
Party meetings men agree that this is unfair and ought to be done away with. 
But in practice, they simply don't allow it. So the Party decided that women 
would sow seeds on common lands, which belongs to the Jantana Sarkar. On that 
land they sow seed, grow vegetables, and build check dams. A half-victory, not 
a whole one.

As police repression has grown in Bastar, the women of KAMS have become a 
formidable force and rally in their hundreds, sometimes thousands to physically 
confront the police. The very fact that the KAMS exists has radically changed 
traditional attitudes and eased many of the traditional forms of discrimination 
against women. For many young women, joining the Party, in particular the PLGA, 
became a way of escaping the suffocation of their own society. Comrade Sushila, 
a senior office bearer of KAMS talks about the Salwa Judum's rage against KAMS 
women. She says one of their slogans was Hum Do Bibi layenge! Layenge! (We will 
have two wives! We will!) A lot of the rape and bestial sexual mutilation was 
directed at members of the KAMS. Many young women who witnessed the savagery 
then joined the PLGA and now women make up 45% of its cadre. Comrade Narmada 
sends for some of them and they join us in a while.

Comrade Rinki has very short hair. A Bob-cut as they say in Gondi. It's brave 
of her, because here, 'bob-cut' means 'Maoist.' For the police that's more than 
enough evidence to warrant summary execution. Comrade Rinki's village, Korma 
was attacked by the Naga Battalion and the Salwa Judum in 2005. At that time 
Rinki was part of the village militia. So were her friends Lukki and Sukki, who 
were also members of the KAMS. After burning the village, the Naga battalion 
caught Lukki and Sukki and one other girl, gang raped and killed them. "They 
raped them on the grass", Rinki says, " but after it was over there was no 
grass left." It's been years now, the Naga Battalion has gone, but the police 
still come. "They come whenever they need women, or chickens."

Ajitha has a bob-cut too. The Judum came to Korseel, her village and killed 
three people by drowning them in a nallah. Ajitha was with the Militia, and 
followed the Judum at a distance to a place close to the village called Paral 
Nar Todak. She watched them rape six women and shoot a man in his throat.

Comrade Laxmi who is a gorgeous girl with a long plait, tells me she watched 
the Judum burn thirty houses in her village Jojor. "We had no weapons then," 
she says, "we could do nothing, but watch." She joined the PLGA soon after. 
Laxmi was one of the 150 guerillas who walked through the jungle for three and 
a half months in 2008, to Nayagarh in Orissa, to raid a police armoury from 
where they captured 1,200 rifles and 200,000 rounds of ammunition.

Comrade Sumitra joined the PLGA in 2004, before the Salwa Judum began its 
rampage. She joined she says, because she wanted to escape from home. "Women 
are controlled in every way," she told me. "In our village girls were not 
allowed to climb trees, if they did, they would have to pay a fine of Rs 500 or 
a hen. If a man hits a woman and she hits him back she has to give the village 
a goat. Men go off to the hills for months together to hunt. Women are not 
allowed to go near the kill, the best part of the meat goes to men. Women are 
not allowed to eat eggs." Good reason to join a guerilla army?

Sumitra tells the story of two of her friends, Telam Parvati and Kamla who 
worked with KAMS. Telam Parvati was from Polekaya village in South Bastar. Like 
everyone else from there, she too watched the Salwa Judum burn her village. She 
then joined the PLGA and went to work in the Keshkal ghats. In 2009 she and 
Kamla had just finished organizing the March 8th Women's day celebrations in 
the area. They were together in a little hut just outside a village called 
Vadgo. The police surrounded the hut at night and began to fire. Kamla fired 
back, but she was killed. Parvati escaped, but was found and killed the next 
day.

That's what happened last year on Women's Day. And here's a press report from 
a national newspaper about Women's Day this year.

Bastar rebels bat for women's rights

Sahar Khan, Mail Today, Raipur, March 7, 2010

The government may have pulled out all stops to combat the Maoist menace in 
the country. But a section of rebels in Chhattisgarh has more pressing matters 
in hand than survival. With International Women's Day around the corner, 
Maoists in the Bastar region of the state have called for week- long 
"celebrations" to advocate women's rights. Posters were also put up in Bijapur, 
a part of Bastar district. The call by the self- styled champions of women's 
rights has left the state police astonished. Inspector- general (IG) of Bastar 
T. J. Longkumer said, " I have never seen such an appeal from the Naxalites, 
who believe only in violence and bloodshed."

And then the report goes on to say:

"I think the Maoists are trying to counter our highly successful Jan Jagran 
Abhiyaan (mass awareness campaign). We started the ongoing campaign with an aim 
to win popular support for Operation Green Hunt, which was launched by the 
police to root out Left- wing extremists," the IG said.

This cocktail of malice and ignorance is not unusual. Gudsa Usendi, chronicler 
of the Party's present knows more about this than most people. His little 
computer and MP3 recorder are full of press statements, denials, corrections, 
Party literature, lists of the dead, TV clips and audio and video material. 
"The worst thing about being Gudsa Usendi" he says, "is issuing clarifications 
which are never published. We could bring out a thick book of our unpublished 
clarifications, about the lies they tell about us." He speaks without a trace 
of indignation, in fact with some amusement.

"What's the most ridiculous charge you've had to deny?"

He thinks back. "In 2007, we had to issue a statement saying 'Nahi bhai, 
humney gai ko hathode say nahin mara.' (No brother, we did not kill cows with 
hammers.). In 2007 the Raman Singh Government announced a Gai Yojana (cow 
scheme), an election promise, a cow for every Adivasi. One day the TV channels 
and newspapers reported that Naxalites had attacked a herd of cows and 
bludgeoned them to death— with hammers— because they were anti-Hindu, anti-BJP. 
You can imagine what happened. We issued a denial. Hardly anybody carried it. 
Later it turned out that the man who had been given the cows to distribute was 
a rogue. He sold them and said we had ambushed him and killed the cows."

And the most serious?

"Oh there are dozens, they're running a campaign after all. When the Salwa 
Judum started, the first day they attacked a village called Ambeli, burned it 
down and then all of them, SPOs, the Naga Battalion, police, moved towards 
Kotrapal…you must have heard about Kotrapal? It's a famous village, it has been 
burnt 22 times for refusing to surrender. When the Judum reached Kotrapal, our 
militia was waiting for it. They had prepared an ambush. Two SPOs died. The 
militia captured seven, the rest ran away. The next day the newspapers reported 
that the Naxalites had massacred poor adivasis. Some said we had killed 
hundreds. Even a respectable magazine like Frontline said we had killed 18 
innocent adivasis. Even K.Balagopal, the human rights activist, who is usually 
meticulous about facts, even he said this. We sent a clarification. Nobody 
published it. Later, in his book, Balagopal acknowledged his mistake…. But who 
noticed?"

I asked what happened to the seven people that were captured.

"The Area Committee called a Jan Adalat (Peoples Court). Four thousand people 
attended it. They listened to the whole story. Two of the SPOs were sentenced 
to death. Five were warned and let off. The people decided. Even with informers 
—which is becoming a huge problem nowadays— people listen to the case, the 
stories, the confessions and say "Iska hum risk nahin le sakte" (We're not 
prepared to take the risk of trusting this person) or, "Iska risk hum lenge" 
(We are prepared to take the risk of trusting this person.) The press always 
reports about informers who are killed. Never about the many that are let off. 
Never about the people who these informers have had killed. So everybody thinks 
it is some bloodthirsty procedure in which everybody is always killed. It's not 
about revenge, its about survival and saving future lives… Of course there are 
problems, we've made terrible mistakes, we have even killed the wrong people in 
our ambushes, thinking they were policemen, but it is not the way it's 
portrayed in the media."

The dreaded 'Peoples' Courts'. How can we accept them? Or approve this form of 
rude justice?

On the other hand, what about 'encounters' fake and otherwise—the worst form 
of summary justice—that get policemen and soldiers bravery medals, cash awards 
and out-of-turn promotions from the Indian Government? The more they kill, the 
more they are rewarded. "Bravehearts" they are called, the 'Encounter 
specialists'. 'Anti-nationals' we are called, those of us who dare to question 
them. And what about the Supreme Court that brazenly admitted it did not have 
enough evidence to sentence Mohammed Afzal (accused in the Dec 2001 Parliament 
Attack) to death, but did so anyway, because "the collective conscience of the 
society will only be satisfied if capital punishment is awarded to the 
offender."

At least in the case of the Kotrapal Jan Adalat, the Collective was physically 
present to make its own decision. It wasn't made by judges who had lost touch 
with ordinary life a long time ago, presuming to speak on behalf of an absent 
Collective.

What should the people of Kotrapal have done I wonder? Sent for the police?

~

The sound of drums has become really loud. It's Bhumkal time. We walk to the 
grounds. I can hardly believe my eyes. There is a sea of people, the most wild, 
beautiful people, dressed in the most wild, beautiful ways. The men seem to 
have paid much more attention to themselves than the women. They have feathered 
headgear and painted tattoos on their faces. Many have eye make-up and white, 
powdered faces. There's lots of militia, girls in saris of breathtaking colors 
with rifles slung carelessly over their shoulders. There are old people, 
children, and red buntings arc across the sky. The sun is sharp and high. 
Comrade Leng speaks. And several office-holders of the various Jantana Sarkars. 
Comrade Niti, an extraordinary woman who has been with the Party since 1997, is 
such a threat to the nation, that in January 2007 more than 700 policemen 
surrounded Innar village because they heard she was there. Comrade Niti is 
considered to be so dangerous, and is being hunted with such desperation, not 
because she has led many ambushes (which she has), but because she is an 
adivasi woman who is loved by people in the village and is a real inspiration 
to young people. She speaks with her AK on her shoulder. (It's a gun with a 
story. Almost everyone's gun has a story: Who it was snatched from, how, and by 
whom.)

A CNM troupe performs a play about the Bhumkal uprising. The evil white 
colonizers wear hats and golden straw for hair, and bully and beat Adivasis to 
pulp—causing endless delight in the audience. Another troupe from South 
Gangalaur performs a play called Nitir Judum Pito (Story of the Blood Hunt). 
Joori translates for me. It's the story of two old people who go looking for 
their daughter's village. As they walk through the forest, they get lost 
because everything is burnt and unrecognizable. The Salwa Judum has even burned 
the drums and the musical instruments. There are no ashes because it has been 
raining. They cannot find their daughter. In their sorrow the old couple starts 
to sing, and hearing them, the voice of their daughter sings back to them from 
the ruins: The sound of our village has been silenced, she sings. There's no 
more pounding of rice, no more laughter by the well. No more birds, no more 
bleating goats. The taut string of our happiness has been snapped.

Her father sings back: My beautiful daughter, don't cry today. Everyone who is 
born must die. These trees around us will fall, flowers will bloom and fade, 
one day this world will grow old. But who are we dying for? One day our looters 
will learn, one day Truth will prevail, but our people will never forget you, 
not for thousands of years.

A few more speeches. Then the drumming and the dancing begins. Each Janatana 
Sarkar has its own troupe. Each troupe has prepared its own dance. They arrive 
one by one, with huge drums and they dance wild stories. The only character 
every troupe has in common is Bad Mining Man, with a helmet and dark glasses, 
and usually smoking a cigarette. But there's nothing stiff, or mechanical about 
their dancing. As they dance, the dust rises. The sound of drums becomes 
deafening. Gradually, the crowd begins to sway. And then it begins to dance. 
They dance in little lines of six or seven, men and women separate, with their 
arms around each other's waists. Thousands of people. This is what they've come 
for. For this. Happiness is taken very seriously here, in the Dandakaranya 
forest. People will walk for miles, for days together to feast and sing, to put 
feathers in their turbans and flowers in their hair, to put their arms around 
each other and drink mahua and dance through the night. No one sings or dances 
alone. This, more than anything else, signals their defiance towards a 
civilization that seeks to annihilate them.

I can't believe all this is happening right under the noses of the police. 
Right in the midst of Operation Green Hunt.

At first the PLGA comrades watch the dancers, standing aside with their guns. 
But then, one by one, like ducks who cannot bear to stand on the shore and 
watch other ducks swim, they move in and begin to dance too. Soon there are 
lines of olive green dancers, swirling with all the other colours. And then, as 
sisters and brothers and parents and children and friends who haven't met for 
months, years sometimes, encounter each other, the lines break up and re-form 
and the olive green is distributed among the swirling saris and flowers and 
drums and turbans. It surely is a Peoples' Army. For now, at least. And what 
Chairman Mao said about the guerillas being the fish, and people being the 
water they swim in, is, at this moment, literally true.

Chairman Mao. He's here too. A little lonely, perhaps, but present. There's a 
photograph of him, up on a red cloth screen. Marx too. And Charu Majumdar, the 
founder and chief theoretician of the Naxalite Movement. His abrasive rhetoric 
fetishizes violence, blood and martyrdom, and often employs a language so 
coarse as to be almost genocidal. Standing here, on Bhumkal day, I can't help 
thinking that his analysis, so vital to the structure of this revolution, is so 
removed from its emotion and texture. When he said that only 'an annihilation 
campaign' could produce "the new man who will defy death and be free from all 
thought of self-interest"— could he have imagined that this ancient people, 
dancing into the night, would be the ones on whose shoulders his dreams would 
come to rest?

It's a great disservice to everything that is happening here that the only 
thing that seems to make it to the outside world is the stiff, unbending 
rhetoric of the ideologues of a party that has evolved from a problematic past. 
When Charu Mazumdar famously said, "China's Chairman is our Chairman and 
China's Path is Our Path" he was prepared to extend it to the point where the 
Naxalites remained silent while General Yahya Khan committed genocide in East 
Pakistan (Bangladesh), because at the time, China was an ally of Pakistan. 
There was silence too, over the Khmer Rouge and its killing fields in Cambodia. 
There was silence over the egregious excesses of the Chinese and Russian 
Revolutions. Silence over Tibet. Within the Naxalite movement too, there have 
been violent excesses and it's impossible to defend much of what they've done. 
But can anything they have done compare with the sordid achievements of the 
Congress and the BJP in Punjab, Kashmir, Delhi, Mumbai, Gujarat… And yet, 
despite these terrifying contradictions, Charu Mazumdar was a visionary in much 
of what he wrote and said. The party he founded (and its many splinter groups) 
has kept the dream of revolution real and present inIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>. Imagine a society without that 
dream. For that alone we cannot judge him too harshly. Especially not while we 
swaddle ourselves with Gandhi's pious humbug about the superiority of "the 
non-violent way" and his notion of Trusteeship: "The rich man will be left in 
possession of his wealth, of which he will use what he reasonably requires for 
his personal needs and will act as a trustee for the remainder to be used for 
the good of society."

How strange it is though, that the contemporary tsars of the Indian 
Establishment—the State that crushed the Naxalites so mercilessly— should now 
be saying what Charu Mazumdar said so long ago: China's Path is Our Path.

Upside Down. Inside Out.

China's Path has changed. China has become an imperial power now, preying on 
other countries, other peoples' resources. But the Party is still right, only, 
the Party has changed its mind.

When the Party is a suitor (as it is now in Dandakaranya), wooing the people, 
attentive to their every need, then it genuinely is a Peoples' Party, its army 
genuinely a Peoples' Army. But after the Revolution how easily this love affair 
can turn into a bitter marriage. How easily the Peoples' Army can turn upon the 
people. Today in Dandakaranya, the Party wants to keep the bauxite in the 
mountain. Tomorrow will it change its mind? But can we, should we let 
apprehensions about the future, immobilize us in the present?

The dancing will go on all night. I walk back to the camp. Maase is there, 
awake. We chat late into the night. I give her my copy of Neruda's Captain's 
Verses (I brought it along, just in case). She asks again and again, "What do 
they think of us outside? What do students say? Tell me about the women's 
movement, what are the big issues now? She asks about me, my writing. I try and 
give her an honest account of my chaos. Then she starts to talk about herself, 
how she joined the Party. She tells me that her partner was killed last May, in 
a fake encounter. He was arrested in Nashik, and taken to Warangal to be 
killed. "They must have tortured him badly." She was on her way to meet him 
when she heard he had been arrested. She's been in the forest ever since. After 
a long silence she tells me she was married once before, years ago. "He was 
killed in an encounter too," she says, and adds with heart-breaking precision, 
"but in a real one."

I lie awake on my jhilli, thinking of Maase's protracted sadness, listening to 
the drums and the sounds of protracted happiness from the grounds, and thinking 
about Charu Mazumdar's idea of protracted war, the central precept of the 
Maoist Party. This is what makes people think the Maoists offer to enter 'peace 
talks' is a hoax, a ploy to get breathing space to regroup, re-arm themselves 
and go back to waging protracted war. What is protracted war? Is it a terrible 
thing in itself, or does it depend on the nature of the war? What if the people 
here in Dandakaranya had not waged their protracted war for the last thirty 
years, where would they be now?

And are the Maoists the only ones who believe in protracted war? Almost from 
the moment India became a sovereign nation it turned into a colonial power, 
annexing territory, waging war. It has never hesitated to use military 
interventions to address political problems— Kashmir, Hyderabad, Goa, Nagaland, 
Manipur, Telengana, Assam, Punjab, the Naxalite uprising in West Bengal, Bihar, 
Andhra Pradesh and now across the tribal areas of Central India. Tens of 
thousands have been killed with impunity, hundreds of thousands tortured. All 
of this behind the benign mask of democracy. Who have these wars been waged 
against? Muslims, Christians, Sikhs, Communists, Dalits, Tribals and, most of 
all against the poor who dare to question their lot instead of accepting the 
crumbs that are flung at them. It's hard not to see the Indian State as an 
essentially upper-caste Hindu State (regardless of which party is in power) 
which harbours a reflexive hostility towards the 'other'. One that in true 
colonial fashion, sends the Nagas and Mizos to fight in Chhattisgarh, Sikhs to 
Kashmir, Kashmiris to Orissa, Tamilians to Assam and so on. If this isn't 
protracted war, what is?

Unpleasant thoughts on a lovely, starry night. Sukhdev is smiling to himself, 
his face lit by his computer screen. He's a crazy workaholic. I ask him what's 
funny. " I was thinking about the journalists who came last year for the 
Bhumkal celebrations. They came for a day or two. One posed with my AK, had 
himself photographed and then went back and called us Killing Machines or 
something."

The dancing hasn't stopped and it's daybreak. The lines are still going, 
hundreds of young people still dancing. "They won't stop", Comrade Raju says, 
"not until we start packing up."

On the grounds I run into Comrade Doctor. He's been running a little medical 
camp on the edge of the dance floor. I want to kiss his fat cheeks. Why can't 
he be at least thirty people instead of just one? Why can't he be one thousand 
people? I ask him what it's looking like, the health of Dandakaranya. His reply 
makes my blood run cold. Most of the people he has seen, he says, including 
those in the PLGA, have a Haemoglobin Count that's between 5 and 6, (when the 
standard for Indian women is 11.) There's TB caused by more than two years of 
chronic anaemia. Young children suffer from Protein Energy Malnutrition Grade 
II, in medical terminology called Kwashiorkor. (I looked it up later. It's a 
word derived from the Ga language of Coastal Ghana and means "the sickness a 
baby gets when the new baby comes." Basically the old baby stops getting 
mother's milk, and there's not enough food to provide it nutrition.) "It's an 
epidemic here, like in Biafra," Comrade Doctor says, "I have worked in villages 
before, but I've never seen anything like this."

Apart from this, there's malaria, osteoporosis, tapeworm, severe ear and tooth 
infections and primary amenorrhea —which is when malnutrition during puberty 
causes a woman's menstrual cycle to disappear, or never appear in the first 
place.

"There are no clinics in this forest apart from one or two in Gadchiroli. No 
doctors. No medicines."

He's off now, with his little team, on an eight-day trek to Abhujmad. He's in 
'dress' too, Comrade Doctor. So if they find him they'll kill him.

End of Part Four. Read Part Five here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/mar/27/arundhati-roy-india-tribal-maoists-5>
 