
'Football is mad, most of the time," Gary Lineker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gary-lineker> says in a hushed library on 
the top floor of the achingly cool Electric House in Notting Hill. There are 
lots of seemingly important and nearly beautiful people lingering over lunch 
downstairs and it's obvious which one of the two grey-haired old men in the 
deserted library is an Electric member. Lineker is the trim, tanned, 
good-looking television personality and deadly former striker who talks 
compellingly about the great players and coaches he has known.

Yet he is tucked away here, answering questions riddled with sniping while 
pondering the madness and spite of football. "There's still lots of venom 
around," Lineker says. "Football matters so much to people and they get very 
defensive – or angry."

The 52-year-old presenter of Match of the Day pauses as if the fury of 
football, often directed at his famous old programme, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/sep/06/alan-hansen-match-of-the-day-horrible>
 has struck him anew. "Oh, the anger! You see it on here," he says, gesturing 
to the Twitter icon on his phone.

Lineker has presented Match of the Day since 1999. Even with a three-year 
break, when the BBC lost the rights, he has done the job for longer than Des 
Lynam, his accomplished predecessor. A staunch defender of the programme, and 
its maligned analysts, he has been derided over the years for pretty much 
everything from blandness to weak jokes. He is, however, respectful of the way 
Gary Neville has transcended the jaded art of football punditry. The former 
Manchester United defender has offered a freshness and clarity on Sky which 
critics argue is lacking on the BBC. Lineker resists the charge passionately – 
but scrutiny of MOTD has intensified following the recentannouncement that Alan 
Hansen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/sep/05/alan-hansen-bbc-motd-retired>
, once hailed as a bitingly incisive analyst, will leave the programme after 
the World Cup next summer.

The perennial debate around MOTD is as familiar as mournful despair over the 
state of the national team. "I wouldn't say it doesn't bother me," Lineker 
murmurs. "I listen and take it. Sometimes I can agree with it but by and large 
it's criticism without telling me what the [fault] is. I always ask: 'What 
would you do?' Match of the Day has fundamentally improved since we got the 
contract back – but football is so emotive and that's why people are never 
going to be entirely satisfied.

"But we're bucking the trends on highlight shows for sport – audiences are 
down everywhere and, considering the excessive football on TV, it's remarkable 
we generally hit between six-to-seven million every weekend."

He must be aware that there is now a deeper dissatisfaction with the 
programme? "I don't think there is. I think it's a Daily Mail thing – and their 
anti-BBC issue."

Does he really believe that serious criticism is just led by the Daily Mail? 
"I do, yeah. The only thing that has been levelled consistently against MOTD, 
particularly in the Daily Mail, is that there's a cozy atmosphere and it's the 
same people every week. Lots of people like familiarity but we are changing 
things now. We've already seen about seven different pundits this season. 
[Last] Saturday we had Danny Murphy and [Everton manager] Roberto Martínez."

Have such attempted tweaks to a show that began 49 years ago been a direct 
result of increased competition? "We have meetings all the time where we're 
looking at ways of finding a different method. But it's forgotten how we made a 
fundamental change 10 years ago. Prior to 2003, you'd see two main games and 
then four minutes of another game and then after that just the other goals on 
MOTD or ITV's version. When we got the [rights] contract back I went to the 
powers-that-be and said: 'Is there a way we can show highlights of every game?' 
They backed it. It was a brave, bold, very expensive decision."

Yet a consistent charge remains – that the staleness of the BBC's punditry has 
been highlighted by Sky's introduction of Neville and sometimes spiky debate 
involving the likes of Graeme Souness. "You cannot get involved in debate on 
MOTD. You can do it on Sky because they've got hours and hours. We've got a 
couple of minutes. It's a very disciplined show. Our primary purpose is to show 
the action and the analysis is very secondary. We have lots of people who would 
prefer no analysis. We have lots of people who would prefer more analysis. We 
have to find a balance."

Has the praise of Neville been excessive? "No, he's very good. The only 
difficult thing for him is that when it comes to analysingEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> players he's involved with them 
as [an assistant] coach. There have already been a couple of occasions when 
he's avoided it. But he's very good – and, well, I wish we'd had him on MOTD."

Lineker recently watched a fascinating eight-minute segment Neville devoted to 
a single corner and reiterates that MOTD could never replicate such detail. "We 
simply can't do that when we've just got three minutes 30 seconds to discuss 
the first match – and we're limited by the contract as to the amount we can 
show."

Surely such restrictions mean the BBC's analysis should be even more acute and 
penetrating? "It's as penetrating and acute as it possibly can be. But MOTD is 
the most difficult football programme to do for a pundit – by far. Once you get 
down to matches where there's a minute or 45 seconds you can't really do any 
proper analysis."

Alan Shearer is often regarded as a symbol of all that is wrong with BBC 
punditry. "Personally, I think he's really good," Lineker says. "He's improved 
a lot. I think the problem is that when players start, with the odd exception, 
they can be a little guarded. But if you listen toAlan Shearer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alan-shearer> now compared to four years 
ago he's become very strongly opinionated. He's as strong as anyone and 
understands the game really well. We do lots of research and he's generally in 
the top three of who people rate."

Yet, in 2010, Shearer suggested that, "No one really knows a great deal of 
him" as he failed to explain Hatem Ben Arfa's impact at Newcastle United. Ben 
Arfa had been called up to the French national squad three years earlier and 
had played his first senior internationals during qualification for Euro 2008. 
"I thought that was so out of order," Lineker protests. "He obviously meant 
Newcastle supporters in general. It's so easy to turn around and say [sinks 
into dumb voice] 'Oh, he doesn't know anything about football.' He quite 
clearly meant that we, as a nation, do not know much about Hatem Ben Arfa – 
outside of us in the game who obviously do lots of research and watch foreign 
football all the time. I think that's what he meant. But Alan's a competitive 
soul and he works really hard. All the guys do."

Hansen is accused now of self-parody but Lineker rightly stresses that the 
former Liverpool defender "paved the way for the good ones and there are not 
many good ones because it's hard. I was initially a pundit but I felt I was 
saying the same thing after a while. That's one of the reasons Alan's had 
enough after 20 years. There comes a time when you feel you're repeating 
yourself."

Would it help if a contrasting voice was occasionally included? "It is 
ex-players but do you want to go down the journalists' route on MOTD? I don't 
even see anyone in this country writing in a tactical or analytical manner. 
We've got some wonderful writers but I don't think MOTD's quite right for that."

Even if we restrict my ridiculously parochial survey to these pages, writers 
like Michael Cox and Jonathan Wilson clearly address tactical intricacies. And 
wouldn't someone accustomed to television, like James Richardson, consistently 
excellent since fronting Channel 4's coverage of Italian football in the 1990s, 
add more vitality?

"Yeah, he was all right but he was a presenter. We've got loads of presenters 
like Richard Keys and all the new guys on Sky. That's why I thought there was a 
niche for someone to come into the presenter role who was an ex-footballer. 
There are loads of James Richardsons and they're great but I have my edge 
because I've been there, I've experienced it, I've played at the top. They 
can't turn round to me, the players, and say what the hell do you know? Well 
they can but … it's very rare."

On Twitter, Lineker is a forthright and often interestingly waspish voice, 
which last month resulted in a typical football hoo-hah as he tweeted criticism 
of England during a World Cup qualifier against Ukraine.Roy Hodgson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/roy-hodgson> took umbrage as, earlier 
this year, Lineker had also lamented England's return to "the dark ages" of an 
archaic 4-4-2 formation.

"England were not passing the ball very well. It was indisputable. I said 
that, tactically, we're set up OK but you've got to be able to pass the ball. I 
spoke to Roy a few days after the game. At the press conference he'd been asked 
40 questions and the last one said: 'Do you know Lineker had a right pop at you 
on Twitter?' But I didn't have a pop at him at all. I was having a pop at the 
fact we couldn't pass the ball from A to B. So at a heated press conference I 
can understand why he reacted. It didn't bother me but he was worried he had."

So Hodgson phoned Lineker? "Yeah, he did. I'd already been on Twitter the day 
after the game because it had gone a bit doolally and I wanted to clarify that 
tactically we were sound and there was great spirit. So we had a chat and it 
was fine. I like the system we're playing now more – the 4-3-3 aspect – because 
it gives us more depth and flexibility. But players have to keep the ball. At 
times it was …[Lineker shakes his head]. These are very good players but they 
had a particularly bad night. We see that frequently with England. It's hard to 
comprehend why. Maybe it's the pressure today but other teams manage it."

Lineker won the Golden Boot at the 1986 World Cup and he was a key member of 
the England team which, at Italia '90, lost on penalties in a dramatic 
semi-final against West Germany. Isn't it simply a case that England were a 
much better side in 1990?

'And other years too [England teams were better than now]. We're going through 
a transitional phase. The so-called golden generation is autumnal and the young 
generation is inexperienced. In the middle you've got probably only one 
world-class outfield player in Wayne Rooney – when he's right. So it's 
difficult. You need five or six world-class players in their prime.

"I just hope we qualify but it's a really difficult job for Roy because I 
don't think he's got the tools he needs. But Roy's worked all his life with 
sides who've played beyond themselves and ground out decent results without 
being spectacular. He might have to do that again with this group of players."

Lineker highlights Jack Wilshere as a rare exception among young England 
players who often lack the technical ability to compete at the very highest 
level of international competition. "This is nothing new," Lineker says. "We've 
always been technically deficient. But I've stood on the touchline in mad 
frustration, watching all my four boys play, while parents shout 'Boot it … 
don't mess about!' We almost need a revolution in the culture of our thinking 
about football."

When I interviewed Neville at the start of the season he doubted whether, if 
he was 18 now, he would reach the peak of his profession. Yet Lineker is 
bullish when asked if it would've been tougher for him to make the same impact 
now? "I don't think so. It's not a problem for the really good players. The 
cream will always rise if you've got the right attitude and mental strength. 
Look at Wilshere."

Later, over lunch downstairs, I like the detailed memories Lineker relates 
about the fleeting elation of scoring or of playing under Johan Cruyff when the 
current Barcelona legacy of possession and success began amid his own strife 
with the Dutchman. More quirkily, it's intriguing to hear how Arsène Wenger 
took over his apartment in Nagoya, when their careers criss-crossed in Japan, 
or how he had agreed to join Fiorentina from Barcelona because he wanted to 
play for Sven-Goran Eriksson and alongside Robert Baggio. Lineker only withdrew 
from the transfer when both Eriksson and Baggio left just before he signed – in 
a twist mirrored by the way in which he nearly accepted Alex Ferguson's 
interest in him at Manchester United before signing for Spurs.

Cruyff, infamously, played Lineker out of position, on the wing, at Barcelona. 
"Yeah, but he was a really brilliant coach. It was all about possession. He 
started the whole Barcelona legacy then. He started the idea that as soon as 
you get the ball you make it as big as you possibly can and when you're not got 
it you make it as small as you possibly can. I learnt a lot from Cruyff. In 
those days you were only allowed two foreign players and, when a new coach came 
in, he wanted his own players.

"He played me on the wing so I'd get the hump and want to go. It was just a 
bit of a game and I had no problem with Johan. I liked him. He's a know-it all 
– about all things in life – but apart from that he was great. And he was 
always the best player in training. He was unbelievable, even then."

Lineker's face lights up again and, in such moments, his sheer love of 
football and deep immersion in the game resonates. "We've just had a slot that 
has been so much longer than MOTD," Lineker quips as we move into a third hour 
together. "But the last time MOTD disappeared people said how much they missed 
it. Of course they'll always pick holes in it. That's normal. It's football. 
But I can assure everyone we are continually striving to improve something that 
has been around forever."
 