
Gary Kirsten has ruled himself out of the England team director's job for 
family reasons.

The South African had been identified by many pundits as the ideal man to 
succeedAndy Flower <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andy-flower>, with the 
England and Wales Cricket Board looking for someone to lead the team across all 
three formats.

However, the 46-year-old insists his personal situation means the England job 
is not one he can consider currently.

"I would regard any job like that as a privilege," Kirsten, who had distanced 
himself from the job earlier in the week, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/03/gary-kirsten-england-andy-flower-ashley-giles>
 told Sky Sports News.

"But I gave up the Proteas job for family reasons – I want to spend more time 
with a young family and that certainly hasn't changed. I love cricket coaching, 
I love being with an international team. But unfortunately the demands of it 
don't suit where I want to be.

"It would have been a great challenge, it's a high-profile sport. Whenever 
I've toured England I've always been amazed by the following. It's a 
pressurised sport and I think Andy Flower over many years did an exceptional 
job."

"I had many chats with Andy and I enjoyed his way.

"I have often wondered whether I could go in with my coaching philosophies and 
thinking that it could work within that environment. I would have enjoyed the 
challenge, like I would any challenge that I take on.

"I'm taking on the IPL team the Delhi Daredevils – thank goodness it's a 
shorter period of time – but I'm looking forward to that challenge and the one 
thing I'm really looking forward to is working with some Englishmen, some 
Australians, some West Indians maybe, some South Africans and Indians."

Flower stepped down as team director last week following England's humiliating 
Ashes whitewash.

The limited-overs coach Ashley Giles is another of the front-runners to take 
on the job, but he fared little better in Australia as the team slipped to 4-1 
and 3-0 defeats in the one-day and Twenty20 series which followed the Ashes.
 