
Where Match of the Day and Saturday night football are concerned, history 
shows that significant change can be unwise. There was uproar when the theme 
tune was tinkered with many years ago, forcing an apology from Jimmy Hill and 
an immediate switch back. At the turn of the century when ITV bought the rights 
they moved the highlights from late night to 7pm, before swiftly reverting to 
type.

For many it is part of a comforting weekend routine, a Saturday-night staple 
on the sofa. Yet as Match of the Day approaches its 50th birthday,BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> producers believe it is the programme’s 
ability to adapt and evolve, while staying true to its roots, that has 
reinforced its institutional status – editors treading the line carefully 
between desires for tradition and transformation.

From the dulcet tones of Barry Davies to the divisive opinions of Robbie 
Savage, the cast of broadcasters has changed as drastically as the protagonists 
on the pitch. However, Match of the Day’s popularity has rarely wavered from 
the days when, according to Davies, “the pubs virtually closed at 10 minutes to 
10 so that people could get home”.

An in-house production team of around 30 assemble at the start of every 
weekend in Salford to put out a programme that last season had an average 
audience of 3.6 million. In reality, the work for each show starts on the 
Monday or Tuesday but it is not until Saturday that the analysing, editing and 
scripting begins in earnest.

If Alan Shearer is working as a pundit he sets off from his home in the 
north-east at 8am and does not return until 3am on Sunday.Gary Lineker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gary-lineker> says that the running order 
is decided at 5pm before “a quick bite to eat, then at about 9pm I’ll get 
ready, get changed, have a bit of slap [make-up] and then rehearse – then off 
we go”.

It is a frantic evening that culminates in, essentially, a straightforward 
show. Play the match, speak with the managers, replay the goals, analyse for a 
few minutes. Making it appear straightforward, though, is the difficult part, 
especially on a busy, incident-filled day.

Shearer says: “We’ll sit down and watch the early kick-off, take notes, then 
watch the games at 3pm with all the big screens in front of us. Normally we 
watch one game but keep an eye on all the goals. Then watch the other game at 
5.30pm before going into the editing suite. I was nervous at first, you can 
make an error on a football pitch but you can’t on live TV because there’s no 
going back.”

Phil Neville, who has been drafted in with Ruud Gullit and Rio Ferdinand for 
the start of the post-Alan Hansen era, adds: “You’ve literally got between 30 
seconds and a minute and a half to make your point. You can’t just waffle on. 
I’ll never forget the first time I went on, quite relaxed and with a lot to say 
but as I’m talking Gary’s nodding his head as if to say ‘hurry up’.”

There are other challenges that Match of the Day faces. In the modern age of 
social media and goals being available at the touch of a phone key, for many 
the major talking points have already been viewed elsewhere by the time they 
sit down and switch to BBC1 for the full debrief.

However, while the results programme Final Score may have seen a slight 
reduction in its audience, Mark Cole, the BBC’s lead executive for football, 
says Match of the Day keeps growing.

“We’ve had the ESPN Goals app, we’ve had the News International app last year, 
but our figures keep going up,” said Cole. “With all the new technology there 
will be more pressure on us to change the programme and we’ve got to resist 
that really. We’ve got to keep evolving at a pace but everything is still about 
the action. Last year we introduced social media voting and used more Opta 
stats, we got Gary Lineker to do some manager interviews, so we have introduced 
some new features.

“But we haven’t alienated that core audience. Over 50% of our audience is 
over-45, so you can’t just change everything.”

This season the BBC is testing a new “analysis” camera that gives pundits more 
scope for tactical breakdowns, while there are ongoing conversations with the 
Premier League regarding referees being interviewed on the programme in the 
future.

From David Coleman, Kenneth Wolstenholme and Des Lynam to Lineker et al, Match 
of the Day remains a cornerstone of the footballing weekend.

Match of the Day at 50, BBC One, 10.35pm Friday 22 August.
 