
Books, as I’m sure you all realise, make the perfect gifts. Firstly, they’re 
economically efficient: stick to paperbacks and you can furnish someone with a 
world entire for under a tenner. Secondly, they’re easy to wrap. Thirdly, and 
crucially, they’re a brilliant means of expressing regard: by matching your 
recipient with just the right book, you’re demonstrating how well you know 
them, and how much you care.

The best book presents are those that say something about, and to, the person 
doing the opening; the acme of my own book-gifting career came when I gave my 
dad – a socialist with a geography degree – a copy of Jared Diamond’s Guns, 
Germs and Steel for Christmas. Almost a decade later, he’s still finding new 
ways to work it into conversation.

To give a book, then, is an unselfish, outward-looking act – but to share one 
is something quite different. The act of sharing a book you love is fraught 
with anxiety and risk: you are, in effect, deliberately creating a test 
situation for your share-ee, on which your long-term view of them will depend. 
The books you share say little about the person with whom you’re sharing them, 
beyond the fact that you view them as worthy of the test. These are the books 
that say something about you.


Best crime and thriller books of 2015
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/03/best-crime-and-thriller-books-of-2015>
I first came across Dorothy L Sayers’ Gaudy Night 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/gaudy-night.html> about a decade ago, when my 
ex-boyfriend’s father pressed a copy on me. “You’ll like this,” he said, 
pulling it off a bookshelf as we were leaving after a weekend’s visit. I’d 
never heard of Sayers before; I wasn’t much of a crime aficionado (I’m still 
not), and my acquaintance with Golden Age detective fiction to that point had 
been limited to the 1980s TV series of Miss Marple, which my grandma used to 
let me stay up to watch. When he gave me the book, therefore, I thanked him 
vaguely and forgot all about it until, halfway through the train journey home 
and in lieu of alternative entertainment (this was during the pre-smartphone 
era), I dug it out and cracked the spine.

The book feels so fundamental to me, now, that I find it hard to cast my mind 
back to a time when I hadn’t read it, and harder still to explain what it’s 
about, because it seems to be about everything. It’s a novel about work and the 
moral value of work; the importance – indeed the necessity – of finding the job 
you’re fitted for and doing it to the very best of your abilities. It’s about 
truth, and the need, in a slippery, shifting world, to find the one true thing 
you’re willing to defend, no matter what the personal cost. It’s about 
friendship, and how it ebbs and flows as you yourself grow – or stop growing. 
It’s about writing: what it means to write well and how to do it. It’s about 
love and integrity, and the thought and work and consideration that must go 
into establishing and maintaining a relationship of equality and mutual 
respect. It’s about class and sex and society between the wars. And above all, 
it’s about the age-old question (which at the time of writing was a fresh, new 
one) of whether it’s possible for a woman to have it all: to have a life of the 
mind and of the heart, and to do equal honour to them both.

All of which makes the book sound like very heavy weather – but it isn’t, not 
at all. Though it carries all of those things with it, Gaudy Night is also a 
cracking detective story: a locked-room mystery in which the room is the 
fictional Oxford women’s college of Shrewsbury, the suspects the college’s 
staff and senior members, and the crime not a nice, neat murder, but a 
spiteful, sticky jumble of vicious pranks and poison pen letters. The book is 
the 10th in Sayers’ series of novels featuring Lord Peter Wimsey, her 
aristocratic amateur sleuth, but the first to be told entirely from the point 
of view of Harriet Vane, herself an author of detective fiction. She was 
introduced in an earlier novel in which she was saved from the hangman’s noose 
by Lord Peter after being mistakenly charged with the murder of her former 
lover. Peter fell in love with her during the trial and proposed to her. But 
scared, scarred and aware that her gratitude to him would put any relationship 
on a profoundly unequal basis, she refused. She crops up again inHave His 
Carcase <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00s9g4l>, in which the pair find an 
easier footing as they solve a murder case together. But Gaudy Night marks a 
significant gear-change for the series, in terms of Harriet’s move to centre 
stage and the fact that, having liberated herself from the point of view of her 
hero, Sayers is also free to shrug off the constraints of efficiency and 
emotional absence imposed by the detective genre itself.

We Have Always Lived in the Castle by Shirley Jackson – a house of ordinary 
horror
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/21/we-have-always-lived-in-the-castle-by-shirley-jackson-a-house-of-ordinary-horror>
As Harriet attempts to solve the crime that has set her old college by the 
ears, while grappling with her feelings for Peter and struggling with the 
possibility of introducing psychological realism into her own orderly and 
(metaphorically) bloodless crime novels, Sayers is busily doing the same. “You 
haven’t yet written the book you could write if you tried,” Peter says to 
Harriet halfway through the novel. “And you’ll get no peace until you do.” This 
is Sayers’ own attempt at fulfilling her potential as a writer – and the result 
is raw, provocative and deeply moving.

Really, I messed things up by reading this book first out of the Lord Peter 
Wimsey novels. I wish now that I’d started at the beginning and built up to it, 
in order to feel its full impact in the context of the series. When I turned 
greedily to the earlier books I was disappointed. They’re clever and amusing 
and well-written, but in the wake of Gaudy Night they seemed to me to be 
depthless: all head, no heart. While the novel has its critics (Golden Age 
purists notoriously view Harriet as a Yoko Ono figure who lured Sayers away 
from the true path) and is, even to my eyes, not without flaws. The lazy 
assumptions around class are jarring, but it’s nevertheless the most honest, 
rigorous and robustly feminist interrogation of love and work that I’ve come 
across. I can think of few books that I love more.

Over the years, I’ve been extremely selective about whom I’ve shared Gaudy 
Night with; the idea of someone I love responding to it in a lukewarm fashion 
is distressing. But by the same token, when it comes to people who really 
matter to me, I’m unable to keep it to myself. The stakes are high, but I need 
to know how they feel about it, so that I know how to feel about them. So 
please, before you comment, bear this in mind. I’ve shared this book with you, 
and like it or not, I’ll be judging you on what you say about it.
 