
Tourists were hurriedly evacuated from Barcelona's emblemetic Sagrada Familia 
basilica after an arson attack destroyed part of the original work of its 
eccentric architect,Antoni Gaudí 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/antoni-gaudi>.

A local man reportedly set the blaze after walking into the sacristy, spraying 
it with a flammable liquid and setting fire to the priests' robes stored there.

A group of tourists raised the alarm after flames and smoke started billowing 
from the sacristy and emergency services rushed to the building. Some 1,500 
people had to be evacuated, though only four needed treatment for smoke 
inhalation.

The sacristy was destroyed in the blaze and the crypt – part of the building 
completed while Gaudí was still alive – was badly damaged by smoke.

All the robes and furniture in the sacristy were lost, local fire chief Miguel 
Ángel Fuente said.

Joan Rigol, the president of the society in charge of building the unfinished 
temple, claimed the arsonist had mental health problems, and said he had been 
caught by a group of tourists and handed to police.

The colourful basilica, with its soaring, ceramic-encrusted towers, became a 
tourist attraction and emblem of the city decades before it was due to be 
finished.

Gaudí devoted the last 15 years of his life to the building before he was run 
down by a tram in 1926, at which point less than a quarter of it had been 
built. Work stalled in the 1930s and funding by public subscription meant money 
to pay for it appeared slowly.

Income from 2.5 million visitors a year has allowed progress to speed up, and 
religious services are now held there. Architects are still unwilling to put an 
exact date on when the building may be finished.

Pope Benedict XVI formally consecrated it as a basilica in November.

A previous arson attack saw anarchists break into the building in 1936 and 
burn many of Gaudí's original models and plans, meaning later building work has 
required a certain amount of guesswork.

Authorities plan to continue with services there over Easter.

The British tennis player Andy Murray, who is in the city for the Barcelona 
Open tournament, had to cancel a photoshoot at the site.
 