
"My client is not in a hurry", Antoni Gaudí is said to have remarked when 
asked if he was concerned about the time it was taking to build theBasilica and 
Expiatory Church of the Holy Family 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sagrada_Fam%C3%ADlia> in Barcelona. According to 
the Old Testament, Gaudí's client was in much more of a hurry than his 
architect: he rushed to create the world in just six days, although even He 
needed a rest on the seventh.

Gaudí was one of God's most loyal servants, yet nothing would make him rush 
the Sagrada Família. He worked on this extraordinary, vegetable-like city 
church from 1883 until his death in 1926.

The date of the completion of the Sagrada Família has long been hazy, a matter 
of conjecture rather than fact. For decades after the Spanish civil war it was 
widely believed that it would never be finished and many thought it was best it 
stayed this way. This was less to do with money – the basilica has always been 
self-funding through donations and ticket sales – and more to do with the 
architecture itself. Now that Gaudí was dead, surely God alone knew how this 
visionary Catalan architect would have completed the work. Gaudí's time scale 
and imagination were such that the architect would surely have changed his 
plans over the years. This was to be the work of generations.

Gaudí would have found it wrong that the one more or less realistic date set 
for the completion of the Sagrada Familiais the centenary of his own death in 
2026 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/sep/22/sagrada-familia-final-completion-date?newsfeed=true>
. He was a man who had long swallowed his youthful vanity and buried his pride. 
When he was taken to hospital after being hit by a tram in 1926 it should be no 
surprise that he was mistaken for a tramp.

No. There should be no fixed date for the completion of the Sagrada Familia. 
In a world in which, increasingly, architecture has become a form of 
advertising and product design with showy "icons" raced up in months as if this 
was a virtue, the saga of Gaudí's basilica teaches us the lesson of patience.

Today, we build far too quickly for a number of banal reasons. A fast buck. An 
endemic and hysterical television makeover show mentality. A belief that 
getting things done quickly is a virtue. Management-led culture. A 
bullet-headed "On time, on budget" mentality. The dismal idea that rapid 
construction – of executive housing estates, unwanted supermarkets and other 
schlock – is a powerful economic lever that, when pulled, will kick a boot up 
the backside of a flagging economy.

Stop. Worthwhile architecture, whether a home or a cathedral, has its seasons. 
There is no ultimate need to hurry its making, while the very making of a 
building is just as important as its day-to-day use. An economy, meanwhile, can 
be boosted as much by having skilled craft workers shaping thoughtful buildings 
as it might by people shopping gormlessly in rushed-up shopping malls.
Architecture <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture> – real, 
true and beautiful architecture in the service of our spirit and senses as well 
as our everyday needs – is the end result of contented producers rather than 
dissatisfied consumers.

Today, we treat architecture as if it was a throwaway consumer "good". We 
should learn to slow down. Rome wasn't built in day, nor was St Peter's. Even 
Barry and Pugin's Palace of Westminster was 30 years in the making.

In Ireland, a Slow Architecture  <http://www.slowarchitecture.ie/>movement has 
been formed, touring the country in gentle fashion by barge. This is a gently 
measured echo of the Slow Food movement founded in 1986 byCarlo Petrini 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carlo_Petrini> when McDonald's opened its first 
fast food joint in Italy by the Spanish Steps in the very heart of historic and 
romantic Rome. Gaudí might well have approved the Irish initiative, and not 
least because taking architecture slowly – it has always been the slowest of 
the arts – allows it to breathe.

It is because the Sagrada Família has taken so long to realise that new 
talents with new skills have banded together to complete Gaudí's masterwork. 
Today,Mark Burry <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mark_Burry>, a New Zealander 
with the very latest computer-design skills is executive architect of the 
emerging basilica. By taking the slow road, the Sagrada Família has embraced 
the skills, intelligence and craft of successive generations. And, because 
people from around the globe raised in a world of lightning-fast, gimmee, 
gimmee junkitecture find it so compelling, it is even able to pay its own slow 
way.
 