
I've heard it said by Greenpeace old hands that when they first arrived in the 
Russian Arctic back in the 1980s, Russian fishermen would shower them with 
gifts. They found it acutely embarrassing. WhenI went to the Arctic Ocean last 
year to take action against Gazprom's Prirazlomnaya drilling rig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/aug/24/greenpeace-activists-arctic-oil-russia>
, I got a decidedly less friendly reaction, but there were no arrests and 
certainly no talk of years in prison.

My protest was hardly the stuff of legend, it's true. I had managed, somehow, 
to climb up the side of the platform, and was hanging about eight metres above 
the freezing Arctic Ocean. Fifteen hours later, when my hard hat was finally 
broken by the water cannon the rig workers were blasting at us, I decided it 
was probably time to climb down.

This August, the same Greenpeace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/greenpeace> ship went back to the same 
waters, to repeat the same protest at the same rig. Gazprom knew exactly what 
to expect and so, we thought, did we.

And then the Russian Federal Security Service (FSB) turned up. The guns and 
knives came out. A cannon was fired, but this time it was not water but bursts 
of ammunition across the bow of our ship.FSB commandos abseiled onto the deck 
and seized the vessel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/sep/19/greenpeace-protesters-arrested-arctic>
, and all 30 on board were held at gunpoint and taken to Murmansk. Since then 
they spent two months in prison, some of them in solitary confinement for 23 
hours a day, before being released on bail. They have been charged with 
hooliganism, which carries a potential sentence of seven years.

The story of my broken hard hat doesn't impress people quite so much as it 
used to.

So what happened in the 12 months that passed between these identical 
protests? What prompted such a different response?

The profit margins on offshore oil extraction in the Arctic have always been 
slim, and it's certainly arguable that recent developments onshore, most 
notably the discovery of the Bazhenov shale deposits, have made Gazprom and 
Shell's expensive joint venture even less economically viable than it already 
was. If that's the case, then Greenpeace drawing attention to its weaknesses 
(like the lack of any plan to clean up an oil spill) stops being a mere 
annoyance and becomes a serious threat.

Yet by over-reacting and demanding the FSB take action, Gazprom attracted a 
lot more publicity than the hanging of a banner could ever have achieved.

I think the Prirazlomnaya and Gazprom's machinations to keep it afloat need to 
be understood in a global context, where an unlikely and somewhat uncomfortable 
coalition is forming between investors, environmentalists, scientists, 
intelligence agencies and an increasingly radicalised public all calling for 
governments to intervene on climate change. If we – and they – succeed, then 
Gazprom and its partner Shellwill see billions wiped from their balance sheets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/apr/19/carbon-bubble-financial-crash-crisis>
.

Here's the problem. Recently the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
warned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/sep/27/ipcc-world-dangerous-climate-change>
 that we can emit a further half a trillion tonnes of carbon dioxide and still 
stay below 2C of global warming by the turn of this century. Two degrees may 
sound trifling, but the global impacts are enormous. It means we lose all of 
the Arctic sea ice and several low-lying nations, and recent extreme weather 
will look mild by comparison.

So we have a carbon budget of around 500 gigatonnes (GT), yet burning the 
fossil fuel that corporations now have in their reserves would produce 2,795GT 
of carbon dioxide — five times the so-called safe amount. So four-fifths of 
known fossil fuel reserves and all of the undiscovered resources, including 
everything in the Arctic, need to remain where they are, underground, unburnt. 
Worthless.Oil <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/oil> companies' market 
valuations are based on "assets" whose value has been wiped out by a cruel 
twist of atmospheric physics. The inevitable market correction won't be pretty, 
which explains how the oil companies persuaded their vassal governments to 
ignore the end of the oil age and keep setting fire to our future.

For a stark reminder of what we'll have to get used to if these companies get 
their way, you need only look to the Philippines. More than 5,000 people lost 
their lives because of typhoon Haiyan, and hundreds of thousands were left 
displaced, without food, water or shelter. We know climate change will bring 
even more extreme weather events. Three years earlier,Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> lost 50,000 people to a heatwave 
similar to the one that killed 50,000 in Europe in 2003. Extreme weather will 
become more and more common if irresponsible governments and fossil fuel 
companies cannot put their self-interest aside and call time on our addiction 
to fossil fuels.

This concern isn't confined to idealistic hippies. The International Monetary 
Fund is asking for an end to fossil fuel subsidies. The World Bank is saying 
that our aspirations to put an end to global poverty in the context of runaway 
climate change will become futile. Intelligence agencies are warning 
governments that the biggest threat to global peace and security is climate 
change, and PricewaterhouseCoopers is warning of stranded fossil fuel 
investments.

Not only are fossil fuel companies holding a busted flush, but alternative 
energy sources are encroaching on their territory. Photovoltaic panels have 
dropped in price by over 99% since the 70s, and by around 80% in the last five 
years. In India, solar is cheaper than diesel. Wind power is following a 
similar, if slightly less dramatic, decline in cost. The gas industry in Brazil 
has asked the government to institute protectionist measures to limit their 
exposure to competition from wind – a competition they have begun to lose. In 
Australia, the world's biggest coal exporter, all forms of renewable 
electricity are cheaper than fossil fuels, even coal. But the current prices 
are less important than the direction of travel. Renewables are dropping in 
price, while fossil fuels are rising.

All of which explains why companies like Gazprom are so determined to silence 
their critics. Their only solution is to obfuscate, to muddy the waters and 
delay the inevitable, all with the connivance of their pocket politicians. Our 
governments have become the man in the joke who, when confronted by a 
highwayman with the usual demand of "your money or your life", asks for time to 
think about it.

Which brings us back to peaceful protests on oil rigs in the freezing Arctic 
Ocean - the only rational response to years of deliberate inaction. In the days 
after typhoon Haiyan, the Filipino climate commissionertold the assembled 
delegates at the latest round of UN climate talks in Warsaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/nov/11/typhoon-haiyan-philippines-climate-talks>
:

"I feel that I should rally behind the climate advocates who peacefully 
confront those historically responsible for the current state of our climate. 
These selfless people who fight coal, expose themselves to freezing 
temperatures, or block oil pipelines. In fact, we are seeing increasing 
frustration and, thus, more increased civil disobedience. The next two weeks, 
these people, and many around the world who serve as our conscience will again 
remind us of our enormous responsibility."

And we will keep doing exactly that. We will battle to make our voices heard 
over the oil industry and their pliant politicians as efforts are made to drown 
us out, to shut us up, perhaps with a court order, perhaps in a jail cell. Not 
because they're evil, but because their fortune is at stake. And it's hard to 
lose a trillion dollars gracefully.
 