
The biggest joint ground assault of the war in Ivory Coast so far is now under 
way against Laurent Gbagbo's presidential residence, anAlassane Ouattara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alassane-ouattara> official claimed.

Apollinaire Yapi, a spokesman for Ouattara's military commander Guillaume 
Soro, said the pro-Ouattara republican forces were advancing in the Plateau and 
Cocody districts of Abidjan on Monday with significant French support.

"It is the biggest ground assault since this started," Yapi said. "This time 
it will not stop. It will continue until Gbagbo steps down, or at least until 
he is pushed back into his residence. If he wants to stay there as a prisoner 
then he can. The main concern for Mr Ouattara is for normal life to resume."

Yapi added: "What's happening is the same as yesterday, by ground and 
helicopter. The military target is to destroy all heavy weapons that have been 
threatening the civilian population. They are not targeting Mr Gbagbo. He must 
be captured and put on trial."

The Red Cross was also present, collecting the wounded and killed, he added. 
Meanwhile Yapi claimed hundreds of pro-Gbagbo fighters were in custody at the 
Golf Hotel and other locations.

French military officials were not available for comment. A UN mission 
spokesman said: "We haven't had an assessment of last night's operation. I 
can't speak for the French forces."

Twenty-four French military vehicles rolled out of their base in Abidjan on 
Monday morning in a fresh attempt to stem the fighting in Ivory Coast's key 
city.

The convoy included three tanks and several armoured personnel carriers. 
Residents have reported heavy fighting between forces loyal toLaurent Gbagbo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/laurent-gbagbo> and Alassane Ouattara in the 
Cocody and Plateau districts.

On Sunday night, at least six French and two UN helicopters fired rockets on 
the presidential residence where Gbagbo is defiantly clinging to power.

Gbagbo's spokesman Ahoua Don Mello said thick smoke billowed from the 
presidential residence after the combined strikes, but he declined to say 
whether Gbagbo was inside at the time.

"UN and French helicopters continue to fire at President Gbagbo's residence 
which has been partially destroyed," he told Reuters on Sunday night.

The head of the UN and the French president, Nicolas Sarkozy, authorised the 
strikes, accusing Gbagbo of continuing to use heavy weapons against civilians 
in his bid to hang on to office more than four months after losing the 
presidential election.

Ban Ki-moon, the UN secretary general, said Gbagbo's camp had pretended to 
surrender on 5 April so they could regroup their forces and redeploy heavy 
weapons. They have since resumed attacks on civilians, the UN mission (UNOCI) 
headquarters and patrols and Ouattara's base at the Golf Hotel, he said.

"On 7 April, Mr Gbagbo's forces used armoured personnel carriers mounted with 
heavy machine guns to attack the civilian population in Adjamé and Attecoube 
districts," Ban said. "More than 200 civilians from the two districts came to 
UNOCI headquarters to seek refuge, and the mission treated 50 wounded 
civilians."

He continued: "These actions are unacceptable and cannot continue. The 
continued use of heavy weapons against the civilian population and our 
peacekeepers, as well as the attack against the headquarters of the legitimate 
government, have compelled me, once again, to instruct UNOCI to use all 
necessary means to prevent the use of these weapons."

It was for this reason that the UN carried out last night's military 
operation, he added, with support from the French at Ban's request. "I am 
particularly concerned about the humanitarian situation across the country and 
about human rights abuses. Civilians are bearing the brunt of the violence – 
the fighting must stop. Mr Gbagbo needs to step aside immediately."

Jean-Pierre Mignard, a lawyer for Ouattara, the internationally recognised 
winner of the November vote, said he supported the French and UN strikes.

"We are satisfied because the Gbagbo residence is a headquarters, and it is 
from this headquarters that shots from heavy weaponry are being fired," Mignard 
told Europe-1 radio. "Gbagbo is in the process of creating a situation of civil 
war to make the situation impossible."

On Sunday night residents from nearby neighbourhoods reported seeing two UN 
Mi-24 attack helicopters and a French helicopter open fire on the residence.

Reporters saw the helicopters take off from the French military base followed 
minutes later by explosions coming from the direction of the residence. 
Successive waves of French helicopters took off from the base in the following 
hours and additional bombardments could be heard.

A first round of UN and French air strikes last week destroyed some of 
Gbagbo's arsenal of tanks, mortars and other heavy weapons. Gbagbo has been 
living in a bunker in his residence in Abidjan for nearly a week.

Pro-Ouattara forces began an offensive late last month to install him in 
power, sweeping across the country in just days before meeting resistance in 
Abidjan. Human Rights Watch has accused the pro-Ouattara forces of killing 
hundreds of civilians, raping political opponents and burning villages during 
the offensive to try to put him in office.

"Everyone here is traumatised. We've all lost something – a member of the 
family, our homes, our belongings," Philomene Houe, a 39-year-old soap maker in 
the western town of Duékoué, told the Associated Press.
 