
My friend George Cyriax, who has died aged 81, was a prominent financial 
journalist for theFinancial Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/financialtimes> and the Economist, a 
financial consultant and publisher, and an honorary treasurer to the 
Alzheimer’s Society.

He was one of the brilliant editorial team on the Financial Times from 1960 to 
1966, contributing a regular, influential weekly column in which he repeatedly 
advocated modernising reform of British business. In 1960, with Robert 
Oakeshott, he wrote The Bargainers: A Survey of Modern Trade Unionism.

After leaving the Financial Times, Cyriax set up a joint financial consultancy 
as well as co-founding Gower Press, an academic publishing company. He retired 
in the 1990s, but continued to support and advise small businesses as well as 
retaining a highly informed interest in the investment market.

Active in the voluntary sector, in 1987 he became honorary treasurer to the 
Alzheimer’s Society at a time when it was in serious difficulties. He greatly 
strengthened the financial position of the society, its income increasing 
50-fold, from £300k to £15m over the 12 years of his tenure. He also acted as 
honorary treasurer of the Acton Housing Association.

Born in Wimpole Street, central London, George was the son of an Italian 
mother, Leonora (nee Capello), and James Cyriax, a consultant in physical 
medicine. He was educated at Wellington college and then at Gonville and Caius 
College, Cambridge, where he gained a double first in economics. After 
graduating he worked for the soap manufacturer Hedley, selling soap products to 
small retailers. When he met Jack Cohen, the founder of Tesco, he was impressed 
by his marketing philosophy of “pile it high, sell it cheap”.

He met Moira Hogan at a party and they married in 1959. Every summer they 
enjoyed great parties for both the English and Italian sides of the family in 
their house in the hills above Nice, France.

George’s talents were remarkable. At one time the wine correspondent for the 
Financial Times, he was knowledgeable about wine, music, art and wildlife. In 
his later years he became an accomplished artist.

He was a wonderful companion, exuberantly enthusiastic about everything, 
bubbling with ideas, argumentative and opinionated, yet always willing to 
listen. His flow of conversation never stopped, even on the long and exhausting 
walks we and others took with him all over Europe.

He is survived by Moira, his three children, Julian, Dominic and Amanda, and 
by four grandchildren.
 