
Andy Coulson denied to George Osborne in 2007 that he knew that phone hacking 
at the News of World went beyond a single rogue reporter, according to evidence 
given by the chancellor in theLeveson inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry>.

The senior Conservative politician also admitted that "a third" of his 
meetings with media owners and top executives since 2005 were with News 
International, including a meeting at a chalet at Davos in early 2009 and a 
dinner in April 2011 as phone hacking revelations mounted.

Osborne said that as shadow chancellor he briefly asked Coulson about phone 
hacking in March 2007, when he was sounding him out for the job of director of 
communications for the Conservative party.

This was two months after Coulson resigned as News of the World editor after 
the paper's royal editor Clive Goodman and private investigator Glenn Mulcaire 
were jailed for phone-hacking related offences.

Coulson has always maintained that he had no knowledge of or involvement in 
phone hacking at the paper, but took responsibility for what happened on his 
watch and resigned.

Osborne said that he asked Coulson "in a general sense, as you might do in a 
social encounter, whether there was more in the phone hacking story that was 
going to come out, that was not already public, that we needed to know about – 
and he said no".

The Conservative minister was the man who recommended to David Cameron that he 
consider hiring Coulson.

Osborne conceded that he thought the appointment was controversial, but said 
it was worth doing because "I thought in the end the balance was that it was 
worth hiring someone with real talent and ability, and weathering the adverse 
publicity of appointing someone who had had to resign from the News of the 
World".

The chancellor and key Conservative strategist said that he had consulted 
Rebekah Brooks – then editor of the Sun and a close friend of Coulson's – as 
Cameron deliberated on the potential appointment, but he sought to play down 
its importance.

"I don't want to overstate the importance of [talking to Brooks] I've just put 
it in here for completeness," he said.

Carefully choosing his language, Osborne consistently sought to de-emphasise 
Coulson's links with News International, and said that the former News of the 
World editor was only helpful in dealing with the publisher of the Sun and the 
Times simply "because he was the director of communications".

On the same theme, Osborne said that "it was not a consideration: let's hire 
the ex-News International man. It was: let's hire this very experience 
ex-newspaper editor". He added that he thought Coulson had "a particular talent 
and ability" he had detected in dealings with him during his time as shadow 
chancellor.

He argued that the "endorsement of the Sun has been elevated to almost 
mythical status", which was "just one of a whole range of things we felt we had 
to get right in the run-up to a general election".

There were few other questions for Osborne about Coulson from Robert Jay QC, 
counsel to the inquiry, who opted not to ask David Cameron's right hand man 
what he thought about the mounting allegations of phone hacking after July 
2009, and whether he believed the Conservatives communications head was still 
right for the job.

Osborne, concluding his evidence on Coulson, said the editor turned PR man had 
become a "personal friend", although he added "sadly I've not been able to 
speak to him for a year". Earlier this month Coulson was charged with perjury 
by the Scottish police relating to evidence he had previously given in the 
trial of Scottish politician Tommy Sheridan.

Osborne said that he met with Rebekah Brooks and James Murdoch for dinner on 
the night of 5 April 2011, hours after Ian Edmondson, the former news editor of 
the News of the World and Neville Thurlbeck, the paper's former chief reporter, 
were arrested. He said the BSkyB deal was not mentioned at that dinner.

He also revealed that he met the Murdochs at a chalet at the World Economic 
Forum in Davos in January 2009, but said it wasn't a "crucial encounter".

Osborne readily admitted that by the time the Sun switched political 
allegiance in September 2009, he and others in the party had had "quite a lot 
of lunches or dinners with the Murdoch family".

His close ties to the Murdoch family also saw him get an invitation from 
Rebekah Brooks to a dinner with Elisabeth Murdoch's on 6 September 2008 shortly 
after Elisabeth Murdoch's 40th birthday. But he said he was not too close to 
News International, quipping "if it was a question of outlunching them I don't 
think we would have beaten New Labour".

Osborne also said that the Times columnist Daniel Finkelstein helped him with 
his speeches. "He occasionally provides good one-liners and jokes", he added, 
but said that there was nothing improper about their friendship, which 
stretched back many years.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <https://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 