
George Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> will 
unveil plans this week to give up to five million current pensioners the right 
to swap their regular retirement incomes for cash lump sums when he unveils his 
final budget before the general election.

In a highly populist move designed to woo older voters into the arms of the 
Tories, the chancellor will say on Wednesday that a Conservative government 
would end restrictions on the sale of annuities, allowing people to cash them 
in without incurring the current punitive tax penalties.

The move – while certain to be popular with existing pensioners, who will not 
benefit from radical pension reforms already announced – will be controversial, 
with critics arguing that older people could be tempted to make rash decisions 
and leave themselves short of regular income late in life.

With weeks to go before the 7 May election, Osborne will paint a picture of an 
economy that is on the mend after several years of necessary, if painful, 
belt-tightening.

The chancellor is widely expected to announce a limited package of tax cuts, 
saying he will raise further the tax-free threshold, while also stressing that 
tight control must be kept over spending for years to come, in order to bring 
the deficit under control.

The Liberal Democrat business secretary, Vince Cable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/vincentcable>, has insisted there is no 
room for bumper pre-election giveaways. But with the deficit on the public 
finances for the coming year expected to be up to £5bn smaller than the £76bn 
forecast in December, Osborne may be able to ease back a little on previously 
outlined austerity plans.

He is expected to say his budget will help deliver a “truly national 
recovery”, adding that it “will not be a budget of pre-election gimmicks or 
giveaways”, but a “budget for the long term”.

The independent Office for Budget Responsibility is expected to upgrade its 
GDP growth forecasts modestly for 2015 and 2016, as the economy reaps the 
short-term benefits of cheaper oil prices. In December, the OBR forecast 2.4% 
growth for this year and 2.2% for next, but experts believe that now looks too 
pessimistic.

Osborne’s latest move on pensions – which would be introduced from 2016 – is 
aimed at the millions of pensioners who cannot benefit from a range of other 
pension freedoms announced in the past year by ministers, including more 
beneficial tax rules on the withdrawal of lump sums from pension pots, because 
they have already entered into annuity deals.

Currently people wanting to sell their annuity face a 55% tax charge, or up to 
70% in some cases. The government will remove this charge, so people are taxed 
only at their marginal rate.

Treasury sources said last night that they expected most of the five million 
people with annuities to keep them, and stressed that the government would work 
with the Financial Conduct Authority to ensure appropriate support and advice 
was offered.

As a result of the changes, sources said, pensioners would be able to sell the 
income they receive from their annuity and would then have the freedom to use 
the capital as they wish. They would be able to take the money as a lump sum, 
or place it in a drawdown scheme and use the proceeds more gradually. Ministers 
believe that obtaining annuities could be attractive to a broad range of 
institutional investors and will be consulting over who should be allowed to 
purchase the annuity income.

Osborne is also likely to announce new help for the North Sea oil industry and 
new powers to pursue bankers and accountants who help their clients to evade 
tax.

Businesses are calling on the chancellor to extend the current £500,000 Annual 
Investment Allowance, which allows them to write off investment against their 
tax bills. That limit is due to fall to £25,000 at the end of the year.

John Longworth, director of the British Chambers of Commerce, urged the 
chancellor to make the £500,000 limit permanent. “Businesses are operating in 
uncertain times – with conflict in the Middle East and Russia and a sluggish 
eurozone to contend with. Yet the greatest source of uncertainty is political 
and home-grown. Businesses have grown tired of constant chopping and changing 
in the UK tax system. They need long-term certainty, rather than short-term 
incentives, to help support investment decisions.”

Labour will seek to highlight the fact Osborne has missed the deficit-cutting 
targets he set himself in 2010, while wage growth has been so weak that living 
standards for many have barely recovered to their pre-recession level.

Chris Leslie MP, Labour’s shadow chief secretary to the Treasury, said: “After 
five years of George Osborne, working people are worse off and our NHS is in 
crisis. This chancellor gives with one hand, but takes away much more with the 
other. No pre-election tax cut can mask the £1,127 a year families have lost on 
average from all his changes since 2010.”

Danny Gabay, director of City consultancy Fathom, said the chancellor might be 
able to use the budget to slow austerity. “The current expenditure plans call 
for a staggering, and unrealistic, 42% real-terms cut in non-protected 
departmental spending. An already austere 22% has been achieved over the past 
four years. The chancellor may use his wriggle room to moderate the extent to 
which future cuts are required to meet Conservative borrowing targets.”
 