
Gerardo Martino has dramatically quit as Argentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/argentina> coach, a week after his side’s 
defeat by Chile in the final of the Copa América Centenario. Martino blamed 
“serious problems” at the Asociacion de Futbol Argentino for his decision to 
step down.

Lionel Messi, forgiveness and the retirement that divided Argentina
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jun/29/lionel-messi-retirement-argentina-football-team>
Martino’s entire coaching staff also went with him, according to a statement 
on the AFA’s official website 
<http://www.afa.com.ar/4842/comunicado-de-gerardo-martino>, which read: “The 
national team’s technical staff have decided to hand in their resignation on 
this day [Tuesday].

“Due to uncertainty over the designation of new authorities in the Argentine 
Football Association and the serious problems in putting together the team that 
will represent the country in the Olympic Games, the staff have chosen to 
resign.”

Martino took over the Albiceleste in 2014 after their loss to Germany in the 
World Cup final, but despite taking them to two straight Copa América finals, 
failed to capture a trophy. His side lost to Chile on penalties in this year’s 
Copa América, a year after the same outcome – a shootout defeat after a 0-0 
draw – in last year’s tournament. Argentina’s 23-year wait for a trophy 
continues.

But Martino’s resignation comes after a fractious couple of weeks in 
Argentinian football, in which Fifa and Conmebol have been forced to step in to 
oversee the running of the AFA in wake of several scandals. Luis Segura, the 
AFA president, was charged in June with fraud related to TV broadcasting 
rights. Segura is also under investigation by the Argentinian courts.

The AFA is struggling to put a team together for the Olympics in Rio, which 
begin on 5 August, and the country is still coming to terms with Lionel Messi’s 
decision to retire from international football, which he announced in the wake 
of the defeat by Chile. Messi missed a penalty in the shootout in New Jersey, 
and afterwards said he felt his time was up.

“I tried so hard to be [a] champion with Argentina. But it didn’t happen. I 
couldn’t do it. I think it’s best for everyone, for me and for many people who 
want it. The choice for me is over, it is a decision. I tried many times [to be 
a champion] but did not.”

Sergio Aguero’s father recently hinted that if Messi follows through with his 
decision, his son will retire too. During the Copa America, Messi described the 
AFA as a “disaster” and said the organisation of flights and scheduling was 
substandard.

Martino, 53, leaves with a record of 19 wins, seven draws and three losses in 
his two years in charge. He also coached Barcelona to second place in La Liga 
in 2013-14.
 