
With little in the way of a structured path into the industry, it is often by 
coincidence rather than design that people end up working in branding and 
design.

If branding and design is an area you've got your eye on though, remember the 
industry needs new recruits who are more than just creative. Understanding a 
businesses' challenges and objectives, then addressing these through design 
requires a certain mindset, as well as a creative spark.

I was fortunate enough to experience how design can be a powerful commercial 
tool in the marketing mix while studying for my masters degree. I think it has 
been invaluable in my career, but doing a degree or course in business or 
marketing is not the only way to achieve this balance between creativity and 
commercial nous. For those looking to make it in the design industry, here are 
my top tips for making the right impression.

Get as much exposure to different disciplines and agencies as possible

Unlike advertising agencies, design agencies tend to be smaller and have their 
own specialisms. As such, it is even more important for candidates looking to 
get into the industry to understand which agencies – and roles within them – 
will suit them best. University degrees have come under fire for not preparing 
students well for a career in design. However, because of the tendency to 
specialise, it would be difficult for universities to cater to all the 
specialisms. Students looking to work in design should use their degree to 
identify the top three areas they are keen to work in and explore them through 
work placements or internships. Don't just do one placement – try and find an 
opportunity to try a number of different roles in a variety of agencies and it 
will be easier to see where you could enter the industry and flourish.

Maintain a firm understanding of the wider industry


Despite the specialist nature of the industry, it is key for candidates 
looking to get into to design to keep a broad perspective. Even if you believe 
you have identified the area you want to specialise in, potential employers 
will value you more if you have a firm understanding of the wider industry. 
Reading the key trade press on a regular basis and at least being aware of the 
books written by key players in the industry will stand you in good stead when 
it comes to your interview.

Focus on transferable skills


When asked to summarise the design industry, the most likely response is that 
it is all about creativity and ideas. This is true but, as with most 
industries, the most desirable skills in new recruits are good communication, 
drive and the ability to demonstrate the commercial value of their work to 
their clients' bottom line.

The design industry is renowned for its dynamism, so it is imperative that you 
have a "can do" attitude and a desire to get stuck in. Indeed, the best 
creatives I have worked with are those who are ideas-driven. They understand 
how to be creative within a framework to deliver maximum value and are able to 
effectively communicate their vision to clients. So, for anyone wishing to 
carve themselves a successful career in design I would definitely suggest 
obtaining transferable skills and learning how to promote these in their 
everyday roles.

A placement at any company should enable graduates to obtain transferable 
skills. Alternatively, many universities now offer courses in transferable 
skills. Investing in core skills illustrates your drive to succeed and in many 
agencies this clear ambition and enthusiasm will get you more exposure to the 
projects and people that will help you to progress.

Organisational fit is important – so be yourself


The most important piece of advice for anyone looking to get into the design 
industry is simple – be yourself. On a daily basis you will experience a number 
of different scenarios and issues that will test your skill set. However, 
regardless of the solution you come up with, how you handle the situation will 
count for a lot. In fact, this is a key consideration for many employers when 
interviewing, and the reason why recruitment consultants will often quiz you on 
the type of agency you think you will fit into.

Fit is important. It will determine how you interact with other members of 
staff and how you deal with all of the challenges the job throws at you. As the 
phrase goes, we should all work to live, not live to work. Your fit into a job 
and indeed a company is a vital element of achieving this balance, which is why 
it is so important that you are always yourself when meeting potential 
employers. Putting on a false persona or trying to be the type of person you 
think they are looking for may get you the job but it will not get you a career.

Find a company and job where your passion cannot help but come through and you 
will be in a fantastic position to not only be employed but also to excel.

Martyn Withers, founder and director, Embrace Brands 
<http://www.embracebrands.com/> – a London based branding agency

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox, sign up for ourweekly Careers update 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 