
Winning your first job in media is tough; it's a highly competitive sector. At 
Napoleon Creative, we recently received more than 250 applications for one 
graduate opening, and it was my job to sift through them, weeding out the weaker
CVs <https://www.theguardian.com/careers/cv>, leaving around 40 to re-read 
thoroughly with the team. So how can you write a CV that survives that first 
cull?

When I'm recruiting, submission is usually via email and I wait for a good 
number of CVs to come in before I start reviewing. Initially I just read the 
opening sentence of the covering email. That opening sentence is important.

For me, a formal tone doesn't work; my eyes just scan over it and I lose 
interest in the application quickly:

Dear Sir/Madam, 
I am writing to apply for the researcher position you have advertised. 

I prefer openingswhich feel like I'm being talked to as a human, rather than a 
human resources robot. I prefer a warm, personal tone to your opening 
paragraph, as though you were meeting the person face-to-face:

Dear Sir/Madam,
I hope you are well. My name is Anna and, as a recent English literature 
graduate who has spent the last three years writing about apocrypha in Hamlet 
and tinkering about on Photoshop, I'm writing to apply for the researcher 
position at Napoleon Creative.

My initial scan is always on screen, so your email is competing with 
everything else going on in my day: a script I'm writing, an edit I'm reviewing 
and chats on Skype with clients about changes to their projects. So keep your 
CV visually clean and simple, with space between each section so it feels like 
a relief from the rest of the clutter on my computer screen.

Younger applicants tend to throw in too much detail, leading to a dense 
document cluttered with irrelevancies. It's better to have a lean, one-page CV 
than two pages of filler for me to struggle through.

Media <https://www.theguardian.com/careers/media-jobs> applicants also tend to 
have chequered careers, changing jobs regularly as they move between projects 
and working in a variety of roles. A compelling personal statement at the top 
of a CV that brings all this experience into a coherent description of you and 
your career aspirations, often works well.

The first sentence should introduce the role you're looking for or the 
vacancy, if you're responding to a specific advert. Next describe what 
experience you've gained to help you in that role, and finally write a sentence 
to show that you're quietly confident, responsible, alert and willing to take 
on whatever task the job requires.

Finish with a little about your ambitions, remembering to be clear that you 
don't expect to get there at lightning speed. For instance: "I eventually want 
to be a producer, so I'm looking for production assistant roles to lay down a 
good foundation of experience first."

You need to communicate that you can work well with others, but don't rely on 
simply stating: "I can work as part of a team" – a cliché long overdue for 
retirement.

Instead, demonstrate where you've worked in a team, even if it was in 
part-time work while studying. For example: "I was one of seven shop floor 
staff, we worked as a team to make sure all customers were given the help they 
needed." You could also demonstrate this by including a group activity in a 
section about your interests.

When you write your covering letter, you should never claim to be the perfect 
candidate. For me, that is the kiss of death. Being the perfect candidate is 
not just about ticking all the requirement boxes, it's also about how you fit 
into the company.

So instead of saying you're the best person for the job, try this subtly 
different, more modest opening line: "I am excited to be applying for this 
role. Not only do the requirements match my skills and experience, but I am 
confident that this is a job I would really enjoy." This way, you're saying you 
have the right skills, but you've left it to the employer to decide whether 
you're right for the team.

Think of the application process as the beginning of a conversation between 
you and the employer. Creative organisations tend to be informal in the way 
they talk to each other, so if your CV and covering letter have a friendly but 
professional tone of voice – as though you'd just met your next boss in person 
– your application will come to life. The more human and approachable your 
application, the more they'll want to meet you in person.

Gavin Ricketts is the founder of Napoleon Creative 
<http://www.napoleoncreative.com/> and author of Clearly Creative CVs 
<http://www.cv4tv.co.uk/>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
. To get more content and advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our 
weekly Careers update <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/>.
 