
Hannah Klutsey ran from her family's single-room house with tears in her eyes. 
A mouthful of bread had lodged in her throat and her eyes were bloodshot and 
bulging.

"Mummy, water!" she shouted as she struggled to swallow. Her mother, Mary, 
dropped the bundle of firewood she had carried into the dusty compound and 
rushed to the huge plastic water pot in front of their ramshackle kitchen.

She came back with a plastic cup of water, which Hannah gulped down. Only 
later, when the youngster was recovering on her mother's knee, did they notice 
the mosquito larvae at the bottom of the cup: half a dozen wormlike creatures 
writhing in the water.

"The pot must have been left open for mosquitoes to lay eggs in the water," 
said Mary, whose immediate concern was that her only daughter, who had recently 
recovered from severe skin rashes, could fall ill again. "She survived her 
recent sickness by miracle: another illness could kill her," said Hannah's 
father, Benjamin, said as he emptied the contaminated water from the giant pot.

There is no running water in Kpobiman, the poverty-stricken community outside 
Accra in which Hannah and her family live. Like most of their neighbours, the 
Klutseys use water from a shallow borehole. Others are forced to draw water 
from stagnant pools, where germs and parasites are abundant.

"The water is so bad you can't imagine this community is just a stone's throw 
from the city," Jeleelah Quaye, the local assembly representative, said.

In the past year, more than 300 residents, both children and adults, have 
contracted buruli ulcer, a waterborne disease causing skin lesions and 
deformities. Four people have died, Quaye said.

In the five years since the Guardian first visited the Klutsey family, Hannah 
has grown into a beautiful five-year-old. Neighbours say she is a lively girl.

However, the family's living standards have not improved. They now have 
electricity, but still share a one-room hut. "This is not good for family life. 
How can we still be living in a single room with our children, some of whom are 
no longer kids, but adolescents?" Benjamin asks. They still have no sanitation, 
not even a pit latrine. Their staple diet is akple, a meal made from cassava 
and corn, which Mary also sells from a stand outside their home. "Meat is too 
expensive for us. We can't afford that luxury," she said.

At Christmas, they eat chicken and rice, but sometimes lunch is just a piece 
of bread. To supplement their diet, local children hunt rats. On the day the 
Guardian visited, thick black smoke billowed from nearby bushes where a dozen 
children had set fires to force the animals from their holes. One of the boys 
was Samuel, Hannah's 10-year-old brother. "It's good meat," he said, pulling 
the skin from a dead rat.

Hannah's eldest brother, 15-year-old Alfred, is already working, although he 
has not finished school. He proudly shows off the Manchester United jersey he 
bought with money earned on building sites.

But his spending is a source of irritation for Mary, who reminds Alfred that 
school term is about to start but the family do not have enough money to pay 
his outstanding exam fees. "That's my immediate headache," she said.

Mary hopes she "will one day own a big convenience shop", a business she 
thinks will help transform her family's economic situation. Her husband, on the 
other hand, wants the government to support his farm with subsidised 
fertilisers and farming implements.

"The crops are not doing well, because the rains have not been regular this 
season," he said as he dug up a cassava root. "This will do for dinner," he 
said. "We thank God we have something to eat today ... tomorrow will take care 
of itself."

Factfile: Ghana

Under-fives mortality (per 1,000 births): 76

Population on under $2 (£1.28) a day: 54.6%

Debt per capita: $125 (£80)

Life expectancy: 62

% children in education (F/M): 80.1/84.2
 