
Gill Hornby <http://www.foyles.co.uk/Gill-Hornby> has spent her life 
surrounded by novelists: her brother is Nick Hornby and her husband is Robert 
Harris. Now she's a novelist herself, having sold her debut,The Hive, for a 
six-figure sum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/dec/30/2013-books-preview-sebald-boyd> 
after a bidding war last year. It is about to be published in 12 territories 
and the film rights have already been snapped up.

Is it nerve-racking, publishing your first novel when your brother is Nick 
Hornby and your husband isRobert Harris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/robert-harris>? 

Yes, it's terrifying, and not just because there are bound to be comparisons. 
Apart from doing a bit of journalism, I've lived an extremely quiet life for 20 
years, raising my children, and now I'm feeling exposed. This is so much more 
personal than writing a column in a newspaper. It's entirely you.

The Hive is about playground politics among a group of mothers who meet at the 
gates of a home counties primary school. Need I ask you, as a mother of four, 
where you got the the idea?

I think I've had the idea all my life, since I was aged seven in the school 
playground. The book is about queen bees, the rule of the clique, and what that 
does to us. There are queen bees like my main character Bea everywhere. Most 
start off quite nice but, as their power over the clique grows, other women get 
girl-crushes on them and indulge them until we find we've created a monster. 
Then it's: "We hate you, you're a bitch", and we start hovering around someone 
else. Power does corrupt, completely, inevitably.

Have you seen this dynamic at work in your daughters' lives?

I have two girls, Holly and Matilda, 22 and 16, and two boys – Charlie and 
Sam, who are 21 and 12 – and, yes, of course I've seen it in their lives. The 
way girls function socially, from birth, is completely different from boys. 
Lots of it is very positive. We bond with one another by exchanging information 
constantly. You know the sort of thing: "I love that top" and "Where did you 
get your hair done?". We praise and flatter each other and automatically learn 
the details of each other's lives. And I don't want to sound sexist, ever, 
about anything but I don't think that is the male way at all. It is only women 
who cross-pollinate in this way. Most of Britain's schools would have crumbled 
to dust without the queen bee and her hive volunteering their services – they 
are the people who keep everything going.

Are you a queen bee?

No, I'm much better as an observer of female cliques. To be a queen bee you 
have to be able to control large groups of women, which I wouldn't have a clue 
about. It's also a very queen bee thing to exclude men, to organise girls' 
weekends and spa days and lunches. It's divide and rule. You don't have the 
same power in a mixed sex group. But birthday parties where you just invite 12 
women – that's not my style.

You write about the "lunch ladder" where mothers try to outdo each other with 
elaborate dishes at weekly lunches.

That's based on real-life. I found myself in a group of ladies who lunch 
called Gourmet Gamble, and I thought, Jesus Christ, why am I doing this? I 
think we all go slightly bonkers when our children are little.

You wrote a children's biography of Jane Austen 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Jane-Austen-Gill-Hornby/dp/1904977154>. Is she a big 
influence?

A huge influence. I'd like to actually be Jane Austen. She famously said 
"Three or four families in a country village is the very thing to work on" for 
a novelist, and I took that as my maxim. Family is the most interesting and 
important thing. I don't know why people write about anything that doesn't 
involve families. They contain all the tragedy and comedy and drama there is. 
And when I read literary novels about deracinated people who operate outside 
the family unit I just don't get it. I always think, yes, but how do you get on 
with your mother?

Which other authors do you admire?

Anne Tyler, enormously. She is someone else who takes the domestic and makes 
it universal. And I love all thePersephone books 
<http://www.persephonebooks.co.uk/>, the unsung women authors of the early 20th 
century. You readDorothy Whipple 
<http://www.persephonebooks.co.uk/authors/dorothy-whipple/> and think: why 
isn't she our most famous novelist? I think it's because the subject matter is 
domestic. But her writing is beautiful, amusing, tragic.

Have you always wanted to write novels?

Yes. But I never really believed I would. I don't think I ever had the 
confidence or the subject matter. Plus, the rest of the family seemed to have 
it licked.  I am – fair to say – a very late developer, and I had given up on 
myself. Robert had always told me I had to write a novel, and I would get 
defensive and say, "Why? Just because you do". But he kept on saying it. Then 
suddenly in my 50s, with the children not needing me so much, I found that not 
only did I have the mental space to give to novel-writing, I also had something 
I wanted to say. At last.

Was there any one thing that gave you the impetus to get started?

I was sacked by the Daily Telegraph when I was caught in Tenerife by the 
Icelandic ash cloud. I was writing a regular column for them and offered a news 
story about the stranded British tourists but they said no, so I filedone for 
theGuardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2010/apr/18/volcano-iceland-trapped-tenerife>
 and theTelegraph fired me. That was the rocket fuel I needed to get me to 
write the book.

Has it been a blessing or a curse having novelists for a brother and a husband?

Neither. Everyone asks me whether I've been in their shadow all these years 
and the truth is I've been living my life and it never felt that way. The only 
thing is, they have both had exceptionally strong careers, so it would have 
been humiliating if I'd written a book and failed to sell it. But I've managed 
to get people interested, and that's nice. In any event, we're not on the same 
territory. Certainly not with Robert. I'm upstairs writing about ladies who 
lunch and he's downstairs writing about ancient Romans.

Your subject matter is closer in some ways to your brother's…

I suppose it is. Although he specialises in the male perspective.

Did you seek advice from either of them?

I first showed Robert the book a third of the way through, which was ghastly. 
He didn't ask for any changes except more weather. He wanted seasons changing, 
that sense of the academic year, and he was absolutely right, so in came the 
conkers and the early frost. With Nick, I showed it to him once it was done. My 
elder daughter has been more of an active critic. She has just got a job in 
publishing and is a real bookworm, so her advice was valuable. My agent, 
Caroline Wood, was on it all the time.

I hear you met your agent through both of you being parents at the same school 
- like a sub-plot inThe Hive.

That is absolutely true. I could actually have made it up.

You have a two-book deal with Little, Brown. What is your next novel about? 

It's going to have an empty nest element, which is again where I am at at the 
moment. It will be set in the same community asThe Hive but focusing on 
different characters a few years further down the line with their children. I 
might try a bit of sex, too. I didn't want to do any in The Hive, even though 
there was some romance. I kept the sex off-stage.
 