
For many years the BBC has refused to permit non-religious opinion to be 
expressed inThought for the Day 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/religion/programmes/thought/>.

The item is provided by the corporation's religious unit, a mighty and jealous 
angel of the Lord that is omnipotent at the BBC in matters of faith. John 
Reith, the first director general, wielded his sword of passionate Christianity 
mightily, spattering religion over a great deal of the early output. When 
Broadcasting House was built, he chose the Latin inscription dedicating it to 
God – the first thing you see as you walk in. That went up in 1931, the year of 
my birth, so I know it's old and way out of date.

Although TftD is a remnant of Reithian Christianity, it has relaxed enough to 
extend invitations to other religions (but not Wicca, the oldest of all, or 
Jedi Knight, the youngest – which claimed 390,000 adherents in the last 
census). Yet the National Secular Society and the British Humanist Association, 
representing the 46% of the British population who belong to no religion, have 
been asking – nagging – for years for a turn at the holy microphone, and are 
ignored.

In the name of common sense, why? In a British Social Attitudes survey, 69% of 
participants either had no belief or never attended any religious service. 
Church attendance has dribbled down from 10% in the 1990s to an estimated 5.5%. 
The BBC can't claim it is offering what most people want. The secular society 
points out that its 46% of the population is more than all the minority faiths 
put together. In the last census, Judaism claimed only 0.5%; and Methodism, 
Catholicism and Spiritualism 0.6% each. Even the Jedi Knights got 0.75%.

Among Today's 6.6 million listeners there could be considerable interest in 
secular humanism. They need to know about groups where they could feel at home. 
And Thought for the Day is a rare opportunity to say for two whole minutes what 
you want to say, without interruption from impatient interviewers. (On Today? 
Never!)

Read the full blogs and join the debate online. From Monday Comment is free is 
podcasting a series of secular thoughts, Another Thought for the Day, from 
Claire Rayner, AC Grayling, Muriel Gray, Polly Toynbee and others,here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/series/another-thought-for-the-day>.
 