
Andy Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> had just captured 
Roger Federer's serve to go 4-2 up in the second set, having grittily fended 
off the Swiss champion's attempt to claw his way back from 0-40 down. The Scot 
was back in the match. The first point of the next game turned into a 21-stroke 
rally in which the extremes of geometrical precision and variation of tempo 
were tested by both players before Murray chased wide on to his forehand and, 
from beyond the tramlines, hit a crosscourt shot that screamed over the middle 
of the net like a tracer bullet and landed at the very optimum point, just 
inside the angle of base and side lines and well outside the reach of an 
astonished Federer.

It was a shot in a million, produced at a moment of the highest pressure, and 
it showed what Murray can do when he is on the front foot, taking the game to 
his opponent. And that, it must be said, is the only way he is ever going to 
beat Federer in the final of a grand slam tournament, gambling on his capacity 
to discomfort a man who, when things are going well, appears to be playing the 
game from inside a golden haze.

At least Federer was made to work for his fourth Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> victory and his 16th grand 
slam title in the seven years since he left Wimbledon having taken his first 
step on the road to eclipsing Pete Sampras's record.

Today Murray erected a few speed bumps in his path, but for the Scot's 
supporters there was always the uncomfortable feeling that the match was a 
contest between a man who occasionally reaches fifth gear and one who always 
has sixth in reserve for emergencies.

When Murray drops down to fourth, which he still does too often for comfort, 
he can look flat-footed as he uses his two-fisted backhand to manoeuvre the 
ball around the court. That was how he started today's final, and although he 
managed to neutralise an early service break, he took so much time to warm up 
that Federer was able to establish his serene rhythm.

Murray's cool judgment in such a blood-boiling environment was demonstrated by 
two successful line-call challenges in the first set. His guts were on display 
in the second, when, having lost his serve to love in the third game, he 
successfully fended off six break points in the fifth and seventh. But both 
sets rolled to what seemed like an inevitable conclusion, which was how the 
third set felt, too, despite its conclusive 24-point tie-break.

For most of the match Federer looked as though he had time to read the maker's 
name on the ball before wiping his racket strings across it with that 
deceptively gentle gesture that usually spells bad news for the man on the 
other side of the net. At 28, he moves as smoothly as if he were playing on 
well-oiled casters.

Murray has six years' advantage over his conqueror, which may be some solace 
as he contemplates his second defeat at the climax of a grand slam tournament. 
His critics will point out that the 22-year-old Federer was winning in 
Melbourne and at Wimbledon and Flushing Meadows, and that others to be found 
near the top of the world rankings – most notably Rafael Nadal but also Juan 
Martín del Potro and Novak Djokovic – have made faster progress in joining the 
ranks of grand slam champions.

But not everyone develops at the same pace, and British athletes very often 
take longer to fulfil their potential. For long periods today, as Murray 
engaged Federer in a game of move and counter-move, it was evident that the 
British No1 is still evolving and has yet to glimpse the limits of his physical 
and tactical potential.

What we saw was that he is not and will almost certainly never be a truly 
great player, if greatness is measured by the standards of Lew Hoad, Pancho 
Gonzales, Ken Rosewall, Jimmy Connors, John McEnroe, Bjorn Borg, Andre Agassi, 
Pete Sampras and, of course, Federer. But plenty of players only half a step 
down from that level – the likes of John Newcombe and Arthur Ashe – proved able 
to win majors and earn promotion to the game's hall of fame, and there is no 
reason why Murray should not eventually secure a place among them.

He has said, quite justifiably, that he expects his prime to come between the 
ages of 23 and 27. The equipment – the physique, the speed, the strokes – is 
finally in place. What he needs now is to draw the correct psychological 
lessons from today's chastening but far from dishonourable experience, to 
abandon caginess and simply play every point againstRoger Federer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer> as if it might be his last.
 