
Global Radio founder Ashley Tabor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ashley-tabor> has set November 1 as the 
target date for the merger of the sales operations of his company and newly 
acquired GCap Media.

Tabor also announced in an email to staff today the departure of GCap's 
national sales director, Simon Daglish.

He indicated that the merged sales business will be based in the current 
central London home of Capital and Classic FM.

"My intention is to have the commercial integration completed by November 1," 
said Tabor, chief executive of the Global Group as well as acting chief 
executive of GCap, in his email to staff. "All our brands will be sold together 
from one sales point here at Leicester Square."

The integration of the two radio companies' sales teams is likely to lead to 
further job losses.

About 160 people have already been made redundant at GCap. The bulk of the 
cuts were in programming, communications, technology and human resources, with 
the sales team emerging so far unscathed. There have also been redundancies at
Global Radio <https://www.theguardian.com/media/globalradio>.

Global Radio last week hired Stephen Miron, the Mail on Sunday executive 
behind last year's Prince CD giveaway, to be its new chief executive.

Daglish is leaving GCap Media <https://www.theguardian.com/media/gcap-media> 
to join Channel 4, where it is understood he will be in charge of advertising 
and sales across all of the broadcaster's digital radio stations.

He will be replaced on an acting basis by his current number two, John 
McGeough.

Global Radio's £375 million takeover of GCap avoided an Office of Fair Trading 
referral to the Competition Commission after it offered to sell a number of its 
stations in the Midlands

When the takeover is complete, the combined group will be the UK's biggest 
commercial radio business, incorporating Global brands, Heart, Galaxy and LBC, 
as well as GCap's Capital, Classic FM, Xfm and Choice.

· To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857. For all other 
inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 7278 2332.

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 