
Global Radio founder Ashley Tabor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ashley-tabor> has accused the competition 
regulators of showing "dated thinking" in investigating his takeover of GMG 
Radio, adding that he is delighted at the £70m purchase regardless of the 
outcome.

In a rare interview Tabor, the founder and executive president of the UK's 
biggest commercial radio company, said that the Competition Commission's 
decision to investigate aspects of the deal was "an error".

The competition regulator has said that for Global to push through its 
takeover of GMG Radio, the UK's third largest commercial radio company which 
owns the Real and Smooth networks, it must sell off stations in seven areas of 
the UK.

"If you look at what the Competition Commission actually said the debate we 
are now having at this point in time is all about local advertising," he said, 
speaking at the Radio Academy's Radio Festival. "Actually they cleared an awful 
lot of it. They cleared national advertising, national sponsorship and 
promotions and content, programming."

Tabor said that the Competition Commission was wrong to not take into account 
the vast array of media companies that local advertisers have the option of 
using, from billboards and newspapers to digital media companies and, soon, 
local TV.

"Radio exists in a wider media market – self-evidently it does – do you think 
that an advertiser has a a wide array of options or do you honestly believe 
that [a] radio [station] just competes with that radio station in the area 
across the street?" he said. "It is really dated thinking, really dated. That 
is why we felt really strongly it is not right, it is an error, that is why we 
challenged it."

The latest stage of Global's legal challenge was heard in court two weeks ago, 
a decision is not expected for some time, and in parallel an information 
memorandum has been sent out to prospective buyers.

Tabor said that he doesn't believe the regulatory process is a "massive 
problem", with most of the deal cleared already.

"Half of [the GMG deal] we actually have got," he said. "It's not by any 
stretch of the imagination a massive problem or anything like that we just 
genuinely believe it is wrong," he said. "Life goes on. If you are asking me am 
I still delighted we made the purchase, absolutely, 100%."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 