
Anthony Browne <https://www.theguardian.com/books/anthony-browne>, who this 
week became the sixth children's laureate, is an illustrator of exceptional 
distinction whose surrealist illustrations bring an ironic commentary into the 
picture book form, showing how sophisticated picture books can be and how 
easily they can appeal to all ages.

Immediately attractive with their bold images, bright colours and endlessly 
inventive stream of visual jokes - often directly referencing the work of 
painters such as Magritte or Leonardo da Vinci - Browne's illustrations are 
sometimes deceptively simple. At first glance they may appear just to tell an 
obvious story; but the more you look, the more you realise how multi-layered 
each picture is. In a single image of a character - sometimes human but just as 
often a gorilla or a chimpanzee - Browne can express an exceptional range of 
emotions. Nuances of stance, expression or clothing, or simply a detail in the 
usually uncluttered background, can convey a whole story.

Most of Browne's work has an underlying humour, but behind the jokes there is 
nearly always a strong sociopolitical commentary. In A Walk in the Park (1977), 
two dogs play and become friends despite the obviously unbridgeable social 
differences between their owners. In The Visitors Who Came to Stay (1984), a 
story by Annalena McAfee, Browne's illustrations find an exceptional pathos in 
the familiar scenario of a young girl whose life is disrupted when her father 
finds a new partner. His images move Katy from a quiet, uncluttered life by the 
sea with her father to a new world with Mary and her son, whose practical jokes 
explode all over the page. In Piggybook (1986) - perhaps Browne's most overtly 
moral book - a father and his sons are slowly transformed from humans to pigs, 
reflecting their increasingly swinish behaviour. The piggy details appear in 
everything from the wallpaper to the doorknobs as the family becomes daily less 
human, creating a counterpoint between words and pictures that will delight 
every reader.

Browne made an immediate impact with his first book, Through the Magic Mirror 
in 1976, and cemented it three years later with the delightful conceit of Bear 
being able to draw his way out of trouble in Bear Hunt. But it was with his 
trademark gorillas that he won his first prizes and widespread recognition. In 
Gorilla (1983) a lonely girl with a passion for gorillas, whose father is too 
busy to take her out, goes on a moonlit adventure to the zoo with a gorilla 
dressed in her father's coat and hat. It won prizes on both sides of the 
Atlantic.

The success of Browne's gorilla was soon matched by that of Willy, an anxious 
chimpanzee, who has become one of his best-loved characters. Willy - whose 
weedy build, Fair Isle sweater and habit of apologising to everyone for 
anything make him an instant target for the neighbourhood gangs of "suburban 
gorillas" - first appeared in Willy the Wimp in 1984. The fact that Willy is 
the perfect anti-hero - a glum midget next to the muscle-bound thugs - 
intensifies the satisfaction when he sees the bullies off. In subsequent 
titles, Willy plays an important role in other stories of contemporary urban 
life, such as how to keep up with sports-mad boys, without the author having to 
be specific on difficult details. Browne's contribution to contemporary 
illustration, through his own books and his influence on others, has been 
exceptional and is recognised worldwide.
 