
We’ve recently moved house and acquired, for the first time, an attic landing. 
It’s just large enough to stack up several of the wine boxes that were a 
student solution to bookshelves and will doubtless accompany us into our 
dotage, packed with books waiting to be shared with our daughters over the next 
few years. The ones not written for children but that I first devoured when I 
was young: Aldous Huxley and Evelyn Waugh, Virago classics like Miles 
Franklin’s My Brilliant Career and Antonia White’s Frost in May, Stevie Smith 
and ee cummings, all of Douglas Adams. It’s where I’d putTerry Pratchett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/terrypratchett> if he hadn’t been 
permanently shared with my book-stealing little sister, and Stephen King if 
reading The Tommyknockers hadn’t put me off him for 20 years.


And it’s where I found and had to pick up again Terry Pratchett and Neil 
Gaiman’s collaborative novel Good Omens, published in 1990, when Gaiman was 
known for Sandman rather than American Gods and when you could still count all 
the Discworld books on the fingers of two hands. Written through the exchange 
of floppy disks and daily phone calls, it’s a marvellously benign, ridiculously 
inventive and gloriously funny end-times fantasia featuring angels, devils, 
17th-century prophets, witches and witchfinders, and the four horsemen of the 
apocalypse in modern guise. Famine sells diet foods and invents nouvelle 
cuisine; Pestilence spreads pollution; War is a glamorous global reporter 
stirring up trouble. Only Death never changes, having never been away.


Neil Gaiman: ‘Terry Pratchett isn’t jolly. He’s angry’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/24/terry-pratchett-angry-not-jolly-neil-gaiman>
The book began life as a parody of Richmal Crompton’s Just William books 
called William the Antichrist. This is evident in the passages about “the 
Them”, the gang led by young Adam Young. He is the son of Satan who, thanks to 
a muddled baby-swap, grows up not so much the Antichrist he’s intended to be, 
as the ideal of a rural English mid-century schoolboy with tousled hair and a 
strong will. The eternal battle between good and evil is personified by the 
angel Aziraphale, a gently fusty rare book dealer, and the demon Crowley, a 
slippery individual in shades. As they have more in common with each other than 
with anyone else on earth, above or below, their enmity has mutated over 
millennia into friendship.

Then there’s Anathema Device, who has inherited the only accurate book of 
prophecy ever written, passed down over generations from her ancestor Agnes 
Nutter, burned in the 17th century as a witch (a demise that she did, of 
course, foresee). These “Nice and Accurate Prophecies” inform the characters 
that they’re living through the world’s last week - unless they can change the 
rules of the cosmic chess game...


I can’t wait to share how clever and silly this book is, often in the same 
sentence – a supernatural being thinking, “That Hieronymous Bosch. What a 
weirdo”, never fails to crack me up – and how lightly it wears its cleverness. 
My daughters will learn the etymology of “nice”, for a start, before the book 
even begins. The countryside where Adam lives is summed up thus: “If Turner and 
Landseer had met Samuel Palmer in a pub and worked it all out, and then got 
Stubbs to do the horses, it couldn’t have been better.” (You can really tell 
throughout that for Gaiman and Pratchett there are parts of rural England that 
are a little spot of Heaven.) It should spur them on to read Revelation, and GK 
Chesterton.


The Happy Prince by Oscar Wilde – fairytales for all ages
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/dec/14/the-happy-prince-by-oscar-wilde-fairytales-for-all-ages>
It’s refreshing to find Pratchett’s humour and erudition trained on Earth 
rather than mediated through Discworld, and the footnotes – apparently Gaiman 
and Pratchett often footnoted each other’s sections, a lovely insight into how 
their styles and humour mingled – show them at their best (“Shadwell hated all 
southerners and, by inference, was standing at the North Pole”). You can see in 
Good Omens a lot of what Gaiman would go on to do – the mythological riffs and 
reboots of Neverwhere and American Gods – as well as a perfect example of 
Pratchett’s personal philosophy: that good and evil are less helpful concepts 
than a million shades of grey, and that the most fantastic supernatural 
creatures could never come close to the depths and heights of humanity.


Twenty-five years on, the book has lasted surprisingly well. Pratchett and 
Gaiman’s obsession with tech meant they were ahead of the curve when it came to 
the “slim computers” that demon Crowley likes so much. Some things haven’t 
changed: “All that lather comes up from the centre of the Earth, where it’s all 
hot,” says a member of Adam’s gang. “I saw a programme. It had David 
Attenborough, so it’s true.” And the real end of the world that Adam foresees 
is closer and scarier than ever: “Everyone’s goin’ around usin’ up all the 
whales and coal and oil and ozone and rainforests and that, and there’ll be 
none left for us. We should be goin’ to Mars and stuff, instead of sittin’ 
around in the dark and wet with the air spillin’ away.”


I remember longing, after finishing Good Omens all those years ago, for 
another Pratchett/Gaiman book, something that was never likely to happen and is 
of course impossible now. In retrospect, it seems amazing that two such 
singular and prolific creative energies could share the writing of a novel: an 
extraordinary congruence of hard work, good timing and readerly luck. Last word 
to Terry Pratchett: “In the end, it was this book done by two guys, who shared 
the money equally and did it for fun and wouldn’t do it again for a big clock.”

 