
Move over Andy Murray, Scotland has another grand slam singles champion. 
Gordon Reid beat Joachim Gérard of Belgium yesterday to win his first 
wheelchair singles title witha 7-6, 6-4 triumph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/30/britains-gordon-reid-wins-australian-open-wheelchair-title>
 high on quality and high on emotion. It was the biggest victory of his career 
and for a long time afterwards, the 24-year-old could not wipe the smile off 
his face.

Britain's Gordon Reid wins Australian Open wheelchair singles title
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/30/britains-gordon-reid-wins-australian-open-wheelchair-title>
Britain’s Davis Cup captain, Leon Smith, who has known Reid for many years, 
was courtside throughout and it was fitting that among the first people he 
should see when he eventually returned to the locker room were Andy and Jamie 
Murray, who have been following his fortunes closely over the last couple of 
years.

“They were in the locker room when I came in after the final and were 
delighted for me,” Reid said. “Big congratulations. First time I met Andy and 
Jamie was really only a year or so ago because it takes a couple of times being 
around guys like that before you have the confidence to approach them. But 
since then they’ve been really good to me, given me loads of encouragement.”

In a sport that receives very little prize money or attention on the world 
stage, a first grand slam title for Reid will help enormously and the profile 
of the sport is also likely to rise.

A promising junior player, Reid was 12 when he was diagnosed with Transverse 
Myelitis, a rare spinal disease. He only took up wheelchair tennis to stay 
connected to be active; now, having won two grand slam doubles titles in 2015, 
he is a grand slam singles champion. “Not only did I never dream of a day like 
this, I didn’t even know wheelchair tennis existed in the grand slams,” he 
said. “As time went on, though, I realised I could get pretty good at this and 
that maybe I could get to the slams. From there, you just set your goals as you 
go along.

“When it got to match point, I couldn’t quite believe it. Then when the final 
point was over, the feeling was just one of pure joy. It took me a couple of 
seconds to realise what was going on, then I heard everyone going crazy and it 
really hit me.”

It was so nearly double joy for Reid but though he and Shingo Kunieda led 5-0 
in the final set of their doubles final, they faded to lose 6-3, 3-6, 7-5 to 
the French pair of Stephane Houdet and Nicolas Peifer.
 