
Gordon McLennan, who has died aged 87 of cancer, was the penultimate general 
secretary of the Communist party of Great Britain. By the time he was elected 
to the post, in 1975, the party's glory days were behind it and the war between 
the traditionalists and the Eurocommunists was already well under way. McLennan 
saw it as his task to end the war and to pass the party on to his successor in 
good condition, and devoted himself to this objective throughout his 15-year 
leadership. He failed, not through lack of commitment, but because it was 
impossible.

As soon as he was appointed, John Gollan, his predecessor as general 
secretary, confided a big secret: that ever since 1956, the party had been 
receiving money from the Soviet Union – wads and wads of banknotes, handed over 
in clandestine meetings between an embassy official and Gollan's deputyReuben 
Falber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2006/jun/06/obituaries.readersobituaries1>.

In the early days, it had been about £100,000 a year, but was now down to 
about £14,000. McLennan always insisted that he told Gollan he wanted the 
practice stopped, and thereafter assumed it had been, though in fact it carried 
on for four more years until 1979.

The year after McLennan became general secretary, the CPGB sold its biggest 
asset, its substantial headquarters in King Street, Covent Garden, bought in 
the 1920s with money secretly sent by Lenin, and moved into more modest 
premises. Membership was declining, and, like the rest of the left at the time, 
the CPGB seemed to be engaged in a hideous struggle to strangle itself. What 
was McLennan to say when the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan? Either 
condemning or defending was fraught with danger. In Moscow in 1981, he 
demonstrated greater independence than any previous British communist leader, 
condemning his hosts for trying to dictate policy to communists abroad.

McLennan tried desperately to reconcile the two factions, deciding that if the 
party were to have a future, it must move cautiously in the Eurocommunist 
direction, which seemed like treachery to some of his old friends. But he could 
not control the communist newspaper, theMorning Star 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/morning-star>. The idea of distancing the 
paper from the party, which had seemed clever in 1946, meant that the paper 
could take its own line. McLennan was reduced to trying to get his supporters 
elected to the paper's management committee.

He took on the battle with great courage. One of his allies told me about the 
meetings to elect the paper's management committee: "They were hissing and 
booing at Gordon, shouting traitor, all sorts of things. It was a generation 
that came through 1956 and Gordon was part of it and was working-class, so they 
were saying he should be on their side, not siding with these young 
intellectuals." McLennan found himself in charge of the offices and businesses 
controlled by the CPGB, but with the other side controlling the valuable 
Farringdon Road building that housed the Morning Star. He was reduced to 
conducting great Soviet-style purges of party members.

During the 1984-85 miners' strike, McLennan feared that Arthur Scargill was 
leading the miners to disaster, and after the strike, McLennan and his 
industrial organiser Pete Carter met Scargill and Mick McGahey. McLennan told 
me it was a "discussion about how to win unity of the miners in the post-strike 
situation", but it was a furious row. He struck up a good relationship with 
Mikhail Gorbachev, advising the Soviet leader to try to reach an understanding 
withMargaret Thatcher <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher>, 
and receiving advice on how to deal with his fractured party.

He retired as general secretary in 1990, to be replaced by Nina Temple, who 
had long believed that McLennan's peace mission was doomed to failure. The 
party wound itself up the next year, and Temple and her supporters used its 
remaining assets to start an organisation called Democratic Left, which 
McLennan refused to join, throwing in his lot with the Communist party of 
Scotland instead. In retirement McLennan threw himself into work with the 
National Pensioners Convention, becoming a member of its national executive and 
chair of its branch in Lambeth, south London, where he lived. Born in Glasgow, 
McLennan became an engineering draughtsman, and joined the Young Communist 
League at the age of 15, serving on the YCL executive committee from 1942 until 
1947, before becoming a full-time CPGB organiser inScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>. He married Mary in 1950, beginning a 
strong, lifelong partnership, and rose within the party to become its national 
organiser in 1966. When Gollan was diagnosed with lung cancer in 1975, McLennan 
was the obvious candidate to replace him.

In private life, he was a kindly, likable man, devoted to his family and 
determined to protect them from the pressures of his political life. Though he 
was attacked more stridently than most politicians, he never bore grudges, and 
treated everyone the same, whether Gorbachev, Gordon Brown or Lambeth 
pensioners. He and Mary were renowned for singing duets of Scottish songs at 
political and family gatherings. One of his sons, John, has Down's syndrome, 
and McLennan never allowed the pressures of his job to prevent him from giving 
John his time and love.

He is survived by Mary, their three sons and one daughter, seven grandchildren 
and two great-grandchildren.

• Gordon McLennan, political organiser, born 12 May 1924; died 21 May 2011
 