
The government's publication of an end-of-first-year progress report on its 
ICT strategy shows it saved £159.6m on ICT contracts during the 2011-12 
financial year, with a further £150m expected to be saved in 2012-13 through a 
common infrastructure.

In the 12 months from April 2011 to April 2012, the government said, central 
initiatives contributed to reductions in ICT spend reported by departments 
including:

• £159.6m by demanding a rigorous business case for any significant ICT spend.

• £140m of the £490m overall savings through centralising procurement of 
common goods and services.

• £64.2m saved from telecommunications networks budgets by applying better, 
common standards for the Public Services Network

The report provides an informative snapshot of the government's procurement of 
ICT, including how it is reducing waste and project failure.

For example, the total number of software licences 'held' in the government's 
assets and services register is 18.4m, However, the number 'used' is about 12m, 
indicating that 6m software licences are currently not being used.

The government currently has 84 data centres, with 17% of servers virtualised. 
In terms of agile project delivery, there are 35 projects using agile 
techniques.

Across government, there are currently 17 ICT contracts with a lifetime value 
greater than £100m, accounting for 27% of all active ICT procurements. In all, 
across government, there are 64 active ICT procurements.

The report's publication coincided with publication of the latest G-Cloud 
procurement, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/government-computing-network/2012/may/24/g-cloud-gii-procurement-cabinet-office>
 which is intended to be more SME-friendly.

Cabinet Office minister Francis Maude said a number of significant successes 
have been "chalked up", including the launch of the Public Services Network 
frameworks; the launch of the Government Digital Service; and the creation of 
the CloudStore.

"We also demonstrate this government's commitment to transparency and openness 
by the publication for the first time of a range of metrics relating to ICT in 
government. These will be developed to provide a more consistent benchmark for 
future years, demonstrating how uptake of the strategy is progressing," he said.

"The next set of metrics will be published in October 2012, and we will report 
on progress again in spring 2013."

In its progress report, the government said that over the past year, it has:

• Established the CIO Delivery Board, the governance body responsible for 
implementation of the strategy (April 2011).

• Launched the Public Services Network (PSN) frameworks (September 2011) and 
awarded the PSN Connectivity Framework, which have generated savings of £64.2m 
for 2011-12 (March 2012).

• Published more detailed strategies on specific areas, including capability, 
cioud computing, end user devices (EUDs), and green ICT (October 2011).

• Launched the Government Digital Service (GDS), a team within Cabinet Office 
tasked with transforming government digital services (December 2011).

• Issued the first cloud ICT services framework (October 2011) and created the 
CloudStore, a way for the public sector to buy ICT products and services via 
the cloud (February 2012).

The report says that improving the way the government sources ICT through 
centralised category management supports its aim of becoming a single customer 
that can leverage its buying power to drive down costs. As of March 2012, the 
report says, centralised category management of ICT has delivered £140m price 
savings against the 2009-10 baseline in central government

Citing a National Audit Office report that highlighted specific challenges 
with implementation, the report argues that the government's chief information 
officer (CIO) Andy Nelson and the CIO Delivery Board are taking action, by 
"establishing new approaches to resourcing projects; and by putting in place 
stronger programme and project management. This will ensure that progress 
continues to be made and that, collectively, government implements its ICT 
strategy, enabling efficient, cost-effective public services which are 
responsive to the needs of citizens and businesses."

The report also highlights the government's closer engagement with SMEs, with 
the proportion of central government direct spending with SMEs across all 
procurements - including ICT - on track to double, from 6.5% of direct spend in 
2009-10, to 13.7% (year to date) for 2011-12.

This article is published by Guardian Professional. For weekly updates on 
news, debate and best practice on public sector IT,join the Guardian Government 
Computing network here 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/gov-computing/start.php>.
 