
The Government Procurement Service (GPS) has published a tender for a pan 
government collaborative framework agreement for IT application development, 
and delivery and support services, worth up to £1bn.

The procurement, which is split into 35 lots, covers IT services including 
consulting, software development, internet and support and is likely to fulfil 
two purposes:

• A move towards the creation of application development towers that 
departments have been undertaking.

• The opportunity to combine several maturing application development 
frameworks.

Specific lots cover: application development; IT design services; integration; 
and enterprise resource planning; finance; human resources; customer 
relationship management; asset management; data warehouse; data management; and 
enterprise content management systems.

Some of the services covered by the procurement are new and some will replace 
those provided through expired or expiring arrangements, such as geographical 
information systems, software application solutions and parts of the ICT 
consultancy and delivery framework.

According to government sources, the procurement supports the delivery of the 
government's ICT strategy and provides an "excellent opportunity" for SMEs to 
compete for government business.

It is understood that the procurement is designed to ensure a balanced 
supplier base including SME niche providers, capable of delivering "innovative 
service solutions" for the public sector, and achieving "best value for the 
taxpayer". The approach has been to have "one comprehensive vehicle for 
software solutions which is aligned with and supports the government's ICT 
strategy".

The Cabinet Office pointed out that the £1bn value published in a notice in 
the Official Journal for the European Union (OJEU) is an estimated figure for 
the life of the framework agreement, and is designed to give suppliers an 
indication of what the spend might be.

This week, the GPS also announced the award of contracts under a much-delayed 
collaborative framework procurement worth up to £4bn covering desktop hardware, 
laptop devices, servers, infrastructure hardware and software. 

This article is published by Guardian Professional. For weekly updates on 
news, debate and best practice on public sector IT,join the Guardian Government 
Computing network here 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/gov-computing/start.php>.
 