
The publisher of GQ magazine has been fined £10,000 after being found in 
contempt of court over an article that seriously risked prejudicing the 
phone-hacking trial ofRebekah Brooks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/rebekahwade> and Andy Coulson.

The article, an “observational piece” headed “The Court Without A King” 
written by US journalist Michael Wolff, implied that Brooks was a “disreputable 
woman”, and represented an “improper attack” on a defendant during the course 
of her trial at the Old Bailey, one of the two presiding judges said.

Condé Nast, a US publisher, was found guilty at a hearing at the high court in 
November last year and two judges imposed the sentence on Thursday.

The article, which was published in April 2014, included allegations that 
Rupert Murdoch was implicated in phone hacking, as well as claims that had not 
been heard by the jury, the judges were told.

Lord Thomas, who is the Lord Chief Justice and the most senior judge in 
England and Wales, and Mrs Justice Nicola Davies were told that former News of 
the World editors Rebekah Brooks andAndy Coulson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andy-coulson> had been on trial for more 
than three months when the article was published.

The two judges concluded that the article created a “substantial risk” that 
the trial would be “seriously impeded or prejudiced”.

Nearly 100,000 copies of the magazine were withdrawn from sale and destroyed 
after concerns were raised and the attorney general Jeremy Wright launched 
contempt proceedings.

Lawyers representing Condé Nast argued that the article had not created a 
substantial risk of serious prejudice.

And barrister Adam Wolanski outlined a number of mitigating factors - at a 
follow-up hearing in the high court in London on Thursday - which, he said, 
judges should take into account before deciding what penalty to impose.

He said editors were “paranoid” about being in contempt and had taken advice 
from a barrister specialising in media issues before publishing.

He said the trial had continued, no-one had suggested that jurors should be 
discharged and the “consequences for the administration of justice” had not 
been serious.


Bosses apologised and the publisher agreed to pay the attorney general’s legal 
costs, which totalled nearly £50,000. Lord Thomas said those factors had been 
taken into account before the size of the fine was decided.

At the trial, which concluded in the summer of 2014, Coulson was found guilty 
and sentenced to 18 months for charges relating to phone hacking while Brooks, 
who is now chief executive ofNews UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsinternational>, was cleared of all 
charges.
 