
Four years ago, I was given a tray of Tulipa sprengeri by Chris and Toby 
Marchant, friends who run a wholesale nursery near Henley. It was a 
coincidence, for just the year before I had stumbled upon them at Great Dixter 
during Chelsea week and marvelled at their scarlet flowers thrown open and 
shining in the sunshine. Although I love a new conquest, I always fret when I 
am given plants, as the garden is already bursting at the seams. I am strict 
about introductions, as I am at pains to avoid that spotty complexion that 
collectors' gardens so often have. I trust the Marchants, though, so I duly did 
my research.

Firstly, I found that the bulbs are expensive and rarely offered in bulk by 
wholesale bulb specialists. Like the named forms of snowdrop, you don't have 
the option of buying by the hundred and splashing the garden with a drift. Yet 
there is an in-built contradiction, for in all the books T sprengeri is 
heralded for its ability to seed and naturalise in a garden setting even, it 
wais rumoured, in grass. This is rare in a tulip, for most of the species are 
too picky to last long in ground that lies wet in winter, as it does here. The 
egg-yolk yellow T sylvestris has naturalised in part of the UK, but most tulips 
like it dry. In their homelands of north Africa and central Asia they do their 
growing when winter wet is available, but on rocky hillsides that drain and 
bake during hot summers.

I have dabbled with the species tulips before, growing them in pots to see if 
I like them and then liberating them into the beds to test their ability to 
cope in the ground. I like this way of getting to know a plant because you can 
bring it up close, live with it and become familiar with its ways. The little T 
tarda with its yellow centre and white petals made the garden sparkle in April, 
and the multi-headed ivory T turkestanica was worth exploring for sheer 
curiosity value. These tulips are like the spark that ignited their blowsy 
cousins, but there is nothing lost to their often delicate stature, for they 
gain everything in intensity.

The lipstick pinks of T clusiana are my experiment in the pots this year. They 
are as good in bud as they are in flower, with petals stained with layers of 
cherry and fuchsia over orange, yellow or cream. I have two: the blood-red and 
saffron T clusiana var chrysantha and the cherry-pink and cream T clusiana 
'Lady Jane'. They have proved their worth with tapers of candle-like flowers 
and will be worked into the beds to see if they have what it takes to make it 
in the long run. I hear that, of the many species of tulips that were trialled 
over the last three years at Wisley, these proved themselves as potential 
long-term garden plants, which is a serious bonus when planting tulips in beds. 
In my own little trial, I am only interested if they like me as much as I like 
them and they prove it with endurance. This is exactly what I wanted from my T 
sprengeri

They were not yet in flower when I planted a dozen pots, one bulb in each with 
glossy green foliage. The tapered buds were half the size of a florist's tulip, 
but already had twice the elegance, and I could see that the colour and timing 
would be perfect with my dusky-leaved peony, Molly the Witch. I had learned 
that they were happy in a little shade, and the peony and the tulip could be 
left where they were to settle in in the dappled light beneath the coyote 
willows. The willow also seemed like it would suit the combination, for it came 
into leaf late, giving the tulips plenty of time to feast upon early sunshine. 
They first flowered at the end of May, and were out for more than a fortnight, 
straddling the spring/summer boundary of June. That summer, to add to my 
delight, they produced a crop of rattle-shaped seed heads that shook free their 
satiny circular seed in the heat of August.

I all but forgot about them until the next April, when I came upon a rash of 
grass-like seedlings, each holding the seed-case high, like a banner to show 
that they had made it. The parent plants had increased in size, too, but not by 
as much as the seedlings, and now, three years on, I am looking at a cluster of 
three generations and hoping for the first of the seedlings to flower next year.

I like a plant that proves its congeniality by seeding and I like the way a 
garden feels when plants are allowed to roam. The primrose sets a good example 
when it is happy in a bank, and there is nothing like the satisfaction of 
seeing snakeshead fritillaries take off. If you wait long enough, you can see 
where they like to be, where the ground lies damp enough for them or where the 
competition is right for the seedlings to make it.

This is what I am hoping the harvested seed from my T sprengeri will be up for 
next year, for I am collecting it now they are establishing themselves. I will 
ferry them to my most patient clients and give them the chance to make their 
own colonies. In one garden, after the meadows are cut in summer, I am going to 
rake an area until it exposes enough bare earth upon which to throw the seed. 
In another, I will work the seed into a colony of violets that occupy a sunny 
bank under eglantine roses. The sun is important, for the full joy of the 
flower is in the opening. It is the last tulip of the season, the herald of 
summer, and I'm so pleased it seems to be here to stay.

dan.pearson@observer.co.uk <mailto:dan.pearson@observer.co.uk> 

· Observer offer: Tulipa tarda flowers in early and mid-spring. Buy 25 bulbs 
for just £6.95 inc p&p or three collections (75 bulbs) for £13.90. Call 0870 
836 0909, quoting ref OBDP076, or send a cheque made payable to Observer Reader 
Offers with your order to Observer Tulip Tarda offer, OBDP076, Rookery Far, 
Spalding, PE12 8SG. Price includes UK mainland p&p. Delivery within 28 days
 