
Graeme Swann has defended his decision to retire midway through England’s most 
recent Ashes tour of Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/dec/21/graeme-swann-announces-retirement-cricket>
, rejecting Graham Gooch’s assertion that he made the team a laughing stock and 
describing the former batting coach as “old school”.

Swann, who withdrew from the 2013-14 series because of an elbow injury, also 
questioned the decision by the England and Wales Cricket Board to sackKevin 
Pietersen <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kevin-pietersen> in the aftermath 
of that ill-fated whitewash, in the belief that the batsman could have simply 
not been selected to avoid subsequent the “bloodletting” that has tarnished the 
game in recent weeks.

Pietersen’s autobiography, in which he launches stinging criticism of numerous 
people within the English setup, has caused significant controversy since its 
release. Swann reiterated his belief that there was no bullying within the team 
and “no one is supporting” Pietersen’s claims.

The 35-year-old former off-spinner retired from international cricket in 
December last year, once Australia had secured an unassailable 3-0 Ashes lead 
in Perth and with England’s camp in disarray. Swann had taken only seven 
wickets in the series and withdrew from the remaining Tests in Melbourne and 
Sydney.

Gooch, the former batting coach who lost his job in May this year, described 
the decision as “criminal” and said that it left a bad taste. However, Swann 
defended his position on Wednesday.

“I never spoke to Goochy about it. I’m surprised actually, I thought he would 
have talked to me. I said at the time, I don’t think it’s right and proper to 
carry on in the sport when you’re a hindrance to the team. It was an injury 
issue. Some people think differently, some people think you should just carry 
on regardless but I don’t and I never will.

“I didn’t see Goochy at all, I haven’t spoke to him since. Goochy is very old 
school, and the fact that me and Goochy haven’t sat down and talked about it, 
perhaps if he had my perspective on it he might see the reasons why I did it. 
He’s a bit misinformed thinking that I just left because of form. It wasn’t 
because of form, it was because I couldn’t turn a cricket ball which, as a spin 
bowler, you are then useless to your team.”

Swann, who took 255 Test wickets for England, was expected to be dropped for 
the Melbourne fixture but his decision to leave the team came as a major 
surprise. He has offered to return to the game as a batsman but has received no 
offers.

He continued: “I’m sure at some point I’ll speak to Goochy. I’ve not spoken to 
him since, I’m surprised he didn’t speak to me first but I don’t think he’s got 
my new number. In retrospect I shouldn’t have gone on the tour at all.”

Pietersen has stated that Swann was part of a clique of bowlers who, with the 
wicketkeeper Matt Prior, bullied team-mates who misfielded. Asked if the ECB 
should have simply not selected Pietersen rather than sacking him, Swann 
replied: “Maybe, it might have been a cleaner way of doing things and certainly 
a lot less bloodletting.”

He added: “Someone is trying to sell a book at the moment. In two weeks’ time, 
once the inevitable rounds of interviews are done, no one will give a monkeys. 
I don’t think he has done himself any favours in the long run. But Kev has 
always been different.

“Certain things that you may have been led to believe happened didn’t. The 
very fact that however many people have been interviewed and no one is 
supporting these claims that Kev has come out with. There wasn’t any bullying.”

BT Sport ambassador Graeme Swann will drive at Wales Rally GB (13–16 November) 
for an exclusive documentary. Tickets atwalesrallygb.com 
<http://www.walesrallygb.com> or on 0844 847 2251
 