
Graeme Swann has spoken out about the circumstances surrounding his 
retirement, saying he had become "a liability", while urging England to keep
Kevin Pietersen <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kevin-pietersen> in the team.

The off-spinner, who quit all international cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/dec/21/graeme-swann-announces-retirement-cricket>
 after England's defeat in the third Ashes Test at Perth last month, wrote in 
the Sun on Sunday, Swann said: "It is about time I set the record straight on 
myself, Alastair Cook, Andy Flower and Kevin Pietersen."

The England batsman endured a difficult Ashes series, which prompted more 
speculation about his future but Swann insisted his former team-mate should 
still have a role. "England's short-term future should include Pietersen. 
People seem keen to create a rift between Kevin and the rest of the team," he 
said.

"Among the more ludicrous stories was one claiming he did not go to the team's 
Christmas lunch. I know he did – because I sat next to him. Since being 
reintegrated in 2012, his attitude has been great. He was England's top run 
scorer in the Ashes and is one of the world's best players, so why get rid of 
him?"

Swann also sprung to the defence of the beleaguered Cook and Flower, 
maintaining they were " the right men to be captain and head coach", and that 
the players should bear responsibility for England's 5-0 Ashes whitewash. But 
although he insisted there were "no cliques" in a dressing room that was "very 
together", he also returned to comments made at his retirement press conference 
about some members of the squad.

"I made some comments about certain players being 'up their own backsides' – 
but I wasn't having a go at Kevin or any other England player. I won't name 
names but if people don't know who I was talking about, they are not watching 
the game with their eyes open."

Of his retirement decision, Swann said: "I decided to end my career with 
immediate effect after our defeat in the third Test meant the Ashes had gone. 
The reason was simple – I was a spent force.

"There were accusations I deserted a sinking ship but it was clear I was a 
liability and not able to contribute in any way towards winning … For me to 
carry on would have been the most ridiculous and selfish decision on the 
planet."
 