
Kevin Pietersen’s explosive claims that Andy Flower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andy-flower> tolerated a culture of 
“mocking, bullying and ridicule” within the England dressing room have prompted 
the game’s hierarchy to close ranks around the former national coach.

In Pietersen’s long awaited book, released to the media on Monday after his 
confidentiality clause with the England and Wales Cricket Board expired, the 
batsman claims that the behaviour of a clique led by the wicketkeeperMatt Prior 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/matt-prior> and bowlers including James 
Anderson and Stuart Broad was akin to workplace bullying. “They ran an 
exclusive club. If you were outside that clique, you were fair game for 
mocking, ridicule, bullying. That’s what those guys did,” he said.

Graeme Swann <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/graeme-swann>, who Pietersen 
said was a member of a bullying clique that so traumatised one young player 
that he was reluctant to field, was the first to hit back calling it “the 
biggest work of fiction since Jules Verne”.

Pietersen also claims that he was made a scapegoat for England’s 5-0 defeat in 
Australia in 2013-14, after which the selectors axed him from the national 
side, and heavily criticises the ECB hierarchy for failing to spot the problems 
earlier.

“I was left feeling isolated and bullied but nobody seemed too bothered as 
long as I did my performing seal routine when I went out to bat,” writes 
Pietersen.

Swann said Pietersen appeared to have targeted those no longer in a position 
to influence his possible return for England. “I immediately realised it was 
codswallop when I read the character assassination of Matt Prior,” said Swann, 
speaking at a grassroots cricket awards lunch at Lord’s. “Tragically I don’t 
think Kev realises the one person who fought tooth and nail to keep him in the 
side is the one person he is now assassinating: Matt Prior.”

Pietersen’s most vitriolic criticism is reserved for Flower, called a “mood 
hoover”, and Prior, who is lambasted as “backstabbing” and bullying. The pair 
were once close but Pietersen mocks his former friend for referring to himself 
in the third person as “the Big Cheese” or just “the Cheese” and belittling 
junior members of the squad.

“A clique choked our team and Andy Flower let that clique grow like a bad 
weed,” writes Pietersen in KP: The Autobiography, saying it took hold from 2009 
onwards.

Perhaps fittingly given the centrality of technology to many of the 
controversies in the book, from the parody Twitter account that angered 
Pietersen to the text message exchanges with South Africa players that led to 
his expulsion from the squad in 2012, followed by his “reintegration”, Prior 
responded by tweeting. “Obvs sad to see the accusations against me this am and 
I will have my right of reply,” Prior wrote. “However today is not the day and 
Twitter is not the place for it! Now back to my Achilles rehab and learning to 
walk again!”

Chris Tremlett was one former team-mate to come out in support of Pietersen, 
tweeting: “Glad @KP24 has finally been able to give his side of the story. 
People can now make an informed opinion of what went on in the dressing room.”

In vaguely shambolic scenes the ECB had not been given a copy of the book 
before it was released to the media and said it was therefore unable to 
comment. Their chairman, Giles Clarke, working on InternationalCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Council business, confirmed he had 
yet to see a copy.

But the ECB managing director, Paul Downton, said there had been “no formal or 
informal complaint about bullying” during the period in question.

Several England players were understood to be angry with the portrayal of 
Prior and the ECB plans to examine the book to see if there was any basis for 
action on Flower’s behalf. The former Zimbabwe international stepped down as 
head coach in February following the Ashes debacle but has a new role in charge 
of England’s academy.

The war of words is likely to continue for several days, with the book being 
released to the public on Thursday and Pietersen planning a series of media 
appearances.

The former England captain Nasser Hussein said he always found the very public 
berating of fielders who dropped catches or made a mistake “a little bit odd” 
but said that Pietersen’s frustration was mainly born of cricketing failure.

“It was an exceptionally well led, well run cricket team that were achieving a 
lot. It tells you a lot about team spirit, which is always there when you’re 
winning but fades away when you’re losing,” he said. “All of this comes of 
losing that Ashes series 5-0. The respect had gone.”
 