
Graeme Smith's long and distinguished Test career ended in deflating 
anticlimax as his last innings lasted only three balls before he fell for the 
fourth time in six innings against Australia to Mitchell Johnson – whose pace 
and hostility has done so much damage to both South Africa and England over the 
past four months.

But two of Smith's senior lieutenants, Hashim Amla and AB de Villiers, then 
frustrated Johnson and the rest of the Australia attack for more than two hours 
to preserve an outside chance that the captain will not bow out with a series 
defeat.

There seemed a real danger of the world's No1-ranked Test team failing to take 
the match into the final day when they slumped to 15 for three at tea on the 
fourth day, Michael Clarke having declared Australia's second innings on 303 
for five after David Warner cracked his second century of the match, and his 
third of the three-Test series.

But Amla and De Villiers showed their courage and class in a fourth-wicket 
partnership of 53 in more than 30 overs until Amla fell lbw to reverse swing 
from James Pattinson late in the day. De Villiers is still there, and it is the 
world's top-ranked batsman who offers Smith a sliver of hope in his role as a 
spectator on his last day as a Test cricketer.

He spent the first half of his penultimate day in the field with a grim face 
as Warner made hay with quick runs needed in the second innings, his favourite 
match situation, as England's bowlers will ruefully confirm. The left-hander 
hit 13 fours and four sixes in following his first innings of 135 from 152 
balls with 145 off 156, giving him an aggregate of 543 in the series at an 
average of more than 90.

Clarke's declaration left South Africa needing a nominal 511 for victory but 
more realistically with four full sessions to bat, plus a tricky half-hour 
before tea. Smith was given a standing ovation by the Newlands crowd as he 
emerged from the pavilion for the last time, and a guard of honour by the 
Australia team as he approached the middle, plus a handshake from Clarke – much 
as Ricky Ponting was by Smith and South Africa when playing his last Test, 
against the Proteas in Perth in late 2012.

Unfortunately for Smith, the similarities did not end there. Ponting had 
failed, continuing a poor run of form that contributed to his decision to 
retire, and Smith's dismissal, poking a short ball to Alex Doolan at short leg, 
left him with a miserable tally of 45 runs from his final series at an average 
of 7.5.

He had defended his first ball from Ryan Harris, then flicked his second for 
three, before Harris nipped one back to dismiss Smith's opening partner Alviro 
Petersen – a 100th wicket for the 34-year-old Queensland seamer, in only his 
23rd Test.

Smith fell in the next over, and there was an unusual symmetry in his 
dismissal as he had also gone for three in his first innings in Test cricket 12 
years earlier, also against Australia in Cape Town. But this lean series has 
not put much of a dent in his outstanding career record which ends with 9,260 
runs in 116 Tests at an average of 48.7, with 27 centuries.
 