
The former England captain Graham Gooch has hit back at Kevin Pietersen’s 
claims of a bullying culture in the dressing room – and called onAlastair Cook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alastair-cook> and his current team-mates to 
do the same.

Gooch, England’s batting coach from 2009-2014, also staunchly defended the 
former head coachAndy Flower <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andy-flower> 
and the wicketkeeper Matt Prior, who both come in for scathing criticism in 
Pietersen’s new autobiography.

Gooch lost his job following the 2014 Ashes whitewash, just as Pietersen did, 
but he had nothing but praise for Flower, in particular for reintegrating his 
star batsman after he had been dropped for sending “provocative” messages to 
South Africa players about his then captain, Andrew Strauss in 2012.

Gooch told the Daily Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/sport/cricket/international/england/11161670/Graham-Gooch-Why-Kevin-Pietersen-is-wrong-about-Matt-Prior-Andy-Flower-and-a-bullying-culture.html>
: “I call Andy England’s anchor. As head coach he created a calm and committed 
atmosphere in the England dressing room. He had great determination to prepare 
for every format of the game. He always looked to promote attacking ideas to 
win matches. He brought a new belief to players following a period of turmoil – 
at least that’s what I noticed during my involvement as batting coach. He had 
strength of character and integrity, and as a student of the game was always 
looking to embrace new training methods and ideologies. He created a top-class 
atmosphere as mentor and motivator.

“When Kevin had been dropped for messaging South Africa’s players about Andrew 
Strauss in 2012, it was Andy who wanted to be conciliatory and build bridges. 
If the allegation over the message’s content was accurate it was unforgivable 
and lot of people were saying there was no way back for KP after that episode. 
But Andy told me he was keen to repair the damage.

“When I heard this word bullying well, I’d never heard this word used before 
in the England dressing room. There are always disagreements within teams and 
things said in the heat of the moment. But the way it has been portrayed is not 
my recollection of the atmosphere within the team.”

When the contents of Pietersen’s autobiography became public last week, Prior 
stated he would, when the time was right, reply to allegations about him while 
the former England spinner Graeme Swann was also damning of the book.

Reactions from the current England set-up have been limited, however, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/11/kevin-pietersen-book-tarnished-england-alastair-cook>
 and Gooch believes that must change.

“I believe Alastair and others should get on the front foot a bit more,” said 
Gooch, who captained England for 34 of his 118 Test matches.

“When you and your system are challenged you need to fight back. This 
sentiment is always expressed in team meetings, never take a backward step, 
have the courage of your convictions. Stand up and stand tall for your country. 
The players may have been told to maintain silence but if I was still part of 
that dressing room I would want to have my say irrespective of any media 
strategy from the suits.

“I mean when the captain and coach stand up in the dressing room to give a 
speech, one of the strong messages is that we fight the fight together. But if 
you are not prepared to stand up to defend the culture in this sort of 
situation I don’t see what credibility the other stuff has. For me it is one 
and the same thing.”

Regarding Prior, Gooch added: “Matt Prior is nothing but a team man and 
nothing but positive. In my reports about Matt over the years, I considered him 
the glue of the side and a brilliant batsman who could adapt his game to suit 
any situation.”
 