
Great Britain started their Fed Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/fed-cup>
 Group One campaign with a resounding 3-0 win over Bosnia in Eilat, Israel.

Anne Keothavong <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anne-keothavong> defeated 
Dea Herdzelas 6-4, 6-2 in the first rubber before the British No1, Heather 
Watson, claimed a 6-3, 6-4 victory over Anita Husaric to set up a 2-0 lead.

Laura Robson and Johanna Konta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/johanna-konta> then finished things off with 
a comprehensive 6-0, 6-0 whitewash of Jelena Simic and Jasmina Kajtazovic as 
Britain completed a perfect start.

The Pool B games had been delayed after heavy rain on Wednesday, which meant 
Great Britain could only begin their tournament on Thursday.

However, it did not disrupt their preparations as they started off in 
excellent style ahead of Friday's scheduled meeting with Portugal.

Watson, ranked 41 in the world, was satisfied to start with a win against 
Bosnia, arguably the weakest team in Group B, knowing that Portugal and Hungary 
will be far tougher opponents.

"I was a little nervous going out today, but I'm pleased to get the first win 
under my belt," Watson told fedcup.com. "It wasn't easy, I was in and out of 
the match as it was the first match, but I'm more settled in now."

Robson, who teamed up with Watson in the doubles last year, played alongside 
rookie Konta and recorded Britain's first Fed Cup double bagel – a match win 
without dropping a game – in 11 years.

After the match, Konta said on Twitter: "Super happy with how my Fed Cup 
career has started. Hopefully many more wins to come for us! £TeamGB."

Britain's captain Judy Murray praised the Australian-born 21-year-old's start 
to the tournament. "It was great to be able to put her in on the first day and 
for her to get her first win," she said. "She played fantastically well today, 
it was a dream debut for her."

Meanwhile, the International Tennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> 
Federation (ITF) has revised the dead rubber policy for all Fed Cup ties. The 
changes, which come into force this weekend in the World Group and World Group 
II first-round ties, state if a tie is decided after the third singles rubber, 
the fourth singles rubber will not be played and the dead doubles rubber will 
be played instead.

However, if the tie is decided after the fourth singles match – where one 
nation has a winning 3-1 lead – the dead doubles rubber will still be played.

The existing dead rubber policy used in the Fed Cup final will remain the 
same, with the revisions made following the successful introduction of new 
rules for all Davis Cup ties in 2011.
 