
No Mo Farah. No Dai Greene. No James Dasaolu. No Christine Ohuruogu. No 
Katarina Johnson-Thompson. No Perri Shakes-Drayton. Those looking for household 
names in Great Britain’s squad for this weekend’s European Athletics Team 
Championships in Braunschweig might struggle to get beyond Olympic long jump 
champion Greg Rutherford and35-year-old triple jumper Phillips Idowu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jun/10/phillips-idowu-european-team-championships>
. This, as Neil Black, the British Athletics performance director, repeatedly 
stresses, is a developmental squad. And so targets are being readjusted 
accordingly.

Last year, when these championships were held in Gateshead, the British team 
set their sights on coming top of the pile, although theyeventually finished 
third behind Germany and Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jun/23/gb-peter-eriksson-european-team-championships>
. This time round the rivals remain the same but ambitions are more woolly.

As Black puts it: “The aim is to be competitive and to challenge for as many 
points as possible. But in comparison to last year’s team, this is very much a 
developmental squad due to the confines of a crowded calendar this summer and 
the British Championships just a week later.

“It was a conscious decision because of the relatively crowded calendar this 
year. We are not taking the most competitive team to take the strain away from 
some of our senior athletes.”

Inevitably with so many big names missing, the team has a scratch feel to it. 
The decathlete Daniel Awde is running the 400 metres. None of Great Britain’s 
big-name sprinters are running the 100m, although the selection – Danny Talbot 
– has talent. Only this week Asha Phillips and Sophie Papps withdrew from the 
women’s 100m and 200m. But Black remains unconcerned. “I am really looking 
forward to seeing how these guys perform,” he says. “There may be one or two 
surprises.”

Black will hope that history can repeat itself. Last year the then 18-year-old 
Jessica Judd won the 800m just four days after sitting her chemistry A-level, 
while 19-year-old Charlie Grice and 21-year-old Laura Weightman came second in 
the men’s and women’s 1500m.

Meanwhile in the women’s hammer, Sophie Hitchon, then 21, threw a metre past 
her own national record to finish a surprise third. And in the women’s 5,000m 
the 19-year-old Emelia Gorecka took a shock second behind the European champion 
Olga Golovkina in her first performance in a senior vest.

But last year these young guns were supported by a hefty array of experienced 
artillery. There are fewer such athletes this time round, although on the 
women’s side Eilidh Child, who finished sixth at last year’s world 
championships, competes in the women’s 400m hurdles and team captain Hannah 
England, a world championship silver medallist, runs in the 1500m.

Then there are the relays, where Britain have named stronger squads and should 
pick up significant points. AsAdam Gemili 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jun/19/adam-gemili-rows-sprinters-blown-out-of-proportion>
, who will be running the 4x100m relay, puts it: “Everyone in British sprinting 
is running ridiculously quick. We’ve got a strong team and if we can get the 
baton round, which we will, I don’t see why we can’t go there and win it.”

Speaking about his involvement in the Championships, Rutherford said: “This 
competition fitted in perfectly in my schedule. I jumped two weeks ago in 
Hengelo which went really well and ran a cheeky 100m afterwards as well which 
was interesting. Two weeks on, I’m feeling really good again and ready to jump 
well.

“Weather permitting and everything else it should be a good competition and 
going forwards there are only a few more now until Commonwealth Games.”
 