
Five decades have passed since America's troubadours and beat poets flocked to 
Greenwich Village, filling its smoky late-night basement bars and coffee houses 
with folk songs and influencing some of the most recognisable musicians of the 
era.

A few landmarks of those bygone bohemian days – most recently portrayed in the 
Coen brothers' film Inside Llewyn Davis, out on 24 January – still exist. The 
inspiration for the movie's fictional anti-hero, Davis, was Brooklyn-born Dave 
Van Ronk, a real- life blues and folk singer with no small talent, who worked 
with performers such as Pete Seeger and Bob Dylan, but remained rooted in the 
village until he died in 2002, declining to leave it for any length of time and 
refusing to fly for many years. Van Ronk's posthumously published memoir, the
Mayor of MacDougal Street 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780306822162>
, takes its name from the street that was home to the Gaslight Cafe, and other 
early 60s folk clubs.

The Village stretches from the Hudson River Park east as far as Broadway, and 
from West Houston Street in the south up to West 14th Street. Its small scale 
makes it easy to explore on foot and perfect for a musical pilgrimage, but the 
arrival last summer of New York's bike-sharing scheme,Citibike 
<http://citibikenyc.com>, makes for a more adventurous experience.
 CitiBikers in Greenwich Village. Photograph: Alamy 
I picked up a bike outside Franklin Street subway station, south of the 
Village in Tribeca, and headed out to the river, at Pier 45. Looking south you 
can see One World Trade Center: at 541m, it's now the tallest building in the 
western hemisphere. Cycle or walk to the end of the boardwalk that juts out 
into the Hudson, facing Hoboken, New Jersey, and look to your left and you can 
see the Statue of Liberty. From there, it's a short cycle along Christopher 
Street, up Hudson and along West 10th, to Bleecker Street, where designer 
boutiques such as Marc Jacobs, Michael Kors and Lulu Guinness mark the area's 
steep gentrification.

On MacDougal Street, a jumble of comedy cellars, theatres and cheap eateries 
have mostly replaced the old, liquorless cafes and basement bars of the folk 
scene. It is the hub of New York University's campus and many of the bars, 
falafel joints and pizza houses are priced for students, with $2 beers thrown 
in.

But several older venues still exist, including the Bitter End 
<http://www.bitterend.com/>, which staged folk "hootenannies" every Tuesday and 
now calls itself New York's oldest rock club". TheWhite Horse Tavern, built in 
1880, still stands on the corner of Hudson Street and 11th. It was used by New 
York's literary community in the 1950s – most notably Welsh bard Dylan Thomas. 
It was here, myth has it, that the writer had been drinking in November 1953, 
before he was rushed to hospital from his room at the Chelsea Hotel, and died a 
few days later.
 Folk singer Dave Van Ronk, the inspiration for the Llewyn Davis character. 
Photograph: Kai Shuman/Getty Images 
The original Cafe Wha? <http://cafewha.com/> remains at 115 MacDougal Street, 
on the corner of Minetta Lane. In the bitter winter of 1961, when the Coen 
brothers movie is set, cash-strapped artists similar to Davis would take their 
chances at the open mic. It was here that Bob Dylan made his New York debut, 
and Allen Ginsberg and Jack Kerouac performed. Cafe Wha? continued to attract 
artists and musicians long after the Village folk scene gave way to 
rock'n'roll. A notice on the door catalogues a few of the famous names who 
played here: Jimi Hendrix, Ritchie Havens, Jerry Lee Lewis, Little Richard and 
the Velvet Underground. It is still a popular music venue, with a house band 
playing five nights a week.

The real centre of the folk scene back then, however, was Washington Square, 
where musicians would gather on Sundays to swap ideas, learn new material and 
play. According to folk singer and historian Elijah Wald, the ballad and blues 
singers who sat around the fountain in the park created sounds that would 
influence artists from Joni Mitchell and Joan Baez to folk-rock groups the 
Lovin' Spoonful, the Byrds and the Mamas and the Papas. The hero of the Coens' 
film is not Van Ronk, according to Wald, but he does sing some Van Ronk songs 
and shares his working-class background.

When I visited on a sunny but cold December day, there was only one musician, 
a saxophonist, playing under Washington Square's stone arch, but at weekends 
the park fills with rap and jazz musicians playing to tourists and students. 
Bikes are not officially allowed inside the square, but there are Citibike 
stations around it, so it's easy to park and walk around.

A block north of the park, on West 8th Street, is a historic 107-room property 
once known as Marlton House and home to many writers and poets, who were 
attracted by relatively cheap rates and the bohemian neighbourhood. Jack 
Kerouac wroteThe Subterraneans 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141184890>
 and Tristessa while living here and, in a darker episode, Valerie Solanas was 
staying in room 214 in 1968, when she became infamous for stalking and then 
shooting Andy Warhol.
 The new Marlton Hotel 
Sean MacPherson, who owns the stylish Bowery and Jane hotels nearby, has just 
reopened the building as the Parisian-inspiredMarlton Hotel (marltonhotel.com 
<http://marltonhotel.com/>). I popped in to its very comfortable lobby for 
coffee and a flick through its copy of John Strausbaugh'sThe Village: 400 years 
of Beats and Bohemians, Radicals and Rogues 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780062078193>
. And I caught up with Strausbaugh later, to ask him about the village in the 
early 1960s, when young idealists were living hand to mouth and sleeping on 
friends' couches.

"In 1961, if you were in any way an artistic person in America, in that vast 
American landscape, you were a lonely figure," said Strausbaugh. "You heard 
about San Francisco, you heard about Greenwich Village, and you went there. You 
didn't play there to make money; you went there to be heard. Like Dylan, who 
played at the Cafe Wha?, then got another entry-level gig, then began playing 
at the biggest places."

There were others, Strausbaugh said, like Van Ronk, who were talented, but 
whose ambitions were more modest than those of Dylan and Baez. The unique thing 
about the Village, he added, is that it survived so long as a bohemian enclave, 
from the early 1850s, when it attracted poets such as Walt Whitman, to the 
beatniks and folk revivalists of the 1950s and later.

"The left bank [in Paris] did not last 100 years, but the Village did," he 
said.

Many of the buildings and sometimes entire streets in the Village have been 
preserved and are now home to some of the most expensive real estate in 
Manhattan and sought-after for their distinctive, old Greenwich Village look. A 
struggling folk artist might find a cheap meal in one of the student cafes 
around MacDougal Street, but they would never be able to afford to live in the 
area – or anywhere in Manhattan, realistically.

"It has not been completely finished off," said Strausbaugh. "There are still 
a lot of theatres. But the people who make the music have not been able to live 
there for 20 or 30 years."
 