
Federal Greens MP Greens Adam Bandt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adam-bandt> said his party will 
move to protect people’s public holiday rates, after the Victorian government 
said it would not be recognising Christmas Day as a public holiday.


Victorian staff working on Christmas Day, which falls on a Sunday this year, 
will not be entitled to penalty rates after the state government confirmed it 
would not make it a public holiday. Instead the public holiday will fall on 
Tuesday, the next available weekday.


Public holiday penalty rates are 2.5 times normal pay, while Sunday rates vary 
from 1.5 to two times the normal rate.Victoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria> is the only state not to 
recognise Christmas Day as a public holiday, with every other state declaring 
public holidays from 25 December through to 27 December.

Victorians get two new public holidays: they deserve them, says government
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/08/victorians-get-two-new-public-holidays-they-deserve-them-says-government>
Bandt, who is also the Greens industrial relations spokesman, said he would 
introduce the fair work amendment (protecting Christmas) bill 2016 into the 
federal parliament in the next sitting fortnight to ensure that public holiday 
penalty rates would be paid to people working on Christmas Day, 25 December, 
and New Year’s Day, 1 January.

“People who have to work on Christmas Day should be properly compensated for 
the time they spend working and away from their families,” Bandt said.

 “It’s simple: if you have to work while everyone else is spending precious 
time with their family and loved ones, you deserve to be compensated for this 
special shared time lost.”

The Victorian government’s decision has been criticised by unions, especially 
given the premier,Daniel Andrews 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/daniel-andrews>, introduced two new public 
holidays last year: one for Easter Sunday and another for the Friday before the 
AFL Grand Final.

That move was criticised by small businesses, with the Victorian Employers 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry (VECCI) estimating the two additional holidays 
would cost small businesses $105m in overtime wages each year.

However the state secretary of the Shop, Distributive and Allied Employees’ 
Association, Michael Donovan, said the unions and were not consulted about the 
decision to exempt Christmas.

“The unions weren’t asked for their opinions, employers weren’t asked for 
their opinions,” he said. “What sort of inquiry is it if no one is consulted?”

The decision would affect 10 to 20% of Victoria’s workforce, he said including 
transport, medical and petrol station workers.


But the VECCI chief executive described the government’s decision as a 
sensible one.

“In September, the Victorian government insisted on holding the Grand Final 
public holiday again, costing many businesses thousands of dollars, so we are 
pleased to see it is sticking to the existing policy that works for Victorian 
businesses around the Christmas period,” he said.

Opposition MP John Pesutto said the Coalition would consider making a weekend 
Christmas Day a public holiday, but they would need to hear the arguments for 
it.

In 2017, Victoria will have 14 public holidays, matched only by the Australian 
Capital Territory. New South Wales and South Australia have 13, Queensland and 
the Northern Territory have 12, and there are 11 in Tasmania and Western 
Australia.

The federal Greens have also launched a petition 
<http://www.adambandt.com/protectchristmas> against Andrews’ decision.

– with added reporting from agencies
 