 The president of the Dominican Republic declared three days of official 
mourning yesterday as it became clear that as many as 175 of the victims of 
Flight 587 were from the Caribbean country.
Many were returning from New York for holidays and reunions with families. 

"This is a great hurt for the Dominican Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/dominicanrepublic> and for the United 
States," the vice-president, Milagros Ortiz Bosch, said.

The focus of the tragedy was initially at Las Americas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/americas> international airport in Santo 
Domingo, where relatives and friends had gathered to seek news of passengers.

A customs officer on duty at the airport at the time the flight was due to 
arrive fainted when he discovered that his wife and children were on board.

Now the focus shifts to the rest of the island as mourning begins for the 
passengers, many of whom had left the impoverished country so that they could 
send money back to their families, and whose rare visits were a cause for 
celebration and partying.

President Hipolito Mejia said he understood that many citizens had died. 

"The president of the republic expresses his profound sadness over this 
tragedy and offers his condolences to family and friends of the victims," the 
presidential spokesman Luis Fabrae said.

An estimated 41 Dominicans, mainly catering and cleaning workers, died in New 
York on September 11, and the president attended memorials in the United States 
last month.

Although the initial investigation suggested that the crash was an accident, 
the Dominican authorities have stepped up security and drafted armed troops 
into the airport area.

The effect of the crash was felt throughout the Dominican diaspora, which is 
centred on New York but has a large presence in Florida.

In Miami, Hector and Milagros Mercedes closed their family-owned Milly's 
Restaurant in Little Havana.

Mrs Mercedes lost two aunts in the crash. "She had talked to her tias last 
night," Mr Mercedes told the Miami Herald.

"She remembered they said they were taking a morning flight out of New York. 
She was destroyed."

Dominicans in South Florida gathered in a Pompano Beach church to pray for 
those killed in the crash.

"Inside my heart I would cry the same way because they're my brothers and my 
blood ... I feel real, real bad for them," Felix Pimental said.

The country will suffer a double economic blow: tourism has been badly 
affected by the events of September 11 and is likely to be further damaged; and 
many of those on the flight helped to keep the economy afloat by sending back 
money to their relatives.

The last major plane disaster to hit the country was in February 1996, when a 
Dominican Alas Nacionales Boeing 757 with 189 passengers on board crashed into 
the sea.

All the passengers were killed.
 