
Poor old Paul Willis. You probably don’t recognise his name, but he is about 
to become the face of the Volkswagen scandal in Britain. Willis, the managing 
director of VW UK, will appear in front of the Commons transport select 
committee on Monday to face questions about the rigging of diesel emissions 
tests.

Judging by the reception that Michael Horn, the US boss of VW, received from 
Congress last week, Willis is in for a rough ride. More than twice as many cars 
are affected in the UK as the US, so perhaps Willis should be prepared for 
twice the ferocity from the transport committee, although it is hardly as 
intimidating as Congress.

The MPs are likely to focus on how the so-called “defeat devices” ended up in 
VW cars and how the company intends to repair the 1.2m vehicles affected in the 
UK. So far VW’s plan to repair the vehicles has been woefully inadequate. 
Motorists still have no idea how their cars will be repaired and whether they 
will perform at the same level afterwards.

Unfortunately, the job of being country head for a multinational carmaker is a 
thankless task. Willis is effectively a brand ambassador, with all the key 
decisions – such as what cars to sell in the UK – made at VW’s headquarters in 
Germany. This means that the transport committee could be in for a frustrating 
day.

Time, gentlemen please


The bell is ringing for last orders in the takeover battle between SABMiller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/sabmiller> and Anheuser-Busch InBev.

The Takeover Panel deadline for the £65bn “megabrew” deal is set for 
Wednesday, by which timeAB InBev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/anheuser-busch> must make a formal offer 
for the brewer of Grolsch and Peroni or walk away. However, SAB could invite 
its suitor into the bar for a lock-in if it wants to extend the deadline. If it 
does so, it would be a clear indication that the deal is likely to happen.

So far, SAB has put up quite a fight against the serial dealmakers over at AB 
InBev. SAB’s chairman Jan du Plessis has rebutted three informal bids and 
claimed that AB InBev “still very substantially undervalues SABMiller”.

The fact that no SAB shareholders have spoken out against the board suggests 
they agree with Du Plessis.

But AB InBev, the maker of Budweiser, is used to getting its own way and will 
surely secure a deal eventually.

With Altria, which owns 27% of SAB, already backing AB InBev’s bid, the best 
SAB can hope for is ensuring that AB InBev pays a frothy price for its pint.

Generosity at WH Smith?


WH Smith: famous for ripping people off in hospitals, rubbish carpets in its 
stores – and growing profits.

Despite the criticism that the stationery retailer has faced for charging 
higher prices in its hospital outlets and the poor state of its high-street 
shops – see @WHS_Carpet on Twitter for more details –WH Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/whsmith> remains the great survivor of 
the high street. This week it is expected to report an increase in annual 
pre-tax profits of more than 7%, according to analysts at Investec, even though 
like-for-like sales on the high street will be down again.

WH Smith has reported results like this for the last decade. The company has 
been able to increase profits by finding different ways to cut costs – such as 
putting its fridges on timers rather than leaving them on all day – and 
expanding its travel business into airports and railway stations around the 
world. The retailer seems to make little effort to please customers, but the 
savvy management team has kept the brand alive.

Given this profits growth and the hundreds of millions of pounds it has 
returned to shareholders in recent years, surely it is time for WH Smith to 
give something back to shoppers by investing in lower prices and modern shops?
 