
Laura Robson, whose 15th birthday came during the first week of the Australian 
Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>, remains charmingly 
unfazed by her success. Two days after she had won the Wimbledon junior title 
last year she flew to Amsterdam for a training session. "A couple of people 
recognised me at the airport and then they made an announcement on the plane 
which was really embarrassing. I was sitting right at the back, and literally 
the whole plane turned and stared. That wasn't very fun."

The young Briton reached her second junior slam final yesterday, when she 
defeated Noppawan Lertcheewakarn of Thailand, the top seed, 6-4, 6-3. Although 
there were signs of nerves at the beginning of the match Robson, struggling 
with both her normally dominant left-handed serve and forehand, quickly took 
control once she discovered her rhythm.

She is getting a little more used to the attention now and happily signed 
autographs afterwards, though it is not so long ago that she collected them 
herself at Wimbledon. "I think [Lleyton] Hewitt and [Kim] Clijsters signed my 
big ball, and [Elena] Dementieva," she added. "I still have it at home."

While Robson's achievement in becoming the country's first junior grand slam 
champion since Andy Murray won the boys' US Open trophy in 2004 sprang her into 
the public focus, those who are nurturing her career are trying their best not 
to get carried away. They know the pitfalls only too well. Just one example is 
the Indonesian Angelique Widjaja, who defeated Dinara Safina in the 2001 
Wimbledon junior final and won the girls' title at the French Open the next 
year, but failed to make the transition to the professional world with any 
notable success.

This week in the Australian heat, with temperatures the highest for 40 years, 
the experience has been something quite different for Robson, the No5 seed: "At 
Wimbledon I was kind of like the underdog. No one expected me even to do well."

Robson's talent was spotted early and she has been funded by the LTA for the 
past five years. She worked extensively when she was younger with Carl Maes, a 
former coach to Clijsters and now the LTA's head of women's tennis, and also 
the 1974 Wimbledon runner-up Olga Morozova, who coached Dementieva, a beaten 
semi-finalist in the senior event here this week. Octagon, which once had the 
teenaged Murray on its books, captured Robson when she was 10, and she already 
has a racket deal with Wilson and wears Adidas clothing. By the time the 
British public next sees her at Wimbledon, almost certainly in the main draw, 
those clothes are likely to be adorned with advertising.

Fortunately for Robson's chances, neither she nor her parents have shown any 
sign of having their heads turned by either money or adulation. According to 
Steven Martens, the LTA's player director, she is an old head on young 
shoulders and those who are nurturing her career are acutely aware of the need 
to keep her grounded. "The challenge is to keep her normal in her environment," 
he says. "You need the chance to chill out.Tennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> is a rough sport in the sense of the 
demands on young people physically and mentally and it's got much tougher in 
the last few years. Players of Laura's age now play a lot more, practise a lot 
more and do a lot more physical training than they used to and all of those 
things have to be balanced."

And balanced Robson certainly is: she has found time to enjoy herself as well 
this week. Serena Williams came up to her and had a chat, Marat Safin penned a 
few words for her birthday card, while she also had her first glimpse of Roger 
Federer playing live. "That was really good," she says. In between times she 
has been contacting friends on Facebook and eating jelly snakes, especially the 
dark red ones. She has also been consuming energy gels: "But they don't taste 
so good."

At 15 years, 9 days...

Venus Williams 26 June 1995
Professional for nine months. In first tournament she led top‑seed Arantxa 
Sánchez Vicario by a set and a break

Serena Williams 5 October 1996
Had turned pro in September 1995 but in her only tournament, at Quebec City, 
she lost in the qualifiers

Maria Sharapova 28 April 2002
In 2002 she was runner-up in the Australian Open junior event to Barbora 
Strycova

Jelena Jankovic 9 March 2000
Most promising result came at Chile's Milo Cup, where she reached the 
semi-finals in 2000, but her career did not properly take off until later
 