
Egypt

Finishing third in their World Cup qualifying group did little to boost the 
hosts' hopes of winning a fifth continental crown, particularly as they've been 
pitted against the Ivory Coast, who beat them home and away on the road to 
Germany.

However, the Pharaohs can at least point to the fact they were the top scorers 
in that group, plundering 26 goals in 10 matches, frequently without any useful 
input from sulky superstar Mido, who, of course, has rediscovered his top form 
since joining Spurs. Mido is one of only three overseas-based players in the 
squad, but that's nothing new: Egypt has always drawn heavily from its strong 
domestic league - most of them this time come from Zamalek and African 
champions league winners Al Ahly.

Whether they will be good enough to make Egypt African champions for the fifth 
time - the third time on home turf - is doubtful, but that home advantage has 
got the bookies scared: Egypt are joint favourites at 9/2.

Players to watch Barnstorming midfielder Mohammed Barakat has been central to 
Al Ahly's 56-match unbeaten run, and ENPPI striker Amr Zaki is a sharp finisher.
Coach Hassan Shehata

Full squad Essam Al-Hadary (Ahly), Abdul-Wahed Al-Sayed (Zamalek), Mohamed 
Abdul-Monsef (Zamalek); Ahmed Al-Sayed (Ahly), Wael Gomaa (Ahly), Mohamed 
Abdul-Wahab (Ahly), Ibrahim Said (Zamalek), Tarek Al-Sayed (Zamalek), Ahmed 
Fathi (Ismaili), Abdul-Zaher Al-Saqqa (Konyaspor, Turkey); Mohamed Shawki 
(Ahly), Mohamed Barakat (Ahly), Mohamed Abou-Treika (Ahly), Hassan Mostafa 
(Ahly), Ahmed Hassan (Besiktas, Turkey), Hosni Abd-Rabou (Strasbourg, France), 
Ahmed Eid Abdul-Malek (Harras Al-Hodoud); Ahmed 'Mido' Hossam (Tottenham, 
England), Emad Moteb (Ahly), Osama Hosni (Ahly), Abdul-Halim Ali (Zamalek), 
Hossam Hassan (Masry), Amr Zaki (ENPPI).

Ivory Coast

Having beaten Cameroon to World Cup qualification, the Elephants can 
justifiably claim to be one of the continent's heavyweights and arguably have a 
squad with more pace and flair even than the traditionally well-endowed 
Nigeria. That'll be why they're second favourites at 11/2.

Cyril Domoraud, Abdoulaye Meité, Marc Zoro and Kolo Touré make for a mean 
defence, while a midfield featuring the power of Didier Zokora and the poise of 
Gilles Yapi Yapo provides plenty of ammunition for Didier Drogba or speedsters 
such as Aruna Dindane and Bonaventure Kalou.

Kalou's brother Salomon has decided not to declare for the Ivorians, hoping 
instead to become a naturalised Dutchman in time for the World Cup (where he 
could end up playing against his brother): he could miss out on his native 
land's first continental trophy since their epic penalty shoot-out win in 1992.

Player to watch Given that many of the Elephants are already household names, 
let's go for zippy Auxerre winger Kanga Akalé, who's usually thrown on from the 
substitute's bench when the team needs someone to do Cristiano Ronaldo 
impressions - only faster.
Coach Henri Michel

Full squad Jean-Jacques Tizie (Esperance/Tunisia), Gerard Gnanhouan 
(Montpellier/France), Boubacar Barry Copa (Beveren/Belgium); Cyril Domoraud 
(Creteil/France), Blaise Kouassi (Troyes/France), Abdoulaye Meite 
(Marseille/France), Etienne Arthur Boka (Strasbourg/France), Kolo Toure 
(Arsenal/England), Emmanuel Eboue (Arsenal), Marc Andre Zoro (Messina/Italy); 
Siaka Tiene (St-Etienne/France), Didier Zokora (Saint-Etienne/France), Emerse 
Fae (Nantes/France), Gilles Yapi Yapo (Nantes), Kanga Akale (Auxerre/FRA), 
Romaric N'Dri Koffi (Le Mans/France), Guy Roland Demel (Hamburg/Germany), 
Gnegneri Yaya Toure (Olympiakos/Greece); Aruna Dindane (Lens/France), Bakari 
Koné (Nice/France), Didier Drogba (Chelsea/England), Arouna Kone (PSV 
Eindhoven/the Netherlands), Bonaventure Kalou (Paris Saint-Germain/France).

Morocco

Morocco delighted many two years ago by reaching the final with an adventurous 
young team featuring many local-based players and sons of emigrants in Europe.

Defeat to Tunisia in the final was accepted with good grace because fans 
believed manager Badou Zaki had cultivated a generation that would soon 
blossom; but when Tunisia then edged ahead of Morocco for World Cup 
qualification, Zaki paid the price and lost his job - slightly harsh given his 
team went through the whole campaign unbeaten.

Zaki was replaced by globe-trotting Frenchman Phillipe Troussier - who lasted 
two whole months before himself being ousted in favour of current incumbent 
Mohammed Fakkir. The new boss's most striking decision to-date has been to 
recall veteran centreback Nourreddine Naybet, who was banished after a bust-up 
with Zaki.

Naybet has hardly featured for Spurs this season and the prospect of him 
partnering Talal El Karkouri, who has been equally distant from Charlton's 
first team, spells joy for rival strikers and a 14/1 price tag at the bookies. 
Morocco have a top striker of their own, mind: Bordeaux's Marouane Chamakh is 
as silky of touch as he is slick of finish.

Player to watch Not as polished as Chamakh, but Lille striker Hicham 
Aboucherouane is definitely a rising star.
Coach Mohammed Fakkir.

Full squad Tarek Jarmouni (FAR Rabat), Mustapha Chadli (Moghreb Tetouan), 
Nadir Lamyaghri (Wydad Casablanca); Noureddine Naybet (Tottenham/England), 
Talal Karkouri (Charlton/England), Abdeslam Ouadou (Rennes/France), Houcine 
Ouchela (FAR Rabat), Oualid Regragui (Racing Santander/Spain), Badr Kadouri 
(Dynamo Kiev/Ukraine), Noureddine Kacimi (Grenoble/France); Youssef Safri 
(Norwich/England), Mohcine Kharja (AS Roma/Italy), Hafid Abdessadek (FAR 
Rabat), Mustapha Chippo (Ouakra/Qatar), Mohamed Madihi (Wydad Casablanca), 
Amine Rbati (Ouakra); Mouha Yacoubi (Osasuna/Spain), Jaouad Zairi 
(Sochaux/France), Marouane Chamakh (Bordeaux/France), Ali Boussaboun 
(Feyenoord/Netherlands), Hicham Aboucherouane (Lille/France), Mohamed Armoumen 
(Kuwait/Kuwait), Youssef Hajji (Rennes/Fra).

Libya

The tournament's rank outsiders at 100/1, Libyans like reminding anyone who'll 
listen that they've never been beaten in the African Nations Cup - though they 
rarely add that that's because they've only qualified for it once before: when 
they hosted it in 1982, and some would say that their two wins and three draws 
(their final defeat by Ghana came only after penalties) owed much to the fact 
that they were more used to playing on their artificial turf that any of the 
visitors were.

Thanks to hefty investment in football from Colonel Gadafy's football-crazy 
sons (including former Perugia-based steroid-user Saaid), the Greens have made 
great strides in recent years. They beat Egypt in Triploi during the 
qualifiers, and also held Cameroon and the Ivory Coast; however, their away 
performances have been a lot less impressive and last week's 2-0 friendly 
defeat to Qatar suggests a second round berth should be the summit of their 
ambitions.

Player to watch Captain Tarek El Taib, who plays his club football with 
Turkey's Gaziantepspor, is a smooth operator, while Al Ittihad's Nader Kara is 
a tidy goal-getter.
Coach Ilija Loncarevic.

Full squad

Luis Alejandro Ruben, Meftah Ghazalla & Samir Abboud (Ittihad); Younes 
El-Shebani & Essam Ragab (both Olympic), Walid Osman, Osama Hamady, Naji 
Shushan & Mahmoud Makhlouf (all Ittihad), Omar Dawood (JS Kabyle, Algeria), 
Mady EL-Ftouri (Al Hilal); Gehad El Montasr (Triestina, Italy), Nasser Saleel & 
Marei El-Ramli (Ittihad) Abdessalam Khamies & Marwan Mabrouk (both Olympic), 
Nader Al Tarhoni (Sailiya, Qatar), Khaled Hussien (Al Nassr), Tarek El Taib 
(Gaziantepspor, Turkey), Ahmed Saad (Ahli Tripoli); Salem Rewani, Nader Karra & 
Ahmed El Masli (all Ittihad) Zuway Ahmed (Ahli Benghazi)
 