
New York, October 28, 2016 - Guardian US today announced funding of $550,000 
from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation to produce a year-long series of 
sustained and deep reporting on the growing homelessness crisis in the western 
United States. The project will focus on bridging the gap between journalism 
and activism by engaging with readers and inspiring them to take action to 
spark real change via new technology provided by Speakable 
<https://actionbutton.org/>.

While homelessness has been steadily declining nationwide since 2007, it is a 
critical issue in the western US, where tent cities have become a defining 
feature of major cities and local governments are increasingly declaring 
“states of emergency” over the number of people lacking shelter.


According to the Department of Housing and Urban Development’s most recent 
annual homeless assessment, California, Oregon, Washington and Hawaii were four 
of the five states with the highest increases in homelessness in 2015. 
California alone accounts for 21% of the nation’s homeless population.


Support from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation will allow Guardian US to 
expand and deepen its coverage of homelessness through reporting and 
investigations, interactives, films and deep engagement with readers and 
viewers. Speakable’s innovative Action Button <https://actionbutton.org/>, 
which will be added to all the journalism produced in the series, will enable 
and encourage readers to take action to address some of the issues highlighted 
throughout the series, for example to donate to, or volunteer with, local 
organizations working on the ground to combat homelessness throughout the 
western US.


Guardian US editor, Lee Glendinning, said: “At Guardian US, we’re committed to 
reporting on some of the most prevalent and troubling issues that face America 
every day, such as the homelessness crisis. This kind of journalism can often 
leave readers wanting to find ways they can do something to help, and we’re so 
pleased this groundbreaking partnership with the Bill & Melinda Gates 
Foundation will allow us to experiment with new ways in which our journalism 
can motivate our community to take action. By engaging deeply with our audience 
throughout this series, and by encouraging them to be part of the solution, we 
hope to collectively create genuine change on this devastating issue.”


Audience engagement metrics and insights from the 12 month project will be 
studied carefully to better understand the effectiveness of this new model of 
action oriented reporting that translates into meaningful participation and 
action by readers.


The project will be run from the Guardian’s San Francisco bureau and overseen 
by itswest coast bureau chief, Paul Lewis, who commented: “Homelessness is a 
devastating problem in the western states - but shockingly underreported. We’re 
thrilled to have an investment of resources that will enable sustained 
reporting on this subject - and similarly excited to have the opportunity to 
innovate with a new technology that will encourage our readers to take action.”


Ends


Media inquiries

E: press.office@theguardian.com

T: + 1 917-900-4675

About Guardian News & Media


Guardian US, with newsrooms in New York, Washington DC and San Francisco, 
covers US and global news for an online audience across America.

Guardian News & Media (GNM), publisher of theguardian.com 
<http://theguardian.com/>, is one of the largest English-speaking newspaper 
website in the world. Since launching its US and Australia digital editions in 
2011 and 2013 respectively, traffic from outside of the UK now represents over 
two-thirds of the Guardian’s total digital audience.


First published in 1821, the Guardian is most recently renowned for its 
award-winning investigation, The Counted, which exposes and documents lethal 
police force across America, its agenda-setting NSA surveillance revelations 
following disclosures by whistleblower Edward Snowden, globally acclaimed 
investigation into phone hacking, and its trailblazing partnership with 
Wikileaks in 2010.

 