
Why did you decide to write about English culture between the wars and what 
you call romantic modernism?

My first big passion was for Virginia Woolf. I wrote some "completely dotty" 
essays about her at university (my tutor's phrase), and then, because I was 
also addicted to paintings, I did an MA in modern European art. There was a 
series of brilliant exhibitions on in London, exploring the work of English 
artists such as John Piper, Paul Nash and Eric Ravilious. I realised that the 
time just before the second world war, when everything was threatened, was a 
moment of truth for the arts in England. How to celebrate a country and its 
traditions without lapsing into insular sentimentality?

Was it your first attempt at writing a book?

It was the first serious attempt at a book, but I was able to draw on lots of 
much shorter things I'd written. I had done an essay on the modern revival of 
interest in John Sell Cotman, and another on Victorian taste. And I had 
co-edited a collection of essays calledModernism on Sea, from which I learnt a 
great deal. Fortunately there are no exhibits from the "Tudor Trilogy" I wrote 
when I was at junior school.

What came first?

An enormous doctoral thesis! It was meant to be about Woolf's argument with 
the idea of pure form, but the subject grew bigger and bigger. I kept drawing 
new comparisons into the discussion: John Betjeman's guidebooks, Evelyn Waugh's 
houses, Edith Sitwell's eccentrics, EM Forster's pageants – I just couldn't 
resist. Then I had to rewrite the whole thing to make it remotely readable as a 
book.

What were the hardest bits?

Every point seemed to depend on all the others having been made already. I 
swapped things round endlessly. How on earth to make all these interrelated 
ideas form an orderly crocodile, single file?

How did you research the book?

While I was a student I had the luxury of being able to read for 10 or 12 
hours a day and then talk about it in the evening. (I say this with nostalgia 
because I don't expect I'll be able to do that again, and nor will many 
students in future have that privilege.) The wonder of the Bodleian is that you 
sit still, make a wish, and any published work you fancy arrives in your hands. 
When my eyes got sore I went on some wonderful "research trips": long walks 
across the landscape Virginia Woolf knew; expeditions in the footsteps of 
Daphne du Maurier or Henry Green. But generally I didn't need to go very far: 
everything around me seemed to be related to what I was thinking about. Every 
street, every church, the typeface on every sign – it all became part of the 
book.

What are you most pleased with?

I'm thrilled that I've been able to turn an academic thesis into something 
people want to read. If I've succeeded in sharing some of my enthusiasm for the 
subject, then that's quite enough pleasure for me.

What would you do differently/better next time?

So many things! I think the book is too complicated. Everything is in there 
for a reason (and I did cut many thousands of words), but because I was very 
close to the material and trying to respond to all sorts of literary critical 
debates, some of my thinking became extremely convoluted. My next book is going 
to be blissfully lucid . . .

Who were your literary models?

I'm a great one for literary models: I have hundreds of them. Because I'm very 
easily influenced I need to have rival forces pulling me in different 
directions. There were four books in particular which stayed by my desk as I 
was writing:Modern Times, Modern Places by Peter Conrad, Virginia Woolf by 
Hermione Lee,Landscape & Memory by Simon Schama, and Hogarth by Jenny Uglow. 
They taught me what non-fiction can do. I also read with pride and excitement 
the work of friends – my contemporaries – who have helped me think about what 
non-fiction might do next. And I'm glad to say that some of my students at the 
University of Liverpool have been setting the bar pretty high as well.
 