
Guardian News & Media (GNM) is pleased to announce the appointment of Evelyn 
Webster as interim chief executive officer (CEO) of Guardian US. The 
appointment follows the announcement that Eamonn Store, currently CEO of 
Guardian US, has decided to leave the business later this month.

Evelyn joins GNM on an interim basis, as GNM begins the search for a permanent 
business leader. She has most recently spent over five years as Executive Vice 
President of Time Inc, one of the largest media companies in the world, where 
she oversaw the business operations and strategy for 26 award-winning brands 
that reached more than 100 million consumers.


In this role Evelyn will be responsible for leading the commercial and 
operations teams, working closely with US Editor Lee Glendinning, as Guardian 
US continues to focus on rebalancing its core business model to ensure it is 
able to serve its loyal and growing readership. Evelyn will report directly to 
Guardian Media Group CEO, David Pemsel.


David Pemsel, chief executive officer, Guardian Media Group, said: “Eamonn has 
led the US business with passion and dedication at a time of huge volatility 
across the industry, and I’d like to thank him for all his hard work and many 
achievements. I am also delighted to have attracted someone of Evelyn’s calibre 
and experience, on an interim basis, to work closely with Lee Glendinning, the 
editor of Guardian US, and the senior team on the ongoing transformation of our 
US operations and our continued focus on maximising the enormous opportunities 
for Guardian journalism in the US market.”

Eamonn Store said: “As the digital news market continues to evolve at speed 
I’m incredibly proud of what we have achieved at Guardian US over the last 
three years, including the doubling of our overall audience and significantly 
increasing our overall revenue. Now feels like the right time to hand over the 
reins as I explore the next chapter of my career in an area I am passionate 
about, working to help senior corporate leaders drive stronger corporate 
citizenship by developing deeper, more enduring cause related partnerships with 
those dedicated to doing good in this world. I will leave the Guardian with 
enormous thanks and gratitude for the role I have enjoyed so much and the team 
that have supported me.”

Evelyn Webster said: “The Guardian is an incredible global brand and one which 
I have long respected on both a personal and professional level. The 
opportunity to spend time working with the highly talented Guardian team, to 
further unlock the potential of the brand’s enormous footprint in the US, with 
around 40m monthly visitors, was simply too good to pass up.”

Prior to joining Time Inc in 2011, Evelyn spent 18 years at IPC Media, joining 
as a graduate trainee in 1992 and working her way up to the role of Chief 
Executive Officer.

-Ends-

For more information please contact:

media.enquiries@theguardian.com or 020 3353 3696

Notes to editors


About Guardian News & Media

Guardian News & Media (GNM) publishes theguardian.com <http://theguardian.com/>
, one of the largest English-speaking quality newspaper websites in the world. 
Since launching its US and Australia digital editions in 2011 and 2013 
respectively, traffic from outside of the UK now represents over two-thirds of 
the Guardian’s total digital audience.

In the UK, GNM publishes the Guardian newspaper six days a week, first 
published in 1821, and the world’s oldest Sunday newspaper, The Observer.


The Guardian is most recently renowned for its Pulitzer Prize and Emmy-winning 
revelations based on the disclosures made by whistleblower Edward Snowden. In 
2014, the Guardian was named newspaper and website of the year at the Society 
of Editors UK Press Awards and is the most trusted news source in the UK (Ofcom 
digital media report, 2014).


The Guardian is also known for its globally acclaimed investigation into phone 
hacking, the launch of its groundbreaking digital-first strategy in 2011 and 
its trailblazing partnership with WikiLeaks in 2010.

 