
New York, Tuesday, August 11 - Guardian US has today announced two senior 
editorial appointments. Jane Spencer joins as deputy editor, strategy, while 
David Taylor is promoted to deputy editor, news. Both will report directly to 
Lee Glendinning, editor of Guardian US.


Before joining Guardian US, Spencer worked at Fusion, where she held the roles 
of editor-in-chief, digital and senior vice president, emerging platforms. A 
former Nieman Fellow, Spencer also served as both executive editor and managing 
editor of the Daily Beast, as well as overseeing digital content for Newsweek. 
She was a correspondent in the Wall Street Journal’s Hong Kong bureau for two 
years, winning a Pulitzer Prize in 2007 as part of a team for the Journal’s 
‘Naked Capitalism’ series on China. She joined the Journal in 2002 as a staff 
reporter in New York. At Guardian US, Spencer will spearhead cutting-edge 
projects and drive innovation across the newsroom, with a particular focus on 
mobile and video.


Taylor joined Guardian US in September 2015 as head of news, overseeing 
day-to-day news operations. He has since led the Guardian’s coverage of the 
2016 presidential election, while stewarding major news events including the 
Orlando and San Bernardino shootings. Taylor previously held the role of head 
of news at the Times of London, winning multiple awards, before which he served 
as the UK newspaper’s US editor, based in Washington DC. He has held numerous 
senior news roles at both the Times and the Guardian. With a journalistic 
career spanning more than 25 years on both sides of the Atlantic, David will 
continue to bring his unrivaled news expertise to bear at a strategic level.


Commenting on the appointments, Lee Glendinning said: “In Jane and David we 
have an enviable combination of cutting-edge digital thinking and unrivaled 
news judgment. I’m looking forward to working with them both to further 
underline the Guardian’s purpose and voice in the United States.”


Jane Spencer said: “I’m thrilled to be joining a news organization that 
combines the highest standards of journalism with bold digital thinking. I look 
forward to helping the Guardian US reach new and underrepresented audiences, 
and take advantage of all the most exciting tools of digital journalism to tell 
meaningful stories.”


David Taylor said: “I’m delighted to be taking a more senior role with 
Guardian US as we continue our mission to go further and deeper in reporting on 
America, telling the stories which are too often ignored, in new and 
imaginative ways. With a lot at stake in election year, there has never been a 
more consequential time to report with rigor and nuance.”


Guardian US reported record traffic in June 2016, with 41.8 million unique 
browsers, according to ComScore, up 33% on the same time last year. The 
editorial team has most recently won a multitude of awards for its ongoing 
investigative project, the Counted, which exposes and documents lethal force 
used by law enforcers across the US, while the Guardian’s coverage of the 
unfolding US presidential election includes deep reporting, lively opinion and 
analysis, a 24/7 election live blog, and the launch of ‘The Minute’ a mobile 
first, immersive daily update of all the news and views from the campaign trail.


Spencer joins Guardian US on August 15.


Ends


Media inquiries


E: press.office@theguardian.com


T: + 1 917-900-4675



Jane Spencer - biography


Jane Spencer is an American journalist and editor with experience developing 
innovative digital content strategies, managing newsrooms, launching new 
products, and reporting at news organizations including The Wall Street 
Journal, The Daily Beast, The Marshall Project, and Fusion.


Most recently, she was Editor-in-chief of Fusion, a millennial-focused digital 
and cable network owned by Univision with a focus on elevating underrepresented 
voices. She oversaw the relaunch of Fusion’s digital editorial properties in 
2015, with an emphasis on “off-platform” content for channels such as Snapchat 
and Youtube.


Jane was one of the founding editors of The Daily Beast in 2008, where she 
served as managing editor and executive editor until 2012. The site won 
numerous awards during her tenure, including a National Magazine Award Digital 
Ellie, a Webby Award for Best News Site, and a Front Page Award for multimedia 
storytelling.


Before joining The Daily Beast in 2008, Jane spent six years as a reporter and 
foreign correspondent for The Wall Street Journal in Hong Kong and New York 
where she covered a variety of beats from the entertainment industry to the 
environment. She was part of a team of reporters that won a Pulitzer Prize for 
International Reporting in 2007 for coverage of China’s public health and 
environmental problems.


She was awarded a Nieman Fellowship at Harvard University for the 2012/2013 
academic year, where she studied emerging forms of digital storytelling at MIT 
Media Lab, and digital strategy, entrepreneurship, and online business models 
at Harvard Business School.


Jane consulted on the launch strategy for The Marshall Project, a non-profit 
newsroom that covers the U.S. criminal justice system, and has taught digital 
storytelling at the University of California, Berkeley through the Knight 
Foundation. In addition to traditional reporting, she’s particularly interested 
in emerging forms of storytelling, including virtual reality, short-form video 
for social networks, dataviz, interactives, and content for social channels.


David Taylor - biography


David brings more than 25 years of news experience gained on both sides of the 
Atlantic.


As head of news for Guardian US since November 2015, he has been leading our 
news operation and has directed 2016 US election coverage, as well as exclusive 
projects ranging from an investigation into America’s water crisis, to new 
revelations about the US torture program. He has also guided imaginative 
coverage in key areas for Guardian US from guns and gender to environment and 
criminal justice.

Currently in his second spell with the Guardian, David also spent six years at 
The Times of London as head of news and US Editor, based in Washington DC.


During his period in charge of The Times of London’s newsroom, his team won 
Newspaper of the Year, News Team of the Year, Scoop of the Year and Reporter of 
the Year awards ­all driven by campaigns which he orchestrated, ranging from 
exposing tax avoidance and hidden child sex abuse, to a campaign which led to 
an historic reform of the UK child adoption system. He developed and directed 
news coverage of: the London 2012 Olympic Games; the 2010 General Election; the 
Arab Spring; the collapse of the Euro; and the 2012 US Election.


In the US, he has reported from more than 20 states and written with flair and 
authority across subjects ranging from guns and immigration policy to baseball 
and music. He has covered events including: President Obama’s inauguration; the 
Sandy Hook school shooting; the Boston bombing; disturbances in Ferguson, 
Missouri; Congressional hearings into Benghazi; midterm elections; and the 
immigration crisis at the Mexican border.


He loves music - from Sufjan Stevens to Bruce Springsteen - and sports teams 
of varying degrees of success from Newcastle United to the Washington Nationals 
and Green Bay Packers.


About Guardian News & Media


Guardian US, with newsrooms in New York, Washington DC and San Francisco, 
covers US and global news for an online audience across America.

Guardian News & Media (GNM), publisher of theguardian.com, is one of the 
largest English-speaking newspaper website in the world. Since launching its US 
and Australia digital editions in 2011 and 2013 respectively, traffic from 
outside of the UK now represents over two-thirds of the Guardian’s total 
digital audience.


First published in 1821, the Guardian is most recently renowned for its 
award-winning investigation, The Counted, which exposes and documents lethal 
police force across America, its agenda-setting NSA surveillance revelations 
following disclosures by whistleblower Edward Snowden, globally acclaimed 
investigation into phone hacking, and its trailblazing partnership with 
Wikileaks in 2010.
 