
Mark Sweney

The Guardian <https://www.theguardian.com/media/theguardian> and Observer 
narrowed losses to just over £30m in the year to the end of March, as income 
from print operations remained resilient and digital revenues grew by almost a 
quarter.

The loss before interest, tax and amortisation of £30.6m followed a restated 
loss last time of £33.8m.

Andrew Miller, the chief executive of the parent company, Guardian Media 
Group, received £2.16m in total remuneration after a £1.41m payout relating to 
the sale of the company’s stake in the parent of AutoTrader, in a deal that
valued the car sales site at £1.8bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jan/22/guardianmediagroup-theguardian>.

Miller spent a decade as finance chief at Trader Media Group, transforming it 
into a digital business, and GMG said the payment “was calculated in accordance 
with a contractual agreement and was directly linked to the sale price agreed”.

Guardian News & Media, the news operation that includes theguardian.com, 
reported a solid 6.8% rise in total revenues to £210.2m for the year to the end 
of March.

Print revenues remained flat year on year at a little over £140m, a strong 
performance in a market that is typically seeing declines.

But digital revenues continued to show strong growth, up 24% to £69.5m, with 
the recently relaunched mobile apps attracting 840,000 users, and those opting 
for the paid-for premium version 150% ahead of planned subscriber numbers.

GMG said if certain charges were stripped out, most notably a non-cash 
accounting charge relating to Guardian Australia, the truer picture of 
operating losses at GNM was £19.4m. Guardian Australia is funded by the 
internet entrepreneur Graeme Wood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jan/15/guardian-launch-digital-australia-edition>
.

Alan Rusbridger, the editor-in-chief of GNM, was paid £491,000, including a 
base salary of £395,000, the same as he received the previous year.

The £2.16m in remuneration for Miller included a base salary of £696,000 plus 
pension contributions of £53,000. A separate bonus of £226,000 has been 
deferred for a year. The company said Miller had waived £457,000 in bonus 
payments over the past four years.

Overall, the company employed 1,539 staff and paid £119.5m in wages.

The sale of AutoTrader helped GMG report a pre-tax profit of £549.2m. At an 
operating level, losses fell slightly year on year to £48.3m. In turn, this has 
meant the cash and investment fund that must support the newspapers has grown 
threefold to £842.7m.

The company has no plan to use the funds for a major acquisition; instead, 
most of it will be invested with an aim of a real return of 5% to support an 
annual loss level of about £40m. However, the plan is to reduce GNM’s losses 
well below this level.

Miller said it was an “important milestone” that, following the fillip for the 
investment fund, losses fall within this level, but much more needed to be done.

“In the current year, we must focus relentlessly on reducing underlying 
operating losses at Guardian News & Media, which continues to be impacted by 
the volatile trading conditions and structural changes sweeping the newspaper 
industry,” he said.

Miller dismissed reports that suggest the Guardian’s internet-only US 
operation is struggling, pointing out that traffic had grown 12% to 20 million 
monthly unique users and that, in the first quarter of GNM’s new financial 
year, the operation was ahead of budget.

“It is very important strategically,” said Miller “To invest in a global 
digital brand and not to be in the US is crazy.”

GMG has now all but completed selling off business interests not related to 
newspaper publishing. The main non-core asset left is a 32.9% stake in Top 
Right, owner of businesses including the fashion forecaster WGSN, 
communications awards Cannes Lions and Drapers.• To contact the MediaGuardian 
news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 020 3353 3857. For all other 
inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you 
are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly “for publication”.

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 