
March 20. It's my 34th birthday. For a treat, I have gone to Les Halles, 
Anthony Bourdain's patch of Paris in Manhattan. I have wanted to go for six 
years, since I read Kitchen Confidential when I was working as a chef. I loved 
how he captured the parallels of rock'n'roll debauchery in the back kitchen and 
back stage. I have come for his Rossini: the most decadent burger in NYC. 
Ground and charred to order, topped with a tranche of home-made foie gras and a 
reduction of red-wine-and-black-truffle sauce to dip it into. When I read 
Bourdain's book I, like most commis chefs, couldn't afford to eat the food I 
sent out every night. Now I'm ordering this delicious opulence seasoned with 
cruelty. Do I feel guilty? Do I feel sorry for the commis behind the 
net-curtained kitchen window? Am I glad to temporarily not be skint? Do I 
question my personal morals?

I think about my fifth birthday. I think about the cake, a glorious creation 
of my mother's, the centrepiece of the feast in the front room of our 
Sunderland semi. It must have been a Saturday as I can hear the Roker Park roar 
in the background as I wait with unsuppressable excitement for the guests to 
arrive. I have crept in among the balloons, streamers, wrapped parcels and 
tailless donkey. I evaluate the banquet. Sausage rolls - horrible. Crisps - 
nice. Sandwiches - horrible. Fizzy drink - nice. Cake - amazing! It's so blue! 
That is the best colour ever! That's why it's my favourite. The icing is so 
heavy it looks like there is no cake, just icing. I like this. In yellow piping 
there is a fat 5. I WANT IT NOW! I notice my finger. I can't control it. It 
pokes into the lower curl of the number. It prods and scoops yellow into my 
mouth. Wonderful sensation of joy rushing happiness to the brain. More probing. 
More delight. It looks less like a five. There's a fleeting slice of ice and 
moral dilemma: fear of the SMACK. Logic leads me. If there's no five on the 
cake, no one will know anything's wrong. I finish the yellow, leaving a smudged 
sea of blank blue.

I don't remember the consequences. I just remember how good the icing tasted. 
The burger tasted great, too, by the way. The writer is the lead singer with 
Franz Ferdinand.
 