
Mass murders are not committed by sane people. Only a small fraction of 
mentally ill people ever become violent, and then, usually, when they fail to 
get treatment. Individuals with a severe mental illness should not be allowed 
to purchase guns or have access to them. Combine guns and untreated mental 
illness: you have a tragedy waiting to happen.

The tragic mass shootings in Newtown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/newtown-shooting>, Aurora 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/aurora-shooting>, Tucson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/arizona-shooting> and Virginia Tech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/virginia-tech-shooting-2011> reportedly all 
involved untreated mental illness. After each such tragedy, I hear people say, 
"Those parents knew their sons were ill; why didn't they do something to 
prevent that tragedy?" Once your child turns 18, he or she has a civil right to 
refuse treatment and remain mentally ill until or unless she or he becomes 
suicidal or homicidal, as determined by judges at commitment hearings. State 
laws vary, but all states set strict controls regarding involuntary 
hospitalization and forced treatment, limiting it to circumstances when a 
person is an imminent danger to self or others, or likely to become so.

These laws give adults with mental illness the right to decide when, where, 
how and even if they will receive treatment. Yet, some serious mental illnesses 
make it difficult for those affected to assess their own need for treatment. 
When patient rights exceed necessary protections, individuals with severe 
mental illness can die. And many do. And sometimes, they harm others along the 
way.

I am the mother of one such adult son, who took his life six years ago. He 
suffered from severe and persistent bipolar disorder. During a manic episode, 
he was transformed into a different person. He became psychotic, completely 
out-of-control. He drove his car at high rates of speed with no regard for the 
safety of others. He was wired. He required little to no sleep. He became 
extremely religious.

He was, he believed, in the "witness protection program". Federal agents were 
trying to assassinate him because he was in possession of top secret 
information that would take down important people in the government if he went 
public. He developed an unhealthy fixation with the president and made many 
attempts to get into the White House, for what he thought were scheduled 
meetings with President Clinton. There were days he actually believedhe was the 
president, living in the White House.

He was in complete denial that anything was wrong with him. It took the 
assault of a police officer to get my son committed for treatment. With forced 
meds, he recovered in five weeks. He went on to have four additional bipolar 
manic episodes, each one more severe than the previous and of longer duration. 
That longer duration was because of judges at commitment hearings who took the 
easy way out, releasing him time and time again, ruling he was not an imminent 
danger to himself or others – many times, against the recommendation of the 
treating psychiatrist.

On release, he would eventually resurface in another city, another state as he 
traveled the US east coast trying to escape federal agents who, he feared, were 
trying to assassinate him. He was again arrested, at which time the commitment 
process started all over again. He was committed 14 times to hospitals in five 
different states.

Mental illness is treatable. Medication compliance is the key. My son was not 
medication compliant. When he stopped taking his meds, both he and his family 
suffered the consequences. During a manic episode, he lost touch with reality 
and lacked the ability to recognize he was ill. Families are – or can be – the 
early warning system. They see the fuse burning long before the bomb goes off, 
but there is nothing concerned families can do until their loved one reaches 
the crisis stage.

When my son told me he had a gun permit and top security clearance at the 
White House, I called theUS secret service <http://www.secretservice.gov/>, 
told them about my son's illness and his previous attempts to gain access to 
the White House. I was informed that most of the people who try to get into the 
White House suffer from mental illness and their agents are trained to 
distinguish between a mentally ill individual and a terrorist.

When he told me of his plan to bear arms to protect himself from federal 
agents he felt certain were trying to assassinate him, I feared he might 
actually purchase a gun and shoot innocent victims he mistook for federal 
agents. I called theFBI <http://www.fbi.gov/> to confirm his name was in the 
database used by licensed firearm dealers to run background checks on 
prospective buyers. Because of the privacy laws, I was unable to confirm my 
son's name was in that database.

Mental illness is not going away. We must address mental health reform and 
find a balance between protecting the rights of mentally ill people and also 
acquiring the much-needed treatment they require to recover and not be a threat 
to society.

Gun control is not the answer.
 