
It is several years since restaurant critic AA Gill wrote of his meal at a 
Welsh dining pub, the Felin Fach Griffin Inn, that it was "Exceptional anywhere 
in Europe - in Wales, it was as damn near miraculous as the Angel of Mons". The 
pub, between Brecon and Hay-on-Wye, has since enjoyed column inches of 
rapturous praise, not only for its food but also for the handful of bedrooms 
subsequently added upstairs (which will be stuffed with literary types 
attending the Hay Festival when you read this).

The reason I am telling you all this is that the chef who wrought the miracle, 
Charles Inkin, still co-owner of The Griffin, is now overseeing the finishing 
touches to half a dozen rooms at his latest venture, The Gurnard's Head, near 
Zennor in Cornwall.

Has he gone way out west because it might, in the eyes of a restaurant critic, 
be deemed a culinary desert? More importantly, in this untamed part of 
Cornwall, will I ever find it?

"Oh you'll see it all right," says the voice on the phone when I ring for 
directions, "The name's on the roof."

Sure enough, as I wind along the coast road hugged by moorland and lonely 
farms towards Land's End, there's no mistaking it. Where the Griffin is 
"look-at-me" pink (against a backdrop of green fields), the Gurnard's Head is 
lemon yellow against gloomy heath, its name etched on the slate roof in white 
letters large enough to be seen if not from space at least from a helicopter 
leaving the little airport down the road for the Scilly Isles.

If Inkin only acquires pubs with a garish exterior, things do tend to calm 
down inside. Through doorways are soothing vistas of flagstones, scrubbed wood, 
clotted-cream and pale-green paintwork, and an inviting terracotta and blue 
restaurant. People are propping up the bar beneath a large painting of a 
surprised cow. It's so chilled I probably wouldn't care if I only had a hammock 
upstairs. But the rooms are finished - not to the squeaky, minimalist smartness 
of the Griffin's though, which is reflected in the rates. Rustic simplicity 
costs £15-£20 less. My room's cheerful rather than elegant, with a simple 
shower and loo, old paintings and prints, a Roberts radio, tea and coffee 
things on a brightly painted tray, and checked Roman blinds.

Never mind all that, you cry, tell us about the food. These days, Inkin has 
head chefs in his kitchens. Here it's a young Kiwi called Matt Williamson, who 
is delivering pub food just as it should be. No truffles, he says, and just 
occasionally foie gras, but lots of Cornish pilchards, crab, skate and local 
veg. Dinner in the bar is a triumphant piece of hake with tartare sauce, and a 
slightly less fabulous sirloin steak with heavenly courgette puree, all totally 
eclipsed by the honey and lavender ice cream which follows (I know this because 
my notebook says "Ohmigod"). The meal is accompanied halfway through by a folk 
duo, who sing in Cornish but say things in English like: "The more I drink, the 
better I sing," and "The more I drink, the better you sound."

Breakfast is eaten en famille in the restaurant. I'm late, having showered 
after a blowy walk through fields to the rocky Gurnard's Head from which the 
pub takes its name, and everyone clears off when I sit down. Which is fine by 
me as I can watch the cows driven past the window to the dairy while I sip 
fresh OJ and work my way through a puddle of scrambled eggs and delicious 
mushrooms.

· Doubles from £97.50 B&B, £142 B&B for a couple, dinner from around £24 per 
head for three courses excluding drinks. 01736 796928,gurnardshead.co.uk 
<http://www.gurnardshead.co.uk>
 