
Gus Poyet is a genuine contender for the Swansea City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/swansea> job, although Huw Jenkins, the 
chairman at the Liberty Stadium, is prepared to broaden his search for Garry 
Monk’s successor in the wake of unexpected interest in a post that has 
attracted a number of high-calibre applicants.

While Poyet is certainly in the frame, and Jenkins is known to be an admirer 
of the man he came close to appointing as Swansea’s manager in 2010, other 
candidates have emerged sinceMonk’s dismissal on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/09/garry-monk-sacked-swansea>.

Jenkins is keeping his cards close to his chest, to the extent that most of 
the board are out of the loop, but it is understood the 52-year-old, who has an 
impressive track record when it comes to identifying managers, is prepared to 
reconsider his initial thoughts on the back of some of the names that have come 
forward.

As well as mulling over the merits of Poyet, who is currently in charge of AEK 
Athens <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aekathens> and would be receptive 
to returning to the Premier League despite publicly playing down speculation 
about his future, Jenkins has run the rule over Roberto Di Matteo, the former 
Chelsea and West Bromwich Albion manager.

Di Matteo, however, is a manager rather than a coach – he is not hands on when 
it comes to taking training – and that will almost certainly rule him out given 
the template that Jenkins has in place at Swansea.

Within the club there is a feeling that Dennis Bergkamp ticks a lot of boxes 
but it is unclear if the Dutchman, who is currently Frank de Boer’s No2 at 
Ajax, would be seriously interested in the post or, for that matter, whether 
Jenkins would be prepared to take a leap of faith and appoint someone who has 
never managed before.

The same applies to Ryan Giggs, who is the latest name to be linked with the 
position. There is also a sense that, given Swansea’s predicament, Premier 
League experience will be crucial in Jenkins’ eyes.

While the search goes on to bring in a manager capable of pulling the club 
clear of the relegation zone and improving a dismal run of results that has 
seen them win only one of their past 11 league matches, Alan Curtis, the former 
Swansea player and a long-term member of the back-room staff, has been given 
the task of taking charge of the team forSaturday’s Premier League game at 
Manchester City.

Curtis has been thrust into the role after Swansea confirmed that Pep Clotet, 
the assistant manager, and the first-team coaches James Beattie and Kristian 
O’Leary were following Monk out the door.

Swansea will have to pay more than £3m in compensation to cover the cost of 
the early termination of the four contracts.

Monk, who managed the club for 22 months after a distinguished playing career 
at the Liberty Stadium, released a statement in which he spoke of his “great 
sadness” at leaving Swansea and stated his belief that he would have been 
capable of turning around the recent poor run of results if given the 
opportunity.

“Everyone at the club from myself, my staff and the players themselves have 
been working tirelessly to change this loss of form, but unfortunately have not 
been able to in satisfactory time,” said Monk, who led Swansea to a club-record 
eighth-place finish in the Premier League last term in his first full season in 
charge.

“I have no doubt whatsoever that these players will start to show their true 
quality again very soon, and the club will be looking upwards once more.

“I feel truly proud of all we’ve done during my 22 months in charge … I would 
have liked to continue because I strongly believe we would have come through 
this period together and stronger but I will now use my time to reflect and 
improve, ready for my next challenge.”
 