
Hamid Karzai's notorious half-brother is likely to use tomorrow's 
parliamentary election inAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> to strengthen his grip over the 
critical southern province of Kandahar, where he is working to win all 
available seats for his allies.

Analysts warn that a win for Ahmed Wali Karzai's favoured candidates will 
further concentrate power in the hands of a reviled elite whose dominance has 
fuelled anti-government sentiment in the Taliban heartland. In Kandahar, where 
US forces are focusing activity, 14 of 249 seats are up for grabs. Many predict 
that nearly all of them will go to the 12 men and three women backed 
by Ahmed Wali Karzai.

The favoured candidates include Mohammad Ishaq, the brother of Arif Noorzai, 
one of Karzai's closest allies who has been dogged by accusations of 
involvement in the drug trade, and Sayed Mohammad Akhund, a powerbroker from a 
family enriched by Nato contracts. All of them have been endorsed byAhmed Wali 
Karzai <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ahmed-wali-karzai> and it is feared 
they could also benefit from fraud in a contest that even election officials 
concede will be tainted.

Today Ahmed Wali Karzai said he was backing the candidates because they 
support his brother's government. "I am campaigning for 15 people because they 
are not the sort of people who are against the government," he said. "This is 
not my decision but the decision of my tribe and I have to follow that."

Tomorrow's election is the second time Afghans have voted for members of 
parliament since 2001. The Taliban issued a statement today vowing to disrupt 
voting. Insurgents kidnapped two candidate and were blamed for seizing 21 
election officials in the north-west.

Western diplomats, the president and senior electoral officials have tried to 
lower expectations, predicting Taliban violence, low turnout and widespread 
fraud.

Little attention has been paid to the possible political outcome, although a 
report by the Afghanistan Analyst's Network said: "The president's entourage 
has been mobilising influential powerbrokers and government officials in an 
attempt to arrive at a more pliable parliament."

None of those backed by Ahmed Wali Karzai are Ghilzais, a large, disaffected 
tribe who feel excluded from power in Kandahar and predominate in the Taliban's 
ranks. Only three of more than 50 candidates in Kandahar are Ghilzais. Carl 
Forsberg, an author of an influential report on Kandahar, said: "Whether Karzai 
is able to get his slate elected will be an indication of how much power he now 
has and how much the election has been rigged."

A former restaurateur in the US, Ahmed Wali Karzai has been accused of 
amassing vast wealth through control over Nato contracts and offering 
protection to drug smugglers – claims he has always denied. He ran his 
brother's presidential campaign in the south last year, when the president 
netted at least 1m fraudulent votes.
 