
With helicopters flying overhead and tight security on the ground, the Afghan 
president,Hamid Karzai <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hamid-karzai>, led 
thousands of mourners in a funeral procession to bury his half-brother in the 
family's ancestral village of Karz.

Karzai pushed through his bodyguards to climb down to the freshly dug grave of 
Ahmed Wali Karzai <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ahmed-wali-karzai>, saying 
a final farewell before throwing stones on the casket, following Islamic custom.

The president later appealed to fellow Afghans to stop the violence."Once 
again I call on theTaliban <https://www.theguardian.com/world/taliban>, my 
dears, my brothers and friends, come and join me in building the country. Stop 
destroying the country," he said.

Karzai, dubbed the president of Kandahar, was killed on Tuesday at his home 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/jul/12/ahmed-wali-karzai-killing-sparks-fears>
 by his trusted security chief, Sardar Mohammad. Rumours circulated that 
Mohammad's remains had been strung up at a city centre roundabout after he was 
shot dead by another bodyguard.

Mohammad's motives for killing his boss are not clear and a personal clash has 
not been ruled out, although the Taliban has claimed responsibility for the 
assassination.

Immediately after the funeral, President Karzai placed a turban on the head of 
Shah Wali Khan, another of his half-brothers, but he made no official 
announcement as to who would become the new provincial council head.

The funeral procession set off from the Mandigak Palace, the governor of 
Kandahar's residence, to a burial plot in Dand district at 7am local time on 
Wednesday.

Karzai was joined at the funeral by Kandahar's governor, Tooryalai Wesa, and 
the mayor of Kabul, Muhammad Yunus Nawandish.

Helmand's governor, Gulab Mangal, was caught in a roadside bomb attack in 
Kandahar's Maiwand district as he travelled to the funeral. Two of his guards 
were injured, although he was unhurt.

Mourners said that Ahmed Wali Karzai would be a great loss, in Kandahar but 
also in the provinces of Helmand, Uruzgan and Zabul where he was a respected 
tribal elder.

Khalid Ahmad, a youth association leader, 30, travelled from neighbouring 
Zabul for the funeral. "I have sat down with Ahmed Wali Karzai and had tea with 
him whenever I had problems and he was always very helpful," he said. "He had a 
good relationship with people, with young people, and he tried to help 
everybody. I hope that his elder brother, Shah Wali Khan, works the same way 
with us."

Haji Nik Mohammad from Helmand was also there to pay his respects. He said 
Ahmad Wali Karzai would be sorely missed as a facilitator among all tribes.

"When people had problems that the governor or the police chief could not 
solve they came to Ahmed Wali Karzai," he said. "No one can replace him. He was 
good to all tribes."

While it is true that many credited Ahmed Wali Karzai with keeping the lid on 
tribal tensions in the province, his detractors suggested that he was the cause 
of more problems than he solved. His system of patronage politics alienated 
members of other tribes, making them more sympathetic to the Taliban.

At a press conference after the killing, President Karzai said: "This is the 
life of the people ofAfghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>
. Afghan families, every one of us, have suffered from it and we hope, God 
willing, for our suffering to be over."

The brothers' father, Abdul Ahad Karzai, was assassinated in 1999.

Ahmed Wali Karzai's body was released to the family on Tuesday afternoon from 
the Mirwais hospital, in Kandahar. Islamic custom stipulates that a body must 
be buried within 24 hours, but a memorial is scheduled for Thursday to allow 
more members of the family time to travel to Kandahar.

Kandahar's police chief, General Abdul Razaq, said an investigation had been 
launched into the assassination. Local media reported claims from officials 
that a number of arrests had been made on Tuesday night, but a spokesman for 
the interior ministry declined to confirm that.

The Taliban adopted a strategy of targeted assassinations in Kandahar after 
its members had their freedom of movement within the province curtailed by the 
influx of soldiers of the Nato-led International Security Assistance Force 
(Isaf) during the 2010 surge. More than half of all assassinations in 
Afghanistan since March occurred in Kandahar, according to a recent UN report.
 