
Wearing an orange prison jumpsuit and handcuffs, the billionaire financier Sir 
Allen Stanford <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/allen-stanford> appeared in 
the dock at a court in Texas today to enter a formal plea of not guilty to 21 
criminal charges of masterminding a $7bn pyramid scheme.

Arraigned alongside three former colleagues, Stanford denied all accusations 
that he used his Antigua-incorporated Stanford International Bank to finance a 
personal playground of Caribbean mansions, private jets and international 
cricket tournaments.

"Not guilty, your honour," Stanford told magistrate judge Frances Stacy.

US prosecutors urged the judge to deny bail, arguing that Stanford, 59, has 
both the means and the motivation to flee the US. In court papers, the 
department of justice said accountants searching for a missing $1bn in 
investors' funds recently found a Stanford-controlled Swiss bank account 
containing $20m.

"If convicted, Stanford is likely facing a sentence that would result in him 
spending the rest of his life in prison," said a filing by US attorney Tim 
Johnson. "Few cases involve such a strong incentive for the defendant to flee."

But defence counsel Dick DeGuerin countered that Stanford had close ties with 
his six children, aged 11 to 26, who all live in the US and that there was no 
prospect of him leaving: "Mr Stanford wants to stand and fight."

DeGuerin revealed that the cricket impresario had suffered depression and 
anxiety since the collapse of his financial empire in February and is taking 
Ativan, a prescription drug to treat stress.

Stanford, who allegedly bankrolled cricket's Twenty20 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/twenty20> international tournaments using 
fraudulently embezzled money, is one of seven people charged over the alleged 
mis-management of SIB which collapsed in February leaving 28,000 people short 
of their savings.

Also pleading not guilty today were SIB's former chief investment officer 
Laura Pendergest-Holt, former chief accounting officer Gilberto Lopez and 
former global controller Mark Kuhrt.

Stanford's lawyer has complained about the financier's treatment since his 
surrender to the FBI at his girlfriend's house in Fredericksburg, Virginia, 
last week. DeGuerin told local reporters that Stanford has been shuttled 
between five jails in four days and was kept "incommunicado" with little sleep. 
Before appearing in court, Stanford spent the night at a county lockup in 
Conroe, north of Houston.

Meanwhile, authorities in Antigua arrested the Caribbean nation's former chief 
financial regulator, Leroy King, following allegations that he accepted more 
than $100,000 worth of bribes, including SuperBowl tickets and rides on a 
private jet, to turn a blind eye to wrongdoing at Stanford's financial empire.

Antigua's government fired King as head of the island's Financial Services 
Regulatory Commission on Tuesday after the US department of justice filed 
criminal charges against him. He is likely to face proceedings for extradition 
to Texas.

It has emerged that seven former and current baseball players have been caught 
up in the Stanford scandal including Greg Maddux, a former pitcher for the 
Chicago Cubs and the Los Angeles Dodgers. The receiver of Stanford 
International Bank is suing the sportsmen for the return of $9.2m, plus 
interest of $300,000, which was withdrawn in the months leading up to the 
collapse of SIB. Although there is no suggestion of wrongdoing by the players, 
the receiver wants to claw back funds in order to share out the remnants of 
Stanford's empire equitably between investors.
 