
Born: Time unknown, 25 April 2005
Place of birth: Kpobiman, Greater Accra, Ghana
Birth weight: Unknown
Mother: Mary Ogborvi, 25
Father:  Benjamin Klutsey

Hannah Klutsey sleeps wrapped in a blanket and a cloth in her mother's arms 
outside her grandmother's house.

"House" is a euphemism. To reach it you stop by the main road on the outskirts 
of Accra, seek permission from the landlady and walk past a fetid disused well 
through a hole in the wall into some marshy overgrown land, to find a breeze 
block single-room structure in a dusty clearing.

Mary, Hannah's mother, is a shy, gentle woman who thinks she's about 25. She 
holds her baby with great care and protectiveness, although she passes the 
child for visitors to cuddle. Hannah's a light but healthy two-month-old, 
content to sleep in the humid open air. There is no record of birth weight, 
because she was born at home helped by a traditional bed attendant. Benjamin 
held his wife's hand during the birth. Hannah is being breastfed, and Mary says 
she will be until she is two years old.

Ghana is experiencing democracy after four decades of coups and dictatorships. 
Last year, President John Agyekum Kufuor's New Patriotic party, whose reformist 
approach has qualified Ghana for debt relief, was re-elected. The country is 
making efforts to provide free healthcare for under-fives.

At the local clinic you can have your baby weighed, receive a book of health 
records, WHO advice on feeding and major childhood diseases, and have your 
child inoculated against five potential killers. This has not been done for 
Hannah. Her parents cannot read and write and are unaware that the clinic is 
free.

They cannot give a date or time of birth for her birth, but Hannah's second 
name, Adzo, means "born on a Monday". Community leader Jeleelah Quaye, who 
introduced us to the family, urges Mary to exploit the scheme and by our second 
meeting she has got a book for Hannah.

Benjamin comes this time and is as shy as his wife. They already have three 
sons - Alfred, eight, Samuel, six, and Jacob, three - and have paid for all 
their education so far. Although there are state schools, no one trusts them 
with even basic education. However, their sons' school has raised its fees to 
200,000 cedis (£12) a term, which they cannot afford.

Benjamin works at a local quarry, work which is irregular and paid by the day. 
He also grows cassava for the family. Mary sometimes trades at market and says 
her dream would be to own a shop. At the moment the boys are at home, and from 
now on they will be attending a state school. Hannah will also attend school.

Literacy levels are improving in Ghana - children's literacy is about 90% in 
the city and 60% in the country. And while their parents only speak Ewe, the 
boys are learning the official language, English. Alfred is wearing a Harry 
Potter T-shirt; his little brother Samuel has one with Bob the Builder. The 
only game they own up to playing is football.

Football is why many in Ghana try to get a television as soon as they have 
electricity. But although the Klutseys have "telly", they have no running 
water. They use a well, and catch rainwater. Nor do they have any sanitation, 
not even a pit. "You go in the bush," says Benjamin.

"Life is hard," says Mary. Child mortality for the under-fives is close to one 
in 10.

When asked if Mary is happy to have a daughter, she says yes. The couple's 
first child was also a girl. When she was 12, she came home complaining of 
stomach ache. She went to hospital, but died that same day. They do not know 
what was wrong.

 Factfile: Ghana

Under-5s mortality (per 1,000 births): 88
Population on under $2 a day: 78.5%
Debt per capita: $115
Life expectancy: 57.9
% children in education (F/M): 43/50

• This article was amended on 17 September 2010 to correct the family's 
surname. It was previously published as Klutse.
 