
Former children's laureate Anne Fine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/anne-fine> told an audience at the Edinburgh 
book festival this week that today's children's books, with their concentration 
on sex, death, drugs and child abuse, are too bleak. As someone who, as a 
10-year-old, was terrified by Five Go to Mystery Moor, I can relate to that. So 
in the spirit of encouraging today's youngsters and showing them that the world 
is not a place of untold terror, uncertainty and injustice, here are my own 
suggestions for reworking a few famous but misguided classics . . .

The Ugly Duckling by Hans Christian Andersen

Offensive tale of persecution and body fascism in which an ugly-looking bird 
is given a hard time wherever he goes. The only birds who take him in are a 
group of wild ducks, who are then promptly slaughtered. He just about survives 
a wretched, lonely winter and is willing his own death when he is saved by a 
sudden (and wholly unconvincing) transmogrification into a swan.

Rewrite: Joins Ugly Duckling Support Group; campaigns successfully for 
physically challenged ducks' rights; is ultimately accepted for what he is 
rather than conforming to meaningless notions of grace and beauty.

Peter Pan by J M Barrie

Leaving aside all the episodes that will terrify small children – ticking 
crocodiles, vicious pirates, poisonings, kidnappings, near-death experiences – 
the real problem with this play that was turned into a novel is Peter: why 
won't he grow up? Why can't he reciprocate Wendy's affection? Is he gay or just 
confused? The ending, when Peter deserts the lovelorn Wendy, is 
heart-wrenching; Barrie's later addendum, with its suggestion that Peter 
repeats his search for a "mother" in each generation of the Darling family, is 
deeply disturbing.

Rewrite: After numerous adventures, Peter and Wendy settle down to a life of 
domestic tranquillity in Notting Hill; the Lost Boys work hard at school and 
make it to Cambridge, where they study law and win rowing blues. The evil 
Captain Hook does not escape the clutches of the ticking crocodile, who 
swallows fey Tinkerbell and the annoying Mrs Darling for good measure.

The Wind in the Willows by Kenneth Grahame

Reactionary story about a rich egotist who lives in a grand house and spends 
all his time crashing cars and causing mayhem. Eventually, he gets a long 
sentence for theft and driving without due care and attention, and his house is 
turned into a workers' co-operative. But this happy state of affairs doesn't 
last long. With the help of some impenetrable plotting, he escapes and the 
forces of counter-revolution reclaim the house.

Rewrite: Toad gets his just deserts and does 20 years in Dartmoor; the stoats 
get to keep the house; a modern collectivist world where we all keep to the 
speed limit is ushered in.

The Tiger Who Came to Tea by Judith Kerr

Terrifying story about a rapacious tiger who suddenly arrives in a 
well-ordered household and consumes everything, causing the mother to panic 
that she has nothing to give her husband for his supper. Much criticised, not 
just on the grounds that an out-of-control tiger will give children nightmares, 
but because of the gender stereotyping of the parents: feeble-housewife mother; 
father who thinks about nothing but his supper. The final blow to child readers 
is that when the family buys a large tin of tiger food in anticipation of a 
return visit, the wretched animal slinks off and never comes back, no doubt 
preferring to terrorise some other unsuspecting family.

Rewrite: Tiger knocks loudly on door; mother looks through peep-hole, sees 
tiger, bars door, calls police; police arrive with Taser gun, stun tiger and 
take it back to the zoo, where it belongs. Peace restored in Surbiton.

Lord of the Flies by William Golding

Group of boys marooned on an island turn to tribalistic aggression, warfare 
and, ultimately, murder. Golding is making some rather obvious points about the 
thin veneer of civilisation and the supposed myth of childhood innocence, but 
will only succeed in frightening any teenagers who are force-fed his depressing 
vision for GCSE English.

Rewrite: The surf is marvellous, the wild berries delicious and Piggy devises 
a splendid recipe for wild pig in basil and cinnamon. When a ship does 
eventually come by to rescue them, they are all jolly reluctant to leave their 
delightful little island.

When the Wind Blows by Raymond Briggs

Jim and Hilda Bloggs construct a nuclear shelter after hearing that the third 
world war is about to break out. The shelter protects them from the force of 
the explosion, but not from the nuclear fallout when they finally emerge. They 
suffer from radiation sickness, and experience vomiting and hair loss. There 
are a few jibes at the expense of the working class along the  way.

Rewrite: The forces of Nato are resolute and strong; the Soviet Union attacks 
Georgia instead so that doesn't bother us; Jim turns the nuclear shelter into a 
hi-tech shed for his racing pigeons.
 