
British shoppers could be unknowingly buying wooden furniture, flooring and 
even food items that are byproducts of destructive illegal logging in the 
Amazon, environmental campaigners are warning.

Friends of the Earth is calling on ministers to make companies reveal the 
source of their products in order to stop the black market trade. Last week
human rights watchdog Global Witness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/20/environmental-activist-murders-global-witness-report>
 revealed that 185 environmental activists were killed in 2015, many of whom 
had been trying to stop illegal logging in the Amazon. An estimated 80% of 
Brazilian hardwood is illegally logged.

Vast areas of forest in Brazil, the Philippines and Colombia are cut down by 
criminal gangs. Multinational companies then use the land for palm-oil 
production, mining or cattle-grazing, while the wood is sold off,according to 
Patrick Alley 
<https://www.globalwitness.org/en/campaigns/forests/perfect-crime/>, co-founder 
of Global Witness.

Local activists – often villagers or indigenous people – are at the forefront 
of campaigns against these activities, but they are attacked and harassed by 
security forces and the gangs, Alley said. The worst-hit country wasBrazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil> where 50 activists were killed last 
year, mostly in Amazonia; 33 died in the Philippines and 26 in Colombia.

Friends of the Earth campaigner Alison Dilworth said companies and governments 
often did not acknowledge that local communities had any rights to their land.

“The outrages committed against environmental activists in many parts of the 
world shows how threatened the environment is from large-scale deforestation 
and illegal logging,” she said. “It’s time governments pressed for more 
supply-chain transparency so we can identify which companies and what products 
on supermarket shelves are directly implicated with deforestation and human 
rights abuses.”

It is almost impossible to tell whether rare tropical hardwoods were logged 
legitimately or not
Richard George, Forests for Greenpeace UK 
Yet it is very difficult for consumers to establish whether or not a product 
contains palm oil from looking at the packaging.

“What’s lacking here is due diligence by companies on their supply chains,” 
Alley said. “It’s too easy for companies not to ask questions about the land 
they are using. They should include due diligence on what happens to local 
people in the area where they operate.”

Richard George, Head of Forests for Greenpeace UK, said it remained almost 
impossible for consumers to tell whether hardwood had been obtained 
legitimately.

“There has been a strong link between commodities like palm oil and tropical 
timber, land-grabbing and the murder of environmental activists,” he said.

“But it’s in South America where illegal loggers are waging the most intensive 
war on indigenous peoples and local communities. Much of that illegal timber is 
logged for export to Europe, and it is almost impossible to tell whether rare 
tropical hardwoods like Ipe were logged legitimately or not. If, as either a 
concerned consumer or a responsible timber importer, you have even the 
slightest doubt about the provenance of a South American hardwood product, walk 
away.”

Britain adopted EU regulations in 2013, with the Timber and Timber Products 
(Placing on the Market) Regulations preventing illegally logged Brazilian 
mahogany, teak and other hardwood from being used in the UK. In the last two 
years, 132 investigations have been conducted by the Department for Business, 
Innovation and Skills, although no company has been fined.

Anyone importing timber or using imported timber has to keep detailed records 
of the source of the wood. David Hopkins, the managing director of the Timber 
Trade Federation (TTF), said that responsible timber importers and companies 
that use Brazilian hardwood in their products had to follow a strict audit 
process.

“Palm oil is a high-value cash crop,” he said. “You can harvest the oil on a 
regular basis, whereas trees take 40 years to grow. It’s in mayonnaise, 
shampoo, every consumer foodstuff you’re likely to buy. People clear tracts of 
forest and replant them quickly but they have to do it fast, and when people 
stand up to them, that’s when violence occurs.

“The forestry industries get tagged with this, and there is a danger that they 
enter the supply chain, but if your livelihood depends on timber, you chop down 
fewer trees and use them in a more efficient manner and keep trees standing.”

Kitchen work surfaces, decking, flooring and window frames should all be 
marked with an FSC logo, showing that it meets standards approved by the Forest 
Stewardship Council, Hopkins said.

The TTF is introducing technology that will allow suppliers to test hardwood 
to establish its species and validate claims from suppliers in Brazil and 
elsewhere.
 