
Harry Kewell will be awarded one of Australia’s most prestigious football 
honours in December, becoming just the seventh player to win the Alex Tobin 
medal. The prodigiously talented attacker has been chosen by Australian players 
- through Professional FootballersAustralia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia> – to receive the award.

Kewell joins inaugural winners Johnny Warren and Joe Marston, Craig Johnston 
(2009), Mark Viduka (2011), Frank Farina (2012) and Mark Schwarzer (2014) as 
Tobin Medallists. The 38-year-old said it was esteemed company to be keeping.

Tim Cahill in headlines but Neil Kilkenny really making Melbourne City tick | 
Jonathan Howcroft
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/17/tim-cahill-in-headlines-but-neil-kilkenny-really-making-melbourne-city-tick>
“When you get voted by your peers it’s something special because they’re 
recognising what you’ve done in the game,” he said. “To be up there with the 
likes of Johnny Warren, Craig Johnston, Schwarzer and Mark Viduka – these are 
the icons of Australia that all the young kids look up to. It’s one that I’m 
very proud of.”

PFA president and Sydney FC defender Alex Wilkinson said Kewell deserved to 
stand alongside Australia’s footballing elite.

“The image of Harry scoring against Croatia to send the Socceroos into the 
knockout stages of the 2006 World Cup is one of game’s most iconic and this 
along with countless others will live long in the memories of all football 
fans,” he said.

“Harry’s achievements for club and country inspired the nation’s young 
footballers and showed that no limits should be placed on what Australian 
footballers can achieve if they work tirelessly and commit wholeheartedly to 
the game.”

Kewell – the only Australian to be named as Young Player of the Year in 
England – left a huge impression on the Premier League over 13 seasons with 
Leeds United and Liverpool.

The left winger was known for his relentless run and attacking verve. With 
fellow Socceroo Mark Viduka, he took Leeds to the final four of the Champions 
League, a trophy he would win with Liverpool.

Kewell played at two World Cups with Australia and was a part of the Socceroos 
side which reached the final of the 2011 Asian Cup, losing to Japan.

Kewell announced his retirement in 2014, but moved quickly to join the 
coaching ranks. He leads Premier League side Watford’s development squad, 
working under well-regarded Italian coach Walter Mazzarri.

Kewell said he saw a future on the touchline for a senior team in his future. 
“I’ve got the taste of it. I love it. I want to go out there and really feel 
that pressure,” he said.

“I want to feel that pressure of winning and losing on the weekend. It was 
something I enjoyed as a player and it’s something that I enjoyed as a coach. 
Whether I will enjoy it as much as I’m talking about it, I don’t know.”

Kewell will be in Melbourne to receive the honour on 6 December at the PFA 
Awards.
 