
From 1969 to 1982 my father, Harry Browne, who has died aged 90, was head of 
arts and languages at Cambridgeshire College of Arts and Technology (CCAT), 
steering it towards awarding degrees, which led to the college becomingAnglia 
Ruskin University <https://www.theguardian.com/education/angliaruskinuniversity>
 in 2005. Indeed it owes its name to his discovery of John Ruskin's connection 
to the art department, the origins of which lay in the art school Ruskin opened 
in 1858.

Born in Birmingham, the son of a postman and a cleaner, Harry came from 
poverty to graduate from Emmanuel College, Cambridge. His Birmingham accent 
disappeared when he was young, but the Aston boy was always there, as indelible 
as the memory of his adored mother scrubbing the post office steps to provide 
bikes and an encyclopedia for her twin boys. Harry won scholarships to a 
private school, but the bus fares were unaffordable. He qualified for London 
Extension College, but his headteacher advised him that it was pointless to 
continue his education. Travelling was a passion, and he cycled across Ireland. 
He left with the school certificate, worked in an electrician's shop and a tyre 
factory and joined the Peace Pledge Union.

During the second world war, Harry was twice jailed as a conscientious 
objector before working on the land. There, he met educated men and women, and 
decided to study for A-levels. After the war Harry impressed an Emmanuel 
history don enough to overcome the prejudice against him - as a working-class 
"conchy". The admissions tutor offered Harry his finger to shake, the hand 
being reserved for gentlemen. After Cambridge, he took a teaching diploma. He 
arrived at CCAT in the early 1950s by which time he had also met, and married, 
a German-Jewish refugee Evie Goldschmidt. Together they went to Spain for a 
period. He later published Spain's Civil War (1983). The clanking typewriter 
would signal to his children that he was writing another history book.

In retirement he learned to cook, and travelled round Europe, learning 
languages and tasting wines. Loyal and supportive, he enjoyed music, revelled 
in conversation, was dismayed and fascinated by politicians and irritated when 
fellow academics dismissed popular culture and Hollywood movies.

He is survived by four children - Jessica, Martin, Nicholas and myself - and 
three grandchildren, whom he would impress with his encyclopedic knowledge, as 
he never forgot a thing.
 