
Harriet Harman <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/harrietharman>, the 
deputy leader of the Labour party, has written to the editors of Britain's 
national newspapers to ask them to publish the number of women aged over 50 
they employ.

In a letter to the 16 national newspaper editors plus the London Evening 
Standard, Harman said that a "balanced team" including older women was needed 
to ensure balanced reporting. The letter comes after the government announced 
in February this year that it had decided not to bring into force the "dual 
characteristics" provision relating to discrimination in theEquality Act 2010 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2010/15/section/14>.

The "combined discrimination: dual characteristics" provision of the act, 
introduced by Harman in Labour's final year in office, allows applicants to 
bring a discrimination case if they have been treated unfairly on the grounds 
of two "protected characteristics" – age, disability, gender reassignment, 
race, religion or belief, sex and sexual orientation.

Harman, who called on the equalities and women's minister, Maria Miller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/maria-miller>, to reverse the 
government's decision on the dual-discrimination provision, said: "I'm writing 
to national newspaper editors to ask them to be open about the number of older 
women working in UK newspapers. We see the world through news and comment in 
our newspapers so a balanced team which includes older women is needed to 
report the world as they see it. Equality is not just important in principle – 
it is important for the quality of newspaper reporting and comment."

Harman has established a Labour commission on older women. Its members include 
Arlene Philips, 70, who was replaced as a judge on Strictly Come Dancing by 
Alesha Dixon, 34 andMiriam O'Reilly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/miriam-o-reilly>, 56, who successfully sued 
the BBC for discrimination after she was dropped as a presenter on Countryfile. 
The commission also includes the Guardian columnist Jackie Ashley.

In her letter to the editors, who include the Guardian News and Media 
editor-in-chief Alan Rusbridger, Harman asked:

• How many staff journalists does the newspaper employ? How many of these are 
women?

• How many of the staff journalists you employ are over the age of 50? How 
many of these are women?

• How many regular* freelance journalists does the newspaper use? How many of 
these are women?

• How many regular* freelance journalists are over the age of 50? How many of 
these are women?

• How many freelance journalists does the newspaper have on contract? How many 
of these are women?

• How many freelance journalists does the newspaper have over the age of 50 
and on contract? How many of these are women?

• How many staff journalists who cover news does the newspaper employ? How 
many of these are women?

• How many staff journalists who cover news does the newspaper employ who are 
over the age of 50? How many of these are women?

• How many political reporters does the newspaper employ? How many of these 
are women?

• How many political reporters over the age of 50 does the newspaper employ? 
How many of these are women?

• How many regular* columnists does the newspaper employ? How many of these 
are women?

• How many regular* columnists over the age of 50 does the newspaper employ? 
How many of these are women?

• How many senior editors (with managerial responsibility) does the newspaper 
employ? How many of these are women?

• How many senior editors (with managerial responsibility) who are over the 
age of 50 does the newspaper employ? How many of these are women?

• How many female journalists have left your newspaper over the last five 
years, and what was their age at time of departure?

• How many male journalists have left your newspaper over the last five years, 
and what was their age at time of departure?

* The letter added: "For the purposes of this survey we would like regular to 
be defined as columnists or freelance journalists who have contributed 10 times 
or more in the last 12 months."

The seventeen editors include two women – Lisa Markwell, the Independent on 
Sunday editor, and Sarah Sands, the London Evening Standard editor.
 