
Q We invested £20,000 in Premium Bonds a couple of years ago and until May 
this year won at least £50 each month, often £100 or £150. Since then we have 
not had a prize. This seemed to coincide with a different policy on how Premium 
Bond winnings were announced on the website.

Before this time, I seem to remember that if you had not won in a particular 
month it did not say 'Congratulations'. But now it says this, rather 
irritatingly, even if you haven't won then but have done so in the past six 
months. Have the odds changed or have we just been very lucky, or is someone 
somewhere pocketing our prizes?

A A spokesman for National Savings & Investment (NS&I) assures me your change 
of luck has absolutely nothing to do with the different way for announcing 
Premium Bond winners. It is simply a coincidence.

If it is any consolation, there are savers who bought bonds back in 1957, when 
they were first available, who have never won anything. You have evidently been 
extremely fortunate so far, because according to NS&I the odds of winning a 
prize are 24,000 to 1.

NS&I add that if you hold the maximum investment of £30,000, with average luck 
you win 15 prizes a year. But the operative phrase here is "with average luck". 
The odds have recently changed slightly, but in the favour of investors.

The prize fund rate - the amount allocated for winnings - has been raised from 
3.15% of the total sum invested to 3.40%. For December 2006 and June 2007, the 
rate will be 3.55% to reflect the fact that in these two months three extra £1m 
jackpot prizes will be on offer.

A growing number of financial advisers agree that it is no bad thing to invest 
a small amount in an investment that could pay off very handsomely, but doesn't 
lock your money away. NS&I's investments also have the advantage of a guarantee 
that you will never lose your money.

Beyond Premium Bonds
 Historically, National Savings provided a range of different deposit accounts 
for investors with a limited amount of money seeking a safe haven. In 2002, 
National Savings, which is part of the Treasury, changed its name to NS&I and 
adopted a more aggressive approach to try and fulfil its role of raising money 
for the government, as an alternative to selling gilts (government bonds). It 
has since capitalised on its ability to provide cast-iron, government backed 
guarantees.

Unfortunately, NS&I's range of products is fairly complicated and it can be 
difficult to choose the right one, particularly as many financial advisers are 
not prepared to help since they do not receive any commission.

Among its current range is a guaranteed equity bond. Returns are linked to the 
performance of the FTSE 100 stock market index, but you are guaranteed the 
return of your original capital after a five-year period, even if the index 
falls.

Meanwhile, NS&I has made its traditional deposit savings products more 
competitive. The tax-free direct Isa is currently one of the best available 
with an interest rate of 5.05%. It is guaranteed to remain 0.55% above the base 
rate until at least 2008. NS&I's fixed rate bonds are a bit of a gamble since 
they can and do get caught out by movements in interest rates.

Longer-term earning
NS&I's current star products, which are receiving a lot of support, are its 
index-linked certificates. Investing in one of these does involve locking your 
money away for a fixed period - either three or five years - but in return you 
are promised one of the best available forms of protection against inflation.

The certificates provide a fixed rate of interest paid over and above the rate 
of inflation. For example, the current three-year index linked certificates 
pays an interest rate of 1.15% added to the rate of inflation, as measured by 
the retail price index (RPI).

Although the RPI is not as good a measure of the true state of inflation as 
the earnings index, it is better than the newer consumer price index (CPI) and 
provides a good measure of protection against inflation.

At present, the RPI is running at the rate of 3.7%. Assuming this continues 
the net return on investments in the three-year index linked certificates is 
4.85%. Allowing for the fact that it is tax free, the "real" return for 
standard rate taxpayers is 6.06% and for higher rate taxpayers it is 8.06% a 
year.

Although the return could decline if the inflation rate falls, it will also be 
enhanced if inflation continues to rise.

Index-linked gilts traded on the London stock market offer more flexibility in 
that you can invest much larger amounts, and withdraw your money when you want. 
But the current NS&I certificates are cheaper to buy and more straightforward. 
They are especially suitable for cautious investors who pay tax. A good test is 
that some financial advisers are recommending them, even though they stand to 
gain no commission.
 