
In the same week that the National Literary Trust revealed that only 28.4% of 
children in Britain read for pleasure outside of school (down from 38.1% in 
2005), it was heartening to see the blanket media coverage afforded David 
Bowie's top 100 reading list, as collated by the Art Gallery of Ontario. For my 
generation, raised on literate pop music, it was like being given homework by 
the coolest teacher in the world.

For the "YouTube generation", though, I doubt the 66-year-old's voracious 
book-a-day appetite for Nabokov, Laing and Mishima had the same impact. Which 
only underlines the fact that modern chart pop – industrially produced by a 
risk-averse industry for distracted tweens who generally get to vote for the 
artists they'd like to perform it – is no longer required to induce academic 
curiosity, nor teach anyone anything beyond what a young gentleman might do to 
a young lady later on in the evening.

Born in the 60s, a turbulent decade that demanded we tune in, I count myself 
lucky to have come of age in the 70s, when it was OK for pop music to be 
clever. Progressive rock drew on fantasy literature and dystopian sci-fi. Art 
and film students like Bowie, John Lennon, Lou Reed and Brian Eno (and their 
punk successors Adam Ant, Ian Dury, Bauhaus, the Human League and Gang of Four) 
marinated their music in the rich juices of education, whether higher or 
self-taught. The Cure's debut single, Killing an Arab, inspired me to seek out 
theAlbert Camus <https://www.theguardian.com/books/albertcamus> novel 
L'Étranger, and the Human League's Being Boiled taught me the word 
"sericulture". This was rock'n'roll with footnotes. Good heavens, even Boney M 
had disco hits about tsarist Russia and the Troubles in Northern Ireland.

We kept up with music's intellectual content by reading NME, which at the time 
assumed the style of "the philosophy department of a small provincial 
university," according to Pat Long's History of the NME. What I hadn't learned 
about philosophers from my Monty Python LPs, I learned from Paul Morley. In the 
80s,Morrissey <https://www.theguardian.com/music/morrissey> turned literacy 
into Top Trumps ("Keats and Yeats are on your side, but you lose 'cause weird 
lover Wilde is on mine") and Echo & the Bunnymen began the track My White Devil 
like an English lit lesson: "John Webster was one of the best there was/ He was 
the author of two major tragedies …"

In the 1990s, when the Manic Street Preachers unleashed their storming top 10 
hit A Design for Life with the opening line manifesto "Libraries gave us 
power," they spoke for a generation. This was a band who drew up a reading list 
before a set list and, along with Radiohead, gave Britpop – more about revival 
than revision – something to think about.

But it couldn't last. In 2007, self-anointed nu rave pioneers the Klaxons won 
the Mercury prize with their frenetic debut Myths of the Near Future, dropping 
references to William Burroughs, Richard Brautigan and JG Ballard. Were they 
carrying the torch for literate pop? Not quite. In an interview, they 
proclaimed, "It's the first Wikipedia album! Before we nailed it, we had a huge 
Wikipedia session." That day, for me, the genie went back in the bottle.

It's tempting to trill the familiar refrain about the decline of education – 
cuts, league tables, SATs, rote learning to push up grades, Gove's war on the 
arts – but I think the culprit for a culture deficient in what Pulp's Common 
People identified as "a thirst for knowledge" is computer technology. In the 
song, this "thirst" leads the protagonist to St Martin's college; in the 
internet age, it would be sated by a quick Google search. But what if fingertip 
availability of information diminishes the joy of learning in the long term? 
The National Literary Trust study found that 21.5% of young people agreed with 
the statement: "I would be embarrassed if my friends saw me read." This jars 
with my fond teenage memory of poring over lyrics with friends in the 
gatefold-sleeve era. In that analogue age, if you wanted to find something out, 
you had to ask a grownup, visit the library or listen to Lloyd Cole.

The same technological advances that make books seem moribund to young people 
enable them to message, text, comment and update statuses all day long. But 
their reading is what David M Levy, in his book Scrolling Forward: Making Sense 
of Documents in the Digital Age, calls "shallow" (road signs, menus, headlines, 
labels) as opposed to "deep" reading (prose, news, poetry, whatever Bowie's got 
his nose stuck in, even if it's Viz or Puckoon).

On the plus side, history's most glorious pop music – Motown, Stax, house – 
required no homework. And there are still smart lyricists in the charts: the 
Manics' new album comes in a deluxe bound edition with lyrics and art prints – 
a "book", in other words. But even acute social observers and storytellers such 
as Jake Bugg, Frank Turner and Arctic Monkeys' Alex Turner won't have anybody 
rushing out to buy, or download, a novel.

We might invest some hope in leftist troubadour Chris T-T, who took literate 
pop literally on his recent album Disobedience, setting the poems of AA Milne 
to music. It didn't chart, of course. That'll teach him.
 