
Is Christian Louboutin toast now that we know his overpriced shoes are the 
favourite footwear of Asma al-Assad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/mar/14/gilded-lifestyle-assad-coterie-conflict>
?

Martina, London

Poor ol' Christian really isn't having a good 12 months, is he? If he thought 
losing the case against Yves Saint Laurent – in which he claimed that the 
latter company's red-soled shoes were an infringement of Louboutin's trademark 
– was bad, one only can imagine the oh-la-la-ing going on in his studio last 
week. The Assad emails revealed thatAsma harbours a particular, if baffling, 
fondness for Louboutin's more repulsive designs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/mar/14/bashar-al-assad-syria24> – a 
revelation that garnered even more media attention thanher husband's 
appreciation for Right Said Fred 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/mar/14/assad-itunes-emails-chris-brown> 
– and images of the shoes were duly splashed across newspaper pages. So that 
can come as some comfort to Christian, perhaps: his designs are deemed by 
newspaper picture editors to be more photogenic than Richard Fairbrass.

Personally, I confess myself surprised by the shock expressed by some that the 
Assads were planning shopping trips to Harrods and bingeing on iTunes while 
protesters outside were being slaughtered. Really, did anyone expect something 
else? Bashar to be stricken with contrition while he snickered at sanctions? 
Asma to be bathing herself in apologetic ashes? Hell, no! Nero fiddled while 
Rome burned and Bashar was sending his wife dirty jokes about world leaders and 
she was cooing over crystal-encrusted £3,000 Louboutin stilettos. They're like 
a pair of evil despots from a Mel Brooks movie, those two, in their adherence 
to cliche.

In any event, who else would buy £3,000 crystal-dusted stilettos, or shoes 
with spikes sticking out of the tips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2012/mar/14/bashar-asma-assad-shopping-pictures#/?picture=387235618&index=6>
? No, those shoes were made for women who either are the wives of despots or 
wish they were.

This is why Louboutin will, I suspect, not be sweating the small stuff, the 
small stuff in this case being an association with Bashar Assad. I'm assuming 
you haven't been in a Louboutin store in some time, Martina, but let me tell 
you, Louboutin shoes? They're not all classic and chic. In fact, quite a lot of 
them are downright trashy, as they always have been – Louboutin, after all, 
originally modelled his designs on those worn by the women he would watch dance 
on stage at Le Palace, a Parisian nightclub. And, frankly, if a man can 
convince the world to spend more than a grand on shoes that basically look like 
the footwear for what my grandmother would call "ladies of the night", I don't 
think he'll have many problems with an inconvenient diplomatic incident.

If nothing else, Christian, console yourself with this thought: Imelda Marcos 
is no longer in power.

I read in a style magazine recently that, as girly fashion is in this season, 
I am "allowed to indulge" my love of frills and pastels. Is it rude of me to 
think that I didn't know I needed anyone's permission to do so?

Sharon, by email

Yes, incredibly rude but also very possibly indicative that you have been 
breaking the law for several years. No, not the legal law – the fashion law. 
Breaking that results in seven years imprisonment in a wardrobe that is hung 
only with offerings from Jane Norman, C&A and River Island on a bad day. Quail, 
fashion law-breakers! Thank goodness I'm here to save you from yourselves!

This explains the curious language some fashion writers use when discussing 
trends. You see, they operate under the belief that fashion designers and 
fashion trends aren't just there to give people inspiration and provide new 
clothes, which people can buy if they like. Rather, designers are like fashion 
parliament, passing laws every six months to which we all must adhere. Hence 
the idea that this season's girly trend "allows you", Sharon, "to indulge" in 
wearing what you like to wear. Last season, such things in your wardrobe were
verboten – literally, verboten – and the wearing of them would have resulted in 
you being forced to work the shop-floor of Primark on Saturdays.

Fashion sceptics mock the idea of one fashion trend being in this season and 
then being out another, but that is because they are confusing the concept of 
"being in" with "being obligatory" when all it means is "being more available 
than usual on the shop-floor". One can hardly blame sceptics for this mix-up 
because it is the fashion writers who reinforce this idea when they use such 
daft lingo as "be allowed to indulge".

So wear your frills any time you like, Sharon. Hell, wear frills one day and 
goth biker the next – whatever floats your boat. As our Graham from Blind Date 
would say in his quick reminder, The choice … is YOURS!

• Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings 
Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Emailask.hadley@theguardian.com 
<mailto:ask.hadley@theguardian.com>
 