
If you needed someone to make a throw or shot or putt or kick to save your 
life, who would you choose?

Over the past 25 years there are a handful of people I would trust not to go 
wobbly. Joe Montana, the impassive miner of 31 NFL fourth-quarter comebacks at 
the San Francisco 49ers, is one. Stephen Hendry in the days when his skin was 
like pumpernickel and his nerves as hard as rye, another. Pre-Apology Tiger 
Woods also makes the shortlist, along with Jonny Wilkinson, whose conversions 
were as monotonic as his conversation.

But right now? It has to be Rafael Nadal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rafaelnadal>, doesn't it?

Even Sunday's unexpected Australian Open final defeat to Stanislas Wawrinka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/26/stanislas-wawrinka-rafael-nadal-australian-open>
 did not diminish him. If anything, it reinforced what we have known for years: 
few sports stars have such natural immunity to pressure, or are able to dig so 
deep when the chips are down.

Having blisters as broad as leprosy sores on his racket hand, as Nadal did for 
much of the tournament, would have given many a convenient exit strategy. The 
back spasms he suffered against Wawrinka in the second set even more so. But 
Nadal kept fighting, even when he was lobbing in 120km-an-hour serves like a 
patzer and his topspin forehand, which usually drops into court like a 
doodlebug, was as soft as a cushion.

Cut his arms off and you suspect Nadal would half-swallow his racket, bite 
down hard and keep swinging. That Nadal is one of the grittiest players on tour 
is reflected in the ATP stats. In six of the past nine seasons he has finished 
in the top five for break points saved. In the same period Roger Federer has 
appeared three times, and Novak Djokovic and Andy Murray not at all.

You might say that, at his very best, Federer was not overly concerned with 
every break-point opportunity; that he was like a commuter on the Zürich S-Bahn 
who refuses to run for a train because he knows the next one will arrive in 
precisely 45 seconds. Still, Nadal's consistency is notable – particularly as 
his serve is not a one-shot riposte to being break point down.

The Spaniard also has a fantastic record of converting break points: in four 
of the past five years he has finished in the top five of the rankings. 
Djokovic has appeared three times, Murray twice and Federer not at all. In the 
crucial points, Nadal delivers time and time again.

But why are some people consistently better in the clutch? Mental toughness is 
frequently cited, from experts and armchair viewers alike, and it is not 
uncommon to hear that pressure is an illusion; that it exists only in the mind. 
Indeed,according to an Australian government coaching manual 
<http://www.ausport.gov.au/sportscoachmag/psychology2/performing_under_pressure2>
: "Aside from the physical pressure exerted on one opponent by another on the 
field, pressure in the competitive context isn't real. It doesn't have a form, 
a colour, a smell."

No colour or smell? Tell that to those of us who have felt parts of the body 
tighten and others loosen when the going gets tough.

Nadal, however, is able to play each point in isolation. It is as if each of 
his tics between points – every brush of the hairband, every wipe of the towel 
– acts as a palate cleanser.

Of course, the best players are used to making shots under pressure so when 
they are up against it they are less worried. Fitness and repeated practice 
play a huge part too.

But when you hear that pressure is all in the head, it is not completely 
right. Genes might matter too. As David Epstein, the author of The Sports Gene, 
points out, there are individual differences in biology that may influence the 
level of calmness under pressure.

A recent study found that pre-training cortisol – which is protective during 
acute stress –was significantly higher in international-level athletes compared 
to national-level athletes <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22915557>. "That 
isn't proof," says Epstein. "But it's interesting."

Scientists have also found that genetic differences influence how individuals 
metabolise norepinephrine, which has a protective effect against stress. "One 
gene that has been implicated in this is the COMT gene, which has been 
nicknamed the 'warrior/worrier' gene," says Epstein. "The two versions of the 
COMT gene are known as 'val' and 'met'. Val carriers tend to do slightly worse 
on certain cognitive tests, but some evidence suggests they are more resilient 
to stress and pain."

As with most traits, one gene probably has only a tiny effect. But as Epstein 
points out <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14583231>, the fact that 
individual biology has an impact on the response to a stressful situation – 
both physically and mentally – is uncontroversial.

So what is the best way to deal with an opponent who appears immune to 
pressure? According to one scientist Epstein spoke to, you should talk to them 
after they have hit a good shot. "Something like: 'Wow, the way you turned the 
racket head to the left there was really remarkable' could take them out of the 
zone of automated performance," he says. "That is exactly what happens when a 
pro athlete 'chokes'. They think too much."

That is food for thought for Nadal's future opponents. Although in Melbourne, 
it was Wawrinka's bullet forehands, and his opponent's bad back, that 
ultimately proved the difference.
 