
The days are numbered for the Bradford & Bingley's bowler hat and the blue and 
orange squares of Alliance & Leicester. The two companies - which are owned, 
along with Abbey, by Spanish banking group Santander - are to be rebranded with 
their parent company's name and logo from next year. But what will the 
rebranding mean for customers of Abbey, B&B and A&L?

When will I notice the change?

The first of the brand changes will happen quickly. Early in the second half 
of this year, Abbey credit cards will be rebranded Santander. Abbey and 
Bradford & Bingley will change their name in the first three months of 2010, 
while Alliance & Leicester will be rebranded by the end of next year. At the 
same time, IT systems at the three banks will be fully integrated.

Will my current account, credit card or loan rates change?

Rates will change for some customers as Santander wants to offer a single set 
of products under the new banner. The rates on some products, such as some 
fixed-term bonds, have already been replicated under all three brands. However, 
the biggest changes are likely to be noticed by current account customers.

The Alliance & Leicester Premier Direct current account has long been regarded 
as one of the best on the market. For those who pay in £500 or more a month, it 
pays 5% credit interest and has a 0% interest overdraft for a year. Abbey 
customers at present can choose either a 5% credit interest current account, 
and be charged 19.9% on their overdraft, or a 0% interest overdraft, but then 
get 0.1% on their savings. It is not yet clear which pricing, if either, 
Santander will keep.

"Consumers will need to keep their eyes peeled to see how this will affect 
them, as there can be no doubt that the consolidation process will leave some 
casualties," says Kevin Mountford of Moneysupermarket.com.

I'm a Cahoot customer. What will happen to my account?

Santander will retain the Cahoot name and the products will attract separate 
rates and charges.

Will I get access to more or fewer branches?

Santander says that Abbey, A&L and B&B branches will be retained when they are 
rebranded, and that the company will open a further 300 by the end of next 
year. However, it has said that where there are two or three branches under the 
different brands on the same street, it may lose one or more but would then 
open another one elsewhere.

Will I still be covered for £50,000 savings with each brand separately under 
the Financial Services Compensation Scheme?

At the moment UK banks owned by Santander currently operate under two banking 
licences. One covers Abbey, Bradford & Bingley and Cahoot; the other covers 
Alliance & Leicester. This means that savers are 100% covered by the Financial 
Services Compensation Scheme (FSCS) for up to £50,000 across Abbey, Bradford & 
Bingley and Cahoot, and are also covered for a further £50,000 with Alliance & 
Leicester.

This will remain the case up until the middle of next year, at which point 
customers with large amounts on deposits with both A&L and any one of the other 
three brands will need to keep a close eye on what will happen. It is possible 
that the FSCS limit will increase to £100,000 anyway.
 