
Since it was published in 1943 the children's classic The Little Prince has 
entranced generations of readers with its parable of loneliness and loss.

The story of a mysterious blond boy who vanishes in a flash once his story is 
told took on a haunting parallel when the author disappeared without trace a 
year later.

Antoine de Saint-Exupéry's body was never found after his second world war 
reconnaissance plane vanished over the Mediterranean: Le Petit Prince , 
believed to be the most widely read book in the west after the Bible, became 
his legacy.

Now a rare film of the enigmatic writer will bring Saint-Exupéry back to life 
when it is auctioned at Sotheby's next month. The footage, never before seen 
publicly, lasts two minutes 19 seconds, and was shot by an unnamed amateur 
film-maker in 16mm Kodachrome.

Made in 1942, while Saint-Exupéry was in exile in Canada, it shows the writer 
on a boat laughing, joking and surrounded by women. It also features his wife, 
Consuelo, of whom no film record was thought to exist, andwith whom he had a 
tempestuous relationship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/jun/24/biography.books>, during a 
reportedly difficult time in their marriage.

It is believed to be the only significant film footage of Saint-Exupéry in 
existence and is expected to fetch at least €50,000 when it is auctioned at 
Sotheby's in Paris on 18 May.

The French newspaper Le Figaro described the footage as "an unexpected little 
miracle". Frédérique Parent, the Sotheby's expert handling the sale, told the 
Guardian she was astonished to learn of the film.

"I assumed it would be like the other two films that exist and show him very 
briefly and from a distance," she said. "When the seller sent me two stills 
from the film, I was shocked. Here was the living breathing Saint-Ex and here 
was Consuelo who we have never seen before on film."

The amateur movie was made when Saint-Exupéry and Consuelo visited Montreal. 
They had been living in America after fleeingFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> on the outbreak of the second world 
war, where the writer, a commercial aviator, had been criticised for not 
supporting General de Gaulle's Free French forces in London.

In 1943 Saint-Exupéry redeemed himself in the eyes of his compatriots by 
rejoining the French air force in North Africa, but in July 1944 while on a 
reconnaissance flight to Nazi-occupied France his plane disappeared over the 
Mediterranean.

His death came one year after he wrote Le Petit Prince, a novella that has 
been translated into 180 languages and sold more than 80m copies worldwide.

"In the film Saint-Ex is surrounded by women under the watchful eye of 
Consuelo, who we see driving the boat; he is telling jokes and laughing and 
being charming and lovely. It's an absolutely unusual portrayal of 
Saint-Exupéry especially as he was said to be ill and depressed at the time," 
said Ms Parent. "He looks pale and tired and he has dark rings under his eyes 
but what is so wonderful is that we see a very happy Saint-Ex, even though we 
know that this time in Canada was one of the most unhappy times of his life.

"It is extremely exciting especially as the public continues to be fascinated 
by Saint-Exupéry."

The yacht's log is also being sold in the same lot as the film. It features a 
sketched self-portrait with the words: "That's me discovering Canada – and I'm 
filled with wonder. I will come back …Antoine de Saint-Exupéry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/antoine-de-saint-exupery> and Consuelo."

In 2007 Sotheby's auctioned 10 love letters from Saint-Exupéry to a female 
military officer in Algeria, which fetched €190,000, and last year one of his 
handwritten manuscripts sold at auction for €250,000.

• This article was amended on 13 April 2010. The original made several 
references to 'Consuela' de Saint-Exupéry. This has been corrected.
 