
"Making comedy out of disappointment is a very English thing," Tim Lott told 
us today. Lott, Ed Victor, Rosie Boycott and Robbie Stamp were discussing all 
things Douglas Adams in the Film Four cinema before a viewing of the 
much-fought-for film adaptation of Hitchhikers Guide to the Galaxy. This was a 
typical Hay session where, as an audience member, you feel as if you're privy 
to a private conversation, an intimate imparting of odd facts; Rosie Boycott's 
admission, for example, that her one regret is that she never travelled with 
Douglas to Vietnam to locate a cow with unusual properties.

There was also talk of books as love affairs. Hay is sentimental like that. 
Even Christopher Hitchens came over cloudy eyed as he spoke of reading to his 
own children, and described his experience of the 'threshold' book that took 
him from child to adult reader. "It's a fantastic thrill ... nothing compares.. 
finding a book that holds its value." He was later bitingly appalled that more 
audience members had seen Fahrenheit 9/11 than read Saul Bellow's The Ballad of 
Augie March, but I like the image of Hitchens as Papa-bear bedtime story 
reader. It's something so incongruous it had to come out Hay.

Hay: readers and writers in a Welsh town, barriers down, wind bashing the 
tents, thumping echo of footsteps on aluminium boards, flags cracking, a blast 
of sunlight from black clouds and too much Shepherds ice cream. Hay: a place 
where the extraordinary happens, Debbie Harry shares chocolate cake with PD 
James and Russian girls hitchhike from the Ural Mountains to see Paul McCartney 
(seriously: her name was Eugenie Evenko and she really did hitchhike from 
Cheliabinsk to Hay in 2000. She told me that she left a note for her mother 
that translated as "just popping down the shops"). Hay is that thing that 
Christopher Hitchens declared he wants to become: a national treasure.

It has been an amazing week so far. For me it began with gout, the prospect of 
a winning a pig and clashing with Miss Goldie Hawn. The gout is little better, 
I'll know the outcome of the pig on Sunday and the clash with Ms Hawn was 
purely down to programming. As she mesmerised the full Copella Marquee with her 
Rowan and Martin's Laugh-In giggle, Diana Evans, Audrey Niffenegger and I, 
first-time authors all, were battling wind (so to speak) on the smaller though 
equally sold-out Review Stage. Our mikes popped and banged in the storm and the 
tent lifted on its moorings, but ultimately it was an event to be proud of. 
Diana Evans is lovely andAudrey Niffenegger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/audrey-niffenegger> just so ... cool.

Signing with Goldie in the festival bookshop afterwards was, however, a good 
leveller. Our first-timer success couldn't compare, and gorilla security guards 
flapped about while the glorious bookshop owner, Di Blunt, took them with a 
pinch of salt and a cup of tea. With nothing more than a blue rope sectioning 
us off from the presence of an icon, we did get to see that a) perhaps plastic 
surgery hasn't graced the Hawn household and b) she signs with a very big blue 
marker pen. That was about as interesting as it got.

For me, the surprise highlight of the week was Temple Gradin, an American 
autistic animal scientist who gave a fabulous talk on "Using the Mysteries of 
Autism to Decode Animal Behaviour". This is a woman who, as a child, couldn't 
speak, and spent days sifting sand through her hands. After a particularly 
laborious audience question she boomed, "Problem is, sir, you're asking me an 
abstract question. I understand in pictures. Can't see a picture. Can't answer. 
What I'm real interested in is how these tents are made." A great way to get to 
the true practicalities of Hay.

It's mid-week now, Radnor's End campsite is a little less full and the 
Glastonbury feel of the bank holiday has passed - that is until next weekend 's 
mini-Live Aid, when Bob Geldolf and Sting are dropping in. Until then, what we 
have is what Hay is about: literary events, both 'grown-up' and for children. 
Ruth Hay's Hay Fever children's festival is in town, and everyone from 
Jacqueline Wilson to Peter Rabbit are, too. Yesterday I looked after the 
brilliant Eoin Colfer. Who else could enchant a huge tent of 11-year-olds for 
over an hour? As the tent flapped in a returning wind Eoin whispered, '"Is that 
Philip Pullman again? Just because I gave him the idea about the bears!" There 
were good life-lessons, too - "Remember boys, girls prefer a dead sportsman to 
a live writer" - and the announcement that his new book is called Artemis Fowl 
and the Philosopher's Goblet of Azkhaban.

As for myself, my glory hour is over and I'm back to the badge of 
volunteering, because Hay does that to a person. I'm switching sides, though I 
do believe that here there are none. At Hay, visitors, writers and organisers 
share the same playing field, literally and metaphorically. The only difference 
is that some jobs (namely those of the organisers) are more difficult than 
others. In this flat, equal world I can jump from being a writer and reader to 
wearing a badge that allows me to tell you the way to the Xtreme OrganiX Bar or 
the ladies' loos. I'm a local you see, brought up near this borderland of farms 
and bookshops, so I'm used to diversification.

·  Happy Accidents is available from the Guardian Bookshop 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=0007183666>
, priced £10.99
 