
The chief executive held responsible for driving HBOS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/hbos> to the brink of financial collapse 
is in the running for the top job at one of Britain's best known high street 
names, Boots.

Andy Hornby <https://www.theguardian.com/business/andy-hornby> – who attracted 
the wrath of shareholders, MPs and unions for his role in the demise of HBOS – 
has been short-listed at Alliance Boots and his appointment is expected within 
days.

The decision has infuriated critics of the City. It would see one of the 
figures blamed for failings leading up to the credit crunch being rewarded with 
another well paid job.

The retailer declined to comment on Hornby's past performance, saying it would 
be premature to talk in detail given no definite decision has yet been taken.

"Alliance Boots confirms it is currently in discussions with Andy Hornby, who 
is a leading candidate for the role [of chief executive]. It hopes to complete 
the process shortly and a further statement will be made at that time," it said.

Hornby was chief executive of HBOS for two years and was at the helm when it 
teetered on the brink of collapse last autumn. It was rescued by Lloyds TSB in 
a controversial merger and has since revealed losses of £10.8bn for 2008.

Hornby admitted to MPs on the Treasury select committee this year that HBOS, a 
merger between Halifax and Bank of Scotland, had been made more vulnerable 
because of its strategy of expanding corporate lending to commercial and 
residential property sectors.

Following the Lloyds takeover, Hornby left as chief executive but stayed as a 
consultant earning £60,000 a month advising Lloyds chief executive, Eric 
Daniels.

Hornby worked in retail before joining HBOS in 1999, spending many years at 
Asda. If he wins the Boots job it will represent a coup for the retailer which 
tried to poach him for the role in 2003.

Since 2007 Alliance Boots has been owned by US private equity group Kohlberg 
Kravis Roberts, and is not listed on the stock exchange, giving Hornby the 
chance for a lower profile. He is a non-executive at the Home Retail Group, 
owner of Argos and Homebase.

There was criticism of the pending appointment tonight from the Lib Dem 
Treasury spokesman Lord Oakeshott said: "Private equity asset strippers have 
taken over Boots and loaded it up to the eyeballs with debt. They should learn 
the lessons of HBOS's collapse under Mr Hornby and pay off their borrowings to 
make Boots strong again."
 