
The man who presided over the collapse of HBOS will step back into public life 
this week – to unveil bumper results at health and beauty groupAlliance Boots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/allianceboots> and deliver a lecture to a 
City audience.

Andy Hornby <https://www.theguardian.com/business/andy-hornby>, who was forced 
out of HBOS when it ran out of cash in September 2008, is expected to reveal 
trading profits of more than £1bn at Alliance Boots tomorrow and a £500m 
reduction in Boots's debts to some £8.5bn. A day later he will make a speech in 
London entitled "Retailing … what's changed with the credit crunch?", outlining 
which retailers are likely to be successful in the coming years.

The former HBOS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/hbos> chief, who had no 
banking qualifications, attracted the wrath of shareholders, MPs and unions for 
his role in the demise of his bank. He resurrected his career last summer when 
he was installed as the £1m-a-year chief executive of Alliance Boots. He was 
appointed by Stefano Pessina, the Italian billionaire who co-owns the company 
with private equity group KKR after a £12.4bn buyout just before the credit 
crunch. It was Europe's biggest ever private equity deal.

Since taking over, Hornby has kept a low profile. His move back into the 
limelight is being interpreted by some analysts as laying the groundwork for 
the company's eventual return to the stock market with him at the helm. But the 
retailer has ruled out any near-term plans for a float. It does not need to 
refinance for five years, and Pessina – whose large holding in Alliance Boots 
prior to the buyout and autocratic approach has led to an uneasy relationship 
with shareholders – believes he can expand the business faster away from City 
scrutiny. Ultimately, however, a flotation is likely.

Boots, like the supermarkets, thrived through the recession, although most 
growth has come from its pharmaceutical wholesaling arm rather than its retail 
stores. Tomorrow, Hornby is expected to reveal sales up nearly 10% to more than 
£22.5bn and an increase in trading profit that surpasses the 12% achieved last 
year.

He will also detail the group's expansion plans – which focus on partnerships 
such as the recent deal with Waitrose to sell Boots ranges in Waitrose stores 
and Waitrose-branded food in Boots outlets. Last month another venture with 
Procter & Gamble was also unveiled to distribute Boots's best-selling Protect & 
Perfect skincare range in Italy. There are also big plans to expand other Boots 
brands, such as Soltan sun cream and Botanics skin care.

In his role at HBOS, before the financial crisis set in, Hornby was highly 
regarded for rejuvenating the bank's retail arm. He used his skills as a 
retailer - honed at Asda - to win new business and make its products easier to 
understand.
 