
The government’s A-level reforms ran into trouble on Tuesday when four 
subjects were suddenly scrapped, other courses delayed and some schools were 
left complaining about “last-minute, piecemeal” changes.

After Monday’s announcement that the introduction of the reformed AS and 
A-levels inmathematics and further mathematics would be put back a year to 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/dec/01/maths-a-level-changes-delayed>
, it emerged that the new chemistry A-level, which was due to be taught from 
next September, has yet to be accredited.

The exam regulator Ofqual said it would be scrapping AS and A-levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels> in applied art and design, 
applied business, human biology, and economics and business, thus reducing 
curriculum breadth that schools can offer. GCSE digital communication is also 
to be withdrawn.

New A-levels due to be taught from 2015 should have been accredited by 
September to give schools at least a year to get to grips with teaching the new 
course.

“It’s chaotic,” said one headteacher. “I wake up every morning and wonder 
what’s coming next.”

The AQA A-level English Literature syllabus – the market leader – is also yet 
to be approved by Ofqual.

One of the examining boards, OCR, confirmed that none of the awarding bodies 
had yet had their new chemistry A-level accredited.

Paul Dodd, director of OCR’s exam reform, said: “This is causing us huge 
concern.”

Disagreement is focused on the mathematics content in the new chemistry 
A-level. Dodd said he expected it to be approved shortly for teaching next 
year, but acknowledged the delay would put chemistry teachers at a disadvantage 
as there was no final course specification from which to work and prepare.

“There’s a lot going on,” said Dodd. “What teachers are crying out for is a 
period of stability. This is massive reform. What teachers are telling us is 
that once we’ve done this let’s just sit back and let these qualifications 
flourish and develop.”

The AQA exam board said their new A-level in English Literature, which is also 
due to be taught from next September, had still not been accredited because of 
disagreements over set texts.

A spokesman said: “Great international works of literature like All Quiet on 
the Western Front by Erich Maria Remarque and A Doll’s House by Henrik Ibsen 
are very popular with teachers and students and we want to include them as 
translated texts in our A-level English Literature syllabus. We have been 
having a dialogue with Ofqual about this and hope to have confirmation in the 
next day or so.”

The education secretary, Nicky Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicky-morgan>, will face tough questions 
from MPs on the education select committee on Tuesday about the government’s 
sweeping school exam reforms.

Labour MP Pat Glass, who sits on the committee, said: “Schools are really 
struggling. The government has ‘reformed’ everything at the same time, but you 
can’t throw everything into the air at the same time and not expect there will 
be negative consequences.”

She said committee colleagues and higher education institutions had been 
piling pressure on the government for months to delay the maths A-level for a 
year until 2017. The schools minister, Nick Gibb, had finally “caved in”, she 
said. As well as maths, she said: “We know there are issues with chemistry. 
Physics is also an issue.”

Schools <https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> are also anxious about 
the uncertainty surrounding the AS-level. The government has announced it plans 
to decouple it from the A-level from September 2015. Labour has said it will 
recouple the exams if it is elected. “The result of the election is causing 
some concern,” said Dodd. “That’s where the greatest anxiety is at the moment.”

At sixth form open days this autumn, head teachers have had to explain to 
prospective students what their programmes for 2015 will look like, and whether 
they will be continuing with the AS-level, as some in higher education would 
prefer.

Mark Jackson, who is head of Haslingden High School, Lancashire, said staff, 
pupils and parents were struggling to keep up with the reforms, of which 
A-levels are but one element. “It’s a mess,” he said. “Everything has changed 
in one fell swoop. It’s like a big explosion has gone off. You need a bit of 
time to plan for change. But it’s all on the hoof. There seems to be real 
little proper planning.”

Brian Lightman, general secretary of the Association of School and College 
Leaders, said many of these decisions should have been made months ago. “Every 
week it seems we have another announcement on GCSE and A-level changes. This is 
hugely frustrating for teachers and makes it incredibly difficult for schools 
and colleges to plan and prepare for next year’s exams.

“Schools have already advised students on GCSE and A level options, and they 
will be making decisions on staffing and resources for next year.”

An Ofqual spokesman said: “Reformed GCSE, AS and A-level qualifications must 
meet required clear standards so that those using them can trust them and know 
that they add value. We will not compromise on those standards. So far, 92 out 
of 124 GCSE, AS and A-level qualifications that have been presented to us have 
been accredited.

“We recognise that teachers would like sight of the reformed qualification 
specifications as soon as possible and we will continue to accredit 
qualifications as soon as they meet the required standards. The responsibility 
sits firmly with the exam boards to submit qualifications that meet our 
requirements.

“We set up the process for accrediting the reformed qualifications so that 
there was enough time to enable its timely completion and to allow enough time 
for necessary work post accreditation. We ensure swift, full and clear feedback 
on rejected submissions.”

A DfE spokesperson said: “As part of our plan for education, we have reformed 
A-levels to ensure students are learning the skills and knowledge they need to 
succeed in higher education and beyond.

“We know that schools need time to prepare for these reforms and have phased 
them in over a number of years. The overwhelming majority of specifications for 
the new A-levels for teaching in 2015 are already with schools.”
 