
Heart of Midlothian's hopes of reaching the Champions League proper ended in 
ignominious failure last night when they had two players sent off and conceded 
three late goals. So Hearts's owner, Vladimir Romanov, will have to wait at 
least another year before realising his dream of seeing his team compete in the 
group phase of the Champions League.

In a controversial qualifying match Julien Brellier was sent off in first half 
for a second bookable offence after having shown a yellow card earlier for 
wearing jewellery - an earring - on the field of play. With the score still 
goallessHearts <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> were reduced to 
nine men in the 63rd minute for a foul. With 11 minutes left Julio Cesar opened 
the scoring with a penalty. He added a second in the last minute in between 
which and Nikos Lyberopoulos headed the second.

As before the first leg, Hearts' preparations were disrupted injury troubles, 
particularly in attack. They had to field the 18-year-old Jamie Mole as a lone 
striker, who had made only one previous start. The influential midfielder Paul 
Hartley was considered fit enough to make his first start of the season and a 
heavy onus was therefore placed on the Scotland international to provide a goal 
threat from midfield.

Romanov's hopes of reaching the Champions League proper had been dealt a heavy 
blow in the first leg at Murrayfield where AEK have a slick and highly 
impressive performance, although Hearts led 1-0 for 89 minutes before two late 
goals earned a the Greeks a victory that their earlier profligacy had out in 
doubt.

Yet it was Hearts who missed the most glaring chances of the opening stages 
here, as Mole found himself one-on-one with the goalkeeper Dionisis Chiotis but 
failed to compose himself enough to find the net. Hearts' best hopes of an 
unlikely progression, as conceded by Ivanauskas before kick-off, was in the 
event of complacency by AEK and such an issue was to the fore as only Chiotis's 
fine save from a 26th minute Hartley point-blank header kept the scores level.

The bizarre circumstances regarding Brellier's earlier booking came to the 
fore three minutes later, as the referee Iouri Baskakov issued a second yellow 
card for the Frenchman's apparently innocuous challenge aerial on Traianos 
Dellas.

Hearts battled bravely in the second period. But the loss of Brellier and 
McCann proved fatal, the latter sent off after 63 minutes for a two-footed 
challenge on Vladimir Ivic, and AEK took the lead through Cesar after Deividas 
Cesnauskis tripped Vasilis Lakis. Lyberopulos's close-range header intensified 
Hearts agony, before Cesar waltzed through for a third.
 