
Scotland's hopes of having dual representation in the group stage of this 
season's Champions League suffered a significant blow here last night as 10-man 
Hearts lost the first leg of their final qualifying round to a vastly superior
AEK Athens <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aekathens> after a pulsating 
meeting of contrasting styles.

Hearts' aspirations of joining Celtic in the lucrative group phase now hinge 
on them returning from a perilous trip to Greece's Olympic Stadium in 13 days' 
time with a victory, after Pantelis Kapetanos's headed effort and a Christophe 
Berra own- goal in the closing minutes overturned Saulius Mikoliunas' opening 
score for the home side.

The Edinburgh side will also be without Bruno Aguiar for the return leg after 
the Portuguese midfielder was dismissed moments after the opening goal, a 
decision the manager Valdas Ivanauskas felt cost his team victory. "You must 
ask the referee about it," he said after the Danish official Nicolai Vollquartz 
showed Aguiar a second yellow for dissent. "I have been involved in a lot of 
European matches and for me the decision wasn't right. If not for the mistake 
by the referee we would have won the game."

Ivanauskas's opposite number Lorenzo Serra Ferrer refused to say that the tie 
was all but over after his side's win. "There are still 90 minutes to play and 
we have to respectHearts <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts>," the 
Spaniard said. "Now we have an advantage but we must exploit it as much as 
possible. This was not an easy game for us but we came close to scoring 10 or 
12 times."

Perhaps Hearts' nervousness during a first half dominated by the Greeks was 
understandable. The owner Vladimir Romanov is adamant that the club should 
compete in the upper echelons of European football in the immediate future, 
meaning his players are under pressure to deliver success at home and abroad 
despite many of them lacking the necessary experience.

The expectations of the Hearts support have also risen to unseen levels since 
Romanov's arrival 18 months ago and such ambitions of glory were demonstrated 
by an attendance of 32,459 - the second largest for a Hearts home European tie.

Under the fiercest of pressure, Hearts somehow carved an opening just after 
the hour mark as the substitute Edgaras Jankauskas played in Roman Bednar 18 
yards from goal. The Czech striker's effort rebounded from a post and 
Mikoliunas was on hand to stroke home the rebound.

The home team's job of defending their slender lead was made more difficult by 
Aguiar's sending off. And after 89 minutes Kapetanos headed a deserved 
equaliser past Gordon from Stavros Tziortziopoulos's cross amid jubilant scenes 
from the small band of travelling fans, before Nikos Liberopoulos's 20-yard 
effort deflected off Berra and past Craig Gordon as the clock entered 
stoppage-time.

It was a harsh way to lose the match but Hearts ultimately lost out to a team 
of exquisite individual and collective ability.
 