
Old Henri Mouhot never got a view of Angkor Wat this good. The French 
adventurer who rediscovered Cambodia's cultural shrine in 1859 must be turning 
in his grave.

Nowadays, for $11 you can get a great bird's-eye view of the Angkor temples 
built between the 9th and 13th centuries by the god-kings of the Khmer empire.

Cambodia's answer to the London Eye is a bright yellow gas balloon moored 
approximately 1km west from Angkor Wat on the airport road. But it's a balloon 
in name only; a giant helium number that is attached to a guide rope. It's 
silent, non-polluting and being tethered it doesn't fly over the temples.

The balloon rides are criminally short (only about 10 minutes) but well worth 
it nonetheless. Where it really scores is in providing a fresh perspective on 
how all the temples and waterways of the Khmer Empire fit together. At ground 
level it's sometimes hard to grasp the extent the Angkor utilised the waters of 
the Tonle Sap, the huge lake in the middle of the country.

The balloon ascent itself is terribly exciting and every few seconds reveals 
more of the famous Angkor Wat temple and its five durian-shaped towers. There 
are also great views of the lush countryside that surrounds the Angkor 
monuments. This is a fertile landscape, which is often an almost luminous green 
colour.

Soon enough you can also make out the Angkor Thom monument and its moat. Then 
as the balloon ascended to its maximum altitude of 200m, even more revelations. 
Suddenly on our left the temple of Phnom Bakheng suddenly emerged from the 
jungle canopy without warning.

The balloon can carry up to 30 passengers but when I went up at 4pm, with two 
friends, we virtually had it to ourselves. There were just two other tourists 
on board. It was an hour or so before sunset and a magical light cast long 
afternoon shadows of palm trees on verdant green rice fields.

Once the balloon attained a decent height I began firing off photos like some 
paparazzo who's just located Lord Lucan riding Shergar. But while the views 
from the balloon are excellent the conditions are not ideal for photography. 
Balloons, tethered or not, have a tendency to shake around and you will require 
a steady hand and good zoom lens to get decent shots of Angkor Wat itself.

Also, make sure you put a new roll of film in your camera, or your digital is 
ready for use, before you go up. Once airborne, time is too precious. One 
tourist almost squirmed with distress as she ran out of film halfway through 
the ride.

A lot of attention is paid to safety. There's a check-in area and prepare to 
be searched before you get on. My bottle of water was confiscated - just in 
case I felt the urge to add to some of the already flooded paddy fields below. 
On the back of the ticket it memorably states: "No bringing any weaponries or 
explosions to the balloon."

While budget travellers may be put off by the $11 price the balloon ride 
actually saved me money. I would have spent double that amount in the same time 
in one of the markets in Siem Reap, the nearest town to the Angkor monuments.

But, as so often with the best things in life, it was over too soon. Although 
we were back on terra firma it took me far longer to land mentally. For several 
minutes afterwards I was still as high as a kite. My friend Chris went even 
further: "That was the best $11 I've ever spent!"

He kind of said that about everything, but judging by his look of glee this 
time he really meant it.

Way to go

The Angkor balloon, located approximately 1km west from Angkor Wat, costs 
US$11 per person and flies 30 times a day between sunrise and sunset. Tel: 00 
855 12 520810, fax: 00 855 63 964 107, or emailsokhasr@camintel.com 
<mailto:sokhasr@camintel.com>
 