
Q I have recently started work at an organisation after applying for a job 
which asked for "self-motivated and enthusiastic people to join our 
cutting-edge team". It said successful applicants would be assigned to a job in 
one of four different areas. I was told my background would prove useful, and 
was given seven weeks' training. The problem came with the actual job: I'm 
stuck repeating a process over and over ad infinitum. What are my options given 
that the job description, interviews and training sessions were clearly 
misleading?
P

A Here's the thing: you've started a job and it's not what you thought it was. 
Now you're cross and frustrated, and basically want to know if you can return 
it to the shop, complain, and swap it for something else, or at the very least 
get your money back.

And can you? Well, you could go and see HR and start shouting about "clearly 
misleading" job ads, interviews and training, but I wouldn't advise it. That's 
basically accusing your employer of lying and scheming, which isn't really the 
way to start a beautiful relationship. And in any case, from the details you've 
given me (many omitted here in case your boss is reading) I'm not sure the 
advert was misleading, just very vague.

This vagueness does make things a bit tricky. Ideally, when you start a job 
you want to have already established and discussed your job title and 
description, your responsibilities, and your salary, terms and conditions. That 
you don't have that agreement on paper (I presume, since you haven't mentioned 
it) does reduce your choices a little - basically, rather than being misled you 
could just have misunderstood.

So, what can you do? Pretty much it boils down to either persuading your boss 
to give you more exciting work or finding a different job. Leaving might sound 
extreme, but if you really feel your employer has duped you, I wonder if you 
are going to be able to get over that and swallow your mistrust.

You needn't be afraid of admitting you've made a mistake, even to your former 
boss. A surprising number of new hires don't work out, and it's not unusual to 
return to a former employer, albeit with a bit more appreciation than when you 
first left. Future employers also tend to be sympathetic to the idea that the 
job wasn't what you thought it was. Don't let pride keep you in a job that is 
making you miserable.

And if you want to stay? My initial thought is that it's unlikely you'd have 
been given such long and detailed training for absolutely no reason - that's 
more on-job training than many people get in their whole career, and it is 
expensive. So why don't you ask your line-manager whether you're likely to get 
to apply that knowledge in the near future. Suggest that it would be good to 
cement it through regular use. See what he or she says.

From what I can gather, this is an entry-level job which will require further 
training and development. In all likelihood, you won't get stuck doing 
repetitive tasks forever, rather you are starting at the bottom and will have 
to work your way up. Why don't you just clarify that situation with your boss 
(gently) rather than presuming you are overqualified for the role. Ask where he 
or she sees you in six months, 12 months and 18 months.

If there doesn't seem to be a structured training programme in place, try and 
set some goals for the next year and ask your boss if he or she could help you 
achieve them. Flatter your manager, and take positive steps to change your 
situation. It is no good getting cross and blaming your employer for 
"misleading" you - your career is your responsibility too.

And next time use your interview or job offer conversation to pin down exactly 
what you will be doing. That way there will be no nasty surprises.
 