
Q I have worked for my employer for 25 years. A few weeks ago my boss informed 
me I had reached the top of my pay scale and would only receive the annual cost 
of living raise, which I accepted.

I have since been informed by a new director that I won't receive that cost of 
living raise until my colleagues catch me up. He told me that the pay scale for 
the position no longer exists and he wants us all on the same pay. A couple of 
years ago, when we took on extra duties, my colleagues were awarded an annual 
increase of £500, which I was not. The difference in our salaries is about £700 
annually.

A We will get down to the nitty-gritty in a moment, but let's be clear I am 
firmly on your side. It is admirable to want a transparent pay structure where 
everybody gets paid equally. But the way to achieve that equality is to give 
everyone else a pay rise, not to cut the pay of one employee - because if you 
don't get a cost of living rise, given the current rate of inflation that is 
exactly what your company is doing.

So how should you react? It is unfortunate that you previously accepted other 
people should be given pay rises when you weren't, as I do wonder if your 
employer is now taking advantage of that. And it is tough that your manager and 
new director aren't even giving you the same message - I would usually suggest 
going to see your immediate boss about the situation, but it doesn't sound as 
though he's really abreast of it.

However, tackling a new director isn't going to be easy. So perhaps go and see 
your boss with an aim to getting him on side first. Explain that you aren't 
making a fuss about the pay scale (I think you need to pick your battles, and 
taking on the company's pay structure isn't one of them), but ask if he can 
explain why you have historically been paid more than your colleagues. Perhaps 
you perform better than them? Maybe you have just negotiated better? Either 
way, there's absolutely no reason why you should now be penalised for that.

Then ask your boss how he would approach the director; he may offer to do it 
for you. If not, ask if he would be prepared to come to a meeting with you and 
help you put your case for a cost-of-living rise.

No joy with this? You'll have to do it alone. Be firm about what you want to 
achieve: your cost of living rise, regardless of what other people are earning. 
Be clear that the fact your colleagues are being underpaid for their jobs 
should not affect you and your salary. Explain that you have shown good will in 
this area before because you are committed to the company, but you expect to be 
rewarded for the work you do and your performance this year does not merit a 
pay cut.

Good luck, and I hope your new director sees sense. It seems ridiculous to me 
that for the sake of saving a few hundred pounds an employer should try and 
take advantage of a loyal and long-serving member of staff by cutting their 
salary. You deserve better. Much better. And your company, by the sound of it, 
does not deserve you.
 