
No one in higher education is going to squabble about the overall direction of 
theSutton Trust research 
<http://www.suttontrust.com/research/tracking-the-decision-making-of-high-achieving-applicants/>
. A sample of 13,000 is not to be decried, and the conclusion that universities 
should work more closely with schools and colleges so that talented young 
people from non-privileged backgrounds study the right subjects and make the 
best university choice possible will get widespread support.

However, somewhere on the journey towards social mobility, the sat nav has let 
down the driver.

Sir Peter Lampl, an experienced and shrewd navigator, has taken a minor byway 
and missed the main road. The repeated notion that bright and talented young 
people, given the right advice, will then be ready to apply to the "13 most 
selective universities" is not going to create a new wave of social mobility. 
It may create more applicants for Magdalen or for Trinity – and there is 
nothing wrong with that – but it will encourage only dozens of young people to 
aspire. We need to be raising the sights of thousands.

Alan Milburn's recent report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2012/oct/24/alan-milburn-university-challenge-response>
, University Challenged, heads in a broadly similar direction, but never quite 
arrives. While the media has focused on the issue of whether contextual data 
should be used in the admissions process, there are many recommendations to 
welcome: that more universities promote sandwich placement years in industry, 
for example, and get involved in mentoring, masterclasses and summer schools.

Research conducted by Aston University academics 
<http://eprints.aston.ac.uk/16218/> Nigel Driffield, Helen Higson and Catherine 
Foster last year – and endorsed by the CBI and other business organisations – 
shows that young people who spend an integrated year in business as part of 
their degree become more polished, more confident and more mature. Indeed, they 
acquire the employability skills that business is asking for.

At Aston, 70% of students do a placement year or year abroad, and 89% of 
graduates get a graduate-level job within six months – a better rate than 
Oxford. A placement year is one of the best tools to accelerate social mobility 
that we have.

Evidence from the Aim Higher consortium of universities in Birmingham shows 
that social mobility can have a snowballing effect when universities work with 
schools over a number of years. All pupils who have the potential to succeed in 
higher education can be given the opportunity to do so. But it is crucial that 
they are given information about the variety of courses on offer at a wide 
range of universities – not simply pushed towards the "13 most selective".

There are many universities operating vibrant outreach programmes, working 
with schools in disadvantaged areas. From Nechells to Norwood, they are sending 
in student ambassadors and opening up sports and social facilities. They are 
succeeding too – at Aston, 40% of our students come from the four most 
disadvantaged social groups. They go on to careers with companies such as 
Jaguar Land Rover, Deutsche Bank, IBM, and Microsoft or work in their 
communities as pharmacists, teachers and optometrists.

The Sutton Trust examines in depth one group of high-achieving young people 
from state schools and colleges who chose not to apply to "the most selective 
universities". These young people, whom it labels "determined, decisive" 
students, make "an informed, rational and highly independent" decision – to the 
evident surprise of the author – to apply to a less selective university. It 
concludes they are happy with their choice.

Sending young people to university is one of the most effective ways society 
has of boosting social mobility. A post-war wave of social mobility initiatives 
led to the creation of universities such as Aston and Surrey, dedicated to 
helping students acquire the skills, confidence and knowledge they needed for a 
career in business, industry and the professions, without regard to class or 
background.

To create a new generation of socially mobile young people who will shape the 
businesses and communities of the future, we do need to read – and act on – 
Milburn and Sutton. But we should focus on sustained, well-funded and 
co-ordinated outreach that does not simply aspire to create more applications 
for 13 universities.

Rather, our aim should be to create as many "determined, decisive" applicants 
from disadvantaged communities as possible, then to support, mentor and nurture 
them so they can succeed as creative thinkers, researchers, entrepreneurs and 
global citizens of tomorrow. In this way we will excite the next big wave of 
social mobility that this country needs.
 