
Q I work for a small charity. It is a crucial time for the organisation, and 
there are several factors that make me wonder about our long-term future.

Firstly, the executive director sometimes sleeps at his desk for up to 40 
minutes. Also, because he likes to spend time out in the field, work on 
projects that interest him and go away regularly for extended trips, we really 
need to get a general manager in place - not least because his managerial 
skills are lacking.

He doesn't anticipate changes or ensure we have decent systems in place. Also, 
he is simply not the type of person I can bounce ideas around with. He is very 
set in his ways, and gives more attention to details than to the overall 
picture.

Secondly, our directors are very hands-off. There is no framework for staff 
support, and no one seems to be actively keeping up to date with employee 
regulations.

Thirdly, we have outgrown the office we are in and desperately need a place we 
can grow into - probably in a different location. However my boss is very 
reluctant to move office (he told me once that it would spoil his social life).

Lastly, though by no means least, our rate of pay is about a third less for 
similar work in other organisations (I've done my research!).

I have been invited to give a talk about my work to the board in a few weeks. 
I want to bring these issues up in a way that is effective and hits the right 
note with them, in order to prompt the necessary discussion and action. What's 
the best way of going about it?
KB

A: I've had to edit your letter quite a bit, but hopefully have managed to 
retain your key worries. Although, I have to point out, there are a lot of 
them. And if you really were to bring up all these issues with the board at 
once, I'm not at all convinced that you would receive the reception you're 
after.

Let's start at the top: your boss sleeps on the job. Really, this is not a 
matter for the board. Or, to be totally honest, for you. You certainly don't 
suggest it's affecting his job. In fact while on the one hand you're cross 
about him grabbing 40 winks every afternoon, on the other you're resentful 
because he's off out in the field. Which is it? Too energetic or altogether too 
slothful?

Which leads me to the next point: I think you just don't like your boss. Look 
at all the faults you find (sleeping aside): that he can't manage; he has no 
vision; he can't organise your systems; he is set in his ways; gives his social 
life priority over the business (although, again, is presumably happy to 
sacrifice that for extended trips).

I'm not saying that there aren't bad managers about - but he has managed to 
keep a charity running and still growing. He must be doing something right.

So take a deep breath and list your manager's good qualities. If you can't get 
five decent things on there, it's time to consider your position. It may be 
that he really is rubbish. It may be that you just think you know better. 
Either way, this is not a good place for you to work.

But I imagine you will find five things your boss does brilliantly and you can 
use them to improve things. Explain how inspirational his fieldwork is - and 
that a general manager would free him up to do more of it.

Push for him to do more special projects for the charity and ask if someone 
could be hired to sort out the IT system as part of this.

Talk to him about these things privately, before putting them before the 
board. There is a risk if he says no to everything that you'll have to go 
against him in front of the board, but if you are as frustrated with work as 
you sound, that is probably a risk worth taking.

Which brings us to the board. Again, choose the flattery route: point out how 
valuable their input is, and that you'd really appreciate more of it. They may 
just be nervous of standing on your boss's toes.

Finally, we come to office and pay. I wouldn't labour the point: just say that 
more space and a more fit-for-purpose office would allow the charity to grow 
more quickly. You are not in a position to demand the organisation moves, and 
I'd be cautious of even pushing it this far.

With pay it's a bit different. That salary differential is in part down to the 
location of your work and the fact you don't have the associated living or 
commuting costs of being based in a city.

That doesn't mean you should accept such a large pay gap. Try to find out how 
your colleagues feel about the salary structure. Be discreet, but don't feel 
guilty for talking about it - that may be one reason why wages have stayed so 
low. Then try and present to the board and your executive director as a united 
voice. You will have much more leverage as a workforce than as one employee - 
particularly one who has plenty of other issues to work through.
 