
Some of the men had walked for days to meet under the shade of the acacia 
trees in the drylands of southern Ethiopia. The livestock herders had come to 
discuss how to maintain their way of life – which has survived and flourished 
in the Horn of Africa for thousands of years – with pastoralists from other 
tribes in the region.

"This is your home, it's a pastoralist area, so all of you are welcome," said 
Nura Dida, Chairman of the Oromia Pastoralists Association (OPA), one of the 
Ethiopian organisations that helped facilitate the gathering with Pastoralist 
Consultants International. The meeting, funded by the UK Government's 
Department for International Development (DFID), was also attended by regional 
government officials from Kenya and Ethiopia.

With erratic rainfall, the lowlands of East Africa are arid and semi-arid, 
making farming a challenge. Shepherding livestock to find new pastures is 
better suited to the harsh environment; in East Africa alone there are around 
20 million pastoralists, half of them living in Ethiopia.

Studies have shown the economic benefit of rearing animals in this way. 
According to the paper 'Economics of Pastoralism in East Africa: Tanzania 
Component', four million people are supported by pastoralism. Oxfam 
International's report 'Survival of the fittest: Pastoralism and climate change 
in East Africa', states that it makes up ten percent of the gross domestic 
product (GDP) in Kenya and provides most of the meat for the region's 
population.

Nomadic and semi-nomadic people from Sudan to Tanzania are far from prosperous 
though. Amongst the poorest and most vulnerable in sub-Saharan Africa, they 
depend heavily on their livestock for food, milk and income. Living in remote 
rural areas, pastoralists also suffer from a lack of services, health care and 
education. They need up-to-date price information to get the best deals at 
livestock markets, and without accurate weather forecasts they rely on scouts 
searching ahead for recent rains. As a consequence, poverty is not uncommon. 
Oxfam estimates that 64 percent of the population in pastoralist areas in 
northern Uganda live below the poverty line, compared with 38 percent 
nationally.

Climate change is exacerbating these problems. With water sources on 
traditional grazing lands disappearing, herders are walking longer distances 
and competition for resources has led to fierce fighting with other tribes and 
land owners. Cattle stealing and murder has become such a serious issue that 
peace was top of the agenda for the herders gathered together in southern 
Ethiopia. "This is a peace gathering," said Dida. "In a place where there is no 
peace, it is not possible to maintain the existing social services, let alone 
build new ones."

Peace gatherings involving different communities, non government organisations 
(NGOs) and government officials are showing positive signs that many issues can 
be resolved through dialogue. "The main objective of OPA is to create the right 
understanding and awareness of pastoralists at government level so that the 
government will include pastoralists in its development policies and programmes 
and allow them to benefit from development," explained Dida.

However, it has proved difficult for governments to implement development 
programmes for communities who migrate through remote areas, often across 
national borders. But progress has been made in representing this minority in 
government. In Ethiopia regional pastoralist offices have opened since the 
Pastoralist Affairs Standing Committee was established in parliament in mid 
2002. And in Kenya several districts now have access to health centres, some 
pastoralist children receive free education and one pastoralist has become an 
MP.

Pastoralists are increasingly working with external organisations such as 
Future Agricultures and the United Nations Office for the Coordination of 
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) to bring in new ideas and medicines to improve the 
quality of their lives. Herders from different regions have begun to record and 
share their innovations too. Mobile phones are being used to access accurate 
weather forecasts and some people are splitting their herds into smaller groups 
or selling cattle to deposit money into bank accounts rather than risk losing 
their assets to disease.

Others have focused on strategy. Two years ago in Kenya's Amboseli National 
Park, pastoralist thinkers from across Africa laid down strategies to improve 
pastoralism in the twenty-first century. Much depends on government policy, as 
Nafisatu Mohamed from Nigeria said at the time: "With issues such as education 
and health, it all boils down to how well the society is governed. If you talk 
about education, whether it is accessible or not depends on how responsive the 
government is to the condition of pastoralists."

NGOs such as Oxfam generally agree that government policy and money are 
crucial for pastoralism to be viable. Investment is needed to improve a wide 
range of areas from market access and financial services to setting up 
flood-proof communication networks, weather forecast information, drought and 
flood mitigation, social welfare systems, and cross-border government 
interaction.

Furthermore, NGOs argue that pastoralism is not only the most sustainable way 
of living in arid environments but that pastoralists such as the Maasai in 
Kenya are the best guardians of wildlife and make nature tourism possible. NGOs 
and forward thinking pastoralists certainly view the way of life as playing a 
key role in East Africa in the future.

'I'm starting with a vision where I see a government receptive to and 
accommodating of pastoralist interests and concerns," said Dida in Amboseli 
National Park. "I see pastoralism contributing to the human race through the 
sustainable use of natural resources."

Pastoralists are beginning to adapt to a connected world where sustainability 
is increasingly important. In southern Ethiopia they have a proverb: 'Life is 
in mobility'. So whatever weather the changing climate brings, pastoralists are 
sure to travel to many more meetings under the acacia trees to protect their 
way of life and their environment.

This longlisted article was published on 23 July 2009. It was written for the 
Guardian's International Development Journalism Competition between 1 April and 
22 June 2009.
 