
A second person has died from an anthrax infection after injecting heroin, 
causing health experts to warn hospitals and walk-in clinics across the UK to 
expect more cases.

The death comes three weeks after another heroin user died after contracting 
the disease from what is assumed to be a batch of contaminated heroin.

Both fatalities were in Blackpool but two further cases of infection have been 
reported in Scotland and Wales since early June.

The deaths are part of a European-wide outbreak of anthrax among people who 
inject drugs: there have been 10 cases across Germany, Denmark and France in 
recent months.

The European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control and the European 
Monitoring Centre forDrugs <https://www.theguardian.com/society/drugs> and Drug 
Addiction have issued warnings that heroin users in Europe are at risk of 
exposure to anthrax and warned there may be further cases.

"Anthrax can be cured with antibiotics, if treatment is started early. It is 
therefore important for medical professionals to know the signs and symptoms to 
look for, so that there will be no delays in providing treatment," said Dr 
Fortune Ncube, an expert in blood-borne viruses with theHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Protection Agency (HPA).

"It's likely that further cases among people who inject heroin will be 
identified as part of the ongoing outbreak in EU countries," he added. "The 
Department of Health has alerted theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> of the possibility of people who 
inject drugs presenting to emergency departments and walk-in clinics, with 
symptoms suggestive of anthrax."

Local drug services throughout the UK have been alerted and the National 
Treatment Agency has circulated posters and leaflets about anthrax 
contamination aimed at heroin users.

Drug users may become infected with anthrax when heroin is contaminated with 
anthrax spores. This could be a source of infection if injected, smoked or 
snorted.

Ncube said there was no safe route for consuming heroin or other drugs that 
may be contaminated with anthrax spores.

"The HPA is warning people who use heroin that they could be risking anthrax 
infection," he said Ncube. "We urge all heroin users to seek urgent medical 
advice if they experience signs of infection such as redness or excessive 
swelling at or near an injection site, or other symptoms of general illness 
such a high temperature, chills, severe headaches or breathing difficulties. 
Early treatment with antibiotics is essential for a successful recovery."
 