
As a symbol of a city gentrifying at warp speed it could hardly be more 
literal: within weeks of the last resident being evicted from a condemned 
council estate in southLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, a team 
of art workers moves in to dismantle one of the blocks and rebuild it as a 
sculpture in the shape of a giant pyramid.

That is the likely fate of part of the Heygate estate in Elephant and Castle 
as Southwark council considers the proposal by the British installation artist
Mike Nelson <http://mikenelson.org.uk/>, a plan condemned by some ex-residents 
as insensitive.

Southwark, along with Artangel <http://www.artangel.org.uk/>, the influential 
group that commissioned Nelson, argue the work is a productive and creative use 
of a space destined to otherwise remain unused during the months before the 
site is levelled for new housing. But some locals argue a public artwork, let 
alone a pyramid, cannot be seen outside of its social setting, in this instance 
one wherethe final resident was removed by bailiffs only last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/nov/04/bailiffs-death-knell-heygate-estate>
. "I think it's terrible judgment on the part of Artangel to come to this 
site," said Chris Morris, a local resident whochronicles regeneration efforts 
in a blog <http://southwarknotes.wordpress.com/> and who met Artangel in 
October to express his worries. "They have this very easy idea that art 
contains some neutrality so we can make up our own ideas. For us, there are 
still much bigger things at stake."

The Heygate, a large concrete estate completed in 1974, was popular with many 
residents but suffered from gradual neglect as well as a largely unmerited 
reputation for social problems. What was 3,000 predominantly council homes is 
being demolished for a development in which three-quarters of properties will 
be sold for prices currently reaching about £380,000 for a one-bed flat.

Artangel's proposal 
<http://planningonline.southwark.gov.uk/DocsOnline/Documents/328350_1.pdf> 
involves "a striking sculptural installation" by Nelson – a former Turner prize 
nominee who represented Britain at the 2011 Venice Biennale – to be built next 
month and opened to the public till June, when the site will be redeveloped. 
Nelson would gradually deconstruct a four-storey maisonette block and 
reconfigure the prefabricated panels to create "a monumental form resembling a 
pyramid", which visitors could ascend.

It is not the first such scheme by Artangel. In 2008 it commissioned Seizure 
<http://www.artangel.org.uk/projects/2008/seizure>, in which artist Roger 
Hiorns poured 75,000 litres of copper sulphate into an empty flat in a south 
London estate also due for demolition, turning it into a blue crystal cave.

While Seizure won significant praise and gained Hiorns a Turner nomination, 
the new project takesArtangel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/artangel> into trickier waters. The 
redevelopment of the Heygate and the wider Elephant and Castle has proved 
hugely controversial, especially after it emerged that another planned block 
would have no affordable housing, as the developer argued this would mean 
having to build a separate entrance and lifts for social tenants.

While Southwark says the money it receives for such schemes means it can build 
thousands more affordable homes nearby, critics argue long-term residents are 
being pushed out of the area.

For John Colfer, there is an even more personal worry: his childhood home will 
become part of the pyramid. The 49-year-old engineer grew up with four siblings 
in Chearsley House, the block Nelson plans to dismantle, and his parents only 
moved out two years ago.His grandfather died in the family maisonette.

"We were the first people in, at the start of 1974," Colfer said. "My father 
made the home a home, fitted new floors, everything. My parents never planned 
to leave the estate. So when you're talking about using those same materials to 
make a pyramid, you just think: what is there to show that this was a 
well-loved home? These are our memories being turned into an artwork."

Artangel says it spoke to "a number" of locals, including Heygate residents, 
before submitting its planning application, due to be decided next week. The 
group's co-director, James Lingwood, said: "We are aware that the block in 
question is to be demolished, and that the estate as a whole is condemned. This 
project would mark a moment between its past and future life."

But Morris argues groups tried to use parts of the estate for vegetable 
growing and art shows and mainly encountered obstruction from Southwark. He 
said: "It seems as if Artangel have the privilege of direct access to the 
council and developers, whereas local people do not." Amid such a context, it 
seems unsurprising that the choice of a pyramid has raised some eyebrows 
further.

A letter to the council's planners says: "Given the extent of the social 
engineering which will follow the redevelopment of Heygate site perhaps the 
erection of a pyramid will present a clear cultural and artistic representation 
of who has won and lost from the scheme."
 