
The Democratic Republic of Congo survived the early sending off of Tresor 
Mputu to hold Angola to a goalless draw in their African Nations Cup Group B 
match yesterday. Congo were on the back foot for much of the game after Mputu 
was dismissed for wildly kicking the Angolan defender Kali between the legs 
after 19 minutes. His automatic one-match suspension may be extended if the 
Confederation of African Football decides to sanction him further for excessive 
violent play.

The Congolese, who now have four points, edged closer to the quarter-finals 
while Angola, who have just one, must win their last group game against Togo on 
Sunday to have any chance of progressing. On yesterday's evidence, however, 
their task will be a steep one. Even with their man advantage, Angola could not 
convert dominant possession into goals with their captain Akwa guilty of 
squandering a myriad of half-chances. His first opportunity was in the seventh 
minute when he was sent clear by the left-winger Edson but the Qatari-based 
striker hit his shot straight at the Congo goalkeeper Pascal Kalemba.

The Congo captain Lomana LuaLua was just wide with an effort soon after and as 
the teams traded chances, Kali also went close for Angola after sliding in at 
the back post in the 16th minute.

Following the dismissal of Mputu, who scored in the Simbas' 2-0 win over Togo 
in their opening match last Saturday, Congo found their chances restricted. 
However, Biscotte Mbala should have done better when a huge gap opened up for 
him in the Angolan defence after a corner but he failed to control the ball. 
Desperate defending by Congo kept out a series of chances for Akwa, Edson and 
Mendonca after just the half-hour.

In the second half, Angola kept up their persistent running at the defence but 
the best chance fell to LuaLua, who broke free on the counter attack only to 
blast wildly wide. The result means Angola have yet to win at the final 
tournament. In their third appearance at a Nations Cup, they have four draws 
and four losses in eight appearances. They were beaten 3-1 by Cameroon on 
Saturday.
 