
Early next year, Annette Bening will garner an Oscar nomination for her tart, 
intense performance as Julianne Moore's control-freak lover in The Kids Are All 
Right. She could just as easily be nominated for her tart, intense performance 
as a neurotic middle-aged healthcare professional in the underrated film Mother 
and Child, another engaging arthouse release that surfaced a few months ago. In 
effect, after more than a decade of working infrequently, and even then mostly 
appearing in duds (Being Julia, The Women, Running with Scissors )Annette Bening
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/annette-bening> is making a serious comeback 
at the age of 52, 20 years after most leading ladies have arrived at the 
expiration date for their careers.

What makes this return to centre stage even more impressive is that Bening was 
a bit of a late bloomer at the dawn of her career, not seriously grabbing the 
public's attention until she starred as a charismatic con artist in The 
Grifters at the ripe old age of 32. Bening, defying all odds, first became a 
star at the age many female actors – Bridget Fonda, Jennifer Love Hewitt – are 
already throwing in the towel, and has now re-emerged as a star at an age when 
most actresses have abandoned all hope of landing any roles of consequence. 
They should give her some kind of Oscar for that, too.

Late bloomers are a rare breed in Hollywood, but they are a truly rare breed 
on the distaff side. Hollywood is a dream factory oriented towards hyperactive 
young males, and young males rarely dream about middle-aged women. The fact 
that Bening, who worked in the theatre before making her mark on the big screen 
in her 30s, is now making a serious comeback in her 50s, is truly a miracle in 
such a vehemently sexist, misogynist, age-biased industry. It helps that she 
can act. It also helps that she's Tinseltown royalty, as wife of Warren Beatty.

Of the few late bloomers in the motion-picture industry, most made their mark 
as character actors, not as leading men or women. Ben Johnson, the 
weather-beaten, conscience-stricken henchman who alerts Alan Ladd to Jack 
Palance's ignoble intentions in the 1953 classic Shane, had been playing the 
third ornery old cowpoke from the left for decades before he got a chance to 
shine in The Last Picture Show, which won him a best supporting actor Oscar in 
1971. He was 52. Brendan Gleeson, the designated burly sidekick in everything 
from Braveheart to In Bruges, did not start acting until his mid-30s. Danny 
Aiello, who did a bit of everything before grabbing the public's attention in 
films such as Moonstruck and Do the Right Thing, did not start landing major 
film roles until he was in his late 30s. But none of these actors can truly be 
called headliners; they are simply very fine second bananas. Or, as has most 
often been the case throughout Aiello's career, very fine third bananas.

Only a few have ever made it big, and usually there are extenuating 
circumstances. Cher was in her 30s when she made Silkwood, and past 40 when she 
starred in Moonstruck, but she was hardly an unknown commodity. Nobody thought 
Colin Firth had star quality until he made the TV version of Pride and 
Prejudice aged 35, but Firth had been steadily working in small film roles for 
more than a decade, biding his time.

And then there is The Curious Case of Steven Seagal. This beloved Hollywood 
martial arts specialist did not make his first film until he was 36, because 
nobody asked him to; it was his association with superagent Michael Ovitz that 
gave him entry to the movie business. Indeed, according to legend, Seagal's 
career was the result of an Ovitz wager that he could make literally anyone a 
star. Which he did. But Seagal's spectacular success did not endure, and today 
he rarely works. Though he supposedly turned down Sylvester Stallone's offer to 
appear in tongue-in-cheek over-the-hill commando flick The Expendables, that is 
just the sort of work he should be doing: kitschy self-parody. Actually, a case 
can be made that kitschy self-parody is always what Seagal did.

A far more interesting case is that of Anjelica Huston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anjelica-huston>, whose exemplary career was 
initially derailed by her debut in the atrocious 1969 film A Walk with Love and 
Death. Just 18 at the time the film was made, Huston had the advantage of being 
cast as the lead in a motion picture directed by her father, the legendary John 
Huston. This was her only advantage. A painful late-60s mediation on the whys 
and wherefores of medieval flower power, A Walk with Love and Death focused on 
star-crossed lovers who boldly promenade across Europe in the middle of the 
hundred years war just because they feel like it. That was a bad idea, as was 
casting Israeli general Moshe Dayan's son Assaf as Huston's co-star. The poster 
for the film carried the words: "Maybe they need to make war as much as we need 
to make love." More likely, nobody needed to make war, nobody needed to make 
love, and nobody needed to make A Walk with Love and Death. Huston, absent from 
the screen for a good many years, did not get the career she deserved until she 
starred in Prizzi's Honor in 1985 with then boyfriend Jack Nicholson, a film 
for which she won the Oscar for best supporting actress. Since then, Huston has 
made a string of excellent films, including The Grifters (with Bening) for 
which she was honoured with a best actress Oscar nomination, and The Dead, a 
haunting screen version of James Joyce's equally haunting short story. The film 
was directed by her father, and was both the last great film of his career, and 
the last film of his career, period. Perhaps he felt he owed it to her.

Tommy Lee Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/film/tommyleejones> has been a 
star for so long, and such a prolific one, that it is easy to forget how long 
it took for him to establish himself. Al Gore's roommate in college, Jones got 
his first break when he was cast in Love Story, the treacly 1970 film based on 
a novel by Erich Segal, a Harvard professor who knew both Jones and Gore. Over 
the next two decades, Jones worked steadily and appeared in a number of 
high-profile motion pictures (Eyes of Laura Mars, The Betsy, Coal Miner's 
Daughter, Under Siege, JFK), but it was his performance as an implacable US 
marshal in the 1993 Harrison Ford vehicle The Fugitive that made him a 
household name. Jones, who has been a huge star ever since, was 47 when The 
Fugitive appeared. A spring chicken he was not.

One is tempted to include Ian McKellen in the same category as Jones. Though 
long revered as a stage actor, McKellen made no inroads into film until 1998, 
when he appeared in the eerie, well-received Apt Pupil and the even more 
admired art film Gods and Monsters. By this point, McKellen was pushing 60. 
Still, his true thrust into the stratosphere had to wait until he hammed it up 
as the wizard Gandalf in Peter Jackson's Lord of the Rings trilogy, by which 
point he was pushing 60 from the other side. Like Jones, McKellen is one of 
those movie stars so admired and widely recognised today that one forgets how 
long it took the public to start widely recognising him. Without Lord of the 
Rings, it might never have happened. This is probably the only good thing that 
can be said about the Hobbit community: they finally got Ian McKellen's movie 
career rolling.

Melissa Leo, who had done yeowoman work as a cop on the TV series Homicide, 
finally got to show off her big-screen chops in Frozen River, for which she got 
a best actress nomination. She was 47. Also worthy of note are Graham Greene, 
the personable Canadian from the Oneida tribe who drifted into the public's 
consciousness after making Dances With Wolves at the age of 37; andPatricia 
Clarkson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/patricia-clarkson>, who did not get 
the roles she so richly deserved until she was into her 40s. A particularly 
patient late bloomer is Richard Farnsworth, a career stuntman who got his big 
break in the 1982 film The Grey Fox when he was already 62, and then starred in 
David Lynch's lovely little film The Straight Story in 1999, when he was 
nearing 80 and nearing death. Farnsworth, terminally ill with bone cancer while 
he was filming The Straight Story, killed himself shortly after.

Back in 1998, I was having lunch with an editor at Movieline magazine when I 
suggested we should do a story about the truly remarkable late bloomer JT 
Walsh. Walsh, a stage actor who seemed to have materialised out of nowhere, 
started making movies in his 40th year and quickly established himself as one 
of the finest character actors in the business. His memorable performances – he 
appeared in 50 films – included the marine officer who kills himself in A Few 
Good Men, Tommy Lee Jones's hapless aide-de-camp in The Client, Jack 
Nicholson's heir apparent in Hoffa, and one of Joe Mantegna's team of 
industrious scamsters in David Mamet's House of Games. No matinee idol he, 
Walsh was extraordinarily adept at playing understatedly malevolent creeps, as 
he did in Red Rock West and Breakdown. And he appeared in everything. So my 
editor friend agreed that we should do the story.

The next day, I woke up to find that JT Walsh had died of a heart attack the 
previous day at the age of 54. This did not seem fair. It took a long time for 
Walsh to get his career off the ground, and when it did, it didn't last very 
long. But of all the late bloomers, he was by far my favourite, and the one I 
miss the most. He was the sort of solid, reliable performer who did not rely on 
his teeth or his contacts or his publicist to get ahead. Late bloomers are a 
special breed, a tiny but noble fraternity in an industry that literally dreads 
anyone with wrinkles or paunches or crow's feet. And almost without exception, 
late bloomers have the kind of talent that blows neophytes off the screen.

The obvious exception being Steven Seagal.
 