
The past two years have not been kind to the Dutch national team. They have 
gone from World Cup semi-finalists to missing out on a competition that it 
seemed easier to qualify for than not. But, while the players will have to 
watch the expanded 24-team tournament from their living rooms this summer, 
there is hope for the future. As always,Holland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/holland> is producing some wonderful 
talents and arguably the biggest of them all, Riechedly Bazoer, is in line to 
win his third cap against England.

Danny Blind wary of England’s young guns for Holland’s Wembley visit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/28/danny-blind-wary-of-englands-young-guns-ahead-of-hollands-wembley-visit>
The 19-year-old holding midfielder – who has drawn comparisons with Frank 
Rijkaard and Clarence Seedorf because of his mature playing style – has emerged 
as one of the most sought-after young talents in Europe. Milan, Juventus, 
Arsenal, Chelsea, Manchester City and Barcelona have reportedly watched him in 
action and his agent and brother, Irchandly, is busy taking calls from clubs 
inquiring about his services.

Bazoer recently responded to media speculation about Barcelona’s interest in 
him. “I won’t be secretive about it,” he told the Dutch weekly Voetbal 
International recently. “Two months ago they informed my brother about their 
interest. Marc Overmars [Ajax’s director of football] knows about it, too. They 
are watching my matches and are keeping an eye on me.”

The former Barcelona coach, and the man who will take over at Manchester City 
in the summer, Pep Guardiola, is apparently a fan, although it would be 
somewhat ironic if Bazoer ended up at City as he nearly joined them in 2012 – 
before his mother put an end to the transfer by insisting that he stayed in the 
Netherlands.

Back then, Bazoer wanted to leave his club, PSV Eindhoven, in order to play in 
a more attacking role than the centre-back position he was usually deployed in. 
“I was, so to speak, already packing my bags,” Bazoer told Voetbal 
International.

“I went to Manchester with my brother, and the idea was that we would finalise 
everything there. We got a tour at the club, and head of academy Patrick Vieira 
came to talk to us, a real legend. It was all really impressive.”

In the end, though, it was not enough. His mother prevented him from moving to 
England because she thought it would be better for her son’s development to 
follow a more gradual path and stay in the country of his birth for longer. At 
the same time,Ajax <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ajax> showed an 
interest, which made the decision a lot easier. “I was impressed with the fact 
that they sent both their manager [Frank de Boer] and football director [Wim 
Jonk] to talk to a 16‑year‑old,” he added.

Bazoer liked the picture they were drawing up for him, in which they saw him 
very much as a midfielder. He decided to move to Amsterdam and now, four years 
later, is happy with his decision.

England’s Roy Hodgson affirms belief in team but neutral on Euro question
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/28/roy-hodgson-england-holland> 
“In hindsight, I’m happy my mother didn’t let me go to Manchester City,” he 
said. “She kept a cool head, while I was a bit more excited about it. My advice 
to other Dutch young players is to spend the first few years of their careers 
in the Netherlands. That’s better than to go to a big foreign club where you 
start way down the pecking order and have to work your way up.”

Still, it has not been all plain sailing for the youngster. Having made his 
debut for Ajax’s first team in the summer of 2013, he then found himself 
demoted back to the reserves for a while. He has admitted he found it difficult 
to deal with the setback and that it needed a lot of mental strength to get 
through that tough period.

In the end a conversation with Ronald de Boer, Frank’s twin brother who has 
also been connected to Ajax, helped him by reassuring the youngster that 
everyone at the club had faith in him. “He said my chance would come, and that 
I shouldn’t be disappointed for too long.”

It proved to a crucial conversation. Bazoer got his confidence back and 
started to impress in a holding defensive midfield role. In 2015 he had his 
definite breakthrough, and has managed to maintain his form in the past 12 
months.

Bazoer has said he would prefer to stay at Ajax for the next few years, as he 
is learning his trade under tutors such as Dennis Bergkamp. It may well be that 
he, in the end, follows in the former Arsenal forward’s footsteps and moves to 
the Emirates to play in a role which was once filled by another Gunners legend, 
Vieira, the man who tried to bring Bazoer to England only to be thwarted by his 
mother.
 