
Australian activist Colin Russell could be home in time for new year if 
Russian authorities grant theGreenpeace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/greenpeace> campaigner an exit visa on 
Friday.

Russell, 59, is one of 30 activists arrested and detained in September for 
protesting against a Russian oil rig operated by the Moscow-based energy 
company Gazprom in the Pechora Sea.

Known as the Arctic 30, the group, made up of 28 Greenpeace activists and two 
freelance journalists, was accused of hooliganism.

But the charges were dropped last week after the Russian parliament passed an 
amnesty law and freed the defendants.

Russell, from Woodbridge in Tasmania, will visit the Russian immigration 
service on Friday with his wife Christine and daughter Madeleine, and hopes to 
get his passport stamped so he can leave.

If all goes well, he could be flying out over the weekend and be in Hobart 
before New Year's Eve.

"It's wonderful news that Colin will most likely see in the new year at his 
house in Woodbridge," Greenpeace communications manager James Lorenz said.

"He has been incredibly strong throughout, never losing his sense of humour, 
but this final step is undoubtedly a huge relief."

Lorenz said Russell was "desperate" to get home since his arrest three months 
ago.

Meanwhile, two other Australian residents, Alex Harris from Sydney and Jon 
Beauchamp from Adelaide, are also waiting for their exit visas and could be 
back in Australia by the middle of next month.

Lorenz said Harris was expected to travel first to the UK to see her family in 
Devon, while Beauchamp would go to New Zealand before returning to Australia.

The first Arctic 30 Greenpeace activist, Dima Litvinov, left Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> by train on Boxing Day.

During the protest, the Greenpeace ship Arctic Sunrise was boarded by soldiers 
on 19 September after campaigners tried to attached a banner to the Gazprom 
platform.

Russell had received Australian consular assistance.

Officials from the Australian embassy in Moscow visited him at the St 
Petersburg detention facility on 21 November.
 