
Dozens of GCSEs, AS and A-levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels> – including home economics, 
performing arts and environmental science – are to be scrapped in the latest 
stage of a major shakeup of exams.

The exam regulator, Ofqual, is to announce on Wednesday that home economics 
will be discontinued as a GCSE subject because of the overlap with the new 
design and technology: food technology course. The move is part of a clean-up 
that will see other obscure or unpopular exam subjects killed off, as well as 
several more being folded in with other subjects. Ancient history, film 
studies, law and media studies could be reformed to become new, tougher 
qualifications.

Some 32,000 pupils took the home economics GCSE last year, making it the most 
popular of the exam subjects to be discontinued, along with the GCSE in 
catering, which will also be merged into food technology.

Film studies is also to disappear as a separate subject at A-level, with plans 
for it to be merged with drama and theatre studies, but overall Ofqual's 
announcement is far from the bonfire of qualifications that had been predicted 
by some.

"The rumours that have been circulating about the abolition of popular GCSE 
and A-level subjects have been greatly exaggerated. Not only are the vast 
majority of courses being retained, rumours like these destabilise efforts to 
promote confidence in England's qualifications system," said Brian Lightman, 
general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders.

In a consultation paper published on Wednesday, Ofqual will call for comments 
on existing exams to be reformed along the lines of English, maths and science 
papers at GCSE and A-level, in order to make them more exam-based and rigorous. 
Media studies is a subject widely tipped to be axed.

Ofqual said it was introducing a cut-off date of summer 2018 for the last 
award of all unreformed qualifications, and that it would remove any 
qualifications that fail to meet "regulatory expectations in the future", with 
exam boards having to make a case to retain subjects.

Ofqual has already announced that English, maths, sciences and a host of core 
subjects such as history will be overhauled to meet government requirements. 
For the remaining subjects – such as astronomy and media studies – Ofqual has 
called for comments to allow exam boards and interested parties a chance to 
argue their case.

Glenys Stacey, Ofqual's chief regulator, said: "We think it important that 
subject content is reviewed and updated as qualifications change.

"At the same time, there are subjects which we think would not meet the 
principles we have put forward, and which we propose should be discontinued. We 
also identify subjects where a decision is yet to be taken and it is for exam 
boards to choose whether they wish to redevelop them."
 