
The food has been in the fridge for two and a half years. I'm back in my 
Glasgow flat. I'm not home often. Everything is as it was when I left for 
Sweden, in the summer of 2003, to record our first album. A packet of vine 
leaves, a jar of chilli paste, something that looks like dripping and a carton 
of orange. All still there. Tonight I'm eating out. Again.

I rattle west of Dennistoun in a cab along the motorway, a mile of dirty 
concrete cast across the city like a slice of gristle through the Glaswegian 
heart. We pull up in the dead-end of Argyll Street, Finnieston. Brutalist 
blocks of flats loom from the gentle rain. The scaffolding-clad Kingston Bridge 
dominates the skyline. Sodium half-light ripples off puddles. I'm eating at the 
oldest, noblest restaurant in town.

The Buttery was built in the mid-19th century. Originally a wine merchant's 
cellar, it expanded over the next 100 years and gained a reputation for its 
food. In the 1960s town planners tore up Glasgow. Finnieston's tenements were 
razed. The only building left standing was the Buttery, apparently because the 
architects ripping up the city didn't want to lose their favourite haunt. A 
Masonic plaque outside may be another clue to its survival.

I'm eating with a friend who updates me with six months of gossip and whispers 
that she feels awkward, being a socialist, for eating somewhere like this. 
She's distracted by a bottle of heavy red and we lean back into the padding of 
our chairs. The warmth of a good library envelopes us with the reassurance of 
ancient oak, leather and stained glass. Like the best of Scottish menus, The 
Buttery's is an entente cordiale of French and Caledonian cuisine: Loin of 
Ayrshire Lamb and Provençale Vegetables. Smoked Confit of French Hen With 
Spiced Haggis, the chieftain of the pudding race, maligned in undeserved 
disgrace. I love this bag of sheep bits and oatmeal. In an age of gourmet 
sausages and head-to-tail eating, it is worthy of a higher place in the 
culinary canon. The aromatic richness is balanced by one of the greatest 
textures to greet the teeth, a gentle bite between your porcelain. Poached 
pairs and whisky ice cream conclude one of the best meals I've had in around 
60,000 miles of travelling.

As we step back out into the street, there is a sense of Brigadoon in the 
drizzle. It seems improbable that this place could still be there in the 
daylight of tomorrow. I'm just glad that Masonic architects spared it, saving 
me from the forlornness of my fridge.

· The writer is the lead singer of Franz Ferdinand. This column appears weekly 
as the band travel the globe.
 