
A furious international dispute has erupted over the publication of a paper 
that claims the hobbit man of Flores was a modern human who had Down's 
syndrome. Published in theProceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
<http://www.pnas.org/> (PNAS) this month, the research has been denounced by 
scientists around the world. The tinyHomo floresiensis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2010/feb/21/hobbit-rewriting-history-human-race>
, discovered on Flores, an island in Indonesia, is definitely a member of a 
distinct ancient species of hominins, they insist.

The dispute has its roots in an expedition by Australian and Indonesian 
researchers in 2003. The scientists were working in a limestone cavern called 
Liang Bua, on Flores, when one uncovered a small skull and lower jaw. Although 
tiny, the skull had adult teeth. "This was no child, but a tiny adult – one of 
the smallest adult hominins ever found," the expedition leader, the lateMike 
Morwood <https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/aug/13/mike-morwood>, of 
Australia's University of Wollongong, announced.

Other remains were dug up and identified as those of a hominid species they 
calledHomo floresiensis. But one small group of scientists has persistently 
disputed this claim, arguing that the bones really belong to a modern human 
with anatomical abnormalities. It is their most recent claim, that the Flores 
hobbit had Down's syndrome, that has enraged fossil experts who insist the tiny 
bones are those of distinct lineage. "It is interesting their paper contains no 
images of skeletons ofDown's syndrome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/downs-syndrome> individuals," said 
floresiensis expert Professor Dean Falk, of Florida State University. "If it 
had, you would see clearly that they look nothing like the Flores specimen. The 
idea is nonsense."
 A model of the tiny skull discovered on a remote Indonesian island. 
Photograph: Stephen Hird/Reuters 
Scientists have also attacked the editors of PNAS – the journal of the US 
National Academy of Sciences – for permitting the authors of the Down's 
syndrome paper to avoid independent peer review because one is an academy 
member and so is allowed to select his own referees when submitting the paper.

"The article is a contributed submission from an academy member, Kenneth Hsu, 
an 89-year-old hydrologist who has absolutely no expertise in the subject and 
who selected referees that were also without expertise in fossil hominin 
skeletons," said one of the key scientists involved in the discovery ofHomo 
floresiensis, Professor Peter Brown, of the University of New England in 
Australia. "This is an outrageous abuse of the peer review process."

It is still not known how these early hominins got to Flores or how they 
evolved their small stature. Yet most scientists accept their authenticity – 
with the exception of the late Indonesian palaeoanthropologist Teuku Jacob, who 
claimed the remains were those of a modern human with an abnormal skull. At one 
point Jacob and his followers took, without permission, the hobbit bones dug up 
by Morwood's team. They were eventually returned, though some had been badly 
damaged.

The measurements taken by Jacob's team have since been used by researchers 
Maciej Henneberg, of Adelaide University, Robert Eckhardt, of Pennsylvania 
State University, and Hsu, of China's National Institutes of Earth Sciences, as 
the bases of articles that claim the hobbit is really a deformed modern human. 
"First they claimed the hobbit was really a modern person with microcephaly – 
an abnormally small head," said Falk. "We showed that this could not be true. 
Then they claimed he had Laron syndrome, a form of dwarfism. Again my team 
showed this was not true. Now they are taking a shot with Down's syndrome. 
Again they are wrong."

This last point was backed by Professor William Jungers of the State 
University of New York. "They sayHomo floresiensis is similar to a modern 
person with Down's syndrome, but no one with that condition has a tiny cranium 
only 400cc in capacity as floresiensis does, nor do they have thick cranial 
bones as it does. This is shockingly bad science riddled with errors of fact 
and attribution."

Crucially, each of the three papers authored by Henneberg and his associates 
since 2006 was contributed to PNAS by Hsu. "Hsu is a distinguished geologist 
and polymath, but he is not an expert on human evolution and anatomy," said 
Professor Chris Stringer, of the Natural History Museum, London. "Indeed, he is 
on record fiercely attacking Charles Darwin and conventional evolutionary 
ideas. Yet he has now co-authored and seen through three papers critiquingHomo 
floresiensis in PNAS." Jungers agreed. "This is just cronyism," he added.

But Hsu's role was defended by the papers' lead author, Maciej Henneberg. 
"Kenneth's contributions to all three papers are essential from the perspective 
of an excellent and accomplished geologist, who studied in detail changes in 
sea levels during the Pleistocene that affected Flores," he told theObserver.

Additional reporting by Meredith Thomas
 