
01 TV
Trollope's he knew he was right
 The latest costume romp from the BBC and Andrew Davies has everything fans of 
classic serials could wish for: frothy frocks, men in high collars, carriages 
crunching on gravel, lots of old stone and stucco, bad-tempered elderly aunts, 
a great yarn (courtesy of Anthony Trollope) and Bill Nighy camping it up as a 
cad. Who cares if the characters occasionally look a bit like representatives 
of a moral argument when they smoulder as soulfully as Laura Fraser, who plays 
the heroine, and say things to each other like: 'You confounded fool!'?GB
· Showing on BBC1, 18 April. 


02 Performance
The Black Rider
 It's nearly 10 years since Tom Waits met up with William S. Burroughs, at 
Burroughs's ranch in Kansas, to write The Black Rider. Their uniquely dark 
musical experiment was staged in Germany by Robert Wilson and has never been 
performed in English. Loosely based on Weber's opera Der Freischutz, it is the 
tale of a man who makes a pact with the devil in order to win the heart of his 
beloved in a shooting competition. Marianne Faithfull will sing the part of the 
demonic Pegleg in Wilson's production, in what promises to be an unmissably 
macabre night out.TA 
· Performing at the Barbican, London 17 May-19 June. For tickets call 020 7638 
8891.

03 Theatre
The return of Sam Mendes
 Scamp, a new film and theatre production company, has been set up by Sam 
Mendes, with co-directors Caro Newling and Pippa Harris. Twelve projects are 
already being developed in London and New York, some in association with 
subsidised theatres. They feature musicals and adaptations of classic films as 
well as new work. The first to take to the stage is David Lindsay-Abaire's 
Fuddy Meers, an off-Broadway hit in 1999, which traces a hectic day in the life 
of an amnesiac. Angus Jackson, who did a sharp job with Elmina's Kitchen, 
directs. The cast includes Julia McKenzie and Nicholas Le Prevost.SC
· Runs at the Birmingham Rep 16 April-8 May, for tickets call 0121 236 4455; 
The Arts Theatre, London, 12 May-28 August, for tickets call 020 7836 3334.

04 Pop
Madonna
 Madonna in Earl's Court and Wembley? Not really that big a deal, now that she 
lives in London and probably drives through them regularly on her way to her 
stately pile, scattering coins for West London paupers from her platinum-plated 
people-mover. Madonna appearing at Earl's Court and Wembley is another matter, 
though. Whatever the state of her most recent album, Madonna's tours are 
legendarily excellent. They're not always good value, though. The cheap seats 
for her Re-Invention tour cost £50, rising to £150. Wembley is £75. So far all 
nights are sold out, but more UK arenas might join the caravan, so check 
listings.KE
· Tour begins 18, 19 August at London's Earls Court; 22, 23, 25, 26 August at 
Wembley Arena. For details,www.madonna.com <http://www.madonna.com>


05 Books
Birds Without Wings, by Louis de Bernieres
 It has been 10 years since we were serenaded by Captain Corelli's Mandolin, 
the idiosyncratic novel by Louis de Bernieres that sold 1.5 million copies, was 
made into a Hollywood movie, won a Commonwealth Writers prize and put its 
author onto Granta's 1993 list of Britain's best young novelists. In July, de 
Bernieres' new novel, Birds Without Wings (is the title a warning?) is to be 
published and - whatever it is like - will be a major literary event. De 
Bernieres has become famous for likening the pressure of trying to write a 
second best-seller to standing in Trafalgar Square and being told to get an 
erection. The publishers will say only that the novel is set 'against the 
background of the collapsing Ottoman empire, the Gallipoli campaign and the 
subsequent bitter struggle between Greeks and Turks'. Oh yes - and it is 
'glorious', 'humane', and 'epic'.KK 
· Published by Secker & Warburg, 1 July. 

06 Opera
Faust
 Covent Gardeners are already begging or stealing tickets for the Royal 
Opera's new version of Gounod's Faust. Why did this particular show sell out as 
soon as the box office opened in February? The cast, even by Royal Opera 
standards, is spectacularly stellar. Husband-and-wife team Roberto Alagna and 
Angela Gheorghiu sing Faust and his doomed love, Marguerite, with Bryn Terfel 
making his debut as Mephistopheles and Simon Keenlyside, Sophie Koch and Della 
Jones along for the ride. Popular music director Antonio Pappano conducts David 
McVicar's new staging. Only six performances of the four-hour spectacular are 
scheduled, so expect people to camp outside overnight for the 67 seats held 
back for sale on the day at 10am.AH
· Performing 11 June-2 July, Covent Garden. For tickets call 020 7304 4000. 

 07 Dance
Bill T Jones on Tour
 Bill T Jones, master provocateur and entertainer, marks his company's 
twentieth anniversary with The Phantom Project, celebrating the range of his 
work. African-American Jones launched his career with his late lover and 
collaborator Arnie Zane, whose name is remembered in the company's title. Some 
of the pair's early duets, experimenting with ways of partnering and 
communicating with the audience, are restaged, along with solos and group 
pieces spanning the decades. Although Jones has often taken part in our annual 
Dance Umbrellas, this will be the 11-strong company's first UK tour. It's a 
chance to catch up with Jones's concerns, including his controversial 
Still/Here, questioning survivors about life in the face of death.JP 
· Bill T Jones/Arnie Zane Dance Company tours from 7-30 June to High Wycombe, 
Sheffield, Glasgow, Inverness, Newcastle; Sadler's Wells, London, 15-19 June.

This Was Tomorrow: Art and the 60s
 Swinging, hip, subversive, radical, free, far-out, psychedelic - the art that 
went with the era, from hippy happenings to Pop and Concept and the cool 
precision of Op. Accompanied by Sixties seasons on BBC2 and BBC4, as told by 
the artists, dealers and collectors, this should be the definitive portrait of 
a decade. Includes works by Hockney, Riley, Caulfield, Hamilton, Gilbert and 
George Peter Blake et al, but also by those who deliberately avoided the 
limelight, such as John Latham and Gustav Metzger whose wild performances are 
preserved on film.LC
· At Tate Britain, 30 June to 3 October. For tickets call 020 7887 8888. 

 09 Theatre
Henry IV: Stoppard Translates Pirandello
 One playwright in search of another. One of the most intriguing 
collaborations of the next few months is that between Luigi Pirandello and Tom 
Stoppard - both teasing philosophers; both theatrical explorers of fractured 
identities and disappearing narratives. Stoppard has written a new version of 
Pirandello's bizarre 1922 tragedy Henry IV, in which an Italian aristocrat 
takes a tumble from his steed and wakes up believing he's a medieval German 
emperor. Ian 'Star Wars and ex-Almeida director' McDiarmid makes his debut at 
the Donmar in the title role; the cast includes Francesca Annis and David 
Yelland. Michael Grandage directs.SC
· Performing at the Donmar, London 29 April-26 June. For tickets call 0870 060 
6624.


10 Books
The Coma, by Alex Garland
 In February 2003, Alex Garland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alex-garland> revealed: 'I am not working 
at the moment. If I am going to write another novel then I need a good idea and 
I just have not got one. I am stuck. I'm playing on my X-box an awful lot.' Now 
five years on from his second book, The Tesseract, which followed the explosive 
success of 1996's The Beach, the hip author has finally broken through his 
block (only interrupted by the screenplay for 28 Days Later ). His third novel, 
The Coma explores the mind of Carl, a man who spends days unconscious in 
hospital after being beaten up by a gang while trying to protect a young woman. 
He recovers and starts to piece his normal life back together, but begins to 
notice distortions in his perception of time and his awareness, forcing him to 
consider whether he really is interacting with the outside world. The story is 
illustrated with woodcuts created by the writer's father, the cartoonist 
Nicholas Garland.GB
· Published by Faber on 1 July, £10.99. 


11 Theatre
The History Boys, by Alan Bennett
 Thirty-six years after Forty Years On, Alan Bennett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/alanbennett> has gone back to the schoolroom 
- and to the study of history - for the subject of his new play, his first 
since The Lady in the Van. Sex and sport in the sixth form are overseen by 
Frances de la Tour, the only woman teacher in an all-boys' school, and Richard 
Griffiths, who plays an independent-minded English teacher: 'The school gives 
them an education. I give them the wherewithal to resist it.' The History Boys 
is directed by Nicholas Hytner, whose previous Bennett hits include The Wind in 
the Willows and The Madness of George III.
· Performing at the Lyttelton, National Theatre, London 8 May-26 June. For 
tickets call 020 7452 3000.


12 TV
Omagh
 Paul Greengrass follows up his award-winning Bloody Sunday with another 
dramatised account of the Troubles - the events of 15 August, 1998, when 29 
people were killed by a Real IRA car bomb in Omagh. The script - by Greengrass 
and Guy Hibbert - has been put together by working intimately with the families 
of those who were killed. The detail is painstakingly accurate and the emotions 
evoked all the more fierce because of it. It centres on the battle of Michael 
Gallagher (Gerald McSorley) to bring to justice the bombers who killed his 
21-year-old son Aidan. The fact that this legal battle is on-going gives 
Greengrass's film a polemical edge.PS
· Shown on Channel 4 in May. 


13 Rock
Gwen Stefani 
 She said she'd never do it. But No Doubt's Gwen Stefani is due to release her 
first proper solo material late this summer. What's more, the former ska-punk 
pin-up-turned-pop star has gone urban, having enlisted R&B producer Dallas 
Austin - who's worked with TLC, Pink, and Janet Jackson - to work on a number 
of tracks. Other names include Outkast's Andre 3000 and there's a whisper that 
Missy Elliott's keen too. It's still early days, but a single is expected in 
late summer. In the meantime, she'll also be making her acting debut playing 
Jean Harlow in Martin Scorsese's The Aviator, the forthcoming Howard Hughes 
biopic.KE


14 Art
Edward Hopper at Tate Modern
 Lonely souls, silent boulevards, the solitary salesman in the drug store at 
four in the morning, raking sunlight, brooding shadows, the out-of-town hopeful 
darning her stockings in the dingy bedsit, hotel rooms on sluggish afternoons, 
heat sizzling on the sidewalk, black misery confined indoors at people and 
places and the human condition itself: this is the genius of Edward Hopper.

There hasn't been a Hopper show in Britain for almost a generation and this 
one promises to be superb. Beginning with the early pensive figures, continuing 
with the Paris paintings, made on trips from 1906 to 1910, and including dozens 
of paintings between then and his death in 1967, during which he lived in the 
same apartment in Greenwich Village, it covers the whole of his six-decade 
career.

Expect all the great works - from Williamsburg Bridge to Early Sunday Morning 
and the immemorial Nighthawks , with its four travellers lost in the 
fluorescent glow of the midnight diner - plus very late paintings like 
Intermissions , which show how much his work changed, becoming increasingly 
minimal with no loss of effect. And given the significance of film to Hopper, 
and his influence on the look of American cinema, the museum is also showing a 
season of related films, selected by Todd Haynes. Book early, or go late in the 
evening during one of the specially extended viewings.LC 
· Tate Modern, 27 May to 5 September 

15 Film
I Heart Huckabee's
 1999 was a great year for young American indie directors with films such as 
Being John Malkovich, Boys Don't Cry, Magnolia and Election. Perhaps the most 
interesting film was David O. Russell's wild Gulf War satire, Three Kings. Five 
years later, O. Russell has made a follow-up. In I Heart Huckabee's, Jude Law 
plays a corporate executive who hires a pair of existential detectives to delve 
into his life and relationship with Naomi Watts. Dustin Hoffman also stars in 
what should be one of year's most ambitious and genre-defying films.AO


16 Biography
Stephen Spender, by John Sutherland
 Seven years after Stephen Spender's death, Professor John Sutherland has 
completed the first authorised life of a fascinating and often enigmatic 
literary figure. Spender was a poet whose best years were always behind him, 
doomed to spend much of his life in the shadow of his youthful achievement and, 
almost as painfully, his great contemporaries from the Thirties: W.H. Auden and 
Christopher Isherwood. This will be one of the most important and eagerly 
awaited biographies of 2004.RMC
· Published by Viking on 6 May.


17 Rock
The Pixies Reunion
 Few bands of recent years have been more influential (or as sorely missed). 
To a certain generation who passed through higher education in the late 
Eighties and early Nineties, this summer's Pixies reunion is a bit like the 
Beatles getting back together; even better, none of them have yet sullied the 
memory of their band's snaggle-toothed pop with a Frog Chorus. They don't 
appear to actively loathe one other, and they haven't played the crowd-pleasers 
since 1992, so we won't be too sick of them. Their tour hits the UK in June, 
and then again for July's T In The Park and August's V Festival. The Pixies' 
three London dates have long since sold out, but you could conceivably nip over 
to Dublin, Paris or Barcelona - they know all the words to Debaser there too.KE
· For festival details, www.tinthepark.com, <http://www.tinthepark.com> 
www.vfestival.com <http://www.vfestival.com>


18 Opera
Glyndebourne
 Former RSC boss Adrian Noble directs a new staging of Mozart's The Magic 
Flute to mark the opening of this year's Glyndebourne season. With the 
Orchestra of the Age of Enlightenment conducted by the company's suave young 
Russian music director, Vladimir Jurowski, the cast includes two exciting 
home-grown talents, Lisa Milne and Jonathan Lemalu, as Pamina and Papageno. 
Jurowski also conducts this year's other new Glyndebourne production, an 
intriguing double bill staged by Theatre de Complicite's Annabel Arden: 
Puccini's Gianni Schicchi and a rare Rachmaninov gem, The Miserly Knight. 
Strong casts include Russian and Italian baritones Sergei Leiferkus and 
Alessandro Corbelli, with the home-grown tenor and soprano Richard 
Berkeley-Steele and Sally Matthews.AH
· Season runs 20 May-29 August. For tickets call 01273 813 813. 

19 Dance
Double Take: The Cholmondeley's and the Featherstonehaugh's 20th Anniversary 
Tour
 Lea Anderson reunites her two companies, The Cholmondeleys and The 
Featherstonehaughs (The Chums and Fans) for a Double Take tour of gems from the 
past. The twist is that The Chums, originally all-female, are now an all-male 
line-up, performing the girls' stuff; The Fans, originally male, are now women, 
dancing excerpts from the men's rep. It'll all make Anderson's quirky brand of 
sense on the night. Favourite riffs from the past return, performed to the 
(live) music of Steve Blake and his band, The Victims of Death. Funny, wry, 
all-too-human, Anderson's performers are an enduring delight.JP
· On tour from 5 May-7 July to Crawley, Poole, Exeter, High Wycombe, Frome; 
Queen Elizabeth Hall, London, 20, 21 May.


 20 Film
20th Century Remakes
 Tom Hanks is a criminal mastermind. Jude Law plays an unreconstructed 
lothario. Nicole Kidman tries to convince as a surrendered wife. Apart from 
striking casting choices, all three stars appear in high-profile remakes. The 
Coen brothers have transferred the action of The Ladykillers from London to the 
Deep South where Hanks and an ill-assorted bunch of crooks plan their heist in 
the house of his (now black and feisty) landlady. More problematic, perhaps, 
are updates of Alfie and The Stepford Wives, a couple of decade-defining films. 
And how do you remake a classic Cold War thriller in the twenty-first century? 
That's the challenge for director Jonathan Demme in The Manchurian Candidate, 
starring Denzel Washington and Meryl Streep.AO
· The Stepford Wives opens 18 June; The Ladykillers opens 25 June. 


21 Biography
Like a Fiery Elephant: The Story of B.S.Johnson, by Jonathan Coe
This will be no ordinary literary biography, but then its subject was no 
ordinary literary figure. In between writing football match reports for The 
Observer in the late Sixties, and before he took his own life in November 1973, 
B.S.Johnson could claim to represent Britain's one-man literary avant garde. 
His six novels pushed the boundaries of the form, most notoriously in The 
Unfortunates, the 27 chapters of which were published unbound in a box, to be 
shuffled by the reader. The ever-inspired Jonathan Coe approaches the life of 
his subject in a sympathetically obsessive manner, collating brilliant 
fragments to build a portrait of a singular, desperately creative life.TA
· Published by Picador on 4 June.


22 Film
Eccentric Documentaries
 With Touching the Void and The Fog of War packing out the multiplexes, this 
summer's crop of documentaries promises to be just as diverse. Check out The 
Story of the Weeping Camel. Directed by two Munich Film School students, it 
follows the life of a nomadic family in the Mongolian desert as they enter the 
twenty-first century - and was the surprise hit of the Toronto Film Festival. 
According to Screen International, 'It has all the adult qualities to melt the 
hardest heart, and become a cult item for adult and student audiences alike.' 
Then there's The Last Victory, an Italian documentary about the passionate 
struggle of a small community in Siena to win the town's annual event: Il 
Palio, a horse race around the town's main square. José Padilha's Bus 174 
investigates a real-life bus hijacking that took place on 12 June 2000 in Rio 
de Janeiro (St Valentine's day in Brazil) and was broadcast live for 
four-and-a-half hours, recording the country's highest television ratings of 
the year). The film intercuts police footage with the life story of the 
hijacker, revealing how social neglect can drive a typical street kid to become 
a violent criminal. Meanwhile, the highest-grossing Spanish documentary of all 
time - Julio Medem's Basque Ball, a remarkable documentary on the Basques, 
their conflicts, and history - will be screened as part of the National Film 
Theatre's Basque Season in May. Medem (best known for feature films Sex and 
Lucia and Lovers of the Arctic Circle ) is adamant that Basque Ball is 
politically independent, saying: 'The film declares its solidarity with those 
who suffer violence related to the Basque conflict.'LH
· Bus 174 is out on 30 April; Basque Ball, 7 May; The Story of the Weeping 
Camel, 9 July; The Last Victory, 18 June.


23 Books
Bergdorf Blondes
 You wouldn't have needed a Harvard MBA to realise that a gap was opening in 
the market for sassy tales of glamorous New York women looking for a potential 
husband, but Vogue writer Plum Sykes has managed to get in there first. Her 
first novel, Bergdorf Blondes, covers prime Sex and the City territory, 
following the fortunes of two single professional women pursuing romantic 
adventures through Manhattan high society. New York gossip columns have been 
a-buzz with speculation as to how far it is a roman à clef , though Sykes's 
ex-fiancé is said to be deeply displeased by the portrayal of her main 
character's ex. De rigueur reading for the summer.SM
· Published by Viking in April.


24 Theatre
Caryl Churchill season at the Sheffield theatres
 The author of Top Girls and Serious Money, and one of the most inventive of 
contemporary playwrights, is celebrated in a mini-season at Sheffield this 
summer. Three plays, spanning nearly 20 years, will give some sense of the 
variety of this prolific dramatist's work. Cloud Nine, the play that gained 
Churchill international recognition when it was first staged in 1979, will be 
directed by Anna Mackmin, and star Daniel Evans. Fen, her dark 1983 portrait of 
rural life, and Far Away, her apocalyptic vision of 2000, will be performed 
together.SC
· Far Away and Fen open 26 May; Cloud Nine opens 3 June. For tickets call 0114 
249 6000.


25 Jazz
Three Tenor Saxophonists
 Jazz lovers will soon have the chance to compare three of the greatest living 
exponents of the tenor saxophone. Sonny Rollins, grand master of the 
instrument, arrives at the end of the month for a concert at the Barbican. 
Renowned for the energy and epic scale of his improvisations, Rollins is still 
an overwhelming live performer at the age of 73, and defines his own stylistic 
terms. At the same venue, Michael Brecker and Joe Lovano, today's two most 
influential players, share the bill. Brecker - polished, assured, technically 
superb - is perhaps the most imitated saxophonist alive. Lovano, equally 
accomplished, is more soulful, his playing veering from lyrical to edgy in the 
course of a single set.DG
· Sonny Rollins is on 30 April; Michael Brecker and Joe Lovano, 3 July at the 
Barbican, London. For tickets call 020 7638 8891.


Contributors: Tim Adams, Geraldine Bedell, Gemma Bowes, Susannah Clapp, Rachel 
Cooke, Laura Cumming, Dave Gelly, Martha Housden, Kitty Empire, Liz Hoggard, 
Anthony Holden, Kate Kellaway, Stephanie Merritt, Robert McCrum, Ellie 
O'Mahoney, Akin Ojumu, Jann Parry, Peter Stanford, Deyan Sudjic, Molloy 
Woodcraft
 