
There was a greyness of emblematic significance to the prose as Edith Hope, 
writer of romantic fiction under a more thrusting name, began her afternoon 
walk of excruciating dullness around the lake. Am I not to be allowed my lapse, 
she thought. And why should I be? I am a serious woman; many people have 
commented on my resemblance toAnita Brookner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/anita-brookner>, and though I have bored 
others, I was not to be allowed to bore myself.

Exhausted, both by the exertion of her passivity and by the habitual use of 
extended parentheses, she returned to the hotel and began writing a letter.

My dearest David, After I did that dreadful thing which I won't mention now 
because I want to maintain some kind of interest, Penelope told me I had to 
leave the country for a month to let things calm down, so I have come to the 
Hotel du Lac in Switzerland, a location every bit as dull as me.

Edith dressed for dinner in her dowdiest Liberty print dress. It was nearly 
the end of the season and the restaurant was empty, apart from a sad-looking 
woman with an eating disorder and a dog that made a puddle on the floor, and an 
equally sad looking pair who appeared to be mother and daughter. "Please join 
us," said the older woman, introducing herself as Iris Pusey. "You seem to be 
as sad and dull as us. Meet my daughter Jennifer."

As was her custom, Edith was content to remain silent while Mrs Pusey droned 
on about how rich she was, how good her husband had been to her before his 
early death and how she loved shopping, thinking only of how old Mrs Pusey 
might be. She must be in her 50s, she decided, which would make Jennifer in her 
late 20s.

Fatigued once more by the strain of having devoted so many pages to so little, 
Edith retired to her room, both to dwell on the unhappiness of her relationship 
with her mother and to commence another letter.

My dearest David, You never knew how I longed for your visits, but then how 
could you when I was replete with the repression of the lonely spinster? I 
would only present my cheerful self to you as it seemed unfair to burden you 
with my sadness when you could only escape the treadmill of the auction house 
and your wife once a month. Oh David, David.

"You quite remind me of someone," Mrs Pusey said two days later after another 
action-packed chapter.

"Virginia Woolf?" Edith offered hopefully.

"Anita Brookner. Now I do declare that Mr Neville over there, who has just 
arrived, has quite taken a shine to you. He's trade, of course, but beggars 
can't be choosers."

Edith considered replying, but thought better of it, concentrating instead on 
the lines in Mrs Pusey's face that showed up in the pale autumn twilight. 
Perhaps Mrs Pusey was in her 60s and the pallid Jennifer in her 30s after all! 
The excitement of such a thought brought an onset of the vapours and Edith 
excused herself to write yet another letter that would allow her to fill in 
still more of the back story.

My dearest David, None of my friends ever suspected our affair and Penelope 
became insistent on me dating an acquaintance of hers called Geoffrey. He was a 
man, unhealthily close to his mother, given to even greater flights of dullness 
than myself, and yet it seemed impolite to turn down his offer of marriage. Yet 
when the day came, I could not go through with it and all my friends were jolly 
cross. And that's my big sin. I warned you it wasn't very interesting.

"You quite remind me of someone," Mr Neville said, escorting Edith on her 
15-minute perambulation by the lake.

"Virginia Woolf?" Edith asked hopefully, for she was nothing if not consistent.

"Anita Brookner," he smiled stiffly. "Now look here old gal. I'm as absurd and 
unconvincing as every other man in this book, so what say we get married even 
though we don't know each other? I was miffed when my wife left me, but you 
seem so boring and so detached my centrality will not be affected."

Edith was not alone in her bewilderment at the use of the word centrality, but 
it would have been déclassée not to reply to such an invitation, so she 
contented herself with a question of her own. "Will we be able to arrange the 
antimacassars together?"

The hotel was pulsing with activity on their return as Mrs Pusey awoke from 
her afternoon rest to declare it was her birthday. "I'm 179 today," she croaked 
as a cobwebbed retainer brought in a slice of Victoria sponge cake.

Then Jennifer must be 139, Edith thought. The same age as me. Now she 
understood why everyone appeared to observe the shocked, petit-bourgeois 
morality of the Victorians when it was actually the 1980s. Her eyelids heavy 
with a tiredness brought on by the pace of the action, she lay down on the 
chaise-longue to write a letter she would actually send.

Dear David, I'm going to marry Mr Neville. I don't love him but it would be 
impertinent to refuse.

Edith awoke refreshed and, donning her peignoir, let herself out into the 
corridor where she espied Mr Neville quietly letting himself out of Jennifer's 
bedroom. A burst of unrepressed feminism coursed through her frozen veins. She 
would not marry Mr Neville after all. Why settle for being a doormat for 
someone she didn't love when she could be one for a man she did? She plucked up 
her quill.

Dearest David, I am returning

• John Crace's Digested Reads appear in G2 on Tuesdays.
 