
There are weekend bargains to be had at popular holiday cottages in winter, 
but with Easter being early this year schoolchildren will be off and prices up 
before we know it. So I'm slipping off to Dartmoor and two-bedroomed Gibhouse, 
which costs in excess of £1,000 for one week in summer but can be yours for 
rather less now.

"This place would be good for families too," says Clare, unlocking the door, 
switching on lights, opening doors and racing up stairs. "Look, the kids can 
have the twin room downstairs while parents get some peace in theirs upstairs," 
she says. We do indeed have a ground floor twin room (with its own shower), but 
also a sitting-cum-dining room with fireplace, and well laid out kitchen. Up a 
winding staircase with smart wooden treads is another sitting room, warm, 
spacious bathroom with decorative tiles and a sweet double bedroom.

While Clare fiddles with the fire (already laid for us) I put the kettle on. 
"I like that collection of apothecary bottles," she says. "No stinting on nice 
things in case they get nicked."

The owners (who live nearby and also happen to own the entire cottage company) 
drop in to check we're OK, kindly offer us the loan of their labrador for walks 
and have a go at the fire which is unaccountably smoky. Alas, we are all doomed 
to failure in this respect and when I start humming Smoke Gets in Your Eyes, 
Clare says it's time to put the thing out. It's a shame but the house is warm 
enough without it (except the shower room, which I rename Siberia). "There's a 
heater on the wall," comes Clare's retort.

We relax in front of my laptop (the telly and video are delightfully lo-fi) 
and watch a DVD - it's a forthcoming BBC programme about Dartmoor through the 
seasons and for once I've got a press preview copy. It is so mesmeric we can't 
wait for tomorrow's walk.

Bea does a dawn sprint down the M5 to join us. I tell her my showering was 
high-speed too. In future I'm packing flip-flops to combat cold floor tiles.

We fill bottles with spring water from the kitchen tap then point the car down 
lanes resembling burrows to the meeting spot for a guided walk. We climb Hound 
Tor in cold rain and survey the ruins of a medieval village, the longhouses 
still clearly identifiable and, while sun struggles through cloud, cross a 
granite bridge into a mysterious boulder field blanketed in lichen. A steep 
lane brings us back to the car park where a snack van called Hound of the 
Basket Meals is doing a good trade in mugs of hot chocolate.

As night draws in back at our cosy thatch, we close the curtains, eat Bea's 
homemade soup in companionable lamplight to the sound of a hooting owl then 
retire beneath duvets and woollen throws.

Morning brings a light frost glittering beyond countless little windows on a 
perfect January scene of fields and naked trees. We borrow the dog and amble up 
to Castle Drogo, then pack in a mini-tour which turns into a pub crawl 
(surprise) before purring back up the drive in the late evening. "Wow - stop!" 
cries Bea. Three pairs of eyes hover above the ground in the darkness ahead, 
then, suddenly caught in the headlights, a trio of deer disappears.

· Helpful Holidays, 01647 433593, helpfulholidays.com 
<http://www.helpfulholidays.com/>. Gibhouse, near Drewsteignton, sleeps four. 
Three-night low-season weekend from £465. Walks from £10pp,
dartmoornaturetours.co.uk <http://dartmoornaturetours.co.uk/>. Highly 
recommended: pub lunch at Union Inn, Ford Street, Moretonhampstead, and Earth 
Pilgrim: A Year on Dartmoor, to be shown Friday January 18, 8pm, BBC2.

sally.shalam@theguardian.com <mailto:sally.shalam@theguardian.com>

This article was updated on 10 May 2012
 