
Friday night, and I am trying to book a room last minute. On The Old Inn's 
website I have typed "asap" in the space where it says "requested date".

Nine minutes later my phone rings - it's the owner of The Old Inn. That's 
impressive, I laugh, when Charlotte Hammick identifies herself, and, phew, yes 
she has a room tomorrow.

I whiz south on Saturday, turning off the A30 for Drewsteignton on Dartmoor. 
Lawks, this is narrow. Hope I don't meet a combine harvester. The lane climbs 
and twists and suddenly I'm hurtling through a narrow gap between stone 
buildings - phew, that was close - and into a tiny village square with a church 
and pub at one end, Post Office and The Old Inn the other. Yippee, here's a 
parking space.

The Old Inn doesn't look like just any old inn - it's obviously been an 
ancient hostelry but now sports a swanky new paint job outside, a fetching 
mantle of French grey, with a sign in elegant lettering hanging out front 
beneath which people are sitting at pub tables drinking tea and smoking 
roll-ups.

Someone steps outside clutching a coffee cup - it's Charlotte. She ushers me 
inside and offers tea - ooh, yes please. Would I like to see my room - yes 
please again. We leave the front room, once a bar and what she calls the "jug 
and bottle", with a log fire crackling in a substantial grate, a jumbo sofa, 
dear little window seats from which to watch village life, and one long table 
laid for breakfast.

Upstairs, my room is at the rear, a spacious, bright double, with a big old 
bath and separate loo.

Back down, Charlotte and I settle by the fire and chat. The scent of wood 
smoke is delicious - a sort of olfactory stress-reliever. She's only been open 
three months, she tells me, used to break horses and deliver them abroad, had a 
fish restaurant in Exeter, worked as a soft furnisher, now she's doing B&B and 
toying with set-dinner nights for guests and locals.

Time slips by, not surprisingly - she's hardly boring company - tea is 
replaced by a glass of wine, and neighbours are dropping in to see if 
Charlotte's coming to a 60th birthday bash over at the pub. They're quite a 
bunch - artists, photographers, and a chef who lives in a converted horse box. 
Someone knows Damien Hirst, and yesterday Jennifer Saunders (who lives nearby) 
screeched into the village in a sports car to pick up her daughter. "A very Ab 
Fab moment," says Charlotte.

The other B&B guests are out - all here for the party, apparently. Now I'm 
being swept along too, to an outbuilding behind the pub, where a seven-piece 
band is playing covers of everything from Primal Scream to the Stones. The 
dancefloor is hopping, only those with walking sticks are seated, around the 
edges. There was I thinking life on Dartmoor must be quiet.

At one point the band stops and what must be the entire village population 
starts to sing Happy Birthday. I find it strangely moving, but that could just 
be the Druid ale.

Next morning, I'm woken by birdsong and whiffs of bacon. The mattress is so 
comfy I imagine I'm sinking into thick sheepskin. Through sash windows I can 
see the moor's patchwork of green.

Sunlight and sweet air slide through the open front door when I join fellow 
B&B-ers at the breakfast table for fresh OJ, strawberries with sliced pear, 
local sausages and eggs, toast and homemade marmalade. I'm sure you could find 
total solitude here, but check when the next party is beforehand.

· 01647 281276, old-inn.co.uk <http://www.old-inn.co.uk>. Doubles/twin from 
£90. Dinner £37.50 for two courses, £42.50 for three. Taxi-able from Exeter 
station

sally.shalam@theguardian.com <mailto:sally.shalam@theguardian.com>

This article was updated on 10 May 2012
 