
A tiled entrance, possibly Victorian, colourful vestibule furnished with 
armchairs, and a glimpse of curving staircase. Inviting - that's what the 
website home page for this hotel is.

With only 15 bedrooms, I'm expecting a townhouse (since I can find no exterior 
shots), in this tiny history-packed Devon town within easy reach of the South 
Hams and Dartmoor. We encounter the hotel sign at the end of a driveway, 
however, and seconds later, a substantial country house with Georgian windows 
almost down to the ground. "Hmm, for some reason it makes me think of an old 
people's home," says my travelling mate, Daniela.

As we check in I flip open the visitors' book and am staggered to find a guest 
has compared St Elizabeth's with his previous night's stay in London, at the 
Mandarin Oriental Hyde Park. St Elizabeth's comes off better. "This blows it 
away" he has written.

Beyond reception lies an open-plan sitting room painted deep red with plenty 
of armchairs and sofas, and flanked by a long zinc-topped bar. If this is still 
Daniela's vision of a retirement home, she obviously has a better pension plan 
than me.

Taking us up to a double when I've requested a twin is not a five-star 
beginning (though a housekeeper swiftly splits the bed and remakes it as two). 
Cigarette butts on the crenellated stone balcony outside let the place down, 
and "dusting doesn't extend to the top of the telly", discovers my mate, giving 
it a quick swipe. Unlike the bold colours downstairs, the decor and furnishings 
are businesslike - but it's still one of the most generous doubles I've seen at 
the price. The bathroom surpasses all expectation with a giant rolltop sitting 
in front of three windows, and a glass-encased shower with a multitude of jet 
options.

We begin to notice the little things: free broadband, tempting room service 
menu and the friendly tone of the guest information. In the A to Z, letter J 
stands for: "Just in case you've forgotten anything, ask us . . ."

"Lovely light in here, and very relaxed," says Daniela later in the lounge and 
bar, but we collapse into a giggling fit at the extraordinary piped music - 
it's an orchestral arrangement of the theme tune from The Office.

No mickey-taking in the restaurant (the room with those fabulous windows). 
We're seriously impressed. "This is the cheapest house white and it's very 
decent," D remarks sipping a £3.95 glass of sauv blanc. A note on the menu 
about special diets is no empty claim. Everything my pal orders is altered to 
accommodate her allergies (with no advance warning). While I'm tucking in to 
pan-fried brill with roasted garlic gnocchi, which come as soft flavour-packed 
little batons, she's enthusing over Ugborough beef fillet with rosti potato, 
aubergine puree and mushroom salsa. "Best beef in ages," she declares, "and the 
cleverest meal adaptation ever." The weirdest sounding dessert - mango sorbet, 
passion fruit jelly and coconut rice pud - is a sublime plateful of flavours.

The freshly made beds are so comfy we sleep on and on, almost missing 
breakfast. Our waitress doesn't hurry us, and she's as cheery this morning as 
she was last night. It's finding the balance - when your midweek guests are 
business people and the rest are off-duty crew, like us - and we rather like 
the way this hotel has struck it.

· 01752 344840, stelizabeths.co.uk <http://www.stelizabeths.co.uk>. Double 
rooms from £139 per night B&B

sally.shalam@theguardian.com <http://www.sally.shalam@theguardian.com>

This article was updated on 10 May 2012
 