
Q I am 27 and for the last three years I have been saving (£20,000 so far) and 
I am hoping to continue saving for the next few years. I have recently asked 
for my credit report and things are not looking good. I had an outstanding debt 
of £370 which has now been paid off in full. This debt was from an old student 
credit card which I stupidly forgot. The debt was sold to debt collectors and 
when they got in touch I paid straight away. I have also noticed a county court 
judgment (CCJ) on my credit file for over £900. Obviously this is more serious 
and will be paying it off once I get in contact with the courts.

These debts mean that my credit rating has gone down dramatically, so my main 
question is how do I build up my credit rating? What is the best way to do 
this? I have two credit cards, both of which are paid in full each month, I 
also have a phone contract on which I missed two payments a few years ago, and 
two current accounts. One is a graduate account with an authorised 
interest-free overdraft of £1,400 and the other has no overdraft at all. I have 
been told to pay the minimum on one credit card each month and one in full each 
month. What is your advice? I am aiming to get a mortgage in three years' time. 
How long will it take to get my credit rating back up to 4/5 or 5/5? I am now 
in a well paid job (£2,000 a month after tax not including bonus) and my 
outgoings are below £1,000 a month. My job is secure and I have been with the 
same employers for three years.MH

A Paying off the debt of £370 should already have helped improve your credit 
history as will clearing the £900 CCJ. However, the CCJ will remain on your 
credit file until six years after the original court case. What you can do, 
though, is to ask the court for a Certificate of Satisfaction once you have 
cleared the debt. You'll need to present it before a credit reference agency 
will update your file to show that the CCJ has been "satisfied". This will tell 
lenders that you have cleared the debt. As far as your missed payments go, they 
will remain on your file for at least three years but you can ask for a Note of 
Correction to be added to explain any special circumstances that may have 
caused you to miss payments. You should make sure that you don't miss any more 
payments and that you don't pay late.

The advice you have been given about your credit cards is nonsense. Paying 
both credit cards off in full every month – as you currently do – is good 
because it shows that you are managing your borrowing and so should improve 
your credit score. Switching to paying off only the minimum on one of the cards 
could suggest you are getting into difficulty and so have a detrimental effect 
on your credit score. Instead of paying off the minimum, you could get rid of 
one credit card altogether. When calculating a credit score, lenders take into 
account what you could borrow rather than just what you owe, so closing down 
lines of credit that you don't use could help to improve your credit score. 
Finally, make sure you are registered to vote as lenders always check the 
electoral roll to make sure that you are who you say you are and live at the 
address you give on your credit application.
 