
I think that if you wish to pursue something you're passionate about as a 
career, it shouldn't feel too much like work; it should be your life; part of 
your identity. Your dedication and ambition to that field should be 
instinctive; I am very fortunate that I feel this way about cartooning.

My biggest fear was, and still is, leaving university and having no idea of 
what to do next. Since being at the University of Westminster, I've made it my 
mission to try and get my foot in the door wherever I can - even if that has 
meant getting a few stubbed toes along the way.

Alongside my studies my aim has been to try and build up a decent CV and get 
first hand experience outside of academic life and prepare for the 'real world' 
once that mortar board has hit the ground. Luckily things have been going well; 
I've managed to get my name out there and I am starting to get some regular 
work.

Here are some of the things I've learned along the way. 

Don't discount the 'it's not what you know it's who you know' line

This simple quote is often loosely thrown around, but it does not mean that 
the message is not important. The phrase demonstrates the importance of making 
contacts, which is essential no matter what industry you're looking to get into.

I don't think the term should be taken literally, but if you have confidence 
and drive in your area of expertise, people will recognise that and it could 
potentially lead to opportunities, or at least some advice. I've found that 
approaching people (either via email or in the flesh) has been the single most 
effective way to get my presence known. After all, you could be the greatest 
artist in the world, but if you keep all your masterpieces on post-it notes 
hidden within a Faberge egg, who cares?

Also don't take for granted good human nature, I know it can be rare but it 
does exist. My greatest opportunity arose scrolling through the pages of this 
very website looking at the cartoons. I noticed Martin Rowson's email address 
was under his mugshot and on a whim I decided to email him asking for advice. I 
expected to hear nothing, but I was pleasantly surprised to get a response that 
very day. To cut a long story short this then progressed into being mentored by 
the man himself along with Steve Bell and taking part in a cartoonist showcase 
for the Guardian. Experiences like that don't come along unless you sniff them 
out, and since the showcase I have been back at the Guardian a fair few times 
as a commissioned cartoonist.

An online presence is essential

I have discovered that within the creative industry it is essential to have an 
online presence; whether it's a blog or a website, it's integral that you're 
able to show someone what you're about at the click of a button. Once your 
online portfolio is up and running it's easier to spread the word (that you're 
brilliant), by scrolling through websites and finding the right people to 
contact and/or plugging your work on social networks like Twitter.

Entering competitions can lead to your big break

Competitions can provide great opportunities for aspiring creatives; I've 
entered loads. It's hard to keep motivated when in the back of your mind 
there's the nagging feeling that it could all be a complete waste of time. But 
if you have that thought, squash it. Even if nothing directly comes of it, 
presumably you've got another piece of work to your name and you've most 
probably learnt something about yourself and/or your work along the way, which 
shouldn't be taken for granted, no matter how minute.

The only thing that is certain is that you definitely won't win if you don't 
enter. I speak as someone who hadn't won much in the past, yet at the end of 
2011 I was one of the winners of the i newspaper's cartoon idol competition, 
which landed me a regular job for the paper, as well as Political Cartoon of 
the Year, to my astonishment, for a piece I had done for the Guardian.

 Ben Jennings is a final year student on the BA (Hons) Illustration degree at 
the University of Westminster. His cartoons have been published inthe Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/ben-jennings>, i newspaper and The 
Huffington Post 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2011/12/21/ben-jennings-beats-cartoon-professionals_n_1162457.html>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox, sign up for ourweekly Careers update 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 