
Asil Nadir <https://www.theguardian.com/business/asil-nadir>, inventor of the 
nadir, is ill in Belmarsh prison. The former millionaire fugitive is in the 
hospital wing with a heart condition following an unsuccessful attempt to clear 
his name. His name remains uncleared and requires more clearing than ever. I 
worry that it'll never get cleared. Some archeologists are sceptical that 
there's a name under there at all.

Perhaps because he's ill, Nadir seems to have postponed the whole 
name-clearing project and is focusing on being allowed to go to prison 
somewhere closer to home: home being Cyprus and closer being Turkey where his 
97-year-old mother is also ill. He wants to see her before she dies. Or he 
dies. Preferably both, I suppose. Which is definitely not the worst aspiration 
he's ever had.

In order to convince the authorities of the wholesomeness of his relocation 
plan, he's repaid £150,000 of the £1m that the British taxpayer forked out for 
his legal costs (although none of the £28.8m he was jailed for stealing) and 
agreed to renounce his British citizenship. This was to counter one of the 
objections to his going to Turkey: that the Turks might let him out early and 
then, as a UK citizen, he'd be free to come back here and hang out in the Ritz 
stinking the place out with his horrible uncleared name.

His situation is odd: he claimed to be penniless 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/sep/27/asil-nadir-court-broke-compensation>
 (which is why he was granted legal aid) but now he's suddenly got £150k. While 
on bail awaiting trial, he was living in a £20,000-a-month rented house in 
Mayfair. The last time he was on bail, in 1993, he fled Britain for northern 
Cyprus and lived in luxury there for 17 years. Were he to be let out of prison 
now, I don't doubt he'd claim housing benefit – he seems to be a believer in 
the welfare state – but, if his previous residences are anything to go by, he'd 
get absolutely stiffed on the bedroom tax.

This often seems to be the way with the former super-rich: they lose their 
money but somehow cling on to the lifestyle. They may not be able to pay the 
bills – but they're champagne, caviar and helicopter-servicing bills. They 
might be millions in debt, but a spare 10 grand always falls out the back of 
the sofa just as the bailiffs are taking it away.

This was true of Boris Berezovsky, who met his end 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/may/08/boris-berezovsky-buried> in an 
Ascot mansion, and Robert Maxwell,who fell off a luxury yacht 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fromthearchive/story/0,,1078193,00.html>. William 
Randolph Hearst's crumbling empire had been taken into more prudent hands long 
before his death, but I don't think anyone ever denied him lobster for lunch. 
Despite their catastrophic failures and failings, these guys are never found 
frozen to death in the tunnels under Marble Arch; they don't meet their hacking 
end on the public ward of an NHS hospital. People who die with nothing are, on 
paper, millions of pounds richer than the likes of Robert Maxwell were by the 
end. But, if you've played for high stakes, you get to remain in a high stakes 
world however much you've lost. The entitlement that comes with great wealth 
seems to outlast it.

But just because the straitening of their circumstances is barely noticeable 
to the wider community, it doesn't mean that these wounded beasts aren't 
bitterly aware of it themselves. Here are some of the day-to-day challenges 
faced by disgraced moguls whose wine cellars have fallen into the hands of 
administrators – and my advice for coping.

Loss of self-esteem

On a capitalist planet, the rich walk tall. "We make all this happen," they 
look around and think. Sudden loss of that status can give you a shrinking 
feeling – and make your supermodel girlfriend tower over you even more than 
usual as she explains that it's not you it's her and drives away in one of the 
bank's cars. A quick self-serving change of moral compass can help here. "What 
good has all this commerce ever done anyway? I would have done more harm if my 
business ventures had succeeded. My creditors' losses are a drop in the ocean 
of pain that is caused by successful corporations." That way you can begin, 
once more, to look down on people – starting with tycoons less incompetent than 
yourself.

Fear of murder

The speed with which the legal and financial systems bring the perpetrators of 
large-scale fraud to book may be unhurried compared with the swift vengeance 
visited upon faltering small businesses, but unofficial forces can be more 
direct. If you've played a dirty game, you'll have pissed off some dirty 
playmates, for whom there can be few more satisfying revenges than having you 
killed – it's the ultimate cure for esprit d'escalier. Worrying about whether 
an enemy has hired an assassin can spoil even the most comfortable of Learjet 
trips between failed states. Unless, that is, the foundering of your schemes 
has made you suicidal – in which case putting a bullet through your head is, 
like squeezing toothpaste on to your brush, just another thing that can be done 
for you by someone else.

Leaves in the swimming pool

As shell companies and offshore entities and weird secret trusts in the names 
of your children's pets start to implode one upon the other, it's difficult to 
keep track of who was nominally employed by what. Then one day you realise your 
pool guy stopped turning up two months ago and your Olympic-sized swimming 
arena is no longer resplendent in the colours of a football club you once 
bought but greened by algae, and clogged with the autumnal droppings of the 
surrounding parkland. As you stare at the mess be grateful you were never one 
to be troubled by metaphor and make a mental note not to go swimming with any 
open wounds. A cleansing dip after a half-hearted cry for help with a Bic is no 
longer an option: septicemia is not an end anyone would choose.

Other people's hatred

This is easier to handle than it sounds. Most aspirant billionaires don't mind 
putting a few noses out of joint – by which I mean they're sociopathically 
obsessed with rhinal violation – so, on the way down, the only real difficulty 
is coping with the change in the nature of the hatred: from envy to contempt, 
from an abhorrence tinged with grudging respect to one tempered by disdainful 
pity. If you can add self-pity to the mix then you could be on your way to 
feeling unfairly put-upon while you continue to sip cognac in a palace. That, 
like Asil's sojourn in northern Cyprus, can make for a pretty comfortable nadir.
 