
With results for A-levels and GCSEs now out, school leavers not planning to go 
to university will be weighing up their career options.

Apprenticeships <https://www.theguardian.com/education/apprenticeships> are 
becoming increasingly popular, especially given rising higher education costs. 
An apprentice scheme allows you to find your feet in a new sector with constant 
guidance and supervision, with the security of a job at the end.


Lisa Hewitt, qualifications development coordinator for the Council for Awards 
in Care, Health and Education (Cache), says now is an ideal time to pursue an 
apprenticeship in social care – an ageing population and less reliance on 
informal care is increasing the demand for staff in the sector. Hewitt 
estimates the number of paid adult social care jobs in 2025 couldincrease from 
1.52m to 2.34m 
<http://www.skillsforcare.org.uk/Document-library/NMDS-SC,-workforce-intelligence-and-innovation/NMDS-SC/State-of-2014-ENGLAND-WEB-FINAL.pdf>
.


“An apprenticeship is a great way in [to social care],” she says. “You learn 
through experience and are able to work alongside and learn from experienced 
practitioners. At the same time, you’re gaining a recognised qualification, 
developing your knowledge and skillset, and you’re getting paid while you 
learn. It can also lead to progression into a role in the sector once you’ve 
completed your apprenticeship.”


Cache identifies the following as being crucial for its apprenticeship 
applicants: communication and interpersonal skills, reflection, personal 
development, employability, responsiveness, flexibility, commitment, teamwork, 
reliability and integrity. There are no other entry requirements, but each 
centre may have its own guidelines for selection. Interviewers will be looking 
for candidates who understand the sector, role and specific employer, says 
Hewitt.


“As with any interview, candidates should be able to self-evaluate their 
skills, strengths and areas of improvement with examples, talk about their 
interests and achievements, and explain why they should be the chosen 
candidate.”


Mencap’s apprentice support worker scheme offers around 30 apprenticeships 
each year across the UK, from Northumberland to Cornwall. Louisa Baker, 
Mencap’s talent manager, explains: “We offer a fixed term contract for one year 
with the offer of a permanent job at the end. It’s a great way to gain the 
qualifications, skills and experience needed to become a support worker while 
earning money at the same time.”


The apprentice begins by attending a week-long induction training programme 
and after that works in a full-time position. During the scheme, the apprentice 
receives monthly visits from a qualified assessor to help them to complete a 
level two qualification in health and social care.


Baker says the main skills required to join the scheme are: “a desire and 
commitment to help people with a learning disability live the lives they 
choose”. She adds: “People with a learning disability are at the centre of 
everything we do. For aspiring support workers, our recruitment is based 
strongly around people’s values and helping us match apprentices to the 
personalities of the people we support.”


Andrea Revell is just completing her apprenticeship on the scheme. To get the 
role she says she did lots of research into the organisation to make sure it 
was the right employer for her. “It seemed to be an organisation that stops at 
nothing to give people equal opportunities and everything I read appeared to 
match with what I wanted from an employer,” she says. “The difference it makes 
in people’s lives is brilliant and I wanted to experience that.”

Leicester based charity Advance provides supported housing, shared ownership 
homes for people with disabilities and mental health conditions, and support 
services. It currently has four apprentices on its books, with another four in 
recruitment, as well as plans to expand these.


Why are so few young people taking up social care apprenticeships?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2015/jun/29/why-are-so-few-young-people-taking-up-social-care-apprenticeships>
Caroline Bing, Advance’s assistant HR director, says: “You know a good 
apprentice when you meet one. In the support field, we don’t necessarily need 
people with experience but we need people with the right values and behaviours.”


Advance has changed its recruitment processes recently to focus more on these 
values and behaviours. “We look for people who are enthusiastic, driven and, 
above all, respectful to others,” says Bing. “We also want people who are 
interested in a long-term career in social care or the charitable sector.”


Social care <https://www.theguardian.com/society/social-care> apprentices need 
to have good communication and self-leadership skills. They also need to be 
self aware and good at managing conflict. This might come from personal 
experience and not educational training, says Ben Kernighan, deputy chief 
executive at Leap Confronting Conflict, which works with young people 
struggling with conflict to get them recruitment-ready.


Many of its graduates go on to successfully complete social care 
apprenticeship schemes. “Their backgrounds and experience of overcoming 
difficulties mean they are well placed to support people facing challenging 
lives,” says Kernighan.


Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 