
The first two weeks are meant to be the hardest. The Atkins induction can be a 
rollercoaster of cravings, hunger and mood swings according to even the most 
die hard low-carb fans.

And it's perfectly understandable why. Suddenly denied of carbohydrates - a 
food you have probably eaten in copious amounts every single day since emerging 
into the world - your body is bound to feel confused. I was certainly expecting 
the induction, the phase where your carbohydrate intake is cut drastically from 
the usual 300g or so a day to just 20g, to be tough.

For me, the problem was mainly one of logistics. In my pre-diet life, I used 
to work on autopilot as far as food was concerned: occasionally, I'd have toast 
for breakfast; a sandwich or whatever odd combination of food was available 
downstairs in the canteen for lunch; and either go out for dinner in the 
evening or go home and have a selection of different toppings on bits of bread. 
At the weekends, it would be an omelette for lunch on saturday while I did my 
laundry and maybe I'd make something more substantial to eat (what my mother 
would call a proper meal) on a sunday evening.

I didn't really need to think about food simply because all my shopping trips 
were the same: down to the supermarket for a loaf of bread, a jar of peanut 
butter, some eggs, a block of cheddar and, when the health fairy made me feel 
guilty, a few red and green peppers. Needless to say, the peppers would often 
languish uncooked, ending up as a gloopy mess at the bottom of my fridge. But 
each time, I'd buy the same stuff (yes, more peppers) and each time I had to 
throw away the same stuff. It was an endlessly repeating cycle.

Don't get me wrong, I'm a big fan of food and I love cooking. But often after 
a day's work, the last thing I wanted to do is prepare and cook a three course 
meal before heading to bed.Bread 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/bread> and cheese was just the easy 
way out.

But there are no easy ways out with Atkins, no sticking a piece of cheese on a 
slice of toasted wholemeal and tucking in. Whatever you can eat takes some time 
to prepare and, of course, that also means you have to have the foods in your 
home in the first place.

Taking bread out of my life nearly three weeks ago was like standing in a room 
and suddenly having all the oxygen sucked out. My predictable food world 
crumbled into a heap by my feet and I was left having to think and plan for 
each meal, something that was quite alien to me.

Eating out, for example, took some adjustment. There were good and bad points: 
the dilemma of choosing from a vast menu (and over-ordering because, well, you 
just like everything there) was immediately removed. But often the only thing 
left was some poxy fish steak with chips. Japanese places were good, as were 
Turkish and Lebanese. But try eating Atkins-style at an Italian restaurant and 
you're stuffed.

The only other issue is that anything you do order usually has to be modified. 
After a few tries, I've become a natural at this Sally Allbright-esque 
manouveur. "I'll have the grilled kebab please but without the rice that comes 
with it - just give me extra salad instead. Does this gravy contain flour, by 
the way? Oh, and can you take the carrots out of the salad please and put the 
sauce on the side?". Easy.

At home, things were a bit more difficult and my first shopping trip to stock 
up for my new diet regime was a disaster. I employed the usual tactic of 
eschewing a shopping list and just heading up and down each aisle, picking up 
whatever took my fancy. I avoided the pasta, sweets and bread aisles and came 
away with some romaine lettuce in one hand and a box of button mushrooms and 
some rashers of bacon in the other.

If the first week was all about adjustment, the second was all about making my 
new eating regime interesting. Armed with my new ingredients, I began to think 
up easy ways to combine them so that I wouldn't have to spend too much time 
thinking of cracking new recipes every evening.

Nearly three weeks later, I'm a man I never thought I'd be. I'll admit it now 
to save embarrassments further down the line: I eat salads. Every day. Trust 
me, if you want to do this diet, there's no avoiding them.

My thinking is simple now: if I make the usual curry/bolognese/whatever's left 
in the fridge stew, instead of eating it with rice/pasta/bit of bread, I just 
cut up a lettuce and eat it with that. Admittedly, it's weird at first but you 
get used to it very quickly. The other day, for a change, I actually copped up 
a load of vegetables and roasted them. That's right, I roasted vegetables.

It was actually when I closed the oven door on the courgettes and peppers that 
the resounding irony of this diet hit me. Never in my life have I eaten as many 
vegetables as I have in the last few weeks. For a nutritional regime which, I 
thought, was all about meat, fat and cheese, it was a bit of an eye-opener.

The next thing I have to do is decide when to leave the induction phase behind 
and move onto ongoing weight loss (OWL) phase. There's no doubt that the diet's 
worked - my favourite jeans are fitting better already, the first time since 
the double blow-out of christmas and new year. I'm promised rewards of a bigger 
choice of foods and up to a doubling of the precious carbohydrate intake if I 
move to OWL. But maybe I'll give it another week or so. Let the jeans fit even 
better, perhaps.
 