
You may have been dreaming about university during every double-maths class 
for the past six years – or you might just have decided one day you fancy 
wearing a mortarboard. Either way, if you're embarking on A-levels and want to 
go on to higher education, now is the time to start the application process.

It might feel daunting. After all, there are, according to the university 
applications service Ucas, 37,000 courses at 300 institutions to choose from – 
and you have just a few months to whittle them down to five, the maximum number 
of courses for which you can apply. But relax; it's not as scary as it seems.

You'll be studying for at least three years, so one of the most important 
things is to ensure you pick a course that you will find interesting. "Sit down 
and think about what you enjoy," says Farah Mendlesohn, head of English at 
Anglia Ruskin University. "Ignore what your best grades are, or what your 
teachers say will get you a job: there is a direct correlation between passion 
for subject and success."

Chris Lucas, admissions tutor for linguistics at SOAS, University of London, 
agrees. "Don't be cowed into choosing the 'sensible' option. If you're not sure 
what you want to study, the sensible option might be a lot less sensible than 
you think. But if you go for a more unusual course, you will acquire a unique 
set of skills, making you stand out from the crowd when it comes to job 
interviews."

If, however, you have a dream career in mind, find out if you need a specific 
degree to achieve it. There are the obvious ones – such as medicine and 
veterinary studies – but you don't, for example, need an undergraduate law 
degree to be a lawyer; lots of legal firms actually prefer their staff to have 
a broader educational background.

Before you start picking through every degree in the country, make sure you 
are aware of the application deadlines. Once you have an idea of the kind of 
courses that you are interested in, look at what is being offered and where. 
You'll find these listed online, on sites such asunistats 
<http://unistats.direct.gov.uk/> and ucas.com 
<http://www.ucas.com/how-it-all-works/explore-your-options>.

It might seem overwhelming: unless you have a very specific interest, it's 
likely you'll find lots of similar-sounding courses around the country – so, 
how to pick?

Well, money might come into it. Universities charge different fees, up to 
£9,000 a year, so you'll want to compare the cost. But course content is 
crucial, too. "Look at the course outlines," advises Mendlesohn, "and look at 
the staff teaching on the course. What they are interested in can often help 
you to distinguish between degrees with the same name."

If you find the decision-making tough, don't worry: everyone does, according 
to Michael Porter, science admissions tutor at the University of Bradford.

"Deciding which course is right for you is one of the most difficult and 
important choices you will ever have to make," he says. "This can be a 
life-changing choice, so it is not a good idea simply to go with what your 
teacher, friends or family suggest. Look at how the course is taught and 
examined. Some methods might suit you better than others."

Don't be scared to ask questions of admissions tutors or potential lecturers, 
says Sean Cassidy, who runs science admissions at Liverpool John Moores 
University. "You lose nothing by asking us questions – it's what we are here 
for."

"Find out everything about all the universities you have chosen," says 
University of Buckingham admissions tutor Julian Lovelock. "Life is more than 
lectures. Find out about the university community and the social life. Be sure 
you know what the town or city is like – do you really want to live there? What 
sort of accommodation is available? What are the library facilities like? Find 
out about sport, music, drama and any other interests you might have."

Your five picks 

Be brave when it comes to making your five university choices. Don't 
underestimate how well you might do in your exams and don't let high entry 
requirements weaken your ambition.

Think tactically – as long as three of the choices are realistic, you can 
afford to be more ambitious with the other two. Believe in yourself and "punch 
above your weight" slightly on one choice, advises Rebekah Lomax, 19, a 
second-year history student at the University of Nottingham.

"I chose my five universities on my AS-levels, which hadn't gone particularly 
well. Then I got A*AA in my A-levels. Because of the AS results I went against 
what I believed I could achieve. Nottingham was my first choice because I 
thought I couldn't go anywhere that required higher grades, which turned out 
not to be true. But I am really happy at Nottingham, so it turned out all 
right," she says.

Aim high again when it comes to accepting a firm and insurance offer. If a 
university has made you an offer, it thinks you can make the grade. So there's 
nothing wrong with being ambitious with your first choice – as long as the 
second "insurance" choice requires lower grades, providing a fall-back 
position. Astonishingly, 42 per cent of applicants hold an insurance choice 
with grade offers that are higher than or equal to their first choice, says 
Ucas.

Putting the lower offer first wastes a choice because if you meet the firm 
offer, you are duty bound to go there, or re-apply through "adjustment" once 
the results are published in August.

Lack of confidence led Adam Johnson, 19, from Consett Co Durham to put 
Northumbria University as first choice for English last year because it offered 
BBB. He put the AAA offer from the University of Newcastle as his second, 
insurance choice.

"The school said go for it, put Newcastle top, but I was predicted three Bs 
and I didn't even think I would get that," he says. "I was dead shocked when 
the results came out and I got AAA. I wished I had gone for Newcastle."

With advice from his school's student support manager he contacted Newcastle 
and made the last-minute switch – but it left him without a student loan for 
several weeks until it was sorted out.

Above all, don't waste choices on universities you don't really want. Research 
by UCAS shows that the most dominant reasons for candidates to turn down offers 
are things they should have known in the first place: course content, distance 
from home and social life.

Jasmine Harris, 19, studying modern languages at Exeter

 Jasmine Harris, 19, is in her second year studying French, German and Spanish 
at Exeter University Photograph: Free image 
The main thing I had to think about was whether a university offered my course 
– French, German and Spanish. I needed to be realistic about grades, so I 
checked requirements online and in prospectuses. I also looked at general and 
subject league tables.

I went to lots of open days because it's important to get a feel for a place. 
I had an amazing day at Exeter and felt comfortable with the city and the 
campus.

My school was good at helping me write my Ucas application and I drafted my 
personal statement five or six times. At the open days, lecturers said to try 
to show passion for a subject and be truthful, so that's what I did. 

I was convinced I hadn't got in to Exeter, so the night before results day I 
looked into Clearing. On the day, Ucas opened early and I saw that I'd got in 
and burst into tears, because I was so shocked.

Now I'm here I love it – I've met close friends and I like my course. The past 
year has been one of the best of my life.

Abby Young-Powell

This article was amended on 1 October 2013 to amend an error, changing the 
number of UK courses on Ucas to 37,000 from 100,000
 