
Part-time master’s degrees are underestimated easily and often. Dr Matthew 
Higgins, co-chair of the flexible and distance learning group at the University 
of Leicester, says it’s common for part-time students to experience self-doubt 
as they juggle their coursework with other undertakings. “Getting out of bed 
while your partner is still fast asleep to sit at your computer and work on an 
assignment requires more than a strong coffee.”

Because of this, Dr Higgins says, the most successful part-time postgrads are 
those with drive and a clear aim. This might be something tangible, such as a 
promotion or a new job, or a personal desire to prove yourself. So if you’re 
considering a part-time master’s, how do you remain this motivated, choose the 
right course, and get the most out of your second degree?

Consider the course structure

There are several ways to study a master’s part-time, including evening 
classes and distance learning. Before choosing your course, it’s worth finding 
out which universities are experienced in supporting students who are combining 
study with work. Some institutions will be better equipped than others, while 
staff might better understand the pressures facing part-time students.

Don't choose a master's before taking these four steps
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/28/advice-to-consider-before-doing-a-masters-degree>
Some universities, such as Birkbeck University or the Open University (OU), 
specialise in part-time and distance programmes. This was the only viable 
option for Rebecca Singleton, a single mother who took a distance master’s in 
literature at the OU while looking after her daughter and her terminally ill 
father. She says taking the opportunity to study has given her “immense 
self-confidence”.

Know your limits

Higgins says that master’s applicants too often underestimate the time they 
spend on existing commitments – whether these involve work, family or friends – 
while overestimating their available time to study. Any master’s degree 
requires students to immerse themselves intellectually within their chosen 
field, but overstretching is a risk for part-timers.

Take Rory McAteer, who studies a part-time master’s in film and literature at 
the University of York. He was initially optimistic that he could hold down two 
jobs – one at Sainsbury’s, another on campus – while studying. But midway 
through his first term he was soon burnt out by his work regime. “I found my 
studies fell by the wayside,” he says. “You just get too tired if you’re doing 
that much. It’s important to be careful with how much work you take on.”

Set aside specific times to study every week, even if this means sacrificing 
your only days off, Higgins says. Tomasz Smyk, who recently graduated with an 
MSc in international management from Birkbeck University, spent every weekend 
at the library. His daily, eight-hour study routine “wasn’t too difficult”, he 
says, because he approached his course with a clear sense of purpose. “I came 
here to get more than just a diploma, I came to get something for myself.”

Use web resources 

Some courses are specifically designed to study using online tools, while 
others may be focused on group seminars. In any case, says Professor David 
Rowland, director of taught postgraduate at the OU, students should consult 
their subject librarians about online journals and digital archives. 
Universities also tend to offer tutorials or workshops on their online 
resources.

Dr Rowland adds that part-time students can also get peer support from social 
media. Online tutorials, study groups, Facebook, Twitter, and student 
associations can be treated as a “ready-made support network”.

How to choose a master's that will put cash in your pocket
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/18/how-to-choose-a-masters-that-will-put-cash-in-your-pocket>
But don’t worry if you lack the know-how or an internet connection. “Some of 
my students don’t have regular access to the internet due to living or working 
in remote areas,” says Higgins. “It’s about selecting a course which fits your 
situation and understanding how the course support is arranged.”

Take your classmates out for coffee

It could be worth taking into account whether your institution takes on many 
other part-time students. Rory MacAteer admits that there is a certain 
camaraderie among full-timers that you may miss out on as a part-time student. 
However, he still manages to socialise with his coursemates outside of class. 
“Being part-time doesn’t mean you have to be isolated.”

If you don’t have the leisure to meet up with your colleagues for informal 
study sessions, consider how much contact with tutors and other students you’ll 
have in the seminar room. Luke Thurogood, who studies a part-time master’s in 
creative writing at Edge Hill University, enjoys the fact that his course is 
largely communal as it is structured around weekly workshops. “The make-up of 
the course itself allows for the opportunity to interact more,” he says.

And do the reading, obviously

The more you contribute to class discussions, the more you’ll get out of them. 
Contact time with tutors is precious, Dr Higgins advises, so attend every class 
with a plan of what you wish to discuss. “Don’t go into meetings with a tutor 
and expect to be spoon-fed. To be an independent learner you need tutors who 
are critical friends, helping you to improve and develop.”

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 