
Q:  I recently graduated with a masters and honours degree in environmental 
chemistry from the University of Edinburgh. I achieved a first in both parts 
and also received prizes for my academic achievement. However, now I'm applying 
for jobs I am having problems with some of the questions on application forms - 
specifically one that asks for "a concise account of your relevant scientific 
experience and achievements".

I don't have any experience beyond that which I gained at university. How 
should I best approach this question to give a good impression and convince 
employers that although I am new to the workplace, I am what they are looking 
for and should be given a chance?
ES

A: The most difficult job to nail is often the first one after graduating, as 
you're finding out. And it may be that this position you are applying for is 
not really intended as a first job.

But none of this should put you off applying — if nothing else, it will help 
you focus on your strengths and weaknesses.

Start by reviewing your university experience. Maybe you did some summer work 
in a lab? Or spent part of your course working in industry? Always include this 
kind of information.

Or perhaps you have a final-year project or dissertation where you worked on 
your own and developed your own conclusions? Briefly describe it on the form, 
along with full details of the academic prizes you were awarded.

And if that's all you have, don't be tempted to start inventing things or 
completely overselling your achievements.

If you don't think that's going to be enough, think about including a letter 
with your application form saying you would also be interested in any 
internships or more junior vacancies that become available. Be enthusiastic 
above all else.

Gaining this kind of poorly (or not at all) paid experience can be a drain on 
your resources — which is why it's good to try and fit it in while you're a 
student and have a loan to fall back on — but it is often a smart way round 
those difficult-to-fudge experience questions and will see you perfectly placed 
for a future position. Good luck!
 