
Rhian Kempadoo-Millar, Kempadoo Millar British Headwear 
<http://www.kempadoo.com/>

We scaled up due to growing demand for our caps in 2013. We were operating as 
a cottage industry, but in order to manufacture in larger quantities we needed 
working capital and the ability to support both web sales and stockists through 
an e-commerce site and new systems. We accessed a £10,000 loan which has 
enabled us to grow steadily over the past 18 months and implement the changes 
needed.

I think it’s a big step for micro-businesses to take on finance, so discuss it 
at length with outside advisors and people working in similar industries to 
yours.


As someone naturally debt- and risk-averse, it wasn’t in my comfort zone to 
use someone else’s money to finance my ideas. However, I spoke to a successful 
company director who reassured me that all businesses have to take risks to 
allow for growth. Sometimes those “I started with £50 and now I’m a 
millionaire” stories give a false impression of the real costs involved in 
launching and maintaining a brand.

Small organisations have an advantage in that they can be fleet-of-foot, 
taking advantage of opportunities as they arise
Amber Massie-Blomfield 
If you do choose to take a loan, decide exactly what the money is for, then 
check, check and check again to see if any of those things can be done free or 
in an alternative way. Once you’ve done that, cost only for essentials.

We’ve found slow growth to be the key to really understanding the product, the 
costs, customer needs and areas where scaling up will be most effective. Our 
business plan is built around a“slow fashion” 
<http://www.slowfashioned.com/about> model, which is based on quality, 
longevity and steady growth of the brand, so our lending reflects this.

Another tip? Keep all the quirks and fun stuff even while it scales up. 
Creativity can get sidelined as the company gets “serious” but it’s the key to 
keeping it interesting on those long, lonely 14-hour days.

Amber Massie-Blomfield, exec director, Camden People’s Theatre 
<http://www.cptheatre.co.uk/>

We have just become a national portfolio organisation for the first time, 
meaning we’ll receive regular Arts Council England (ACE) funding from 2015-18. 
We are the only London theatre to join the portfolio in the new funding round.

It’s not a huge shift for us in terms of budget, but it means a change in our 
confidence as well as the public’s perception of what we do. It also brings new 
responsibilities; we’re more accountable than we’ve ever been before.

In terms of scaling up, the key is to have a mission and a plan to achieve it. 
Camden People’s Theatre exists to support emerging theatre artists, making work 
that’s innovative in form, so every decision has to emerge from the question of 
whether it serves that. We can only invest in expanding our infrastructure if 
ultimately it means there will be more opportunities for more emerging artists 
to make more great work.

Taking risks is the same; you’ve got to plan, weighing up the impact on your 
mission if it goes right, or wrong. Saying “no” to a great opportunity is 
sometimes the best decision you can make.

Back funding with support – and watch the arts grow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2015/mar/26/funding-plus-support-growth-arts>
Having said that, small organisations have an advantage in that they can be 
nimble and fleet-of-foot, taking advantage of opportunities as they arise, 
rather than having to be bound by thinking long-term or worrying about how many 
mouths there are to feed.

Good business planning can be as much about recognising this and leaving space 
for it. We’re cautious about ensuring we don’t simply create more admin by 
growing unnecessarily. As our ACE officer sagely put it: paperwork is 
self-perpetuating. Scaling up could be as much about making more intelligent 
choices to serve the mission – staying compact might be exactly what allows you 
to do that.

Liza Fior, founder, muf architecture/art <http://www.muf.co.uk/>

We’ve tended to expand in jumps, for example the successful winning of larger 
commissions and our being selected for approved lists to allow us to apply for 
bigger public commissions. We have not had the working capital to do so on spec.
My advice when it comes to scaling up? It’s worth collaborating in order to 
benefit from the experiences and expertise of others. We have always worked 
with engineers and cost consultants much bigger than our own office.

Another tip: understand how you spend money. Do not expand your fixed costs 
unless you have to. Finally, consolidate by pursuing commissions you know how 
to do, but also try to have new thoughts and explore new possibilities. For 
example, although we’ve not yet taken on built commissions abroad, we are doing 
more consultancy in the US, Germany and Sweden. This is work that could be 
built upon at a later date.

Kempadoo Millar British Headwear and muf architecture/art are recipients of 
Creative Industry Finance support <https://www.creativeindustryfinance.org.uk/>
, a programme managed byCreative United <http://www.creativeunited.org.uk/> and 
publicly funded by Arts Council England

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 