
Much revulsion has been expressed about the opening of a new shopping mall in 
east London, Westfield Stratford City. The majority of people attending the 
Olympics next summer will be obliged to pass through it. Certainly, the scheme 
shows a high degree of willingness to wring cash out of visitors. But, hey, 
that's "growth".

What's really revolting is the "incredible" discovery made by the mall's 
Australian director, John Burton, that so many British young people, who are 
applying for jobs at Westfield, have left school functionally illiterate and 
innumerate.Burton told the London Evening Standard 
<http://www.thisislondon.co.uk/standard-olympics/article-23983067-bosses-shocked-by-hundreds-of-games-staff-who-cannot-read-or-write.do>
: "We brought in tutors for the people we thought might make it because their 
enthusiasm levels were so high." One tutor, Petr Mracek, professed himself 
"astonished" by the lack of basic skills.

I've been critical of this appalling problem in the education system for 
years. I hope against hope that at last it can be tackled. But what about those 
who are far beyond school now? So many adults in Britain, especially in London, 
need to learn to read.

How can this be achieved without spending a fortune we do not have?

A big part of the solution has to be Yes We Can Read, a phonetics system 
designed by Libby Coleman, a retired comprehensive headteacher, and Nick 
Ainley, a former Mencap chairman who has worked with adults with severe 
learning disabilities for most of his career. Basically,Yes We Can Read 
<http://yeswecanread.co.uk/> is a big paperback book that anyone who can read 
fluently – no training needed – can use, a couple of hours a week, to teach 
another person, one-on-one, to read, in six months or less. If you would like 
to do it, and don't already know someone who needs help, then the charity's 
website has aFinding a Learner <http://yeswecanread.co.uk/findinglearner.html> 
section. It's the simplicity of the concept that makes it a hugely hopeful 
aspect of an otherwise grim societal failing. It needs to be supported.
 