
My first show, Animals Without Backbones, was a mixed bag of sketches I wrote 
mainly on the tube on the way to work. The show kicked off at the Lion and 
Unicorn pub theatre in Kentish Town with a sketch about an underwear model who 
had somehow got stuck on a farm and was plagued by crows – she came on wearing 
a bikini and galoshes stabbing the air with a garden hoe. Another was called 
Mad Dog Macy Gray. The performers came on as Macy Gray eagles, wearing masks of 
her face, flapping their wings to one of her songs. It was quite a spectacle.

One of the performers was a brilliant comic actor called Barney Power. He was 
also appearing in a play at the same time and had invited along some of his 
fellow actors. They took him aside in the bar afterwards and spent an hour 
telling him why he should stop doing the show immediately. But he stayed and 
the shows got better while the audiences got worse. We went from 65 the first 
night to six the last. At least six people saw a good show.

I continued meeting up with Barney and we talked about writing some stuff 
together. I'd always tried to write funny stuff. I used to circulate surreal 
cartoons in school up north, inspired by Viz, when it was just a couple of 
sheets distributed in Newcastle pubs, and was up for collaborating. We didn't 
really have a long-term strategy apart from we knew we wanted to get our stuff 
in front of an audience any way we could. One night in the pub he said he had a 
title for a comedy play - The Suicide Club – and would I like to write it with 
him. I said yes.

We imposed a good writing discipline: we would hire a rehearsal room for £20 
an hour. Paying for the room ensured we got some proper work done, and we'd 
jump around acting out the scenes and scribbling down notes. Using the room 
after us were a group called Survivors' Poetry. An impatient, bearded man would 
always poke his head through the door just as we were on a roll and say: 
"Sorry, time's up!".

To help discipline further, we booked a venue for the first show, so we had a 
target to work towards rather than just messing around for months. The Canal 
Cafe Theatre had agreed to a one-night only deal for a box office split. The 
show became about a New Model Army fan obsessed with music (and suicide). On 
the first night there was a young BBC Radio producer there to see some proper 
comics after us and we persuaded him to see our show. We had a brief chat with 
him afterwards and he mentioned that the comedy department had been trying to 
get an afternoon play commissioned for a while, and so it might be good for 
that. He agreed to submit it to the next programme development group. BBC Radio 
comedy hold the groups monthly to decide on scripts to be offered to Radio 4, 
mainly. We set about writing it as a spec script for radio.

It was submitted to the group and we got some great feedback, but Radio 4 
turned it down saying it wasn't right for an afternoon play. However, the 
department were behind us and they asked if we had any other ideas on the go.

My brother and I had been moving around a lot and we had most of our 
possessions in bags. My brother had some very random stuff. I'd open a plastic 
bag and there'd be a bit of metal in there and a newspaper. The mad thing was 
he'd labelled it "Random stuff from under the desk" or "Various shit". One day 
we took a load to a storage unit. It was massive. It crossed my mind that you 
could live there and nobody would know...

Self Storage was a sitcom about Dave, recently split up with his wife, who 
moves all his possessions into a storage unit. Then, when he realises he's got 
nowhere to go himself, he moves in with his stuff. After many months of 
re-writing, waiting, recording a pilot with Barney and actor Kevin Eldon and 
writing another pilot script, it was commissioned and went to two series. It 
starred Reece Shearsmith, Mark Heap and Rosie Cavaliero and The Times called it 
"A Beckettian examination of the parameters of solitude with plenty of wry 
laughs."

There's no one clear way into writing comedy for radio but, (for what it's 
worth), my advice is: put something on live. If you can't afford to get into 
the Edinburgh festival, try to put a show on in a fringe venue and get some 
producers to come along.

There are entry-level radio shows that can get your writing noticed, such as 
Newsjack, but I think putting on a live show is much better than just sending 
producers scripts because they can see an audience's reaction and it shows your 
commitment. Plus, you learn so much as a writer. Off the back of this, try link 
up with a producer who likes and understands your work, then develop that 
working relationship.

It takes a long time to get anything commissioned and it's low paid, but 
there's no substitute for watching one of your comic heroes laugh at something 
you've written.

You can see more of Tom's comedy work here 
<http://www.youtube.com/user/KetsMixedBag/videos?sort=p&view=0>. Self Storage 
is currently beingbroadcast on BBC 4 Extra 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b01g97r7>.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox, sign up for ourweekly Careers update 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 