
Until very recently, common wisdom held that breakfast was the most important 
meal of the day. We’ve anecdotally tied all sorts of ills to a failure to sit 
down to a “complete breakfast.” But health research hasproven that skipping 
that fried egg or bowl of cereal 
<http://well.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/08/21/is-breakfast-overrated/?_r=0> does 
not, in fact, lead to weight gain, health issues or underperformance.

Our reverence for breakfast is actually relatively recent. Before the late 
19th century in the US, breakfast didn’t have any particular importance 
ascribed to it. But all that was changed by a small group of religious fanatics 
and lobbyists for cereal and bacon companies.

Historically, breakfast didn’t come with its own list of prescribed foods, 
says Abigail Carroll, author ofThree Squares: The Invention of the American Meal
 <https://www.amazon.com/Three-Squares-Invention-American-Meal/dp/0465025528>. 
People simply ate whatever they had around for breakfast, which was often 
leftovers from the night before.


Fish for dinner? Your seafood might come with a side of plastic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/31/fish-plastic-pollution-ocean-environment-seafood>
By the 1800s, what Americans think of as a farmer’s breakfast started showing 
up at the table.

Eggs have always been a popular breakfast food, says Heather Arndt Anderson, 
author ofBreakfast: A History 
<https://www.amazon.com/Breakfast-History-Heather-Arndt-Anderson/dp/075912163X>
. Chickens lay eggs in the morning, and egg dishes are easy and fast to 
prepare. Meat that did not have to be slaughtered that day and could keep was 
also incorporated. Chicken was never a breakfast food, points out Arndt, as no 
one is going to kill a chicken first thing in the morning, but cured meat from 
a pig that was previously slaughtered could be.

In the late 19th century, however, people began to worry about indigestion as 
the Industrial Revolution saw people move from farm labor to factories and 
offices, where a lot of their time was spent sitting or standing in one place. 
Heavy farm breakfasts before work got the blame for indigestion, a major 
preoccupation at the time, and a lighter version became the ideal.

It was around this time, in the middle of a general healthier living fad, that 
breakfast cereals got their start at sanatoriums founded by followers of the 
newly formed Seventh-day Adventist religion.

These religious health gurus opened sanatoriums and introduced people to 
vegetarian diets and eating bland, whole wheat as a way to counter ill health. 
The first cereal, invented by James Caleb Jackson, and the better known 
Kellogg’s brand, invented by John Harvey Kellogg, were both born at sanatoriums.

Jackson was a preacher, and Kellogg a religious man who believed that 
masturbation was the greatest evil, which bland, healthy foods like corn flakes 
could prevent. Both Jackson and Kellogg were early Seventh-day Adventists, 
further tying a sense of religious morality into their ideas around the 
importance of healthy eating.

Using moralizing rhetoric to sell the idea of a healthy breakfast in the 19th 
century changed how people thought about the meal, says Carroll. That 
moralization wasn’t just around religion and health: it also incorporated our 
reverence for hard work. In the early 20th century, the idea that if you ate a 
lighter, healthier breakfast you were going to be more efficient and productive 
at work added “another moralizing layer”, according to Carroll.

The cliche that breakfast is the most important meal – and one with very 
specific food groups – developed from those early days of cereal.

After vitamins were discovered, it did not take long before, in the 1940s, 
breakfast cereals were fortified and heralded as a source of every vitamin 
under the sun, making breakfast that much more important, according to 
advertisements at the time.

It was also around that time that women were entering the workforce in droves 
during the war, and needed something quick yet nutritious to feed the kids in 
the morning. Maternal guilt was used to market cereal as the best food to give 
to children, and underline the importance of eating breakfast.

It was a combination of fear of indigestion, religious moralization and 
advertising that helped push the idea of breakfast as the most important meal 
of the day – but it was a campaign to sell more bacon that really solidified 
the idea. A public relations expert working for the Beech-Nut company,Edward 
Bernays <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KLudEZpMjKU>, whose other claim to 
fame was being the nephew of Sigmund Freud, exploited all the moralization and 
health fears around breakfast to help the company push its bacon.

The dubious science of Dr. Luke's Core brand: inside the premium bottled water 
industry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/09/dr-luke-core-bottled-water-likely-not-better-kesha>
Bernays got a doctor to agree that a protein-rich, heavy breakfast of bacon 
and eggs was healthier than a light breakfast, and then sent that statement to 
around 5,000 doctors for their signatures. He then got newspapers to publish 
the results of his petition as if it was a scientific study, explains Carroll. 
That brought bacon and eggs back into fashion and added more weight to the idea 
that breakfast was not only very important but medically recommended.

Today, we are still mostly eating foods like cereals, bacon and eggs, rolls, 
bagels and croissants for breakfast. Dinner and lunch somehow never got the 
same treatment, and our adherence to the same narrow category of breakfast 
foods continues unabated.

It’s not just the moralization that got caught up with breakfast that has 
changed how we see it, says Arndt Anderson. Unlike lunch and dinner, there is 
something about the meal that lends itself to judgment.

“I think that the breakfast table is one place where you see the most blatant 
demonstrations of this human tendency to tie what one eats to who one is,” says 
Arndt Anderson. “People make their lifestyle change at New Year and every 
morning is like a small New Year’s Day – a chance to start things off in the 
right direction. So if you have cold pizza for breakfast, it says what sort of 
person you are.”












 