
The Hollywood A-listers are an elusive bunch at the best of times. I've been 
on the tiny Caribbean island of Anguilla for four days now and it seems that 
the elite have developed the same characteristics of the creature that the 
island is named after in Italian: like the eel, they're always just slipping 
out of my grasp. 'Honestly, David Letterman was in here just an hour or so 
ago,' beams the owner of Lloyd's Guest House. 'He was asking for directions to 
one of the beaches.' The previous day, I had been accosted by the manager of 
Santorini, a restaurant in a five-star resort where rooms go for more than a 
thousand dollars a night in peak season. 'Malkovich left only last week,' he 
told me over a shot of Pyrat, the lethal locally-brewed rum. 'This island took 
over from St Barts a long time ago as a place for the stars to relax in. They 
just don't get any bother here from anyone.'

Only 15 miles long, this British overseas territory regularly plays host to 
the likes of Robert de Niro, 50 Cent, Brad Pitt, Uma Thurman and Rod Stewart. 
The official tourist brochure is glossier than Vanity Fair

But the truth is you don't have to be an Oscar winner or a rock star to afford 
a holiday on this most northerly of the Leeward Islands. Markedly different 
from its near neighbours, the designer-store clogged St Martin and the resort 
saturated Antigua, there is a deliciously languid vibe to the deserted beaches, 
undeveloped scrubland and slow-as-syrup waters of the salt ponds.

The island's fascinating history is displayed at a museum owned by Anguillan 
Colville Petty. Fought over between the English and the French for hundreds of 
years, the locals were enslaved, then largely ignored as attempts to create 
profitable trades in cotton, tobacco and sugar all failed - largely because of 
the lack of rain and dry scrubby land of the interior.

Ruled by neighbouring St Kitts from 1825, Anguilla's larger neighbour 
neglected the island to such an extent that come the 1960s there was still no 
electricity or phones. Most Anguillans fled the poverty. Those that remained 
revolted during a beauty contest one night in 1967, throwing the St Kitts 
police force off the island and asking to be taken back under British control.

One of the most wonderful things about the island is that every single beach 
is publicly owned - so there is nothing to stop you sharing the same stretch of 
fabulous white sand as De Niro et al, though you probably won't get the butlers 
from the secluded, wallet shreddingly expensive resorts such as Altamer rushing 
to fill up your champagne glass.

David Lloyd, the owner of Lloyd's, the oldest hotel on the island, a charming 
wooden clapboard building, shows me the bullet holes from 1967 when the hotel 
was fired on in the revolution. My delightful room, with its 1950s colonial 
feel - except for the air-con and decent showers - cost £56 per night. The 
hotel is only two minutes' walk from Crocus Bay, a secluded beach which, for 
each of my daily visits during peak season, was totally empty.

For the greatest of all of Anguilla's beaches though, head to Rendezvous Bay 
where the secret of how to have this island on the cheap is revealed. The 
Anguilla Great House is a collection of beautifully-maintained gingerbread 
style cottages on the beach to which you have the same access as the elite 
staying in the swanky Cuisinart resort and spa next door, but for as little as 
£85 per night instead of several hundred.

All the top resorts are open to day visitors so each morning I pottered over 
to Cuisinart to enjoy incredible breakfasts of saltfish with salsa and eggs 
benedict, all for less than £10 a head.

Gwen's Reggae Grill is Rod Stewart's favourite. It's located in a prime 
position in Shoal Bay East next to one of the island's few coconut groves, but 
it's pretty reasonable too. Food typically centres around generous chicken and 
rib combos and an array of lobster, shrimp, snapper and crayfish, with a whole 
lobster priced at £15. The best of the local food shacks is the little known B 
and D's on Long Bay where locally caught fish, including hind and mahi-mahi was 
served al-fresco to me on a paper plate with rice, chips, salad and beer for 
around five pounds.

I was finding it a struggle to get my heart rate above the pace of a 
nonagenarian elephant until the last night. Then, thanks to a local taxi driver 
called Calvin who refused to take me back to the hotel until I'd joined him for 
a drink, I was propelled into what he called 'a proper Anguilla place': the 
extremely sweaty and anarchic Red Dragon Dance Club, the only place on the 
island to have something approaching a proper dance floor. Reggae and 
occasional calypso hits roar out of the speakers until dawn at weekends and it 
was only here that I really felt something of the vibe that goes on among 
locals far away from the cocktails and sun loungers.

As Calvin explains as the dawn begins to break on my last morning on the 
island: 'I had Ethan Hawke here last year. I just headed straight for the posh 
places but he made me stop for fish at this shack on the way. He loved it. Man! 
That's the place where I eat every day!'

It seems that Ethan and his showbiz ilk may be savvier than I thought when it 
comes to finding the numerous bargains in this corner of the Caribbean.

Essentials

There are no direct flights to Anguilla. Virgin <http://www.virginatlantic.com>
 flies to Antigua from £398 from whereLiat <http://www.liatairline.com> has 
40-minute flights to Anguilla for around £90 return. Rob Crossan stayed at the
Anguilla Great House <http://www.anguillagreathouse.com> and Lloyd's Guest House
 <http://www.lloyds.ai> which cost from £85 and £56 per night respectively. See 
www.anguilla-vacation.com <http://www.anguilla-vacation.com> for more.
 