
Sarah Greenwood, production designer

It may have been an ingenious creative and financial solution, but Joe 
Wright's big idea onAnna Karenina – to stage most of the film inside a Russian 
theatre – posed a herculean challenge for his long-time production designer. 
Rather than shooting the film on location in Russia and England as planned, "We 
had to reconceive the whole thing and build this theatre from scratch in 
Shepperton with just 12 weeks to go till shooting and no extra budget."

Luckily, this was not Sarah Greenwood's first collaboration with Wright. She 
had worked with him right at the start of his career, on his 2000 TV debut
Nature Boy, and on his subsequent feature films (receiving Oscar nominations 
for her work onPride & Prejudice and Atonement), so she trusted his judgment 
and he trusted that she could pull it off.

"Framing it in this derelict theatre was a fantastic concept, given the 
theatricality of high society in St Petersburg and Moscow at the time," she 
says. It also allowed them to move between scenes – from restaurants to 
ice-rinks to racecourses – with dizzying fluidity: rarely has a production 
designer's work been so foregrounded in a film.

Only Levin's story brought them outside the theatrical frame and into the 
"real" world, which meant shooting some wintry scenes on location in Russia. 
The famous scything scenes were filmed on Salisbury Plain, "the closest we 
could get to massive open Russian plains here in the UK – Salisbury hasn't 
really been touched in 200 years because of the army base".

Was all the mayhem and hard graft worthwhile for Greenwood? "With hindsight, 
it would've been dull had we just done a period drama," she says. "This was 
much more exciting."

Jacqueline Durran, costume designer


Like many of the crew members on Anna Karenina, Jacqueline Durran has worked 
withJoe Wright <https://www.theguardian.com/film/joe-wright> several times in 
the past and with considerable success – she was Oscar-nominated for her 
costume design onPride and Prejudice and Atonement. The closeness of Wright's 
team is liberating, she says, because people aren't afraid to speak their 
minds; it also helps that Wright is more fashion-conscious than most directors. 
"His interest in costume comes from puppets – his parents had the Puppet 
Theatre at the Angel Theatre – so he has always been aware of the possibilities 
of costumes and how costumes move."

For Anna Karenina, Wright wanted Durran to concentrate on silhouette rather 
than surface detail. "He didn't want to end up with naturalistic 1870s costumes 
or to get constricted by the period. As the Russian aristocrats were obsessed 
with French culture in the 19th century, we came up with the idea of tweaking 
it a bit and using the heyday of couture from the 1950s to emphasise Anna's 
modern streak. That really helped Keira understand Anna."

Historians and costume purists may quibble with the odd anachronism or 
cultural mash-up, but Durran is unapologetic: the film's theatrical framework 
meant that historical accuracy was low on their list of priorities. In the case 
of Levin and his peasants: "We might have muddled up the regions, north and 
south," she says cheerfully. "No money was spent on a Russian expert."

Instead, she threw her energies into realising Wright's ultra-specific vision. 
"Vronsky's uniform had to be absolutely white – but hardly any wool is made 
white; it's made cream or grey. That proved to be an absolute nightmare. But we 
got there in the end."

Seamus McGarvey, cinematographer


When Seamus McGarvey photographed Atonement for Joe Wright in 2006, they 
devised a moment at the centre of the film that became one of its major talking 
points: an extraordinary five-minute tracking shot through a military camp on 
the beach at Dunkirk that captures in sweeps and pirouettes the surreal horrors 
of war. There may be no single moment inAnna Karenina that compares to that 
shot for virtuosity; rather, the whole film is a virtuoso act by the acclaimed 
Northern Irish cinematographer, whose recent credits includeWe Need to Talk 
About Kevin and Avengers Assemble.

McGarvey joined the film just before shooting began and had little time to get 
to grips with its unorthodox theatre setting and the fact that certain scenes 
were designed to change right before our eyes, without the camera cutting away, 
like a stage set being rearranged in the middle of a performance.

"One sequence goes from Oblonsky's office at closing time and takes you 
through the streets of St Petersburg, where you see Levin looking for a 
restaurant, and suddenly the camera swirls around into the restaurant and the 
scene begins – all in one shot, without leaving the room."

It's rare that a cinematographer on a big digital-age production is asked to 
create effects in-camera rather than relying on computers to fill in the blanks 
in post-production, but on this movie McGarvey used mirrors, Georges 
Méliès-style, to realise Anna's premonitions, and filmed with a stocking over 
the lens to imbue certain scenes with a particular glow.

"I relished it," he says. "Working with Joe, you're always presented with 
difficult challenges; he really pushes every department to do their very best. 
He won't settle for average. The best work I've done has been on Joe's films as 
a result."
 