
Despite the recent economic crisis, it seems that the appetite for a position 
within investment banking is as insatiable as ever. Recruitment numbers have 
bounced back up to pre credit crunch levels, having jumped up by more than a 
third in the last year, according to 'The Graduate Market in 2010' – carried 
out byHigh Fliers Research <>. 

The demand for new talent might be increasing, but getting into investment 
isn't just a case of having stellar academics and the 'right' degree from the 
'right' university. Given the depth of the global talent pool that the 
investment banks select from, there is still too much talent. Straight As at 
A-level or 40+ points from the International Baccalaureate may only be the 
first rung on the ladder.

Investment banks are looking for intelligent, hard working, proactive and 
intuitive talent. And, they can afford to be very picky. Stellar academics are 
considered something of a standard for most top-tier investment banks. This 
requirement is an effective macro-screener of talent – one way of trimming the 
population into a manageable sample to recruit from. However, it's not enough. 
The interview process will assess intuition and practical ability as well as 
intellectual talent and will aim to find out what drives your ambition.

True intellectual talent isn't the ability to retain facts and regurgitate on 
demand text book answers. Intellectual talent for me is the ability to view A 
and B, analyse the link and then derive what possibilities could get us to C, D 
and E - a cognitive talent so to speak. This is much rarer and seen in a small 
percentage of the candidates that pass through our hands. It is this type of 
talent that is the focus of investment banking recruiters across the world.

Applying the skills learnt in education is not always straight-forward. In a 
working environment the application of the appropriate method or skill is often 
judgement based and dependent on the personal characteristics of the applicant.

So the most crucial insight I can give is learn by understanding and develop 
by applying your skills to real-life deals and transactions. Do not be afraid 
to develop and share a view or an opinion. Investment banking is an advisory 
profession, it requires judgement and opinion. And while this is a skill that 
develops over a lifetime, you should start conditioning your thinking now. 
Don't just learn the A to B links – understand the link and what drives them. 
Consider what C, D and E derived options could be. Consider if there are any 
other ways of getting to B – rather than just using established principles. 
Change your angle or perspective of the thought process.

Often learning at school is focused on progressing past the next exam hurdle. 
And once you are accepted into the ranks of an investment bank, there is going 
to be a great deal of learning. As the learning is now applied to a new 
direction – actually demonstrating a vocational skill rather than just passing 
an exam, it forces a change in the approach to learning. Retention of facts or 
processing information is not an advisory skill. The brain needs to be re-tuned 
in order to adapt this approach.

So the advice bit. Think, don't process. If you find yourself learning through 
forcing knowledge into your head (I think back to university finals – late 
nights – last minute exam cramming and re-reading the same paragraph again and 
again – each time feeling likes it's the first time you've read it), you're 
probably going down the wrong route. If you understand an issue, you understand 
the key drivers and are able to follow the mechanism that pulls the issue 
together, then the likelihood is that there is little for you to learn – you 
understand it and you can apply it on the basis of rationale.

A good place to start is to read and interpret the financial press. Many 
would-be analysts read the financial press – which is great and should only be 
encouraged. But the error is that they often attempt to absorb the factual 
detail rather than examine and understand the drivers of the news. It is a 
massive advantage to anyone attempting to enter into the profession to be able 
to discuss why a transaction took place, what drove the deal, why was it 
financed in a particular way – rather than just regurgitate a deal term sheet. 
Also news flows over a period – sometimes days, often weeks. There is little 
value to be added by picking up a financial daily once a week – it's got to be 
a regular habit.

What else can you do?

Internships

In many ways an internship is a 10-week interview from the investment bank's 
perspective. It is pretty much a prerequisite these days to have a clutch of 
internships under your belt when applying for these positions. Securing an 
internship demonstrates early commitment and practical exposure to the 
profession.

Get a life outside of academics

Investment banking is a team effort. The analysts will be placed in teams or 
groups pretty much as soon as they arrive. Social and personal skills – the 
ability to work well within a team, adaptability and the emotional intelligence 
to interpret signals displayed by work colleagues are all essential skills when 
working within a time pressured and deadline orientated environment.

Be yourself

This may not be the right profession for you despite the desires you have. Be 
yourself. The recruiters will be assessing your fit into their existing team 
dynamics. You cannot fake your whole professional life in order to fit into 
role. On the flip side, flair, creativity and individuality can be very 
attractive attributes during the recruitment process – you'll be remembered – 
hopefully for the right reasons.

Geoff Robinson is head of investment banking at 7city Learning 
<http://www.7city.com/index.html>
 