
Law <https://www.theguardian.com/education/law> firms provide services across 
a vast range of specialisms, or “practice areas”, but most lawyers specialise 
in just one area – or even a subset of one – after qualifying.

How much control lawyers have over the specialisation process varies and may 
depend on the type and size of firm they joined as trainees and which practice 
areas they experienced during training.

Many lawyers approaching qualification discover that economics plays a big 
part in which departments have vacancies available. For example, there will be 
less demand for corporate mergers and acquisitions (M&A) lawyers during an 
economic downturn, but more for the services of insolvency lawyers.

You’re therefore unlikely to have completely free rein when it comes to 
choosing a practice area – it’s more likely you’ll be picking from a range of 
available options. However, you can maximise your control through extensive 
research, gaining work experience wherever possible, and making targeted 
applications based on your preferences.

1. Research

Before digesting the huge array of specialisms in the solicitors’ profession, 
you need to ask yourself whether you’re broadly interested in commercial law 
(where you would act for companies and organisations), family/private client 
law (where you would act for individuals), or criminal law (where you would 
defend or prosecute people accused of crimes).

What kind of law firm should I apply to?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/feb/11/what-kind-of-law-firm-should-i-apply-to>
The practice areas that a firm offers will be determined by the type of client 
it serves, so next consider the type and size of firm at which you want to 
work. There is a whole continuum of organisations from small high-street 
practices serving their local communities to globe-spanning megaliths serving 
multinational corporations. Where on that spectrum do you see yourself?

Look at the important departments within a firm – these are the practice areas 
that are most likely to have jobs available when you qualify. It would be 
unwise to set your heart on finding a role in a small niche firm staffed by 
just a few lawyers.

Firms’ websites offer an insight into this – look at how many lawyers make up 
each department, which departments produce a lot of briefings, and which recent 
deals are covered most prominently. You could also call or email the 
recruitment team to ask how practice areas are weighted.

2. Work experience

The only way to know for certain whether a practice area is right for you is 
by gaining some first-hand experience. Charlotte Bown, an associate at Watson 
Farley & Williams, says: “Work experience is unbeatable as a way to find the 
kind of career that suits you. It doesn’t even have to be in the practice area 
which most interests you. Even if you decide that the areas you experienced 
during the placement were not for you, your opinion and understanding will be 
much more informed. It will also help your training contract applications.”

Firms’ vacation schemes are probably the most valuable form of work 
experience, as they tend to cover multiple practice areas over the course of a 
few weeks and are an important part of many firms’ recruitment processes, with 
schemes typically ending in an interview for a training contract.

Seven skills that will land you work experience at a law firm
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jan/04/seven-skills-that-will-land-you-work-experience-at-a-law-firm>
However, various other forms of legal work experience and interaction are 
available and they are all useful. Take the initiative and contact local high 
street firms to ask if you can help out for a couple of weeks or even just 
shadow one of the lawyers for a day or two – talking to lawyers about their 
jobs and watching them work can be very instructive, but just make sure you 
have done your homework on the firm before getting in contact. Meanwhile, those 
interested in areas such as family law, crime, immigration and human rights 
could volunteer at a law centre of the local Citizens’ Advice Bureau.

There are also lots of opportunities for direct contact that you don’t have to 
organise yourself – open days, presentations and university law fairs, for 
example – that enable the well-briefed candidate to find out more about what it 
is really like to be a certain type of lawyer.

3. Training

With extensive research and some legal work experience under your belt, you 
will be well equipped to target your applications at firms operating in the 
areas that really interest you. When you start training is when the 
specialisation process really begins. Training contracts are usually divided 
into “seats” in different departments, bothcontentious and non-contentious law 
<http://www.lawcareers.net/Information/Features/01062010-A-bone-of-contention>, 
so here is where you will hopefully have the opportunity to find out if the 
reality of working in your chosen practice area matches your expectations.

However, the non-rotational training model, for which international firm Jones 
Day is known, dispenses with the usual “seat” system and instead makes trainees 
free to pursue work with departments of their choosing (and avoid spending 
months in a practice area that they know isn’t for them).

Alex Hatvany, a trainee solicitor at Jones Day, says this has made it easier 
for him to spend time working on things he finds most interesting. He adds: “By 
the end of my training contract, I will have done much more than six months’ 
work in the area I want to qualify into, and will hopefully be working in my 
chosen department for a good few months immediately prior to qualification.”

Dealing with rejection as an aspiring solicitor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/sep/03/dealing-with-rejection-as-an-aspiring-soclicitor>
The final stage of the specialisation process can be competitive. James Down, 
an associate at Hill Dickinson, says: “At my firm, a list of available jobs is 
posted in advance of qualification, and trainees apply for the ones they want 
by way of a CV and cover letter. If multiple people apply for the same post, 
there is then an interview process.”

Remember that the reality of working in a practice area may be very different 
from what you imagined, so don’t exclude all other possibilities in favour of 
one area. Charlotte Brett, a solicitor at Foot Anstey LLP, advises keeping an 
open mind. “I ended up enjoying things that I never thought I would, and I 
certainly never expected to qualify as a corporate solicitor when I was a 
student,” she says.

Those sentiments are also echoed by Sophie-Burton Jones, a senior associate at 
Mills & Reeve, who adds: “Don’t tie yourself to one rigid idea for your career 
path. Some people begin training contracts thinking they have to do a certain 
seat or qualify into a certain area, but what you really enjoy could be 
something unexpected. I wasn’t pushing to do a commercial seat during my 
training contract, but once I experienced it, I knew it was for me. Don’t worry 
about mapping every twist and turn of your path too early.”

Josh Richman is the editor of LawCareers.Net <http://www.lawcareers.net/>

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 