
Q I'm a second year undergraduate student. In my third year I will be 
completing a compulsory industry placement. I wish to enter the hospitality 
sector, but while my university is great at sorting out office jobs in large 
multinational car companies or investment banking firms, it is not so good at 
providing placements for students like myself that wish to work somewhere 
slightly different. I have enquired at several hotels with varying degrees of 
success (some offered me work placements as a waiter), but was wondering if you 
knew of any other ways of getting a semi-managerial work placement within the 
hotel industry?
DH

A To be honest, DH, it's probably pushing the boundaries of my knowledge 
somewhat to ask for details of semi-managerial work placements in hotels. I 
can, however, give you some slightly less specific advice on sorting out your 
work placement.

First, I think you should head off to your university careers service. Not 
everyone who has ever studied at your uni has gone on to work in a car company 
or for a bank, and many careers services keep hold of contact files for alumni 
who work in different areas. Finding a past student who is working in the hotel 
industry could be a brilliant way for you to find out more about it.

The careers service will probably have a way for you to contact alumni, 
usually via email. Don't send one asking immediately for work experience - they 
probably get plenty of those. Instead, ask if perhaps you could meet them for a 
coffee and a chat about their career. Or, if they are too busy for that, send a 
few (short) questions in your reply email - the final one should be: "How did 
you go about finding work placements while you were a student? Does your 
company run a work experience scheme?".

I'd be dumbstruck if your careers service doesn't have some contacts in the 
industry, but if not there is still hope. Rather than enquiring with individual 
hotels about work experience I would write to the head office of hotel chains 
who are more likely to offer you a placement that uses your skills as a 
graduate. As an aside, do not take any work placement that involves being a 
waiter. That is not a work placement, it is someone taking advantage of you.

And if none of them can help you? Look outside the hotel industry. Work 
placements are all about gaining skills and experience, and it matters more 
that you see how managers work with their staff than you see how to make beds 
in hotels. So show some imagination and (dare I say it) initiative. Be focused 
in your approach, and never write off the best resource you have: the 
university, its staff, and alumni. Otherwise you'll look back after graduation 
and wonder why you never made use of its services.
 