
Q Since graduating more than three years ago I have worked for the same 
company. At the end of my second year I transferred departments to increase my 
role and responsibilities, but I have not been rewarded for my efforts, despite 
a review confirming I have been successful in my new position. I know that 
other colleagues are earning double my salary while fulfilling a similar role, 
and I feel I am being let down because I have "climbed the ladder" rather than 
come in from another company. My boss says he will look into my salary, but 
nothing ever happens. Should I start to look for a new job?
DN

A It would be easy to say yes here; not only do you feel let down by the 
company, but also by your boss who, it seems reasonable to conclude, is either 
being totally ineffectual or not being entirely straight with you. Either way, 
it is enormously frustrating. But don't start checking the job advertisements 
just yet. If you think there is still potential for you to progress and learn 
with your employer, and you're not so bitter that it's going to affect your 
attitude at work, it might be possible to salvage the situation. (If you are so 
bitter that colleagues crumple under your stare of pure hatred, however, get 
going on those applications before you sabotage your reference.)

But before you launch a rescue plan you need to make sure all your facts are 
in order. You say, for instance, that you know colleagues are earning double 
your salary in similar roles. How? Does your company make job descriptions and 
salaries common knowledge? Can you be sure? Are there variables - such as 
experience - that you are not taking into account when you compare positions? 
Take a look at equivalent jobs in outside companies. What would you be earning 
elsewhere? You might also want to get a copy of your appraisal, which will be 
useful in showing how you are progressing within your role.

So that's the boring homework bit done. Next you need to consider how to get 
questions over your salary dealt with effectively. You probably don't need me 
to tell you that this isn't the best time to be trying to get what sounds like 
a substantial pay rise. You need to approach the situation delicately. First, 
make an appointment to see your boss - a proper meeting time rather than a 
quick grabbed moment. Ask if there has been any progress on the question of 
your salary, and if there has been none ask when you should expect to hear. Try 
and get a commitment to an exact date. Send a follow-up email thanking your 
boss for the meeting and setting down the date by which you should have an 
answer. And save a copy.

Or in the real world, don't get any solid answers and come out of the meeting 
seething beneath your professional smile. But don't stress - on past form your 
manager isn't going to solve the problem so this meeting is just a stepping 
stone to your big boss. When your manager fails to deliver on promises/doesn't 
even bother making any, this is the time to visit the boss above and, very 
gently without having a fit about how rubbish your immediate manager is, 
explain the situation. Don't apportion blame, however much you think your boss 
deserves to be dropped in it. Ask sensible questions about how and in what time 
frame you are expected to progress financially as well as professionally within 
the company. This is slightly risky of course, but given how undervalued you 
feel I think it is a gamble worth taking.

There is also a lesson to be learned in all this. It is easy to get manoeuvred 
into taking on new responsibilities and increasing your role at work. It is 
exciting; it stops the daily grind from boring you to death. But big changes 
and extra duties should be accompanied by some recognition of what you are 
taking on - and it's always easier to discuss recompense before they become 
part of your job, however difficult that may be.
 