
"It's pretty simple," says Clive Hopwood. "There are 87,000 people in prison 
today. A handful will be coming out on a street near you soon. Would you like 
them better or worse than when they went in?"

Hopwood (who has had more than 100 titles published and more than 20 plays 
performed) is co-director of theWriters In Prison Network 
<http://www.writersinprisonnetwork.org/>, set up in the 1990s to unite prison 
writers-in-residence. The network (which becomes the Writers In Prisons 
Foundation this month as it achieves full charitable status), oversees 19 
writers' residencies in some of England's toughest prisons.

Formerly funded by Arts Council England <http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/>, the 
charity (currently surviving on leftover funds) is now seeking more backing, 
following an independent evaluation of the service fromSheffield Hallam 
University <http://www.shu.ac.uk/>, published in August. At the moment the 
prisons pay a minimum of 25% and in year three this rises to 50% match-funding. 
But there are those prisons which extend a residency's life into year five and 
beyond that have funded the whole cost of it.

Who are prison writers-in-residence? They are usually jobbing writers, says 
Hopwood's co-director Pauline Bennett. They will have experience with group 
work (teaching, creative writing classes) but not necessarily prison 
experience. This bit, the foundation helps with as each writer undertakes a 
week-long training course. What is important, says Bennett, is that the writers 
are "strong and they can cope". She adds: "A prison is not a 'place', it's a 
series of departments and the writers need to be able to work well with many 
different departments and the people in them."

One writer, Sarah*, has been writer-in-residence at a maximum security prison 
for the last six years. She goes in two days a week ("and they are very long 
days") to do a mixture of writing workshops, reading groups and one-to-one 
work. Each prison is different but Sarah's groups are all voluntary, although 
one prisoner is doing them as part of his sentence planning. She works in 
tandem with the prison's other structures, often taking referrals from other 
education or mental health specialists.

Sarah first became involved in the role after working with young offenders. "I 
saw then the power of early intervention and the arts and I wanted to see what 
it was like at the other end of the spectrum," she says. One of the greatest 
issues Sarah deals with is low self-esteem. "Often these people have been 
repeatedly told they are a failure," she says.

Sometimes the simple act of empowering can make a difference. Sarah says: "I 
worked with someone who had never been to school. He was in his 50s and an 
emerging reader and writer. The education department told me he had a fair few 
stories to tell and asked me to do 30 minutes a week with him. I got him to 
tell me his stories, I wrote them down, printed them out and he learned to read 
and write from his own stories. Watching his confidence grow like this was 
amazing. He became a very articulate member of the writing group after that."

Sarah reckons she works with about 700 contact points in a year and at least 
50 people a year on a constant basis: "So in a prison population of 400 or 500 
it can make a big difference."

Former teacher and short story writer Jane* is on her third residency in a 
maximum-security prison. "I've had several attempts at novels which have gone 
nowhere," she jokes, "so I know all about disappointment. I am perfect for 
working in a prison."

She describes her role as "massively inspiring," but says that it can be 
draining when times are tough and you wonder if you're really making a 
difference. "There are ups and downs like any job," she says, "but in prison 
everything is magnified so the ups are amazing and the downs are awful."

One of her favourite "ups" was shortly after she had been studying the book We 
Need To Talk About Kevin by Lionel Shriver with some prisoners. A member of 
staff reported one of the prisoners had been talking in another group about how 
he'd suddenly realised the potential impact of his crimes (10 years later) on 
his family.

Hopwood agrees he is addicted to the ups. "It's the most rewarding job I have 
ever done in my life," he says. "It can make your heart swell."

* Names have been changed

This article is published by Guardian Professional. Join the social care 
network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2012/jul/16/become-member-guardian-social-care-network>
 to receive regular emails and exclusive offers.
 