
Q I'd like to know how to go about choosing a child trust fund (CTF). I'd like 
to invest the money in a stakeholder account, but how do I choose a provider - 
is there a performance table somewhere? I don't believe it's simply a case of 
looking up interest rates as it is for a cash CTF.

We also have a five-and-a-half-year-old boy and would like to set up a similar 
account for him. I appreciate the stakeholder account is not available, but we 
would like something that is also long term with moderate risk returns.

A It is far too early to collate performance tables for CTFs. After all, 
although children born after August 2002 qualify for the free vouchers, the 
first CTF funds were not actually launched until April last year.

In any event, it would be extremely difficult to make proper comparisons since 
there are so many conflicting factors to be taken into consideration, in 
particular the level of risk.

The highest returns are likely to come from the most risky funds, which many 
parents want to avoid. Personally, I am not convinced that the stakeholder 
funds are the best option.

Stakeholder drawbacks
 Under the rules, a stakeholder fund has to provide a "lifestyling" guarantee. 
This means that when the child reaches the age of 13 the existing portfolio, 
which must consist of a spread of shares, must be moved into "safer" 
investments such as bonds and cash.

It is a tactic commonly used by pension funds to protect the value of the 
accumulated funds. However, setting an arbitrary date for the switch, such as a 
child's 13th birthday, could mean the portfolio is moved at an unsuitable time, 
for example when the share market has just collapsed and/or the price of bonds 
has reached a peak.

Under the rules, the provider has some flexibility to judge the state of the 
stock market when deciding when to start switching to safer investments. 
However, bearing in mind the cost of running these relatively small funds, it 
is very likely that most fund managers will simply apply a standard formula 
whatever the situation. They will also be aware they could be liable to charges 
of mismanagement if a decision to delay moving the investment backfires.

Extra risk

In my view, which is evidently not shared by the government, forced changes 
provide an extra element of risk - speculating on the right time to move out of 
shares with a loss of potential returns, as well as the extra costs involved in 
making the switch.

With such a long-term investment there is a strong case for sticking with the 
portfolio of shares. One attraction of the CFT stakeholder funds is there is a 
cap, currently of 1.5%, on the annual management charge. In other words, a 
maximum of £1.50 for every £100 held in the fund. However, the restriction on 
charges can also be counter productive.

In order to keep administration costs down managers will offer limited 
choices. They will seek the cheapest, standard portfolios such as "tracker" 
funds, which are linked to the performance of a specified index, such as the 
FTSE 100. Ironically, most non-stakeholder tracker funds have charges below 
1.5% because they are so cheap to run, especially when larger amounts are 
involved.

According to the first statistical report on the CFT scheme issued by the 
Treasury in September, 74% of accounts opened were in stakeholder funds, but 
this figure is distorted by the fact that if a parent has not used the £250 
voucher (or £500 for low-income families), HM Customs and Revenue (HMCR) will 
automatically put the money into a stakeholder account.

Safety first
 At the moment, a lot of parents still prefer the safety offered by cash 
deposit accounts with banks and building societies, even though they are not 
really suitable for a long-term investment of this kind. This is partly because 
many parents find it difficult and confusing to go into share-based CTFs, 
especially if they have not invested in shares before.

There is no simple answer to choosing the best performer. Picking the best 
share-based funds consistently is virtually impossible. Top performers in the 
past years often turn out to be the worst performing funds in ensuing years.

There is a basic strategy of deciding how much risk you are prepared to take, 
bearing in mind the 18-year duration of the investment. Aside from the modest 
kick-start provided by the government voucher, CFTs enjoy favourable tax-free 
treatment.

Reality bites

In reality, these tax concessions don't amount to much unless the fund 
performs astonishingly well. Children have the same tax-free allowances as 
adults and no income can be drawn from a CTF fund. It could be argued that 
non-CFT funds have the potential to provide better returns since they have less 
restrictions and more flexibility, as well as, in some cases, lower charges. 
For example, regular investment trust savings schemes have very low costs, as 
do some unit trust trackers.

It would be an interesting experiment to invest, on behalf of your older boy, 
exactly the same sum as your chosen CFT fund to see which returns most at the 
end of 18 years. My money would be on the non-CFT fund, since the limited 
amount that can be invested in a CFT fund restricts diversification, and the 
stakeholder funds in particular are more inflexible.

You can find details of all the CFT providers and distributors on the 
HMCR-affiliated website of theChild Trust Fund 
<http://www.childtrustfund.gov.uk>. The Association of Investment Companies 
<http://www.aicstats.co.uk>, formerly the Association of Investment Trust 
Companies, provides a useful comparison of the performance of different sectors 
and indices over the past 10 years. You can get a free fact sheet on investing 
for children by calling 0800 707707 or clickinghere 
<http://www.aitc.co.uk/files/factsheets/ChildrenFactsheet.pdf>.

While the CFT scheme has not been the great success claimed in the first 
year's government report, there is no doubt it has achieved one of the 
objectives - to encourage more parents to consider long-term investments on 
behalf of their children, possibly with the help of relatives and friends that 
may well provide a useful annual Christmas or new year present.
 