
Are wanted posters no longer wanted? They may have been serving America’s 
fight against outlaws since the days of the wild west, but this week they were 
finally overtaken by technology. As police hunted a man suspected of being 
involved in the bombings in New York at the weekend, which injured 29 people, 
millions of people’s phones in the city began bleeping.

Since 2012, the US has been using what is known as the Wireless Emergency 
Alerts (WEA) system 
<https://www.fema.gov/frequently-asked-questions-wireless-emergency-alerts> 
sending texts to phones in specific areas. Sometimes it is weather alerts – 
warning of hurricanes or winter storms – but they have also been used to tell 
people to “shelter in place” during a terrorist attack, such as during the 
Boston bombing in 2013, or to raise the alarm about child kidnappings.

Monday’s alert, which read “WANTED: Ahmad Khan Rahami, 28-year-old male. See 
media for pic. Call 9-1-1 if seen,” is thought to be the first time it had been
used to find a suspected criminal 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/20/nyregion/cellphone-alerts-used-in-search-of-manhattan-bombing-suspect.html>
. But according to the city’s mayor, it won’t be the last: “This is a tool we 
will use again in the future,”Bill de Blasio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/bill-de-blasio> was reported to have said. 
“No more wanted posters on the precinct house wall. This is a modern approach 
that really engaged a whole community.”

Alerts are sent from the Federal Emergency Management Agency to mobile phone 
networks, to “push” the message through the mobile masts in the alert zone, so 
only (WEA enabled) phones in the area covered by the mast receive it. Because 
they use a different “channel” on the mobile masts they don’t get stuck if the 
networks are busy. The alerts appear like text messages, and as long as your 
phone is compatible (some older phones may not be), you will get a unique 
bleeping and vibration to help those with vision or hearing impairments. Users 
can opt out of all the messages sent to them - with the exception of a message 
from the US president, although such a message has not yet been sent.

But experts in early warning systems of this nature warn there are dangers to 
using the technology in this way.

Zehra Zaidi, a researcher at UCL’s Institute of Risk and Disaster Reduction, 
says “Public confidence [in the warning] is very important; it determines the 
response. If you send out too many messages there is a danger of public fatigue 
– if the alert is too early, or too late, or not the right message.” The 
systems are used to “pre-empt, prevent or protect” people from harm, and can be 
useful in emergencies but only if the government has enough information, 
explains Zaidi. During the Nice attack, for instance, “people heard noises and 
gunfire and ran in the wrong direction …” and therefore WEA could have been 
useful – but only if the agencies involved knew exactly where the attacker was.

In the UK, although there are initiatives to create smaller-scale systems 
around issues such as flooding, an early warning system is not seen as a 
priority – in part because we have fewer natural disasters, but also because 
the focus is on controlling the event itself, rather than the public reaction 
to it.

Giving people information they don’t know how to respond to can be 
problematic, too. A recentstudy 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1468-5973.12108/abstract> suggested 
that in the case of an unfamiliar event, such as a dirty bomb, the messages 
could create panic and confusion. “As someone who works in the field, this is 
not what the system is made for,” says Zaidi. “It’s not an emergency alert, 
it’s a call for information. People don’t know how to respond and feel panicked 
when they don’t need to.”

And the stakes, she says, could be high: “The next time there is a real 
emergency, people might not take it as seriously.”
 