
At the end of March this year there was a wonderful moment of television 
interviewing onNewsnight. It was just after student protesters had invaded 
Fortnums and other shops in Oxford Street during the TUC march against the cuts.
Emily Maitlis asked Lucy Annson <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HN8BI52su0c> 
from UK Uncut whether, as a spokesperson for the direct-action group, she 
condemned the violence.

Annson swiftly opened the door that leads to the nightmare interview, saying: 
"We are a network of people who self-organise. We don't have a position on 
things. It's about empowering the individual to go out there and be creative."

"But is it wrong for individuals to attack buildings?" asked Maitlis.

"You'd have to ask that particular individual," replied Annson.

"But you are a spokesperson for UK Uncut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/uk-uncut>," insisted Maitlis. And Annson came 
out with a wonderful line: "No. I'm a spokesperson for myself."

What you were seeing in that interchange was the expression of a very powerful 
ideology of our time. It is the idea of the "self-organising network". It says 
that human beings can organise themselves into systems where they are linked, 
but where there is no hierarchy, no leaders and no control. It is not the old 
form of collective action that the left once believed in, where people subsumed 
themselves into the greater force of the movement. Instead all the individuals 
in the self-organising network can do whatever they want as creative, 
autonomous, self-expressive entities, yet somehow, through feedback between all 
the individuals in the system, a kind of order emerges.

At its heart it says that you can organise human beings without the exercise 
of power by leaders.

As a political position it is obviously very irritating for TV interviewers, 
which may or may not be a good thing. And it doesn't necessarily mean it isn't 
a valid way for organising protests – and possibly even human society. But I 
thought I would tell the brief and rather peculiar history of the rise of the 
idea of the "self-organising network".

Of course some of the ideas come out of anarchist thought. But the idea is 
also deeply rooted in a strange fantasy vision of nature that emerged in the 
1920s and 30s as the British Empire began to decline. It was a vision of nature 
and – ultimately – the whole world as a giant system that could stabilise 
itself. And it rose up to grip the imagination of those in power – and is still 
central in our culture.

But we have long forgotten where it came from. To discover this you have to go 
back to a ferocious battle between two driven men in the 1920s. One was a 
botanist and Fabian socialist called Arthur Tansley. The other was one of the 
most powerful and ruthless rulers of the British Empire, Field Marshal Jan 
Smuts.

It all started with a dream. One night Tansley had an unsettling nightmare 
that involved him shooting his wife. So he did the natural thing and started 
reading the works of Sigmund Freud, and even went to be analysed by Freud 
himself. Then Tansley came up with an extraordinary theory. He took Freud's 
idea that the human brain is like an electrical machine – a network around 
which energy flowed – and argued that the same thing was true in nature. That 
underneath the bewildering complexity of the natural world were interconnected 
systems around which energy also flowed. He coined a name for them. He called 
them ecosystems.

But Tansley went further. He said that the world was composed at every level 
of systems, and what's more, all these systems had a natural desire to 
stabilise themselves. He grandly called it "the great universal law of 
equilibrium". Everything, he wrote, from the human mind to nature to even human 
societies – all are tending towards a natural state of equilibrium.

Tansley admitted he had no real evidence for this. And what he was really 
doing was taking an engineering concept of systems and networks and projecting 
it on to the natural world, turning nature into a machine. But the idea, and 
the term "ecosystem", stuck.

But then Field Marshal Smuts came up with an even grander idea of nature. And 
Tansley hated it.

Field Marshal Smuts was one of the most powerful men in the British empire. He 
ruled South Africa for the British empire and he exercised power ruthlessly. 
When the Hottentots refused to pay their dog licences Smuts sent in planes to 
bomb them. As a result the black people hated him. But Smuts also saw himself 
as a philosopher – and he had a habit of walking up to the tops of mountains, 
taking off all his clothes, and dreaming up new theories about how nature and 
the world worked.

This culminated in 1926 when Smuts created his own philosophy. He called it 
Holism. It said that the world was composed of lots of "wholes" – the small 
wholes all evolving and fitting together into larger wholes until they all came 
together into one big whole – a giant natural system that would find its own 
stability if all the wholes were in the right places. Einstein liked the 
theory, and it became one of the big ideas that lots of right-thinking 
intellectuals wrote about in the 1930s. Even the King became fascinated by it.

But Tansley attacked. He publicly accused Smuts of what he called "the abuse 
of vegetational concepts" – which at the time was considered very rude. He said 
that Smuts had created a mystical philosophy of nature and its 
self-organisation in order to oppress black people. Or what Tansley maliciously 
called the "less exalted wholes".

And Tansley wasn't alone. Others, including HG Wells, pointed out that really 
what Smuts was doing was using a scientific theory about order in nature to 
justify a particular order in society – in this case the British empire. 
Because it was clear that the global self-regulating system that Smuts 
described looked exactly like the empire. And at the same time Smuts made a 
notorious speech saying that blacks should be segregated from whites in South 
Africa. The implication was clear: that blacks should stay in their natural 
"whole" and not disturb the system. It clearly prefigured the arguments for 
apartheid.

And this was the central problem with the concept of the self-regulating 
system, one that was going to haunt it throughout the 20th century. It can be 
easily manipulated by those in power to enforce their view of the world, and 
then be used to justify holding that power stable.

Because, although Tansley and Smuts and their argument about power would be 
forgotten, hybrid combinations of their ideas were going to re-emerge later in 
the century – strange fusions of systems engineering and mystical visions of 
organic wholes.

Thirty years later, thousands of young Americans who were disenchanted with 
politics went off instead to set up their own experimental communities – the 
commune movement. And they turned to Arthur Tansley's idea of the ecosystem as 
a model for how to create a human system of order within the communes.

But they also fused it with cybernetic ideas drawn from computer theory, and 
out of this came a vision of strong, independent humans linked, just like in 
nature, in a network that was held together through feedback. The commune 
dwellers mimicked the ecosystem idea in their house meetings where they all had 
to say exactly what was on their minds at that moment – so information flowed 
freely round the system. And through that the communes were supposed to 
stabilise themselves.

But they didn't. In many communes across America in the late 1960s house 
meetings became vicious bullying sessions where the strong preyed mercilessly 
on the weak, and nobody was allowed to voice any objections. The rules of the 
self-organising system said that no coalitions or alliances were allowed 
because that was politics – and politics was bad. If you talk today to 
ex-commune members they tell horrific stories of coercion, violent intimidation 
and sexual oppression within these utopian communities, while the other commune 
members stood mutely watching, unable under the rules of the system to do 
anything to stop it.

Again, the central weakness of the self-organising system was dramatically 
demonstrated. Whether it was used for conservative or radical ends, it could 
not cope with power, which is one of the central dynamic forces in human 
society.

But at the very same time a new generation of ecologists began to question the 
very basis of Arthur Tansley's idea of the self-regulating ecosystem. Out of 
this came a bloody battle within the science of ecology, with the new 
generation showing powerfully that wherever they looked in nature they found 
not stability, but constant, dynamic change; that Tansley's idea of a 
underlying pattern of stability in nature was really a fantasy, not a 
scientific truth.

But in an age that was increasingly disillusioned with politics, the ghosts 
not just of Tansley but also of Smuts now began to re-emerge in epic form. In 
the late 70s an idea rose up that we – and everything else on the planet – are 
connected together in complex webs and networks. Out of it came epic visions of 
connectivity such as the Gaia theory and utopian ideas about the world wide 
web. And human beings believed that their duty was not to try to control the 
system, but to help it maintain its natural self-organising balance.

At the end of 1991 a giant experiment began in the Arizona desert. Its aim was 
to create from scratch a model for a whole self-organising world.

Biosphere 2 was a giant sealed world. Eight humans were locked in with a mass 
of flora and other fauna, and a balanced ecosystem was supposed to naturally 
emerge. But from the start it was completely unbalanced. The CO2 levels started 
soaring, so the experimenters desperately planted more green plants, but the 
CO2 continued to rise, then dissolved in the "ocean" and ate their precious 
coral reef. Millions of tiny mites attacked the vegetables and there was less 
and less food to eat. The men lost 18% of their body weight. Then millions of 
cockroaches took over. The moment the lights were turned out in the kitchen, 
hordes of roaches covered every surface. And it got worse – the oxygen in the 
world started to disappear and no one knew where it was going. The "bionauts" 
began to suffocate. And they began to hate one another – furious rows erupted 
that often ended with them spitting in one another's faces. A psychiatrist was 
brought in to see if they had gone insane, but concluded simply that it was a 
struggle for power.

Then millions of ants appeared from nowhere and waged war on the cockroaches. 
In 1993 the experiment collapsed in chaos and hatred.

The idea of nature that underpinned all these visions of self-organisation was 
a fantasy. A fantasy that was born at a time when those who ran the British 
empire were desperately trying to cling on to power as the dynamic forces of 
history whirled around them. So they turned to science to create a vision of a 
static world where everything is stable and your moral duty is to make sure 
that nothing ever changes.

The other problem with the self-organising system is that it cannot deal with 
power. Although it sees human beings all linked together in a system, its 
fundamental rule is that they must remain separate individuals. Alliances and 
coalitions would compromise the precious autonomy of the individual, and 
destabilise the system.

And in a Newsnight studio on a March evening this year, this is what you could 
hear. Lucy Annson insisted again and again to Emily Maitlis that she was only a 
spokesperson for herself, and under the rules of the network no one could stand 
back and judge the system. Emily said: "You're not a completely peaceful 
organisation." Lucy came back with the killer line: "I don't think anyone can 
make an assessment of that, other than the people involved in the actions 
themselves."

What the anti-cuts movement has done without realising is adopt an idea of how 
to order the world without hierarchies, a machine theory that leads to a static 
managerialism. It may be very good for organising creative and self-expressive 
demonstrations, but it will never change the world.

At the end of Biosphere 2 the ants destroyed the cockroaches. They then 
proceeded to eat through the silicone seal that enclosed the world. Through 
collective action the ants worked together and effectively destroyed the 
existing system. They then marched off into the Arizona desert. Who knows what 
they got up to there.

The second part of Adam Curtis's series All Watched Over by Machines of Loving 
Grace is broadcast on BBC2 on Monday 30 May
 