
"I've never had a character called Jonathan," muses Stephen Poliakoff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/stephen-poliakoff>. "I don't like the 
name. But I've used Richard twice." The writer of nearly 50 plays and 
screenplays, including last year's Dancing on the Edge for the BBC, has come up 
with countless fictional names in the course of a career that has spanned 
almost five decades – from the disaffected waifs of his early plays to figures 
rubbing shoulders with 20th-century history in recent work. So how does he do 
it? "The name comes out of the character," he says. "I often see them, but just 
don't know what to call them. And if I give them the wrong name, I find I can't 
write – it's all to do with unlocking the stream of thought."

Theatrical names do a lot of heavy lifting: creating a world, setting a mood, 
sealing a time and place. A name can be destiny (nomen omen, in the Latin 
phrase), and British drama has a long tradition of grotesque naming to signal 
someone's characteristics. Penitent Brothel and Epicure Mammon in Jacobean 
comedy, Fopling Flutter and Lady Wishfort in the Restoration, wear their 
frailties and desires like branding, even if their authors gradually complicate 
the picture.

Although things may be more subtle in contemporary drama, playwrights do still 
seem to love the name game. "I'm completely obsessed by it," saysJames Graham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/may/16/review-history-falling-things>, 
author of the National Theatre's 2012 hit political dramaThis House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/oct/09/this-house-review-cottesloe>. 
"There is the potential for incredibly sexy, idiosyncratic names to do half the 
work for you." While working on the Old Vic's revival ofSweet Bird of Youth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jun/13/sweet-bird-of-youth-review> last 
year, he trawled through Tennessee Williams's early drafts and saw how 
the writer shifted from naturalism to symbolism. Phil Beam, the protagonist, 
gradually became Chance Wayne, perfect for a smalltown hero shooting for the 
stars. "It was brilliant to see the character gaining romance, poetry and 
symbolism," Graham says. "Chance Wayne is such a cool, matinee-idol name.Kim 
Cattrall <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/kim-cattrall> [the production's 
star] said that as soon as he was named, his fate was sealed."

Williams may be the baroque master of 20th-century naming, but Moira Buffini 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/buffini> had a similar moment of inspiration 
while writing Silence, her 1999 play about a medieval woman raised as a boy. "I 
was in the British Library reading a Cornish epic called The Romance of Silence 
– and I thought, 'That's her name.' The whole play clicked into focus. All you 
know is that, somehow, it nails it." Poliakoff echoes this notion of the right 
name acting as a springboard: "Getting Oswald Bates for Timothy Spall's 
character in Shooting the Past helped me in the writing," he says. "You have 
Bates as in Psycho, and as soon as I got Oswald, I felt his character."
 Rory Kinnear, left, as Sir Fopling Flutter in Man of Mode. Photograph: 
Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
But writers don't just tinker with their characters' names. Abi Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/abimorgan>, who recently collected an Emmy 
for her series The Hour, dropped the "-gail" from her own first name in her 20s 
through "a desire not to be too middle class". Poliakoff, by contrast, is 
always Stephen. "Nobody ever calls me Steve," he says. "And I never shorten 
anybody's name, I don't like it." Has he ever pressed his name into dramatic 
service? "In the TV series Perfect Strangers, the family archivist is a 
Stephen. He was a minor but important character who made all the connections, 
but it wasn't in any way a self-portrait."

In Richard Bean's runaway comic triumph One Man, Two Guvnors, a posh twit 
harrumphs: "First names are for girls and Norwegians." But withholding a first 
name can actually make a powerful statement. It suggests intimacy denied, 
motive obscured: as in Mrs Trevel, the insistent and quite possibly crazed 
parent who stalks a child psychologist in Poliakoff's Sweet Panic. 
"Originally," he says, "I wanted to call the mother Mrs Trevelyan, with its 
sense of mock grandeur. But it was such a long name, I decided to snap it in 
half to see how that looked. I couldn't find a single person in the world with 
that name, but when it was spoken on stage it worked very well." Didn't he 
privately give Mrs Trevel a first name? "No, I wouldn't have known her name."

Likewise the cabal of retired teachers in his most recent stage play, My City. 
For Lambert, the charismatic but mysterious headteacher played by Tracey 
Ullman, Poliakoff drew on his own past. "I named her partly after my first 
boss, the TV producer Verity Lambert. She produced my first TV dramas – we were 
never friends, but I knew her all my adult life. She was formidable and in a 
position of great authority. Verity was a glamorous, warm person – but she and 
the head were both stars in their own world."

James Graham has a grumble about increasingly finding himself writing for the 
screen: "You have so many characters! You find yourself scrabbling through your 
inbox. I ended up giving them the surnames of all my teachers." However, in the 
worlds of cinema and television, legal departments check that no fictional 
paedophile or philanderer has a real-world namesake. Buffini fell foul of this 
process when adapting Posy Simmonds's graphic novelTamara Drewe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/sep/09/tamara-drewe-review>, in which 
libidinous Nicholas Hardyman is a key character. Alas, the name exists in 
meatspace. "Posy got away with it, but we had to change it to Hardiment, which 
isn't so good."

Buffini should take comfort from the fact that this is a problem that has 
afflicted the best. Falstaff, the rascal at the heart of Shakespeare's Henry IV 
plays, was originally named Sir John Oldcastle – a friend of Prince Hal's who 
met a martyr's death. But Sir John's descendents, including Elizabeth I's lord 
chamberlain, balked at a character so steeped in drink and dishonour, and 
insisted on the change.

Having to drop a name because reality got there first is, says Abi Morgan, 
"like your best friend choosing the name you planned for your own baby". In 
Poliakoff's film Capturing Mary, Maggie Smith played a journalist called Mary 
Gibson. "For some reason," he says, "it sounded very convincing." But late in 
the day, they discovered there had actually been a journalist of that name. 
"Maggie was very upset," he remembers. "It seemed a big loss, but I was 
surprised the actor felt it as much as I did."

Sometimes, authors withhold names altogether. Morgan's The Mistress Contract, 
about to open at London's Royal Court, is based on the unusual real-life 
relationship between two elderly Californians, who are labelled simply She and 
He. "They use terms of endearment," Morgan explains. "But people rarely use 
each other's names in conversation. It always clangs when they do it in films."

You might have thought that writing about famous figures presented no great 
difficulty when it came to names. But Buffini and Graham have both fretted over 
a dauntingly familiar one: Margaret Thatcher. "You have to get under the skin," 
says Buffini, who decided to reduce Thatcher to the sawn-off "Mag" in 2013's 
Handbagged. "When someone is an 'ism' that's really tough," says Graham, who in 
2007 examined the ex-PM's childhood with his play, Little Madam. He found an 
intriguing way to think of her afresh: "Just writing 'the Roberts household' in 
the stage directions helped. She became Margaret Roberts, a 12-year-old from 
Grantham." Thatcher's ascent also stalks the action in Graham's This House; but 
like all the play's MPs, she is known only by her constituency. "She's 'the 
member for Finchley'. I carve out her career without calling her Thatcher."

Graham's play didn't just do away with names, though. He even fretted over 
whether to put first names or surnames on his script when introducing a 
character's lines. "I was aware that just the look of a name can create an 
environment in the minds of the actors," he says. In the end, he plumped for 
surnames. So if a name can open the door to a character, does Graham have any 
thoughts for future dramatists who may set out to explore our own times? "I 
worry for Miliband," he says. "There's something quite blah about his name."
 