
We eat raw fruit as a dessert every day. It's easy and delicious, but a tad 
samey. Any suggestions for fruit desserts?

Jean Rigby, Halifax

I find cooking or just warming fruit can alter its texture and flavour greatly.
Fruit <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/fruit> also benefits from a 
hot/cold combination: think poached pears and ice-cream, or frozen berries 
covered in hot, melted white chocolate.

Try this orange citrus parfait with glazed rhubarb.The parfait is a cinch, can 
be made well in advance and goes with lots of desserts. For the parfait, you 
need: 8 egg yolks; 280ml 2-1 stock syrup; 420ml double cream, lightly whipped 
(until it just holds its shape); and the zest and juice of 3 oranges (boil the 
juice until reduced by half and cool). To make the 2-1 stock syrup, boil 450g 
of sugar with 280ml of water until clear and leave to cool. (This can be kept 
in a sealed jar for many weeks for vinaigrettes and many sweet dishes.)

Whisk together the egg yolks, grated zest and stock syrup in a metal bowl. 
Once mixed, continue to beat the mixture over a pan of boiling water until it 
is thick, hot and the whisk leaves a discernible trail in the bowl. Remove from 
the heat and transfer to an electronic mixing bowl. Using the whisk attachment, 
beat the mixture until it is quite cold and very thick. Now add the reduced 
juice and fold in the whipped cream. The parfait can now be frozen.

For the glazed rhubarb, bring to the boil 570ml of water, 225g of sugar, 2 bay 
leaves, 1 small cinnamon stick and the juice and rind of a lemon. Reduce the 
heat and add 6 sticks of rhubarb, washed and cut into 5cm pieces. Don't crowd 
the pan: cook over a gentle heat in batches if necessary. Turn over while 
cooking and don't overcook – the rhubarb is ready when the tip of a knife 
pierces the fruit easily. Taste for sweetness, lift out, bring the liquid to 
the boil and reduce to a light syrup. Pour over the rhubarb and serve with the 
parfait.

• Sonya Kidney is a chef and the owner of Soda delicatessen, Oxfordshire
 