
It’s not just people at or near retirement who can make use of the new pension 
freedoms. Millions of people in work aged 55-plus who are perhaps five or 
10 years away from retiring will be able to dip into their pension pots. So how 
will it work? Should you access the cash? What about tax? Here we answer the 
questions many workers are likely to have.

So I don’t have to retire to take the money?

That’s right. There are millions of people in their 50s and 60s who are still 
working and who from Monday will – in theory at least – be able to access their 
pension and use the cash for whatever purpose they like.

Let’s say you are 55, have worked for the same company for the past 15 years, 
and are paying into its pension scheme. You have a small-ish defined 
contribution (DC, aka money purchase) pension pot from the five years you spent 
at your previous firm, which you have never got round to transferring over. If 
you want that money, you will now be able to take it as a single lump sum, or 
draw it down over several years. The same applies if you have a personal 
pension or stakeholder plan, as these are DC schemes, too.

Not only that: the legislation allows those aged 55-plus to take money out of 
their current DC workplace pension scheme at the same time as they are paying 
into it. If, say, you need £5,000, your scheme may allow a payment for that 
amount to be made directly to you. But from Monday, anyone who dips into their 
pension in this way will see the maximum they can pay into their scheme (and 
benefit from tax relief) permanently slashed from £40,000 a year to £10,000 a 
year. That said, most people aren’t paying anything like £10,000 a year into 
their pension.

What if I’ve got an old final salary pension pot relating to a previous job?

You will be able to access it, though if you are in your mid-50s you will 
almost certainly receive a reduced pension, to reflect the fact that you are 
taking it early (ie, before the scheme’s retirement age).

Alternatively, you could transfer that pot away from your former employer – 
for example, into a personal pension plan. But you are giving up a guaranteed 
pension income and may have to pay fees, says Malcolm McLean at consultancy 
Barnett Waddingham, who adds: “In general, that would not necessarily be a 
sensible thing to do.”

This all sounds great. But what’s 
the catch?



Aside from the obvious point that this is money for your retirement, there are 
a whole load of potential hazards and downsides to bear in mind:

1. It’s far from clear how many schemes will offer all these options, and when.

2. You could be clobbered by tax.

3. You could run out of money.

So should I break into my pension pot?

Paying off expensive debt may be the right answer for certain people, says 
Andy James at wealth advice firm Towry. Andrew Tully at retirement specialist 
firm MGM Advantage agrees, saying: “If you’ve got credit card debt and you’re 
paying 18% interest, then it probably makes sense.”

Sophia Singleton at pension consultants Aon Hewitt says that while paying off 
a mortgage or another debt might be the right thing to do, “potentially paying 
for the cruise of a lifetime or a child’s wedding might not be. You may not be 
able to continue working in later life to supplement that shortfall at 65 or at 
retirement”.

Tully says the general rule should probably be: don’t take it out unless 
there’s a good reason to do so. But he adds: “Using a little bit to enjoy 
yourself – to go on a holiday, for example – sounds fair to me.”

What about public sector workers? 

The rules are different for most of those who work in the public sector. From 
Monday, transfers from “unfunded” public sector schemes – such as those for NHS 
workers, teachers and civil service staff – into defined contribution schemes 
will be banned (it’s too late to do anything now). However, for “funded” public 
sector schemes such as the Local Government Pension Scheme, transfers will 
continue to be allowed – though whether you should do that is quite another 
matter.

These new flexibilities sound great, 
but will employers and pension schemes be ready? 

Many won’t, particularly some smaller and medium-sized companies. And some 
people’s schemes will be a lot less flexible than others. “It’s clear that not 
everything is going to be ready and available on day one of this new era,” says 
Singleton.

Many firms are still working out what they are going to offer members – for 
example, will an individual be able to withdraw some of their money, or will 
the scheme require them to take it all if they want it?

What about tax? 

That’s probably the biggest downside. “If people who are still working cash 
in some/all of their pension pot, then tax is the key risk. As the withdrawal 
is added to their other income, it is very likely they will pay at least 20% 
tax, and many who may always have been basic-rate taxpayers could fall into the 
higher-rate tax bracket for the first time,” says Tully.

He gives the example of Jack, who earns £30,000 a year so is a basic-rate 
taxpayer. In 2015-16 he would normally pay tax of £3,880. He withdraws his 
pension pot of £30,000. The first £7,500 is tax-free, while the remaining 
£22,500 is added on to his income, giving him a total taxable income of 
£52,500. He would have to pay tax of £10,403 – ie, an extra £6,523. Jack would 
pay less tax if he made the withdrawal in phases – if, for example, he took 
£10,000 in 2015-16, £10,000 in 2016-17 and £10,000 in 2017-18, he shouldn’t 
fall into the higher-rate tax bracket.
 