
Q I am writing this email to you at 5.45pm and I'm still at my desk. I was 
meant to leave at 5pm but I have only just finished doing all the stuff I 
needed to do. In fact, that's probably not true, but I have done enough that I 
feel I can go home without feeling guilty. I was in early and worked through 
lunch - I was at a meeting, but I often eat at my desk and end up checking 
emails or picking up the phone so I never seem to end up having a full lunch 
hour. I don't mind working longer than I am paid to work, as I enjoy my job and 
want to get on, but I am worried it is becoming a habit that I will not be able 
to break.

I feel I could be doing better things with my time, or feel more generally 
relaxed if I didn't spend so much time in the office. But I feel guilty about 
leaving before things are finished, and get cross with the people who do leave 
on time every day, so I end up staying on when other people have gone home. 
What can I do? My job sometimes does require staying late so I'm not sure I 
could commit to doing something regularly in the evening just to make me leave 
on time - I've thought about signing up for evening classes, but if there was 
an emergency here I wouldn't be able to go.
PT

A Working late is one of the thorniest of problems - not least because, while 
we are all at it, attitudes as to whether we should be differ widely between 
industries, companies, departments, even line managers. A City solicitor, for 
instance, may see a large salary as compensation for working a billion hours a 
week (although you do wonder why firms don't just employ two well- but not 
crazily-paid staff instead), while her equivalent elsewhere, without the 
equivalent salary, is not best pleased if she works beyond 5.30pm.

Where working hours become a problem (as in your case) is when either you seem 
to be working harder and for longer than your colleagues, or where you feel you 
didn't sign up to putting in an extra hour or two every working day.

So how do you tackle that? Strictly speaking you shouldn't have to: your line 
manager should already have noticed that your workload is too heavy. But I 
wouldn't bet on that happening (they're probably either too swamped with work 
themselves, or, more gallingly, not in the office late enough to realise).

So get yourself a notebook and start keeping a note of how many hours you're 
doing and what particular tasks are very time-consuming. Think about what you 
could delegate, and identify anything you're struggling with. You don't need to 
be ostentatious about what you're doing - and if people ask, you can say you're 
just making an effort to manage your time better. Then make an appointment to 
see your line manager and raise your concerns.

Lots of people worry about doing this. They think that admitting they can't 
get through their workload within normal office hours is tantamount to saying: 
"I can't do my job". Or "actually, I'm just not very interested in this. Please 
don't promote me ever." Of course, neither should be the case. But - and I'm 
just being realistic here - you do need to present your case carefully and 
smartly to make sure that isn't what your boss takes away from the meeting.

Present the situation as queries that have solutions. Say: "I wonder if you 
have any tips on how I can do this task more efficiently?" not "I have to spend 
HOURS doing this totally pointless task and it's ruining my life." Even if that 
is closer to reality.

It's fair to explain that you'd feel you would do your job better if you had 
more and better downtime away from it. Explain how committed you are to the 
position, and that you want to do it to the best of your abilities. I'm not 
saying there isn't potential for this to go wrong - not all bosses are forward 
thinking - but if the situation is leaving you cross with colleagues and 
feeling guilty for leaving, it really is time to do something about it, before 
you just explode with anger.

And if it doesn't go well and you find the situation continues? Personally? 
I'd just go and book all those commitments. Evening classes, team sports - 
anything that means you have to leave on time at least twice a week. If your 
colleagues are going on time, there really is no reason why you shouldn't. And 
start taking a lunchbreak. You'll have a more productive afternoon if you've 
stepped away from your screen and cleared your head. And really - how much 
emailing can anyone really do brandishing a sandwich?
 