
One of the best ways to prepare for a job interview is to do a mock. If you 
know someone who is experienced in interviewing people, they might be able to 
help you. If not, don't give up on the idea: one way around this is to run your 
own mock video interview.

If you have a video camera, a camera on your mobile, or a webcam on your 
computer, then you already have the necessary kit. You may feel slightly 
nervous or embarassed about seeing yourself on video (everyone does, you're in 
good company), but it's worth getting over this shyness as it can be a powerful 
way of improving your interview performance. You can be your own interviewer if 
necessary – read the questions out to yourself before answering them on camera. 
You could even pre-record your questions and play them back during your mock 
interview.

Here's the process you should follow:

1. Select your interview questions and their order
2. Record yourself asking these questions
3. Get the footage onto a computer to act as a virtual interviewer
4. Record yourself answering the questions
5. Play it back and review your performance

Pick your questions

Use a mixture of common interview questions 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/careers-blog/common-interview-questions> with 
ones that are tailored to the role you are applying for, using the job 
description and personal specification to guide you. For example, if the person 
specification says the recruiter is looking for "excellent customer service 
skills," then the question may be: "Tell me about a time when you have 
delivered excellent customer service following a complaint". Questions that ask 
you to give examples of situations in previous work are common as they allow 
you to present evidence of a skill.

Start the interview with "Tell me about yourself," and finish with "Are there 
any questions that you would like to ask before we finish?". Six questions is a 
good start – though the more preparation the better.

Record your questions

This doesn't have to be too sophisticated – it's just a prompt for you to 
answer, but playing back recorded questions is closer to an actual interview 
than simply reading them out as you go. Leave a few seconds between each one so 
when you are playing it back you can pause it.

Record your answers

Play the questions, pausing after each one, and answer them to the camera, as 
if it was the interview. Try to be concise and speak for no longer than a few 
minutes on each one. For the "Tell me about a time when…" questions, you may 
want to use the STAR acronym to structure your answer Here's an example:

S – situation – describe the problem you encountered
T – task – what was required of you
A – activity – what you did to solve the problem
R – result – how brilliantly the situation turned out.

Review your performance

Don't do this immediately: take a break, return to the footage after around10 
minutes and watch it twice.

The first time, pause between answers and make notes, answering the following 
questions:

• How fully did you answer the question?
• How convincing was your answer?
• Is there anything you would change if you were asked it again?
• How long was your answer? Could it be more concise?
• How was your body language? Did it match your words? Did you fidget?
• Are there any words that you repeat excessively? Most people have an "um" or 
an "actually" that they over use when they are nervous.
• Where did your eyes go? Were you maintaining eye contact with the camera?
• How was the pace of your answer?

The second time, go back and watch through from beginning to end again, 
without pausing. How would you rate yourself overall? If there were three 
things you would change, what would they be?

Then give yourself a pat on the back – and invite yourself back for the second 
round and repeat tomorrow.

Michael Higgins is a career coach at This Is My Path 
<http://www.thisismypath.co.uk> and author of Pit Stop: A Career Review for 
Busy People 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780957277304>
.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly update and careers 
ebook <https://register.guardian.co.uk/careers/>.
 