
In the first instalment of this blog 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/improve-your-professional-writing-how-to>, we 
focused on how to get started when writing: organising and structuring your 
ideas. We also touched upon elevator pitches and the importance of clear 
headlines. Here, we explore the extra elements that can help your reader 
navigate your work.

Use examples

Knowing your core message is vital, but if it's stripped bare of any colour it 
can become dry and boring. Even where the core message is complicated or 
obscure, you may still be able to find a story or analogy to demonstrate your 
point.

Finding simple comparisons and thinking about things from your reader's 
perspective will improve the clarity of your work. And you might need to think 
laterally about how to do this.

Explain your references

Try to stay away from – or at least explain – any jargon and check that you're 
not making assumptions about your readers and their understanding. References 
that may be less obvious need explanation, either immediately or as footnotes, 
in an appendix or glossary.

Use acronyms or abbreviations only after explaining their meaning first. Not 
knowing what RPG refers to – be that a role-playing game or a rocket-propelled 
grenade – could get your readers into all sorts of trouble.

A picture tells a thousand words

Consider how visuals might help to shortcut or enhance your words. Even formal 
documents can be brought to life, and dense or complex information can be 
simplified using graphics.

There's no end of interesting visuals available: infographics can be 
innovative and engaging, simple line graphs or bar charts can display growth 
and pie charts could reveal market shares.

But beware of hasty cutting and pasting. Black and white photos, rainbow 
graphics, cartoons, random company logos – we regularly see them packed into 
someone's work, either to observe company protocols or brighten up a dull slide 
or page. But without proper arrangement, they can look like a dog's dinner. The 
symbols and images you choose need to be consistent with the tone of your 
communication and should reinforce your key messages.

Plain English is a good idea

No matter how serious or important your subject is, mere mortals need to be 
able to understand it. As professional communicators, our task is to help 
people digest the depths of our expertise and knowledge by writing in plain 
English.

Clean, clear and straightforward writing works: it ensures that our ideas are 
more likely to be received, understood and acted upon.

Expect to redraft

Very few professional writers would ever dream that their first draft is good 
enough — nor should professionals who are writing a document.

In the drafting process, it's useful to revisit the five "Ws" 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/improve-your-professional-writing-how-to> – who, 
what, where, when and why – to help you focus your ideas.

Checking your first draft for clarity is just as important as proofreading for 
typos – sometimes it can help to print out your work for this. Set your writing 
aside, take a break and then come back to your final draft with a fresh mind. 
Get someone else to read your writing too – you may no longer see the wood for 
the trees.

So, if your writing quills need sharpening, following these few simple tips 
should help you to hone the clarity of your professional writing.

Julie Wales <http://www.juliewales.com> is a communication skills expert and 
tutor.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Careers 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/>. To get more content and advice like this 
direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update and receive our free 
careers ebook <https://register.guardian.co.uk/careers/>.
 