
Christmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> morning, 2010. 
I’m in bed with my mother in a Thai sex hotel. It is my 30th birthday. How have 
things got so out of hand?

To wind back a little, I hadn’t been looking forward to a third decade. My 
father had died three years before, and I’d responded with great 
resourcefulness, by having a comprehensive breakdown, ending a nurturing 
relationship and moving back home. I couldn’t work, or go out, and didn’t want 
to be seen. A life shrunk to four small walls was all that seemed manageable. I 
was watching The Lion King a lot, and doing all the voices.

So when my mother announced that we were going to Australia and Thailand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/thailand> for Christmas, I was unresponsive. 
Having been in the UK since 1979, she had recently become a British citizen and 
wanted to celebrate by flying as far away from Britain as geographically 
possible. She wanted me to see the Great Barrier Reef, she said. I pictured men 
in shorts, throwing pigskins at my head. But I had no other plans.

The Australian leg was … not good. I became extremely sick, which is my 
signature move. My mother, basically a toddler, had us pinballing between 
territories like they were rides at Alton Towers. In three weeks we flew from 
Perth to Cairns to Melbourne to Darwin. We spent about 40 minutes in Alice 
Springs. She was loving it; I was dragging the meat of my own carcass around. 
We went to Sydney for a single night, which I spent staring at a toilet bowl. 
In one airport I looked so rough they nearly didn’t let me on the plane in case 
I had bird flu. The night before we left the country, my ex called me on a 
hotel lobby phone to tell me our dog had died.

Like I said: not good. Still, there was everything to play for. Christmas in 
Thailand sounded like an idea from a “30 things to do before you’re 30” 
peak-experience hit list, the ones that fixate on kayaking, takingayahuasca 
<http://www.ayahuasca.com/> on Machu Picchu, or inconveniencing dolphins in 
Cancun. However, those lists are aimed at sexy young couples who like house 
music, not a depressed 29-year-old and his elderly mother. Don’t imagine beach 
huts or tinsel-strewn palm trees. Owing to a lack of online hut-booking 
facilities, and mobility issues, we were to spend the week sharing a Bangkok 
hotel room.

You may have a dated, stereotypically seedy mental image accompanying the 
words “Bangkok hotel room”. You’d be correct. Instead of chocolates, they left 
condoms on the pillows of the bed. The bed which we were sharing. The “door” to 
the bathroom was a barely frosted glass slat, a saloon door to a nightmare. A 
week on a porn set was not how I’d pictured becoming a man. At least, not like 
this.

So there we were, Christmas morning in a Buddhist land, my birthday, no 
tinsel, surrounded by sex aids. The thing was, with nothing else to do, we sat 
in the room and talked. I couldn’t remember the last time we had.Depression 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/depression> had left me uncommunicative, 
paralysed, angry with the world. There is so much shame attached to not being 
able to function, and I knew my life hadn’t progressed. I was turning 30 having 
not realised any dreams. I felt small.

Finally talking, it became clear none of that stuff mattered to her. I’d done 
nothing in my whole life to make her proud, yet unfathomably, she was proud 
anyway. She’d used her savings for us to be able to go away as far away as we 
could, to show me things, for me to be happy.

And I asked her about her life, which I’d never done, having always assumed I 
just emerged from a fog in the 1980s. She told me she’d been born in a trench 
in Burma during the war. How her mother had suffered too much to bear, losing 
many children. How my mother raised her surviving siblings. How later, after 
the death of my father – her husband – she’d not given up on life, and taught 
herself a new skill every year, conga drumming, sculpture, digital 
storytelling. We talked about what it means to surrender your Indian passport 
forever, and take a British one. I realised I came from somewhere, which is to 
say I realised I was alive.

No one tells you the truth about adulthood, which is that you spend most of it 
missing people, and only a handful of moments last. Sometimes we have to force 
ourselves to not shut out the people we love, because they’re all that keeps us 
here. I didn’t transform. I can happily report I’m still grumpy, ungrateful and 
complain a lot. But I started to understand, that Christmas. And I started to 
mend.

Thanks, Mum. And Merry Christmas, everyone. Wherever you are.
 