Which town is infested by la peste in The Plague (1947) by Albert Camus?  
Algiers  Tangier  Muscat  Oran Simone de Beauvoir's The Blood of Others (1945) 
sees pacifist Jean make a volte-face to become a leader of which group?  Vichy 
government  French Popular Party  French resistance  German military 
intelligence How many souls are damned to interpersonal hell in Jean-Paul 
Sartre's No Exit (1944)?  1  2  3  4 Sartre considered Fyodor Dostoyevsky's 
Notes from the Underground (1864) to be the first existentialist novel. In 
which famous St Petersberg boulevard does The Underground Man hang around?  
Kamennoostrovsky Prospekt  Nevsky Prospekt  Moskovsky Prospekt  Bolshoy Prospekt
Latin American existentialism is too often overlooked. In The Passion According 
to GH (1964), by Clarice Lispector, a sculptress from Rio endures an 
existential <i>passio</i> – lasting a single night – with a creature of this 
type.  Butterfly  Dog  Cockroach  Cat Kafka is an immediate precursor to the 
midcentury existentialists. The protagonist of his unfinished novel, The Castle 
(1926), is known by which letter?  M  K  Q  V Which 18th-century mystic's 
writings make life even more miserable for the neurotic narrator of Inferno, 
August Strindberg's pioneering 1898 novel?  Swedenborg  Madame Guyon  Novalis  
Elijah ben Solomon (the Gaon of Vilna) The Invisible Man of Ralph Ellison's 
1953 novel steals electricity from which supplier?  White Titan Light & Power 
Company  Monopolated Light & Power Company  Black Power Company, Ltd.  
Consolidated Quango Electric Co. What does Robert Musil naughtily rename the 
Austro-Hungarian Empire in The Man Without Qualities (1930-43), his modernist 
doorstopper?  Ostrichland  Merdungland  Kakanien  Albernien Which of these 
lines is uttered by Meursault, the protagonist of Camus' The Outsider (1942)?  
“It is not necessary to accept everything as true, one must only accept it as 
necessary.”  “... and standing before this symbolic night bursting with stars, 
I opened myself for the first time to the tender indifference of the world."  
“Like all dreamers, I mistook disenchantment for truth.”  “Nothing happens 
while you live. The scenery changes, people come in and go out, that's all."  
You got…  A perfect score. But you know just how meaningless that is, don't you?
 An average score – like the one alloted to all beings, destined to lead 
meaningless lives. Roll your stone back up the hill, if you can muster the will.
 This is hopeless. But then, it's also a bit arbitrary, isn't it? (That should 
make you more cheerful, you know.) Make like Sisyphus and try again!  Challenge 
your friends Submit answers  