
Q I have been working in sales for the past five years, and have been 
successful. However, I am sick of it, as it is sometimes too depressing and I 
feel I should change my career. Could you suggest some options? I am very good 
at typing - around 80 wpm. How do I go about getting professional jobs as a 
typist?
N

A January - a time of freezing cold, driving rain, empty bank accounts and 
self-denial on the food and booze fronts. And also, because all that is 
obviously not bad enough, a time to change job. Just thinking about it makes me 
feel tired. But while I falter, the rest of the nation rallies - more people 
look for new, ahem, "challenges" in January than at any other time of the year.

But idly flicking through the job ads to see how much more cash you could earn 
is not the same as plunging headlong into a career change, which is what you 
seem to be planning. It's one thing deciding that work is a bit boring, and 
quite another to ditch all your skills and experience in one area and start 
again in another. Particularly when you don't really seem to have any grasp as 
to what that other area might be. Put bluntly, this all seems a bit half-arsed.

Have you considered whether you might enjoy your job more if you were doing it 
at a different company, for instance? Or whether you could change your role 
without moving out of the sector completely? Have you really looked at all the 
possibilities the industry offers before writing off sales completely?

As for professional typing jobs, you need to do at least a bit of research 
concerning the area in which you think you'd like to work. The secretarial and 
administrative sector has changed in recent years with the growth of graduate 
PA jobs, particularly for those who have a second language. But you'll need 
more than typing skills for these roles - great communication, strong IT skills 
and a good phone manner are all important. It's not simply a case of sitting 
down and typing up a few letters.

It might be worth talking to a recruitment agency that specialises in finding 
admin staff and seeing what roles it suggests as a match for your skills. If 
you find those choices disappointing, get the consultant to explain what 
qualities firms are looking for in candidates, and think about getting some 
extra training.

You need to talk about salaries too. Work out how much you earned each month 
this year, if it fluctuated depending on sales, then compare it with the kind 
of secretarial jobs you are likely to be offered - and don't cheat by just 
using the top-of-the-range bilingual PA rates either. Be honest.

Only after all this can you make an informed decision about changing job. 
Money is by no means everything, and a career you're passionate about may well 
be more rewarding than a big fat salary. But that doesn't seem to be the 
driving force of your dilemma.

My advice is to stay put for now, and use the next few months to work out what 
you really want to do, and how to get the skills and qualifications to do it. 
Then make your move. Don't just rush at things without thinking it through; 
moving jobs is stressful enough without doing it badly.
 