
Q I will soon be in possession of a cheque for around £130,000 from the sale 
of my main residence and am looking for the best way of earning income from it 
while I am looking for another property. I do not have a property in mind at 
present so I am looking at putting the money away for a minimum of three months.
AW 

A Investing cash may involve much less risk than going into shares, but 
choosing a deposit savings account is much harder these days than in the past - 
ironically because of the greater choice available. It is like going to a 
restaurant with a huge menu instead of only a limited choice of dishes.

There are many factors that have to be taken into consideration when selecting 
the best account for you. Perhaps the most important is whether you want 
instant access to your money or are prepared to lock it away for a specified 
period in order to qualify for a higher return.

"Rate tarts"
 Before taking a decision, try to make a realistic estimate of when you will 
need access to all or some of your money. Bear in mind that it might be galling 
if your money was locked away when a good opportunity to buy another property 
cropped up.

The main high street banks pay pitifully low rates on instant access accounts, 
so it is worth shopping around for accounts paying interest rates that at least 
beat inflation, with no risk of any loss of capital.

However, there is a need for caution when comparing interest rates offered. 
Many deposit accounts quoting what appear to be the highest interest rates only 
pay those rates in the form of "bonuses" if no money is withdrawn for a certain 
period.

Another trick the banks play is to offer a high "introductory" bonus for an 
initial period of, say, six months, but cut this back to a lower rate 
subsequently so that the AER (annual equivalent rate) is much below the 
starting figure. The bank's hope is that customers' inertia will lead them to 
leave their money in the account even after the reduction.

So unless you want to be a "rate tart", constantly shifting your money around 
in pursuit of the best rates (but earning no interest during the "lost" period 
that occurs every time you change accounts), it is easier to stick with one or 
two "core" accounts that suit your time scale and income requirements.

More hidden dangers
 Most deceptive are the regular savings accounts that offer a seemingly high 
interest rate based on monthly contributions over a 12-month period. For 
example 8% is paid on the first monthly contribution, but the second 
contribution receives eleven twelfths of this rate, sinking to one twelfth of 
8% on the final contribution. The average return for the year is, therefore, 
well below the 8% starting figure - and your money is locked away for 12 months.

Other savings accounts with high rates are dependent on a specified amount 
being retained in the account or paid in each month.

Apart from the time period, it is also important to bear tax implications in 
mind. The recent rise in the Bank of England base rate should help cash 
investments maintain the basic objective of maintaining their value above 
inflation. However, it is a close run thing to beat inflation when income tax 
is taken into account - especially for high rate taxpayers, who face a 40% tax 
deduction on the interest earned.

It is important, therefore, to take full advantage of tax-free investments 
such as Isas (Individual Savings Accounts). Follow the same cautious line when 
choosing between these. Watch out for bonuses only paid after a certain period 
has elapsed, and for early redemption penalties.

Internet sites like moneysupermarket <http://www.moneysupermarket.com/> and 
Moneyfacts <http://www.moneyfacts.co.uk/>are useful resources for comparing the 
many deposit accounts available. Financial pages in the newspapers, especially 
at weekends, also publish comprehensive details of the "best" rates for 
different kinds of accounts, and the minimum amounts required.

Eggs and baskets
 With a sum as large as £130,000, there is a case for diversifying investments 
over a range of different accounts and products if you are not in need of 
instant income.

As well as an ISA you might consider putting a proportion into premium bonds. 
There is no guaranteed return at all but it is a very safe gamble if you do not 
need the income and, with luck, you could receive a hefty tax-free sum. You can 
also withdraw your money at short notice without paying any penalty.

The way in which you invest can also affect the return. Higher rates are 
available for investments made via the internet, or by telephone since the 
administrative costs involved are much lower.

Fixed rate accounts would seem a bit dangerous at present unless you believe 
interest rates have now reached a peak and will not continue to rise further.

The choice of investments available widens if you are prepared to lock money 
away for longer periods. Bonds and government securities also need to be held 
to maturity if you are to take advantage of the known return they offer without 
any risk.
 