
The last few years have been difficult for the UK economy, and those working 
in IT haven't escaped feeling some of the pain. Innovation in technology rarely 
stops or even slows down just because the economy may be facing difficulties. 
It is fair to say that the pace of change in technology and the holding back of 
investment has led to a situation when transformation is now very much on the 
agenda for all companies. This is likely to come about through the use of 
technology such as cloud computing, which is now driving demand for those with 
very specialist skills.

A step change

Cloud computing 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/cloud-computing/what-is-cloud-computing> 
technologies, networks and data systems that store data virtually are now one 
of the most talked-about topics in IT. Businesses are looking for more 
cost-effective and agile ways to build and operate their IT infrastructure. 
More efficient ways of sharing information and collaborating can offer real 
competitive advantage. This means cloud is more than just a passing fad, but a 
real step change for the industry. It's changing the way IT professionals need 
to think and work.

As a result of this move towards virtualisation and cloud computing, the 
physical aspect of IT systems is reducing, and workers in IT may find 
themselves working less and less directly with large data storage units.

That's why, if you're looking to work with this emerging technology, you'll 
need to be good at more abstract thinking instead, and an active imagination 
comes in handy as well. But you mustn't forget to link it back to the needs of 
the business – you can't only focus on which technology to deploy. You also 
need good project management skills to be able to take a vision, no matter how 
enormous it seems to be, and break it down into sizable chunks of actions.

Skills for cloud architects

To work as a cloud architect, you need strong virtualisation skills, 
automation and orchestration experience. Employers also look for recognised 
professional qualifications (ie CCIE, VCP, Microsoft SQL) and multiplatform 
experience. Strong "on the job" experience and showing you are keeping up with 
what's happening in the market are really key. Understanding what analysts talk 
about, what vendors offer and what customers want is also crucial. Combining 
this with strategic understanding of the business goals alongside commercial 
acumen will help you stand out from the crowd.

Even though it might be reasonably easy to find people with the right skills 
for this sort of work, it can take a long time to bring them up to speed. This 
is because cloud is not necessarily the same everywhere; each company would use 
a different model.

Being able to advise a CIO on a strategic level

What we've talked about so far is very much working with cloud technologies at 
an operational level, but at a strategic level it's extremely difficult to find 
the right people to work on cloud projects. People who can scope and define 
what customers want, and who can help organisations understand what solutions 
are right for their business are thin on the ground.

A recent report on employment and recruitment in the IT sector from 
recruitment agency Hays shows the market for hiring business-facing IT 
specialists is undergoing a rapid transformation, and it has become one of the 
fastest growing sectors in the UK. No wonder; these people help their clients 
add value to the business. But a different mindset is needed to be able to do 
this – you need to be strategically and commercially focused if the 
transformation is going to be properly adopted.

The Hays report indicated that throughout the downturn it has still remained a 
challenge to recruit the best workers in this field. We've seen this first-hand 
at Cable&Wireless Worldwide, and as a result we have recruited internally to 
keep up with the growing demand in our flexible computing team. It's worth 
looking around in your organisation for the right role to help move your career 
along, but you have to demonstrate that you think both commercially and 
strategically. It's easy to spot this mindset on a CV as candidates will 
clearly link their achievements to business requirements and goals. The ability 
to do that often comes with experience, but even new graduates should strive to 
think in this way from the very beginning. They need to understand that IT is 
not about the technology, but rather about enabling the business objectives.

Technology skills still crucial



Despite this, I'm not suggesting that knowledge of the technology itself is 
not important. It's still crucial, as you need to speak to CIOs and other 
senior IT managers, but you don't necessarily need to have a degree in IT or 
engineering. One of my team members is a chartered accountant and his ability 
to speak the same language as clients has proved invaluable. He's able to 
tackle IT problems from a different angle, looking at the objective first and 
then the technology.

It might be worth investing in training such as Six Sigma 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Six_Sigma> to boost your understanding of 
business processes, or in financial management to learn the language of the 
boardroom. The list goes on, but it is much more focused on the softer skills 
today, alongside the technological skill set. You also have to understand your 
customers, so softer people and listening skills are extremely important – 
often not an area the IT trade is known for. I also like to send my consultants 
on media training.

There's currently a huge demand for people with these skills, and I think 
there always will be. Newer technologies may well become available in time, but 
you'll always need people who not only understand it at the operational level, 
but can think of it strategically as well.

Exciting times

There is significant investment in virtualisation and cloud computing taking 
place in IT, from SME to corporate level, and it's a very exciting time to be 
involved in this industry. The next three to four years are going to see a huge 
increase in the uptake of cloud computing and this will in turn transform how 
IT departments are shaped. IT professionals need to get ready for this, 
up-skill and focus on how to best add value to the business.

Malcolm Seagrave is a solutions director at a telecommunications company 
Cable&Wireless Worldwide <http://www.cw.com/>

To get more content and advice like this – including links to forthcoming Q&As 
– direct to your inbox, you can nowsign up for our weekly Careers update 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>
 