
Q I recently started a new job leading a small team. We work very closely with 
another team - with both groups reporting to the same person. But the leader of 
this second group is not a team player and uses every opportunity to make 
herself look good and others (including myself) look bad; in most cases a 
triumph of form over substance. She is a very strong character, but is younger 
and not as qualified as those on my team. I am not sure how to deal with this 
as it is getting us all down - we don't want to end up with an out and out war 
by resorting to her tactics - we all want to work in a supportive environment. 
Any ideas?

A What is worse than watching horribly ambitious people squabble in front of 
Sir Alan Sugar? Working with someone who seems to think they are permanently on 
The Apprentice and that trampling all over their colleagues is an effective and 
professional way to further their own career. It isn't.

But how can you go about creating workplace harmony? First - and while I am 
sympathetic to your plight - I must say that drawing attention to your 
colleague's age is not going to get your argument off to a good start. So she 
is younger? That in itself is not a reason for doubting her abilities. Far 
better, if you feel this is an important point to raise, to suggest that she is 
less experienced in some areas than your own team members. That way, your point 
has less chance of being construed as older members of staff feeling threatened 
by a bright young talent.

And that, of course, may be part of the problem here. It can be disconcerting 
to find someone younger - and perhaps less qualified on paper, at least - 
moving up the ranks at speed. Before you go any further check this isn't the 
case; be honest about your feelings.

But what to do if you're sure the problem lies with her and not with you? 
Don't get involved in bitching with your team. Remove yourself from sessions 
where people are letting off steam about her approach, but keep a note of 
occasions where you feel your colleague has made herself look better at the 
expense of you or your team. A diary over a period of a month should be 
sufficient if the situation is as bad as you suggest.

Don't tackle her about the problem; you are her equal, rather than her boss, 
and it really wouldn't be appropriate. However, during the month try and lead 
by example. Be sure to praise your team members and attribute their ideas in 
front of your boss, and in front of her. Emphasise how well your people work as 
a team (and if they don't, get that situation sorted out first), and even when 
she tries to take credit make sure your team understand that you appreciate and 
value their work.

It may be that this is enough: a team that is united should outperform a team 
that is not. But if you still feel the issue needs addressing, make an 
appointment to see your manager. Don't be cross, definitely don't be defensive, 
and explain that you're worried about your team's morale because they don't 
always get credit for their ideas and work. Be clear that you admire your 
colleague's drive and confidence, but you are finding it difficult to forge a 
strong relationship with her. Is there anything you can do? Do you maybe need 
to more assertive? How can both teams work more effectively in tandem?

Your manager is probably already aware of the situation. It may be that your 
colleague is so full-on that your boss hasn't quite worked up to dealing with 
the situation themselves. Or it may be that actually your manager would like 
more people like her, which is a whole different problem.

But don't despair. Remember, as the leader of a team you already have the 
opportunity to make the workplace a more supportive environment, and the best 
way to bring old shouty-pants back down to earth is simply to out-perform her. 
Even Sir Alan would agree with that.
 