
There were a fair few older African-Caribbean and Irish men on our allotment 
site when we started. My partner, Simon, was accepted immediately, but I was 
viewed with more suspicion. It took me two years of hard graft for them to see 
I was physically strong. Now they're my best friends. At first they were always 
giving me advice; now it's a two-way street. One of my Irish friends, Tony, 
never grew courgettes, so I gave him some spare plants. Rehman was the first 
plot-holder from a Pakistani background, and we built a greenhouse out of old 
window frames together. Sometimes I come home and he's left a curry hanging on 
the door knob, knowing I don't have time to make a meal. It's a really profound 
friendship that you can call on outside the allotment context – and his curries 
are so good.

In summer, we go to the allotment after work – it's great to be together and 
have a chat. I used to garden a lot with my mother, then I abandoned it as a 
teenager and came back to it in my 20s. I've had my allotment for 13 years, and 
my dog, Glyn, has grown up on the plot. He can't roam free, so he hangs about 
by us. He likes to eat asparagus.

When people get a plot, I tell them to try and see it as taking on a pet – 
it needs as much attention as a puppy. I spend up to 24 hours a week weeding, 
watering, harvesting. You think, do I really need to be making elderflower 
champagne until 4am? But there's the joy of giving away jam from fruit you've 
grown – there's nothing like it. I don't grow food to save money, I just 
couldn't imagine my life without it.

I turned my passion for allotments into my academic research as a research 
scientist, specialising in big and open data. There's huge pressure on waiting 
lists, and allotment stock has been dwindling. We waited two months; it's 15 
years now. I was struck by how hard it was to get allotment data: how much does 
it cost, how long are the waiting lists. If we don't have good data, allotments 
become difficult to protect when there are pressures on councils to sell off 
land. They're such an important part of the landscape.

My favourite spot 

I love hiding in the greenhouse when it rains in spring, and being forced to 
sit it out, smelling the rain and plants. Especially when the dog's with me.

• How does your garden grow? Email space@theguardian.com 
<mailto:space@theguardian.com>
 