
Hugh Grant has always had a weakness for hyperbole, but his claim that Hacked 
Off saved the press from police spying while editors did nothing is 
jaw-dropping (The hypocrisy of newspaper bosses and Tory ministers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/feb/22/murdoch-dacre-conservative-minister-press-freedom-free-speech>
, 23 February). If he actually read the newspapers he’s so ready to criticise, 
he would know the review of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act (Ripa) 
by the interception of communications commissioner, which led to the prime 
minister’s announcement that police would not be able to access journalists’ 
phone records without a judge’s permission, was ordered the day after the Mail 
On Sunday revealed how police had trawled its newsdesk’s phone records in order 
to identify a confidential source.

Every national newspaper editor (including all of Associated’s) signed the 
Society of Editors/Press Gazette letter to the prime minister. The Daily Mail 
has written editorials and articles deploring Ripa. Its editor has attacked it 
in a speech and, with other executives, has worked remorselessly behind the 
scenes to convince ministers of its iniquity.

And if Grant still thinks that is “preferring victimhood to change”, I wrote a 
2,000-word submission to the Home Office, on behalf of Associated, which argued 
for exactly the changes now being put in place. And that’s not to mention the 
detailed and powerful critique submitted on behalf of all editors and 
publishers by the Media Lawyers Association.

Grant’s damascene conversion to the cause of freedom of expression is of 
course welcome. But perhaps his next campaign could be against the appalling 
royal charter, which politicians are trying to impose on all journalists, and 
the oppressive, discriminatory exemplary damages which will enforce it – both 
measures backed by statute. Ironically, where Hugh and his chums can justly 
claim credit is that they really did write the royal charter. Indeed it is as a 
result of their actions that the police and other bodies which should know 
better think it’s open season to undermine Britain’s free press. That is one of 
the Leveson’s most depressing legacies.
Peter Wright
Editor emeritus, Associated Newspapers

• It is certainly welcome news that safeguards are being introduced to protect 
journalists from misguided and excessive use of Ripa. However, Hugh Grant is 
quite wrong to suggest that editors played no part in persuading government 
ministers of the need for urgent action on Ripa. Indeed, the opposite is true. 
Through the efforts of theSociety of Editors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/society-of-editors>, which represents its 
members, and other media organisations, editors of all papers (and their 
lawyers) played a central role from the outset.

When the act was going through parliament in 2000, we warned that its wording 
allowed the police and other agencies to use it as a convenient tool for 
general data-gathering in a wide array of cases. Even education authorities 
have used it to make checks on parents’ attempts to get their children into 
good schools. Editors’ efforts to change the act have been maintained ever 
since. When it was revealed that the police used Ripa to check on journalists’ 
sources in the so-called Plebgate affair and in the wake of former MP Chris 
Huhne’s bid to avoid getting points on his licence for a speeding offence, we 
expressed our concern both publicly and behind the scenes.

At the Society of Editors’ conference last November, we told the culture 
secretary, Sajid Javid, that journalists are not terrorists or criminals. He 
accepted that action had to be taken. He said: “Ripa was passed to help with 
the fight against serious criminal wrongdoing. Not to impede fair and 
legitimate journalism, no matter how awkward that journalism may be for police 
officers and local councils.”

Grant’s Hacked Off colleague, the former MP Evan Harris, was there, so must 
have been aware of editors’ strong feelings. Javid’s sentiments were first 
expressed by the Society of Editors as long ago as last March at the Press 
Awards when the Guardian was named newspaper of the year largely as a result of 
the Snowden revelations. The campaign culminated in aletter to the PM organised 
by the Society of Editors and Press Gazette 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jan/16/editors-david-cameron-police-snooping-rules>
 and signed by more than 100 editors from across the whole of the media, as 
well as all national newspaper editors and major broadcasters, including the 
Guardian and the BBC.

That unprecedented display of unity was met with a positive response from the 
PM and his colleagues. Nobody understands better than editors the vital 
importance of press freedom. To suggest otherwise is utterly wrong.
Bob Satchwell
Executive director, Society of Editors <http://www.societyofeditors.co.uk/>
 