
Cumin is a spice I would hate to be without, especially at this time of year, 
when its fennel-crossed-with-citrus-zest-with-a-hint-of-burnt-toast savour 
stimulates and comforts in equal measure. Its warm, orangey, woody notes can be 
a little addictive, however: the more you cook with it, the more you hanker for 
its defining touch.

Cumin is perhaps most familiar to us as a curry spice, known in India as 
jeera, and is crucial in countless masalas and spice mixes, but it's also 
central to north African and Middle Eastern cooking. Yet this is not a spice to 
be pigeonholed – it's far too useful for that. Combining the seasoning action 
of black pepper with an assertive whack of flavour, cumin finds its way into 
many of the dishes I cook these days: homemade hummus and dips, of which I am 
inordinately fond, nearly always get a pinch, as do countless veg soups.

When I'm engaged in a bit of raid-the-fridge cookery, the bits and pieces I 
use are frequently brought together with a hint of spice – and that spice is 
often cumin. Roasted roots such as beetroot and parsnip, pumpkins and squashes, 
be they whizzed into impromptu soups or chucked into chunky salads, benefit 
from a kiss of this enlivening seed, and it's a real winner with fried 
or roasted aubergine, too.

Although cumin can be a star in its own right, it also mingles very well with 
other spices (not to mention with garlic, chilli and citrus) and is important 
in many classic mixes. You'll find it in the seasoning for spicy north African 
merguez sausages, for instance. I've had a lot of success using a 
merguez-inspired, cumin-rich spice blend in other recipes; not just meaty ones, 
such as this week's kofte, but bean- and vegetable-based dishes as well. 
It's also essential in harissa, the fiery Tunisian paste that takes couscous 
from bland to bling in a second, and is also excellent in rice salads, 
or stirred into yogurt and dolloped on soups, roast chicken or burgers.

You can buy cumin ready-ground, but I prefer buying the seeds whole, not least 
as these little striped torpedoes of flavour are easily crushed or ground, and 
give a much richer, rounder note. I always toast them lightly first, too: a 
mere minute in a hot, dry pan activates their incredible essential oils and 
makes them all the more delicious.

Merguez kofte with seasoned yoghurt

If it all possible, mince the lamb and beef yourself – ready-made mince is 
usually too fine and not fatty enough for really good kofte. Failing that, 
blitz it briefly in a food processor, keeping it reasonably coarse. You'll need 
six skewers for this. Serves six.

1kg boned-out lamb shoulder, fat still attached, fairly coarsely minced
400g minced beef (not lean), quite coarsely minced
3 tbsp poppy seeds
3 tbsp sesame seeds
2 tbsp olive oil

For the merguez seasoning 
2 tsp fennel seeds
2 tsp cumin seeds
2 tsp coriander seeds
2 tbsp sweet paprika
1 tbsp harissa paste
1 tbsp salt
1 tsp ground cinnamon
1 tsp cayenne pepper
1 tsp freshly ground black pepper
4 garlic cloves, very finely chopped
1 tsp sumac (optional)

For the seasoned yoghurt
1 tbsp cumin seeds
200g thick, plain yoghurt
½ small clove garlic, crushed
Finely grated zest of 1 small lemon
1 small bunch coriander, leaves picked and finely chopped

For the spice mix, heat a dry frying pan over medium heat. Add the fennel, 
cumin and coriander seeds, toast until fragrant – about a minute – then pound 
with a pestle and mortar until fine. In a bowl, mix with the other seasoning 
ingredients. Add the minced meat and combine with your hands. Cover and 
refrigerate overnight for the flavours to develop. Next day, break off 
a walnut-sized piece and fry it until cooked through. Taste and adjust the 
seasoning as necessary.

For the yoghurt, dry-fry the cumin in a frying pan until just fragrant, then 
grind coarsely with a pestle and mortar. Combine with the rest of the 
ingredients and set aside.

Divide the merguez mixture into six and mould each portion firmly around a 
skewer in a sausage shape. (If using wooden skewers, cover the exposed ends 
with foil before cooking.) Mix the poppy and sesame seeds on a plate and roll 
each kofte in the seeds until well coated.

Heat the oil in a large frying pan over a medium heat and fry the kofte until 
they're cooked through and the seed coating is crisp and golden – about 10 
minutes. Serve with the yoghurt and a crisp, green salad.

Other things to do with the merguez seasoning mix:

• A tablespoon, warmed gently in olive oil, makes a great dressing for 
chickpeas and other tinned pulses – add these to a salad, stuff in a pitta or 
toss with roasted vegetables.

• Add to a simple vegetable soup, such as leek and potato or roasted parsnip; 
or add to sweating onions or leeks at the start of cooking, then add another 
pinch just before serving.

• Use the spiced meat mix to make meatballs, fried and added to a warm salad, 
perhaps with roasted root vegetables or couscous.

• The meat mix makes a great filling for pasties or filo parcels; combine with 
diced potato or sweet potato.

Cheese soup with cumin

A cross between a hearty soup and a fondue, this rich, spiced concoction will 
keep the cold at bay. Serves four.

30g butter
3 large onions, chopped
1 bay leaf
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper
1 celery stick, de-stringed and chopped
1 carrot, chopped
1½ tsp cumin seeds
150ml dry white wine 
700ml chicken stock 
500ml milk
200g potato, peeled and chopped
250g emmental, grated
A squeeze of lemon juice
4 slices baguette

Melt the butter over medium heat in a heavy-based saucepan. When it stops 
foaming, add the onions, bay leaf and a good pinch of salt. Sauté gently for 40 
minutes, stirring now and again, until the onions are a rich, golden amber. 
Stir in the celery, carrot and a teaspoon of cumin seeds, and sauté for five 
minutes. Add the wine and let it bubble until almost evaporated. Increase the 
heat, add the stock and milk, bring to a simmer and add the potato. Cook until 
the potato is tender, about 10 minutes, remove the bay, then blend until very 
smooth in a food processor or with a stick blender.

Return to the pan, bring to a simmer and bit by bit add 200g of the cheese, 
stirring, until it is melted and the soup is smooth. Stir in a squeeze of lemon 
juice. Taste and season if necessary. Keep the soup warm, but do not let it 
boil.

Toast the remaining cumin in a dry frying pan over medium-low heat until 
fragrant; grind until fine and mix with the remaining cheese. Place a slice of 
toasted baguette on top of each serving of soup, scatter with the cumin/cheese 
mix and grill until bubbling; or scatter the mix over the bread, toast until 
golden, then place in the soup. Serve at once.

Cumin cookies

The hint of lemon in these richly spiced, slightly chewy biscuits balances the 
warmth of the cumin. Makes about 24.

1 tbsp cumin seeds
125g unsalted butter, softened
125g caster sugar
Grated zest of 1 lemon
175g plain flour
Pinch of salt
A little milk

Put the cumin in a dry frying pan on medium heat and toast, tossing, for two 
minutes, until fragrant – don't let them burn – then leave to cool.

Put half the seeds in a bowl with the butter, sugar and lemon zest, and cream 
together until light and fluffy. Work the flour and salt into the butter mix 
with a fork, then add just enough milk – a tablespoon or so – to bring it 
together into a dough. With your hands, form into a ball, wrap in clingfilm and 
chill for 30 minutes.

Heat the oven to 170C/335F/gas mark 3 and grease two oven trays, or line them 
with parchment. Break the dough into walnut-sized pieces, roll each into a 
ball, then squash into little cakes about 1.5cm deep. Place on the trays, 
leaving some room for spreading, and top with the reserved cumin seeds. Bake 
for 15-20 minutes until just golden. Leave to cool on a rack (they'll firm up 
as they cool) .

• Visit us at the new River Cottage Canteen & Deli in Plymouth 
<http://www.rivercottage.net/canteens/plymouth/> – go to rivercottage.net for 
details.
 