
Sour is a word with some contradictory baggage. Almost all its metaphorical 
outings are negative – sour-faced, sour puss, etc. But in the kitchen sour can 
be good and bad. Sour cream – yes, please (pass the blinis); sour milk – no, 
thanks (pass the sick bag). When sour is good, it's usually because it's 
intentional – and then it can be very good indeed.

The right kind of sour makes things taste brighter, cleaner and sharper – 
think of that squeeze of lemon over a piece of fish, or a splash of lime in a 
salsa; it zings the thing right up. But today I want to go way beyond the 
familiar tang of citrus. I want to talk about some sour things you may not have 
cooked with before.

In fact, at the risk of provoking one of those not uncommon letters that 
complain about obscure ingredients in these pages (giveYotam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/yotamottolenghi> a break – his recipes are 
sensational), I'm wheeling out no fewer than three of them at once. (The point, 
of course, is that we believe these ingredients should be less obscure!) So 
please welcome into your kitchen: sumac, tamarind and pomegranate molasses. 
They may be unfamiliar here, but they are beloved of Middle Eastern and Indian 
cooks because of the way they deliver sourness with intriguing depth and 
character. They work their special magic to enliven rich dishes, calm hot ones 
and wake up mild ones. And they bring a welcome extra dimension to any 
home-grown produce you bestow them on.

Sumac is the product of Rhus coriaria, a bush that grows in Mediterranean and 
Middle Eastern climes. Its berries, usually sold in the form of glistening, 
deep red flakes, have an astringency tempered with fruity sweetness. It's most 
commonly used inza'atar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/may/22/thyme-recipes-hugh-fearnley-whittingstall>
, the beguiling Lebanese condiment, along with thyme, sesame seeds and salt, 
but it earns its place in any kitchen. Rub it on oily fish or pork chops before 
grilling, stir into steamed greens or carrots with a little butter or olive 
oil, sprinkle over tomato salads or grilled onions. For an intriguing one-fruit 
salad, scatter it over sliced oranges; mix with garlic, ginger, chillies and 
yoghurt for a very good marinade for lamb or chicken kebabs.

Majestic, evergreen tamarind trees are native to East Africa, and today they 
grow extensively through India and south-east Asia, too. Their knobbly brown 
seed pods contain a sticky pulp that surrounds the seeds. The pulp's high 
tartaric acid content gives it its distinctively sour flavour, which is both 
deeply fruity and refreshing, making it a key ingredient in curries, hot and 
sour soups, sweetmeats – it even lends its distinctive tang to our very own
Worcestershire sauce <http://www.heinz.co.uk/sauce-partners/lea--perrins>. You 
can buy tamarind as a sticky block that needs soaking and straining to remove 
the seeds to create the liquid, or as a concentrate, which simply requires 
diluting.

Tangy pomegranate molasses are made by boiling down juice from tart varieties 
of pomegranates to a thick trickle of fruity flavour. They are a key ingredient 
in Middle Eastern and some Mediterranean cooking. Like tamarind, they are both 
tart and sweet at the same time, and are great in marinades and dressings. Try 
replacing honey with pomegranate molasses in recipes and see how you like it. 
It makes a great dressing simply whisked together with some sumac, olive oil, 
salt and pepper – add grated ginger, ground coriander and cumin, and you have a 
delicious marinade for duck, lamb or pork. You can even trickle some over thick 
yoghurt or ice-cream, or try a little pomegranate molasses in a glass of 
sparkling wine as a winning aperitif.

Though these tart treasures are far more widely available than they were, if 
you can't track them down locally, trythespiceshop.co.uk 
<http://www.thespiceshop.co.uk> or arabicafoodandspice.com 
<http://www.arabicafoodandspice.com>. Pucker up and embrace the thrilling, 
seductive, addictive potential of sour.

Hot and sour tamarind chicken soup

Bracing, tangy and enormously restorative – perfect for a cold, blustery day. 
If you like, add finely sliced mushrooms and/or spring onions with the chicken. 
Serves six.

1 tbsp groundnut oil
3 shallots, halved and thinly sliced
4 cloves garlic, finely sliced
4 kaffir lime leaves, shredded
2 stalks lemongrass, finely minced 
2 small red chillies, halved, seeds and membrane removed, finely sliced
1 thumb-sized piece ginger, peeled, halved and finely sliced
Salt and freshly ground black pepper
1 litre chicken stock 
400ml tinned coconut milk 
100ml tamarind water (made from 2 tsp concentrate diluted in hot water)
4 tbsp fish sauce (nam pla) 
1-2 pinches soft brown sugar
2 chicken breasts or boned thighs, skinned and cut into strips (or 400g 
leftover roast chicken, shredded)
1 small handful coriander, including roots, if possible, roughly chopped
Juice of a lime
To serve, a handful of coriander leaves, some basil leaves (Thai basil, if you 
can get it) and lime wedges

Warm the oil in a large saucepan over a medium-high heat. Add the shallots, 
garlic, lime leaves, lemongrass, chilli, ginger and a pinch of salt (and some 
coriander root, if you have some), and sauté gently, stirring, for four 
minutes, until the shallots are soft. Add the stock, coconut milk, tamarind 
water and nam pla, and simmer gently for 10 minutes. Taste, adjust seasoning 
and add a pinch or two of brown sugar to get the right sweet/sour/salty 
balance. Add the shredded chicken, simmer until cooked through, remove from the 
heat and stir in the coriander and lime juice. Serve with coriander and basil 
scattered on top, and lime wedges on the side.

Sumac eggs

Picture overleaf – a great weekend breakfast or a quick, delicious lunch. 
Serves two to four.

3 tbsp olive oil
2 onions, halved and finely sliced
2 tsp fresh thyme leaves
2 garlic cloves, minced
¼ tsp chilli flakes
400g tinned chopped tomatoes
Salt and freshly ground black pepper
4 eggs
1 tsp sumac
150g feta or mild cheddar, crumbled
Small handful of coriander leaves
A small knob of butter
Flatbreads or crusty bread, to serve

In a medium frying pan, warm the oil over medium-low heat and gently sauté the 
onion and thyme, stirring from time to time, until the onions are softened and 
starting to turn golden. Add the garlic and chilli, stir for a minute, then add 
the tomatoes, season and simmer until thickened slightly, about eight minutes. 
Break an egg into a saucer and slide it into the sauce. Repeat with the other 
eggs. Sprinkle on half the sumac and some pepper, and cook the eggs gently 
until poached. Remove from the heat, crumble over the cheese and sprinkle on 
the coriander. Warm the butter in a small saucepan, add the rest of the sumac, 
stir, then trickle over the eggs. Serve with warm flatbreads or crusty bread.

Lamb meatball salad

This hearty salad is great warm and leftovers are just as good cold in a 
lunchbox the next day. Serves four.

For the meatballs
3 tbsp sesame seeds
1 tbsp olive oil
1 onion, finely minced
2 garlic cloves, minced
½ tsp ground cumin
½ tsp ground coriander
1 tsp dried mint
A pinch of cinnamon
A few grinds of nutmeg
500g minced lamb 
40g fine white breadcrumbs
1 egg 
1 tsp pomegranate molasses
Salt and freshly ground black pepper

For the salad
150g bulgur wheat
2 handfuls rocket or baby spinach
3 spring onions, finely chopped
80g walnut halves, toasted and roughly chopped
1 small handful parsley and mint leaves, shredded

For the dressing
1 tbsp pomegranate molasses, plus a little more for trickling over the salad
Juice of half a small lemon
2 garlic cloves, minced
¼ tsp sumac
4 tbsp extra virgin olive oil
Salt and freshly ground black pepper

Heat the oven to 230C/450F/gas mark 8 and line a baking tray with baking 
parchment. In a small frying pan over a medium heat, toast the sesame seeds 
until they just begin to pop and become fragrant. Tip into a large bowl and set 
aside.

Warm the oil in the frying pan over a medium-low heat and sweat the onion 
until soft and translucent, about 10 minutes. Add the garlic, cumin and 
coriander, and sauté for a couple of minutes more. Tip into the sesame seed 
bowl and stir in the dried mint, cinnamon and nutmeg. Add the lamb and 
breadcrumbs. Whisk the egg yolk with the pomegranate molasses and pour over the 
lamb. Season generously and mix with your hands until well combined.

Pat the mixture into balls about the size of walnuts – you should have about 
18 balls. Place on the baking sheet as you go, making sure they're not crowded 
together, then bake for about 10 minutes, until golden and just cooked through.

While the meatballs are cooking, make the rest of the salad. Cook the bulgur 
according to the instructions. Whisk together the ingredients for the dressing. 
While the bulgur is still warm, trickle over three tablespoons of dressing (the 
rest will keep well in a jar in the fridge for a couple of days) and fork it 
through.

When the meatballs are ready, toss with the bulgur, rocket or spinach, spring 
onions, walnuts and herbs. Trickle over a little more pomegranate molasses, 
sprinkle on a little more mint and parsley, and serve.

• Learn new skills on River Cottage's four-day cookery courses; 
rivercottage.net <http://www.rivercottage.net> for details.
 