
Galileo Gold blew his chance by running too freely when eighth in his latest 
race, his trainer said on Monday. The chestnut, such an impressive winner of 
the 2,000 Guineas, is reckoned to be close to his peak once more for the Queen 
Elizabeth II Stakes on Saturday but will need to be, with Minding and 
Ribchester expected to line up against him.

“I’m really confident he’s going to go to Ascot at the peak of his powers,” 
Hugo Palmer said after watching his Qatari‑owned colt cantering up Long Hill at 
7am. The trainer would have given a different answer about a month ago, when 
the horse bruised a foot and missed work, leaving no margin for error in his 
preparation. Everything has gone smoothly since, Palmer reports, and he is 
inclined to think the horse will be better suited by his two-month absence than 
the mere 18 days between his Sussex Stakes success andhis flop in the Prix 
Jacques Le Marois 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/14/ribchester-richard-fahey-deauville-ebor-york-juddmonte-international-david-lanigan-horse-racing>
.

“Quite simply, we didn’t have the time between races to get the work into him 
to settle him down,” Palmer said. “He had the luxury of his own private jet to 
Deauville. Part of me just wonders whether, if we’d treated him a bit more 
normally, the edge might have been taken off him by the journey. He just was 
too fresh and he over-raced.”

Horse racing tips: Tuesday 11 October
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/10/horse-racing-tips-tuesday-11-october>
Galileo Gold needs a lot of work if the fizz is to be kept out of him, to the 
extent of cantering every Sunday when most of his stablemates get the day off. 
Temperament has also dictated he does most of his work on Long Hill; months 
ago, he refused for days in a row to cross the road that separates it from 
Warren Hill and Palmer gave up trying to insist.

“People always think of horses like humans, that what they really want to do 
is lie on a beach and recharge their batteries for a fortnight. He doesn’t have 
a desire to sit down with an improving book. He’s a racehorse, he likes a 
routine and he enjoys training. He’s certainly showing no signs of being bored 
of it.”

Galileo Gold is reportedly “bang on his racing weight”, just 2kg below what he 
was when scoring at RoyalAscot <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ascot>. Now 
Palmer hopes a return to professional mid-race behaviour will help him turn 
around the Marois form with Ribchester. “He’s raced 10 times in his life; the 
first time he ran, he pulled his chance away and the last time he ran, he 
pulled his chance away, but every other time he’s been perfect. So I hope we 
can go back to what’s happened on the other eight times.”

Beyond that, discussions have yet to take place as to whether Galileo Gold 
will go to the Breeders’ Cup at Santa Anita next month or whether he will stay 
in training next year. He hopes to sway Sheikh Joaan by pointing to the £2.5m 
on offer to the winner of the Dubai Turf in March.

Palmer has a second shot at Qipco Champions Day glory with Architecture in the 
Fillies & Mares race. The bookmakers offer 20-1, which the trainer described as 
“crazy”. He said: “She hasn’t done a lot wrong all year. There was that 
glorious moment when we thought we’d won the Oaks. And there was a much shorter 
but equally glorious moment when I thought she’d won the Irish Oaks.

“By the looks of the betting, she’s got to take on the filly that beat her 
both at Lingfield and at the Curragh [Seventh Heaven]. But there’s no easy 
Group Ones and the same applies for that horse as it does for mine. They’ve got 
to bring their A game to win these races and they’re not machines.”

The season is now over for some of Palmer’s better horses, including Gifted 
Master, Escobar and Unforgetable Filly, but he may yet send Best Of Days, his 
Royal Lodge winner, to the Racing Post Trophy a week on Saturday. A fortnight 
after that, Home Of The Brave has a choice of races at the Breeders’ Cup.

“It’s hard to know what to do,” Palmer said. “The Mile looks very hot but it’s 
a much more valuable race. If Limato went to the Turf Sprint, maybe we’d be 
better to take on Tepin [in the Mile]. I can’t help thinking Tepin’s best form 
is with a little bit of cut in the ground,” which she is most unlikely to get 
at Santa Anita.

Such concerns are the preserve of the high-profile trainer and Palmer is 
already in that bracket, having made extraordinary progress since the seven 
winners of his first season five years ago.

“It’s been a dream come true, really. The big worry is that you can’t go on 
stepping up year on year because eventually there becomes nowhere to go. I’m 
just incredibly grateful for the support I’ve had and the horses I’ve got. It 
takes an awful lot of hard work from an awful lot of people.”
 