
What are the researchers doing?

Scientists at the University of California, Davis, are hoping to find a way of 
growing human organs inside pigs, which can then be transplanted into humans. 
The technique involves altering the genetic makeup of the pigs so that they do 
not develop a pancreas and then injecting human cells that will go on to make 
replacement organs inside the animals.

Why might this research be useful?

It is hoped the research will provide a solution to the shortage of organs 
available for transplant. According to the NHS, about three people die every 
day in the UK because replacement organs cannot be found for them. Organs grown 
in the pigs could, in addition, be genetically tailored to specific patients.

Scientists attempting to harvest human organs in pigs create human-pig embryo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jun/05/organ-research-scientists-combine-human-stem-cells-and-pig-dna>
Are they creating piglets here?

Not at this research stage. It would take 114 days for a pig, containing a 
human organ, to be born but for now the embryos are only allowed to develop up 
to 28 days to permit scientists to monitor the human cells’ behaviour.

How does it work?

The scientists “knock out” key genes involved in pancreas development in the 
pig embryos using the gene-editing techniqueCrispr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/may/10/crispr-genome-editing-dna-upgrade-technology-genetic-disease>
. To replace the pig pancreas, the scientists then inject human cells that can 
develop into any tissue type into the pig embryo. These are called induced 
pluripotent (iPS) stem cells.

Although genetically foreign, the human cells are not rejected by the pig 
embryo because its immune system has not yet developed. So the pig embryo goes 
on to develop into a foetus with a pancreas derived from the injected human 
cells.

Is this the same as xenotransplantation?

Not quite. Xenotransplantation involves putting an organ from one species into 
another – for example a pig’s liver into a human. With a chimera, the organ 
transplanted from the pig would primarily be composed of human cells, not pig 
cells.

Is this the first time this has been done?

Research with chimeras has been going on for decades. Among previous 
experiments, scientists using different techniques were able to produce a mouse 
with a rat’s pancreas <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20813264>, and mice 
with livers almost completely composed of human cells 
<https://www.salk.edu/insidesalk/articlenph.php?id=168>. In the latter case, 
the liver was not human-sized – one of the reasons why scientists are now using 
pigs.



What are the ethical worries surrounding this research?

There are several areas of concern, not least worries about animal welfare and 
the possibility that viruses could jump from animals to humans. What’s more, 
some are concerned that human cells could be involved not only in forming the 
pancreas of the pig, but also other tissues, including the brain. That 
proposition gives rise to a host of conundrums around whether the pigs could 
become human-like in some way. “It would have to be a major contribution either 
overall or to specific parts of the brain before I would expect it to have any 
significant effect on pig behaviour,” said Robin Lovell-Badge, a geneticist at 
theFrancis Crick Institute <https://www.crick.ac.uk/> in London. 

Who is funding the research in the US?

The National Institutes of Health <https://www.nih.gov/> – the main agency for 
medical research in the US – imposed a moratorium on providing funds for 
research with chimeric embryos last year amid ethical concerns. But Pablo Ross 
from the University of California, Davis, one of the scientists involved in the 
current work with pigs, said their research was funded by a number of sources, 
including the California Institute for Regenerative Medicine, the University of 
California, Davis, the Universidad Católica de Murcia, Spain, and private 
funds. Researchers undertaking similar work at the University of Minnesota were 
funded by the US Department of Defense, said Ross.

How is this research regulated in the US?

Researchers must seek approval from a number of bodies before the work can be 
carried out. According to Ross, these include the Institutional Animal Care and 
Use Committee, the Institutional Biosafety Committee, and the Stem Cell 
Research Oversight Committee.

And in the UK?

Researchers in the UK who are planning to carry out such work need to apply to 
the Home Office for a licence.

What is a chimera?

According to Greek mythology, a chimera was a creature made up of different 
animals – the head of a lion, body of a goat and tail of a snake. But in 
science, a chimera is an animal that has cells or genes that come from two or 
more different species.
 