
More than 200,000 people have emptied their pension pot or withdrawn cash from 
it after the relaxation of rules on accessing retirement savings this year.

The first comprehensive independent analysis shows that 204,581 people have 
taken advantage of thepension freedoms bought in by George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/14/george-osborne-pensions-giveaway-annuities-older-voters-pensioners>
 on 6 April that give those aged over 55 unfettered access to their money for 
the first time.

The figures from the Financial Conduct Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/financial-conduct-authority>, the City 
watchdog, show that 137 savers cashed in entire pension pots worth £250,000 or 
more, despite the fact that only 25% of such a lump sum withdrawal would 
tax-free. Of the remainder who cashed in their entire savings, more than 47,000 
withdrew pots worth up to £30,000.

At the same time, the sale of annuities – which provide a regular income from 
the pot of money that a pension plan holder has accumulated during their 
working life – took a major hit. Just more than 12,000 annuities were sold 
between April and June compared with almost 90,000 in the same period two years 
earlier.

Tom McPhail, head of pensions research at financial adviser Hargreaves 
Lansdown, said previous reports on the pension freedoms had understated the 
significance of the changes.

“We now know that investors are behaving radically differently compared to 
just a few months ago,” he said.

“Investor demand for non-annuity retirement incomes, in the form of drawdown 
and one-off lump sums, now dwarf sales of annuity arrangements.

“It is perhaps too early to be sure that this is a permanent shift but it is 
starting to look that way.”

As well as revealing the numbers of people accessing their pension cash, the 
FCA report highlighted the hefty charges some savers face when they try to get 
their hands on their money.

While the report showed that 85% were able to access their pension money 
without paying an exit fee, more than 100,000 people faced charges of £1,000 or 
more. About 13,000 of these would pay more than £5,000.

Steve Webb, the former pensions minister who brought about the pension 
freedoms, said on Twitter: “147,000 over-55s face exit penalties over 5%; no 
way Govt will allow that to continue.”

The figures will feed into an ongoing consultation by the Treasury into 
charges. The consultation was announced by the chancellor in June in response 
to mounting criticism over high charges and will close in mid-October.

“The Treasury will be taking a close look at these numbers to see whether 
there are grounds to intervene,” said McPhail. “An exit penalty of over £1,000 
is hard to justify.”

The FCA figures also appear to dispel some suggestions that pension providers 
are simply refusing to offer savers access to their cash. It said 80%-90% of 
people could access their pension money without needing to transfer providers.

However, the FCA figures do not cover workplace pension schemes and a separate 
report from the pensions regulator suggests that fewer than half of workplace 
pension schemes allow one-off or regular withdrawals from pension pots.

In addition, fewer than a third of workplace schemes give people access to 
their money via income drawdown.

 * The headline on this article was amended on 17 September 2015. An earlier 
version said “Hundreds of thousands of people empty pension pots since 
relaxation of rules”. The article was further amended on 18 September 2015. A 
previous version “said “only 25% of any lump sum withdrawn is tax-free”. Under 
the new rules a lump sum of 25% of the total pot can be withdrawn tax-free.  