
Hometown: Manchester.

The lineup: Theo Hutchcraft (vocals), Adam Anderson (electronics, guitar).

The background: Once upon a time, it was the law that all indie bands had to 
be moody and European, arty and pretentious. Then along came Oasis and the 
Thick Rock Lad took over. Still, thanks to today's new band, we can be reminded 
of a period when it was OK to namedrop obscure literary texts in interviews and 
resemble gaunt, starving artistes masquerading as stylish Italian models or 
actors in pseudo-y French existentialist movies from the 60s. The video to 
Hurt's debut single,Wonderful Life <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Kuwdw7KmGwA>
, is so gloriously sombre and monochrome, it's almost obscene, although 
frankly, up here, we could weep with joy. The angular haircuts, the savage 
cheekbones, the darkly lit black-and-white setting, the pained stares into the 
middle distance ... it reeks of eau d'1983 – the year when half-remembered 
bands with names like the Lotus Eaters, It's Immaterial and Pale Fountains took 
the shaved-sideboards-and-suits look of post-punk into the mainstream. The song 
itself is surgingly sad synth-pop, with a mysterious lyric whose optimistic 
chorus ("Never give up, it's such a wonderful life") contrasts with the dour 
verses, filled with references to crying and rain. It's even got a 
Spandau-style sax solo while the video features a gorgeous Edie Sedgwick-alike 
who appears to be dancing to a completely different song.

Hurts – and that name is already splitting opinions because it's so 
self-consciously serious, which is precisely why we love it – come from the 
home of the grave, Manchester (well, when Joy Division and Factory Records 
dominated the city like shadowy colossi). Hutchcraft and Anderson used to be in 
a band called Bureau who later formed part of a pop outfit called Daggers and 
recorded some tracks with Richard (Kylie) Stannard and machine-pop maestro 
Richard X. Now they've streamlined the operation down to just the two of them 
and they're making lushly mournful electronic pop music like Illuminated and 
Unspoken, tracks that recall the epic synth melodramas of Ultravox circa 
Vienna, and Wonderful Life, which apart from being way better than the 1987 
Black single of the same title, posits Hurts as a boy-duo styled by Helmut 
Newton, directed byAnton Corbijn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/anton-corbijn> and produced by Trevor Horn 
on a Martin Hannett tip.

The buzz: "Wonderful Life is a heart-piercing future classic. Close your eyes 
and you're transported back to 1987, with the pristine production and melodies. 
The black-and-white video is top notch, and the dancer is an excellent touch."

The truth: All true – except for 1987, read 1983.

Most likely to: Force hostile critics to resurrect the insult "poseurs".

Least likely to: Put on weight.

What to buy: Hurts are as yet unsigned.

File next to: Ultravox, the Lotus Eaters, Blue Zoo, Blancmange.

Links: myspace.com/ithurts <http://www.myspace.com/ithurts>

Tomorrow's new band: Jonathan Jeremiah.
 