
In the dog days of summer during a miserable spell for Wall Street, along 
comes a live and kicking sex scandal. A senior executive atCredit Suisse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/creditsuisse> in New York has quit over 
an affair with a married woman in London.

Steven Rattner, head of Credit Suisse's private equity arm DLJ Merchant 
Banking (and not to be confused with the Steven Rattner who founded Quadrangle 
Group and manages Michael Bloomberg's blind trust), last week "decided to 
retire after more than 20 years at the bank", according to a press release.

The New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2008/08/05/business/05sorkin.html?ref=business> has the 
real reason - Rattner has been the subject of a whispering campaign following 
an affair.

Although the relationship ended some years ago, the woman's husband at the 
time, an Australian called Tommii Cosgrove, has taken a dim view of the 
dalliance and has bombarded cyberspace with messages obliterating Rattner's 
reputation.

Some of the allegations are jaw-dropping in nature. Rattner has owned up to 
the affair and apologised - but he told the New York Times that some of the 
allegations about him were a little over the top: "I feel like the star of a 
bad made-for-TV movie."

Credit Suisse's DLJ division is launching a new fund and the allegations, 
which are all round Wall Street, haven't been helping. So in the brutal lore of 
high finance, Rattner had to go.

Rattner complained that there's no way to stop innuendo spread online. His 
love rival, Cosgrove, hit back: "He should have thought about that before he 
did what he did to me."

To rub salt in wounds, the Australian has updated his MySpace page to describe 
his mood as "triumphant", alongside a slightly sinister grinning green face.

The New York Times published the story thinly disguised as an important 
high-brow fable about the power of gossip on blogs. I am bringing it to you 
because I am interested in rich peoples' sex lives.

Fraudster faking it again?

Remember Samuel Israel, the hedge fund manager who faked his own suicide to 
avoid a prison sentence for fraud? He's been in court to face charges of bail 
jumping – and, in characteristic fashion, the hearing didn't go smoothly.

Israel was convicted earlier this year of fiddling investors out of $450m 
(£225m) at his corrupt Bayou hedge fund. But instead of starting a 20-year 
prison stretch, he left his car on a bridge over the Hudson River back in June 
with "suicide is painless" etched onto the windscreen. He lasted 23 days at a 
$40-a-night campground before his mother persuaded him to give himself up.

At this week's hearing in New York state, Israel said he wanted to plead 
guilty to jumping bail. But when the judge asked a routine question about his 
state of mind, Israel declared that he only understood "60 to 70%" of the 
proceedings because he was taking methadone to wean himself off an addiction to 
prescription drugs.

"70% is not a number that makes me feel comfortable," said the judge, abruptly 
adjourning proceedings.

The judiciary's patience is running thin with Israel. At an earlier hearing 
last month, the balding 48-year-old claimed he was too ill to stand up.

The judge on that occasion, Colleen McMahon, pointed out that a few days 
earlier, he had driven up to a police station on a moped to surrender: "If you 
can ride a motorcycle, Mr Israel, you can stand up in my courtroom."

Sub-prime shenanigans

The US Mortgage Bankers Association is the voice of the beleaguered homeloans 
industry which, through various sub-prime shenanigans, can claim a major role 
in triggering a global economic crisis.

Somehow, therefore, it seems appropriate that the association's new president, 
John Courson, is the boss of a bust business himself. Courson owned a 
Californian firm, Central Pacific Mortgage, which bit the dust in February last 
year when it ran out of money to pay its staff.

"John did close his company," a spokeswoman for the association told the 
Washington Post's business columnist Jeffrey Birnbaum 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/08/04/AR2008080401834.html>
. "It was a cash-flow and capital situation ... there was a lack of cash."

Birnbaum points out that Courson also has a unique perspective on dealing with 
the government's department of housing and urban development.

Back in 2001, Courson agreed to pay the agency $50,000 to resolve an "issue" 
over charging fees to run credit checks for customers. He put aside a further 
$35,000 to refund customers.
 