
I have a “fully crystallized” pension pot, so just the cash left after all 
drawdowns and lump sums have been taken. My financial adviser of many years 
told me to transfer it to a cash account withAviva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/avivabusiness> as I already have a 
minuscule account with it.

She can’t make the transfer as her firm no longer allows advisers to do so. 
The reason for the transfer is purely down to tax liability – the company it is 
currently with will only allow the whole amount to be withdrawn, whereas with 
Aviva you can make several smaller withdrawals.

I have contacted Aviva, and been told that the transfer must be instigated by 
a financial adviser. Why should I have to pay another one for advice I have 
already received. SJ, Coalville, Leicestershire

You are discovering that financial advisers and pension companies are running 
scared of the new rules designed to free up people’s access to their pensions. 
Legislation requires pension providers to check that anyone wanting to convert 
a final salary scheme of more than £30,000 to a defined contribution pension, 
or who has a pension with certain other safeguarded benefits, has taken 
independent financial advice.

However, after the PPI scandal, companies are making up their own, more 
stringent, rules to avoid future compensation claims. This means people like 
you are being forced to pay around £1,000 for unnecessary advice in order to 
access their money.

Research by the Financial Conduct Authority has found 72% of the largest firms 
required customers to take advice before transferring into a scheme, and 
concluded that many were confused about their statutory obligations. ThePensions
 <https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> Advisory Service says it has 
received many calls from customers in your position, even when there is no 
regulatory or legislative requirement for advice.

Aviva says that because drawdown is complex ongoing independent advice is 
necessary. The mystery is why your existing financial adviser can’t oblige. As 
Chris Hannant of the Association of Professional Financial Advisers says: “The 
financial adviser has already advised on the drawdown and therefore assumed 
liability for that advice, so as this is just the remains of a DC pot I’m not 
sure why they wouldn’t do it.”

There are companies that will accept transfers of pension pots without advice 
and the government body Pension Wise can give pointers on how to find them.

If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:your.problems@observer.co.uk> or write to Your Problems, The Observer, 
Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number.
 