
It is, they say, the unhealthiest recipe ever published: Antony Worrall 
Thompson's Snickers pie contains no less than five Snickers bars and boasts an 
incredible 1,250 calories per serving. When they gave the pudding Death By 
Chocolate its name, they were clearly envisaging a comparatively slow suicide. 
Calling Snickers pie a dessert is like describing a precipitous leap into the 
lion's enclosure as a day at the zoo.

So what does it taste like? To find this out you have to make one, and this 
presents a few unfamiliar challenges. I've never bought five Snickers bars in 
one go. I'm not even sure you're allowed to. Worrall Thompson's recipe treats 
the Snickers bar as if it were some fixed unit of measurement, but they come in 
all sizes: snack size is 42g; the bars from Now Even Bigger five-packs come in 
at 62.5g apiece; the ordinary individual Snickers at the newsagents are 64.5g. 
Fun size and the huge New Big One I didn't weigh. It was beginning to look 
weird. I went for the 64.5g model.

The recipe also calls for 110g of soft cheese and 140g of mascarpone, which is 
an even softer cheese. Why mix? Are the subtle nuances of taste and texture 
going to be at all apparent once you've added five Snickers bars? It could be 
to do with fat content - mascarpone has roughly double the fat of ordinary 
Philadelphia - but is Worrall Thompson trying to bring the numbers up or down? 
If the latter, who is he trying to kid? If the former, who is he trying to kill?

I have one other issue. Worrall Thompson's pie demands an eight-inch fluted 
tart tin. My entire tart tin collection consists of one 11-inch fluted and one 
eight-inch unfluted. Which is more important, the size or the flutes? I opt for 
the bigger - if only because the five Snickers bars on their own barely fit in 
the eight-inch smaller tin - and line it, as per the instructions, with 
bought-in puff pastry.

In the end the recipe is simple, if deeply suspect: cream the soft cheeses 
with sugar, beat in three eggs, add chopped up Snickers and bake. I can't 
believe that this Snickers pie will ever amount to more than the sum of its 
parts, but 35 minutes later it has puffed up into something truly terrifying, a 
souffle studded with singed Snickers bar ends.

How does it taste? It tastes insane. Quite apart from anything else, it's got 
peanuts in it. It tastes like a quiche made with Snickers bars, Snickers bars 
which, in this critic's opinion, gain nothing from being baked in the oven for 
half an hour. There is a more pressing matter: my kids will be home from school 
in eight minutes. Where can I hide this thing?
 