
Q: I relocated to London five months ago and have been working as an 
administrator to the MD's PA for a catering company. Four months into my job I 
feel I have to hand in my notice as I go to work to do no work. Apart from some 
minor menial tasks, my daily workload depends on what I get given by other 
staff members. To my requests for work I always get an "I am sorry, but I have 
nothing to give you at the moment."

I have spoken to the MD about it and his reaction has been to advise me to 
take it easy. I am not going to. The situation is absurd and at this stage I 
can only think the best solution is for me to terminate my contract. Is this 
going to add a hideous stain to my CV?
LG

A: Good grief! Calm down. In your letter you said you were overqualified for 
the job and only took it for the sake of your bank balance and to avoid a big 
gap on your CV. If you flounce out with nothing else to go to you're in danger 
of sabotaging both objectives.

Here's the thing. Yes, it's boring not having much to do at work and being 
left twiddling your thumbs - but the answer isn't storming off like a petulant 
teenager, it's finding a new job or transforming the one you've got.

Let's take the transforming thing first. You say you've already talked to the 
MD and he's told you to "take it easy".

How did you approach him? In the same way you've written here? Perhaps you 
could try again, this time using a more measured approach.

Ask him how he sees your job developing and if he can set some goals for you. 
Do not rant about how absurd things are.

If, as I suspect, the MD is not actually your line manager (it appears that 
you answer to the MD's PA, rather than directly to him), maybe you need to 
arrange a meeting with his PA, or even perhaps HR, and ask the same questions.

Also, work on developing relationships with the people who should be 
delegating to you - talk about how you can ease their workloads in ways that 
they wouldn't normally have considered. Suggest and innovate. Don't give the 
impression you are above the work provided.

And if none of that works? Then yes, you do need to leave your job. But first 
you need to find a new one.

Luckily, not having much to do gives you plenty of time in which to search and 
apply for your dream position - and a big advantage over most other applicants.

This doesn't mean you should use the web or other office computer facilities 
for your job search, but do make the most of your spare time by planning, 
drafting covering and speculative letters in your notebook, tweaking your CV, 
and (if you can do it discreetly) scouring the job pages of the paper.

Within a couple of months, I expect you'll find a new position. If you're 
asked at interview why you want to move so soon, explain your current job 
doesn't challenge you in the way you expected it to, and that you feel you're 
not working to your potential. Be positive.

Above all, do not be tempted to slag off your current employer, however 
frustrated you feel.
 