
In 2010, my son was diagnosed with a medulloblastoma, the same childhood brain 
tumour for whichAshya King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/sep/04/ashya-king-parents-spanish-hospital-treatment-plan>
's parents are now seekingproton beam therapy 
<http://www.nhs.uk/news/2014/09September/Pages/what-is-proton-beam-therapy.aspx>
 in the Czech Republic.

He was diagnosed a few months before his 6th birthday. For the next 18 months, 
I did not leave his side. We quickly developed our own private language – 
talking in physically close whispers to carve out our world from the rooms full 
of (often strange) people.

We spelled messages to each other across crowded waiting rooms using the sign 
language alphabet we were sure no one else could decipher, exchanging 
meaning-filled but wordless looks, a rich, virtual vocabulary that seemed to 
have sprung up suddenly and fully formed. I was determined to be the thing he 
could take for granted when everything else was being pulled apart.

This is what makes the four-day separation of Ashya King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ashya-king> from his parents almost 
unbearable to contemplate. I have been trying to describe the feeling, but the 
words disintegrate between my fingers in a pile of dust. So I am, in a very 
personal way, relieved that Ashya and his parents have been reunited.

But this episode has stirred (other) sleeping demons. Childhood brain tumours 
are typically treated with a combination of chemotherapy drugs and radiotherapy 
(high-energy x-ray radiation). Radiotherapy is particularly effective for 
treating medulloblastoma, the specific tumour that Ashya has and our son had.

During our first two-hour meeting with his oncologist, I took seven pages of 
notes about the NHS's medulloblastoma medical protocol (treatment plan), the 
very one Ashya's parents are now challenging. Four of those pages were all 
about the treatment's inevitable toxic effects – on his brain function, on his 
fertility and growth, on his hearing… the price of survival.

Medicine is not an exact science and the medical protocols can feel arbitrary, 
particularly if you look behind them and into the dark universe of the medical 
research underpinning them. Those who do look might find something that looks 
like hope, in a recent academic article in a specialist medical journal or on 
an online community bulletin board.

Frankly, when your child has been diagnosed with a potentially 
life-threatening illness, your critical faculties might relax a fair bit. You 
might contemplate things you'd have previously discarded as fanciful or simply 
"as yet unproved". Some will seem bonkers (coffee enemas, for instance), while 
others will just be very "new" (proton beam therapy, for instance).

As your child's chief medical advocate, you will want to turn every stone to 
maximise success and minimise harm. The doctors might find it exasperating at 
times, but will, it's hoped, understand you are just doing your job, much as 
they are doing theirs.

In some cases, pushing them will actually make a difference to the treatment 
chosen (it did in ours), and doctors are often receptive to, even grateful for, 
this greater parental engagement in the child's treatment.

Of course their answer might still be "no" ("not available" or "not 
appropriate in this case"). At this point, some parents and patients might 
yearn for the medical innovation of the US, where doctors can develop their own 
treatment protocols and compete for patients in a (private) medical 
marketplace. There, it is said, if you can pay for it, you can have it. TheNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>, on the other hand, is a state-run, 
publicly funded bureaucracy.

Because the NHS is publicly accountable, it takes fewer risks and will adopt a 
new protocol only after it has been satisfied by a longer tail of evidence of 
its clinical (and cost) effectiveness. Sometimes, it will adopt a new treatment 
protocol, but will be unable to deliver the treatment itself – this is the case 
with proton beam therapy. University College London hospital foundation trust 
and the Christie Hospital foundation trust in Manchester are currently 
developing proton beam therapy centres; in the meantime, the NHS funds 
qualifying patients to go abroad for treatment. Appetites for medical 
risk-taking will vary and the best place to get sick is somewhere in the 
theoretical mid-Atlantic.

But, whatever might have gone wrong in Southampton, I am glad we were here, in 
the care of the NHS. No one had prepared us for the expectation-busting, 
linked-up care we received through the seamless partnership of doctors and 
nurses at Great Ormond Street hospital, University College hospital, our local 
hospital and our local community nursing team. This team included oncologists, 
radiotherapists, psychotherapists, endocrinologists, audiology and ENT 
specialists and ophthalmologists. The system worked and the dropped jaws of 
friends in other countries are still scraping the floor. And crucially, our son 
is doing very well.

But now, four years later, Ashya's case has reignited the arguments in favour 
of proton beam therapy, primarily its claims to spare healthy tissue, unlike 
the more common x-ray based radiotherapy our son received. This means proton 
beam patients might need less (or no) hormone treatment to compensate for the 
unintended fall-out of the radiation on their pituitary and thyroid glands. 
Their memory, concentration and ability to process information might not be 
(as) compromised and their risk of cataracts or secondary cancers later in life 
might not be increased by x-ray exit doses.

So now I'm obsessing over whether we did the right thing four years ago. When 
doctors told us proton beam therapy was "not appropriate in this case", should 
we have pushed harder? What do we actually know now that we didn't (and, 
crucially, that we couldn't) know then? I had built myself a firmament of 
confidence about our thoroughness and our choices. Now it's being infiltrated 
by doubt and I'm stressed.

All being well, this firmament will never be safe from attack. It might seem 
perverse but part of me hopes it continues to be hit by more doubts of this 
kind, more often, more intensely, starting as soon as possible. I want medical 
research to continue to develop more effective treatments, less toxic 
treatments, quicker and less painful treatments, cheaper and more accessible 
treatments. Every time it does, I will kick myself and my emotional roof will 
leak, but it will be worth it.

Camilla Bustani lives in London with her husband and two children. This month 
is CLIC Sargent's childhood cancer awareness month (
clicsargent.org.uk/content/childhood-cancer-awareness-month 
<http://www.clicsargent.org.uk/content/childhood-cancer-awareness-month>) 
 