
John Kasich needs to display some political muscle in advance of Ohio’s winner 
take all primary next week. So who better to endorse him thanArnold 
Schwarzenegger <https://www.theguardian.com/film/arnold-schwarzenegger>?


At a chilly outdoor rally in a Columbus park, Kasich received the backing of 
the action movie star and former California governor on Saturday. 
Schwarzenegger warmly endorsed Kasich, telling the crowd of almost 1,000: “We 
needJohn Kasich <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/john-kasich> to now take 
charge and be in the White House. The former governor, who will replace 
Republican frontrunner Donald Trump as host of The Apprentice, described Kasich 
as “an action hero” who “kicked some serious butt” during his time in Congress.

Kasich celebrated the endorsement by wearing a “governator” jacket, which he 
said was a gift from Schwarzenegger. Kasich spent most of his speech sticking 
to his insistence on “a positive message” and avoiding “name calling and 
sliming”.

However, he did retell a favorite story about how he was “whining to 
[Schwarzenegger] about negative campaigning in Ohio” during Kasich’s first 
campaign for governor in 2010. He said the then-governor of California looked 
him straight in the eye and said: “Love the beatings. Love them.”

But, without winning a single state and with only a pair of second place 
finishes to his name so far, Kasich has had a lot of beatings to enjoy in the 
2016 primary. However, while the Ohio governor is campaigning hard in 
Michigan’s primary on Tuesday, he has staked his entire campaign on the 
winner-take-allOhio <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ohio> contest on 15 
March, and Schwarzenegger’s endorsement added hometown credibility in addition 
to celebrity luster. The Terminator star was in Columbus for the Arnold 
Classic, a world-renowned bodybuilding competition that is held in Ohio’s 
capital city annually. However, at the rally on Sunday, many of the attendees 
seemed to be there for Kasich, rather than Schwarzenegger.

Henry Rosenstein, a high schooler from Dublin, Ohio, told the Guardian: “I 
always kind of thought Kasich has made the most sense out of the Republican 
candidates ... I like his temperament.”

Rosenstein added that although there were a lot of Trump supporters in his 
high school, he did not expect many of them to vote.

Cindy Bond of Columbus said: “I wouldn’t come to see Schwarzenegger,” adding: 
“But it’s nice.”

Mary Knight of Westerville, Ohio, praised Kasich as “a moderate” and noted: 
“What he says is sensible. He doesn’t say crazy things, over-the-top things, 
and grew up as a lower-middle-class person.”

The Kasich campaign is hoping to bank on this local appeal as well as their 
strong organization in the Buckeye State to notch up a big win on 15 March. 
Matt Borges, the chair of the Ohio Republican Party, said that the Kasich 
campaign was working with candidates in competitive local primaries to make 
sure that the presidential hopeful’s literature was being handed out by them 
and even to get local candidates to identify potential Kasich supporters for 
the Ohio governor.

In contrast, Borges said Trump had simply flown in for a campaign stop and 
claimed he had heard anecdotally of exactly one person whose door had been 
knocked by the Ted Cruz campaign.

Kasich, who was five points behind Trump in a recent poll of the state 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/oh/ohio_republican_presidential_primary-4077.html>
, just needed “to remind Ohio voters why they wanted him to be governor in 
first place,” Borges said. Kasich “can win, will win and everything changes 
when he carries Ohio.”

With all this organization behind him – at the rally on Sunday, a parade of 
Ohio Republicans including a former senator took the state to warm up the crowd 
– Kasich should be a favorite in his home state. However, with only one recent 
poll and a volatile electorate, anything could happen.

As Mary Knight told the Guardian: “This is the most difficult [election] to 
gauge because of that idiot Trump.”
 