
I normally wheel it out to impress. “Oh yes, the charity I’m a trustee for 
...” is often thrown in to a conversation and will usually at the very least 
keep the small talk flowing.

But truth be told, when I actually think of being a trustee, a knot grows in 
the pit of my stomach because *whisper it* I’m not really sure that I know what 
I’m doing. And in the current climate, after theKids Company fandango 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/01/kids-company-ministers-overrode-civil-service-bernard-jenkin>
, the stakes seem too high for that to be the case. “Could I be the next 
Yentob?” I ask myself – and I’m not thinking of fronting the BBC Imagine series.

'Don't be afraid to resign': trustee advice from the charity sector
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/feb/12/trustee-advice-from-charity-sector>
I’m also fairly sure that many charity trustees aren’t entirely clear what 
they’re supposed to be doing – especially when they start. The best way to 
learn how to be a trustee is clearly to become one. But recently, just as 
scrutiny of trustee boards has increased, so too has enthusiasm for there to be 
more young trustees.

For many people, when they think of “young” trustees they’re envisaging 18- to 
24-year-olds bringing the youth perspective to a fusty, dusty board. But I’m 
talking more of people like me – settling in to their career and keen to add a 
string to their bow, something to their CV and of course – give back. I’m in my 
early 30s and mine was a fairly classic route to the board. I volunteered with 
a charity, made tentative enquiries about maybe, one day, possibly becoming a 
trustee and suddenly hey presto – within the year there I was in the annual 
report.

And then it dawned on me that being a trustee isn’t just a great bullet point 
for the CV, it’s actually a hell of a lot of responsibility. And yes, I realise 
I should probably have known this before I signed up, but youthful naivety 
meant I jumped straight in.

Ours is a small charity, and aside from governance, the board is often called 
upon to bolster capacity around functions such as HR, finance and 
communications. Being small, any staffing issues have a big impact, and the 
charity finds itself continually buffeted by changes in the funding climate. We 
may only meet officially every two months, but are called upon often between 
those times. It’s been a far bigger commitment than I’d originally imagined.

I'm young and female. Is that why no charity wants me as a trustee?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/sep/06/young-and-female-no-charity-wants-me-trustee>
 I can’t help but wonder that with a few more years’ experience, and 
conversations in advance, I’d have gone in a bit more prepared. I’m certainly 
not advocating against young(er) trustees, but I think we need decent and 
tailored support, not just to recruit us but also to train us up. Yes there are 
networks and reports out there – all enthusiastic about the potential of young 
trustees, but again the onus is on us to find the information out, and often it 
seems aimed at the 18- to 24-year-old market. Not us 30-somethings.

It would have been lovely if someone had taken the time to sit me down in 
advance and clearly set out what it is to be a trustee, what the legal 
obligations are, what you will be asked to do and most importantly what you, as 
a younger trustee, will be bringing to an organisation. When I’ve talked to 
friends who are thinking of becoming trustees themselves I’ve been very bald in 
my analysis. It’s so much more than attending board meetings, you’re legally 
responsible for an organisation, you could be the boss of a charity leader 30 
years older than you, and you may find yourself making decisions about matters 
(financial and legal) that you feel in no way qualified for.

Being a trustee has provided me with one of the most worthwhile learning 
curves of my career, but I’m just scared that I’m not contributing as much as I 
could be.

Confessions of a charity professional is the Guardian Voluntary Sector 
Network’s <https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network> anonymous 
series where charity workers tell it how it is. To pitch us an idea read our 
guidelineshere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/jan/02/confessions-of-a-charity-professional-we-want-your-blogs>
 and email voluntarysectornetwork@theguardian.com.
 