
The decision by Amber Rudd (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/31/government-rules-out-orgreave-inquiry>
, 1 November) not to sanction a public inquiry into the events at the Orgreave 
coking plant during the miners’ strike is clearly misguided on a number of 
counts. In recent days many misleading accounts have been given, particularly 
from politicians who were nowhere near Orgreave on 18 June 1984, yet speak with 
great authority about what happened. I was the only journalist present 
throughout the whole of the picketing at the plant over a three-week period, 
reporting for the Guardian. My sympathies lay with the mining communities 
during the strike but my reporting was always impartial. I kept a detailed 
timescale of the events that led up to day of the “battle”, which this 
newspaper published.

There were just over 3,000 police on duty during the picketing of the coking 
plant. Around 6,000 miners and others gathered near the plant that day, a far 
greater number of people than had been there earlier. There had been very 
little, if any, violence, merely shouting and robust pushing and shoving when 
lorries either arrived or left the plant. Miners even played football from time 
to time with the police officers. But on June 18 there was a huge influx of 
extra miners and many other people who were not, but were there to support the 
striking miners’ cause and wanted a more aggressive confrontation. When Arthur 
Scargill, the then NUM leader, arrived the tempo of the picketing changed 
dramatically. Lamp-posts were uprooted, a wall dismantled and barricades set 
up. The “battle” began just after 7am. The first convoy of lorries arrived 
around 8am and it was then that the assistant chief constable of SouthYorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/yorkshire> police, Tony Clements, called 
in the mounted section of 42 horses.

The police did come under fire before a charge was made, contrary to what is 
now being said. Bricks, stones, sticks and bottles of fluid were thrown into 
the police lines and at least one riot shield was set on fire. There were three 
charges made in all to try and disperse the mass of people and allow snatch 
squads to run into the crowd. Truncheons were drawn, not always in 
self-defence, and the fighting began. There is no doubt that people were beaten 
by the police and then dragged back behind the police lines, but police 
officers were also openly attacked and injured, including one who was hit on 
the head. At the top of the field, metal stakes were set into the ground to 
prevent any horses galloping further and a car was set alight to form a further 
barrier. The confrontation lasted until 1pm with running battles, fist fights 
and truncheons being used. What has not been made clear before is that not all 
the people confronting the police were miners.

If an inquiry had been granted this would have emerged and, more importantly, 
the police would have had to explain their own behaviour after the event, in 
relation to arrests made and the possible falsifying of evidence. By refusing 
to hold an inquiryAmber Rudd <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/amber-rudd> 
has stifled open debate about the event, giving the impression there is much to 
hide, when in fact a proper examination of the confrontation would have 
produced an accurate account of what happened on that dreadful day.
Malcolm Pithers
Wakefield, Yorkshire 

• Simon Jenkins (Opinion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/03/amber-rudd-right-orgreave-public-inquiries>
, 3 November) may be right to conclude that a public inquiry would be costly, 
and unlikely to reveal anything we don’t know already – so perhaps there 
shouldn’t be one. But that doesn’t mean leaving Orgreave in the past. There is 
clear evidence from serving officers that individuals within the police 
committed criminal offences in relation to the events at Orgreave. This should 
be investigated – just as all allegations of serious lawbreaking should be 
investigated. Our inability to hold police officers to judicial account in 
politically sensitive actions continues to cause deep divisions and animosity 
in our communities – and while public inquiries may have done little to heal 
these scars, a proper attempt to prosecute lawbreakers on all sides just might 
do more. The miners were charged and acquitted, but the police (and possibly a 
few surviving politicians) have serious questions to answer.
Nik Holmes
Uttoxeter, Staffordshire

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 