
I don't envy anyone running a university these days. Just thinking about it 
makes me queasy: hustling for "customers" as if they were airlines or insurance 
companies; trying to keep their vital numbers of fee-paying foreign students up 
at the same time as the government is saying, rather clearly, thatforeigners 
are no longer welcome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2013/sep/17/vince-cable-international-students-not-welcome>
; persuading their staff not to emigrate when academics' pay is rubbish; and 
navigating a Kafkaesque system for awarding research funds that would give 
anyone trained in logic a nervous breakdown.

Forget those little headaches. There are some more fundamental problems 
rumbling underground, most of them triggered by the onward march of the digital 
world.

For a start there's the question of how to respond to the dinner-party truism 
that we're educating kids for jobs that haven't been invented yet. For 20 years 
smart folks likeKen Robinson <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iG9CE55wbtY> have 
been saying there has to be much less emphasis on passing on knowledge and 
skills – much of which will be redundant by the time a student graduates – and 
much more on creativity, flexibility, teamwork and learning to learn.

That seems screamingly obvious to me, but education ministers of all stripes 
remain stubbornly committed to marching off in the opposite direction, and many 
in the education world, perhaps not unreasonably, see it as a direct threat to 
their intellectual empires – not to mention their departments, status and 
pensions.

The science/humanities division is redundant

And beyond the question "What are we educating them for?" lies a related bit 
of tricky swampland. The neat division of the world into skills and 
disciplines, grouped as "sciences" and "humanities", is being rendered 
redundant by the digital revolution.

Everything is suddenly converging in a gigantic open-plan office of the mind. 
The techniques, technologies and mindset of the world of arts and digital 
entertainment are now being brought into service across whole swathes of the 
economy, from hi-tech manufacturing to systems analysis and healthcare.

Three years ago Google's CEO, Eric Schmidt, admonished Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/aug/26/luvvie-boffin-digital-computing-television>
 for its failure to bridge the gap between what he called the "luvvies" and the 
"boffins".

We needed to get back to the great days of British dynamism in the industrial 
revolution when "the same people wrote poetry and built bridges". Of course, 
he's got to be right, but the world is a more complicated and sophisticated 
place than when Brunel was a young man so how, in the 21st century, does higher 
education respond to that call?

Unsurprisingly, and with that compelling need for "customers" in mind, some 
universities are serving up the academic equivalent of smoothies – chucking 
bits of arts, humanities, business skills and a couple of techie modules into 
the blender and giving the resulting course an attractive, low-calorie, 
career–oriented title. But there may be a better way to go.

As one leading venture capitalist is fond of saying, instead of trying to 
teach art students the skills they need to run a business, it would be more 
practical to teach them the social skills they need to make friends with 
accountants and lawyers.

The goal shouldn't be the production of mini Robinson Crusoes, (or, more 
accurately, half-arsed jacks-of-all-trades), but team players who can regard 
the need for intellectual, creative technical and business skills with mutual 
and equal respect.

Give equal weight to arts graduates and technology graduates

Research into 500 digital media businesses in Brighton found – surprise 
surprise – that the companies that gave equal weight to the role of arts 
graduates and technology graduates were growing three times faster than the 
ones that didn't, even though the skills of the staff in what the researchers 
called "superfused" companies were no better than in the "unfused". That seems 
like an important lesson.

True to their reputation of being the smartest people in Europe, the Finns are 
already ahead of the game – watching their economy disappear down the pan with 
the rapid collapse of Nokia, the Finnish government pushed an engineering 
university, an art school and a leading business school into bed together and 
rebranded it asAalto University – the University of Creativity 
<http://acs.aalto.fi/>. The idea was not to homogenise them but to get them 
collaborating as equals. And it's working.

Meanwhile our very own Arts <https://www.theguardian.com/education/arts> and 
Humanities Research Council is running a four-year programme looking at how to 
build more robust and productive relationships between universities and the 
clusters of creative, mainly digital, businesses that are located in the 
communities around them. It's looking at the interface between the generation 
of knowledge that goes on in a university, and the generation of ideas and 
wealth that goes on in an innovative business.

One component of this programme, Creativeworks London 
<http://www.creativeworkslondon.org.uk>, is doing some really simple stuff like 
offering entrepreneurs short-term placements in university research departments 
and academic researchers equivalent placements in companies. There are very 
modest funds for specific projects that explore that interface between the 
knowledge-generating capacity of the university and the business-generating 
capacity of the small company. Results are beginning to flow and be analysed. 
It's looking good.

At a time when ideological and financial pressures on universities are 
threatening to degrade many of them into broken-backed servants of the labour 
market, hawking easily digestible courses of limited rigour and value, this is 
a small step towards recognising that the convergence of skills and disciplines 
triggered by the digital revolution doesn't mean abandoning the need for 
academic rigour and specialisation; it means we need to learn from the 
superfused companies of Brighton and the bloody obvious lessons that Ken 
Robinson has been preaching for a couple of decades. And if it's good enough 
for the Finns, it's probably good enough for us.

John Newbigin is the chair of Creative England and a member of the Arts and 
Humanities Research Council oversight group for knowledge exchange.

Join the Higher Education Network  
<https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/>for more comment, analysis 
andjob opportunities <http://jobs.theguardian.com/>, direct to your inbox. 
Follow us onTwitter @gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. 
 