
Finance ministers and central bankers from more than 100 countries will gather 
at the International Monetary Fund in Washington next week amid a diplomatic 
spat over China’s plans for a rival financial institution.

The IMF’s regular get-togethers of policymakers, held jointly with the World 
Bank <https://www.theguardian.com/business/worldbank>, have been a fixture on 
economists’ calendars since the birth of the so-called Bretton Woods 
institutions after the second world war.

But times are changing, and Britain’s decision last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/13/white-house-pointedly-asks-uk-to-use-its-voice-as-part-of-chinese-led-bank>
 to join a new $100bn Chinese-led lender, the Asian Infrastructure Investment 
Bank, despite US opposition underlines the shifting balance of power in the 
global economy.

The AIIB, like its European equivalent, the Luxembourg-based European 
Investment Bank, will focus on backing large-scale infrastructure projects such 
as dams, pipelines, road networks and power generation schemes that may have 
considerable economic benefits, but cannot easily secure full funding from 
domestic banks.

The need appears to be great. The Asian Development Bank (ADB), the 
Japan-dominated lender already operating in the region, reckons $8tn worth of 
infrastructure is needed by 2020. British construction, engineering and 
consultancy firms are expected to compete for contracts.

At the time, the British chancellor, George Osborne, described the UK’s 
involvement in the AIIB as “an unrivalled opportunity for the UK and Asia to 
invest and grow together”.

The US, however, was irritated by the chancellor’s enthusiasm, and issued a 
rare public rebuke to London. The US national security council spokesman 
Patrick Ventrell said Washington feared the AIIB would take a laxer approach to 
lending than the World Bank and ADB.

“We believe any new multilateral institution should incorporate the high 
standards of the World Bank and the regional development banks,” he said. 
“Based on many discussions, we have concerns about whether the AIIB will meet 
these high standards, particularly related to governance and environmental and 
social safeguards.”

Washington’s refusal to engage with the AIIB has begun to look increasingly 
futile. Thirty Asian countries have now signed up as founding members of the 
AIIB, and the UK has been joined by Germany, France and Italy.

Alert to the shifting global landscape, Christine Lagarde, the IMF’s managing 
director, said last month that she would bedelighted 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-32007090> to cooperate with the new lender 
once it was up and running.

The World Bank president, Jim Yong Kim, described the AIIB, together with the 
Brics infrastructure bank set up by Brazil, Russia, India,China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> and South Africa –another new 
institution of which the US has been wary – as “potentially strong allies in 
tackling the enormous challenge of bringing much needed infrastructure to Asia”.

Developing countries have battled hard to win their fair share of influence at 
the IMF and the World Bank, whose leadership is vetted by the Europeans and the 
Americans, and whose voting power is still dominated by the west.

The IMF was originally envisaged as the guardian of the global financial 
system, but since fixed exchange rates were largely abandoned in the 1970s it 
has become more prominent as a lender to governments in crisis, including most 
recently inthe eurozone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/09/greeces-459m-debt-payment-to-imf-due-on-thursday>
. The World Bank was created to rebuild Europe’s shattered infrastructure after 
the war, but now focuses on tackling global poverty.

Japan’s proposal for an “Asian monetary fund” at the height of the region’s 
financial crisis in the late 1990s, when many countries felt ill-served by the 
IMF’s aggressive approach, was stifled by US opposition to the idea.

Since then, the US Congress has blocked even modest efforts to ensure the 
voice of developing countries is heard more clearly within the IMF.

Hard-fought negotiations in 2010 resulted in a package of proposals that would 
cut the number of European seats on the IMF board, and increase representation 
for major developing countries. Under current arrangements,China’s voting share 
is only marginally larger than Italy’s 
<https://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/memdir/members.aspx>, despite having an 
economy more than four times its size.

There is a deep suspicion on Capitol Hill of multilateral institutions, 
particularly among Republican, and Congress has never adopted the 2010 reforms.

Five years on, developing countries haven’t given up fighting for change in 
Washington, but they are increasingly building up their own alternatives.

The US reluctance to relinquish control of the Bretton Woods institutions may 
ultimately have led to the formation of a new family of lenders that will 
result in Washington ceding far more power.

As David Marsh of the Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum 
(Omfif) put itin a recent briefing 
<http://www.omfif.org/analysis/the-omfif-briefing/2015/march/americas-predictable-defeat-on-infrastructure-bank/>
, “The US and China, the world’s two main economic powers, have locked horns 
over establishing a major development bank that could rival the twin Bretton 
Woods institutions - and Beijing has emerged, for the first time, as the clear 
winner.”

The governance arrangements for the AIIB are still under discussion, but 
Britain argues that signing up as a founder member will mean its voice is heard 
when deciding what kind of loans to make.

For the cash-strapped countries that turn to development lenders, whether it’s 
in times of crisis or to fund a new bridge or runway, the arrival of the AIIB 
and other new bodies is likely to be a good thing, according to Duncan Green, a 
strategic adviser to Oxfam. “What they’re creating is a kind of pluralism, 
which should strengthen the hand of the governments looking for help,” he said.
 