
British culture could lose a generation of talent unless the next government 
allows students from overseas more latitude to stay in the UK after finishing 
their degrees, leading figures from the world of arts and fashion have warned.


In a letter published in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/apr/23/revise-immigration-policy-keep-talented-overseas-arts-students>
, the group of artists and writers – including the actor Sir John Hurt, Turner 
prize winner Grayson Perry and broadcaster Sandi Toksvig – argue that those 
most likely to contribute to Britain’s arts sector are penalised by the current 
immigration rules, which make it difficult for those who rely on freelance or 
unstructured work to qualify for visas.

The signatories include high-profile figures in the arts world who also hold 
leadership positions at British universities, including the actor Sanjeev 
Bhaskar, who is chancellor of Sussex University, and author and criticBonnie 
Greer <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/bonnie-greer>, who is chancellor of 
Kingston University in London. Other signatories include John Rocha, the Hong 
Kong-born fashion designer who graduated from the Croydon school of art, and 
Wayne Hemingway, co-founder of the Red or Dead fashion label.

Revise immigration policy to keep talented overseas arts students in the UK | 
Letter from Grayson Perry, John Hurt, George Martin, Richard Eyre and others
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/apr/23/revise-immigration-policy-keep-talented-overseas-arts-students>
“Some of the most acclaimed individuals from the arts – spanning film, 
fashion, fine art, design, drama, dance and music – have studied in the UK. Not 
only that, but we have allowed them to stay on and work after their studies, 
enriching the cultural life of the UK. However, this is at risk as a result of 
the UK government’s approach to immigration,” the letter says.

The letter recommends removing students from immigration targets and calls for 
“an increase in opportunities for qualified international graduates to remain 
in the UK once they finish their degree. Otherwise, if we do not act, we risk 
losing a generation of talented individuals to our competitors.”

Under current immigration rules, students wishing to stay on in the UK need to 
work for a single employer and earn a minimum of £20,800. But many entry-level 
roles in the arts sector offer lower salaries, while young artists, musicians 
and actors are often freelancers who have multiple or short-term employers.

Are international students in the UK getting a raw deal?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/apr/23/are-international-students-getting-a-raw-deal>
Nicola Dandridge, chief executive of Universities UK, which lobbies on behalf 
of higher education, said her organisation was concerned that the government’s 
immigration policy was hurting the ability of British universities to attract 
students and staff from overseas. “Several leading figures in the arts world 
have studied at UK universities, many of whom have gone back to their home 
countries and remained lifelong ambassadors for the UK, or have stayed on in 
the UK to contribute enormously to our cultural life,” she said.

“If the UK is to remain internationally competitive, it should be looking to 
broaden, not limit, the opportunities for qualified international graduates to 
stay in the UK to work for a period and contribute to the economy. Numbers 
accessing post-study work categories in the UK have dropped dramatically since 
the government’s most recent changes were introduced.”

Labour has said it would reintroduce a post-study work visa, while both Labour 
and the Liberal Democrats say they will remove students from immigration 
statistics.

 