
The decision on the application for royal charter recognition by the press 
regulatorImpress <https://www.theguardian.com/media/impress> has been deferred 
after objections by newspaper and magazine publishers.

At the opening of today’s meeting of the board of the Press Recognition Panel 
(PRP), which was specifically called to decide on Impress’s application, its 
chair, David Wolfe, announced that it would delay its decision for a further 20 
days.

It followed “correspondence received in the last few days” from several 
publishing bodies, including the News Media Association andAssociated Newspapers
 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/associated-newspapers>, owner of the Daily 
Mail.

Other objectors included the magazines’ trade body, the Professional 
Publishers’ Association, and the Scottish Newspapers’ Association.

Wolfe said the board had agreed to delay its Impress decision following a 
discussion about the correspondence at a confidential panel meeting held prior 
to the public meeting.

During the 15-minute meeting, Wolfe referred to the need for the board to 
consider “additional information” (his full statement can be found here 
<http://pressrecognitionpanel.org.uk/prp-board-decides-to-defer-its-consideration-of-impress-application/>
).

One particular objection concerned the timing of the board’s hearing. This was 
reiterated in a question by Peter Wright, the formerMail on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mailonsunday> editor representing Associated 
Newspapers.

He asked why the PRP meeting was being held in the third week of August after 
just two weeks’ notice.

Wolfe replied that the timing had flowed from the PRP’s “published procedures” 
and that the date was “the earliest opportunity” to hold its meeting to decide 
on Impress’s application for charter recognition.

As for the new correspondence, it was the first chance the board had had to 
get together to discuss it. “There was nothing sinister about it,” he said.

Impress has had 42 applications from small, independent news outlets 
<http://impress.press/complaints/regulated-publishers.html> that wish it to 
regulate them. Only 13 of them are currently being regulated. The others are 
awaiting “compliance checks”.

Most national and regional newspaper publishers and magazine publishers have 
joined the Independent Press Standards Organisation (Ipso), which has said it 
will not seek royal charter recognition.

In a statement about the postponed PRP decision, Hacked Off registered its 
disappointment, saying it was “hardly surprising as the press have attempted to 
sabotage and delay the Leveson process at every turn.”

It said: “The PRP have gone above and beyond to ensure no one can reasonably 
doubt their transparency and independence yet again today, but if anyone is 
under the impression this will protect them from irrational and aggressive 
press attack after the decision is taken then they are sorely mistaken.”

And Hacked Off’s executive director, Evan Harris, referred to “procedural 
bullying and attempted sabotage” by “the press industry”, which “is simply 
trying to intimidate the Press Recognition Panel, just as it has attacked 
Impress and bullied the victims of press abuse.”
 