
Sir Ben Ainslie is making waves once again. This weekend his Land Rover BAR 
crew <http://land-rover-bar.americascup.com/en/home.html> (BAR stands for Ben 
Ainslie Racing) becomes the first British team to contest an official America’s 
Cup World Series competition in front of a home crowd since 1851.

Half a million people are expected to descend on Portsmouth this weekend and 
millions more will be watching on TV around the world. Ainslie’s extraordinary 
achievements in the2012 London Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/05/london-2012-ben-ainslie-fourth-gold>
 have helped Britain rediscover its love of sailing and allowed a nation to 
dream an impossible dream: that the America’s Cup, the oldest major sporting 
trophy in the world, can be brought to these shores for the first time.

But while the crowds are focusing on Ainslie’s heroics at sea, the key to 
Britain’s hopes of winning the America’s Cup in 2017 will not be wowing them 
out on the water. Last Thursday it could be spotted resting on sturdy metal 
legs in the dry dock of the BAR team’s purpose-built ultra-modern HQ – an 
eye-catching, six-storey building that stands proud on the harbour-side of
Portsmouth <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/portsmouth> old town, among 
Georgian pubs and multistorey boat parks.

“This is the boat that Batman would have,” said Andy Claughton, the BAR team’s 
chief technology officer, as he inspected a sinister-looking grey catamaran 
hull, smooth as a shark’s skin. The hull belongs to the T2, an experimental 
craft that the team will use to develop its boat for the next America’s Cup, in 
Bermuda in 2017.

As Ainslie and his crew worked out in the state-of-the art gym high above the 
T2 last week, a team of mechanics and engineers were busy equipping it with 
sensors that will be able to report back a wealth of performance data. The 
frantic activity around the craft is understandable. T2 will take to the water 
in one month’s time, and learning as much from the catamaran as possible over 
the next two years will be crucial if Britain’s hopes for sporting glory at sea 
are to be realised.

This is because, unlike this weekend’s World Series event, in which all the 
boats are built to exactly the same dimensions and specification, the America’s 
Cup gives competing teams licence to design and develop their own craft. To put 
it another way: if the results of this weekend come down to how well Ainslie 
and his crew perform, Bermuda 2017 will be about how they can best understand 
and exploit their boat’s technology.

Claughton draws comparisons with the world of cycling, where Chris Boardman 
and Sir David Brailsford revolutionised the sport by ensuring that Team GB 
athletes develop an almost symbiotic relationship with their bikes. “They 
understood that athletes have to have time to get comfortable with the 
equipment,” he said. “Stuff that comes in at the last minute is hopeless. It’s 
like learning to run in a new pair of shoes.”

But this learning does not come cheap. Ainslie’s quest is costing £80m. He has 
secured high-profile sponsors and, given that his headquarters did not even 
exist a year ago, his team’s progress is remarkable. “We went from having no 
staff to 70 in nine months,” said Andy Hindley, the team’s chief operating 
officer. “That’s not normal.”

A stellar team of technical experts, meteorologists, analysts and fitness 
coaches has been drafted in. A technical innovations group that includes 
British Aerospace – a world leader in designing submarines and fighter planes – 
has been established. A team culture now permeates the HQ. Staff wear BAR team 
polo shirts. Key moments in the history of the America’s Cup are emblazoned on 
the walls. A board of shareholders and independent directors hold the BAR team 
to account.

“This is one of the most exciting things I’ve been involved with,” said one 
board member, former BBC chairman Lord Grade. “And I’ve met Elvis.”

But, despite their early success, they know the clock is ticking. Claughton 
spends hours fretting over the calendar, trying to work out how much time he 
can devote to testing any given piece of equipment. The rules stipulate that 
crews are not allowed to launch the boat in which they will compete until 150 
days before the competition. This means that getting the design right long 
before the race begins is crucial.

New rules are complicating matters. The next America’s Cup will be contested 
by boats that are 50ft long; those that competed at San Francisco in 2013, when 
Ainslie helped Oracle Team USA achieve a memorable comeback, were giants by 
comparison, at 72ft.

“They were massive boats in San Francisco,” Claughton said. “Just getting 
something that big to the start line was the limit of the teams’ ambition. But 
now the challenge is: how do you get to the start line with a faster boat than 
your competitors?”

It is a demanding question given that those competitors include an Oracle Team 
bankrolled by software tycoon Larry Ellison – on a good day the fifth- richest 
man on the planet – and Ainslie is adamant that Land Rover BAR must pay its way.

“The goal is to bring the cup home but also to build a sustainable business 
that will be around for years to come,” he said.

The hope is that the business generated will become an economic catalyst for 
Portsmouth and the wider Solent area. A recent report suggested that the siting 
of the Team New Zealand base in Auckland created 1,000 jobs and brought an $88m 
boost to the local economy.

It was for this reason that Ainslie insisted the team be based in Portsmouth 
rather than Bermuda, where most of the other teams will locate as they prepare 
for the race. “There is no point saying you’re British and being based in 
Bermuda,” Claughton said.

But the need to operate as a business inevitably brings tensions. Difficult 
choices have to be made about how and where to spend a large but finite pot of 
money. “Tiny gains cost a lot of money,” Hindley said. “We have to work out how 
much each percentage improvement costs in pounds.”

In a major coup, the BAR team has poached Martin Whitmarsh, the former team 
principal of Formula One’s McLaren Racing, to be its chief executive. The hope 
is that the Solent area could eventually become the sailing world’s equivalent 
of Motorsport Valley, the global centre for motorsport technology centred on 
Oxford.

“What drew me was the vision that Ben and the team have,” Whitmarsh said. 
“There is a belief that we can do this thing.”

But many other Britons have harboured similar convictions down the years, only 
to see them dashed ignominiously on the rocks. “We do have a history of 
glorious failure,” conceded Claughton, who has tasted America’s Cup success – 
as part of Team New Zealand in both 1995 and 2000.

This is a source of national embarrassment, given that the first America’s 
Cup, in 1851, was contested around the Isle of Wight, observed by Queen 
Victoria. Since then the competition has never been staged in British waters, 
because the winner of the cup determines the format and the venue for the next 
contest. Last week, Ainslie revealed that he had a vision of his team racing to 
a finish line stretching across Portsmouth harbour, powered by “a nice 
south-westerly breeze”.

A year ago many would have dismissed his vision as hubris. But few now doubt 
Ainslie’s conviction that he can bring the cup home.

“It’s the only major event that we have never won,” he said. “If I didn’t 
think it was possible, trust me, I wouldn’t be doing it.”
 