
Gangs of New York may now never be released after suffering serious budget 
problems and falling behind schedule, according to an Irish website. A movie 
"insider" told Showbiz Ireland: "It has been so long now that some of us are 
seriously wondering if this film will ever be released. Miramax want it to 
premiere at the Cannes Film Festival this summer - but none of us can actually 
see that happening."As previously reported, official sources promise Martin 
Scorsese's epic of 19th century New York gangland, which features Liam Neeson 
and Leonardo DiCaprio, will hit cinemas screens at Christmas after being 
delayed for more than a year.

The second X-Files movie should be released in 2004, creator Chiris Carter has 
said. He will write the script this summer and start shooting in late spring 
and summer 2003. Carter said "everyone" had expressed a desire to get involved, 
which presumably includes original stars David Duchovny and Gillian Anderson.

Star Wars fans have started queueing outside Hollywood landmark Grauman's 
Chinese Theater in anticipation of the May 16 premiere of Episode II - Attack 
of the Clones. Determined fan Jason Thomas, 27, of Los Angeles, would have been 
two years old when the original movie opened there in May 1977. "I hear the 
jokes. Do you ever shower?" he said.

Manga comic Dragonball is to be made into a live-action motion picture after 
Twentieth Century Fox struck a deal with creator Akira Toriyama. An epic of 
battling superhero types light on substance but heavy on the fight sequences, 
it appears to be almost as confusing as Pokemon.

Lord of the Rings actress Miranda Otto says her Eowyn character in the second 
and third episodes of the Peter Jackson trilogy will be no shrinking violet. 
"She's not some wimpy kind of Sleeping Beauty character, but someone with a bit 
of guts," says the 34-year-old Australian actress, who plays a pivotal part in 
both The Two Towers and The Return of the King.

The Warriors, the cult 1979 gang epic is to be updated by Paramount Pictures. 
The original featured a small group of gang members falsely accused of 
murdering a charismatic gangland boss. They have to fight their way past a 
variety of different gangs, all with their own styles, while the coolest radio 
DJ in movie history provides a running commentary on their progress.

Nona Gaye, daughter of singer Marvin, has replaced the late Aaliyah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/aaliyah> in the second Matrix movie, Matrix 
Reloaded. The singer and actress, who played one of Muhammad Ali's wives in the 
recent Ali flick, has taken on the role of Zee and will begin filming scenes in 
Australia next week.
 