
The International Monetary Fund and the World Bank are holding annual 
meetings, but the big news in global economic governance will not be made in 
Washington DC in the coming days. Indeed, that news was made last month, when 
the United Kingdom, Germany, France, and Italy joined more than 30 other 
countries as founding members of theAsian Infrastructure Investment Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/asian-infrastructure-investment-bank> 
(AIIB). The $50bn AIIB, launched by China, will help meet Asia’s enormous 
infrastructure needs, which are well beyond the capacity of today’s 
institutional arrangements to finance.

One would have thought that the AIIB’s launch, and the decision of so many 
governments to support it, would be a cause for universal celebration. And for 
the IMF, the World Bank, and many others, it was. But, puzzlingly, wealthy 
European countries’ decision to join provoked the ire of American officials. 
Indeed, one unnamed American source accused the UK of “constant accommodation” 
ofChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>. Covertly, the United States 
put pressure on countries around the world to stay away.

In fact, America’s opposition to the AIIB is inconsistent with its stated 
economic priorities in Asia. Sadly, it seems to be another case ofAmerica’s 
insecurity about its global influence 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/china-global-governance-by-jim-o-neill-2015-03>
 trumping its idealistic rhetoric – this time possibly undermining an important 
opportunity to strengthen Asia’s developing economies.

China itself is a testament to the extent to which infrastructure investment 
can contribute to development. Last month, I visited formerly remote areas of 
the country that are now prosperous as a result of the connectivity – and thus 
the freer flow of people, goods, and ideas – that such investments have 
delivered.

The AIIB would bring similar benefits to other parts of Asia, which deepens 
the irony of US opposition. President Barack Obama’s administration is 
championing the virtues of trade; but, in developing countries, lack of 
infrastructure is a far more serious barrier to trade than tariffs.

There is a further major global advantage to a fund like the AIIB: right now, 
the world suffers from insufficient aggregate demand. Financial markets have 
proven unequal to the task of recycling savings from places where incomes 
exceed consumption to places where investment is needed.

When he was chair of the US Federal Reserve, Ben Bernanke mistakenly described 
the problem as a“global saving glut.” 
<http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2005/200503102/> But in a 
world with such huge infrastructure needs, the problem is not a surplus of 
savings or a deficiency of good investment opportunities. The problem is a 
financial system that has excelled at enabling market manipulation, 
speculation, and insider trading, but has failed at its core task: 
intermediating savings and investment on a global scale. That is why the AIIB 
could bring a small but badly needed boost to global aggregate demand.

So we should welcome China’s initiative to multilateralise the flow of funds. 
Indeed, it replicates American policy in the period following the second world 
war, when the World Bank was founded to multilaterise development funds that 
were overwhelmingly coming from the US (a move that also helped to create a 
cadre of first-class international civil servants and development 
professionals).

The World Bank’s assistance was sometimes overburdened by prevailing ideology; 
for example, the free-marketWashington Consensus 
<http://www.who.int/trade/glossary/story094/en/> policies foisted on recipients 
actually led to deindustrialization and declining income in Sub-Saharan Africa. 
Nonetheless, US assistance was, overall, far more effective than it would have 
been had it not been multilateralised. Had these resources been channeled 
through America’s own aid agency, policymaking would have been subject to the 
vagaries of development thinking (or the absence of reflection) from one 
administration to another.

New attempts to multilateralise flows of assistance (including the Brics 
countries’ launch of theNew Development Bank 
<http://brics6.itamaraty.gov.br/media2/press-releases/219-agreement-on-the-new-development-bank-fortaleza-july-15>
 last July) are similarly likely to contribute significantly to global 
development. Some years ago, the Asian Development Bank defended the virtues of 
competitive pluralism. The AIIB offers a chance to test that idea in 
development finance itself.

Perhaps America’s opposition to the AIIB is an example of an economic 
phenomenon that I have often observed: firms want greater competition 
everywhere except in their own industry. This position has already exacted a 
heavy price: had there been a more competitive marketplace of ideas, the flawed 
Washington Consensus might never have become a consensus at all.

America’s opposition to the AIIB is not unprecedented; in fact, it is akin to 
the successful US opposition to Japan’s generousNew Miyazawa Initiative 
<http://www.mofa.go.jp/policy/economy/asia/crisis0010.html> of the late 1990s, 
which offered $80bn to help countries in the East Asian crisis. Then, as now, 
it was not as if the US were offering an alternative source of funding. It 
simply wanted hegemony. In an increasingly multipolar world, it wanted to 
remain the G-1. The lack of money, combined with America’s insistence on flawed 
ideas about how to respond to the crisis, caused the downturn to be far deeper 
and longer than it should have been.

That said, US opposition to AIIB is harder to fathom, given that 
infrastructure policy is much less subject to the influence of ideology and 
special interests than other policymaking areas, such as those dominated by the 
US at the World Bank. Moreover, the need for environmental and social 
safeguards in infrastructure investment is more likely to be addressed 
effectively within a multilateral framework.

The UK, France, Italy, Germany, and the others who have decided to join the 
AIIB should be congratulated. One hopes that other countries, both in Europe 
and Asia, will join as well, helping to fulfill the ambition that 
infrastructure improvements can raise living standards in other parts of the 
region, as they have already done in China.

 * Joseph E. Stiglitz, a Nobel laureate in economics, is University Professor 
at Columbia University. His most recent book, co-authored with Bruce Greenwald, 
isCreating a Learning Society: A New Approach to Growth, Development, and 
Social Progress 
<http://cup.columbia.edu/book/creating-a-learning-society/9780231152143>. 

Copyright: Project Syndicate <http://www.project-syndicate.org>, 2015.




 