
The council chamber at the Barnsley HQ of the National Union of Mineworkers is 
a jaw-dropping sight: a huge, oak-panelled room, draped with banners that were 
once kept at collieries across Yorkshire and beyond. One of them is from the 
nearby Wombwell Main pit, and tells its own story. Its main image is of a 
solitary miner, with arms aloft, climbing a staircase to the clouds. On the 
first step, it says "nationalisation"; after that comes "the five-day week", 
"social security", "family allowances", "health and peace", and "prosperity and 
happiness". At the top, surrounded by sunbeams, is the single word "socialism": 
the destination that, some would say, decisively disappeared from view midway 
through the 1980s.

Here as elsewhere in post-industrial Yorkshire, the surrounding landscape 
attests to what arrived instead. All but two of the county's collieries have 
closed, and in their place are seemingly endless retail parks, the foundations 
of a local economy in which people work in shops to spend money in other shops. 
Further afield, amid great stretches of empty space, you find places that seem 
to be clinging on by their very fingertips, such as the former pit village of 
Goldthorpe, stranded halfway between Barnsley and Doncaster. Its main street 
leads to a huge expanse of rubble and weeds; on the way there, you pass a 
branch of a business called The Recycle Shop. With the promise of at least £5 
in cash, its sign reads thus: "We buy your unwanted clothes, shoes, socks, 
belts, handbags, paired footwear."

Back at the NUM I have an appointment to meet Betty Cook and Anne Scargill, to 
discuss the 30th anniversary ofthe miners' strike of 1984-5 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/miners-strike-1984-85>, which began in 
Yorkshire during the opening days of March 1984. Back then, Scargill was the 
wife of a man who would soon be among the two or three most famous people in 
the country, but what she did during the strike pushed her conclusively out of 
his shadow.

She and Cook, then a miner's wife were among the founders of an organisation 
called Women Against Pit Closures, and organised support for striking miners' 
families, as well as taking to picket lines: early on in the strike, she was 
hauled away from one such gathering in Nottinghamshire, and detained for hours 
at a police station, where she was eventually strip-searched.

When remembering this, she brims with the same rage she must have felt at the 
time. "I shall never, ever forgive the police for doing that to me," she says. 
"And I tell you summat: when I come out of there, I thought to myself, 'Right – 
they can't do owt any worse to me now. So they shouldn't think they've scared 
me. They've made me worse.'"

Half our time is spent discussing the strike and its aftermath; for the 
remainder, the two of them talk about what has happened to the place where they 
live since then. "We're going backwards, aren't we?" says Scargill. Every 
Monday, she says, she helps out a local church project that gives free 
breakfasts to whoever shows up.

"Five years ago, when I first started, if we got 30 or 40, we thought we'd got 
a lot," she says. "But we've had to move to new premises. And yesterday, do you 
know what? We got 111. They're all talking about the bedroom tax, and not being 
able to afford a good meal." Herein, she says, lies a direct link to what she 
did three decades ago. "At least Women Against Pit Closures tried to do 
something to prevent it happening. So our conscience is clear."

"It's Thatcher's legacy, isn't it?" offers Cook. "Destroy everything, and 
create a 'me-me-me' class. It's always those lower down who are suffering. 
We've got food banks now, but they're doing clothing banks for children and 
babies as well."

On a nearby mantelpiece is a small pink calendar, filling up with dates: 
academic seminars, radio shows, outdoor festivals and more. Downstairs in the 
NUM's waiting room there are flyers and posters advertising other events, 
complete with long lists of invited speakers.

But one name is missing: that of Scargill's ex-husband, who will forever be 
synonymous with the events of 1984 and 85, but has seemingly resolved to sit 
through the anniversary in silence.

Mention of him draws a quick response. "I never, ever talk about my 
ex-husband," says Anne Scargill. "I've never, ever said owt. I've had hundreds 
and hundreds of pounds offered for my story, and I'm not washing my dirty linen 
in public."

They divorced in 2001. Does she think she ever will talk about him?

"No."

She won't be writing a book?

A smile. "I am writing a book, but he's not mentioned in it. Well, he is, 
in dispatches [laughs]."
 Anne Scargill (left) and Betty Cook at the National Union of Mineworkers 
headquarters in Barnsley. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
The intended title, she and Cook tell me, is Only a Miner's Daughter, and it 
will tell the story of her entire life, with a seeming focus on the strike. How 
will she write a book like that while somehow keeping him out of the story?

"In the strike, he were never at home … We didn't spend much time together 
that year," she says. "I was either on a picket line, or in a soup kitchen. We 
were busy. I were 42, me. I had a job at the Co-op. We did soup kitchens. I 
drove the picket bus. Arthur's dad lived with us as well: there were me, 
Arthur, Margaret [their daughter] and Arthur's dad. He very, very rarely came 
home, 'cos he was always in the offices or organising things."

She then shoots me a look. "Don't you think I've done enough without him?"

Arthur Scargill <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/arthur-scargill> is now 
76. He keeps a home close to the pit village where he was born, and is said to 
be close to Nell Myers, the American-born woman who was the NUM's national 
press officer during the strike, and continues to assist Scargill in his 
political and media dealings. Before I set off for Yorkshire, I email her to 
request an interview with him, citing the fact that my own grandfather was a 
coalminer and union activist, and many of my close relatives were actively 
involved in the strike. I receive no reply.

Having been elected president of the NUM in 1981, Scargill held that position 
for just over 20 years. His time at the top of the union saw not just the 
strike and his union's defeat, but the rapid decline of the British coal 
industry – not least in the early 1990s, when the-then trade minister Michael 
Heseltine announced that 31 of the UK's remaining 50 deep collieries were to 
shut. Cabinet papers released earlier this year proved that when, at the start 
of the strike, Scargill claimed that there were secret plans to shut around 70 
pits in the face of endless official denials, he was unquestionably correct.

To his remaining allies, this fact confirms that his reputation still burns 
bright: Scargill was right, they say, and this verdict extends beyond the fate 
of the British coal industry, to every key aspect of his leadership of the NUM. 
To his detractors, by contrast, the fact that he understood what was at stake 
is no excuse for a series of elemental mistakes that sealed his union's fate 
and marked a huge turning point in postwar history.

One of his closest associates is Ken Capstick, 73, who lives 20 minutes' drive 
from Barnsley in a quiet corner of Wakefield. A former miner and vice-president 
of the Yorkshire NUM, he now serves as the treasurer of the Socialist Labour 
Party, the would-be challenger to Tony Blair that Scargill founded in 1996, 
whose membership has since dwindled to around 300. Scargill remains its leader, 
which may account for its lamentably low profile; after all, if your figurehead 
is also a media recluse, the world may not be yours for the taking.

Capstick – a genial, soft-spoken man, whose disposition rather belies the 
rock-solid certainties of his politics – talks to me for well over two hours. 
One by one, he bats away the standard criticisms of Scargill's leadership of 
the strike: that it was ill-advised to commence the strike in the spring, that 
he should have held a national ballot ("The miners weren't calling for a ballot 
– the people who were calling for a ballot were our enemies"), and that in 
returning to work without an agreement, the miners were left in an impossible 
position.

"I don't know what a deal would have been," he says. "How can you come to a 
compromise so you, say, agree to close half the pits that were threatened? It 
was all or nothing. If you're out for a wage increase, you can cut a deal. But 
an issue like that – it wasn't easy to come to a compromise. Either they won or 
we did."

Capstick also reiterates something he has said in the past: that somehow, for 
all that the miners lost the strike, "the victory was in the struggle itself".

"The way I would put that is this," he says. "If you've got a young lad at 
school and he's being bullied, and he comes out of school at the end of the day 
and the bully is waiting for him, to give him a good hiding … the bully may be 
bigger than him, but he has a choice. He can either cower down and take his 
beating, or he can stand and fight, and hope to maybe land a few punches. He 
may still lose. But his victory is in the struggle itself. We stood and fought 
against enormous odds, and not just for the pits – for our way of life. The 
fight was a political one, as well. And did we win that? It's too soon to say."

Like Anne Scargill and Betty Cook, Capstick will be appearing at this year's 
commemorative events, across Yorkshire and elsewhere. But so far, Arthur 
Scargill is conspicuous by his absence. So how is he?

"He's OK," says Capstick. "It's strange, because Arthur was a media person. He 
was on television all the time: a charismatic character. And now he's ditched 
all that. He tells me he's writing a book. I don't know how far he's got. But 
his brain is as active as ever."

There follows the most illustrative of anecdotes. "One day last year, I was 
talking to him on the phone. And when I put the phone down, I came and sat in 
the house, and the television was on, and it came on thatMargaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher> had died. So I knew 
Arthur didn't know. I got my mobile phone, and I sent him a text. It just said: 
'Thatcher dead.' And I got a reply." He reaches for his phone and shows me what 
he received. Just to hammer the point home, it was in block capitals: "SCARGILL 
ALIVE!"

"And that," says Capstick, "was the only thing he said about Thatcher. He 
wouldn't say another word."

ITN, he claims, offered Scargill £7,000 for a five-minute interview. "They 
asked me to relay that to him. I thought: 'Well – I've got to do it.' So I sent 
an email, and the £7,000 was rejected. They came back to me, and said: 'We'll 
up it to £10,000.' I said: 'I'll pass it on. But I can't promise you there'll 
be any chance of an interview.' Arthur had told me that under no circumstances 
was he going to give an interview. I sent a message – it was £10,000. 'No.' 
They said: 'How about £15,000?' An email came back: 'No.' They made a final 
offer of £16,000." He smiles. "The gentleman was not for turning."

What can he tell me about Scargill's everyday life?

"He doesn't live lavishly, although he does like a glass of red wine. He lives 
a normal sort of a life. He has his relatives around him, his two grandsons … "

As late as 2009, it was said that Scargill was estranged not just from Anne, 
but his daughter, Margaret, and her husband – and, by extension, his twin 
grandsons. But apparently not.

"He's estranged from his ex-wife. But his daughter visits him regularly. So 
does his son-in-law. He injured himself a couple of years ago playing penalty 
shoot-out with his grandkids. They'll probably be 10 or 11 now."

When did Capstick last see him?

"Today," he says.

It is only after I leave the NUM's HQ for the last time that one striking fact 
hits home. Arthur Scargill's name is on the list of union officials that adorns 
one wall, but that is it: among the banners, memorabilia and countless images 
of the strike, he is nowhere to be seen.

And this is why. Since 2010, Scargill has been battling its current 
leadership, on issues pertaining to Scargill himself, and matters relating to 
both the people now in charge of the union, and a small handful of miners who 
have tried to dislodge them. Many of the details are too complex and arcane to 
comprehensively explain, let alone understand, though some of what has emerged 
from all this tussling has been manna from heaven to those sections of the 
press who would have their readers believe that Scargill's reputation is beyond 
repair. We now know, for example, that until late 2012, the NUM paid £34,000 a 
year in rent for his council flat in the Barbican in London – and that in 1993, 
he tried to use the Right to Buy scheme pioneered by Thatcher to buy it. 
Scargill says that if he had succeeded, the property would have been eventually 
returned to the union; the NUM's leadership insists there is no evidence to 
back up this claim.

The union now has just under 1,800 members, who work at a small handful of 
deep pits and open-cast mines, but its financial holdings are said to total 
around £20m, which Scargill's supporters say lies at the heart of their current 
battles. The NUM says the money is being used to defend what remains of the 
coal industry and help both its members and former miners. Allies of Scargill 
counter that there is a clear and present danger that the funds will be 
misused, and as the union's membership shrinks, they want its handsome holdings 
to somehow be ploughed back into former mining communities.
 Chris Kitchen, general secretary of the NUM, at the union's headquarters in 
Barnsley. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
The NUM's general secretary is 47-year-old Chris Kitchen. He was 17 at the 
time of the strike, and an active picketer, in Yorkshire and elsewhere. His 
last formal tussle with Scargill came on 13 February, when Scargill took four 
matters to an Employment Appeal Tribunal, and was granted a future hearing.

"There's definitely a disproportionate amount of time and money being spent 
fighting Arthur Scargill rather than looking after the members and protecting 
the union," he tells me. "It's sad to be in this position. I've never 
criticised Arthur for what he did during the strike, because I didn't know the 
ins and out of it at the time. The man's had 30 years of decent living out of 
the union, and he's got a pension that's second to none. Had he done the humble 
thing and walked away with what he were entitled to, his reputation would still 
be intact."

Kitchen has said he believes Scargill is out to destroy the NUM.

"Yes. I've always said that if Arthur can no longer control the NUM, he'll try 
and destroy it. That's what I believe."

He's also claimed that "many" people now believe that Scargill has turned out 
to be as bad as Margaret Thatcher. Does that include him?

"I don't see much difference between the way Arthur has lived his life and 
the capitalist system he built a reputation for fighting – in that he's all out 
for his self. And he's done very well out of it."

Three decades on from 1984, Kitchen says there are many aspects of the strike 
and its aftermath that have yet to be thrashed out in public: the precise 
details of what the Thatcher government were up to,the horrific police violence 
seen at the Orgreave coking plant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/nov/16/miners-strike-police-battle-orgreave>
, the involvement of MI5 – and some matters relating to Arthur Scargill. "I 
would have thought that someone who was public enemy number one, with MI5 
tapping his calls and following him, and everything else they were allegedly 
doing to him – I'm very surprised he managed to live the life he did and get 
away with what he did without being pulled up," he says.

What I infer from that, I tell him, is that he believes the secret services 
deliberately turned a blind eye to some aspects of Scargill's life. But he will 
not be drawn any further. "I'm just curious as to why some of the stuff we're 
finding out and bringing to light wasn't brought to light years ago," he says. 
Among those matters, he says, is Scargill's attempt to use Right to Buy, and 
the NUM's claim that Scargill somehow managed to buy his current house when he 
was not being paid by the union.

That house sits on the edge of Worsbrough, close to the pit village where 
Scargill was born. It's the last place I visit in Yorkshire before I turn the 
car round and head south: a low, long, stone-clad cottage only 50 or so yards 
from the M1, with a silver 4x4 parked outside, and a modest set of gates.

Hanging on a door facing the back garden is a fluorescent jacket. There 
are two security cameras fixed to the front wall, and all the blinds are 
closed. First, I ring the bell, to no avail, then use a door knocker in the 
shape of a miner's lamp.

Five seconds later, the door creaks open, and there he is: the man who 
once parried the huge forces of British industrial history, dressed in a 
white-and-blue check shirt and light blue denim trousers. His hair is much 
thinner than it was 30 years ago. His eyes have sunk a little into his face; 
the voice is deeper and huskier than it once was.

I'm working on article about the 30th anniversary of the strike, I say. People 
have said things about him and his affairs, and it's only fair that he should 
be given a chance to respond. And as I was in the area, it would be remiss of 
me not to knock on his door.

He listens to all this with an air of mild amusement. "Well, you've knocked on 
my door," he says. "Now, good day to you." And with that, not for the first 
time, Arthur Scargill retreats, inside.
 