
Over the past three decades and more there has been a sustained effort in this 
country to devalue or deny the relevance of an education in the humanities, a 
humane, a liberal education – even to subvert its very meaning. What is a 
liberal education, what might or should it be?

Liberal in the sense of free-ranging: so that the unexpected can be discovered 
and experienced by student and teacher alike, that the intellect might soar and 
know no boundaries. In this sense a liberal education may, and indeed should, 
consist as much of science as of history or classics or music. Applying dubious 
metrics to second-guess the outcomes of either education or research in our 
universities, bringing the methods of accountancy and the business school too 
closely to bear on the actual process is utterly self-defeating. As in the 
capitalist process itself, waste is an inevitable concomitant and promising 
pathways may turn out to be blind alleys. The intuition of the gifted 
researcher has to be trusted, risks have to be taken.

The model of university in which teaching is undertaken by those engaged in 
research is a crucial part of this liberal process. It has an intrinsic value 
but also a social function both in the production of useful knowledge and, as 
far as students are concerned, in the development of flexibility and 
intellectual focus.

Another sense of liberal education is that it should be, for the student, 
genuinely free and not turned into a market commodity or a preparation for a 
more or less lucrative career. Basing university funding policies on the notion 
that a degree brings higher earning capacity for an individual is bound to lead 
to a narrowing of choices and a subversion of the idea of a university. Once 
again, it needs to be underlined that the study of theoretical physics or 
English literature or history is valuable in and of itself and that, over and 
above that intrinsic value, we all have an interest in having a well-educated 
citizenry. But, if we want to look at the purpose of universities in truly 
economic, rather than accounting terms, the relevant concept is one elaborated 
in a recent book by the economist, John Kay: the notion of obliquity. “In 
general, oblique approaches recognise that complex objectives tend to be 
imprecisely defined and contain many elements that are not necessarily or 
obviously compatible with one another, and that we learn about the nature of 
the objectives and the means of achieving them during a process of experiment 
and discovery. Oblique approaches often step backward to move forward.”

“Tell all the truth but tell it slant 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/247292>,” as the poet Emily Dickinson put 
it. “Success in circuit lies.”

I feel all this particularly strongly, no doubt because it’s personal for me. 
I’m a singer but I trained as a historian. I was supported by local authority 
grants, central government funds, my parents, by academic institutions, to 
pursue a discipline that did not, in the end, lead to a career. That discipline 
nevertheless set out to nurture in me habits of focus, imaginative engagement 
and intellectual rigour which have been crucial to my work on stage, in the 
concert or recital hall and in the recording studio. The vital contribution of 
education has, however, been an oblique one.

One of the main ways through which this ideal of liberal education works, in 
its vision of unconstrained but disciplined intellectual exchange, is through 
what one might call the circulation of metaphor, so that the most unlikely of 
disciplines can offer inspiration to each other. Sciences inspire the arts, the 
arts the sciences.

My favourite historical example involves music. Musical metaphor has played a 
crucial role as midwife in the physical sciences from the time of Pythagoras. 
Musical theory was a crucial, if publicly underplayed, component in Isaac 
Newton’s understanding of light – through an analogy between the colour 
spectrum and the musical scale. The seven notes of the scale before the return 
to the octave are analogous tothe colours of the rainbow 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rainbow> – red, orange, yellow, green, blue and 
violet, plus the strangely superfluous indigo which made the number up to seven.

More significantly, Newton interpreted Pythagoras’s views on musical 
consonance as containing the essence of the inverse square law of gravitation, 
his dazzling solution to the unity of celestial and terrestrial dynamics. Thus 
Newton, a sort of Pythagorean magus, reinterpreted the notion of the harmony of 
the spheres.

If anyone thinks this sort of intellectual midwifery by metaphor is a thing of 
the past, they need only consider whether one of the most familiar foundational 
physical theories currently in play: string theory. The true meaning of string 
theory may be inaccessible to most of us – even to most scientists – in the 
complexities of its mathematical formulation, and its acceptance or 
non-acceptance will hang upon experimental data. But it owes at least some of 
its origins, and even its appeal, to the strength of the musical metaphor that 
seems to lie at, or at least around, its core.

At the beginning of the last century Max Weber wrote about the disenchantment 
of the world and the encroachment of an iron cage – or, in a more correct 
translation, hard steel casing – of rationality –a Stahlhartes Gehäuse 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iron_cage>. One of the jobs of the university is, 
paradoxically, to resist with reason the pernicious advance of such heedless 
rationalisation, with its culture of homogeneity, which can only result in 
intellectual entropy and what Weber called “a polar night of icy darkness”.

• This is an edited extract of Ian Bostridge’s inaugural lecture as humanitas 
professor of classical music and music education at the University of Oxford
 