
Four days in and the only thing I crave is chocolate - and not because I'm a 
particularly big fan of the sweet stuff.

No, the real reason is that, driven by extreme hunger and no possibility of 
finding any bacon and eggs within twenty yards of my desk, last night I tucked 
into an "Atkins Advantage" food replacement bar. Some packets of them had been 
delivered to me days after my first article appeared in Life and they had been 
languishing at the bottom my drawers for long enough, I thought. My 60 grams of 
fake chocolate and hazelnuts was specially made for people that need to watch 
their carbs but who still wanted to eat "normal" food.

It looked like a carefully-cut block of hash, smelt like a mouldy banana and 
tasted like a burnt car tyre. Chewing slowly, it suddenly dawned on me that 
this chocolate replacement was all I had for snack-time junk foods for the next 
few months. Come back Snickers, I thought, all is forgiven.

Sudden realisations of what I might be missing aside, the first few days have 
been a cautious adjustment period. There are some early problems still to 
crack, not least finding a regular place to go for lunch - I'd rather not make 
the local greasy spoon, which I visited with some pleasure on day one, an 
everyday thing. And I already find that I'm thinking a great deal about food - 
not always because I'm hungry, but because I need to plan ahead with where I'm 
going to find an Atkins-friendly menu. Like pregnant women who suddenly notice 
other pregnant women all around them, I'm starting to notice rogue 
carbohydrates in nearly everything I would normally eat. Sandwiches and side 
dishes of rice and potatoes are obvious but then there are the subtle things: 
does that sauce contain bread? What's in that salad dressing? Is that 
tasty-looking sausage actually full of breadcrumbs? that I can imagine that a 
few weeks of this paranoia could drive anyone to temporary madness.

The first few weeks of the diet, what Atkins calls the induction phase, is the 
most severely restricted in terms of what you can eat. So I suppose the sudden 
change from one regime (eat anything you like) to the other (cut out more than 
half the things you would normally eat every day) can make you prone to all 
sorts of prickliness in the mood department.

In his book, Atkins mentioned that some of his dieters had indeed reported 
feeling terrible or simply sluggish and bad-tempered for the first few days. 
Indeed, I know a few fellow dieters have gone through that phase (one in 
particular has been on Atkins for a few months and hasn't smiled once - but I'm 
willing to believe that he's just an unhappy person for other reasons right 
now). Touch wood, all of that seems to be passing me by.

The fact that the induction phase bans drinking alcohol too made me a little 
apprehensive at first but I've just avoided pubs and it seems OK. Mind you, 
it's only been a few days and none of those days have been at the weekend.

The eagle-eyed among you (in particular anyone contributing to the brilliantly 
lively debate on the pros and cons of the Atkins diet on the Guardian 
talkboards) will have noticed that it has taken some time to actually get this 
diet off the ground. The delay was caused, for once, not by my own laziness but 
simply in the name of good science.

The biochemists monitoring the chemical profile of my blood unexpectedly told 
me that they needed several samples before I started doing Atkins. To make 
valid comparisons later in the experiment, they needed as much information as 
possible about the normal levels of cholesterol, fats, glucose and countless 
other trace elements in my blood. Three weeks, four blood samples and a couple 
of bruises on my arm later, they gave the all clear to begin the meatfest.

All my other tests had been done weeks before. A typical week's food diary had 
been delivered to the dieticians, recording everything that I had eaten over 
seven days. It was a sorry sight of sheer randomness and looking at the list of 
strange cocktails, bits of pizza and odd combinations of foods (a chronic case 
of whatever-is-in-the-fridge syndrome) was almost depressing.

Most disturbingly, the location and percentage of the fat on my body had been 
measured by a truly heroic dietician trying not to crease up with laughter as I 
stood naked (just from the waist up, I hasten to add) in front of her and tried 
to make small talk. But that's a story for another day.

So it's full steam ahead with the experiment. Keep your thoughts and tips 
coming in on the talkboards (linked on the left of this page). My next task 
will be to try to see how the Atkins lifestyle fares in a social setting - 
going to the pub when you can't drink or going to a restaurant when most of the 
menu is off limits has to be a test of anyone's mettle. If I don't somehow give 
in to temptation, I'll report back shortly.
 