
Whose side is the BBC Trust <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-trust> on? 
A simple, but inherently vexed question. The answer is straightforward enough, 
in theory: we're on the side of you, the licence fee payer, we deliver good 
value for money. But scratch your head over the BBC's annual report, and wonder.

So 6 Music is saved, amid much rejoicing. Fifty thousand twittering protesters 
can't be wrong. Except that 6 Music lives while theAsian Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/asian-network> dies purely in terms of 
relative fuss levels. The balance might have tipped another way if 100,000 
tweets had supported the Network – and the trust doesn't do much more than 
measure the protests as it reaches its decision. There isn't much ideological 
meat in this sandwich, and the picnic is even sparser the deeper you delve.

Is Joe Licence-Fee outraged over top BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> salaries? Does he go to bed each night 
fuming about Brucie's Strictly loot or Wogan's contract? Perhaps: but the real 
push here has come from politicians and the press. It's Dave's theme song as 
his prime ministerial salary shrinks. It'sMail, Murdoch and Telegraph daily 
fodder. And instead of mounting a stout defence, the trust merely trundles 
along, denouncing too many rich pickings and lecturing the corporation's 
hierarchy on the error of its ways.

Are there good things to bolster confidence in this annual assessment? Yet 
more public opinion findings and pride-soaked adjectives, to be sure. We're 
told repeatedly how the BBC is a continuing beacon for the broadcasting world. 
But every drop of praise seems to need counterbalancing by gripes about daytime 
TV's poverty of ambition or BBC1's supposed lack of a creative cutting edge.

In short, it's another headmaster's report, carefully judged to keep Cameron 
and Murdoch at bay by throwing them scraps. No cheerleading, no championing, 
because that's not in the trust's brief. Which is where, perhaps, everyone 
ought to pause.

The BBC does not lack for critics. But who, pray, is on the corporation's 
side? Even director generalMark Thompson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/markthompson> can't launch a plan without 
fearing it will be cut down to something quite different when the trust starts 
animadverting. He isn't the master in his own house. The DG proposes, the trust 
disposes.

Too many enemies, then; too few advocates. Underlying practice would seem to 
hold that the viewer is best served by a drizzle of complaints and 
reservations. Would a single BBC board with an independent chairman do better, 
in Channel 4 mode? Certainly – leaner, fitter and cheaper – that feels closer 
to the spirit of an era, which believes in bonfires of the quangoes.

It won't happen yet, though. The BBC is still too secure in fee-payers' 
affections to mess with. The trust will be left ducking and weaving without any 
hope of espousing the one pitch that counts: simple enthusiasm.
 