
The anti-corruption movement that Anna Hazare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/anna-hazare> and his associates have 
launched rocked the establishment in Delhi to its foundations; but it is 
utterly hyperbolic to describe this movement as a second independence movement 
and to liken Hazare to Gandhi.

Your leader column says: "Anna Hazare … whose anti-corruption movement is 
posing an increasingly serious challenge to the Indian government, has 
certainly borrowed both style and technique from the Mahatma. He wears plain 
white clothes, if not the actual homespun on which Gandhi insisted" (Indian 
corruption: Gandhi's mantle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/aug/17/anna-hazare-gandhi-india-corruption>
, 18 August). You continue: "Like Gandhi, he fasts. Like Gandhi, he goes to 
prison – and sometimes refuses to come out. Like Gandhi, he has a model village 
… Like Gandhi he has mobilised large numbers of Indians, many thousands of whom 
have been demonstrating in New Delhi and other cities after Manmohan Singh's 
government made the mistake of arresting him two days ago."

While Hazare has "borrowed both style and technique" from Gandhi and has 
mobilised many of his compatriots, issues of scale and substance separate the 
two men and the movements associated with them.

Gandhi galvanised millions and was instrumental in bringing them into the 
anti-colonial movement. But the numbers coming out on the streets to support 
Hazare are minuscule, and they hardly cut across social classes and regions – 
his following as yet is predominantly urban and significantly middle-class.

Gandhi had a holistic social and political philosophy which underlined his 
actions and which he tried to make the basis of the movement he led – which, 
too, had universalistic aspirations. That can hardly be said of Hazare. If he 
has a larger worldview, we have not yet been told about it, and his movement is 
also informed by often superficial assumptions. One is that the 
political/bureaucratic establishment is almost solely responsible for 
corruption and, therefore, setting up an authoritarian ombudsman operating 
outside the process of politics can eradicate this canker. Indeed, Hazare and 
his associates go to great lengths to dissociate themselves from politics – 
though, of course, they are anything but apolitical.

From the inception of this movement I have been arguing that, to be a potent 
anti-establishment force, it has to link up with the more substantive movements 
against exploitation by a depredatory capitalism aided by a neoliberal state. 
My conviction stems from my experience as a journalist and academic researcher 
working on issues of dispossession and displacement. Last Saturday, Hazare 
addressed these questions for the first time at a public rally, when he spoke 
about land being taken from the poor and given to industrialists.

If this rhetoric is translated into substantial action, this movement has a 
potential for potency. At the same time, it would alienate Hazare's most vocal 
backers – the middle-class and capitalist entrepreneurs. Gandhi understood the 
gravity of this contradiction, which is why he never spoke the language of 
class.
 