
The veteran Indian campaigner Anna Hazare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/anna-hazare> has started a three-day hunger 
strike while parliament on Tuesday passed the first stage of controversial 
legislation designed to crack down on corruption.

Hazare is protesting over a government bill that would set up a new 
anti-corruption ombudsman.

The 74-year-old activist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/aug/17/who-is-anna-hazare> and his team 
say the proposed law does not go far enough, and will not stamp out the endemic 
petty bribery which accompanies even the most mundane ofdealings with 
officialdom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/aug/19/corruption-india-anna-hazare?intcmp=239>
 in India.

The lower house of India's parliament passed the bill on Tuesday but faces 
several more tests before it becomes law. In the upper house, the ruling 
coalition is in a minority, so the bill – known as thelokpal bill in Sanskrit, 
meaning "protector of the people" – is likely to be watered down further.

In August, Hazare led a campaign calling for a powerful independent anti-graft 
authority and brought tens of thousands on to the streets.

The protests destabilised the ailing administration of Singh, which imprisoned 
more than 1,000 activists.

Corruption scandals have tainted Singh's second term, with a multibillion 
dollar telecoms scam landing a former minister and other officials in prison.

The issue of corruption has focused on a range of general grievances and 
mobilised broad dissatisfaction with a government that, after seven years in 
power, has failed to solve many of India's deep problems.

Most of Hazare's supporters come from the newly wealthy Indian middle classes. 
However, turnout at demonstrations in Mumbai and Delhi looked relatively low on 
Tuesday, prompting some commentators to speak of how the campaign had "lost its 
connection with the public at large".

But others said Hazare had already achieved many of his aims.

"He wanted to get corruption debated in every nook and corner of the country, 
and he has succeeded in that already," Pankaj Vohra, political editor of the 
Hindustan Times, said.

In Delhi, the junior parliamentary affairs minister, V Narayanasamy, moving 
the legislation in the lower house, said the government's proposal maintained 
the "fine balance" between the powers of the legislature, the judiciary and the 
executive branch.

However, Sushma Swaraj, leader of the rightwing Bharatiya Janata party, argued 
that although the country needed a "strong and effective" anti-corruption 
watchdog, the government was offering a bill that was "so full of holes and 
flaws that it has disappointed all of us".

A key area of disagreement is the future role of India's central bureau of 
investigation, which normally conducts big corruption inquiries. Senior elected 
officials or bureaucrats would come under the new body's authority.

The BJP, the biggest opposition party, has backed Hazare's protest in part 
because of the discomfort the activist has caused the government, a coalition 
led by the Congress party.

Hazare, who claims inspiration from Mahatma Gandhi, has described his protest 
against corruption as India's "second freedom struggle".

A controversial figure, the former soldier has been accused of links to 
rightwing Hindu nationalist organisations and of subverting democracy by using 
street protests to force an elected government to revise proposed legislation.

"I will live and die for India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> … 
bigger than the parliament at Delhi is the parliament of the people," he told 
protesters gathered in Mumbai on Tuesday.

Hazare's health was called into question on Tuesday, just hours after he 
started his latest fast, with television reports saying that he may need to be 
hospitalised to treat a high fever and control his blood pressure.

Around India, scores of people were jailed for taking part in "unauthorised" 
demonstrations in support of Hazare.

More than 50 were detained in the northern city of Chandigarh alone, the Times 
of India reported.
 