
A 73-year-old Indian anti-corruption campaigner has refused to end his "fast 
until death" despite government concessions on his demands for a powerful new 
body to stamp out graft in the country.

Anna Hazare <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anna-hazare> ended his third 
day of hunger strike on Thursday saying he had lost weight and "felt a little 
weak" but could continue without food for at least another week.

Hunger strikes – which invoke the memory of those undertaken by Mahatma Gandhi 
– are popular political tactics inIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> and are frequent features of public 
life. However, this most recent campaign against corruption has mobilised 
millions of Indians. Hazare's Facebook page has more than 80,000 friends and 
supporters mobbed the Jantar Mantar observatory, the site of his hunger strike, 
in central Delhi on Thursday.

Tens of thousands also joined the protests, ranging from hunger strikes to 
candlelit vigils in cities around the country including Mumbai, Lucknow and 
Jaipur. A number of Bollywood stars have also come out in support of Hazare, a 
former soldier and veteran social activist.

Corruption in India is endemic and ranges from the small fees that need to be 
paid to avoid fines for trumped up traffic offences to an alleged £24bn fraud 
in the telecoms sector, which saw a former government minister jailed last 
month.

"This is a corrupt government, full of corrupt ministers in a corrupt country. 
We have had enough," said Peta Singh, an 18-year-old student from Noida, a 
satellite town of Delhi, who had travelled to the centre of the capital with 
friends to demonstrate.

The telecoms scandal was just one of a series to hit the Congress-led 
coalition in the last year. Others included alleged kickbacks connected with the
 hugely expensive 2010 Delhi Commonwealth Games. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/aug/04/commonwealth-games-delhi-preparations>

The protesters want speedy adoption of a law to create a powerful 
anti-corruption ombudsman which would be able to ensure rapid investigation and 
prosecution of offenders. Current authorities – described as either politicised 
or toothless by protesters – would be placed under the ombudsman's control.

The activists reject the current draft of the law as too weak. It suggests the 
ombudsman, known as the Lokpal, be a recommending authority without prosecuting 
powers.

The wealthy and powerful in India usually escape any charges against them or 
succeed in drawing out the legal process for many years, sometimes decades.

A bill to set up a powerful anti-graft mechanism has been repeatedly 
introduced into parliament but has never passed. Many lawmakers make huge 
fortunes illegally.

Keshal Gunjal, 28, had come to Delhi from the southern city of Pune to support 
Hazare. A science graduate who had given up his government post in protest 
against "the system", he said Hazare and his followers would achieve their aims.

"We will definitely reach our objectives. All of India is united against 
corruption – except the corrupt people of course," he said.

Another demonstrator, PN Jha, said he had personal experience of "scams" while 
working in the oil and gas sector.

"No one believes the politicians any more," he said.

In the global list of perceptions of corruption compiled by Transparency 
International, India is ranked the 87th least corrupt along with Albania, 
Jamaica and Liberia. China ranks 78th and Pakistan 143rd, local commentators 
have noted.

Brahma Chellaney, a respected Indian international affairs analyst and author, 
has called corruption an "existential threat" to India.

Negotiations between the campaigners and the government are set to continue on 
Friday.
 