
At the weekend he was India's hero, the man who had followed the example of 
Mahatma Gandhi and fasted to force a new morality on a government accused of 
failing to deal with corruption. NowAnna Hazare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/anna-hazare> is under fire from all sides.

Feted in his home village of Ralegaon Siddhi, in the central state of 
Maharashtra, 73-year-old Hazare has been accused elsewhere of despising the 
poor and condoning communal violence.

The storm began with a press conference given by the social activist, whose 
week-long fast forced the government to make radical changes to proposed 
anti-graft legislation.

Hazare, who has won vast popular support with thousands thronging his protest 
site in central Delhi and joining impromptu fasts or demonstrations across the 
country, said democracy inIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> was 
flawed because the "ordinary voter does not have awareness".

"They cast their vote under the influence of 100 rupees or a bottle of liquor 
or a sari offered by candidates. They don't understand the value of their 
vote," the former soldier said, referring to the widespread practice in India 
of politicians effectively buying votes with giveaways to local communities.

An editorial in the Indian Express attacked the statement as anti-democratic 
and anti-poor. "This institutionalises the contempt for established 
parliamentary democracy that Hazare has revealed …" the newspaper said, "… [a 
contempt] he shares with those in the Indian urban elite who do not trust a 
state that rests on the votes of the poor and 'illiterate', votes they imagine 
are cast thoughtlessly and for a bribe."

Other commentators objected to Hazare's successful attempt to influence the 
composition of a committee that will draft legislation which, among other 
things, would appoint an anti-corruption ombudsman. Changes conceded by the 
Congress party make the post much more powerful.

Hazare also caused upset by describing two political leaders as "models". 
Although one – Nitish Kumar, the chief minister of Bihar state – is a 
technocrat whose work in one of the poorest parts of India has been universally 
lauded, the other – Narendra Modi, chief minister of western Gujrat – has been 
accused of condoning communal violence in which more than 1,000 people, mainly 
Muslims, died in 2002.

After television began reporting his comments, Hazare issued a clarification 
saying he praised only the development work done by Modi and Kumar in rural 
areas. "I am equally opposed to any form of communal disharmony. I am 
completely opposed to any kind of communalism or discrimination on religious or 
caste lines," Hazare said.

Even his comments about rural development caused a row, with veteran activists 
writing a public letter claiming the "development-crazy Narendra Modi has done 
great harm to the rural area[s]".

Despite the row, support for Hazare's cause remains strong. There is deep 
anger at a slew of recent corruption scandals. One minister was forced to 
resign, charged with being responsible for a loss of up to £25bn to the Indian 
exchequer through manipulating the sale of telecoms licenses in return for 
bribes. Allegations of graft have also led to the arrest of senior party 
figures involved with the organisation of last year's Commonwealth Games.

"I don't care what people say about him. He has done more in a week than all 
those politician types do in years and years because they all have their 
fingers in pies," said Satish Kumar, a taxi driver in Delhi.

Opposition figures have capitalised on the Congress-led coalition's 
vulnerability. LK Advani, a leader of the Bharatiya Janata party, said the 
country's rulers had "earned the singular reputation of being the most corrupt 
government independent India has seen".

The draft bill is due to be voted into law in the late summer. Similar 
legislation has been introduced eight times into parliament but has not been 
passed.
 