
Indian police have detained two powerful mining magnates over allegations that 
they illegally created a business empire worth billions of dollars, in the 
first high-profile arrest since anti-corruption campaignerAnna Hazare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/anna-hazare> inspired a wave of protests 
across the country.

Agents from the Central Bureau of Investigation arrested Gali Janardhan Reddy, 
the owner of the ObulapuramMining <https://www.theguardian.com/business/mining> 
Corporation and a former minister in Karnataka state, and his brother-in-law 
Srinivas Reddy, the company's managing director, on Monday. The men face 
charges of conspiracy, forgery and violation of mining laws.

Manmohan Singh's beleaguered government has been mired in allegations of 
corruption since last year, but nationwide public outrage came to a boil last 
month when the 74-year-old Hazare held a two-week hunger strike until 
parliament agreed to tougher anti-corruption laws. Hazare's campaign tapped 
into deep-rooted anger over the country's endemic corruption, petty and 
large-scale, which successive governments have failed to tackle.

Singh, who appeared to underestimate support for Hazare, has come under 
increasing criticism for failing to deal with major corruption scandals in 
telecommunications, sports and mining.

"One motive for the arrests may be to show the government is acting against 
corruption," said lawyer Prashant Bhushan, a close aide of Hazare. "But the CBI 
acts only when there's political direction, and the fact is that it suits Delhi 
politically to arrest the Reddys now. These arrests were long overdue."

Janardhan Reddy, with his brothers Karunakara and Somasekhar, had long been 
accused of running an illegal iron ore extraction empire along the border of 
Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh which had devastated the environment.

"With these arrests Delhi may be trying to give the impression that it is 
fighting corruption," said Paranjoy Guha Thakurta, director of the documentary 
film Blood and Iron.

"But the arrests should have happened long ago," he added.

As ministers, Janardhan and Karunakara Reddy were seen as the real power 
behind chief minister BS Yeddyurappa, recently forced to resign after a damning 
report on the state's illegal mining operations by the ombudsman, Santosh 
Hegde. He described links between Karnataka politicians and mining as a "mafia 
type of operation."

Due to Hegde's ground-breaking investigation, the Reddy brothers were also 
ousted from the state cabinet last month, but had begun to jockey for a return 
to power when the CBI acted.

"The loot was allowed to go on with open eyes," Hegde said after the arrests. 
"There were irregularities at every stage of the business. But the arrests are 
not because of my report, since the Karnataka government has still not given 
the CBI permission to investigate. The arrests are due to a case filed in 
neighbouring Andhra Pradesh."

The distinction drawn by Hegde is loaded with political significance. 
Karnataka is ruled by the Bharatiya Janata party (BJP), which is in the 
opposition at the centre. Andhra, however, is ruled by the Congress party, 
which is also in power in Delhi. The achievement of the Reddy brothers, from 
the city of Bellary in Karnataka state, was to cosy up to powerful leaders in 
both the BJP and the Congress.

"The loot enriched the two largest political parties in India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>," said Thakurta.

However, the death of an Andhra chief minister in a helicopter crash in 2009 
seriously damaged the Reddys' links with the Congress party.
 