
Indonesia’s top accident investigator has said there are no indications of 
foul play in last month’s crash of an AirAsia jetliner carrying 162 people.

AirAsia Flight 8501 plunged into the Java Sea in late December, shortly after 
the pilots asked to climb from 32,000ft to 38,000ft to avoid threatening 
clouds, but were denied permission because of heavy air traffic. No distress 
signal was received. The plane was en route from Surabaya, Indonesia’s 
second-largest city, to Singapore.

“There is no sign of sabotage in the AirAsia crash,” the head of the national 
transportation safety committee, Tatang Kurniadi, told reporters.

He said investigators have downloaded all of the data from the aircraft’s 
cockpit voice recorder and flight data recorder and are analysing them along 
with advisers from Airbus, the plane’s manufacturer. An investigator who 
requested anonymity told AFP that warning alarms onboard were “screaming” as 
the pilots desperately tried to stabilise the plane just before it crashed.

The noise of several alarms – including one that indicated the plane was 
stalling – can be heard going off in recordings from the black box in the 
cockpit, the investigator said. “The warning alarms, we can say, were 
screaming, while in the background they (the pilot and co-pilot) were busy 
trying to recover,” the investigator said.

The transport minister, Ignasius Jonan, told the Indonesian parliament on 
Tuesday that radar data showed that the plane was climbing at an abnormally 
high rate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/20/air-asia-crash-plane-climbed-rapidly>
 – about 6,000ft a minute – then dropped rapidly and disappeared.

“It is not normal to climb like that, it’s very rare for commercial planes, 
which normally climb just 1,000 to 2,000ft per minute,” he said. “It can only 
be done by a fighter jet.” He did not say what caused the plane to climb so 
rapidly.

An excessively rapid ascent is likely to cause an airplane to go into an 
aerodynamic stall. In 2009,an Air France Airbus A330 disappeared over the 
Atlantic Ocean in bad weather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jul/05/air-france-crash-ruling-pilots> 
while flying from Rio de Janeiro to Paris. Investigators determined from the 
jet’s black boxes that it began a steep climb and then went into a stall from 
which the pilots were unable to recover.

An Airbus spokesman, Justin Dubon, said on Tuesday that it was too early to 
comment on possible similarities between the two crashes.

Kurniadi said a preliminary report on the AirAsia accident is expected to be 
submitted to the International Civil Aviation Organisation next week, in line 
with a requirement that it be filed within 30 days of a crash. But he said a 
full analysis of what went wrong with the plane could take up to a year.

Rescuers are struggling to lift the fuselage and what appears to be the 
plane’s cockpit from the seabed at a depth of 30 metres (100ft). The search has 
been complicated by strong currents, high waves and bad weather. Only 53 bodies 
have been recovered so far.Associated Press in Jakarta
 