
Given the bleakness of the news coming out of Ukraine, it is a pleasant shock 
to finda short season 
<https://www.stjamestheatre.co.uk/2015/08/festival-of-ukrainian-culture/> 
celebrating the country’s culture taking place at St James’s theatre, London. 
There are films and a photography exhibition, but the centrepiece is a group of 
four plays from the repertory of Kiev’s National Academic Theatre of Russian 
Drama.

I caught Life’s Little Nothings, which dramatises five of Chekhov’s early 
short stories. It was staged with simple effectiveness and the company of 12 
actors and three musicians was clearly talented, but I felt there were only 
occasional hints of Chekhov’s mature greatness.

The stories come from a collection called Motley Tales published in 1886 and 
assembled from Chekhov’s sketches and stories written for literary magazines. 
One reviewer said at the time: “Mr Chekhov will like a squeezed-out lemon 
inevitably die, completely forgotten, in a ditch,” an insult Chekhov never 
forgave. Although the stories are better than that, they don’t reveal the 
subtlety, grace and musicality of the superb, later work such as The Lady With 
the Dog, The Bishop and The Black Monk: stories every bit as impressive, if 
less well known, than the four great plays on which Chekhov’s reputation now 
rests.

In the five playlets presented by the Ukrainians – performed in Russian with a 
headphone translation in English – there were fleeting intimations of the later 
Chekhov. In A Tripping Tongue an ageing husband, listening to his young wife’s 
account of her holiday flirtations, gloomily declares: “If you don’t want to be 
left alone, don’t get married.” Chekhov’s caustic view of the Russian character 
also emerges in A Daughter of Albion, in which a drunken fisherman shamelessly 
taunts and abuses a strait-laced English governess.

Best of all perhaps is The Wallet, in which three impoverished actors chance 
on a stash of money and, plotting to kill each other, end up dead. It’s similar 
to the story Chaucer used in The Pardoner’s Tale, which suggests it is a 
folkloristic legend common to all cultures.

I was glad to have seen Mikhail Reznikovich’s production, and the actors had 
the robust earthiness that you often find in Slavic companies. It was also 
fascinating to find Chekhov constantly returning to the theme of the 
unslakeable Russian thirst for vodka: in one of the plays a female theatrical 
star eagerly expects a young comic actor to propose to her only to discover 
that all he craves is another drink. But, if you really want the best of 
Chekhov, read a collection of the masterly later stories, which seem to contain 
all human experience.

• The Ukrainian season 
<https://www.stjamestheatre.co.uk/2015/08/festival-of-ukrainian-culture/> at St 
James’s theatre, London, ends with Lesya Ukrainka’s reinterpretation ofDon Juan 
<https://www.stjamestheatre.co.uk/theatre/don-juan/>, 17-19 September. Box 
office: 0844-264 2140.
 