
To those wending their way sorrowfully to Steven Wells's last published 
article in the aftermath of his recent death, the fact thathis final online 
posting for Philadelphia Weekly 
<http://www.philadelphiaweekly.com/news-and-opinion/in-extremis/Steven-Wells-Says-Goodbye-49054426.html>
 ended with a quote from Michael Jackson ("Me? I blame it on sunshine. I blame 
it on the moonlight. I blame it on the boogie.") added a still more eerie 
lustre to the virtually synchronous demises of these two titans of 80s pop 
discourse.

And while those of his former colleagues who wrote articles to the effect that 
Wells was the only king of pop they really cared about were of course entitled 
totheir personal feelings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/jun/28/faith-schools-judaism-christianity-catholicism>
, I think the man himself would have taken a more positive view of this sombre 
coincidence.

Fervent, Smiths fan-baiting carnivore that he was, Steven Wells's lurid 
imagination would certainly have found something to laugh about in the idea of 
himself as the meat in a Farrah Fawcett/Michael Jackson sandwich. And given 
that the one-eyed solipsism and lack of perspective of so much 
contemporary-rock writing was probably, over the years, his number one 
satirical target, an orderly retreat from the endless political ramifications 
of the Jackson saga's grim public denouement into a private chapel of 
journalistic rest is the last thing he would've wanted.

As his one-time Molotov Comics co-conspirator James Brown has already suggested
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/organgrinder/2009/jun/25/nme-writer-steven-wells-tribute-james-brown>
 elsewhere on this website, the early death of the NME's erstwhile Trotskyite 
conscience (and longest-serving freelance contributor) seemed an especially 
cruel blow in the same month that the paper's most recent editor Conor 
McNicholas embraced an aptly consumerist and demographic-conscious destiny by
becoming editor of Top Gear magazine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/jun/24/top-gear-nme-conor-mcnicholas>. 
But the ebullience and vivacity that had sustained Wells's online account of 
his battle with cancer were a stern injunction against self-indulgence on the 
part of those required to mark his passing.

Billy Bragg's measured yet tender appreciation in the pages of NME (it's hard 
to find on the website – presumably out of concern that it would put the rest 
of the paper's contents to shame – but can be accessedhere 
<http://www.philadelphiaweekly.com/news-and-opinion/Billy-Bragg-remembers-Steven-Wells-his-uncompromising-spirit-and-influence.html>
) does an excellent job of tracing Wells's venom-fuelled trajectory from 
ranting poet to poetic ranter, in the process reconciling the phantasmagoric 
extremity of his invective with the grisly reality of the disease that 
afflicted him. It also emphasises the important point that the linguistic 
extremity, which was Wells's trademark, was not its own justification, but had 
a higher goal of leaving readers "outraged to the point of engagement".

In contrast to the tearful sincerity of his brief NME sidebar, the longer 
Guardian obituary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/jun/29/obituary-steven-wells> by 
Wells's former comedy writing partner David Quantick seems somewhat constrained 
by the formality of its setting. But it's in the readers' comments annex of 
Wells's last Philadelphia Weekly posting that the real story is to be found. 
There's no sign of Maya Angelou or Nelson Mandela among the (at the last count) 
269 contributors to this extended outpouring of affection, but Wells's ex-boss 
Conor McNicholas does dutifully take his place among those lining up to pay 
their respects. The subject of the ensuing slew of heartfelt reminiscences 
would no doubt have scathingly characterised them as an appalling orgy of Lady 
Di condolence book-style sentimentality, at the same time as being secretly 
delighted by the levels of warmth he'd inspired.

Just as the city of Dublin could theoretically be rebuilt from a single copy 
of James Joyce's Ulysses, any cultural archaeologist of the future warped 
enough to wish to reconstitute the British music press from the early/mid 80s 
to the end of the century would find all the raw materials they needed here for 
a complete reconstruction. From Wells's aforementioned 
Xerox-helpmeet-turned-Loaded-founder James Brown (writing under his old fanzine 
banner of Attack on Bzag) to Smash Hits­­ pop authority turned Pet Shop Boy 
Neil Tennant: as gamuts go, that's certainly B to T at the very least.

The overriding consensus which emerges from these fulsome tributes is that the 
harder he tried to project himself as a ferocious SWP boot-boy, the more widely 
apparent it became that Steven Wells was actually (to borrow the words of his 
rival northern rent-a-gob John Robb in the Quietus.com's similarly effusive 
obituary selection "a sweetheart" 
<http://thequietus.com/articles/02000-steven-wells-a-tribute>. But another 
truth is what an effective safety-valve Wells's splenetic tirades made for the 
self-loathing that new arrivals at NME could not help but feel from the mid 80s 
onwards on realising how far short the paper fell of the yardstick established 
in its late-70s and early-80s heyday.

One thing Steven Wells had in common with his arch-enemy Morrissey was that 
both had so successfully honed their individual styles of communication that 
any attempt to emulate them (and there have been many, in both cases), was 
inevitably doomed to failure. And the key fact that latterday legions of Swells 
wannabes tended to miss was that his writing was at its best when its harsh 
tone had a moral dimension.

"The comments section of every website is full of posts from cynical jerk-offs 
who get their kicks from upsetting people," Bragg notes sternly. "Swells could 
be hurtful in what he wrote, but his contrarian stance was ... underpinned with 
an unswerving belief that things could be better." This same utopian gleam can 
be discerned in the eyes of those who have foresworn forever the witterings of 
Perez Hilton and Kwame Kwei Armah, and opted to experience Michael Jackson only 
through the medium of Off the Wall.
 