
Of the several magazines cited approvingly in last month's despatch for 
"exulting in the possibilities of the artefact" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2009/may/18/maggoty-lamb>, one 
(the bulky American fanzine Skyscraper)had gone web-only  
<http://www.skyscrapermagazine.com/features/letter.html>before our now 
metaphorical ink was even dry. Another – Plan B – took just a few days longer 
to announce that its June issue would be its last.

Whether we now need to come to terms with the possibility that the artefact no 
longer has any possibilities, only that venerable gent who lives on top of the 
pavilion at Lord's cricket ground can testify. But the latter of this brace of 
unwelcome demises was especially poignant. Not just for the gloomy dignity of 
(editor and publisher respectively) Louis Pattison and Frances Morgan's 
"quitting while we're ahead" announcement on the title page – with its defiant 
refusal to compromise production standards in a bid to escape inextricable 
linkage with a recorded music industry "currently in freefall", but also 
because of the exemplary excellence ofPlan B's final edition 
<http://www.planbmag.com/shop/>.

Neil Kulkarni's simultaneously euphoric and maudlin Speech Debelle cover story 
is the perfect measure of the extent to which this magazine has improved over 
the last few months, rounding off the best sequence of issues in its five-year 
history with a ringing declaration of faith in the present. (The spikily 
effervescent Ms Debelle also managed to elicit unusually warm praise from David 
Hepworth in that issue of the Word with the terrifying picture of Iggy Pop on 
the front, and it is a rare artist who has the power to induce agreement in 
messrs Hepworth and Kulkarni.)

Plan B's extensive but not exhausting review section has the courage to face 
up to the fact that two of the month's most exciting releases – Flipper's 
unique Generic and the Megaphone label's marvellous introduction to the wit and 
wisdom of Bahamian hotel bard Blind Blake (not to be confused with the 
excellent bluesman of the same name) – are technically reissues; and then the 
vision to entrust them to writers (Shane Moritz and Everett True, respectively) 
with the passion and knowledge to convey just how much these diversely superb 
records have to offer the contemporary listener.

Moritz's felicitous phrase "buoyant sludge" perfectly captures Flipper's 
galvanising turgidity, while Plan B éminence gris True's well-judged comparison 
of Blake's vocal style with that of latter-day after-hours troubadour M Ward is 
just the thing to bring his unfamiliar subject (whose raffish wit actually 
knocks the slightly soporific Ward into the proverbial cocked titfer, but 
that's not important right now) to the wide new audience his talent seems to 
demand. Buy this magazine now, while you still can.

The uncomfortable suspicion that a show of approval from this column might be 
a virtual death sentence for any specialist music publication suggests a 
malevolent (and necessarily fraudulent) paean to the greatness of Uncut could 
be in order. But it's tough enough out there without me making things worse. 
And with regular correspondents from Artrocker virtually pleading to be 
overlooked, the most responsible course of action seems to be to exult in the 
possibilities of the non-artefact.

Readers of the Sunday Telegraph (come on, I know you're out there) have had 
good cause to deplore the sidelining of Paul Morley in recent weeks. So last 
month'sexpansion of his OMM column into an MC Escher-inspired online walking 
tour around the haunted theme park of Michael Jackson's mythology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/interactive/2009/may/14/paul-morley-michael-jackson>
 was a timely and heartening reminder that digital's wide open spaces can be a 
blank canvas of creative opportunity, as well as a Beachy Head for much-loved 
music magazines to walk off.

Traditionally, one of the big problems with newspaper video podcasts has been 
how clearly they demonstrate the unsuitability of the journalists involved for 
work in a broadcast medium. However, this objection does not apply with an 
experienced multimedia operator like Morley at the helm. And since the timidity 
of BBC commissioning editors has ensured that some of his best recent ideas (ie 
last year's sublime BBC4 celebration of pop fashion through the prism of Noddy 
Holder's trousers) have been corralled into one-off programmes when they could 
easily have sustained a full series, the prospect of Morley being regularly 
given a free rein in a new audio-visual arena is an enticing one.

Another frequently noticed drawback of extra online content is that it 
devalues what's left behind on the page. Yet the real beauty of this initiative 
is that each aspect of it – print, video podcast, website commentary on Craig 
David's hilariously aspirational domestic circumstances – works equally well as 
a self-contained entity, and as a bridge up or down to the next level.

It is not necessary to hold Camera Obscura in quite the same high esteem that 
Paul Morley does to share in his obvious pleasure at being able to airlift them 
into a field-hospital treating the psychic wounds he'd engendered while not 
being able to say quite what he felt he ought to about Michael Jackson in the 
course of a discussion with Richard & Judy. Apparently Kraftwerk will be 
getting the same multi-faceted treatment this Sunday: an eventuality it is 
difficult to contemplate with anything other than unrestrained optimism.
 