
"It feels so unnatural to sing your own name," Peter Gabriel modestly 
observes, shortly after doing exactly that in the course of his and Hot Chip's 
joint cover version of Vampire Weekend's Cape Cod Kwassa Kwassa. On first 
hearing this jaunty act of reappropriation earlier this year, it just seemed 
like a good joke. Eight months later, it can be seen to have been a sombre 
portent of an especially frenzied outbreak of navel-gazing in the upper 
echelons of UK rock journalism.

In recent weeks this virus has reached pandemic proportions, mutating from 
erstwhile Emap bigwig John Harris's auteurist hearkening back to an imaginary 
golden age inthis very paper 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2009/jun/27/music-writing-bangs-marcus>, to 
the apparently endless requiem for the rock writer's not-so-humble trade 
published byDrowned In Sound 
<http://drownedinsound.com/lists/ismusicjournalismdead>.

Some might say that going to the latter website for analysis of the
declining status of music journalism is a bit like reading about
global-warming in a private jet manufacturer's trade magazine. But it's
quite fun finding out exactly what soon-to-be reformed Membrane John Robb's 
average day consists of <http://drownedinsound.com/in_depth/4137355>. But 
responsibility for 2009's ongoing spiral of self-referentiality actually lies 
in a different quarter.

It's towards the generally unimpeachable Simon Reynolds that the finger of 
suspicion points in this instance. It was Reynolds's decision to round off his 
latest book Totally Wired – the chunky Q&A supplement to his benchmark 
post-punk history Rip It Up And Start Again – by interviewing
himself that seems to have opened the floodgates of amour-propre. The 
evolution of Simon Reynolds's critical framework is not an uninteresting 
subject in itself. But Reynolds's decision to omit the name of his fellow Faber 
stalwart Jon Savage (to whose peerless punk history, England's Dreaming, his 
own Rip It Up explicitly proposed itself as a companion volume) from his list 
of formative influences, while praising Oi! propagandist turned Sun TV critic 
Garry Bushell for his "impressively thought-out aesthetic", suggests that 
Reynolds himself is not the best person to address this issue. On the evidence 
of her defiantly next-level contribution to the first volume of Faber and 
Domino's biannual rock-crit cornucopiaLoops <http://www.loopsjournal.com> 
(which I can't write about, as I'm in it), Anwyn Crawford (aka Aussie blogger 
Emmy Hennings) would seem to be the right woman for that job.

With both Kerrang! and NME having recently followed Terrrorizer's lead in 
appointing female editors (Nichola Browne and Krissi Murison respectively, and 
OK, Ms Browne is actually Kerrang!'s second female editor but still, a trend is 
a trend), and a "give Sylvie Simmons a crack at Mojo when the time comes for a 
change" campaign already gathering strength in the personal columns of Record 
Collector, it's clear that a dramatic adjustment to rock criticism's one-sided 
gender power-balance is currently underway. While this overdue equalisation 
probably goes some way to explaining Harris's boyishly canonical embrace of 
such totems of old-school machismo as Nick Kent and Lester Bangs, it brings us 
no nearer to understanding Reynolds's attempt to hide Savage's light under 
Garry Bushell.

For if that most battle-weary of adjectives "influential" is to be turfed out 
of its hospital bed, unplugged from its drip, and sent back to the frontline 
for one last tour of duty in the interests of people who used to work for 
Sounds but weren't Savage, surely it's not Bushell but Geoff "Deaf" Barton to 
whose name it should be appended? The founder of Kerrang! is currently editor 
at large on the often-more-fun-than-it-sounds Classic Rock, where earlier this 
year he explored the cutting-edge phenomenon of "Pirate metal", uncovering such 
all-but-buried musical treasures as "Scotland's Alestorm, New Jersey's 
Swashbuckle and Tennessee's Pegleg".

But it was in his earlier role as godfather of the new wave of British
heavy metal that Barton made his most enduring mark. In the sleevenotes to an 
excellent NWOBHM compilation, Metallica's Lars Ulrich recounts how the siren 
lure of Barton's prose led him to the exotic environs of the Woolwich Odeon for 
the crucial encounter with Diamond Head that would set him on the path to Kill 
'Em All.

It would be taking it a bit far to say "Barton ergo Cobain", but without 
Metallica, there's no thrash metal. And without thrash metal to create their 
constituency, Nirvana might (I said might) still be releasing criticall 
acclaimed albums of Raincoats-inspired feminist Afro-funk on Calvin Johnson's K 
label, while Everett True's claims to being a figure of major historical 
significance would be just that little bit less persuasive.

I am not close enough to the Guardian hierarchy to be able to
tell you if our own Laura Barton is actually, genetically Geoff Barton's
daughter [she isn't, ed], but spiritually, the lineage is clear. Surely Ms
Barton's penchant for quoting whole paragraphs of Marcel Proust to
explicate her emotional responses to the music of Holy Ghost Revival is
most easily – and perhaps best – understood as an act of generational
rebellion against being forced to grow up listening to the Tygers of
Pan-Tang over breakfast?

In the meantime, anyone wasting valuable seconds of their precious time on 
this beautiful planet worrying about the future of music journalism is advised 
to check out Savage'sexcellent website <http://www.jonsavage.com> (not to 
mention hisnew blog <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/series/jon-savage-on-song> 
on Guardian.co.uk/music), Paul Morley's latestmulti-platform fantasia 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/interactive/2009/aug/20/1> and/or Popjustice's 
debate on the relative merits of Beyoncé and Girls Aloud's VIP tour packages (I 
can't actually find this now, but it was really good, honest). Now tell me the 
written word doesn't have a future.
 