
What was I thinking? After two and a half years of striving to inspire a 
heated debate with an outmoded combination of impassioned polemic and 
old-school Bernstein and Woodward-style investigative journalism, last month's 
bulging crop of enraged responses confirmed that all you need to do to really 
get the wires humming is casually drop in a dismissive aside about Interpol or 
Spoon. But how best to pass the time until next month's no-stone-unturned 
analysis of the terrifying possibility that neither Broken Social Scene nor the 
Bowerbirds are currently among the world's top 10 rock bands? A spot-check on 
the current state of Anglo-American urban music magazine publishing seems the 
only realistic way forward.

On the middle-shelf of a small newsagents in Hackney's once bustling Dalston 
Lane, there lurks what seems to be the entire UK stock of a publication called
Hip Hop Weekly <http://hiphopweeklyblog.com/>. This disturbingly entertaining 
magazine views the triumphs and tribulations of all your favourite rap stars 
(and a few you've never heard of) through the same filter of amoral 
obsequiousness that Hello! used to – and, for all I know, still does – apply to 
the social lives of minor European royals. Thus paparazzi shots of Yung Joc's 
birthday bash at Velvet Room in Atlanta ("Shawty Lo never misses an industry 
event") nestle comfortably alongside "Beach Bodies" Eve and Beyoncé.

Yet the proceedings are given a distinctly surreal edge by the way hip-hop's 
darker realities are addressed in precisely the same breathlessly admiring 
voice with which Hip Hop Weekly introduces this season's fashion must-haves – 
that $570 pair of Miu Miu glitter slingbacks, for example, or the Stella 
McCartney patent rivet detail clutch (a snip at $725). One page it's "Shady 
Dudes: Drake and Trey Songz rock their sunglasses", the next it's "DG Yola 
begins jail sentence for shooting cousin" or "C-Murder Sentenced to Life" 
("When his retrial began," asks the concerned interviewer, "was he optimistic 
that he would be vindicated?").

The strangest thing about such glaring disjunctions is that they are actually 
totally appropriate to the mixed messages encoded within rap's unfolding 
spectacle. And for anyone with even the slightest interest in finding out how 
Joe Budden's latest internet beef ended in real-life drama, Hip Hop Weekly is 
as essential as reading is likely to get (those not within striking distance of 
Dalston Lane can clickhere <http://hiphopweeklyblog.com/> for a free sample)

The Source <http://www.thesource.com/>, on the other hand – even "under new 
management", as it is – seems to be struggling to come up with a consistent 
approach to rap's inner conflicts. A heartfelt editorial tries to convince us 
that "it kind of feels like 1988 outside, like the days when hip-hop was about 
talking about something, when studied masters taught eager listeners how to get 
their hustle on". But such earnest hopes are quickly (albeit amusingly) 
undermined by "Baby Mama Drama", a page-long celebration of the relative 
earning potentials of such former rap muses as TI's Lashonda Dixon and Jeezy's 
Tynesha Dykes: apparently "sometimes it's cheaper to keep her".

The following eye-catching standfirst suggests that the Source is currently 
happiest when it's worthiest: "What happens when a rapper born in Peru and 
raised in New York City ventures into war-torn Afghanistan to start an 
orphanage? My name is Immortal Technique and this is my story, part two." But 
it's hard to have too much faith in a magazine that would allot four pages to 
an in-depth interview with Warner Music Group co-chairman Lyor Cohen, but only 
two to speak to the great Ghostface Killah (and one of those is taken up by an 
– admittedly excellent – photo of the Wu-Tang's finest wearing a highly 
desirable tangerine velour tracksuit).

Happily, Kevin Fairbanks's regrettably brief encounter with the man who would 
be Tony Starks still manages to pack a punch. Having worried for years if his 
fans would accept the distinct R&B-ward move he's making on forthcoming album, 
The Wizard of Poetry, Ghostface explains that he has now reached a stage in his 
career "where I've been around so long that I don't give a fuck if my fans 
respect it or not. The ones that don't respect it – this ain't for you then. 
I'll catch y'all … when I get back to talking that other stupid-ass shit".

Passing swiftly over a copy of XXL magazine  <http://www.xxlmag.com/>with 
Jay-Z on the cover (editor Vanessa Satten has crawled so far up Hov's arse in 
her determination to secure the 24 pages of Rocawear adverts with which last 
month's issue opens that apparently you can still see the top of her head when 
he opens his mouth to speak), we find ourselves contemplating the place in the 
Borders magazine section where the specialist British black music titles used 
to be. Only a beleaguered-lookingEchoes <http://echoesmagazine.co.uk/> remains, 
and I'm not sure if an interview with Reggae Reggae sauce mogul Levi Roots 
represents the best strategy for securing this distinguished title's long-term 
future.

Online, though, things look a little brighter, with a surprisingly functional 
version of old rivalBlues and Soul <http://www.bluesandsoul.com/> ("The 
official first stop for music writing, comment, integrity, opinion and 
listings," apparently) trumping Echoes' lamentably inadequate Maxwell interview 
with Pete Lewis's vastly superior career retrospective. And best (albeit 
saddest) of all – the finest journalistic catch in this month's transatlantic 
trawl – are the handful of prototype digital editions put together by the 
late-lamented Hip-Hop Connection, which gave up the physical ghost earlier this 
year,but still struggles on virtually <http://www.hhcdigital.net>. Compact and 
elegant PDFs are easily downloadable (well,the T La Rock one was 
<http://hhcdigital.net/blog1/2009/05/31/the-original-015-preview/>, I could 
only get the cover of the much sought after MF Doom exclusive). Read them and 
weep, or, if you are a millionaire rap star, slip them £50k to get this 
beautifully designed vehicle back on the road.
 