
As the decade draws to an end, the English language seems to be trying to pull 
us back from the abyss of retrospective indulgence. After all, is it even 
possible to provide a serious, critical evaluation of a 10-year span in history 
when you have to call it "the Noughties"?

"OK, it was fun to look back at the 60s, 70s, 80s and 90s," seems to be the 
general message, "but perhaps this time around, we should take a break. And 
let's maybe give the whole decade thing a rest for the next 10 years too, as 
'The 10s' isn't really going to cut it either. Then we can have another go in 
the 2020s, and just think how fresh the whole process will seem by then!"

If only Uncut had listened to this inner voice. Sadly, it was drowned out by 
the biological imperative that drives people who work at music magazines to 
make lists. As a consequence, this month'sUncut  <http://www.uncut.co.uk/>
presents us with a selection of the top 150 albums of the decade (the 
magazine's 150th issue supposedly supplying an additional cause for 
celebration), the top eight of which contains not one buttwo Bob Dylan albums, 
as well as Brian Wilson's necromancer's remix of Smile (when they say "the 
decade", they obviously mean "the 60s"). The first black artist (apart from the 
drummer in the Libertines and Kevin Mark Trail's vocal contribution to the 
first Streets album), crops up at No 45!

Who knew that the 44 best albums of the last 10 years were all made by white 
people? What an amazing coincidence. And by which landmark recording is this 
trend of Caucasian creative domination finally bucked? Of course, it's the 
under-the-circumstances-somewhat-plaintively-titled Don't Give Up On Me, in 
which reanimated 60s soulman Solomon Burke sings "songs from the likes of Bob 
Dylan, Brian Wilson, Tom Waits, Van Morrison, Nick Lowe and Elvis Costello".

In contrast to the warped logic that seems to have prevailed in compiling 
their top 150 albums chart, Uncut's choice of Jack White as the magazine's 
man-of-the-decade seems an entirely apt one. Not just on account of his surname 
(which he borrowed, of course, from his first wife, Meg), but because White's 
preoccupation with the past has led him to do great things that have never been 
done before. Nonetheless, Barney Hoskyns's perfectly serviceable 
career-spanning interview appears to have been secured on the basis that it 
would not involve asking the one question that everyone really wants to know 
the answer to, which is whether or not the the White Stripes have any kind of 
future.

Uncut's two main rivals limber up for their own later entries into the 
best-of-the-Noughties tag-team contest by focusing on the creative trailblazers 
of earlier decades. Both actually look in surprisingly good shape at the 
weigh-in.Mojo <http://www.mojo4music.com/blog/>'s multifaceted festival of 
Kraftwerk is – like Keith Cameron's epic Arctic Monkeys piece a couple of 
months back – a textbook example of everything the magazine does best. Ditto 
Q's entertainingly quote-heavy encounter with the marvellously rejuvenated 
Prodigy (deservedly lodged at No 1 in an impractical list of "50 Gigs you must 
see in the remaining two and a bit months of this decade").

The Prodigy's two Keiths – Flint (who at one point utters the immortal 
punchline, "It might be a maggot, but it's been in some peaches") and "Maxim 
Reality" Palmer – are both on inspired form. The latter not only brings us the 
lowdown on his jewellery designs ("You see that they're butterflies, but 
they're actually skeletons with machetes, and they're killing bees!"), but also 
supplies a metaphysical explanation of his band's existence. "The Prodigy's 
like a milkmaid's stool … if there wasn't a stool there would be … no milk. If 
there's no milk, there would be no biscuits and no people working in the 
factories."

The impact of these words gradually sinks in, but as they ponder their delayed 
entries into the decadal melee, the editorial boards of Q and Mojo need to face 
the possibility that an internet usurper has already taken the title. 
Initially, the respective top 20s ofPitchfork's 500 tracks 
<http://pitchfork.com/features/staff-lists/7693-the-top-500-tracks-of-the-2000s-20-1/>
 and200 albums of the decade 
<http://pitchfork.com/features/staff-lists/7710-the-top-200-albums-of-the-2000s-20-1/>
, which they have confusingly dubbed "the aughts", look like a craven attempt 
to balance the website's mystifying affinity for third-rank indie nonentities 
(Interpol? Spoon? Modest Mouse?) with a broader understanding of the music 
that's really meant something over the last 10 years.

So instead of the level playing field that ought to exist – where Jay-Z's 99 
Problems and the White Stripes' Seven Nation Army could compete on equal terms, 
as the good Lord intended – you end up with a slightly skewed contest; a warped 
internet extrapolation of the old apartheid lie of "separate but equal", in 
which incontrovertible R&B and rap classics (R Kelly's Ignition (Remix), Missy 
Elliott's Get Ur Freak On) have to go head-to-head with such meagre blogosphere 
gruel as Animal Collective's My Girls and Yeah Yeah Yeah's Maps. Now I've 
finally got around to reading the whole thing properly, though, there's no 
denying that as subtly disingenuous balancing acts go, this one has actually 
been pulled off with a fair measure of aplomb. And while Pitchfork's best 
track/best album double whammy of Outkast's B.O.B. and Radiohead's Kid A will 
not be the final word on the decade that has no name, it certainly puts down a 
marker.
 