
It was a lovely, late summer afternoon. In Ray's Jazz 
<http://www.foyles.co.uk/rays.asp> on the top floor of Foyles bookshop in 
London's Charing Cross road, the elegantly-dressed woman approaching the 
counter with twoEddie "Lockjaw" Davis 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9CTtR8RofgQ> albums under her arm suddenly gave 
an involuntary start. Out of the corner of her eye, she had caught sight of the 
jazz magazines.

There on the counter – not even on any sort of raised shelving, and with no 
warning notice of any kind - were the August issues ofJazz Journal 
<http://www.jazzjournal.co.uk/> and Jazzwise <http://www.jazzwise.com/catalog/>
. The covers of these magazines seemed specifically designed to induce a double 
take on the part of the unwary consumer. The former focused in on the very big 
face of Lee Konitz, the latter offered a truly terrifying photo of British 
eminence John Surman. Admittedly, it was intimidating stuff, but over the next 
few weeks these images began to haunt me.

At first sight, Jazzwise is the glossier and more accessible-looking of the 
two titles. The September issue leads with the story of Cuban émigré violinist
Omar Puente 
<http://www.jazzwisemagazine.com/feature-table-mainmenu-134/10937-omar-puente-motherland-pulse->
, and lest anyone doubt it, this is a story. Apart from his extensive musical 
endeavours, the sometime Courtney Pine sideman has also been a dignified 
presence in the national news pages over the past few months, supporting his 
MS-stricken wife Debbie Purdy's brave struggle to get the Law Lords to clarify 
the legal position of the partners of those who might be inclined to seek 
voluntary euthanasia.

Reprising the unexpected human interest theme, the "Bitches Brew" gossip 
column remarks how little coughing there was at the recent Keith Jarrett show 
at the Royal Festival Hall. And back on more predictable terrain, the "Lost in 
the Vaults" section offers an interesting paragraph about Basil Kirchin's 
Worlds Within Worlds (Parts 1 & II), a vinyl copy of which recently sold on 
eBay for £598. The only thing to really frighten the first-time reader is the 
letters page – so often the most reliable guide to a magazine's spiritual 
centre – two of whose four reprinted missives seem hellbent on confirming the 
prejudices of the jazz-wary.

Harry Howell from the Isle of Man concludes his discussion of the 
applicability of the concept of genius to "composer/musicians like the 
misunderstood and highly intelligent Frank Zappa", with the following ringing 
conclusion: "Our only hope is that there exists a 'planet jazz', where pop 
music is strictly forbidden." Meanwhile, Colin Barnes of Claygate in Surrey 
puts a warning shot across Seb Rochford's bows by recounting the dramatic fall 
from grace of Tony Crombie, "Ronnie Scott's favourite drummer", who - having 
had the temerity to start a rock'n'roll band in a bid "to cash in on all the 
Bill Haley nonsense" - found himself "roundly booed on his return to jazz at 
the Mapleton in Leicester Square".

In the aftermath of this festival of bad vibes, it's a great relief to turn to 
the more extensive correspondence section of the theoretically still more 
old-school Jazz Journal (founded in 1948) and discover a verdant oasis of 
open-minded scholarship. Alongside a letter of support for the magazine's 
recent change in direction from professor Courtney Pine, a reader called Jurgen 
Wolfer supplies some hilariously-detailed corrections to Richard Palmer's 
estimable four-part survey of the later works of Woody Herman (good news from 
the editor: "Richard is limbering up for something similar on Milt Jackson"), 
and there's also a polite request for a 40th anniversary review of the recently 
re-released Soft Machine, volume two.

But the expectation that Jazz Journal might be a magazine living predominantly 
in the past is confounded from its very first page, as Mark Gilbert's letter 
from the editor makes the following unexpectedly internet-friendly declaration: 
"Perhaps we shouldn't value the fixed recorded object so highly… jazz is 
already an ephemeral thing. It's improvised, and the music and the apprehension 
of it are both largely unrepeatable …'

Having been forced to suspend publication for two months earlier this year 
following the death of longtime editor/publisher Janet Cook, Jazz Journal has 
re-floated itself as a bold partnership between former deputy editor Gilbert 
and a firm of Ashford printers. When Gilbert first took over, the magazine was 
still being put together using a manual typewriter and paper galleys, and he 
seems to be doing a sterling job of bringing it into line with at least the 
late 20th century without alienating the sensibilities of his hardcore 
readership of 7,500. It even has awebsite <> now.

Gilbert's new model Jazz Journal now incorporates the Edinburgh-based Jazz 
Review, and the Caledonian influence can certainly be detected in the opening 
lines of north-of-the-border jazz sage Brian Priestley's excellent introduction 
to maverick clarinettistSandy Brown <>: "He died watching his native Scotland 
take on England at rugby, but then we've all done that." For those wishing to 
find out more about this intriguing figure, all too often "consigned to the box 
marked British trad", but actually boasting a modernist alter ego (Al Babb), 
and prone to making jokes about Roland Kirk (and I shall definitely be checking 
out his album Dr McJazz), the magazine's classified section gives directions 
both towww.sandybrownjazz.co.uk <http://www.sandybrownjazz.co.uk> and the 
terrestrial address of a rival Sandy Brown society and newsletter.

Reading Jazz Journal, there's an exciting sense of a publication trying to 
bridge the gap between two very different worlds. Gilbert's commendable 
determination to broaden his magazine's musical remit without drowning the baby 
in the bathwater clearly recalls Mark Sinker's visionary early-90s editorship 
of The Wire. And hopefully it will be the foundation of the same kind of 
thriving institutional presence as that was.
 