
Born: 24 February 2005 

Place of birth  : Grandmother's home in Nsalu

Birth weight: Considered 'average'

Mother:  Lenita Smoke, 29

Father: Boy Smoke, 29

Innocent Smoke lives just a few hundred yards from the economic heart of Malawi
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malawi>, hard by the country's giant grain 
reserve silos and tobacco warehouses on the edge of the capital, Lilongwe.

His parents are new African urbanites, smallholder farmers growing maize, 
tobacco, and groundnuts within the boundaries of the capital, Lilongwe.

For now, Maenje village in Area 25 is a collection of 30 or more 
straw-thatched huts, small maize fields and, down by a stream, a near Garden of 
Eden where the village works communally to grow and share cash crops, 
vegetables and fruit. There is no electricity, and the shallow well dries up in 
October.

Their small patch and the communal village land can, in a good year, provide 
for everyone. What could go wrong?

Plenty. "Innocent has malaria. He is suffering, badly," says Lenita. "We 
cannot afford drugs." She does not know it, but one in 10 children in Malawi 
will die before the age of one. Malaria is one of the biggest killers.

It has been a bad farming year, too, "one of the worst in memory", says Boy. 
The rains came and stopped early, the crops wilted, the government's handout of 
fertiliser came late, the price paid for the tobacco collapsed and the price of 
everything else has spiralled. "We got only three cartloads [of maize]. We 
needed 12. After October, we will have nothing left."

Boy walks or takes a 2p minibus ride to the city centre a lot these days, 
looking for day labour, doing anything that will pay. At best, he can get about 
60p a day.

School is free for five years, but there is little chance that the family will 
be able to pay the £20 a year to send Innocent to secondary school. If he grows 
up unskilled, say the statistics, he will earn the equivalent of £100 a year, 
live only until he is 40 and will owe the rich world £150. Over the next 20 
years, he can expect to have less than that spent on his health.

 Factfile: Malawi

Under-5s mortality (per 1,000 births): 114

Population on under $2 a day:  76.1%

Debt per capita:  $173

Life expectancy: 37.5

% children in education (F/M):  71/77
 