
Senior US science officials have shut down two government laboratories that 
were the subject of "serious and troubling" safety lapses, and suspended some 
transfers of potentially dangerous germs.

Dr Tom Frieden, director of the Centers for Disease Control, revealed on 
Friday that in addition to the exposure of anthrax and the discovery of 
insecure smallpox vials, which had already been disclosed, inquiries had 
discovered the cross-contamination of flu viruses.

Frieden said the discoveries raised "serious and troubling questions" in 
announcing the new safety measures on Friday. “Fundamentally, what they 
revealed was totally unacceptable behavior,” said Frieden. “These events should 
never have happened."

Frieden said he was disturbed to learn of the influenza virus 
cross-contamination in the last 48 hours, the incident was not previously known.

In June, news first broke that CDC bioterrorism scientists may have 
accidentally exposed 84 of their colleaguesto live anthrax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/19/anthrax-exposed-scientists-cdc-atlanta-live-bacteria>
 by deviating from a protocol meant to kill the bacteria and spores. Just a few 
days ago, 16 vials labeled "variola", or smallpox, from 1954 werediscovered in 
a storage room 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/jul/08/smallpox-vials-found-cardboard-box-maryland-laboratory>
 by a scientist at the Maryland campus of the National Institutes of Health.

Two of those vials were found be viable, or potentially infectious. Frieden 
said it does not appear that workers or the public were exposed to the 
dangerous pathogens in either incident.

Just two days ago, Frieden said he found out that a cross contamination in one 
of the CDC's influenza laboratories led to a highly pathogenic strain of "bird 
flu", or H5N1, to be accidentally shipped to a Department of Agriculture lab 
that was expecting a safer strain.

It does not appear anyone was exposed in that incident 

Frieden said bioterrorism researchers who nearly exposed their colleagues to 
anthrax broke lab protocol, had a “lack of scientific knowledge in this 
laboratory about anthrax", and should have known a method used to kill anthrax 
bacteria could leave small amounts of spores viable.

“The root cause, fundamentally, was that the scientists failed to follow a 
scientifically derived and ensured protocol that ensured that anthrax was 
deactivated,” said Frieden. There is a “lack of standard operating procedure, 
[and] lack of adequate laboratory oversight,” that allowed the incidents to 
happen, he said.

Frieden said he found the cross-contamination of influenza the most disturbing 
of the three incidents.

"It’s most distressing not because it’s most dangerous," he said. "What’s 
distressing about it is that our influenza laboratory is a superb laboratory … 
So, to me, the fact that something like this could happen in such a superb 
laboratory is unsettling." Frieden said it was also disturbing that the 
incident took about six weeks for scientists to report to superiors.

In response to the incidents, a moratorium on the transfer of biological 
materials from high-security CDC laboratories is being immediately issued, and 
will not be lifted until a lab-by-lab review is conducted.

The influenza laboratory is closed pending an investigation, and the 
laboratory that improperly handled anthrax is suspending work with that and 
other dangerous pathogens. Employees will be disciplined where appropriate, 
Frieden said.

New laboratory safety initiatives include naming Dr Michael Bell, currently 
the deputy director of health care quality promotion, as director of laboratory 
safety. Bell previously worked in the CDC's infectious disease control division.

Current lab protocols for transferring and deactivating biological material, 
such as the flu, will be reviewed and updated. An external advisory committee 
has been established, as well as a working group headed by Bell.


Frieden said any lessons the CDC learns through its review could be absorbed 
into its function regulating labs around the country, such as private or 
university labs.

A 23-page report issued by the director comes before his hearing before the 
House energy and commerce committee next week. Frieden has headed the CDC since 
2009, and previously headed the New York City department of health.
 