
Anselm Kiefer <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/anselm-kiefer> is a 
bewildering artist to get to grips with. The word that comes up most often when 
his work is discussed is the heart-sinking and slippery "references". His vast 
pictures, thick with paint and embedded with objects from sunflowers and 
diamonds to lumps of lead, nod to the Nazis and Norse myth, to Kabbalah and the 
Egyptian gods, to philosophy and poetry, and to alchemy and the spirit of 
materials. How is one to unpick such a complex personal cosmology? Kiefer 
himself refuses to help: "Art really is something very difficult," he says. "It 
is difficult to make, and it is sometimes difficult for the viewer to 
understand … A part of it should always include having to scratch your head."

Now 69, Kiefer is the subject of a retrospective at the Royal Academy, where 
he is an honorary academician and which, through its summer exhibitions, has 
done much to bring him to the attention of the British public. This show is 
part of an extended German moment in UK galleries:Gerhard Richter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gerhard-richter> and Georg Baselitz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/feb/14/georg-baselitz-interview> 
have both had exhibitions recently, whileSigmar Polke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2014/apr/17/alibis-sigmar-polke-moma-in-pictures>
 comes to Tate Modern next month. It is therefore a good time to judge Kiefer's 
standing. Such is the scale of many of the pieces in the exhbition, 40% of 
which are new, that the RA is leaving more time to hang them than it did for 
the Anish Kapoor show in 2009,wax-firing cannon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/dec/03/anish-kapoor-royal-academy-wax>
 and all.

Kiefer's Germanness is different from Richter, Baselitz and Polke's; they are 
of a slightly older generation and from the Protestant east of Germany rather 
than Kiefer's Catholic west. Unlike his peers, Kiefer has no personal memories 
of the war but only of its aftermath. He is a child of the rubble and of the 
national silence about Hitler's atrocities that settled on Germany after 1945. 
It was here that he formulated his idea that "creation and destruction are one 
and the same". Whatever else is going on in his pictures and sculptures, 
history is always present.

The weight and seriousness of his art can perhaps be traced to the day of his 
birth, two months before VE Day. Kiefer's mother was living in the Black Forest 
town of Donaueschingen, where the rivers Breg and Brigach converge to form the 
Danube. Thanks to its military garrison and rail hub it was a regular target 
for allied bombers. On the day he was born, 8 March 1945, the house next door, 
belonging to his parents' landlords, received a direct hit. The only thing that 
survived was the couple's Singer sewing machine, which was blown into the 
street where it landed upside down amid the debris and dust. This lump of metal 
set into crumbled greys and earths was a prototype Kiefer, fashioned by high 
explosives.
Black Flakes, 2006, by Anselm Kiefer. Courtesy of Anselm Kiefer/Privatbesitz 
Famille Grothe 
Kiefer is a great revisitor of themes. His art is best seen not as a 
progression but as a cycle, and as such a reflection of the way he sees the 
present and the past. "No atom is ever lost," he points out, and so, for him, 
the atoms that surround him and make up his work are the tangible remains of 
former times and long dead people. An atom or two that are now part of Anselm 
Kiefer himself, he believes, were once a part of Shakespeare, Nietzsche and 
indeed Hitler.

Such mutability fascinates him. It is why he often includes a material such as 
straw in his pictures, or dribbles acid on them and leaves them out in the 
rain, or dunks his sculptures in an electrolysis bath, so that even when they 
have taken their place in a gallery the pieces continue to change. Kiefer gives 
the old artistic adage of "truth to materials" a new twist.

A favourite substance, lead, has an even weightier role: as he explains it, 
"lead comes from the depths of the earth, from which it is extracted and 
a shaman then places a chunk of it on a plinth between heaven and earth, 
between the spheres of the Nigredo and the spirituality of the Albedo … equally 
I could mention the sacred groves of the Druids, the Celts, the Germanic tribes 
…" No viewer confronted by Kiefer's lead books, for example, could be expected 
to extrapolate even a fraction of this – perhaps the only word that makes some 
sort of sense is "shaman". However, few viewers standing in front of the work 
itself could fail to sense that this is not the meretricious gobbledygook of 
the contemporary art world taken to a new level but that, for the artist, there 
is something meaningful going on, however knotted or nebulous that meaning 
might be.

The Kiefer worldview is best seen at La Ribaute, his 200 acre compound near 
Barjac in the Cévennes. At the centre of the estate is a handsome stone manor 
that was once the heart of a silk factory, and around it is a series of barns 
where the manufacturing processes took place. When Kiefer moved there in 1992 
he needed 70 lorries to move the contents of his studio: he would need rather 
more now. The artist turned this quiet domain into a Brobdingnagian 
Gesamtkunstwerk, surely one of the most extraordinary artworks of the last 
century.
 A Kew Gardens-size greenhouse in the grounds at Barjac. Photograph: Charles 
Duprat 
The grounds are dotted with teetering towers made from the stacked concrete 
casts of shipping containers that resemble a steampunk San Gimignano. There are 
Kew Gardens-size greenhouses that are used as immense vitrines, containing a 
12-foot lead battleship washed up on a choppy sea of broken concrete or a 
full-scale lead aeroplane sprouting sunflowers. Elsewhere there is a 
cathedral-like barn with six house-size paintings in it and an underground 
temple of Karnak, where the columns were made by digging out the earth from 
around the foundations of the buildings above. There are tunnels and 
subterranean hospital wards, a lead-lined room full of water and a series of 
pavilions, each bigger than a squash court, with doors that open like an 
altarpiece triptych to reveal a single work inside. Metaphysics and megalomania 
are mixed on a daunting scale, and the effect is overwhelming.

Kiefer intends the RA exhibition to be a "concentration" of Barjac. La Ribaute 
is no longer his main workplace, he has another Ozymandian studio set-up – 
36,000 square metres in a former Samaritaine department store warehouse at 
Croissy-Beaubourg outside Paris. La Ribaute is the site for what Kiefer calls 
"reverse architecture" – putting artefacts back into the landscape. He moved 
there for its wildness and to escape the art world, and now he is thinking of 
leaving it to the French state. Given his origins he likes the idea of a German 
artist making such a gesture; it is another way of addressing and redressing 
the past.
 One of many cathedral-like spaces at Barjac. Photograph: Charles Duprat 
The painting that in turn best concentrates his various concerns is Margarete 
(1981), based onPaul Celan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/jun/16/poetry.hywelwilliams>'s poem 
"Death Fugue" <http://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/fugue-death>. Celan was a 
German-speaking Jew, born in Romania, and the poem was written in response to 
his time in a death camp. Its two protagonists are Margarete, a German prison 
guard, and Shulamith (the subject of a companion piece), a prisoner. In the 
painting plant-like fronds grow out of a clinker soil, each topped with a 
flame. The fronds are made of straw (a representation of Margarete's blond 
hair) while the soil represents the remains of Shulamith's hair after the ovens 
have turned it to ash (Kiefer will often mix sand and ash into his paint). The 
flames are those of the furnaces, the flickering of spirits, the formation of 
stars, the artist himself … the interpretations, as so often with Kiefer, are 
innumerable.

Fields make frequent appearances in Kiefer's pictures, usually furrowed, 
barren and on the brink of regrowth. These paintings, and the earth inMargarete
, are in turn a reference to the Nazis' fixation with Blut und Boden (blood and 
soil) and Hitler's belief that "true Germans" came from the soil. This appears 
too, in transmuted form, in his recent Morgenthau paintings of wheatfields – 
grey and black ones in his case. Although, with their hovering crows, they are 
a dark homage to one of Kiefer's artistic heroes,Van Gogh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/van-gogh>, they refer too to the 
Morgenthau Plan, conceived towards the end of the war by the US treasury 
secretary Henry Morgenthau Jr to turn a demilitarised and deindustrialised 
Germany into a vast agricultural landscape instead – Europe's bread basket. One 
of Kiefer's pavilions at Barjac contains a Morgenthau installation: a field of 
wheat fashioned from rushes, with each of the heads covered in gold leaf, and, 
in the middle of this operatically bucolic statement, a coiled snake. It is 
Kiefer's version ofNicolas Poussin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/nicolas-poussin>'s 1637 memento mori 
paintingEt in Arcadia ego – "I [death] am here, even in Arcadia."
Winter Landscape ( Winterlandschaft), 1970, by Anselm Kiefer. Courtesy of the 
Royal Academy 
In all Kiefer's idiosyncratic pastorals there is a link too to German Romantic 
painting and specifically that ofCaspar David Friedrich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2001/feb/19/artsfeatures2>. Friedrich's 
motif of the figure seen from behind contemplating the immensity of nature – 
the Rückenfigur – appears explicitly in some of Kiefer's more recent paintings. 
It was an idea he first played with as an art student in 1969 in hisOccupations 
pictures. In these he photographed himself in his father's army uniform 
standing on rocky outcrops, sea shores or in front of famous buildings giving 
the Nazi salute. The gesture was not just shocking, but illegal. It was his way 
of forcing his fellow Germans to confront the past rather than ignore it. The 
affront he generated has seen him accused of neo-Nazism and his relationship 
with his compatriots remains uneasy. For all his celebrity, the bulk of his 
paintings, he says, have been bought by Jewish collectors.

One of the changes in Kiefer's work instigated by his move to France was 
a broadening of his themes. As he left Germany behind he moved on from the war 
too. His art from the 1990s onwards has had at its heart the connection between 
earth and heaven. When he paints the constellations he uses the same dark 
tonality and denuded palette he employs when painting the earth – even though 
he starts painting in colour and then covers it with greys and browns. There is 
the same encrusted paint and the same swirl suggesting both order and chaos.
Heroic Symbol V ( Heroisches Sinnbild V), 1970, by Anselm Kiefer. Courtesy of 
the Royal Academy 
In this flux sits his interest in alchemy and the writings of the Jacobean 
astrologer-alchemist Robert Fludd. What Kiefer tries to do in his work is what 
Fludd tried to do with base metals: examine what links an earthbound substance 
such as lead with a heavenly one such as gold, and how one becomes the other. 
His response can be seen in a new sculpture that will greet visitors to the RA, 
The Language of the Birds. It shows a pile of lead books that has grown wings 
and is trying to fly off.

For Kiefer, painting and sculpting are themselves transcendent processes. 
"It begins in the dark after an intense experience, a shock", he says. "At 
first it is an urge, a pounding. You don't know what it is, but it compels you 
to act. At first, it is very vague. It must be vague, otherwise it would just 
be a visualisation of the shock experience." When he has finished working on a 
piece he often returns it to the dark, putting it into a shipping container and 
leaving it, like wine in a bottle. When the container is opened it is, he says, 
like seeing the work for the first time – a rebirth.

The majority of visitors to the RA will of course actually be seeing Kiefer's 
work for the first time. Some brave people will try to unravel what they see, 
others – sensibly perhaps – will acknowledge the presence of all those 
references and then immerse themselves in these allusive, baffling, mysterious 
and – above all – powerful pictures and sculptures.

• Anselm Kiefer <https://www.royalacademy.org.uk/exhibition/anselm-kiefer> is 
at the Royal Academy from 27 September to 14 December.
 