
When I receive a PR email which begins, “We’ve done a study about cycling,” I 
inwardly wince. This is based, I’m afraid, on bitter experience.


Who could forget the infamous 2009 “study” by insurers Liverpool Victoria 
<http://www.cyclingweekly.co.uk/news/latest-news/ctc-slams-car-insurance-company-71174>
 which claimed cycling accidents had shot up because of hordes of inexperienced 
riders taking to the roads? Among many errors the company managed to 
sufficiently mangle the data that they doubled the actual numbers of cyclists 
on the roads.

In 2012, the Institute of Advanced Motorists said 57% of cyclists admit to 
jumping red lights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/bike-blog/2012/may/14/cycling-red-light-jumping-iam-survey>
. Aside from the fact this was based on a self-selecting web survey it emerged 
that only 1.9% said they regularly did it, with the IAM lumping these in with 
those who did so rarely or had done so only once or twice.

Thus the scepticism alarm had already sounded when I started reading what 
insurance giantAviva <https://www.theguardian.com/business/avivabusiness> was 
proudly trumpeting as a major study on cycle safety in and around London.

It’s based on a mixture of police data and Aviva’s own claims statistics, and 
a few elements are interesting in their way. For example, as someone who 
commutes daily around the vast, speedy and traffic-choked Elephant and Castle 
gyratory system it’s illuminating to find that from 2009-2013 it hosted 80 road 
incidents involving cyclists of sufficient seriousness for police to be called, 
more than anywhere else inside the M25.

And while it’s well known that lorries are disproportionately involved in 
crashes with cyclists, Aviva’s own claims statistics also show 37% of serious 
incidents with bikes involved vans.

But that’s about as good as it gets. I have two main worries about this 
exercise: one about a particular statistic, and then the overall tone.

First the statistic. One of four headline findings in the press release is the 
eye-catching claim that among serious incidents that took place after dark a 
third involved cyclists not using lights.


This struck me a surprising. Not using lights is, for me, very silly, all the 
more so when modern bike lights are increasingly tiny, powerful and cheap. But 
the Aviva statistic doesn’t tie in with other studies.

The most exhaustive national research, a Transport Research Laboratory paper 
based on three years of police data 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/dec/15/cycling-bike-accidents-study>
, found a lack of cyclist lights was cited as a factor in just 2% of incidents 
where a rider was seriously hurt or killed.

Transport for London (TfL) has done similar studies. Its figures for 2010 
<http://www.tfl.gov.uk/cdn/static/cms/documents/pedal-cyclist-collisions-and-casualities-in-greater-london-sep-2011.pdf>
 found that of 3,338 factors ascribed in incidents where a cyclist was injured, 
a lack of lights in the dark or in poor visibility totalled just 38 of them. 
That’s 1.1%, not 33%.

I asked Aviva where their very different figure came from. The first worry 
comes with the source. This isn’t police data, it’s claims data – this is, 
potentially, a driver just saying, “The cyclist had no lights”. Aviva stresses 
these are settled claims, where the issue of lights was agreed. But without 
examining all the cases it’s hard to know how robust the explanations might be.

The next concern is the sample size: just 100 incidents in all, according to 
Aviva, and so a mere 33 where no lights were supposedly involved. We can argue 
all day about how prevalent a safety issue is cycling without lights – my own 
observations is that even in London fewer than 5% of riders do so – but I just 
don’t think a sample of 100 is nearly enough to make such a bold claim, 
especially one that ties so neatly into the popular narrative that cyclists are 
often injured because they are reckless or negligent.

Next, the tone. In part it’s just facile. The press release announces that a 
third of all badly hurt cyclist around London are “Mamils”, that infamous 
species/acronym of the middle-aged man in Lycra. What they actually mean is 
just men commuting to work aged 40 to 49. Aviva’s by now long-suffering press 
office conceded there was no data about what clothing might have been worn, and 
that the Mamil reference was “in retrospect, a bit silly”.


Far worse is the new and glossy Aviva cycle safety video, which you can view 
here <https://vimeo.com/vismedia/review/120354170/e96967a916>. It‘s clear the 
people who made this believe it exudes reasonableness and everyday common 
sense. It’s equally clear those same people have very little real idea about 
cycling.

For a start, it’s stupidly alarmist. The film begins with helmet camera 
footage of riders being cut up and knocked off. The main talking head, Aviva’s 
chief underwriting officer, Simon Warsop, gravely explains that in the last 
five years there have been 23,000 “accidents” involving bikes inside the M25. 
Heart-rending strings swell as he talks about “the human cost”.

Warsop is perfectly right that London could and should be a far safer place to 
cycle. But he’s over-playing the risks, missing the context. Somewhere between 
10 and 20 people die on bikes per year in London. That’s far too high. But if 
you extrapolate national figures then inactivity – people not doing exercise 
like cycling – kills around 20,000. By repeatedly stressing cycling dangers is 
the video really helping the overall human cost? Or is it just that one human 
cost is normalised?

And what do Simon Warson and Aviva suggest as a way to cut cycle casualties? 
Yes, helmets and high vis. I’m not opposed to either in theory. But when 50% of 
the cyclist deaths in London involve drivers of lorries with massive blind 
spots crushing cyclists as they turn left, helmets and high vis are not the 
answer, irrespective of whether you think bad driving or bad cycling is the 
main cause of this.

Also not the answer are the platitudes presented by Warson and by the three 
cyclists who speak on the film (all men, all in or around middle age). Be less 
angry and “show each other a bit more love”, suggests one rider. I’m not about 
to disagree with the sentiment in general, but if he really believes this will 
significantly cut the cyclist casualty toll the man needs to spend a bit less 
time loving and a bit more time thinking.

The whole film is predicated on the notion that cyclists’ actions are as much 
to blame for their injuries and deaths as drivers. And that’s just not true. 
The same 2010 TfL study mentioned above shows that in incidents where a cyclist 
was hurt, factors connecting the cyclist behaviour were cited 3,338 times. The 
figure for drivers? 7,856. That means cyclists contribute 29% of the factors.

In 43% of all the cases drivers not looking properly, or misjudging a 
cyclist’s speed, or just being reckless, were seen as to blame. However much 
love the cyclist shows, that’s not going to help here.

So what does keep cyclists safe? Proper infrastructure, that’s what. Safe, 
segregated lanes, with protected junctions and bike-friendly traffic lights. On 
this, Aviva’s press release and film are oddly silent. The company has a big 
headquarters in London’s City district, not far from theplanned new east-west 
segregated cycle superhighway 
<https://consultations.tfl.gov.uk/cycling/eastwest?cid=cycle-east-west>. But 
whenlots of businesses spoke out in favour <https://cyclingworks.wordpress.com/>
 of the scheme during a recent consultation process, Aviva was not among them.

The most frustrating part of all this is that Aviva almost certainly mean 
well. The press officers were endlessly stressing how much the company supports 
cycling. But if they think flaky “statistics” implying cyclists are the 
architects of their own demise are helpful, they’re wrong. If they think a 
combination of helmets, high vis, and some generalised goodwill is all that’s 
needed to improve cycle safety, they’re wrong. They want to be a force for 
good. Instead they’re just yet another part of the problem.

10.45am update

A bit belatedly I’ve realised I was, in one element, slightly unfair on Aviva. 
While the video does not mention infrastructure, and as far as I can tell they 
did not formally back the new London cycle superhighways, their press release 
does have this quote from Simon Warsop, which I initially missed:

Aviva believes an improved transport infrastructure would create safer streets 
which would reduce the risk of an accident for all road users. For example, we 
would support Transport for London’s (TfL) segregated London Cycle Superhighway 
and TfL’s Better Junctions Scheme.
 