
Axa UK is cutting 350 jobs as part of a strategic review of its life and 
pensions business. The move has been condemned by theUnite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/unite> union.

The insurer's chief executive, Nicolas Moreau, said he was trying to ensure 
the company emerged from the recession "fitter and stronger".

Axa <https://www.theguardian.com/business/axa> has raised its cost-savings 
target from £80m to £150m over the next three years in the UK, with the bulk of 
the savings to come from its life operations.

Unite was quick to condemn the plans, which will mean a 10% reduction in staff 
at Axa Life, with most of the job losses taking place this year and next.

David Kennedy, Unite regional officer, said: "Unite is obviously extremely 
concerned about the potential impact of this on our members. In these difficult 
financial times, this announcement will only serve to cause them more anxiety.

"We understand that Axa Life is concerned about its cost base and level of 
profitability; however, this must not be used as an excuse for the short-term 
slashing of jobs. We will scrutinise and robustly challenge these plans as 
appropriate and will expect Axa Life to make every effort to avoid compulsory 
redundancies."

The news came as Axa reported a 2% rise in underlying earnings to £186m in the 
UK and Ireland for the first half of the year. The figures were flattered by a 
one-off profit of £106m derived from the restructuring of a portfolio of 
annuity liabilities in the life and savings division.

Life and savings revenues fell 18% to £441m, while the wealth management 
business saw a 37% drop to £208m. Globally, Axa reported a 26% fall in 
first-half earnings to €2.1bn (£1.8bn).

"We have made considerable progress in the last six months," said Moreau. "The 
insurance business's focus on driving profitability is starting to show some 
positive signs; in healthcare the international business is now performing 
strongly and the life and savings businesses continue to execute successfully 
their strategy while reviewing their operations to reduce their cost base 
significantly, which I acknowledge also involves making difficult decisions 
that impact on employees."

Unite said it was in the early stages of consultation with Axa about the job 
cuts and was awaiting full details.

Axa's life business employs about 3,500 people in Bristol, Basingstoke and 
Coventry.

In June, Axa asked its healthcare staff in Kent to choose between job losses 
or cuts to their pay and conditions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/jun/16/british-airways-free-work>
.
 