
International students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/internationalstudents> are being forced 
to queue up in their thousands to collect visas from post offices, according to 
Julia Goodfellow, vice-chancellor of Kent University.


Speaking at a Guardian higher education panel debate, Goodfellow highlighted 
the plight of Indian students in the UK, and warned that their belief that they 
are not welcome is not perception but a reality.


Goodfellow – who is the incoming president of Universities UK, the umbrella 
organisation for university leaders – told an invited audience of 
vice-chancellors in London that unnecessary administrative hurdles are 
deterring international students.

“I’ve got a thousand more overseas students coming to university in Kent – 
I’ve got to bus them down to Ashford post office, they have to stand in line 
there, all 1,000 of them, to get their visas,” she said. “I’m sorry, but that’s 
not being made welcome.”

Goodfellow appeared on a panel alongside the universities minister Greg Clark, 
John Newbigin, chair of Creative England, and Andy Westwood, former special 
adviser to Labour’s John Denham and professor of politics Winchester 
University, and chaired by the Guardian’s opinion editor, Jonathan Freedland.

Clark conceded that there were “some perceptions in India that the obstacles 
to getting to study here were too great”. He is planning to meet regularly with 
the Indian High Commission and the Home Office to consider “any administrative 
problems that surface” in relation to international students.

Westwood said the government was “hamstrung” on the issue. “It’s hamstrung 
itself with two competing narratives about being open for business and being 
worried about immigration,” he said.Questions were submitted by the audience, 
and the panel was asked whether current tuition fees of £9,000 would have to 
increase to meet the rising costs of providing degrees.

Clark defended the changes the coalition government had introduced, saying 
that universities now have more funding to support teaching. He added that 
Labour’s proposal to lower fees to £6,000 was a “profound step away from 
sustainability”.


“Ed Miliband says he’ll make the fee up, but that will come through an annual 
application to the Treasury,” he said. “That becomes an annual headache and 
source of anxiety.”

Goodfellow told audience members that the current system is not sustainable if 
fees are kept at £9,000. “It’s not going up with inflation – which should 
really be a minimum. Or we should look at areas that are under pressure, the 
science subjects, for example.”

But Newbigin said the arts should not be neglected if university funding is 
overhauled. “Everyone believes the creative industries are very important, but 
there’s a paradox, in that they are decreasingly present in so much of our 
education.”

Newbigin pointed to Steve Jobs, who said that employing poets, musicians and 
artists – rather than just computer geeks – was the secret to Apple’s success.

He stressed the role of arts graduates in shaping society. “When science and 
technology are changing the way we understand the world so profoundly, if we 
don’t have a parity of esteem in the study of culture and humanities, then we 
are in danger of creating a really unbalanced dystopia.”

Join the higher education network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>.
 