
If we were to redesign the farm financial support system so that, instead of 
encouraging agro-industrial approaches, it required recipients to practise the 
sort of agro-ecological methods advocated by Felicity Lawrence (Hyperintensive 
farming will never feed the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/02/agrichemicals-intensive-farming-food-production-biodiversity>
, 3 October), we would be able to re-conceptualise it as not a “subsidy” or 
“welfare payment” (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/02/ed-balls-should-take-a-quickstep-off-strictly-come-dancing>
, same day) but a management fee for essential ecological services. After 
Brexit, we will in principle have the opportunity to do this. But will Mrs May 
and Mrs Leadsom see things this way?
Richard Middleton
Castle Douglas, Dumfries and Galloway

• In the early postwar years, Monsanto’s William Rand claimed that the 
chemical industry was a form of alchemy, unmatched in its dynamic power and 
therefore entitled to protection from criticism of its products’ potential 
dangers. Willard Dow, of Dow Chemicals, regarded the industry’s critics as 
“traitors to civilisation” and “economic parasites destined to destroy 
themselves”.

The agri-chemicals industry has tended to see nature as an enemy to be tamed 
or, in some of its aspects, obliterated. This has resulted in the loss of 
diversity and the lower yields to which Felicity Lawrence refers. Overuse of 
chemical farming techniques is more likely to be self-destructive than the 
ecological approach of Flamingo Homegrown. As EF Schumacher, the advocate of 
organic methods, expressed it: “If we win the battle with nature, we shall be 
on the losing side.”
Philip Conford
Newark-on-Trent, Nottinghamshire

• Intensity and diversity are not opposites. Monoculture and diversity are, 
intensive and extensive are. Many peasant farming systems are intensive and 
diverse for example, some industrial monocultures are extensive.

However, the report Felicity Lawrence refers to also explains that the less 
industrial agriculture preferred by the International Panel of Experts on 
SustainableFood <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/food> Systems (Ipes) 
requires a greater input of human labour in order to avoid one of the traps 
that the industrial system catches us in – cheap food. Non-industrial 
agriculture will require more labouring away in the fields in order to provide 
us with more expensive food. It’s difficult to see this as an advance in the 
human condition.
Tim Worstall
Senior fellow, Adam Smith Institute
Messines, Portugal

• As producers of the raw ingredients to a food and drink industry worth 
£108bn to the UK economy, farming is far more forward-thinking than the picture 
painted.Farming <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/farming> is stepping 
up to the challenge of producing food for a growing population with the UK 
predicted to be the most populous country in what is now the EU by mid-2040s. 
To increase production of home-grown food while delivering for the environment 
means big strides are needed to increase resilience and efficiency. This is a 
journey that the industry is already on. Innovation and technology already 
feature heavily in today’s food production.

The people on the frontline of producing the nation’s food have positively 
embraced the conservation agenda. With 30,000km of hedgerows and 10,000 
football pitches worth of flower habitat being planted or cared for by farmers, 
there’s a lot to be said for the wildlife habitat thriving on our diverse and 
dynamic farmed environment.
Guy Smith
Vice-president, National Farmers Union
Stoneleigh Park, Warwickshire

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 