
If dementia is now a leading cause of death in England and Wales (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/14/dementia-and-alzheimers-leading-cause-of-death-england-and-wales>
, 15 November), this is partly due to increasing awareness and diagnosis of 
dementia, along with improving treatments for general medical disorders. These 
figures highlight the need for science-driven, clinically oriented research to 
improve diagnosis and treatment. There is currently research investigating the 
earliest brain changes associated with dementia, and development of novel 
pharmacological and psychotherapeutic interventions to improve outcomes.

However, these figures also highlight the urgent need to improve access to 
advance care planning and palliative care for patients who have end-stage 
dementia. Patients with advancing dementia experience significant psychiatric 
and medical comorbidities, which can pose difficult management issues for 
relatives and attending physicians. Advance care planning is a targeted 
intervention that promotes autonomy in end-of-life decisions, before 
individuals lose decision-making capacity.

Multidisciplinary working, involving psychiatrists, physicians and other 
health professionals, is required to facilitate holistic and dignified care. 
Service development, as well as research, is required to tackle the challenges 
that dementia poses, especially at the end of life.
Dr Ketan D Jethwa
Leicester

• Alzheimer’s dementia increases in incidence with age, and there is no 
effective treatment. It is therefore inevitable that, as longevity increases, 
more cases will be reported. As a consequence, more people die with the 
disease, but this does not mean that it was necessarily the cause of death, nor 
that the underlying incidence of Alzheimer’s is increasing.
Dr Bob Bury
Leeds

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>




• This page was amended on 18 November 2016. Because of an editing error, and 
earlier version misspelled the name of Dr Ketan D Jethwa.
 