
In something of a landmark move, newspaper and magazine publishing groups 
regulated by the Independent Press Standards Organisation (Ipso) have published 
their annual statements.

They disclose information about publishers’ approaches to editorial standards, 
complaints-handling processes and records of compliance, including details of 
complaints dealt with byIpso <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ipso>.

According to Ipso’s press release about the matter, “this is the first time in 
its history” that the UK press has “publicly disclosed its procedures and 
failures to comply with the editors’ code [of practice].”

Sir Alan Moses <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sir-alan-moses>, Ipso’s 
chairman, is clearly delighted with this transparency, regarding it as a 
demonstration to the public that publishers take the code seriously and that 
they also “acknowledge the authority of Ipso.” He said:

“The annual statement is a vital element in the fulfilment of Ipso’s 
regulatory functions of monitoring and improving compliance with the editors’ 
code...

The annual statements are a remarkable undertaking by the UK press, which just 
a few years ago would have been unimaginable, and I am grateful for their hard 
work and cooperation in producing this first set of statements.”

Moses believes the publication of annual statements is “one way by which Ipso 
can acquire the information necessary to act as an effective independent 
regulator and assist the press in gaining the trust and authority which 
regulation is designed to achieve.”


And Matt Tee, Ipso’s chief executive, saw publication as representing “an 
important step in the development of Ipso as a regulator.”

Well, they would say that, wouldn’t they? Clearly, Ipso is eager to dispel 
continuing criticism from those - such as Hacked Off - who remain sceptical 
about its work.

Critics may well note that the statements are historic: they cover only the 
first period of Ipso’s existence, from 8 September 2014 to the end of December 
2014.

In so doing, publishers have fulfilled their obligations under their contract 
with Ipso to providing such statements. It is expected that statements for the 
whole of 2015 will be published in late spring next year.

The statements, which can be found on Ipso’s website 
<http://www.ipso.co.uk/AboutIPSO/AnnualStatements.html>, cover best-selling 
national newspaper titles, such as the Sun and Daily Mail, to much smaller 
titles, such as the digital-only fortnightly local outlet, the Glossop Gazette.

In the magazine sector, it includes glossy magazines like Glamour alongside 
highly specialised publications – some in print, some online – covering topics 
ranging from running (Fetch Everyone, Runner’s World) to water treatment 
(Desalination and Water Reuse). Doubtless the producers of Have I Got News For 
You will take note.

I’m not quite as moved by this turn of events as Ipso’s “historic” press 
release implies. But I cannot help but recognise that it enables the public to 
get a better grasp of how newspapers respond to complaints. And that, in 
itself, is an advance.

The Guardian and Observer has not joined Ipso. Nor have the Financial Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/financialtimes> and the Independent titles, 
along with various smaller magazines, notably Private Eye.

I plan to take some time reading the individual statements, which could take 
some time, and will report later on some of the details.

 