
Among the laptops and the lattes in the foyer of London's BFI Southbank sits a 
dissident and exile. Film-maker Mania Akbari fled her native Tehran last 
summer. She is determined to examine marriage, abortion, infidelity and 
lesbianism at home inIran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran>. She has 
explored what it's like to lose your breasts to cancer. She has made films that 
have upset and shocked the religious establishment. Now, after 15 years of 
censorship, "of living in fear and frustration", Akbari is finally seeing her 
films screened commercially for the first time.

The 39-year-old actor, writer and director is not in the UK by choice. During 
production of her latest film, From Tehran to London (originally titled Women 
Do Not Have Breasts), members of her crew were arrested by Iranian authorities 
for supposedly filming without official permission. Scared she too might be 
imprisoned, Akbari fled Tehran for London. "I left the country of my birth with 
grief, fear and frustration," she says in her native Farsi. "But I was 
alienated and isolated. I could not get permission to make my films, or to get 
my films seen. I still love Iran. I am still fascinated by it. It gave me my 
creativity. But I had to leave."

The keynote film in a season of Akbari's work at the BFI, From Tehran to 
London opens with a politically charged dedication to "all the film-makers in 
Iran who have served a prison sentence, and the ones who are still in prison". 
Yet Akbari's films are not calls to arms. Entirely self-taught, she has made 
five feature-length movies – each made in near secrecy, on tiny budgets – in 10 
years, while also working as a photographer and painter. Her films have 
screened at more than 40 festivals; her debut, 20 Fingers, won best film at 
Venice film festival's Digital Cinema section. Her documentaries are even more 
political than her dramas: in 2011, she made what she describes as a "cautious 
documentary about anger and revenge, violence and law", about a child named 
Benhood who was put to death by the Iranian state.

But her features are rivetingly human: pitiless, potent studies of domestic 
strife, and of the fight for happiness – and domination – in sexual 
relationships. Take off their headscarves and Akbari's women could be social 
workers in Sheffield or hairdressers in south London, talking wearily about the 
struggle of working motherhood and love eroded by intimacy.

Akbari first came to prominence in 2002 as the lead in Iranian director Abbas 
Kiarostami's Ten, a film composed entirely of conversations inside a car. 
"Kiarostami taught me to strip away my inhibitions," she says, "to lose myself 
in my work, to be totally bare, totally exposed."

In 2007, Akbari was diagnosed with an aggressive form of breast cancer. In her 
film 10+4, a sequel of sorts to Kiarostami's Ten, she explores the sensation of 
living "with both life and death".

"Cancer is not just an illness," she says. "It changes your appearance as much 
as your inner self. We hide behind our skins. This is one of the concepts of 
art: to define suffering, or even death, differently. To give it 
a beautiful meaning."

Her influences are not confined to cinema. She cites Michael Haneke's Palme 
d'Or-winning Amour – "a dance between love and death" – but also "the reclining 
figures of Henry Moore, the dancers of Henri Matisse, the red armchair of Pablo 
Picasso". A single scene in Akbari's films, shorn of sympathy or pretence, 
without closeups, montage or stirring music, can unfold, unedited, for between 
10 and 20 minutes. It can feel as if you're witnessing a cross between fiction 
and documentary, yet Akbari plans and rehearses every second of her films 
"months in advance". If a man stops, mid-sentence, to brush a stray hair from 
his wife's face, it is no accident. "With cinema, you can take your audience by 
their hands and guide them through your life," she says. "I carry with me every 
experience I've ever had."

From a western point of view, it can be difficult to understand why the 
Iranian state might view Akbari's films as such an existential challenge. But 
she is matter-of-fact about the issue: "Cinema can make people aware, so it is 
threatening to government. Governments want to impose their ideology on their 
people."

With the recent election of moderate cleric Hassan Rouhani, however, Akbari is 
optimistic about progress: "We're witnessing a new energy in the people or 
Iran. Without hope, human beings become walking corpses, which is a frightening 
prospect, no? A society devoid of hope reeks of decay. We must all, always, 
believe and welcome change."

• From Tehran with Love: The Cinema of Mania Akbari 
<https://whatson.bfi.org.uk/Online/mania-akbari> runs until 28 July at the BFI 
Southbank, London.
 