
Q My wife and I are both retired. Poor advice and poor judgement mean that our 
savings have taken a bit of a battering (they were worth £120,000 but have gone 
down to £40,000).

Luckily, our mortgage is paid off on our house, which is valued at between 
£240,000 and £250,000. We also own a mobile home in the south of France where 
we now spend about three months of the year. But we need to find money to pay 
rent for our site, plus water, electricity and gas supply. We would like to 
keep our mobile home for at least a further five years or so.

What would be the better alternative: sell our house – which we both love, 
having lived here for 35 years – and downsize to a two-bed semi or apartment; 
or enter into equity release for £40,000 to £50,000?

Our two sons – who are both thankfully financially well off and with settled 
lifestyles – favour the equity release option.

HG

A In strictly financial terms, downsizing is probably the better alternative. 
However, it's important to take the emotional aspects into account as well, 
given that moving from the family home could be a wrench for you. Your sons 
clearly appreciate this and maybe they are also considering practicalities such 
as not being able to come and stay if you were to move to a two-bed property – 
something that you should certainly consider.

If you were to go down the equity release route, you would be able to stay in 
the family home. There are two types of equity release scheme: the lifetime 
mortgage and the home reversion scheme. With the lifetime mortgage, you take 
out a loan against your home and are charged interest, which is added to the 
loan. When the home is sold, the loan plus interest is repaid. But interest 
rates are typically in the region of 7%, which can mean that the original loan 
can almost double in 10 years as a result of the interest being added to it. 
The real downside with this sort of equity release is that there could be very 
little left over when the home is sold and the loan, plus interest, is repaid.

This risk doesn't exist with a home reversion plan where you sell a percentage 
share of your home – usually for less than its market value. When the home is 
sold, the home reversion company gets that same percentage of the sale 
proceeds. So if you sell 25% of your home, when it is sold, the home reversion 
company gets 25% – and no more – of the sale proceeds.

If you do go down the equity release route, make sure that you use an 
independent financial adviser who has the relevant equity release 
qualifications (go tounbiased.co.uk <http://www.unbiased.co.uk/>) and also that 
any recommended equity release company is a member ofSafe Home Income Plans 
<http://www.ship-ltd.org/>.
 