
Last month, the burden of writing my university application personal statement 
began to weigh on me. Feeling confused about which course to apply for, and 
which university I'd like to study at, I decided to speak to my teacher, who 
instantly said: "Apply for the Oxbridge universities."

This was flattering. I'm 17 and although I obtained high grades at GCSE, I 
found my AS exams much more challenging and so thought I wasn't willing to 
consider Oxbridge until I received my results. But after reflecting on what my 
teacher had said, I realised that I preferred not to apply to Oxbridge and I 
later discovered I am not the only high-achieving student at my school who 
feels this way.

So I wrote down the names of other universities with great English 
departments. The competition to get into Oxbridge – or even Russell Group 
universities – is intense and has become even more so with the introduction of 
the A* grade. The new grade system has turned out to be really unpopular, 
because it means that top universities could be turning away increased numbers 
of state school candidates. On the other hand, top universities, which are in 
favour of the new grade, firmly believe that it will help them to identify the 
best applicants.

However, as far as I can tell, high-achieving students are beginning to drown 
under the immense pressure and are doubting their ability to achieve high 
grades. Consequently, vivid visions of attending Oxbridge seem to be fading 
away.

There is another, deeper, reason why students like myself are choosing to 
abandon their chances of attending prestigious universities. It's simply 
because we assume that the possibility of being accepted is unrealistic.

The biggest factor is the image we have of Oxbridge. When I asked my friend 
Anita Chagar, who is definitely Oxbridge calibre, why she would not consider 
applying toOxford <http://www.ox.ac.uk/> or Cambridge <http://www.cam.ac.uk/>, 
she started by saying: "I feel that I may not get the grades they require," 
before adding: "They might look down on me because I don't come from a 
background of private schools or rich parents."

There is the impression that Oxbridge only accepts "posh, rich snobs from 
private schools". That's certainly what I had heard.

Asked to write this article about why I wouldn't apply, I did some research 
and discovered this statistic: for entry in 2010, the percentage of Oxbridge 
offers that went to UK state school students rose to 56.4%. Impressive.

That changed my mind. It made me think that students should stop feeling 
intimidated by the thought of applying. Perhaps there is no harm in it. The 
worst that can happen is to receive a rejection letter, but at least I will 
never regret not taking the opportunity when I had the chance.

So now I am going to convince my friends that, if we turn out to be heroes on 
results day and achieve amazing AS grades, then we should have the courage to 
apply to Oxbridge. Just as it is impossible to win the lottery unless you buy 
the ticket, you'll never know whether you can get into Britain's most 
prestigious universities unless you apply.

Sara Abbasi, who attends a large comprehensive in west London, is part of the 
Social Mobility Foundation <http://www.socialmobility.org.uk/>'s summer intern 
programme
 