
THE LETTERS

"The light-hearted manner of Brian Oliver's World Football column (last week) 
was very condescending, offensive and insulting. Like all other continental 
football tournaments, the Cup of Nations is Africa's primary football gala and 
I would have thought that a serious publication like The Observer would have 
treated its coverage of the tournament more seriously.


"Oliver had very little to say about the football itself, nor did he proffer 
any solutions to the various organisational problems that have beset the 
tournament as a result of Africa's plethora of socio-economic problems. You 
devote a lot of space to the presence of Egyptian army recruits in the stands 
but say nothing about the quality of passing and overlapping we have seen in 
the tournament.


"The most insulting and condescending comment is that Samuel Eto'o 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/samuel-etoo> is the first 'truly world 
class player' to grace the tournament in its 50-year history. I can only assume 
that Oliver is ignorant of the fact that the likes of George Weah, Roger Milla, 
Mustapha Rabah Madjer, Abedi Pele, Tony Yeboah, Austin Okocha, Nwankwo Kanu, 
and Finidi George have all played in this tournament.


"George Weah was World Footballer of the Year - a feat Eto'o has yet to match 
- while Rabah Madjer virtually single-handedly won the 1988-89 European Cup for 
Porto. AC Milan actually tabled a $4m bid for Madjer in 1989, which at the 
time, would have made him more expensive than Gary Lineker, John Barnes, 
Gianlucca Vialli, Marco Van Basten or Jurgen Klinsman.


"While not wanting to go through the article line by line to dissect every 
offensive and patronising sentence, I think it should be noted that it is clear 
to the discerning eye that the primary purpose of the piece is to ridicule the 
African Cup of Nations as some Mickey Mouse jamboree. It is hard to go through 
it and not come to the conclusion that these primitive Africans are finally 
learning how to kick a round leather object at long last" -Ayo Akinfe, 
Billingshurst, West Sussex.

"I don't believe that Brian Oliver wrote such nonsense. No matter what you 
say, the Nations Cup is Africa's biggest football tourney and talents abound in 
Africa, though most of them play abroad. How can you say Eto'o is the only true 
striker in the championship?" -Emeka Nwani, Lagos.

"Your article was unfair and derogatory to Africans. If this was an attempt at 
satire, it was distasteful. The hosts went to great lengths to stage a very 
creditable opening ceremony and should be commended. The article is also 
incorrect as Jomo Sono (a black African) coached the South African team to 
victory over Slovenia at the last World Cup" -Kunle Iluyemi, Johannesburg.

"How dare you claim Eto'o is the 'first truly world class player' to play in 
the Nations Cup? What are you, some sort of racist? What does that comment make 
the likes of Jay Jay Okocha, Kanu, Finidi, Roger Milla, George Weah, Abedi Pele 
and other major talents that have graced that elite competition? Your own 
'world class' players, such as Beckham (Lord help us) couldn't hold a torch to 
any of these individuals" -Annoyed, Lagos.

"Your article has been causing a lot of controversy in Nigeria, where an 
interactive website are furious and have branded you as racist for saying this 
is the first time the African Nations Cup has had a 'truly world class striker 
in the person of Samuel Et'o'.


"I rose up your defence saying that Africa has produced world-class 
footballers but not for country and club at the same time, stating that George 
Weah was world class but had nothing to offer for Liberia at the Nations Cup. 
In this context, I believe the closest any African player has been to 'truly 
world class' was when Algerian legend Rabah Madjer, playing for Porto, was the 
star of the African Nations Cup in 1990 when Algeria won the Cup. But Madjer of 
1990 cannot be compared to a player voted as the fourth best in the world by 
Fifa in 2005 and currently the best striker in the Spanish league with 
Barcelona" -Sopirinye Jaja, Port Harcourt, Nigeria

BRIAN OLIVER'S REPLY ...


Apologies for any offence taken (and the Jomo Sono error), but I stand by my 
comments about Eto'o. I can understand those football fans who believe George 
Weah was 'truly world class' but he was never that in his two appearances at 
the Nations Cup. In 1996 Liberia failed to qualify from a three-team group, 
finishing bottom, and there was no buzz about Weah in South Africa as there has 
been in Egypt whenever Eto'o has played. In Mali in 2002 Weah was coming to the 
end of his career and, although I will always remember the game when he finally 
quit the world stage, against Nigeria in Mopti, I would not have him in my 
all-time list of world favourites. Yes, he won the world footballer of the year 
award (in a non-World Cup, and non-Nations Cup year) and he was very, very 
good, but not as good as Eto'o.


Madjer is a better shout (it was the 1987 European Cup, by the way) and he 
played well in the World Cup, the European Cup and the Nations Cup. He, and 
Abedi Pele (who did create a buzz in Senegal 92), were the two players I most 
considered before making my comment, but again I decided against because I 
believe Eto'o is that little bit better.


As for the others put forward as 'truly world class' I can't have them. Roger 
Milla was the most important African player of all, and did more to raise the 
profile of African football than anyone through his astonishing performances in 
1990. But, although he had a great World Cup, he was not a great player (look 
at his club record). And how many top-level club matches has Jay-Jay Okocha 
played? I remember seeing him play for Eintracht Frankfurt many years ago and 
thinking 'this boy will really go places'. I did not have Turkey and Bolton in 
mind.


Just as there are many in Nigeria who will think their country has produced 
many 'truly world class' players, there will be millions in Japan who think 
Hidetoshi Nakata is a great world star. Very famous, yes, but a world great? Of 
course it is all very subjective, and it also depends on what one means by 
'truly world class'. To me it means someone you would consider putting into an 
all-time world match, 11 stars against 11 stars. Or even anyone who might get 
on the bench.


And I must say I am very, very surprised that nobody put forward the name of 
by far the best African player of all: Eusebio. He didn't play in the Nations 
Cup because Mozambique barely had a team (they were amateurs) when he was a 
teenager. He was 'nabbed' by Portugal at the age of 17 - and moved to Europe 
two years later than Eto'o did.
 For the record, I have been to six Nations Cups, I am not a racist, and here 
is my all-time top ten from Africa. By all means send in your own versions. 
Nothing wrong with healthy debate.

1. Eusebio, Mozambique
 Would have played for Mozambique but the national team barely existed 40-50 
years ago and all their players were amateurs. Moved to Portugal in his late 
teens and won world fame at Benfica - 1962 European Cup winners, runners-up in 
1963, 1965 and 1968; 11 Portuguese league medals; three league and cup doubles. 
Eusebio was the 1966 World Cup top scorer (nine) as Portugal finished third, 
and European Footballer of the year in 1965. Portugal's all-time top scorer, 
with 41, until Pauleta broke his record last October. Scored 727 in 715 matches 
for Benfica.

2. Mario Coluna, Mozambique
 Another who moved as a teenager, and a team-mate of Eusebio for Benfica and 
Portugal. A complete midfield player, captained Portugal in all but one of 
their World Cup matches in 1966 and led Benfica to European Cup final glory in 
1961 and 1962. Also played in the 1963, 1965 and 1968 finals. Following 
independence in his homeland in 1975, Coluna became president of the Football 
Federation of Mozambique. Was minister of sport from 1994 to 1999.

3. Samuel Eto'o, Cameroon
 Real Madrid let him go and he's now having a sensational time at Barcelona. 
The youngest player at France 98, aged 17. In 2000 he helped Cameroon win the 
Nations Cup and Olympic gold; also starred as they retained the Nations Cup two 
years later. African Footballer of the year in 2004 and 2005. Could become the 
greatest African striker - has scored 21 in 23 La Liga appearances already this 
season, and capable of moving up the rankings.

4. Rabah Madjer, Algeria
 Made his name by scoring the opening goal and a pivotal role in Algeria's 2-1 
defeat of West Germany in the 1982 World Cup. Also led Algeria during Mexico 
86, and in 1990 was the driving force behind their unexpected Nations Cup win. 
Five years after his goal against the Germans, Madjer upset them again by 
scoring a back-heel equaliser for Porto in their 2-1 European Cup triumph over 
Bayern Munich.

5. Abedi Pele, Ghana
 Black Stars' captain between 1992 and 98. Starred for Marseille in the early 
90s alongside Jean-Pierre Papin; they won the Champions League in 1993, having 
lost in 1991 to Red Star Belgrade, and the French League four times. 1992 
African Footballer of the year, and Nations Cup player of the tournament the 
same year when Ghana lost on penalties in the final.

6. Roger Milla, Cameroon
 A largely undistinguished club career in France with Monaco, Bastia, 
Saint-Etienne and Montpellier - but did a fantastic promotional job for African 
football by scoring four times for Cameroon at the 1990 World Cup, aged 38. His 
super-sub performances and famous dance-around-corner-flag goal celebrations 
lit up the tournament. African footballer of the year in 1976 and 1990.

7. George Weah, Liberia
 Signed for Monaco in 1988 and won a Cup medal under Arsene Wenger. Moved to 
Paris Saint-Germain (league champions, 1994), then Milan (1996 and 1999 Serie A 
titles). Failed to flourish in the Premiership with Chelsea and Man City, 
though did win the FA Cup with Chelsea in 2000. The 1995 World, European and 
African player of the year was unable to match club success at international 
level as Liberia were a poor side.

8. Nwankwo Kanu, Nigeria
 Having won the U17 World Championship with Nigeria in 1993, the extravagantly 
skilled, lanky striker shot to stardom at Ajax winning a hatful of domestic 
titles and the Champions League in 1995. Won world acclaim when captaining 
Nigeria to gold at the 1996 Olympics. After a disappointing spell at Inter and 
a heart operation to repair a defective aortic valve, Kanu moved to Arsenal 
where he won a couple of Premiership titles and FA Cups. Played in two World 
Cups (1998 and 2002) and was African footballer of the year twice (1996 and 
1999). Funds his own charity - the Kanu Heart Foundation.

9. Bruce Grobbelaar, Zimbabwe
 Not everybody's favourite player, but there has never been a better African 
goalkeeper and there is no arguing with his medals at Liverpool (European Cup 
1984, six league titles, three FA Cups, three League Cups).

10. Jay-Jay Okocha, Nigeria
 One of Africa's most skilful players, the Bolton and Nigeria midfielder and 
captain has appeared in three World Cups, and won the Nations Cup in 1994 and 
Olympic gold in 1996. Player of the tournament in 2004 even though Nigeria only 
made the semi-finals. Previously played for Eintracht Frankfurt, Fenerbahce and 
Paris Saint-Germain, with no medals to show for it, and quits international 
football after these championships.

Other contenders:
Michael Essien: Chelsea and Ghana midfielder shows signs of storming into the 
top 10 in the next couple of years
Sammy Kuffour: Ex-Bayern Munich and Ghana central defender, won Champions 
League 2001.
Stephen Appiah: Midfielder and captain of Ghana who spent seven years in Italy 
before moving to Fenerbahce last year.
Obafemi Martins: 21, explosive striker at Inter who has scored nine in 10 
games for Nigeria.
Didier Drogba: Chelsea and Ivory Coast striker.
Magdi Abdelghani: Egypt defensive midfielder who played in 1990 World Cup.
Kalusha Bwalya: PSV and Zambia striker, holds all-time appearance and scoring 
records for his country.
Geremi: Chelsea and Cameroon midfielder.
Arouna Kone:PSV and Ivory Coast - it's a bit early, but he looks exceptional)
Mido: Tottenham and Egypt - and the biggest shorts in football
And what about Claude Makelele?
 The Chelsea and France midfielder was born in DR Congo but moved to France 
aged four. Let's not go down that road...

Send your top tens, views, complaints and even praise to sport@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:sport@observer.co.uk> and mark them African Cup of Nations.
 