
It's dangerous to compare it with the Statue of Liberty. The boosters of 
ArcelorMittal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/apr/02/orbit-eiffel-tower-olympics>
Orbit, the £19m, 115-metre tower to be built on the London Olympic site, 
announce it will be taller than New York's great green lady, but it's unlikely 
to be as eloquent. Is the ArcelorMittal steel company, one wonders, as great a 
cause to be celebrated as liberty? Well, no, but the aim is that this big red 
sculpture, by the artist Anish Kapoor and the engineer Cecil Balmond, will do 
more than glorify its generous sponsor. It is the most extravagant example yet 
of the idea that a big, strange object can lift tens of thousands of people out 
of deprivation. This idea has had some successes, but the Orbit could mark the 
point at which it overreaches itself and we decide to try something different 
in the future.

According to the mayor of London, Boris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris>, the Olympic site "needed 
something extra, something to distinguish the east London skyline, something to 
arouse the curiosity and wonder of Londoners and visitors. With £9.3bn going 
into the Games, we need to do everything we can to regenerate the area and 
ensure that crowds are still coming here in 2013 and beyond".

The Orbit is therefore to join the ranks of the Angel of the North, the 
Millennium Dome and the London Eye. Also of the Eiffel Tower, the Seattle Space 
Needle, the Rotterdam Euromast, the Portsmouth Spinnaker Tower, the Oriental 
Pearl TV tower in Shanghai and the Unisphere of the 1964 New York World's Fair. 
Also of the Tower of Juche Idea, Pyongyang, a celebration of the late Kim Il 
Sung's unique fusion of Korean identity and Marxist-Leninism. The latter, at 
170m, is taller than the Orbit and for some reason this is a comparison Johnson 
chooses not to make.

The Orbit is a landmark, an icon, a thing, a doo-dad, a wotsit. Its aim is to 
imprint an image on the consciousness of the world, which will also make people 
want to come to Stratford, east London, even after the Games have gone. It 
means that, as well as the new Olympic Park, the gigantic new Westfield 
shopping centre, and whatever might be happening in the ex-Olympic stadium, a 
great day out in these parts can include a ride to the top of the Orbit. By 
some associative magic, businesses, investors and housebuyers will want to be 
there more. This district, whose statistics of deprivation are often repeated, 
will begin to go up in the world. You might have thought that the Olympic 
billions were already enough to draw attention to this site, but the Orbit will 
be the icing on the cake.

It's not wholly fanciful that such landmarks can help lift places. No one can 
put a figure on jobs created or investments made in Gateshead thanks to the 
Angel of the North, but it has at least created a feelgood factor and sense of 
pride. The Bilbao Guggenheim of 1996, still the archetype of such 
town-boosting, certainly placed a relatively obscure city at the centre of 
attention.

Buildings can't do it alone and if people find their attention has been drawn 
only to a wasteland, they will go away again. The Guggenheim worked because 
there were also dull practical things in Bilbao such as new transport 
infrastructure and business parks. In this respect, the Orbit is in luck: 
Stratford, long the example of urban deprivation, has been love-bombed with 
train lines and parks.

But the most important ingredient of a successful icon is that it works. It 
has to strike a chord, sound the right note, catch a mood, win hearts and 
confound sceptics. It must justify the spending of money that might otherwise 
go on kidney machines or rehousing Haitians. It is a risky business: for every 
Angel of the North there are many more unloved rotting wrecks that no one has 
the nerve to demolish.

Here I fear for the Orbit. It's true that Kapoor is a crowd-puller and his 
recent exhibition at the Royal Academy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/sep/27/anish-kapoor-royal-academy-cumming>
 drew unprecedented numbers for a one-man show by a living artist. But his 
Olympic monument seems to lack the pith and succinctness with which he usually 
engages people. His temporaryTarantantara of 1999  
<http://www.crownpoint.com/images/taratantara-1999>(another jewel of Gateshead) 
was a wonderfully direct construction of two giant funnels that created 
striking optical effects. HisMarsyas in Tate Modern 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/modern/exhibitions/kapoor/default.htm> did something 
similar. Next to these, the Orbit looks ponderous and confused. Its basic 
concept seems simple, of making a giant structure that is something like a loop 
of string arrested in mid-fall, but this simplicity is compromised by the 
stairs and lifts needed to get people into it.

During the two-and-a-bit weeks of the Olympics, it will be animated by crowds 
descending its stairs, but it's hard to imagine this ever happening again, 
least of all in the damp east London Februaries of the future. The main thrill 
it offers is of a view slightly better than that enjoyed by residents of nearby 
tower blocks and less good than that of bankers in the towers in Canary Wharf. 
This doesn't seem enough to justify such an effortful work or the maintenance 
costs.

It's hard to see what the big idea is, beyond the idea of making something 
big, and the official blurbs don't add much light. These are full of words such 
as "wonderful", "incredible", "spectacular" and much-repeated "greats". There 
is some 24-carat guff. The work is variously said to be like "an electron cloud 
moving" and to have "this sense of energy, twist and excitement that one 
associates with the human body as it explodes off the blocks down the 100m 
straight".

Johnson also references his kids, in an ominous echo of Blair's belief that 
the Millennium Dome could be justified by the pleasure it would give young 
Euan. As with the Dome, it seems that grandiosity has caused a group of smart 
people, including Johnson, Kapoor and Balmond, to do something dumb. They all 
laughed, of course, when Christopher Columbus told them that the world was 
round and it's possible that in two-and-a-bit years we sceptics will be humbled 
by the joy and majesty of the Orbit. Right now, it threatens to be an urban 
lava lamp. It might look fun on 25 December, but by the 27th you're cursing the 
need to change its bulbs. So what else could be done with this creative energy 
and £19m?

It could have gone into beautifying those parts of Stratford where people 
live. It could ensure that the aquatic centre and other Olympic venues have 
enough money to keep running after the Games. It could have paid for uplifting 
places as needy as Stratford, but without its celebrity. It could have helped 
in making the safety-first architecture of the Olympic buildings a little less 
boring, so there would have been no need for another injection of excitement. 
But these would have been less good advertising for ArcelorMittal and you 
couldn't have compared them to the Statue of Liberty.
 