
Everyone has heard that employers are crying out for science graduate 
recruits. And you've almost certainly read a headline somewhere in the last few 
years about how the UK needs to invest in science education to persuade young 
people to improve their skills in the subject.

But what are the facts? The Higher Education Statistics Agency 
<http://www.hesa.ac.uk/> publish updates about who's studying what at UK 
universities. Last year alone, theHigher Education (HE) qualifications obtained 
<http://www.hesa.ac.uk/dox/dataTables/studentsAndQualifiers/download/qualsub1112.xls>
 in the UK included:

• 103,950 qualifications in medicine and related subjects
• 81,630 in biological and physical sciences
• 72,425 in engineering, architecture and related subjects
• 30,520 computer science qualifications
• 11,485 in mathematical sciences

Working in a recruitment and communications company, with a speciality in 
graduate recruitment, I know that the number of graduate jobs available is 
nowhere close to that sort of level. In fact, the last time we attempted to add 
up the numbers from all the graduate schemes, we arrived at a grand total of 
just 65,000.

The reality is that lots of science graduates don't go into scientific roles 
because of three key issues:

1. We don't pay them enough

You've just finished your four-year science degree, with all the associated 
debts, and you're considering your options. There are some science graduate 
schemes, which pay a fairly average wage, or there are sectors, such as 
investment banking or management consultancy, which want your numeracy skills 
and are demonstrating their enthusiasm by offering double the salary.

The fact is, other industries are giving Stem graduates better offers. It's no 
surprise that many decide that science and technology might not be their best 
option. Interestingly, in other countries starting salaries for technical roles 
are often far higher – some US engineering schemes pay up to $95,000 a year. So 
if there really was a skills shortage, the salaries would have risen by now.

2. Some Stem recruiters reject candidates too readily

From rigid selection procedures, to throwing out candidates who don't have a 
2:1, some Stem employers do a poor job when it comes to recruiting. It's pretty 
daft to reject someone with good A-levels and a strong CV, simply because they 
didn't get a 2:1 at university – they may still be a great candidate and it 
might be worth considering which university they studied at. In one case I came 
across, the first stage of selection for an employer's electrical engineering 
scheme was to screen out people with poor grammar. Does your ability to use a 
semi-colon have anything to do with your knowledge of semi-conductors?

Such things tend to be in the process either "because they always have been", 
or because the people doing the screening need better judgment when it comes to 
assessing graduates' technical skills. But if there was really a desperate 
skills shortage, issues like this would have been rectified.

3. A lot of the jobs just aren't attractive

The sad reality is that a lot of graduate roles in science and technology 
involve going in at the bottom of the department and doing the jobs no one else 
wants to do. Real high-fliers with impressive academic credentials may well 
baulk at the thought of spending years earning the right to think again. And 
even when the jobs really are good, the language used to describe them often 
undersells the opportunity, using general comments about managing projects, 
rather than giving hard details on the exciting work on offer. Meanwhile, other 
sectors that have worked harder at making their jobs sound appealing, are 
stealing the talent.

So what does all this mean? It's a red herring for employers to shrug their 
shoulders and blame the education system for not producing the talent we need. 
The talent is there — it's the employers' fault if they fail to attract 
graduates into careers in science, technology or manufacturing.

Marcus Body is head of research at Work Communications 
<http://www.workcomms.com/>. Marcus presented his findings at a TARGETjobs 
Breakfast News event <http://gtimedia.co.uk/targetjobs-breakfast-news>.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update 
<https://register.guardian.co.uk/careers/>.
 