
Video game movie adaptation. It’s a phrase likely to strike fear and dread 
into the heart of most gamers, and indeed most moviegoers. Street Fighter, 
Super Mario Bros, Silent Hill, Hitman. All of these classic, hugely acclaimed 
video games have been thrust onto the big screen (or the straight-to-DVD 
shelves) by people whose knowledge of the source materials seems to have been 
passing at best. The results have been ... horrible.

Assassin’s Creed, we are being told, is a different story. Produced by 
Ubisoft, the company that developed and published the bestselling games, it has 
actual star actors (Michael Fassbender, Marion Cotillard, Jeremy Irons) and a 
talented director in the form of Justin Kurzel, who made the award-winning 
Snowtown and helmed Fassbender’s gritty Macbeth movie. For once this isn’t a 
bunch of Hollywood chancers hoping to cash in on a successful gaming brand; 
it’s the game makers themselves, overseeing their vision as a motion picture 
spectacle. The Assassin’s Creed titles have apparently been referenced closely 
by the production team, with the prop makers studying 3D representations of 
every weapon and costume.

The movie doesn’t follow the specifics of the games – its lead character is 
Callum Lynch not Desmond Miles – but it has the same setup; a futuristic 
company sending the lead character back through time via his ancestral DNA. It 
is still a historical battle between the assassins and the Templars. There 
don’t appear to be any ridiculous liberties being taken – I was going to 
reference the Super Mario Bros movie here but I just can’t face it.

Anyway, the trailer was released on Wednesday night, giving us firsthand 
evidence of this careful conversion. And well ... it’s sort of OK. The 
representations of medieval Spain are suitably epic; we see swooping overhead 
shots and moments of Fassbender standing on rooftops looking out across the 
sprawl, which is something we all do a lot of while playing the games. There is 
also a heck of a lot of parkour, which is very faithful to the game but in a 
cinematic context looks like some kind of cross between a freerunning 
exhibition and a historical reenactment society.

Can Michael Fassbender's Assassin's Creed save the video game movie?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/aug/31/michael-fassbender-assassins-creed-video-game-movie>
Also, the soundtrack to the trailer is Kanye West’s self-deprecating classic I 
am a God. I’ll just leave that there.

There is synchronised archery, there are really big jumps, there is a bit 
where Fassbender breathily declares “we work in the dark to serve the light. We 
are assassins”, which I really wish he hadn’t done. The lighting is nice. There 
are no obvious bugs or crashes, so that’s taking a broad step away from the 
games – although the trailer does reuse the same shot of huddled masses running 
down a street, but that will probably be dealt with in a patch just after the 
movie launches.

Really though, what this super straight-faced collage of images seems to show 
is that Assassin’s Creed is a serious blockbuster movie project, just like the 
Warcraft movie – and in a very different way, Angry Birds. None of these flicks 
are going to be troubling the Oscars but at least they may avoid the Golden 
Raspberries. Although, of course, when Cotillard says, “welcome to the Spanish 
inquisition”, all you can really think about is this:

Which is perhaps fitting, as no one expects a decent video game movie.

Why are video game-based films always so poor?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2007/nov/30/whyarevideogamebasedfilms>
Let’s be fair for a second. There have been modest successes. The Mortal 
Kombat movie was as charmingly daft as the games – although nowhere near as 
gory. The first Tomb Raider movie was sort of OK: Angelina Jolie was not 
entirely convincing as a member of the landed British aristocracy, but she got 
the outfit right. Some people have even taken a masochistic delight in the low 
budget tie-ins confected by German director and producer Uwe Boll who spent the 
mid-2000s churning out cinematic assaults on games such as House of the Dead, 
Alone in the Dark, Postal and Far Cry, and then challenged his critics to a 
boxing match.

But it’s an ignoble history, forever overcast by the image of the late, great 
Bob Hoskins dressed in dungarees and wondering what the absolute hell he was 
doing in a sewer fighting Dennis Hopper.

Anyway, what do you think? Does the trailer suggest a fitting tie-in or a 
disrespectful abomination?
 