
What better place to mark the completion of a multibillion dollar deal in the 
beer industry than the upstairs room of an Irish bar in New York, with 
miniature burgers and tepid slices of pizza all round?

SABMiller this week toasted the closing of a merger between its US operations 
and those of Denver-based Molson Coors. The deal, creating a business worth an 
estimated $10bn (£5bn), ends 135 years of rivalry between Miller and Coors.

For guests at Monday's pub lunch reception, there was a slick video showing 
lots of employees declaring that "we are MillerCoors". Presumably the ones 
chosen to appear on the film won't be among the staff axed to create cost 
savings of $500m annually.

A branding company has come up with a snazzy MillerCoors logo 
<http://www.millercoors.com/intro.aspx> of a glass containing a modest amount 
of amber-coloured liquid. SABMiller's chief executive, Graham Mackay, assured 
me that the glass shown is definitely half full, rather than half empty.

The biggest impetus for the deal is to cut costs and to combine distribution, 
reaching more bars and off-licences across the US in a more efficient fashion. 
But the bosses' brows became furrowed when they were asked what actual changes 
the average beer drinker might notice.

"Beer drinkers shouldn't see any difference," said Leo Kiely, chief executive 
of the newly merger business. "All they're going to see is a fresher beer, more 
distribution and more investment behind these brands."

The two firms are anxious to be a more robust competitor to the Budweiser 
maker Anheuser-Busch, which has roughly 48% of the US beer market compared to 
Miller's 18% and Coors's 11%.

The four most popular beers in America are Budweiser, Bud Light, Miller Lite 
and Coors Light. This merger means it will be a straight two-two fight between 
Anheuser and MillerCoors.

One of the oddities of the premium lager industry is that although Bud Light, 
Miller Lite and Coors Light are deadly rivals commanding fierce loyalty among 
drinkers, they really don't taste very different to each other. It would take 
something of a connoisseur to identify each in a blind taste test – as 
SABMiller's boss acknowledges.

"In most markets, within a particular beer type, there's not that much 
differentiation," said Mackay. "The differences are emotional - they've each 
got a whole history and providence behind them."

MillerCoors intends to continue marketing its Miller and Coors brands with 
fiercely competing images, in spite of the fact that the actual contents of the 
bottles are really very similar.

While Coors bangs on about being cold refreshment and using water from the 
Rocky Mountain springs, Miller has more of a tough, blue-collar, sports-related 
image. But it's all a bit of a marketing sleight of hand on consumers who 
probably wouldn't notice if they got one beer in the other brand's bottle.

This is a puzzling scenario which wouldn't happen in many other industries. 
Take petrol, for example. If BP and Texaco came under one corporate umbrella, 
they wouldn't continue to advertise against each other. They'd probably combine 
into one brand and motorists wouldn't care – nobody can tell the difference 
between the stuff in competing petrol pumps.

Benj Steinman, publisher of Beer Marketer's Insights, says MillerCoors doesn't 
have much choice with big, bad Budweiser breathing down its neck: "You've got 
these huge, established businesses that have loyal clienteles. You can't just 
walk away from one of the brands and expect to retain its customers."

The US brewing industry is in a state of flux this year, with Anheuser-Busch 
struggling to fight off a $46bn takeover bid from Belgium's InBev.

For SABMiller, it might seem a bit of a waste of money to market two rival 
stables of beer – but the company is wholly unrepentant.
"You could call it wasted," says Mackay. "But unless you deliver emotional 
differentiation into the market, interest in the category declines."

Quoting an old adage in the business world, he adds: "At least half of every 
marketing dollar is wasted. The question is - which half?"
 