
The leader of the Islamic State (Isis), Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-bakr-al-baghdadi>, remains incapacitated 
due to suspected spinal damage and is being treated by two doctors who travel 
to his hideout from the group’s stronghold of Mosul, the Guardian has learned.

More than two months after being injured in a US air strike in north-western 
Iraq, the self-proclaimed caliph is yet to resume command of the terror group 
that has been rampaging through Iraq andSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> since June last year. Three sources 
close to Isis have confirmed that Baghdadi’s wounds could mean he will never 
again lead the organisation.

Isis is now being led by a long-term senior official, Abu Alaa al-Afri, who 
had been appointed deputy leader when his predecessor was killed by an air 
strike late last year.

Isis leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi 'seriously wounded in air strike'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/21/isis-leader-abu-bakr-al-baghdadi-wounded-air-strike>
Details of Baghdadi’s condition, and of the physicians treating him, have 
emerged since the Guardian revealed he had been seriously wounded on 18 March 
in an air strike that killed three men he was travelling with. The attack took 
place in al-Baaj, 80 miles (128km) west of Mosul.


The Pentagon subsequently denied that Baghdadi had been killed and, while it 
acknowledged that it had carried out the attack, claimed to be unaware that the 
world’s most wanted man had been among the casualties.


Sources within Mosul, who refused to be named, said a female radiologist from 
a main Mosul hospital and a male surgeon had treated Baghdadi. Both, along with 
their extended families, are strong ideological supporters of the group.


“The women’s sons work in the hospital,” said one Mosul resident with 
knowledge of Baghdadi’s wounds. “They dress like Kandaharis and even carry guns 
inside. Both are on the regional health board.


“The man is not a renowned surgeon, but he is absolutely with them [Isis]. His 
daughter married a Salafist and said she was going to have as many children as 
she could to fight the enemies of Islam.”

Isis: the inside story | Martin Chulov
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/11/-sp-isis-the-inside-story> 
Only a small clique of Isis leaders know the extent of Baghdadi’s injuries, or 
where he is being treated. Fewer still have visited him. However, word of his 
wounds has started to spread to the group’s second-tier leadership, where talk 
is rife of avenging the most serious blow to Isis since the group overran half 
ofIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq>.


Afri is a professor of physics and a long-term member of Isis. He was touted 
as successor to the group’s previous leader, Abu Omar al-Baghdadi, who was 
killed in a US-led raid near Tikrit in April 2010. Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi assumed 
the mantle of leader in the days following his predecessor’s death, but has 
dramatically risen to prominence since early 2013, when the group first made 
its presence felt in Syria’s civil war. In June last year, less than 1,000 Isis 
fighters ousted the Iraqi army from the north of the country, and took control 
of Mosul, Tikrit as well as Anbar and Nineveh provinces.

Since then, Isis has menaced Baghdad and Irbil and drawn the US military back 
to a country it had left in 2011.


“They have a lot of confidence in al-Afri,” said Hisham al-Hashimi, senior 
adviser on Isis to the Iraqi government. “He is smart, and a good leader and 
administrator. If Baghdadi ends up dying, he will lead them.”

Two Isis insiders told the Guardian that the US-led air strikes, which have 
also involved Jordanian and GCC fighter jets, have taken a heavy toll on the 
organisation’s numbers, and increasingly its morale.


“They are planning to fight back against Europe,” one member said. “They want 
to take revenge for Baghdadi.”


Though proving to be a potent threat to the group’s leaders, intelligence 
surrounding air strikes has often been imprecise. In April, the White House was 
forced to apologise after the US military killed an American and an Italian 
citizen, as well as al-Qaida’s spokesman, Adam Gadahn, in a drone strike in 
Waziristan in January. Pentagon officials took more than three months to 
establish whom the strike had killed.

While boasting technical skills that can monitor telephone calls and internet 
traffic, the US and its allies have limited access to on-the-ground sources 
within Isis – a fact well understood by the group’s senior members, who largely 
avoid using technology.

Baghdadi in particular had proved difficult to track. His appearance in the 
al-Noori mosque in Mosul to anoint himself as caliph was the only time he had 
been seen publicly since the Isis campaign began, and yielded the only images 
of him since he was jailed by the US military in the infamous Camp Bucca prison 
in 2004.

An Isis insider told the Guardian in December that Baghdadi had begun 
positioning himself to eventually lead the organisation as early as then. By 
the time he eventually took over in 2010, the group was known as theIslamic 
State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> of Iraq, and had suffered 
several years of setbacks, which appeared to stymie its goals.

However, the outbreak of the Syrian civil war gave Isis a new platform, on 
which it began to capitalise in early 2013, two years into the conflict. Aided 
by a porous border with Turkey, which saw at least 15,000-20,000 foreigners 
cross to join its ranks, and the capitulation of the Iraqi army around Mosul, 
the group was by last June operating outside of state control and threatening 
the entire regional order.

 Baghdadi sought legitimacy as caliph in a family ancestry that traces back to 
the Prophet Muhammad and from post-graduate training in Islamic studies. 
However, he has been regarded within Isis as more than a figurehead, 
contributing to strategic decisions taken by the group.
 