 A team of investigators is heading to one of the most remote islands in the 
Pacific next week to resolve a 70-year-old mystery: what happened to Amelia 
Earhart, the world's most famous woman aviator.
The glamorous adventurer, the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic, 
disappeared along with navigator Fred Noonan while attempting to circumnavigate 
the globe. It was always assumed their aircraft crashed in the sea and sank, 
but now an expedition by members of the International Group for Historic 
Aircraft Recovery, or Tighar, hopes to prove that one or both of the fliers 
survived.

The organisation has found circumstantial evidence Earhart may have spent the 
last days of her life as a castaway on Nikumaroro, one of the Polynesian 
Kiribati islands, northeast of Australia.

A team of 15 will carry out archaeological searches at a campsite where human 
remains and a woman's shoe were found in 1940. 'We hope to find some bones on 
the island and use DNA tests to prove they belonged to Amelia or her navigator 
by comparing it with DNA from their living relatives,' said American expedition 
leader Ric Gillespie.

Earhart and Noonan set off from Oakland, California, in May 1937 in a 
twin-engined Lockheed Electra. After a route that took them over the Caribbean, 
South America, Africa, Arabia, India, Burma, Singapore, Indonesia and Australia 
they stopped in Lae, New Guinea. The next leg of the flight on 2 July was a 
daunting 2,500-mile trip across the Pacific to tiny Howland Island. A US 
coastguard vessel, Itasca, was to guide them in by radio.

The Lockheed, fitted with extra fuel tanks, never arrived. After 19 hours in 
the air, radio operators aboard the Itasca heard Earhart but apparently she was 
unable to hear them. She said the aircraft was low on fuel before contact was 
lost.

A massive two-week search failed to find any trace of the plane or its crew. 
Wild theories flourished. It was suggested the US Navy had used the incident as 
an excuse to send aircraft over the Marshall Islands, where the Japanese were 
building military installations. Another, widely discounted, premise was that 
Earhart and Noonan were captured by the Japanese and shot as spies, or returned 
to the US secretly.

Gillespie says ships reported radio distress signals that continued for 
several days, coming from the vicinity of Nikumaroro. They were dismissed as 
hoaxes or mistakes, he said.

Then, three years after the crash, bones were found on Nikumaroro near a 
campsite where a castaway had obviously lived. A British administrator took the 
bones to a Fiji doctor who said they were from a small man. More than 50 years 
later, in 1997, forensic anthropologists re-evaluated the remains and said they 
were probably those of a white woman who was about 5ft 7ins tall. They have 
since been lost.

'It is a popular mystery shot through with myth and legend,' said Gillespie. 
'By using the latest techniques and technologies we may be able to get closer 
to the facts and find out what happened.'

tighar.org <http://www.tighar.org>
 