
Alesha Dixon cried tears of joy last night after she and dance partner Matthew 
Cutler won the latest series of the BBC's hugely popularStrictly Come Dancing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/strictly-come-dancing> competition.

The singer, 29, beat EastEnders star Matt Di Angelo and partner Flavia Cacace 
in the final when the public cast their votes after watching each couple 
perform five dances.

An estimated 12 million people watched last night's climax to the series, 
which pits celebrities, teamed with professional partners, against each other 
live on the dancefloor on Saturday night primetime television.

Dixon was, by common consent, the best entrant this year. However, she said 
before the final that she felt her floorwork had to be superior to her male 
rival's because the show's heavily female audience favoured the men taking part 
over the women.

That fear proved unfounded as the voters chose her ahead of 20-year-old Di 
Angelo, who plays Deano Wicks in EastEnders. Dixon had been the bookies' heavy 
favourite, even though Di Angelo had been the only competitor to score a 
perfect 40 points in an earlier episode. The verve and precision of her steps 
impressed the judges - who awarded her a number of tens during the 12-week 
series - and viewers alike.

Last night's finalists first performed their three favourite dances from the 
series, before showing off their skills to T. Rex's 1976 hit, 'I Love to 
Boogie'. To finish, in the dance-off Di Angelo and Cacace interpreted Lenny 
Kravitz's 'Are You Gonna Go My Way?' while Dixon and Cutler's final song was 
Bonnie Tyler's 'Holding out for a Hero'.

Dixon, an ex-member of girl group Mis-Teeq and now a solo singer and aspiring 
actress, said she had been 'scared and excited' by the dance-off and had 
practised for hours.

The final was preceded by controversy when Len Goodman, one of the four 
judges, said that many viewers were middle-aged women - some of them 'bloated' 
- and predicted they would back Di Angelo as 'a bit of eye candy, a hunky young 
dude'.

It was the first time in Strictly Come Dancing's five-year history that the 
final had only two contestants. Model and actress Kelly Brook had been expected 
to compete but pulled out this month after her father died.
 