
In his own extraordinary, egomaniacal way, Diego Maradona 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/diego-maradona> has lived by the motto 'Yes 
we can' all his life. Play football as easily as breathing? Yes we can. Ingest 
copious amounts of cocaine and enjoy as much female company as possible? Yes we 
can. Eat forArgentina <http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/argentina>? Yes we 
can. Shoot an air rifle at unwanted guests outside your house? Yes we can. 
Incite thousands to protest on the streets of Buenos Aires against the 'human 
garbage' otherwise known as George W Bush? Yes we can. Coach the Argentina 
national team to the World Cup success that came to him so naturally as a 
player? So sorry to be a killjoy, but no we probably can't.

It is possible that Maradona will calmly handle the expectations of one of 
football's most demanding nations and guide them with more expertise than he 
showed in his 23 club matches in the dugout in the mid-1990s. But please 
forgive us, Diego, for having some doubts.

The list of iconic players who cannot resist the calling to lead their nation 
again - with an older head rather than youthful feet - generally reads badly. 
Michel Platini had mixed fortunes in charge of France, who botched 
qualification for Italia 90, then blazed their way into the finals of Euro 92 
before going home early as fallen favourites. He quit.

The levels of expectation can be too burdensome. Dino Zoff, Italy's 
goalkeeping centurion, had led an impressive campaign at Euro 2000, but when 
his team lost the final, cruelly, narrowly, he felt consumed by failure. He 
quit.

More recently, Hristo Stoichkov, as clever with a football as he is volatile a 
man, took over the Bulgaria team only to fall out with several players, 
ostracise the captain, fail to qualify for Euro 2008, and accentuate his own 
description of himself as a 'red hot chilli pepper'. He quit.

Gheorghe Hagi, the Maradona of the Carpathians and Romania's player of the 
century, had a troubling spell in charge of the country he represented on the 
pitch 125 times. It was his first foray into management. He was sacked after 
six months.

In Mexico, the supreme striker Hugo Sánchez had a turbulent period as national 
coach, in which he was criticised for concerning himself with superfluous 
issues such as changing the traditional colour of the kit (reasoning that the 
green shirts blended in with the grass) while the team dawdled. He was fired.

There are exceptions. The Brazilian Mário Zagallo has an astounding CV as a 
World Cup-winning player and manager, even if he was not universally loved 
along the way. Germany's Franz Beckenbauer is the only other man to match that, 
an achievement embellished by his status as one of the greatest players of all 
time.

Maradona, whose first game in charge is a friendly in Scotland next week, 
surely lacks the discipline to join Zagallo and Beckenbauer, even if it was a 
real sea change to see him turn up for his anointment asArgentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/argentina> coach last week wearing a suit 
and tie. Although the players are mostly enthusiastic about this brave new 
world - Javier Mascherano spoke of his excitement about taking a living legend 
to Melwood to show off to his Liverpool team-mates last week, when Maradona 
also dropped in to manchester United's training session - inwardly they must be 
as baffled as the rest of us about what kind of impact he will have on the 
squad.

The Maradona circus makes David Beckham look like an amateur. A hurricane 
approaches whenever he and his entourage are in the vicinity. Even when 
surrounded by the usual mass of bodyguards and hangers-on, the man is 
impossible to miss. Despite his being conspicuously small, Maradona's aura is 
awesome.

What his contribution to the coaching philosophy will be is hard to predict 
because, more than most former greats, he instinctively feels, and behaves, 
like a fan. At the 2006 World Cup in Germany Maradona was regularly seen in the 
stand wearing his replica shirt, singing, swearing, pogo-ing and swirling his 
scarf around his head.

A manager with a fan's mentality is a risky proposition. In Argentina, where 
Maradona is revered to the point of religious fervour, nobody wants to think 
about the possibility of having to criticise him.

To give this the best possible chance of working, the Argentine Football 
Association have done the decent thing by appointing Carlos Bilardo as general 
manager. The extent to which their responsibilities are divided has yet to be 
formalised, but it would make sense for Maradona to be the cheerleader and 
media puppet, while Bilardo pulls the team's strings.

When they worked in tandem in the past Maradona was the greatest player of his 
generation and Bilardo, as national coach, created a platform for him to 
inspire Argentina to win the World Cup in 1986 and reach the final again four 
years later. They were also allies at club level, at Sevilla and Boca Juniors.

Bilardo is used to being Maradona's straight guy. He, too, is an interesting 
character. As a young coach he combined his work in football with practising 
gynaecology and helping to run his father's furniture business. He clearly 
knows how to work hard and keep his head clear, two huge assets for what lies 
ahead.

The reason the AFA have turned to two such successful sons is simple. 
Argentina are underachieving. Since the golden age, when they reached three of 
the four World Cup finals between 1978 and 1990, Argentina have struggled to 
live up to their promise. Their junior teams are consistently impressive, but 
that form does not easily translate into top-level success. Recent performances 
have been particularly uninspiring and Argentina have won only once in eight 
matches. They need a lift and they are certain to have some fun and games with 
Maradona in charge.

There is a clip on YouTube that sums up the spirit of Maradona better than any 
match footage or controversial headlines. He is warming up before a match at 
Napoli, while the 1980s Euro classic 'Life is Life' plays over the PA system. 
Maradona's laces are undone, his muscles loose, he asks the ball to dance, and 
they tango together as if they are having a wonderful affair.

What it demonstrates is this: Maradona was meant to be spontaneous, not 
deliberate. He was meant to be a player, not a strategist. Good luck, Carlos 
Bilardo. A lot rests on your experienced shoulders.

Ketsbaia goes from kicking adverts to giving Mourinho a kicking

Anybody who remembers Temuri Ketsbaia's one-man destruction campaign against 
perimeter advertising hoardings would justifiably question whether he would be 
management material. On Tuesday the bald Georgian looked every inch the part as 
he watched his team make José Mourinho's Internazionale come over all Laurel 
and Hardy. Mourinho's expression was a study in disdain as he saw Inter's 
enthusiastic opponents,Anorthosis Famagusta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/anorthosisfamagusta>, force the Italians 
into a series of defensive gaffes - they were lucky to concede only three 
comedy goals in the 3-3 draw in Cyprus.

Chelsea's former boss will be looking for reinforcements, but finding quality 
defenders, even in Italy, is not a simple task nowadays. After all, who made 
his debut for AC Milan two nights later in San Siro? None other than José's old 
friend from Chelsea v Arsenal games, Philippe Senderos. With Mourinho's 
defenders under fire, how sweet was that clean sheet for Senderos against Braga?

• When Arjen Robben pulled up with a torn thigh muscle during the warm-up to 
last week'sChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> tie with Juventus, Real 
Madrid must have wondered whether they had signed a guinea pig for their 
medical staff rather than a footballer for their first team when they paid 
Chelsea £24m.

The brittle Dutchman has suffered seven injuries since he joined Real Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> 18 months ago - and that 
doesn't include the pains he was nursing when he arrived. He was the fifth most 
expensive signing in Real's history, after Zinedine Zidane, Luís Figo, David 
Beckham and Ronaldo, but the club have seen little of a talent they prized 
above Robinho. Now they are pining for their departed Brazilian.
 