
The rehabilitation of Angus Deayton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/angus-deayton> is complete, with ITV 
hiring the former Have I Got News For You presenter to host a major new reality 
show in which fearsome chef Gordon Ramsay will train 10 celebrities to be cooks 
at a London restaurant in a show which is being billed as a "culinary bootcamp".

Deayton - who was sacked from HIGNFY by BBC1's controller, Lorraine Heggessey, 
18 months ago following a series of lurid tabloid stories about him taking 
cocaine and sleeping with a call girl - is fast becoming one of the new faces 
of ITV1.

As well as fronting cookery reality show Hell's Kitchen with Ramsay, Deayton 
is also being lined up to host a new ITV1 topical quiz format and will appear 
in an upcoming sketch show for the network, The All Star Comedy Show.

Hell's Kitchen will open for just two weeks in a central London building hired 
by ITV especially for the show, which is to be broadcast this summer.

The 10 celebrities will be split into two teams of five and will have to 
compete to see who is best at cooking for the restaurant under Ramsay's 
supervision.

They will live on the Hell's Kitchen premises in specially built quarters and 
will be expected to work the long hours and endure the stressful working 
conditions common in the restaurant business.

The 10 contestants will have to cook for other celebrities, food critics and 
members of the public, and those who do not come up to scratch will be thrown 
off the show.

"We've got a huge building in central London, which we are converting at the 
moment. The restaurant will open and close in two weeks," said the ITV director 
of programmes, Nigel Pickard.

"Some of the celebrities will maybe have a passion for cooking. But at the end 
of the two weeks we're going to find out which one is the best chef. There's 
going to be some elbowing [of contestants off the show]," he added.

"It's a culinary boot camp. The celebrities will be in an enclosed environment 
and they will have to get up early every morning and do things like baking 
bread. This is a restaurant that's got to do 70 covers a night," Mr Pickard 
said.

Deayton will front a live peak time show from Hell's Kitchen on ITV1 every 
night during the weeks the restaurant is open.

There will also be Hell's Kitchen spin-off shows on ITV2.

Mr Pickard said he would try to avoid scheduling Hell's Kitchen against 
Channel 4's Big Brother, which usually runs from late May until the end of July.

Hell's Kitchen is being made by the same Granada Productions team behind 
ITV1's hit reality show I'm a Celebrity... Get Me Out of Here!.

I'm a Celebrity executive producer Natalka Znak will take the same role on 
Hell's Kitchen.

· To contact the MediaGuardian newsdesk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 