
Andy Murray could hardly be in a better place a week before Wimbledon, owner of
a record fifth Queen’s Club title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/19/andy-murray-beats-milos-raonic-wins-queens-club>
 as well as a winner’s bottle of champagne he hopes may also come in handy for 
celebrations when the All England Championships are decided three Sundays from 
now.

However, Britain’s world No2 is not about to get ahead of himself after 
defeating the 6ft 6in Canadian power-server Milos Raonic in the final of the 
Aegon Championships here on Sunday, 6-7 (5), 6-4, 6-3, a scoreline that tells a 
story of his growing strength in the contest over two hours 12 minutes.

Andy Murray beats Milos Raonic to claim record fifth Queen’s Club crown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/19/andy-murray-beats-milos-raonic-wins-queens-club>
One of sport’s most notable teetotallers later eyed the jeroboam of champagne 
placed alongside the championship cup – surely one of the biggest in sport – 
and smiled. “I’ll take it home, I guess, and hopefully maybe have something to 
celebrate in a few weeks. Yeah, keep it for after Wimbledon.”

Victory was pleasing, too, for Ivan Lendl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ivan-lendl>, who returned to the Murray camp 
last Tuesday after more than two years away and was missing again during the 
on-court celebrations. Murray explained: “He said he had to go to the toilet 
and he watched from up on the balcony.”

More pertinently Murray and Lendl, along with his year-round coach, Jamie 
Delgado, have already crunched the numbers of this final and his wins against 
Nicolas Mahut, Aljaz Bedene, Kyle Edmund and Marin Cilic earlier in the 
tournament. “Mainly actually we spoke about today’s match but more about next 
week and planning for Wimbledon, how I’m going to prepare for that, the things 
that we’re going to be working on,” he said.

“I like that. It’s sort of not concentrating too much on the win today. It’s 
like, OK, great, now what do we do tomorrow? What do we do to get better over 
these next few days to put myself in a better position for Wimbledon?

Andy Murray beats Milos Raonic to win Aegon Championships – as it happened | 
Les Roopanarine
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jun/19/andy-murray-v-milos-raonic-aegon-championships-final-queens-club-live>
“He was definitely happy with this week because of the way that I fought, the 
way that I played in the big moments and the preparation, getting five matches 
when I had literally zero preparation for this event. It’s turned out to be a 
great week.”

Did the taciturn Lendl enjoy it all? “I hope so,” Murray said. “I have enjoyed 
having him back.”

Murray said that passing the illustrious four-times Queen’s Club champions of 
the modern era, John McEnroe (who was in Raonic’s box as his temporary 
grasscourt adviser), Roy Emerson, Lleyton Hewitt and Boris Becker, “feels good”.

“It’s not an easy tournament to win,” Murray said. “It always has a great 
field and the players I have beaten in the finals a lot of times have been top 
players. It’s not like I have had easy finals.

“They have been top, top players, most of them top 10, some of them grand slam 
winners, grand slam finalists. That’s good.”

That is as close to boasting as Murray is ever likely to come and there was a 
sense that it was a statement of intent, laying down a marker for the toughest 
challenge in tennis: getting past the world No1, Novak Djokovic, for a second 
time to win Wimbledon – and stop the Serb’s run at a calendar grand slam. 
Murray does not lack for incentive, as Lendl will no doubt remind him this week.
 