
Government forces in Ivory Coast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ivory-coast> claim they have destroyed the 
last pockets of resistance from fighters loyal to the country's deposed 
president.

A dwindling band of Laurent Gbagbo supporters had made a last stand in Yopougon
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/may/04/ivory-coast-gbagbo-militia-fight-on?INTCMP=SRCH>
, a district of Abidjan, three weeks after he was prised from his bunker and 
arrested.

But President Alassane Ouattara's army has said it now controls the whole of 
the city. Chérif Ousmane, the commander in charge of Wednesday's operation, 
told Ouattara's TCI television that Yopougon was "the only area that remained, 
and the entire district is now definitively occupied by us".

The final battles came at a heavy cost. The prime minister, Guillaume Soro, 
who had visited the scene, told the same TV channel: "I saw streets littered 
with bodies. At the militia headquarters we saw an improvised cemetery.

"I can imagine the slaughter that took place. I'm still under shock after 
seeing all these dead, all these bodies."

Red Cross officials said residents of Yopougon had told them of a mass grave 
of about 30 bodies buried in a field where children used to play football.

Franck Kodjo of the Red Cross, wiping tears from his eyes, told Reuters: "This 
land will never be used by youth, will never again be suitable for children's 
games. It is a cemetery in the middle of the neighbourhood."

Red Cross workers have collected nearly 70 corpses since Tuesday from the 
streets of Yopougon, where many of the pro-Gbagbo gunmen were mercenaries from 
neighbouring Liberia.

Residents said food and water were in short supply after pillaging and heavy 
fighting left shops and infrastructure in disarray.

Stephane Bedjra, who lives with his wife and two children, said: "The 
situation was terrible. There were militants who terrorised us.

"They were armed and they did whatever they wanted. We lived like this until 
the arrival of the FRCI [government army], who chased them from the area."

Gbagbo refused to cede power after a November election that he lost to 
Ouattara, sparking open conflict that killed more than 3,000 people and 
displaced a million – reopening the wounds of a 2002-03 civil war.

Gbagbo was arrested on 11 April at the presidential residence in Abidjan and 
is being detained at a villa in the north of the country. The Swiss government 
says it has identified assets worth 70m Swiss francs (£50m) linked to Gbagbo 
which were blocked in January.

In the west of the country, many families displaced by the fighting are still 
living and sleeping out in the open and lack access to clean drinking water. 
Save the Children has warned that thousands of children living without shelter 
face a health "catastrophe" as the rainy season approaches.
 