
A bit earlier: Early arrivals were offered this account of how Libya crashed 
out of the tournament despite beating Senegal. You can still read it, if you 
like.

Ihaab Boussefi's two goals were not enough to send Libya through to the 
quarter-finals at theAfrica Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> despite a 2-1 win over 
Senegal on Sunday.

Boussefi struck in the fifth and 84th minutes to give Libya victory at the 
Estadio de Bata but Zambia's 1-0 win over the co-hosts Equatorial Guinea in 
Group A's other game in Malabo – which was played at the same time – saw the 
Zambians progress.

The striker's double did give Libya their first victory at the Cup of Nations 
in 30 years, however, and the country's first win in the competition on foreign 
soil.

Libya reached the final of the African Cup at home in 1982, then had two 
defeats and a draw at their only other appearance six years ago.

Boussefi's early goal raised hopes of an unlikely quarter-final place for 
Libya, who needed a win combined with a defeat for Zambia to have any chance. 
He finished neatly after being set up by Ahmed Sa'ad.

Deme Ndiaye equalised with a glancing header from a corner in the 11th minute 
for Senegal, who were playing for pride alone after defeats in their opening 
two games.

Boussefi claimed a late winner with a sweetly struck volley six minutes from 
time but Zambia progressed as group winners ahead of Equatorial Guinea, who had 
already qualified.

The Libyans still go home with a win from a tournament they were never 
expected to reach after they emerged from chaos and civil war at home during 
the qualifying competition to make the finals.

For Senegal it was a third straight defeat at the tournament and a humiliating 
end to their Cup of Nations after being tipped as possible contenders. They 
lost all three games by 2-1 to exit the tournament without a point for the 
first time in their history.

5.40pm: So, the final games in Group B and all we know for sure is that 
Burkina Faso are out and Ivory Coast are through. The Ivorians need only a draw 
against Angola to ensure they win the group and play their quarter-final in 
Malabo, where they have played all their group matches and are comfortably 
ensconsed in a palatial hotel with en-suite golf club and private beach. 
Victory for Angola will see them win the group, a draw will guarantee their 
progress and even a defeat might be fine, depending on Sudan's result against 
Burkina Faso. Sudan go through if they beat Burkina Faso,Ivory Coast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ivorycoast> beat Sudan and the margin of 
victory of both games combined is three or more goals. Or by various other 
complicated methods, including the exciting possibility of the drawing of lots.

Ivory Coast will start, inevitably, as favourites but their much-vaunted 
attack could struggle to shine today against an Angola side who were criticised 
for playing a particularly sterile, dull form of "anti-football" to defeat 
Burkina Faso. "The type of football we played against Burkina Faso was for a 
purpose," said the Palancas Negras coach, José Vidigal. "My players carried out 
instructions perfectly." Given the mutual convenience of a draw, I'm slightly 
worried that we might not get our full helping of entertainment tonight. Surely 
there are enough talented attackers on show, including former Manchester United 
flop turnedAfrica-wowing hero Manucho 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F7fmprcAZUo>, to guarantee a bit of goalmouth 
fun? Surely?

5.46pm: The winners of this group will play Equatorial Guinea in Malabo this 
Saturday, 4 February. Runners-up play Zambia in Bata earlier that same day.

5.48pm: Today's teams are in. Ivory Coast select a considerably below-strength 
side with Kalou, Drogba and Yaya Touré among the substitutes:
Ivory Coast: Yeboah, Bamba, Eboue, Touré, Boka, Lolo, Konan, Coulibaly, 
Gradel, Doumbia, Bony.Subs: Barry, Angoua, Zokora, Gosso, Kalou, Tioté, 
Gervinho, Drogba, Tiene, Keita, Touré Yaya, Gnanahouan.
Angola: Wilson, Zuela, Miguel, Airosa, Dani Massunguna, Macanga, Dede, 
Gilberto, Djalma, Manucho, Mateus.Subs: Hugo, Osorio, Kali, Jaime, Amaro, 
Flavio, Love, Rafael, Manucho Barros, Mingo Bile, Vunguidica.
Referee: Slim Jedidi (Tunisia).

5.52pm: The teams are in the tunnel. Action imminent.

5.54pm: There are nearly as many people on the teams' benches as there are in 
the stands. Equatorial Guinea yet to catch football fever, it seems.

5.56pm: I'll also be keeping half an eye on the Burkina Faso match in Bata, 
who already seem to be a couple of minutes behind this one. That stadium is 
even more empty. I've been to dinner parties that have attracted more people. 
But then, that's life in Guardianland for you.

5.59pm: "Wasn't Manucho supposed to the Next Great Sir Alex Ferguson Signing 
(along with John Curtis, Massimo Taibi, and, inevitably, Bebe)?" asks Lou 
Roper. "Whatever happened? And could we compile an XI of such illustrious 
talents?" Yes, Lou, yes he was. He was rubbish. He's playing in Turkey now.

1 min: Peeeeeeeep! We're off!

2 mins: Interesting stat: Sudan, who have to win convincingly today to deny 
Angola <https://www.theguardian.com/football/angola> a place in the 
quarter-finals, have not won a single match in the African Nations Cup finals 
since the 1970 final. Hell of a high to go out on, but that's a lot of rubbish 
football.

5 mins: The Sudan game has been delayed by a lengthy injury break. It doesn't 
look good for Abdelgabar, who is being stretchered off on a golf buggy having 
taken a boot in the face, apparently unconscious.

5 mins: Gradel tricks a couple of markers from a throw-in to get into the 
penalty area, and shoots optimistically from a silly angle. The keeper saves, 
but it was a nice bit of skill from the former Leeds man.

9 mins: Ivory Coast try to pass the ball out from defence but Manucho, 
Angola's lone forward, nicks the ball and wins a corner. Nothing comes of it, 
mind.

11 mins: Jonathan Wilson on Twitter, debating the wisdom of Ivory Coast's mass 
player-resting (they've made nine changes for this match), reminds me that at 
Euro 2008 all four group winners rested players in their final group games, and 
all played poorly in their quarter-finals – three of them lost, and a 
stuttering Spain beat Italy on penalties.

13 mins: Angola win a free-kick in a promising position, 18 yards from the 
byline, out on the left wing. They try to roll a low ball towards Manucho, the 
kind of clever trick they might have worked on on the training ground. It's a 
rubbish old pass, though, and the ball is cleared.

15 mins: GREAT SAVE! Wilfried Bony cuts in from the left, takes the ball to 
about 23 yards from goal and then arrows it fast and low towards the corner of 
the goal. The keeper tips it wide.

17 mins: Eboué's corner is cleared, and he hacks down a defender in his 
attempt to get the ball back again. That Bony shot is the finest attacking 
moment of the game so far, from a shortlist of one.

21 mins: Not entirely relevant to the matter in hand dept: three thousand 
years of civilisation and the best humanity can offer isthis 
<http://foodonmydog.tumblr.com/>?

22 mins: Is it Wilfried Bony, or Bony Wilfried? Anyone know?

23 mins: Kolo Touré's 35-yard shot zips well wide.

25 mins: Angola have a shot on goal, though Macanga's effort is a) from about 
four miles out, and b) about four miles off target.

28 mins: Eboué and Dedé collide just outside Angola's penalty area, and both 
collapse. Play continues for a minute before the referee blows his whistle. 
Eboué seems the worst affected, though it didn't look like there was much 
contact.

GOAL! Ivory Coast 1 Angola 0 (Eboué 36) Bony, or Wilfried, whatever he's 
called, ends my long wait for something interesting enough to update you with 
by zipping past two men and into the box. His low centre is ludicrously badly 
defended by Miguel, and Eboué has a tap-in at the far post.

GOAL! Sudan 1 Burkina Faso 0 (Eltaib Mudather 33) Meanwhile in the group's 
other game Sudan take the lead, meaning that one more goal from either them or 
Ivory Coast and they would leapfrog Angola into second place.

38 mins: Sudan's goal aided considerably by an indescribably terrible tackle 
by Burkina Faso's Mamadou Tall. He went to ground and did touch the ball, but 
only prodded it into a handy shooting position.

42 mins: "How does the level of play compare here?" asks Paul Taylor. 
"Championship?" It's not terrible, Paul – decent technical ability on show from 
both sides. Ivory Coast's B team would take the Championship by storm, I think. 
Gradel, who starred for Leeds before moving to France, and Bony are standing 
out. Angola look less impressive. The main problem, though, was that until the 
recent two-goal swing nobody has had any motivation or inclination to attack.

44 mins: A decent set-piece delivery from Angola causes concern. The Ivory 
Coast goalkeeper comes, but doesn't get anywhere near the ball and is grateful 
that Bamba beats Manucho to the header.

45+1 mins: Peeeeeeeeep! It's half-time. Sudan have just started the first of 
two minutes' stoppage-time of their own, against Burkina Faso.

Half-time: Well this is probably a best-case scenario. With Sudan winning and 
needing just one more goal to move into second place, Angola have little choice 
but to attempt some concerted attacking in the second period. I'm looking 
forward to it.

Still half-time, but not for long: The players are back out, the Ivorians in a 
huddle on the pitch. More action imminent.

46 mins: Peeeeeeep! They're off! Again!

46 mins: The first half of tonight's other game, between Sudan and Burkina 
Faso, finished a couple of minutes after this one's. But the second half kicked 
off a couple of minutes earlier there. Go figure.

49 mins: Some promise here for Angola, mainly in their ability to win 
set-pieces around the Ivory Coast penalty area.

50 mins: ...though Djalma's delivery needs to seriously improve if they're 
going to make anything of them.

54 mins: Excellent run into the heart of the penalty area by Arthur Boka, the 
left-back, who is halted within a few yards of goal as he prepared to shoot. 
Elsewhere, Burkina Faso miss a gilt-edged chance to equalise against Sudan.

57 mins: Igor Lolo is booked, for kneeing Djalma in the back.

60 mins: Abdul Kader Keita has come on for Eboué, who has been stretchered 
off. Don't worry, Eboué fans: it didn't look like anything serious.

61 mins: Ivorian goalkeeper Yeboah's clearance is charged down by Manucho. The 
ball could have gone anywhere, but on this occasion it went looping high and 
wide.

GOAL! Ivory Coast 2 Angola 0 (Bony/Wilfried, 64 mins)! Calamity! A nice pass 
behind the defence. Dani Massunguna tries to head the ball back to his 
goalkeeper, not realising that his goalkeeper has come to collect the ball 
himself. The ball would have bounced into the empty net had Bony/Wilfried not 
raced in to welly the ball home from two yards.

66 mins: And for the first time this evening, Sudan seem on their way to the 
quarter-finals. Angola waste no time in bringing on another forward, Rafael 
replacing Macanga.

70 mins: Angola's Massunguna is booked for a frankly terrible challenge on 
Keita. The two creators of the second goal there.

71 mins: Another Angola free-kick, and this time Djalma's delivery is pretty 
good. But nobody even competes for the header, Manucho half-heartedly waves a 
foot at the ball and the goalkeeper collects.

72 mins: From 25 yards, Manucho has Angola's second shot on target. It's not 
very good.

75 mins: TERRIBLE MISS! Keita's corner is flicked on by Lolo at the near post 
and practically hits Bamba in the head. He directs it vaguely goalwards, but a 
bit more precision was required – the ball floats a yard wide.

76 mins: Angola have done pretty much nothing to disrupt the Ivorian defence. 
They've been terrible disappointing. Though from what little I've seen of the 
other game it seems Sudan are riding their luck somewhat, Angola can hardly 
claim that they deserve better.

77 mins: No sooner do I write that than Angola, for the first time, play a 
decent ball over the Ivorian defence and Mateus has a chance, eventually 
deflected wide for a corner.

77 mins: BRILLIANT SAVE! From the corner, Manucho heads at goal and Yeboah 
does excellently to turn it over.

GOAL! Sudan 2 Burkina Faso 0 (Eltaib Mudather, 79mins) More on this in a 
minute...

80 mins: Cleared off the line! A cross from the right causes a bit of chaos at 
the far post. The goalkeeper loses it, the ball looks to be dropping towards 
goal, but it's booted away. And Djalma is replaced by José Vunguidica

81 mins: Sudan's second goal involved quite possibly the worst defending ever 
seen in the history of football. The goalkeeper boots the ball forward, and 
Mudather hares off in chase. No defender thinks about tracking his run. The 
Burkina Faso goalkeeper could have come out and dealt with the situation, but 
he only gets as far as the edge of his area and then stops, as if there's some 
invisible force keeping him inside. So Mudather collects the ball without 
challenge, takes it round the keeper and rolls it into the net. It's genuinely 
hideous stuff.

84 mins: Didier Drogba has come on. Actually he came on a few minutes ago, 
while I was busy tapping away.

90 mins: There will be five minutes of stoppage time in the Sudan match. We've 
got another minute to go before we find out what we're in store for here.

90+1 mins: The answer is four minutes. Ivory Coast are playing keep-ball.

90+2 mins: Angola win a corner, and curl it over everyone's head and out of 
play for a goal-kick.

90+3 mins: My colleague Jonathan Wilson reports on Twitter: "Angoua comes on 
for CIV, which means all of 23-man squad bar 3rd keeper, Gnanhouan, has played 
a part for CIV." An interesting footnote.

GOAL! Sudan 2 Burkina Faso 1! A stoppage-time header, but it's too late to 
save Angola, surely?

90+4 mins: Peeeeeeeep! And it's all over in Malabo!

90+5 mins: Peeeeeeeep! It's also all over in Bata! Sudan have won their first 
African Nations Cup match for 42 years, and qualified!

Final thoughts: Angola were a very grave disappointment. I feared the 
possibility of a mutually convenient goalless draw, but they appear to have
expected it. Plan B didn't exist. When forced to attack they were still 
reluctant, and they came close only once, with a header from a corner. This was 
a totally deserved beating. Ivory Coast managed to rest 9/11ths of their team 
and still boost their confidence, maintaining their 100% record with some 
comfort. Though both of their goals owed a great deal to abysmal defending, the 
Ivorians clearly have a deep and decent squad. A delighted Sudan now face 
Zambia for a place in the semi-finals.
 