
Ivory Coast's military has carried out arbitrary arrests, illegal detentions, 
extortion, inhuman treatment and torture, Human Rights Watch claims, dealing 
another blow to hopes of reconciliation after last year's civil war.A report by 
the watchdog <http://www.hrw.org/reports/2012/11/14/long-way-reconciliat> 
details a "brutal crackdown" following a string of attacks on military 
installations around the country in August. The attacks were allegedly 
committed by militants loyal to former president Laurent Gbagbo,who is awaiting 
trial at the international criminal court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/nov/29/laurent-gbagbo-hague-icc-custody>
.

The resulting military action recalls the grave crimes of the 2010-11 
post-election crisis, in some cases under the same commanders responsible for 
those abuses, Human Rights Watch said.

"The security threats to Ivory Coast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ivory-coast> are real, but widespread abuses 
by the military will fuel – rather than end – them," said Corinne Dufka, senior 
west Africa researcher for the charity. "The government should quickly show the 
determination to bring to account the soldiers responsible for torture, inhuman 
treatment, and criminality."

Alassane Ouattara was elected president after beating Gbagbo in a 2010 runoff 
with the backing of other parties. But the incumbent rejected the results,
triggering a brief civil war in 2011 that forced him from power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/apr/11/laurent-gbagbo-detained-ivory-coast>
. Since then Ouattara, a former International Monetary Fund official, has been 
praised for overseeing an economic recovery but concerns have been raised over 
a lack of reconciliation between rival political factions. Since April at least 
50 people, including many civilians, have been killed during seemingly 
co-ordinated attacks, which the Ivorian government has blamed on pro-Gbagbo 
militants intent on destabilising the country.

The response has been uncompromising. In August, members of the government's 
Republican Forces carried out mass arrests of perceived Gbagbo supporters 
almost daily in the Abidjan neighbourhood of Yopougon, Human Rights Watch said. 
"Without arrest warrants or individualised evidence, soldiers arbitrarily 
arrested young men in their homes, at neighbourhood restaurants, at bars, in 
taxis and buses, as they walked home from church, and at traditional community 
celebrations.

"Soldiers often arrived in neighbourhoods in military cargo trucks and forced 
20 or more perceived pro-Gbagbo youth to board. Hundreds of young men appear to 
have been rounded up and detained, largely on the basis of their ethnicity and 
place of residence. Those arrested were often brought to military camps, which 
are not lawful detention sites for civilians under Ivorian law."

The charity said it had interviewed five captives who told how military 
personnel subjected them to beatings and floggings, generally during 
questioning related to the location of guns or alleged suspects, or to extract 
a confession. Several had scars allegedly from the physical abuse, and of other 
detainees returning to cells with bruises and open wounds. A former detainee at 
a military police camp described his mistreatment: "I was there for a week, and 
they questioned me every day but the last one. Each day they pulled me out and 
took me to another room for questioning‚ 'Where are the guns?' 'I don't own a 
gun, I've never held a gun.' Whack! They'd wrap their belt around their hand 
and hit me in the head, the face, the side.

"The metal [ring] of the belt was on the end they hit you with, [I think] to 
inflict the most pain. I had a lot of wounds, from when they'd strike you just 
right with the metal ring."

In August and September, the commander in charge of one detainment camp was 
Ousmane Coulibaly, better known as "Bin Laden", Human Rights Watch said. In a 
previous report on the post-election violence, it had named him as one of the 
Republican Forces commanders whose soldiers committed acts of torture and 
dozens of summary executions during the final battle for Abidjan in April and 
May 2011.

"The recurrent crimes committed under certain commanders should serve as a 
stark reminder of the consequences of impunity," Dufka said. "Military 
commanders who oversee abuses should no longer be untouchable, or else Ivory 
Coast will continue to be plagued by the grave human rights violations that 
have marked the last decade."

Human Rights Watch said it had briefed the Ivorian government on its findings 
and that officials stressed the gravity of the security threat and the need for 
solidarity with the military in the face of the repeated, violent attacks. They 
also promised an investigation into the abuses and indicated that anyone found 
responsible for torture or inhuman treatment would be prosecuted.
 