
The young mother's eyes were careworn and tearful. Nothing could prise away 
the tiny and fragile baby, wrapped in a blanket, that she clasped to her 
breast. She had given birth a week ago as gunfire and explosions echoed around 
her – and was now being plucked to safety.

The rescue of the woman and her seven-day-old child was performed by French 
gendarmerie in Ivory Coast's war-torn main city, Abidjan. They were taken to a 
nursery at France's military base there, two among hundreds of desperate people 
being collected daily from their besieged homes for protection and possible 
evacuation.

Such is the continuing threat from fighting across Abidjan that the British 
embassy evacuated its 17 staff. They were taken by UN armoured personnel 
carrier to Abidjan airport, which is under the control of French troops – who 
also secured the seaport.

Abidjan is a broken city. Embedded with French forces on patrol, the Observer 
witnessed desolate, deserted streets with only a handful of cars or motorcycles 
visible. Small groups of Ivorians in T-shirts wandered listlessly and without 
purpose in the withering heat; women carried bowls of water or fruit on their 
heads in defiant habit.

Signs bearing the logos of Heineken, Kodak, Orange and Shell recall what used 
to be one of Africa's most thriving commercial capitals. A giant billboard 
poster advertises a Steven Seagal action movie. But down below, all is ruin: 
discarded tyres, shards of glass from smashed windows, uncollected piles of 
garbage, eerily deserted petrol stations that have long run dry.

Hotels, shops and restaurants are shuttered and closed. The unlucky ones have 
been broken into and looted.

The patrol passed a building that collapsed, presumably after taking a big 
hit. Numerous advertising posters have been torn, leaving only half an image.

French soldiers describe a lull in violence over the past two days. But still 
there are 800 people in the north of the city waiting to be rescued. They are 
all too aware of the beatings and the burnings. In some neighbourhoods, corpses 
have been set on fire because the smell of decomposition became unbearable. The 
French patrols sit in humid armoured vehicles that fly the tricolore. One 
soldier mans a gun turret, while others carry rifles. The lieutenant consults a 
map and printed emails showing the addresses of those in need.

"We call each of them to say be calm, stay at home, don't go out on the street 
as it's not safe," said one soldier, adding that calls from Ivorians had 
dwindled over the past two days.

One Lebanese man was waiting on the kerb with his new suitcase neatly packed, 
as casual as if waiting for a London cab. His neighbours watched the scene 
curiously. There has been gunfire on this street just a day earlier.

Citizens from France, Europe and countries with whom France has an "accord" 
take priority for the pickups. There are 12,000 French people in the former 
colony – half of them French, half of them Franco-Ivorian.

Forces loyal to Laurent Gbagbo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/laurent-gbagbo> have made advances in the 
main city of Abidjan even though their leader is holed up in a bunker within 
his luxury residence.

The gains are another sign of Gbagbo's defiance after he had appeared on the 
verge of surrender. On Tuesday, three of his generals requested talks, a plea 
taken as a sign that the 65-year-old was ready to stand down. In response, 
fighters supportingAlassane Ouattara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alassane-ouattara>, who won the November 
election but has been prevented from taking power by Gbagbo, halted their 
attacks in the city after sweeping down from the north.

However, just when the ultimately futile discussions were taking place, 
Gbagbo's forces were reinforcing their positions and retaking territory. "We 
understand that since that time [Tuesday], the forces of Mr Gbagbo … have 
regained terrain and they have full control of the Plateau and Cocody area," 
said the UN's peacekeeping chief, Alain Le Roy, referring to the plush 
districts of Abidjan where Gbagbo is holed up and where most diplomats live.

Other embassies, official residences and private houses were also being 
evacuated.

Le Roy said heavy weapons had been transferred to Cocody on Friday, 
reinforcing Gbagbo's arsenal, which includes tanks, rocket launchers and 
armoured personnel carriers. The statement cast doubt on the claim by Ouattara 
that his forces had blockaded Gbagbo's residence.

The UN said Gbagbo's fighters were moving towards the city's Golf hotel, where 
Ouattara has been based since the November poll, under guard by UN 
peacekeepers. There were reports that it had come under mortar fire. France, 
the former colonial ruler, also accused Gbagbo's troops of firing on the French 
ambassador's residence. Separately, a French helicopter mission to rescue 
foreign diplomats in Cocody on Saturday morning drew fire, causing the 
operation to be cancelled. Commander Frederic Dagillon, a French military 
spokesman, reported that an armoured vehicle that had fired on French 
helicopters had been destroyed.

The fear and uncertainty gripping Abidjan amid the political chaos has caused 
an exodus. Immigrants – many of them French or Lebanese – are scrambling to 
escape as the country implodes. Few Ivorians are so lucky: about 1,000 are 
gathered outside the French military base for so-called "passive protection". 
Inside the French base, an Ivorian girl attacked with a machete and an Ivorian 
woman who was forced to lie down while a gang stamped on her face and hands 
were receiving treatment.

Otherwise, the base has been turned into a refugee camp for largely 
middle-class expatriates. A 26-year-old German, who did not wish to be named, 
told how she and her daughter were rescued from a furious crowd by the French 
army.

"We spent two days locked in our home," she said. "There were big explosions 
outside and we didn't sleep for those two nights. A mob of a thousand people 
came storming down the street. They were all over the place, smashing boxes, 
breaking into shops and looting. Everyone was going nuts.

"One was carrying a tray of drinks; someone would grab a drink and run off in 
another direction. We had no idea who was actually who or what the hell was 
going on. There were people with filthy hair – I don't know if they were 
prisoners who escaped. We were scared of stray bullets."
 