
Travelling around Abidjan and the west of Ivory Coast over the past week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/apr/09/ivory-coast-rebels-kill-hundreds?intcmp=239>
, as the push to dislodge former presidentLaurent Gbagbo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/laurent-gbagbo> reached its climax, it was 
difficult to escape the stench of death.

In the Carrefour neighbourhood of Duékoué, at the abandoned headquarters of 
one of the warring militias, I peered down a deep well. No bodies were visible 
but the smell was unmistakable. No one knows how many bodies lie inside. The 
grisly work of recovering and identifying the dead lies ahead.

Elsewhere, the extent of the bloodshed is already emerging. In two deadly 
incidents, the most recent on 28 March, more than 300 people were killed. The 
Moroccan peacekeepers sent to the site of these massacres have so far counted 
255 bodies, but more lie in dense bushes and other inaccessible places. A UN 
human rights team is also present at the scene, gathering evidence and trying 
to establish the chain of events.

The picture is not black and white. Information available to the Office of the 
UN High Commissioner for Human Rights indicates that the first incident took 
place in the area controlled by forces loyal to the now-captured Laurent 
Gbagbo. The victims were mostly members of the Dioula ethnic group, which has 
tended to support Gbagbo's rival,Alassane Ouattara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alassane-ouattara>, who is widely recognised 
as the winner of last year's elections and the legitimate president of the 
country. The second took place in an area under the control of forces loyal to 
Ouattara, and the victims were mostly Gueré, who tend to support Gbagbo. The 
dead were found in civilian clothes.

It is not known exactly how many people have died in Abidjan. The UN human 
rights team inIvory Coast <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ivory-coast> puts 
the likely number at more than 400. Dead bodies have not been collected 
systematically, because of the persisting security risks. Hospitals have run 
out of many basic medical supplies and food is scarce, leaving many people 
hungry and afraid. UN peacekeepers used armoured personal carriers to evacuate 
diplomats and journalists caught in fighting in Cocody, the neighbourhood close 
to the presidential residence where Laurent Gbabgo made his last stand. Local 
people had no such escape route.

President Ouattara has said he would do everything in his power to break the 
vicious cycle of ethnically based violence.

"I will establish a truth and reconciliation commission and ensure 
accountability of everyone who committed crimes, no matter their political 
affiliation or ethnicity," he told me last Thursday in Abidjan. "I want 
reconciliation. I will form a government in which all regions and ethnic groups 
will be represented." He has since repeated the pledge in public statements.

If the truth about crimes committed since the start of the conflict in 
September 2002 had been established earlier and perpetrators held to account, 
perhaps Ivory Coast could have been spared the situation it faces.

An international commission of inquiry was established in 2004, but its report 
was never made public, nor taken up by the UN security council. Hopefully, that 
will not be the case this time. The security council has already requested 
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon to present it with the report of the independent 
investigation commissioned by the human rights council, and to share it with 
other international organisations. The report is due by the middle of June, but 
how many people may have lost their lives by then? Will further retaliation be 
averted?

With Ouattara assuming effective control of the reins of power following 
Monday's arrest of Gbagbo, there is renewed hope that the long-suffering people 
of Ivory Coast will finally see peace. This is by no means assured. Ouattara 
and other political leaders across the country need to embark, immediately, on 
the long and difficult but necessary road of accountability but, in doing so, 
they must avoid any form of retaliation.

Former President Gbabgo must be treated with dignity and, if charged, tried in 
accordance with international human rights standards. He should not be made a 
scapegoat: all individuals implicated, no matter their political affiliation, 
should equally face justice. Truth and justice are prerequisites for 
reconciliation and sustainable peace.

Ivory Coast is a rich country with strong infrastructure, most of which 
remains intact. But it will need substantial help from the outside world, both 
in the form of immediate humanitarian relief and longer-term assistance to 
jump-start its economy. One hopes that it will not struggle to secure 
international attention and funding in the face of the upheavals in NorthAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> and the earthquakes in Japan.
 