
Mass killings have been carried out by both sides of the conflict in Ivory 
Coast <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ivory-coast>, according to the 
campaign group Human Rights Watch.

Their report 
<http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2011/04/09/c-te-d-ivoire-ouattara-forces-kill-rape-civilians-during-offensive>
 documents a trail of death and destruction carried out by rebel forces who 
have swept through the country and are now fighting on the streets of Abidjan 
to secure the presidency for Alassane Ouattara.

As Ouattara, backed by the UN and the international community, edges closer to 
victory, the Guardian has uncovered evidence of atrocities committed by the 
forces acting in his name. Refugees who scrambled through the rainforest to 
safety in neighbouring Liberia have described children being burned alive 
during rebel attacks and bodies littering the streets.

HRW is calling for an investigation into massacres carried out by both the 
rebels and those loyal to the defiant president,Laurent Gbagbo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/laurent-gbagbo>, who refused to give up 
power after losing the presidential election in November.

Hundreds have been killed by forces loyal to Ouattara, according to HRW's 
report. It found that summary executions of perceived Gbagbo supporters had 
taken place, and reported accounts of mass rape. Matt Wells, HRW's Ivory Coast 
researcher, said: "In village after village, Ouattara's forces terrorised 
civilians perceived as supporting Gbagbo, killing hundreds and raping dozens 
more. In committing to move Ivory Coast out of its longstanding crisis, 
Ouattara must ensure that the perpetrators of these heinous crimes are brought 
to justice."

Pro-Gbagbo forces are also accused of having carried out atrocities, killing 
more than 100 presumed Ouattara supporters as rebels advanced.

The Guardian spent a week travelling in the border region between Ivory Coast 
and Liberia, hearing tales of savage attacks on civilians. It also encountered 
what is emerging as a recurrent aspect of the violence in Ivory Coast: the use 
of mercenaries from Liberia, believed to have been recruited by both sides in 
the conflict.

Crouching in the bushes along the banks of the river that separates Liberia 
from Ivory Coast, two young Liberian men in filthy clothes and flip-flops 
agreed to a recorded interview after a small payment was made. They described 
how they had just returned home from a nine-day operation with pro-Ouattara 
rebels, where they said they were told to kill "anyone and everyone".

They described barbaric scenes in which they surrounded villages in the west 
of Ivory Coast and, armed with machetes, killed everyone they saw. "The town we 
entered first, most of the people were on the road. We killed them, just 
cutting them with our machetes," they said.

One of the towns they claim to have attacked was Blolequin. UN investigators 
said yesterday they had found more than 100 bodies in Blolequin and surrounding 
towns. Some appeared to have been burned alive and others had been thrown into 
a well. The UN believes Liberian mercenaries may have been responsible.

Toulépleu is another town the two mercenaries say they attacked, and where HRW 
has uncovered evidence of mass killings. One mercenary said: "There are so many 
bodies in Toulépleu. A digger came from Danane to bury the bodies. There was no 
way for cars to go over there because of the bodies on the ground. It stank."

Now in the safety of a transit camp in Liberia, refugees fleeing from 
Toulépleu spoke of the horrors they witnessed there. They described how they 
grabbed family members and escaped from their homes in a hail of bullets. 
Whoever and whatever were left behind were burned.

Cradling his five children in the red dust outside the UNHCR tent that is now 
all he has, Kuide Pehe Ferdinand described the chaos when the attack began. "I 
had too many children to save when the rebels hit. We tried to pick them all 
up, but one of my baby girls is disabled and we had to leave her. When I went 
back, they had burned the house with my baby inside."

The Audgines were also grieving for a loved one killed after the rebels set 
fire to their home. "I can't even eat, I feel such sadness now," said Rosaline, 
mother of nine, whose elderly father was burned alive. She said she could do 
nothing to help him, as he shouted to them from within the flames. She and her 
children are a few of the many people in the camp who have shaved their heads 
in a traditional gesture of mourning.

The International Red Cross recently reached Toulépleu, and said it found a 
town almost completely razed to the ground.

HRW has documented the executions of elderly people who were unable to escape 
rebel attacks. It says they were held captive in their villages by the 
pro-Ouattara rebels, and has evidence that more than 30 were executed. One 
67-year-old woman from the village of Doké told HRW that pro-Ouattara fighters 
had taken several captives out each day – often men and women between 60 and 80 
years old – and executed them at point-blank range.

The pro-Ouattara forces have denied killing civilians in their advance upon 
Abidjan, blaming any deaths on Gbagbo's soldiers. Those standing guard at the 
border crossing with Ivory Coast near Toe Town, eastern Liberia, were in 
victorious mood when interviewed by the Guardian. In their smart camouflage 
gear and with AK47s slung around their necks, they swaggered up to the barrier 
across the bridge between the two countries.

"I pray for democracy in Ivory Coast and that the will of the people will be 
respected," said "Angelou", their commander, gripping his gun. As he talked, 
the sound of gunfire cracked from the forest behind him and his troops. "We 
don't have problem with civilians. If you see someone's died, it's because he's 
taken up a gun. If he's taken up arms, he is not a civilian, he is my enemy."

The conflict threatens to cause a wider humanitarian crisis in the region. 
More than a million people have been internally displaced within Ivory Coast, 
while more than 125,000 have crossed the border into Liberia, a country that 
itself has been devastated by 14 years of civil war. Many Liberian communities 
are sheltering refugees, but barely have enough food for themselves, and there 
are fears the crisis will destabilise Liberia's fragile peace.
 