
The Ivorian government has begun compensating small- and medium-sized 
businesses for damages suffered during the post-election crisis, in order to 
relaunch the economy.

The government allocated $13m to the task on 15 July, prompted by the fact 
that the private sector in theIvory Coast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ivory-coast> is dominated by 
micro-enterprises and a vast informal sector, according to the finance 
ministry. A further $74m of support for the country's banks was announced a few 
days later by finance minister Charles Diby Koffi, to allow financial 
institutions to support businesses with loans.

The ministry estimates the contribution of small and medium-sized enterprises 
to the country's gross national product at around 18%; small, medium and 
micro-enterprises (SMMEs) together account for about 23% of formal employment.

Alassane Ouattara's victory in presidential elections in the west African 
country in November 2010 was challenged by the incumbent, Laurent Gbagbo; a 
lengthy standoff followed, brought to a close when the Ouattara-aligned 
Republic Forces of the Ivory Coast marched from their strongholds in the north 
of the country to seize the economic capital, Abidjan, in April 2011.

Restoring the economy

"The relaunch of the economy is one of the government's priorities. It's 
imperative to support SMMEs and avoid not only an explosion in the rate of 
unemployment, which is already more than 25%, but also to encourage business 
owners to pursue their activities," says Michel Koné, inspector of public 
finances at the finance ministry.

Business people such as Florent Amédée are the target of the interventions.

Accompanied by three of his employees, Amédée, 38, began clearing up the mess 
at his two furniture stores on 17 July. The stores, in the southern Abidjan 
district of Marcory, were abandoned three months ago: the windows are still 
shattered, the wrecked premises flooded with rainwater.

"We will reopen in the next three or four weeks. By the time orders placed in 
Europe and Asia arrive, we have to have our shop back in order," he explained 
to IPS.

According to Amédée, his business employs 32 people, among them five contract 
workers. Surveying the damage caused by looting at the end of March and April, 
he estimates he suffered a loss of about $76,000.

"I was forced to lay off all my workers without a penny at the end of March 
and they've received nothing since. Now, there's hope after the government's 
announcement, and we have returned to take our place, hoping that things will 
be better," he said.

His delivery driver, Ousmane Kamara, is overjoyed to return to work. "We work 
to feed large families. So when we don't get a salary for two months, it's 
truly catastrophic," he says. Kamara supports a family of six on his monthly 
salary of about $185.

In Cocody, a neighbourhood in the east of Abidjan, Sandrine Dagou, 43, saw her 
supermarket gutted. Her deliveries in the third week of March as well as goods 
on the shelves were carried off. The total value was about $22,000.

"The looters didn't leave behind so much as a tin of sardines. If the 
supermarket is up and running again, it's in part because I've drawn on my own 
savings," Dagou told IPS. "My staff of 13 has suffered over the past two 
months. Half of them have returned to work now. With support from the 
government, we will invest and bring everyone back."

At the height of the confrontation between pro-Gbagbo and pro-Ouattara forces 
at the start of April, many businesses, including those of Amédée and Dagou 
were looted, and about 50 have closed their doors, according to the Business 
Confederation of the Ivory Coast. It estimates the losses at about $2m.

"The losses are truly significant and it will take a year, even two, for the 
Ivory Coast to resume growth," says Issiaka Sangaré, an economist based in 
Abidjan.

But he said that the programme of support for SMMEs can only succeed if there 
is a minimum guarantee of security. "The country must restore security. We are 
presently in a situation where many men are carrying arms, and there is still 
harassment and extortion. This doesn't reassure business people and 
enterprises."
 