
Alassane Ouattara <https://www.theguardian.com/world/alassane-ouattara>, the 
president of Ivory Coast, has dissolved his cabinet in a surprise move that 
suggests instability at the heart of a country still struggling to get back on 
its feet after a near civil war.

The presidential spokeswoman, Kady Traore, confirmed that Ouattara had 
dissolved his government but gave no reason why he had done so.

Ouattara came to power in a deeply divisive election in 2010. He won the 
presidential runoff but the longtime ruler, Laurent Gbagbo, refused to concede 
victory, and used the army to hold on to power. It took United Nations air 
strikes to finally release Gbagbo's grip on power. He was arrested in April 
2011, paving the way for Ouattara to assume control of the country he had been 
elected to run.

A presidential aide, who requested anonymity because he was unauthorised to 
speak on the matter, said the dissolution had come after the government 
attempted to pass a new family law that would have given equal rights to men 
and women.

The statute was introduced by the minister of women's affairs, who is from a 
political party whose candidate backed Ouattara during the 2010 runoff, giving 
him the votes he needed to defeat Gbagbo. In return, the prime minister 
Ouattara chose was a member of that party, called the PDCI. However, the aide 
said, the new law was nearly blocked once it reached the parliament earlier 
this week after delegates from the PDCI refused to back it.

"You can say that this was the drop of water that made the vase overflow," the 
aide said. "The president is not happy because he tells himself: 'The prime 
minister is PDCI; two of my other ministers are also PDCI.' And yet when his 
government proposed this law, it is the PDCI that tried to block him. He 
doesn't understand what is going on, and I think he wants to start afresh."

Analysts have long said Ouattara's rule is precarious. Not only did he have to 
enlist the PDCI to win; after Gbagbo refused to step down, Ouattara accepted 
military help from a rebel group that is now accused of carrying out mass 
atrocities against members of ethnic groups known to be allied with the former 
president.

His rule has been chequered with accusations that he has been unfair in his 
dealings with members of Gbagbo's party. Dozens of Gbagbo associates are still 
under house arrest awaiting trial.

Human rights groups have published voluminous reports detailing extensive 
abuses by the former Force Nouvelle, a rebel group based in the country's north 
that allied itself with Ouattara and helped him seize back power.

For the past few months, suspected allies of Gbagbo have led increasingly 
brazen attacks on military positions inIvory Coast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ivory-coast>, including in Abidjan.
 