
James Dasaolu, the British sprinter who broke the 10-second barrier for the 
100m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/13/james-dasaolu-second-fastest-british-100m>
 and made the world championships final in Moscow in 2013, believes his new 
training partner, Adam Gemili, will make him run even faster.

Gemili, who broke 20sec for the 200m for the first time in Moscow, started 
training in Loughborough with Dasaolu and his coach Steve Fudge only last week 
but the pair have already struck up a relationship.

"It's brilliant," said Dasaolu. "I've always been an advocate of having the 
quickest guys in the country working together. We are so young and have so much 
development to do in our training and we are pushing each other on."

Dasaolu refused to be drawn on whether the pair can inspire each other to beat 
Linford Christie's 20-year-old British record of 9.87sec for the 100m in 2014 
but he expects it to happen at some point.

"We're not thinking about times," he said. "It's more about technique. Getting 
things perfect. I'm sure it will come, whether it's next season or the year 
after."

Dasaolu shot to prominence this year after several seasons marred by injury 
and he says criticisms that he is fragile are unjustified. "Fragile athletes 
can't run 9.91sec and make the world championship final," he said. "I went 
sub-10sec twice in one year. I don't know what else people want.

"I've had six weeks off and come back uninjured. I finished last season 
uninjured. Last winter I was injured. I think I've only missed two weeks in the 
last 365 days through injuries so I strongly believe I am over them."

Dasaolu's next target is the world indoor championships in Poland in March 
next year where he is targeting a medal. However, he has yet to decide whether 
he will compete in both the Commonwealth Games and European Championships next 
summer.

"My focus is on the indoors," he said. "After that my coach and I will sit 
down and discuss what to do. Of course the Commonwealth Games is a big games. 
I'd love to take part in both."

The world T44 100m champion Jonnie Peacock, who will be competing with Dasaolu 
at the Glasgow BritishAthletics <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> 
International Match on Saturday 25 January, is looking forward to putting an 
injury-marred season behind him.

"Last time round I didn't start training fully until mid-March so I didn't 
have the chance to have that winter. That's why I had so many inconsistent 
starts to my races," he said. "Yet I was able to run a PB; that's not bad. 
Hopefully with another year's training we'll see some faster times."

Meanwhile the British javelin record holder, Goldie Sayers, has successfully 
appealed her omission from the World Class Performance Programme for 2013-14 
and will now get lottery funding.

"I'm delighted my appeal was successful," said Sayers. "I'm back on the right 
path after surgery and back in full training after a successful period of 
rehab. I am preparing for the Commonwealth Games and the European Championships 
next year."
 