
Some staples of our common culture are so established, so embedded in the 
collective consciousness, we think we know them even if we don't. Everyone 
knows Shakespeare, Dickens or the Beatles, even if they haven't seen one of the 
plays, read the books or played the music in years, if ever. They somehow 
linger in the air, ready to be imbibed as if by osmosis.

So it is with James Bond, perhaps the single best-known literary character of 
the 20th century. Everyone thinks they know James Bond. The terms – M, 007, 
licence to kill – have not just entered the English language, they are part of 
a global common currency, readily understood across the planet. WhenDanny Boyle 
sought to project Britain to the global television audience watching the 
Olympic opening ceremony this summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jul/27/olympic-opening-ceremony-danny-boyle-father>
, he needed only to cast two individuals, each as mythic as the other, in a 
single scene: Queen Elizabeth II and James Bond.

More substantially, Ian Fleming <http://www.ianfleming.com/>'s novels have 
become a template handily available to those who seek to explain aspects of our 
world. Any news story that touches, however obliquely, on intelligence will 
sooner or later feature the phrase "real-life James Bond", even if only to 
explain that this or that spy was, in fact, nothing like James Bond. Beyond 
espionage, any public figure who combines grandiose ambition, perceived malign 
purpose and memorable idiosyncrasy will eventually be likened to a "Bond 
villain".

Such an allusion requires no explanation. One need only to have come into 
contact with one of Bond's countless imitators – or parodies – to get the idea. 
There might well be a cohort of younger readers who think that, because they 
have seen theAustin Powers <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0118655/> movies or The 
Incredibles <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0317705/> (the 2004 animated feature 
that paid repeated homage to 007), they have no need to acquaint themselves 
with the real thing. In an equivalent impulse, there will be many more who 
think they have seen the films and so need not pick up the books.

Both groups would be making a mistake, on a par with thinking that because you 
once saw a Beatles tribute band you can skipSgt Pepper. Readers of every stripe 
have good reason to return to the source from which this extraordinary cultural 
phenomenon sprang: the books ofIan Fleming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/ian-fleming>.

For one thing, they yield an unexpectedly rich insight into an era now long 
gone. One drawback of the timelessness of Bond – maintained by a movie 
franchise that keeps 007 in a permanent present – is how easy it is to forget 
that Fleming was writing in, and therefore about, a very specific period. 
Postwar Britain, to be sure, but also a Britain caught between the dusk of 
empire and the dawn of decline. Bond sits intriguingly on that cusp.

So, yes, he is an imperial archetype: adventurer, explorer and, as he puts it, 
"a sort of policeman", ready to meddle in faraway places to lethal effect. But 
Fleming also knows that the muscles of empire are atrophying by the time Bond 
gets to work. The tell comes early, in the debut novelCasino Royale 
<http://www.vintage-books.co.uk/books/0099576856/ian-fleming/casino-royale/>, 
published in 1953. Our hero duels the wicked communist Le Chiffre across the 
baccarat table. But, for all his skill, the former commander in the Royal Navy 
loses and is bankrupted – saved only by an emergency bailout from the CIA, in 
the form of a cash-filled envelope "as thick as a dictionary", handed to 007 at 
the critical moment and bearing the unambiguous message: "Marshall Aid. Thirty 
two million francs. With the compliments of the USA." No doubt who's top dog 
now.

Fleming tacitly concedes the new international hierarchy in the plotting of 
the sixth novel,Dr No 
<http://www.vintage-books.co.uk/books/0099576929/ian-fleming/dr-no/>: what 
gives the villain's evil scheme punch is that its target is the missile 
programme of the mighty United States. The author knows that in 1958, two years 
after Suez had confirmed London's diminished global standing, a conspiracy 
against Britain alone would not be enough: the plot has to involve the US, 
ideally drawing in the Soviet Union and the cold war.

This geopolitical landscape should draw in the historically minded reader, for 
it is a world that has passed now, just as the empire ofJohn Buchan 
<http://www.johnbuchansociety.co.uk/>'s novels was crumbling when Fleming took 
to his typewriter. Students of the changing relationship between men and women, 
and the advances won by a half-century of feminism, will also find much to 
seize on in the books' parade of gorgeous, eager women, usually positioned to 
catch Bond's eye. Naivete is a common trait, a crucial one in the case of 
Tatiana Romanova, deployed as bait inFrom Russia with Love 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Russia-Love-Vintage-Classics/dp/0099576899>. 
Honeychile Rider is even more unworldly, depicted inDr No as part intuitive 
animal, part innocent child. She is, as we would expect from a Bond girl, a 
fantasy figure – curvaceous, unspoiled and, as her name promises, sexually 
eager. "You've got to wash me," she implores Bond once they are alone in the 
"mink-lined prison" No has set aside for them. "I don't know what to do. You've 
got to show me." (She is also the object of that recurring Fleming interest in 
what might be nudgingly referred to as discipline. "Honey, get into that bath 
before I spank you," Bond warns.)

There is guilty pleasure in all this, the same guilty thrill so profitably 
exploited by the creators of theTV series Mad Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mad-men-tv-series>. For Bond offers 
the opportunity to glimpse, even to revel in, how things used to be before 
progress and equality spoiled all the fun. Few contemporary thriller writers 
would risk a hero who treats women the way Bond does, but that was then: 
different rules apply.

Similarly, 21st-century audiences are often told they want their stories dark 
and brooding, their heroes filled with angst. But Bond appeals partly because 
he, and therefore we, dwell so rarely on his inner life (though the seventh 
novel,Goldfinger 
<http://www.vintage-books.co.uk/books/0099576937/ian-fleming/goldfinger/>, 
introduces a more introspective 007). He is no cipher: we know there are 
"phantoms" that haunt him. But mention of them is usually fleeting, just enough 
to keep us intrigued. He is instead a man of action, capable of doing 
extraordinary things very well. And people will always long to see that.

In this age of confession, where almost every public figure feels the need to 
make himself more real by admitting to vulnerability, weakness and self-doubt, 
Bond's certainty is compelling. "His cause was just," the author tells us, when 
describing 007's sense of elation as he embarks on a mission. Fleming feels no 
great obligation to explain that confidence, just as Bond rarely feels the need 
to question the rights and wrongs of the task M has handed him. It is enough 
that he is serving his country and his Queen.

Few of us can imagine such iron certainty now. Fleming was writing before 
Vietnam and Watergate, before scepticism towards our governmental masters 
congealed into outright cynicism, before thrillers became laced with paranoia 
and deep, dark ambivalence. The Bond novels return us to a world of courage, 
ingenuity and moral clarity – and do it with consummate élan.

Fleming never forgets that a thriller has to thrill; that, whatever else it 
does, it must entertain. Central to such fiction's magic is the promise of 
escape. WhenCasino Royale appeared, rationing still had a year to run in 
Britain. To a readership still trudging through a drab, grey country exhausted 
by war and austerity, Fleming offered the prospect of azure skies, powder-white 
beaches, stunning women and handsome men. When jet travel was still a novelty 
and foreign tourism still off limits to all but the wealthiest, how exotically 
enticing must have sounded Jamaica's north coast, Miami or Istanbul. To the 
Brits back home, heads down against the rain, "their legs whipped by the wet 
hems of their macintoshes", a Bond novel was a ticket to distant joys.

And here we are again, in the early 21st century, in our very own age of 
austerity. That successive generations keep trying to follow where Bond led, 
imitating and copying him, only proves that our need for 007 endures. As every 
villain should know by now,James Bond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jamesbond> is a man who can appear to die a 
thousand deaths – but cannot be killed.

• The entire series of James Bond books is being reissued as Vintage Classics. 
Jonathan Freedland's novelPantheon, under the pseudonym Sam Bourne, is 
published by Harper.
 