
The European champion, James Dasaolu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/james-dasaolu>, took several notable scalps 
as he pitted his wits against the world’s best over 100m at the Diamond League 
meeting in Zurich.

Dasaolu, who secured his first major gold medal on the same track earlier this 
month, clocked 10.06sec, into a slight headwind, to come home third, with 
Jamaica’s Commonwealth champion Kemar Bailey-Cole winning well in 9.96.

The British Athletics <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> 
performance director, Neil Black, challenged his athletes to “go global” after 
their record-breaking European Championships and this was an encouraging start 
from the Londoner.

There was no Usain Bolt, who pulled out of the meeting at the weekend, 
deciding to bring an early end to his season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/aug/24/usain-bolt-ends-season-withdraws-zurich>
, but Dasaolu still beat Tyson Gay and Asafa Powell, both back from their 
respective drug bans, along with Jamaica’s Nesta Carter and Trinidad and 
Tobago’s Richard Thompson.

He also came out on top in his domestic duel against training partner, Adam 
Gemili,the European 200m champion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/aug/15/adam-adam-gemili-gold-european-athletics-championships-2014>
 finishing a respectable fifth in 10.13.

Dasaolu told BBC Sport: “Today was just about mixing it with the best 
sprinters in the world.”

Gemili has had a longer season than his compatriot, also winning 100m silver 
at the Commonwealth Games, while Dasaolu missed the event following his 
injury-delayed start to the season – and he admitted this was possibly his last 
race of the year. “For me, this year, I might have to call it a day,” he said.

The third Briton in the race, Harry Aikines-Aryeetey, was eighth in 10.31.

Chijindu Ujah, who ran 9.96 early in the season only to miss out on 100m 
selection for the Commonwealth Games and the European Championships, clinched a 
morale-boosting victory in the B race in 10.16.

If Britain’s male sprinters are on the up, the progress of their female 
counterparts is even more exciting. They broke the British 4x100m relay record 
for the second time in less than two weeks, the quartet of Asha Philip, 
Ashleigh Nelson, Anyika Onuora and Desiree Henry clocking 42.21.

It earned them victory ahead of Jamaica and the US. Those lineups were not at 
full-strength but it could be argued neither was Britain’s, with Onuora in 
place of Jodie Williams the change from the team that ran 42.24 to win the 
European title. Britain’s women have now broken a record that had stood for 34 
years twice in 11 days.

Nelson, the individual European bronze medallist, was sixth in 11.20 in a 
loaded 100m won by Veronica Campbell-Brown in 11.04.

Nijel Amos, the Botswana athlete who beat David Rudisha to the Commonwealth 
800m title in Glasgow, got the better of the Kenyan Olympic champion and world 
record holder once again, finishing strongly to win in 1:43.77.
 