
The American lutenist James Tyler, who has died suddenly aged 70, was a 
versatile force in the world of early music. During the 1970s and 80s, he 
performed and recorded in London with such groundbreaking period-instrument 
ensembles as Musica Reservata under Michael Morrow, the Consort of Musicke, the 
Julian Bream Consort and the Early Music Consort of London under David Munrow. 
In 1977, a year after Munrow's death, Jim founded his own ensemble, the London 
EarlyMusic <https://www.theguardian.com/books/music> Group.

As a dynamic soloist and ensemble musician, he performed extensively in 
chamber music series and festivals throughout the world. He made more than 60 
recordings, including two popular versions of Vivaldi's Concerto for Two 
Mandolins and Strings, with the English Concert under Trevor Pinnock and the 
Academy of St Martin in the Fields under Neville Marriner.

He composed and arranged music for four productions of a BBC television cycle 
of Shakespeare plays, including Romeo and Juliet, and Henry VIII. He can also 
be heard – and seen – in the film Mary, Queen of Scots (1971), for which one of 
his off-screen duties was to instruct Glenda Jackson, as Elizabeth I, in the 
art of smashing lutes, in this instance over the head of Daniel Massey, playing 
Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester. Jim recounted how the prop man wheeled in 10 
historically accurate balsa lutes, most of which were destroyed in the interest 
of securing the perfect take.

Born in Hartford, Connecticut, Jim started to study the mandolin, tenor banjo 
and the classic five-string banjo in 1954 with Walter Kaye Bauer, who gave him 
a first-class grounding in technique and musicianship. Jim found that the 
techniques he acquired on the circa-1900 gut-strung banjo were almost akin to 
those for the renaissance lute and baroque guitar – much more so than the 
Segovia-style classical guitar technique that many of his contemporaries were 
using on the lute.

A recital by the lute virtuoso Joseph Iadone led to Jim falling in love in his 
late teens with the instrument's "luscious" sound and extraordinarily rich 
repertoire. Iadone, a member of the early music ensemble New York Pro Musica 
and teacher at the Hartt School of Music in Hartford, accepted him as a private 
student.

In 1963 Jim joined the Pro Musica, and made his recording debut. That year he 
also performed with the Consort Players and Basil Rathbone in An Elizabethan 
Evening at the White House before the Kennedy family and their guest, the Grand 
Duchess Charlotte of Luxembourg. With Max Morath and the Original Rag Quartet, 
he toured the US, recording and playing the tenor and five-string banjo on such 
vintage television shows as the Bell Telephone Hour and The Dinah Shore Show.

In 1968 Jim left the US to work in Munich with Thomas Binkley, director of the 
Studio der Frühen Musik. By the start of the following year, he was in London, 
having realised it was the true centre of early music activity. He married 
Joyce Geller, a former screenwriter, in 1975, and she subsequently took over 
the management of his career.

While on tour, Jim visited libraries to study original books and manuscripts 
for his numerous publications on early instruments, their repertories and 
performing practices. For Oxford University Press he wrote The Guitar and Its 
Music: From the Renaissance to the Classical Era (with Paul Sparks, 2002); The 
Early Mandolin (with Sparks, 1989); and his first book, The Early Guitar: A 
History and a Handbook (1980), as well as numerous articles in the various New 
Grove dictionaries and the journal Early Music.

In the early 1980s, The Early Guitar was the sole comprehensive guide to the 
instrument. It could have been written only by a consummate performer-scholar, 
and inspired my own journey from Australia to California 20 years ago to study 
with Jim. It also led to a continuing revival of the instrument.

From 1986 until his retirement in 2006, Jim was professor of music and 
director of the master's and doctoral degree programs in early music 
performance that he founded at the University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles.

He was working recently with a team to establish the earliest known recording 
machine and preparing an article on the 19th-century banjo composer Paul Eno. 
His final publication, A Guide to Playing the Baroque Guitar, will be published 
in February.

He is survived by Joyce.

• James Henry Tyler, lutenist, teacher and writer, born 3 August 1940; died 
23 November 2010
 