
Sometimes it’s only when the emotions kick in that you can really appreciate 
what players go through on the path to achieving their goals. For Britain’s 
Jamie Murray, years of uncertainty, frustration and self-questioning were swept 
away in a few joyous moments on Saturdayas he won his first grand slam doubles 
title at theAustralian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>.

In just their third tournament together, Murray and Brazil’s Bruno Soares beat 
the vastly more experienced Daniel Nestor of Canada and the Czech Radek 
Stepanek 2-6, 6-4, 7-5 to win the title. It was the first grand slam doubles 
win for both men but for Jamie, in particular, it was a sweet moment that at 
many stages in his career he thought he might never experience.

“I think when you get up there [to make an acceptance speech], you realise 
what you’ve done, you want to thank everyone that’s been with you along in the 
journey,” he said, referring to the cracking in his voice that gave the game 
away when he spoke on court. “Hasn’t always been rosy for me. A lot of ups and 
downs in my career. Thankfully things have started to really pick up in the 
last year or so. I had Louis [Cayer, his coach] with me on and off, for 10 
years. He’s the guy that made it happen for me to have success on the doubles 
court. He really believed that I could do great things. It took me a lot longer 
to realise it.

“As I said it out there, my wife, she’s the one when I’m winning matches, 
great, but when I’m losing matches coming home disappointed, she’s the one 
that’s there, kept believing in me, kept telling me I had talent, I could do 
great things.”

Both Murray, at Wimbledon with Jelena Jankovic in 2007 and Soares, at the US 
Open with Ekaterina Makarova, had won a mixed doubles grand slam title before. 
But winning a men’s doubles title, Jamie said, was that much more satisfying. 
“This is my bread and butter,” he said. “For me, the grand slam men’s doubles, 
that is going to be the pinnacle of my career, other than Davis Cup obviously. 
This is what I’m working towards every day, every time I step on the court.”

It was almost exactly three years ago when Murray was at his lowest. Without a 
regular partner, his ranking had dropped to 92 and he was not enjoying the 
grind of going from event to event, scrambling for someone to play with. 
Everything changed when he began playing with the Australian, John Peers, in 
early 2013 and the pair quickly established themselves. It was around that time 
that Murray also began working again with Cayer, probably the top doubles coach 
in the world, and he has not looked back since.

This win was also vindication for Murray’s decision to end his relationship 
with Peers late last year, even though they had enjoyed their best ever season, 
reaching the final at Wimbledon and the US Open and qualifying for the ATP 
World Tour Finals. Murray asked Soares to play and the Brazilian’s level head 
was crucial in the latter stages of the final as they clinched the title.

“Just before I started playing with John, I’d had a rough kind of couple 
years,” said Murray, admitting he had been close to quitting at that time. “I 
didn’t have a partner again, been floating around, didn’t really have any 
direction, didn’t quite know where I was going. I didn’t want to keep going 
like that.

“Thankfully things worked out with John. I was able to establish a partnership 
with him. Obviously last year we did a lot of great things that got us right to 
the top of the game. Then the opportunity to play with Bruno came up. It really 
worked out good.”

Things did not look that rosy when they dropped the opening set, with Soares 
broken twice, but the Brazilian picked up his game and they broke once to level 
the match. At 5-4 in the decider, Murray served for the match only to be broken 
but they broke the Nestor serve in the following game and Soares served out for 
victory.

It was a win that means Murray will be ranked No2 in the world when the 
rankings are updated on Monday and on current form, Jamie could hit No1 before 
Andy, who turned up to see the end of the match, even though he plays Novak 
Djokovic in the singles final on Sunday. “That’s amazing,” he said. “I never 
thought about that. Louis, every time he’s working with me, he keeps telling me 
that he really believes I can get to No1. It’s a process. I guess the race is 
on. Bring it on.”
 