
If ever there was an example of a team being more than the sum of its parts it 
is doubles, where trust, belief and tactical nous is at least as important as 
individual ability.

Top singles players can play good doubles, of course, as Andy Murray has shown 
recently and competitors such as John McEnroe and Stefan Edberg have proven in 
the past, but even they are nothing if the team dynamic does not quite work. 
WhenJamie Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jamie-murray> decided late 
last year it was time to look for a new partner, after three years with 
Australia’s John Peers, he wanted someone whose playing style not only 
dovetailed nicely with him, but whose personality matched his. In the Brazilian 
Bruno Soares, he found someone who is rarely flustered and whose desire to win 
a first grand slam men’s doubles title matches his.

Jamie Murray: British experience at Australian Open has been incredible
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/28/jamie-murray-british-experience-australian-open-doubles-final-bruno-soares>
His Australian Open final, which starts at about 10.30am UK time on Saturday, 
against Daniel Nestor and Radek Stepanek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/28/jamie-murray-british-experience-australian-open-doubles-final-bruno-soares>
, will be Murray’s third consecutive grand slam final, a remarkable run for a 
man who only a few years ago wondered if he really had a future in the sport. 
The decision to start working again with the doubles guru Louis Cayer in early 
2013 turned things round and it was Cayer who suggested Soares as a good 
partner.

Murray said: “Once I decided we [he and Peers] were going to go different 
ways, Louis was very much for me to try and play with Bruno. He thought Bruno 
would be keen on it. Thankfully, he was – and so far it has turned out to be a 
great decision.

“We have been friends a long time. I have known Bruno maybe 10 years. It is 
maybe longer now. I just messaged him and said: ‘Look, I am looking for someone 
for next year. I really want to play with you, I haven’t spoken to anyone else. 
Do you want to do it?’ Then we spoke on the phone a bit and decided to go for 
it and we haven’t looked back since.”

The pair won the title in Sydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/16/jamie-murray-wins-sydney-title-bruno-soares>
 earlier this month in only their second tournament together and they dropped 
just one set on their way to the final. Although Peers was a good partner for 
Murray and the pair enjoyed a successful three years, the feeling was always 
that in the biggest moments, especially at the net, the Australian was the weak 
link in the partnership.

Murray was too polite to suggest as much but it is clear he has absolute faith 
in Soares, a runner-up at the 2013 US Open and a vastly experienced player at 
the top level. “I don’t think we [he and Peers] necessarily dealt with it [the 
pressure of being in a grand slam final] the best we could,” he said.

“Maybe that was lack of experience but with Bruno he has been to grand slam 
finals before. He has played a lot of big matches – Masters Series, things like 
that. I think we go into the match with good vibes. We trust each other and 
hopefully good things will happen.

“I am not going to have to worry about what he is doing, what his mentality is 
or anything like that. He will bring that calmness to the court. Hopefully, I 
will as well and that is how you perform well, I think, in big events and in 
pressure situations. You have to keep your wits about you and stay in the 
moment, stay in the process and then I think good things happen.”

Cayer should be able to give Murray plenty of insider information on Nestor, 
having coached him for several years, although the Canadian’s exploits are well 
known to everyone. The 43-year-old has won 12 grand slam titles, including four 
mixed, while Stepanek has won two grand slam doubles crowns. The pair may have 
a combined age of 80 but their experience and class makes them a massive threat.

Murray said: “They’ll be very tough to beat in this situation because they’ve 
been there and done it before. We’ve obviously been to grand slam finals but we 
haven’t won, so I guess that’s an edge they would have over us. But we’ll go 
out there prepared to play them and just get it done.”
 