
Jared Lee Loughner pleaded guilty on Tuesday to killing six people and 
wounding 13 others, including his intended target: former US congresswoman
Gabrielle Giffords <https://www.theguardian.com/world/gabrielle-giffords>.

Loughner's plea spares him the death penalty and came soon after a federal 
judge found that months of forcibly medicating him to treat schizophrenia had 
made him competent to understand the gravity of the charges and assist in his 
defence.

Under the plea, the 23-year-old college dropout will be sentenced to life in 
federal prison without the possibility of parole.
 Jared Loughner. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
The outcome was welcomed by some victims, including Giffords herself, as a way 
to avoid a lengthy, possibly traumatic trial and years of legal wrangling over 
a death sentence.

"The pain and loss caused by the events of January 8, 2011, are incalculable," 
Giffords said in a joint statement with her husband, Mark Kelly. "Avoiding a 
trial will allow us – and we hope the whole southern Arizona community – to 
continue with our recovery."

Experts had concluded that Loughner suffers from schizophrenia, and officials 
at a federal prison have forcibly medicated him with psychotropic drugs for 
more than a year.

Court-appointed psychologist Christina Pietz testified for an hour about how 
she believes Loughner became competent. Loughner listened calmly without 
expression. His arms were crossed over his stomach, lurched slightly forward 
and looking straight at Pietz.

At one point, he smiled and nodded when psychologist mentioned he had a 
special bond with one of the prison guards.

The decision to spare Loughner a federal death sentence makes sense, said Dale 
Baich, a federal public defender in Phoenix who handles capital case appeals 
and isn't involved in the case.

"As time went on and there were numerous evaluations, I think everybody had a 
better understanding of Mr Loughner's mental illness," Baich said.

He added: "It appears that he will need to be treated for the rest of his life 
in order to remain competent."
 