
What a bunch of garbage; liberal, democrat, conservative, republican. It's all 
there to control you! ... I'm sick of it.

– from Jared Lee Loughner's reportedly favourite movie, Waking Life 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0243017/>, about a man trapped in dreams

Are we all Jared Lee Loughner? Or is it a "blood libel" to associate us 
"normals" with the 22 year old who murdered six people, including a 
nine-year-old child, and shot 13 others, including CongresswomanGabrielle 
Giffords <https://www.theguardian.com/world/gabrielle-giffords>? The media now 
delightedly jumps on a statistic from the department of health and human 
services that one in every five of us adult Americans – or 45 million people – 
"has experienced mental illness in the past year". Talk about spreading the 
guilt. I'm not sure how helpful those numbers are when, despite Oprah, Dr Phil 
and all those "intervention" TV-reality programmes, it's almost impossible to 
get effective help in America for a depressed or suicidal or seriously mentally 
disturbed person.

But we "normals" didn't pull the trigger. It was done by a "mentally 
unbalanced loner", a "loser", "weirdo", "paranoid schizophrenic" – choose your 
word-weapon – armed with a Glock 9mm pistol he had recently bought in a Tucson 
sporting goods store, loaded with discounted bullets bought from – where else? 
– a Wal-Mart. The debate will go on endlessly about whether his crescendoing 
rage was incited in any way by Rush, Sarah, Glenn and Fox News. It may be just 
as relevant to blame it on his weakness for the books of Philip K Dick, or 
parallel-universe movies like Matrix and Inception, or on tastes I share with 
him for jazz artists John Coltrane and Charlie Parker, and obsessively keeping 
a dream journal. Thank heaven Jared Lee wasn't a quasi-leftist like Lee Harvey 
Oswald, or many of us progressives would be backpedalling like fury from the 
Safeway massacre.

Today, we're all mental health experts. There's usually somebody, in our 
family or neighbourhood, or at school or at work, a little or a lot like Jared 
Lee, with off-the-wall opinions and out-of-kilter behaviour. Everybody, 
including his ex-girlfriends and a magenta-haired school buddy and a former 
"best friend" and a raft of "expert" psychologists, wants a piece of him. How 
useful are their "insights"? The first thing he did on being handcuffed was 
demand his fifth amendment right against self-incrimination. Before the 
massacre, he's also reported to have told a chum that the only way to get 
attention as a celebrity is "either be a politician or a serial killer". A 
rational act, and a rational view.

For several years, after myself having been labelled "schizophenic", I worked 
with young people not unlike Jared at Shenley Hospital, in Hertfordshire, 
England, and atKingsley Hall <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kingsley_Hall>, a 
therapeutic community I helped found in London's east end. Many of them were 
quite mad – hallucinating, bizarre behaviours, voices-in-their-heads, the full 
menu of psychotic symptoms. Some were fractious, at times, too – except that 
their violence was strictly limited to what they could do with a fist, a boot 
or, at worst, a knife: no guns (after all, this was England).

So, there is a huge cultural – and political – gap between my British 
experience and Jared Lee's trajectory inArizona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arizona>. At Shenley and Kingsley Hall, 
and other British mental hospitals I observed, doctors and nurses could be 
quite paranoid about the possibility of being hurt by patients. But what struck 
me, again and again, in dealing face to face with schizophrenics (rightly or 
wrongly diagnosed), was how terrifiedthey were of what was happening inside 
them. After all, they had not asked Jesus to sit down to breakfast with them or 
lured the Queen Mother into sending them personal messages via the radio.

But even the maddest patients were political. They couldn't help it because 
their sandpaper-sensitive, strangely-angled antennae picked up all sorts of 
verbal, visual and physical signals about what was happening in the world at 
large. These prompts and cues, found in newspaper headlines or on TV, might 
involve a parliamentary debate or a murder story, or celebrity marriages or 
archaeological finds of Roman coins. News from nowhere and everywhere became, 
for them, a mishmash of stimuli, which was then retransmitted as "messages" via 
poetically skewed psyches – and were diagnosed as symptoms of delusion and 
schizophrenia.

Overlooked in much of this was their very angry, mocking and self-mocking 
sense of humour, sometimes macabre, but often piercingly acute. They put things 
together, and connected dots, in ways we're not used to.

Yet, as anyone who has spent time with psychotic people knows, it can be 
incredibly gruelling and boring, and demands extremely steady nerves and 
saint-like patience to be with angry, babbling people, especially if they're 
young and strong, as well as demented. Let's not even mention the suffering 
that mental disability causes to their families.

One "expert" psychiatrist claims Jared is a "textbook case of schizophrenia". 
Then again, there is theex-girlfriend, Ashley Figueroa 
<http://www.examiner.com/crime-in-national/jared-loughner-s-ex-ashley-figueroa-speaks-about-his-mental-state-video>
, who insists, "He's faking everything." My hunch (for whatever that is worth) 
is that he may well be schizophrenic – but that he's also performing 
schizophrenia. Along with other cues, the mad are often drawn into an elaborate 
theatre-of-the-absurd, where, helpless or otherwise against their demons, they 
play up to frantic expectations of their authority figures: parents, teachers, 
police, therapists. "You think I'm crazy? I'll show you crazy!"

The bitter irony is that the governor of Arizona, Jan Brewer, who just last 
week was offering prayers of support to bereaved relatives 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/idUSTRE70A6ZS20110111> in Tucson, has this week 
announced the suspension of Medicaid 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2011/01/19/AR2011011905781.html>
 in Arizona in order to balance the budget. This will cut off healthcare, 
including mental healthcare, to more than a quarter of a million low-income 
Arizonans – people whose personal economic circumstances may look much as Jared 
Lee Loughner's did. It would be disrespectful to people with mental illness to 
call this policy mad, it's just very, very stupid.
 