
Jared Loughner, the suspect in the shooting of Democratic congresswoman 
Gabrielle Giffords <https://www.theguardian.com/world/gabrielle-giffords>, 
pleaded not guilty in court, in his first response to the charges.

Silent but displaying the grin that has become his trademark, Loughner made 
his second appearance in public since the attacks on 8 January at the federal 
courthouse in Phoenix,Arizona <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arizona>.

He is alleged to have killed six people and injured a further 13, including 
Giffords, during a deadly shooting rampage at a public meeting at a supermarket 
car park in Tucson.

Witnesses inside the courtroom reported that Loughner - shackled and dressed 
in an orange jump suit – smiled broadly throughout the hearing, including the 
moment when his lawyer entered his plea of not guilty.

Nicholas Riccardi, a journalist for the Los Angeles Times, said the 
22-year-old "continued to flash an uncanny, self-satisfied grin throughout the 
otherwise routine nine-minute arraignment".

Loughner was surrounded by heavily armed marshalls on his journey to and from 
the courtroom. He faces five federal charges, including one of attempted 
assassination of a member of Congress, two charges of killing an employee of 
the US and two charges of intent to kill employees of the US. He will almost 
certainly receive Arizona state charges as well, and is likely to face the 
death penalty if convicted.

Loughner's lawyers gave no hint how they planned to defend him against the 
charges. When Judge Larry Burns asked if there were any doubts about Loughner's 
ability to understand the charges, his lawyer Judy Clarke said: "We are not 
raising any issues at this time."

Clarke is a veteran of several high-profile murder cases, having defended the 
Unabomber, Theodore Kaczynski, and the Atlanta Olympics bomber, Eric Rudolph, 
both of whom were convicted but escaped the death sentence.

Judge Burns is normally based in San Diego but Arizona's judges have all 
recused themselves from hearing the case since one of the murder victims was 
Arizona federal judge John Roll.

After the hearing prosecutors said they had passed on to defence lawyers 
copies of 45 disks-worth of material taken from Loughner's computer.

Loughner's next court appearance is on 9 March, when the full extent of 
charges against him will be revealed.
 