
Today is Ada Lovelace Day <http://findingada.com/about/our-mission/>, a day to 
celebrate female role models in science, technology, engineering and maths (the 
STEM subjects).Last year, Ada Lovelace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ada-lovelace> Day produced an ebook 
<http://findingada.com/book/>, for which I wrote a chapter about Jean Golding, 
the woman who set upChildren of the 90s <http://www.bristol.ac.uk/alspac/>, the 
dataset I use for my PhD. Here’s an extract:

I’m very lucky, when it comes to research. Not only is my PhD on something 
that I find really interesting, but to do it I get to use one of the finest 
epidemiological resources that currently exists in the UK. Children of the 90s 
is a huge dataset containing biological, psychological, social and medical 
information about a group of children, their parents, and soon their siblings 
and their own children as well. The dataset is world renowned, with hundreds of 
papers published using the data, from researchers across the world.

The woman behind it, Jean Golding, is a quietly spoken lady. Although no 
longer directly involved in the running of the cohort, she still conducts 
research using the data, and is often seen at talks and events in the 
department. In 2012 she was made an OBE for her role in setting up and 
developing the cohort. But her journey to this point was far from 
straightforward, involving illness, personal hardship, hard work, and even 
smuggling (for a good cause)!

A growing familiarity with hospitals

Jean was born on 22 September 1939 in Cornwall. Her childhood coincided with 
the war, and she describes is as a time of rationing, of making do, and playing 
with whatever was around and available. While Cornwall sounds like an idyllic 
location to grow up, Jean was beset with illness, which meant she became 
familiar with hospital wards.

Even before she was old enough to go to school, she developed tubercular 
glands, a form of TB, which meant numerous hospital stays of months at a time. 
This was before designated children’s wards, so Jean was often in a cot in the 
middle of a ward with 20 elderly women. She describes it as a somewhat 
traumatic experience.

It also delayed her schooling, which she wasn’t able to start until the age of 
six. Around this time she moved to Plymouth, and then to Chester, where a more 
serious illness befell her. Jean contracted polio, quite unexpectedly as there 
was no epidemic occurring at the time. This led to her missing a year of 
school, and left her weak and with a permanent major limp.

Her poor health didn’t stop her excelling at school, although it did affect 
the study choices she made. While her early life had stoked an interest in 
medicine and biology, she had spent so much time in hospital during her 
childhood that the thought of studying anything that would take her back there 
did not appeal. At school her passions were subjects like zoology and 
chemistry, which, due to her physical ailments resulting from the polio, she 
wouldn’t be able to pursue at university. But she was clearly highly 
intelligent and her school encouraged her to study mathematics, which didn’t 
involve prolonged periods standing at a lab bench conducting experiments. She 
was good at maths, but it wasn’t a passion for her. She was still talented 
enough to gain a place at Oxford University, where she started at St Anne’s 
College in 1958.

Oxford at this time was very much a male-dominated place, particularly in the 
sciences and maths. Across the whole university, Jean remembers a ratio of 
about 10 men to every woman, although the college system meant that she mixed 
with people from many backgrounds. There were not many other women studying 
maths with her, but she describes her experience as reading very little maths, 
but having a wonderful time.

Although she would spend much of her adult life doing medical statistics, 
however, her first experience with that area of mathematics didn’t immediately 
inspire her. At the first statistics lecture she attended, the lecturer stood 
at the front of the class and made a statement along the lines of, “we’ll 
assume that this is approximately equal to that.” Jean, knowing nothing about 
statistics, recalls thinking, “this isn’t for me. I’m a pure mathematician.” 
She would of course eventually embrace statistics as an invaluable tool to 
glean insights into health.

Hardship and opportunity

Jean was at university at a time when career advice to women was, as she put 
it, “teaching, or secretarial work”. So she became a maths teacher. But soon 
personal circumstances would mean Jean would have to look for work that she 
could do from home. She married, had two children, and divorced within the 
space of four years. Her ex-husband left the country and stopped sending money, 
meaning Jean became a single parent. She needed to earn an income, but she also 
had two children to care for. Jean remained philosophical, saying that while 
being a single parent added difficulty in terms of time management, “I only had 
my children to worry about, rather than a husband as well!”

For a time, Jean took any job she could do at home, and found herself editing 
books, proofreading documents, and writing guides for teachers in the third 
world. But one of these jobs would take her life down an unexpected path: A 
group advertised for a statistician, and she applied. They wanted a person to 
calculate percentages, something she could do at home, and they paid by the 
hour, although very badly as Jean remembers it. The percentages she was 
calculating were on a large epidemiological survey of the health of people in 
the UK, and the small group she was working with were analysing the data and 
writing up the research as a book.

This was the mid 1960s, and there were no high-powered computers or fancy 
statistical software. The analyses were done using punch cards which went 
through a counter sorter. You could even make your own cards for specific 
analyses. Jean found this an exciting way to conduct research; being able to 
see what your data were showing, and potentially jumping to unexpected 
conclusions from what was revealed. This was her first introduction to 
epidemiology, at a time when she hadn’t thought about medical research since 
school.

Jean was fortunate enough to work with people who would take the time to 
explain the medical background and biology to her, giving advice as to what to 
read to learn more. For Jean it was a revelation: “The maths I wasn’t remotely 
interested in, but it was this detective story of why on earth does that 
happen? Can you think of an explanation? What other information do you need? 
That fired me up”.

Enthused by her discovery of this field of science, Jean successfully applied 
for a research fellowship at University College London. And, as she put it, 
hasn’t looked back since then.

Around this time Jean had a couple of role models who inspired her both 
professionally and personally. Dr Eva Elberman was a paediatrician. She had 
four children, which made being a clinical medic very difficult in those days, 
so she became an epidemiologist. Another female epidemiologist Jean worked with 
at the time was Alice Stewart.

Stewart would become known for groundbreaking work on childhood cancer. She 
collected information from the parents of children who had cancer, asking about 
their background and events during pregnancy, and looking at their medical 
records. This method of investigation was unique at the time because no one had 
really considered looking at the relationship between events in pregnancy and 
something as late on as childhood cancer. Stewart’s work pinpointed x-rays 
during pregnancy as being an important predictor of childhood cancers, in 
particular leukaemia. Her findings were not taken seriously until her results 
had been replicated by male scientists, when the link finally became accepted.

Jean herself experienced some sexism around this time. She recalls an 
interview with a distinguished statistician who told her “all things being 
equal, I would give this place to a man.” Rather than putting Jean off, though, 
this spurred her on. “So the answer is, you’ve got to not make it equal, you’ve 
got to be better.”

But this is Jean all over. When asked what made her who she is, she replied 
“stubbornness”. She sees each setback as something to improve upon, rather than 
be disheartened by.

When Jean’s time working on this study came to an end, she moved on to other 
jobs, but kept in touch with the survey and how it was progressing. In 
particular, she continued to work with Neville Butler, who was head of 
paediatrics in Bristol. She describes him as “bizarre and exciting and 
difficult and fun to work with”. He was a man of many ideas, and not enough 
time to take them forward. Jean believes that she was in the right place at the 
right time to pick up the good ideas and make something of them.

Butler was, at the time, involved in another birth survey, the 1970 Birth 
Cohort Study. Jean saw the design of these studies, which were very medically 
focused, particularly around pregnancy, and noticed that something was missing. 
Butler was convinced that it would be valuable to look at the psychological and 
psychosocial aspects involved. Jean herself was very interested in the 
biological and chemical aspects of pregnancy and development, and their roles 
in health. The very first research she worked on was looking at congenital 
malformations, and she maintained an interest in the development of 
physiological abnormalities, extending to the influence of pre-birth events on 
the long-term development of a child, throughout her career.

A Europe-wide challenge

In 1985, Jean was invited by the World Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Organization to a Europe-wide 
meeting to discuss setting up a new study. The plans were vague: it wasn’t 
clear what the study would be, or when it would start. Jean was given the 
unenviable task of beingrapporteur for the group, appointed to report on the 
group’s meetings. This turned out to be a fortuitous job. The meeting was in 
Russia, and while everyone else was out sampling the local vodka, Jean would 
spend her evenings writing up the day’s discussions. When talks had been going 
round in circles, she wrote what she felt the group ought to have decided on. 
When the meeting reconvened the next morning, the group read over her reports 
and agreed with them.

An idea emerged from the meeting: start a cohort in pregnancy, and monitor the 
psychological and social side, as well as the physical and medical. The WHO 
gave the researchers $5,000 to run pilot studies in Russia, Greece and the UK. 
Jean remembers there being a huge amount of scepticism among the researchers 
involved that you could simply ask mothers for information and expect it to be 
accurate. These pilot studies helped Jean and her colleagues to discover what 
was feasible, and what wasn’t. When they compared the answers the mothers gave 
to those taken from their medical records, it showed that they knew their own 
records very well.

From these pilot studies, a design for the European Longitudinal Study of 
Parents and Children (ELSPAC) emerged. There was a problem though: the WHO 
didn’t have the money to fund a European wide cohort study of this magnitude. 
All they could do was write to the ministries of health across Europe 
explaining the study design, recommending its implementation, but reporting 
that they were unable to fund it.

The study had been planned before the fall of the Berlin Wall and, since the 
Soviet Union employed everybody, and had large scientific institutes and 
five-year plans, it had been thought it would be easy to implement in Russia, 
Ukraine, and what was then Czechoslovakia. After the wall fell, ex-Soviet 
countries suddenly discovered they had to raise money, but there was no 
structure in place to do that. This led to perhaps one of the strangest 
activities Jean has been involved in. She helped set up the study in Russia, 
but doing so was a “sharp learning experience”, as she put it.

This is an extract of the chapter. To find out the rest of Jean’s story, the 
ebook (also featuring chapters on Dorothy Hodgkin, Jocelyn Bell Burnell, Joan 
Feynman, and a host of other amazing women) isavailable here 
<http://findingada.com/book/>. All money goes to Ada Lovelace Day and the 
findingada <http://findingada.com/>website. Or you can ask Suzi on Twitter for 
spoilers@soozaphone <https://twitter.com/soozaphone>.
 