
Born: 1.30pm, 22 April 2005
Place of birth: Mama Yemo hospital, Kinshasa
Birth weight: 3.5kg
Mother: Ngosia Nzinga, 28
Father: Jean Mtoko, 30

It has been an inauspicious start for Jean Mtoko. The child, dubbed Dieumerci 
(Thank God) by his weary looking mother, Ngosia Nzinga, has spent his first 
five weeks in Kinshasa's rundown Mama Yemo hospital, where he was born in April.

Not that Dieumerci is ill. Far from it, his 28-year-old mother says as she 
breastfeeds on one a rickety bed in Pavilion 12B, in a relatively cool ward, 
considering the tropical heat of Congo's capital: "He's doing well and hasn't 
been ill at all.

"The problem is I had to have a [caesarean section] to have the baby and now I 
can't afford to pay the bills to go home."

She and the baby share a narrow plastic mattress. But the hospital has 
provided a tiny mosquito net so the child is less likely to catch malaria. 
According to Unicef, there were 4.6m cases of malaria last year in the Congo, 
with children under five accounting for 920,000.

But the mother and child are quite literally imprisoned. They are not allowed 
to leave until she has settled her bill.

Fellow patients share the odd meal and although the hospital is not charging 
for the bed they sleep in, the unemployed Ngosia has no chance of repaying the 
$400 (£220) for the operation and drugs.

Her husband visits occasionally, but seldom with food and, as a street hawker 
who sells peanuts, soap and plastic bags, never enough money to foot the bill.

Doctors at Mama Yemo say this predicament is common in Congo where, although 
most of the guns have been silenced, the task of rebuilding a country destroyed 
by decades of dictatorship and years of war has only just begun.

The former Belgian colony's capital has never really been the battleground of 
Congo's wars but it is always a useful indicator of the country's woes.

Having at one stage captured the world's imagination with the 1974 Rumble in 
the Jungle – the heavyweight boxing title fight between Muhammad Ali and George 
Foreman – by 1997, the end of Mobutu Sese Seko's dictatorship, Kinshasa, like 
much of the vast mineral rich country, was crumbling.

Peace did not last long under Laurent Kabila, the man who had marched across 
the country and ousted Mobutu, helped by troops from neighbouring Rwanda.

Congo's second war broke out in 1998 degenerating into a five-year scrap 
between dozens of rebel groups and six foreign armies. Across the country, 
armed groups ransacked towns and raped civilians while they plundered timber, 
coltan (a mineral used in mobile phones), gold and diamonds. A string of peace 
deals, concluded in 2003, brought the government, rebels and the political 
opposition together in Kinshasa to form a government and organise elections.

But the elections, which were due by the end of this month, will have to be 
delayed (probably by at least one year), with those in power accused of 
continuing to plunder, rather than rebuild, their country.

"I don't expect much from this transitional government or the elections they 
promise," says Ngosia. "If, or when, we get out of here, I'm going to pray a 
lot, try and get some money together and start my own little business."

The daily grind in Makala, like most other poor districts in the sprawling 
city of up to 9 million people, is a struggle.

Roads are potholed, electricity infrequent and Ngosia has to go to a 
neighbour's house, where she can collect water for free. Buses running to and 
from the centre of town are old VW combies, with holes cut in the metalwork to 
let air in.

On school days there is no shortage of children about the streets – just under 
52% attend primary school.

A complete education is something Ngosia would dearly love for Dieumerci. She 
never went to school, her husband only finished primary school and none of her 
three other children (aged 12, five and four) is currently studying.

In theory, this should be possible soon, as one of the concrete steps taken 
towards rebuilding Congo was the adoption in May of a new constitution, which 
pledges free primary education for all.

But Ngosia remains cynical: "I didn't even hear about this promise, but I'll 
believe it when I see it. It's not the first time we have been given promises. 
Let us see something happen."

Donors have pledged just under $6bn to rebuild Congo over the next few years, 
and every cent of it will be needed.

Since the end of the war, inflation has tumbled and growth is estimated at 7% 
this year. But official figures for per capita income remain just over $100, 
while 3.5 million people are still displaced and 80% have no access to safe 
water.

Persistent insecurity in the east means that, two years after the war, 
millions of Congolese still think in terms of survival, rather than development.

As for when Dieumerci will leave hospital, that depends, says the nurse in 
charge: "The large majority of the people who come to this hospital just can't 
afford to pay their bills."

Says Melanie Munsanga, in charge of Pavilion 12B: "Some of them have to escape 
when there are lots of visitors around, charities pick up some of the bills, 
but a lot of the time we release them after about three months."

 Factfile: Congo

Under-5s mortality (per 1,000 births): 129
Population on under $2 a day:  n/a
Debt per capita:  $143
Life expectancy:  41.8
% children in education (F/M): 24/30
 