
There are some people who need do next to nothing to be funny. Jennifer 
Coolidge only needs to appear on screen and you're primed to laugh. Oversexed 
and undereducated seems to have become her forte.

Currently, she is starring as a vampish Polish cleaning lady in the US sitcom 
2 Broke Girls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/shortcuts/2012/may/02/2-broke-girls-racist-baffling>
 where her every pout is a treat. Before that, she memorably playedLegally 
Blonde <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/89407/legally.blonde>'s 
Paulette, the scrunchied, sweetly frumpy manicurist whose stale romantic life 
Reese Witherspoon seeks to remedy. But most people know 52-year-old Coolidge as 
the ur-milf: Stifler's Mom inAmerican Pie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/79575/american.pie>. Boozed and 
sizzling, she sizes up her adolescent prey with the words, "I got some scotch. 
Aged 18 years, the way I like it." I put to her the truism that it takes a 
smart person to play dumb. "Well I think you have to believe you're dumb," she 
says. "I think if you truly believe deep down that you're dumb it really helps, 
it really comes out."

And dumb comes in handy in the world of Austenland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156702/austenland>. If you are a Jane 
Austen fan – or rather, a fetishiser of bonnetted femininity and that version 
of gender relations where women wait silently for socially awkward men in tight 
britches to stammer their proposals of lifelong bondage – then you might enjoy 
the movie.Keri Russell <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0005392/> is a 
pathologically Darcy-philic, single thirtysomething American who blows her life 
savings on a trip to England's Austenland, a country house made into an 
experiential theme park where anachronistically buff, bronzed butlers smirk and 
actors dressed as Darcy-ish fops fawn over guests paying for faked Regency 
romance.

Coolidge plays Miss Elizabeth Charming, a wealthy, not-too-clever American 
whose perfectly terrible Dick Van Dyke-ish English accent is the only really 
funny thing in the film. "Things come out in a movie and it's not planned," she 
says of Charming. "You're like, 'Where did that come from?' I don't know if I 
wanted it to sound that vulgar, but that's what happened."

Ringletted, trussed up in fuchsia, and in a perpetual state of 
over-excitement, she is as scrumptious as Miss Piggy made flesh. Today, though, 
encased in LBD body armour, aggressively tanned and towering in heels, her 
Barbie-fabulous rigid blonde waves don't so much fall as they do pillar over 
her face and shoulders. Coolidge says she grew up watching a lot of TV, 
especially British shows likeUpstairs Downstairs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/upstairs-downstairs>, "wanting to be 
one of those women so badly and knowing the harsh reality that I probably don't 
have the sophistication to pull it off."

As for Austen: "I became sort of obsessed ... I know some of the women get 
ripped off in these stories and it doesn't end up great for them but, you see, 
that never occurred to me. My fantasy was that I'd be the outspoken girl who 
could, you know, get Darcy. It's so misleading because I don't think in real 
life that happens much. I don't think men really fall in love with the 
outspoken girl."

'I feel like "cougar" sounds more predatory, it sounds more like someone 
seeking out young men and I just like it more when it's their idea. Because 
with "milf" it was really the kid's idea, you know?'

 Jennifer Coolidge in American Pie. Photograph: Rex/Moviestore Collection 
Since American Pie, Coolidge is often written up in the tabloids as the 
archetypal Hollywood cougar. "I like 'milf' better than 'cougar'," she 
clarifies. "I feel like 'cougar' just sounds more predatory, it sounds more 
like someone really seeking out young men and I just like it more when it's 
their idea. Because with 'milf' it was really the kid's idea, you know?"

Coolidge loved the film, she says, because it was a rare opportunity for her 
to play the object of desire. Even now, 14 years on, young men tend to come up 
to her in airports and ask to have their pictures taken with her and, she says, 
tremble next to her when she obliges: "I don't know if they think I'm going to 
rip their clothes off or something." She adds: "I did date younger men after 
that movie. I really dated younger men for the next 10, 15 years. I've been 
dating someone now for, let's see, about a year and a half, and, you know, he's 
a very smart, funny guy. And handsome. He's sort of the whole package."

Nonetheless, she is phlegmatic about romance in the year 2013. "There's all 
this availability and upgrading. If things don't work out with one person 
there's many other people to replace you with online. I think we're in this 
real disposable relationship time. When times get uncomfortable you just 
switch. I hate to sound jaded. But, I'm just observing. Observing how many 
times I'm talking to young girls that are having a really tough time with men. 
I love that topic, the whole relationship thing, and I think that's why I love 
all this stuff, the Jane Austen stuff."

She reveals that she went to see Sense and Sensibility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/62314/sense-and-sensibility>, the 1995 
version with Emma Thompson as Elinor Dashwood, 10 times. "That scene where she 
just hyperventilates, when she loses it and you almost think she could maybe 
keel over on the spot because it's such a big moment …"

She is talking about the bit where Thompson finds out that Hugh Grant isn't, 
in fact, engaged, and makes a noise, as Dawn French put it in The Vicar of 
Dibley, "like she's giving birth to some great enormous giant baby".

'I did a movie with Hugh Grant about five years ago and there were so many 
women who lost their minds … he has this magic in real life'

 Coolidge with Bret McKenzie and Keri Russell in Austenland. Photograph: 
Allstar/Sony Pictures Classics 
Coolidge, though, recalls it dreamily: "I think that's one of my favourite 
acting moments … if I could document my top 10, I think it's probably in my top 
two. Because that really is what that moment would be, when youthink you've 
lost the guy. And you know,Hugh Grant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/hughgrant> … I did a movie with him about 
five or six years ago [2006'sAmerican Dreamz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/111997/american.dreamz>] and there were 
so many women who lost their minds on this movie, so I didn't feel like I was 
unusual. Hugh Grant has that magic in real life, so when he's saying these 
lines, 'It's always been you', it's just devastating."

Coolidge was born in Boston, studying at the city's Emerson College before 
moving to LA and joining improv comedy troupe The Groundlings. Finally, in 
1993, her break came with a spot on Seinfeld as Jerry's masseuse girlfriend. 
Some of her greatest moments came in the mockumentaries ofChristopher Guest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2013/jul/21/christopher-guest-family-tree-interview>
 (Best In Show, For Your Consideration, A Mighty Wind) and it's with Guest, she 
says, that her tendency to crack up on set is at its worst. She has a tactic: 
"I take my nail and I dig it deep into my vein in my wrist. I sometimes have 
these very dark bruises on my wrist. But sometimes, there are people in this 
lifetime that it doesn't matter what kind of pain you inflict on yourself; when 
there's pressure not to laugh, you do the opposite."

It is off set, however, that she has found that tendency most problematic. "I 
had a guy in my acting class come into my house," she recalls. "We were 
supposed to rehearse a scene and he just broke down sobbing in my apartment. He 
was really sobbing - he was just literally hyperventilating. Then he said: 'My 
parrot Petey died today.' And like ... I couldn't, I couldn't keep my shit 
together."

If this story doesn't look that funny in print, as she tells it – lightly, 
with a kind of faux-vapid innocence – I find myself shaking with laughter, 
tears of hysteria in my eyes. "See what I mean?" she says triumphantly. "It's 
so hard! I love animals and whatever, but I couldn't keep it together; this was 
something that was absolutely devastating a friend of mine, and it just sounded 
so hilarious."

What I don't say, is that it is not the story making me laugh but her telling 
it.

Austenland is released in the UK on 27 September 

• This article was amended on 13 September 2013. A reference to "Asperger-ish 
men" was removed because its use was inconsistent with the Guardian style guide.

 