
Spirit of Columbus was a high-wing, single-engined 170mph Cessna 180, the kind 
of aircraft which in the 1960s was – and still is – the staple of private 
flying clubs around the western world. In 1964 it was already 11 years old and 
its pilot, Jerrie Mock, appeared to conform to conservative stereotypes of the 
era, as an affluent, white, middle-class American woman, just over seven stone, 
and 5ft tall. She even called herself "the flying housewife". She would have 
preferred to fly in slacks, she said, but thought the public expected her to 
wear a skirt. She kicked off her high heels once airborne.

But on 19 March that year, Mock set about shattering the stereotypes and 
establishing herself in aviation history. Just after 9.30 in the morning, she 
took off from Port Columbus, Ohio, in Spirit of Columbus, known to her as Three 
Eight Charlie, or just plain Charlie, after her radio call sign 1538 Charlie. 
Twenty-nine days later, on 17 April, she was back in Columbus, having flown 
23,000 miles, made 21 landings, and become the first woman to fly solo around 
the globe.

Until that epic, Jerrie, who has died aged 88, had never flown over water. Her 
journey had taken her out to the Azores, on to Casablanca in Morocco, and Bône 
(now Annaba) in Algeria. In Cairo she accidentally landed at a military 
airfield; in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, her plane was searched to find the man 
assumed to be the pilot – and she was applauded when the male onlookers 
realised she was the lone aviator. By 5 April Mock had arrived in New Delhi, 
and nine days later she was in Hawaii, setting out on the last Pacific leg, on 
to Oakland, California. On the way, she had encountered dud radios, severe 
icing-up, defective brakes and a malfunctioning engine.

Mock had also outpaced a rival for the record, Joan Merriam Smith 
<http://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=1955&dat=19650218&id=IcgtAAAAIBAJ&sjid=iJwFAAAAIBAJ&pg=2830,1220172>
, who had set out to circumnavigate the globe in a twin-engined Piper Apache 
from Oakland, following the route fatally pioneered in 1937 by Amelia Earhart. 
Both women had drawn inspiration from Earhart, an interwar American heroine and 
in 1932 the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic, who had disappeared 
over the Pacific in 1937 while attempting a round-the-world flight.

Earhart had been a rarity as a female aviator. So, in 1960, were Mock and 
Smith, two of 12,471 women in the United States then licensed to fly. By the 
end of the decade, the numbers were close to 30,000, a growth which was part of 
a generational transformation. The equal pay and civil rights acts affected 
women in aviation, as did the foundation, 14 months after Mock's flight, of the 
National Organisation of Women. "I was never going to abide by manmade laws 
that said women couldn't do something," Mock told Jim Massie of the Columbus 
Dispatch in 1994. "I guess I was a women's libber before it was popular. I knew 
one thing: I wanted to see the world."

Daughter of Blanche (nee Wright) and Timothy Fredritz, she was born in Newark, 
Ohio, and educated at Newark high school. Having flown for the first time in 
1930 with her father, in the cockpit of a Ford Trimotor transport, she was the 
only girl at her school taking an engineering course, just as she was, in 1943, 
the only woman enrolled for an aeronautical engineering degree at Ohio State 
University. Two years later she left to marry Russell Mock, a pilot and 
sometime advertising executive.

In 1956 she began flying lessons, qualifying in 1958. By 1962 she was 
meticulously planning her record-breaking journey– which would receive official 
sanction from the US National Aeronautic Association – and accumulating 750 
hours of flying time. Her husband threw himself into fundraising, and preparing 
the aircraft for the flight.

In Spirit of Columbus, Mock set seven records. She was the first woman to fly 
solo around the world, the first woman to fly across the Pacific and Atlantic 
oceans, the first woman to do so in a single engined-plane, the first woman to 
fly the Atlantic from the US to Africa, and the first woman to fly the Pacific 
west to east. She set the female speed record for round-the-world, and 
established the speed record in a Type C1-c aircraft (that is, one weighing 
less than 1,626kg).

On 4 May 1964, the US president, Lyndon Johnson, presented her with the 
Federal Aviation Administration's Exceptional Service Decoration, and the 
Fédération Aéronautique Internationale awarded her its Louis Blériot silver 
medal, making her the first American and first woman so honoured. The Spirit of 
Columbus was later donated to the US National Air and Space Museum, in 
Washington, DC, where it remains.

More records came later, in a Cessna P106, including eight fastest speed 
records on recognised courses, including Columbus to San Juan and Oakland to 
Honolulu. But by the end of the 1960s, flying had become too expensive. Mock 
wrote Three Eight Charlie (1970) about her round-the-world flight, and later 
retired to Quincy, Florida.

Mock's marriage ended in divorce. She was predeceased by two sons, Gary and 
Roger. She is survived by her daughter, Valerie, 12 grandchildren, several 
great-grandchildren, and a younger sister, Susan.

• Geraldine Lois Fredritz Mock, aviator, born 22 November 1925; died 30 
September 2014
 