
"A few years ago, my friend Daniel Smith [of indie oddballs Danielson Famile] 
invited me to the Tin Angel, a tiny club in Philadelphia, to hear Jimmy Scott. 
I had no clue who he was, but I was blown away. He sang in this lilting, odd, 
almost grandmotherly voice, but it was also so youthful. It was like he was 
extremely old and extremely young simultaneously.

"Afterwards, Daniel loaned me a live record, with If You Only Knew, Very Truly 
Yours, andSometimes I Feel Like a Motherless Child  
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x1tcij_jimmy-scott-motherless-child-live_creation>
on it. That's the track that kills me every time I hear it. I already knew the 
song, but I've never heard it like that. It almost sounds like he's singing in 
a different time signature or tempo, and yet he's very deliberately placing his 
phrases in all of these bizarre upbeats. Everything is so suspended, his voice 
just drifts. "We saw him again a couple of years later in Manhattan. He was 
noticeably more feeble, he seemed to have aged a lot, but his singing was just 
as otherworldly. There's this joy that he has, a joyful presence. When he's 
singing he's so grateful to be there, and so alive. He makes himself readily 
available at these shows, but I was too nervous to go up to him. The band play 
a few songs, he sings, and then he leaves and sits to the side somewhere and is 
really accessible and sweet. He's so angelic.

"He made some great records in the 50s and 60s but then he was out of music 
for so long. Then Lou Reed used him [on 1992'sMagic and Loss], and he was in 
Twin Peaks <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nEK11rS3dRI>, and then someone 
re-released the old records and he started performing again. Now, there's a lot 
more awareness of his work.

"Pop music is so structured, and I'm excited to try and challenge that in my 
own work. Every time Jimmy Scott sings, it's the same but slightly different. I 
don't know how he does that or where he gets that from. I think it's instinct. 
Nothing he does is by chance, he's in complete control of what he's doing. He's 
just beautiful and unique."

Key recording: The Source(Label M, 1969)
 