
Jo Pavey has been given the chance to defend her European 10,000m title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/aug/12/jo-pavey-gold-european-athletics-championships-zurich>
 in Amsterdam next week – and to stake a last-ditch claim for an Olympic place. 
The 42-year-old mother of two is part of a 98-strong British squad for the 
championships, which also includes theLondon 2012 long jump gold medallist, 
Greg Rutherford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/04/britain-greg-rutherford-olympic-gold>
, and Dina Asher-Smith in the 200m.

Adam Gemili enjoys ‘best feeling’ after qualifying for 200m in Rio
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/26/adam-gemili-best-feeling-qualifying-200m-rio-olympics>
Pavey and Rutherford are among six reigning European champions to be included 
– alongside Martyn Rooney in the 400m, Tiffany Porter in the 100m hurdles,Adam 
Gemili <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-gemili> in the 100m and James 
Dasaolu in the 4x100m – in a squad that is far stronger than expected.

The UK performance director, Neil Black, said he believed his squad was ready 
to make a statement before the Olympics begin in August. “The bottom line is 
this is a great team,” he said. “We are really serious about the European 
championships and the athletes are desperate to compete. It says a lot that 
someone likeGreg Rutherford <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/greg-rutherford> 
regards this event as critical and wants to win another title.”

Black also confirmed there would be a race-off in the 200m between Nethaneel 
Mitchell-Blake, who has run 19.95sec this year, and Zharnel Hughes, who was 
fifth at the world championships in Beijing last year, to decide who will take 
the final 200m spot alongside Gemili and Danny Talbot for Rio.

“They are the two guys in the frame,” said Black. “They have both had a few 
challenges recently, which are relatively minor, but when you are running at 
the speeds they produce that can affect rhythm. They both know that they have 
to show their form and fitness and we are excited to see what outcome will be.”

Black said that, while he was disappointed that Mitchell-Blake pulled out 
minutes before he was due to race in the UK trials on Sunday, he would not be 
holding a grudge. “We are looking forward and he is clearly an amazing athlete 
and lovely guy,” he said. “It is going to be truly exciting to see where he 
ends up.”

Pavey’s selection is the most intriguing. She became an overnight sensation at 
the age of 40 when she won the European title at Zurich in 2014 but her hopes 
of becoming the first British female track athlete to compete in five Olympics 
appeared to be dashed when she finished well down the field in the UK 10,000m 
trials after suffering an illness last month.

However, Black believes Pavey has shown enough since recovering from a chest 
infection to be selected for Amsterdam and does not rule out her also making it 
to Rio.

“Jo is clear she is on an upward trend but now she has to run a time that puts 
her in the top 24 in the world,” he said. “That is what she has got to do. It 
is a tough task but it is one that is achievable if she maintains her current 
progression.”

Mo Farah and Jessica Ennis-Hill, who both won golds on ‘Super Saturday’ at 
London 2012 on the same day as Rutherford, have opted to pass on the 
competition, which takes place from 6-10 July. The pair, along with Katarina 
Johnson-Thompson, Lynsey Sharp and nine others have decided instead to focus on 
preparations for Rio.

Black, however, still expects his team to top the medal table next week. “We 
have picked our biggest team ever for the European championships and given 
everyone the best possible chance to put themselves in the frame for the 
Olympics in Rio,” he said. “We expect every athlete to make their individual 
final, with many challenging for places on the podium.”

GB squad – men

100m James Ellington, Adam Gemili, Richard Kilty; 200m Danny Talbot, Nethaneel 
Mithchell-Blake, Zharnel Hughes;400m Martyn Rooney, Jarryd Dunn; 800m Michael 
Rimmer, Jamie Webb, Elliot Giles;1500m Jake Wightman, Lee Emanuel , Tom 
Lancashire;5,000m Jonathan Davies, Jonathan Taylor; 10,000m Andy Vernon, Dewi 
Griffiths;3,000m steeplechase Rob Mullett; 110m hurdles Andy Pozzi, Lawrence 
Clarke, William Sharman;400m hurdles Jack Green, Rhys Williams, Tom Burton; 
high jumpChris Baker, Robbie Grabarz; pole vault Luke Cutts; long jump Greg 
Rutherford, Dan Bramble;triple jump Nathan Douglas, Julian Reid; hammer Nick 
Miller, Chris Bennett, Mark Dry;decathlon Ashley Bryant; 4x100m relay 
Ellington, Gemili, Kilty, Talbot, Mithchell-Blake, Hughes, Chijindu Ujah, James 
Dasaolu, Harry Aikines-Aryeetey, Ojie Edoburun;4x400m relay Jarryd Dunn, Jack 
Green, Rabah Yousif, Delano Williams, Matthew Hudson-Smith, Nigel Levine;
Half-Marathon CupCallum Hawkins, Tsegai Tewedle, Derek Hawkins, Jonathan Hay, 
Matt Bond, Lee Merrien

Women

100m Asha Philip, Desiree Henry; 200m Dina Asher-Smith, Jodie Williams; 400m 
Anyika Onuora, Christine Ohuruogu;800m Adelle Tracey, Alison Leonard, Jenny 
Meadows;1500m Sarah McDonald, Melissa Courtney; 5,000m Steph Twell, Laura 
Whittle, Eilish McColgan;10,000m Kate Avery, Jessica Andrews, Jo Pavey; 3,000m 
steeplechaseLennie Waite, Rosie Clarke; 100m hurdles Tiffany Porter, Serita 
Solomon, Lucy Hatton;high jump Isobel Pooley; long jump Shara Proctor, Lorraine 
Ugen, Jazmin Sawyers;triple jump Laura Samuel; Shot Rachel Wallader; discus 
Jade Lally;hammer Sophie Hitchon; javelin Goldie Sayers; heptathlon Morgan Lake;
4x100m relayPhilip, Henry, Asher-Smith, Daryll Neita, Bianca Williams, Louise 
Bloor, Shannon Hylton;4x400m relay Anyika Onuora, Seren Bundy-Davies, Emily 
Diamond, Eilidh Doyle, Perri Shakes-Drayton, Margaret Adeoye, Kelly Massey;
half-marathon cupAlyson Dixon, Tina Muir, Charlotte Purdue, Gemma Steel, Lily 
Partridge, Jessica Coulson
 