
Shalina Parveen is a model Muslim in David Cameron's Britain. She left 
Bangladesh a decade ago, settled in Rochdale, and is now learning English 16 
hours a week at college. She is married to a minicab driver, has two young 
children, and is determined to find her own job. "I want to do a child care 
course," she says. "I really want to do it. But I have to improve my English to 
get accepted."

A week ago Cameron made a controversial speech declaring that state-sponsored 
multiculturalism had, in his view, failed. He blamed the radicalisation of some 
Muslim youths and the phenomenon of home-grown terrorism on a sense of 
alienation that can build among young people living in separate communities 
with no anchor in the culture of their homeland.

There were practical things that could be done, he said. "That includes making 
sure that immigrants speak the language of their new home and ensuring that 
people are educated in the elements of a common culture and curriculum."

Shalina agrees. "You have to speak English, because it helps with everything. 
If you want to go to the doctor, or if people ring you. It makes you feel more 
relaxed in the community."

Unfortunately for her and thousands like her, the government is about to pull 
the plug. From September ministers are cutting back on public funding of 
English for speakers of other languages (Esol).

Under the new rules, the state will limit free places to students on 
jobseeker's allowance or employment support allowance – benefits paid to those 
who are actively seeking work.

For those receiving other benefits, such as housing benefit, income support or 
tax credits – who are all currently eligible – free places will not be 
available. Funding for courses in the workplace will also go, and it will be 
left to employers to pay.

Shalina, who receives tax credit and will therefore lose the right to free 
lessons, is distraught. She says she will be unable to meet the £1,000-a-year 
cost. "I cannot pay that. I will have to stop lessons, stop learning English," 
she says. Several of her classmates, including 28-year-old Nisreen, a refugee 
from Iraq, who is now on jobseeker's allowance but will soon be downgraded to 
income support, having failed to get a job, say the same. "I don't know what to 
do. I can't pay. I will have to stop," says Nisreen.

Patricia Sullivan, the curriculum leader at Hopwood Hall College in Rochdale, 
where the women study, says she finds it difficult to believe that students who 
have worked so hard will now be denied help from a government that preaches 
about the need for them to learn English.

She says that around 70% of the students at this and other colleges across the 
country will pull out of courses. There will also be large-scale redundancies 
among language teachers. "I just don't understand it. It defeats me," she says.

A national campaign has been organised by the National Association for 
Teaching English and other Community Languages to Adults to try to get 
ministers to change their minds. "The cuts in further education funding are 
creating the most serious crisis for the future of Esol that has ever been 
seen. If the government truly wants people to integrate and be part of the 'big 
society', then language is the key, " said a spokesman.

There seems no hope of a reprieve. A spokesman for the Department for Business 
Innovation and Skills said the cuts would go ahead as planned from September. A 
statement said help would be targeted on those actively seeking work. "The 
government's skills strategy delivers targeted help where it is most needed to 
enable people to prepare for work and get on in their careers. That is why we 
will fully fund Esol courses for unemployed people on active benefits where 
English language skills are a barrier to entering employment."

As for those in work, it would be the employers who would benefit, so they 
would have to pay. "As Esol training provides clear benefits to employers, it 
is right that employers as well as learners contribute towards the costs when 
public funds are limited."

John Denham, the shadow secretary of state for business, innovation and 
skills, said the new restrictions would undo work by the Labour government to 
concentrate funding for Esol on areas most in need.

All of which is of little comfort to those affected. In Rochdale, Shalina and 
her classmates are making the best of their last few months of tuition. Parveen 
Ahktar, a single mother who came to this country from Pakistan, said: "It is 
very sad because I will not be able to learn on my own. And sad because I like 
to learn English."
 