
No matter how much experience you have of being interviewed or conducting 
interviews yourself, that all-important meeting with the chief executive can 
make or break your move into senior management. How do you ensure you come out 
on top and differentiate yourself from other candidates?

Here are five key questions almost every chief executive needs to have 
answered in the interview. They may not ask them out loud, but you can be sure 
they're thinking of them.

Are you commercial?

Your technical skills may have got you to this stage in your career, but 
unless you have well-rounded commercial skills and business acumen, you are 
unlikely to progress further. To shine in the interview, talk numbers and 
results. Show that you understand what's going on in the business outside the 
confines of your own department and show financial intelligence.

Tip: When preparing for your interview, go back through your key achievements 
in your career and find out what the numbers were. It's not enough to say the 
work you did resulted in improvements – prove it. Show the return on investment 
for the projects and activities you led.

Are you strategic?

You may be fantastic operationally – and this is a good skill to have – but to 
bring in someone at a senior level, the chief executive needs to be satisfied 
that you can think and behave strategically. They are looking for someone who 
thinks further ahead than next week or next month. They want a person who 
understands the organisation's vision, mission and goals. If they don't have 
them documented, they may want you to help create the vision, mission and 
goals, so you need to show you're up to the job.

Tip: Think about examples when you have behaved strategically and practise 
talking about what you did. You probably won't be asked this question outright 
so you need to weave your strategic abilities into the answers to other 
questions – make sure you use the word "strategy" at several points in the 
interview. Look at the organisation's website to research their vision, mission 
and business goals and make sure you refer to them in the interview.

Do you understand our culture?

Every organisation's culture is unique. Even when you've worked at a very 
similar organisation, there will be differences in the way things are done. 
This is as much about understanding the organisation's values as the 
personalities within it.

The chief executive needs to be satisfied that you are going to fit in and not 
rock the boat too much. This isn't about being a "yes" person; more about how 
well you will work with the other senior executives.

Tip: You can get a good feel for the culture from the website. Look at how 
they present themselves to the world: go through with a fine-toothed comb to 
see what they say and how they say it. Also look at how they have photographed 
the senior people in the organisation. These portraits can be very telling and 
also give you a good indication of the dress code.

Do you respond well to being challenged?

At a senior level, you are likely to be challenged on your decisions and the 
work of your department. Will you run out of the office in tears, explode in 
rage or deal with it calmly in an appropriate manner? You might be asked this 
question or, more likely, the chief executive will be challenging in the 
interview to test how you respond.

Tip: Be ready to back up anything you claim in the interview. Avoid giving 
vague answers as these are likely to be challenged. Deal with any challenging 
comments assertively but not aggressively – after all, this person could be 
your next boss.

Can I trust you?

As they say, it's lonely at the top and the chief executive is well aware of 
the political games played at work. It can take a lot for the chief executive 
to open up about any development issues they have or any decisions they are 
struggling with. They need to trust that anything they discuss with you will be 
confidential and handled discreetly. Do you want to be seen as their right-hand 
person or the gossip who goes blabbing to the rest of the executive team?

Tip: Demonstrate that you have a trusting relationship with your current boss 
by not being drawn into any discussions about what you like or dislike about 
working with them. If you have been a sounding-board to a senior person in the 
past, you let them know this is the case without divulging any confidential 
information.

To perform well in an interview with a chief executive, you need to think like 
a chief executive. If you were in their position, what would you be looking for?

Hannah McNamara is an interview and career coach at HRM coaching 
<http://www.hrmglobal.co.uk/>. This is an edited version of an article that 
originally ran onChangeboard <http://www.changeboard.com/content/3696>.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional?guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
. To get more content and advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our 
weekly update and careers ebook 
<https://register.theguardian.com/careers/?guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
.
 