
After Ryan Giggs unexpectedly stole the show to claim the BBC Sports 
Personality of the Year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bbc-sports-personality-of-the-year> award 
last year, footballers are conspicuously absent on the 10-strong BBC shortlist 
in 2010. That will come as no surprise following England's disastrous World Cup 
performance in South Africa and a myriad unwelcome sex-scandal headlines; 
instead the shortlist represents the major triumphs of the year – from the 
Ryder Cup winners Graeme McDowell and Lee Westwood to Jessica Ennis's 
domination of the heptathlon and the pentathlon for a second year in a row.

It is the jumps jockey Tony McCoy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tony-mccoy>, though, who is the bookmakers' 
tip to take the BBC title. In April the 36-year-old finally won the Grand 
National at his 15th attempt, adding this piece of silverware to an incredible 
collection that includes a record 15 champion jumps jockey titles and more than 
3,000 winners. Should McCoy also win the BBC award, the votes will no doubt 
reflect his entire career achievements as much as recognising a successful 12 
months – a sentiment that would echo Giggs's victory in 2009.

McDowell is likely to be a frontrunner in the voting after a scintillating 
year from the golfer that included winning the US Open – the first European to 
do so since Tony Jacklin in 1970 – and helping to clinch victory over the US 
Ryder Cup team in October. McDowell played in the final singles match of the 
competition, hitting a birdie on the 16th green to secure his lead and retain 
it in a match that was all about holding his nerve.

Should the England bowler Graeme Swann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/graeme-swann> perform well at the Ashes in 
the lead-up to the vote he could swing the poll – his Twitter feed has almost 
100,000 followers. The cyclist Mark Cavendish, who also made the shortlist last 
year, repeated his success in 2010 with an impressive five stage wins in the 
Tour de France and a points jersey at the Tour of Spain, the first Briton in 21 
years to earn the sprinters' title at a grand tour.

Only two women are on the list, which some may feel is a slight on the many 
British sportswomen making their mark in world-class competition. Beth Tweddle, 
who came third in the 2006 BBC poll, won her third world title this year, 
confirming her status as Britain's most successful gymnast in history, surely 
deserved a mention, as did the road cyclist Emma Pooley, who won her first 
world title in the time trial in September along with a string of other 
prominent races to stake her claim. But Ennis andAmy Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/amy-williams> certainly deserve their places.

Following on from Ennis's world title last year the Sheffield-based 
heptathlete was once again in winning form in 2010, claiming the world indoor 
and European titles, setting championship records in each, while Williams's 
Olympic gold in the skeleton was the first individual British Winter Olympics 
gold medal in 30 years.

At 50 years old, Phil "The Power" Taylor, who was crowned world champion for 
the 15th time in his career this year, is the oldest personality on the list, 
while the 16-year-old diver Tom Daley – twice the winner in the Young Sports 
Personality of the Year contest – is the youngest having secured individual and 
pairs gold medals at the Commonwealth Games in Delhi.

The only name on the list that may cause some consternation is the boxer David 
Haye, whose world title fight against an ageing Audley Harrison this month was 
widely scorned.

The awards ceremony will be held in Birmingham on Sunday, 19 December.

The Sports Personality shortlist

Mark Cavendish, Tom Daley, Jessica Ennis, David Haye, Tony McCoy, Graeme 
McDowell <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/graeme-mcdowell>, Graeme Swann, 
Phil Taylor, Lee Westwood, Amy Williams
 