
Newcastle's director of football, Joe Kinnear, has hit back at the club's 
record goalscorer,Alan Shearer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alan-shearer>, claiming: "This is a guy 
who doesn't have a clue about coaching."

Shearer, who scored 206 goals in 404 games for Newcastle, told The Sun last 
week that the appointment of Kinnear had "undermined" the manager, Alan Pardew, 
and said recent events at St James' Park had turned the club into a "laughing 
stock".

Kinnear responded angrily to Shearer's comments in an interview in the Sunday 
Times, and highlighted the former England striker's failure to keep Newcastle 
in the Premier League in the final eight games of the 2008-09 season, when he 
succeeded Kinnear after he had suffered a heart attack.

"What Shearer says is diabolical," said Kinnear. "This is a guy who hasn't got 
a clue about coaching."

He added: "The last game of the [2008-09] season he came up with the master 
idea of playing Damien Duff at left-back. Damien is one of the best 
left-wingers in the business, but can't tackle. And we went down with an own 
goal from Damien. Shearer keeps slagging me off. He is being disrespectful to 
me. I am entitled to fight back."

The interview with the Sunday Times was his first in print since returning to 
Newcastle, following on from two colourful and controversial interviews on 
television and radiowhere he made a number of erroneous claims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2013/jun/18/joe-kinnear-newcastle-interview-video>
, mispronounced the names of several players and claimed he had "more 
intelligence" than Magpies supporters.

On Sunday, Kinnear apologised to Newcastle fans for the latter remark. "I 
regret what I said about the supporters," he said. "I can't get anybody to say 
that Joe has the utmost respect for the supporters and they are the most 
important people at the club.

"I always go to their forums and loved having the craic with them around the 
city when I was manager there. There are 10% I'm never going to win over, that 
is the point I was trying to make, but I regret what I said and if I offended 
any Newcastle fans I apologise."

Kinnear's appointment immediately created speculation around the future of 
Pardew and also of influential chief scout, Graham Carr, who both now report 
into him. But the Irishman insists he will not be interfering in first-team 
matters and believes his job may be under bigger threat than the former 
Charlton manager's.

"I will have the job of overlooking the reserves and the youth team and see 
where we are progressing, as well as being chief advisor to [the chairman] Mike 
Ashley," he said.

"If things are going wrong at the club I am accountable and he will be coming 
through me and not anybody else. Everybody thinks Pardew is under pressure. 
He's not. I am. I could get sacked.

"The manager: the running of the teams when it comes to the players needed, 
the selection of players on match days, the tactics and the public face when 
addressing the supporters via the media will be Alan Pardew."

He added: "He was looking for clarification about my role, not his own, and I 
explained my role to him in full.

"I said, 'You are on an eight-year contract and my role is to support you and 
give you the best help possible. I have been informed that you found it 
difficult last season to speak to Mike or get messages to Mike about various 
things'.

"I am not after his job. Alan knew there was a director of football coming in. 
He felt a little isolated and Mike sussed that."

Since Kinnear was appointed, the managing director, Derek Llambias, has also 
resigned and there has been a minor furoreover the renaming of the Shearer's 
Bar at St James' Park. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jun/20/newcastle-alan-shearer-bar-sign>
 