
Johanna Konta’s heroics at the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> could earn her up to £1m 
this year in sponsorship, according to the sports marketing consultant Nigel 
Currie.

The 24-year-old has emerged from the doldrums of women’s tennis in Britain to 
distinguish herself as a genuine viable trailblazer for a new, more prosperous 
era. Konta’s run to the semi-finals in Melbourne, where she was beaten by 
Germany’s Angelique Kerber, has led to a sudden increase of exposure which has 
also netted her £370,000, well over half what she had previously earned.

Johanna Konta’s new challenge: keeping focus as life off court changes | Simon 
Cambers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jan/28/johanna-konta-new-challenge-australian-open>
Currie believes there will be no shortage of marketing firms looking to take 
advantage of her rapid rise to fame. “She is very talented so opportunities 
should arise,” he said. “Jo’s performance is definitely a look to the future. 
If she continues the way she’s going, then she could earn up to seven figures 
from off-court ventures.”

Konta’s achievements this week, which have not been matched by a British woman 
in 33 years, have catapulted her from 47th in the rankings to the top 30. There 
has been some promising emerging talent in recent years but, while Laura Robson 
has been dogged by injury and Heather Watson by inconsistency, the public have 
longed for a new poster girl to pin the nation’s hopes on every year. The 
burning question is if she is here to stay.

Steve Martin, chief executive of the PR firm M&C Saatchi Sport, believes it is 
too early to make a definitive call and urged “a reality check”. “It has been 
somewhat of a silent rise as she’s come from nowhere,” he said. “If you were to 
ask people before the tournament, most people wouldn’t have known who she was.

“Britain is looking for a new golden girl now after the hysteria of Jess Ennis 
and the preceding Denise Lewis but she still has a big job to do and there 
needs to be a reality check. It is great she has got to a major semi final but 
must show consistency before she reaches that level of exposure.”

The Australian-born Konta, who this week described herself as the “Jason 
Bourne of tennis”, seemingly has the charisma as well as the playing talent to 
equip her for a long stay at the top of the sport.

However, Currie does admit she will have to develop her personality and 
“Britishness” to win over the public but says the uniqueness of her achievement 
will ensure she has opportunities to expand herself as a brand.
 