
When I arrive at John Prescott's flat, he is at his desk, a telephone in one 
hand and a letter in the other. "Can't get the bugger to answer," he growls. He 
is trying, he explains, to call a man called O'Reilly, who has just written him 
an astonishingly rude letter on stationery illustrated with a drawing of a 
foxhunter.

"I always ring 'em up," the former deputy prime minister explains, as he goes 
to dial again. Is it a drag to have to respond to abusive correspondents, I 
ask, or does he enjoy it?

"Oh, I want to ring him!" Alas, the man fails to pick up the phone, so 
Prescott offers a vivid impression of what he would have said had O'Reilly 
answered. "I'd start off saying, 'Reilly! Prescott here. I've got your letter 
here.'" Prescott adopts a music hall caricature of a posh accent. "And it just 
proves how ignorant you foxhunting fraternity are! The language is terrible, 
and me as a former seaman, well, I'm not used to it. Obviously it's normal for 
you public-school boys. And I know you went to public school," he adds, 
triumphantly knowing. "Addressing me as 'Prescott' was the giveaway!"

Then he is off on to an anecdote about another rude letter-writer, a colonel 
whose snooty butler refused to put Prescott through when he called. Somehow the 
story collides into another one, this time about a prison riot in the 70s, when 
the governor was insulting to him, and the officers reported Prescott to the 
police for an out-of-date car tax disc. Now suddenly it is 2001, and we are in 
Rhyl, the scene of his famous election campaign punch. "And the sisters were 
wetting their bloody knickers, with Harriet Harman saying: 'Ooh, we can't have 
a macho in our ranks.' But it was a conspiracy between the foxhunters andAdam 
Boulton <https://www.theguardian.com/media/adam-boulton> and Sky! Sky used that 
footage to try and get rid of me! That were Boulton: 'Press your red button if 
you think Prescott should be sacked.' I'd have pressed his red button," 
Prescott glowers, "if I'd got anywhere near him."

Grievances keep tumbling out of him, a great waterfall of gleeful indignation 
and affront. On and on it comes, this torrent of memory, until, without any 
warning, he shudders to a halt and peers across at me suspiciously, as if only 
just registering my presence.

"What paper," he demands, "are you on anyway?"

I last interviewed Prescott in 2008, only a year after he had stood down from 
government. At the time, I remember marvelling that this great man-mountain of 
ungovernable emotion could have been in Downing Street for more than a decade – 
and three years on it is not so much a marvel as a total mystery. He is quite 
unlike any other politician I have ever met, with a mind that zigzags about all 
over the place, defying any convention of logic or order; and very rarely does 
he respond to a question with a direct answer. It is impossible to tell if he 
has heard the question and deliberately chosen to ignore it, or whether his 
mind has heard something else altogether, but the effect is less like a 
conversation than the confusing experience of eavesdropping on a crossed 
telephone wire.

He says he talks so fast because of his trade union background. "My experience 
of life is you don't go slow, or some bugger at a strike meeting'll jump in 
when you're drawing for breath, so you've got to keep talking and breathing." 
He can be gloriously catty, impersonating former cabinet colleagues with silly 
voices and a scornful roll of the eyes; at one point he has a bitch about David 
Blunkett, then nods to my notepad and adds: "Put it in braille, so he can read 
it." A baffling mixture of canny and unworldly, loyal and anarchic, he is in 
one sense an open book – only, it's a book full of indecipherable squiggles, 
and the qualities that made him so indispensable in Downing Street are 
impossible to read.

Everyone always said his real role was to provide a reassuring link between 
New and old Labour. But it can't be as simple as that, for why would both Tony 
Blair and Gordon Brown have trusted him to be their marriage-broker through the 
long years of bitter rivalry? That Prescott was indispensable to the fragile 
balance of power is beyond dispute – and you don't get to perform that role 
unless you have remarkable interpersonal skills, emotional tact and political 
judgment. It's just that for the life of me I can't see any evidence of it.

But God, he's good fun. A while ago the Radio 4 continuity announcer Alice 
Arnold tweeted that Prescott, a seaman in his youth, should read the Shipping 
Forecast; he promptly tweeted back with "*clears throat* Humber. Wind 
north-east 4 or 5, occasionally 6," and now the joke has turned into a stunt 
for Comic Relief. On Saturday 19 March, he will read the Shipping Forecast for 
real on Radio 4, just after midnight, to raise money for eating disorder 
charities, obliquely referencing his own history of bulimia.

For someone so sensitive about personal slights, he is surprisingly willing to 
send himself up these days. Last year he performed a cameo role playing himself 
in the sitcom Gavin and Stacey, last month he argued with Jeremy Clarkson on 
Top Gear about his M4 bus lane, and he is currently featuring in a 
moneysupermarket.com advert,playing himself as an angry-looking boxer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2011/jan/30/john-prescott-flogs-car-insurance>
 who gets knocked out by his own punchbag. There is a fine line between good 
humour and self-parody, and when the advert came out I did worry, but he says 
it had nothing to do with showing off. "No! No, I come to the Lords, and I've 
got a fucking part-time secretary! That's why I did the boxing advert. To get 
money for a secretary."

He launches into a furious rant about the iniquities of pay and expenses in the
House of Lords <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lords>. "They pay you £300 
a day and if you're not working you claim £150. That's supposed to be for your 
accommodation and business expenses. But you've got to tick on at 2.30. Well, I 
go in there at seven or eight o'clock in the morning. I'm not paid until after 
2.30. I suppose that's all right for the blokes from the City who turn up after 
work. But I'm there from seven in the morning! And I share an office now with 
four lords, and they don't give me a full-time secretary. That's why I did the 
advert; to get money to hire a secretary."

Did he have any misgivings about appearing in an advert? "I did, yeah. What 
would the public think? But, well, first of all I wasn't doing the Parkinson 
thing, where you're advertising a particular product. This was basically saying 
go on to a compare dotcom." Then he is back on to his rant about the Lords.

"Look, right, the MP gets a full wage throughout the year, he gets money for 
the secretary, he gets travel expenses, all them things. I get £150 a day, 
right? And no fucking secretary, right? Now I'm doing the same job! If I was a 
union official, I'd be bloody leading them out! Now, look, I don't mind doing a 
job, but pay me the same as what you pay others I'm working alongside. It 
drives me, in a way, into doing other work, which I've always been against and 
never done for 40 years. Look, for 40 years I've never had a second job, just 
simply done my job. And, shockingly, I've had one house and one car. According 
to the press, I've had about five bloody cars! But I've got to be politically 
effective otherwise I might as well just get out of the game."

Some people, I suggest, might wonder why he doesn't just relax and enjoy the 
Lords as a gentleman's club. At 72, couldn't he kick back a bit? He looks 
genuinely appalled.

"I can't. I can't. That might be all right for the blokes from the City. But 
I'm not that kind of politician."

Prescott is certainly keeping himself busy, representing the Council of Europe 
and campaigning on climate change, human rights and the ongoing phone-hacking 
scandal at News International. He is particularly proud of a recent charitable 
venture to kit out an Indian village with 100 solar lamps. He is also one of 
the loudest voices in Westminster currently objecting to the alternative vote 
(AV).

Is there any truth in the claim that AV will help to restore public trust and 
political accountability? "Absolute nonsense! And what's the other thing they 
say? 'It'll bring in hard-working MPs.' The buggers that say it are part-time 
themselves half the time! Cashing in on their expenses while telling us we need 
to reform? What a load of crap! Clegg can't even remember when he's at work!"

Opponents of AV appear to be increasingly persuaded that the way to defeat it 
is by making the vote a referendum onNick Clegg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nickclegg>, but Prescott is doubtful 
about this strategy. "People have an opinion about Clegg, we all know he won 
The X Factor we call the general election, right? But we found with The X 
Factor, like, with the what do you call them? The Dead Beats? No, the Jedwards. 
People kept voting for them even though they were rubbish!"

He does not really think the electorate would take the same perverse pleasure 
in supporting Clegg, does he? "Well, Clegg won The X Factor, didn't he? And now 
we're getting the fucking result!"

So if Clegg shouldn't be the main focus of the anti-AV campaign, what should 
its message be? "I think the clear message is coalition. It's coalition. It's 
whether you can trust a political system to produce something you want when you 
vote in an election. And coalitions are less likely to do that."

Prescott isn't exactly disloyal to his leader, but his support is decidedly 
lukewarm. I ask how he thinks Ed is doing. "Who?" he says.Ed Miliband 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband>, I remind him. Prescott sighs.

"Look, I think he's got a difficult job. I always said I disagreed with his 
campaign, 'cos he talks as if there was no record. I think he's now put his 
jacket on, though, thank Christ. All this business of no tie, no jacket, I 
think that's wrong." I ask if he thinks Labour would be doing better under Ed's 
brother David, but Prescott is off on another rant about a political TV show he 
recently appeared on, whose producers told him, "We don't do ties." "I do," he 
told them. "You look bloody scruffy."

He has spoken to the last Labour leader only once since Brown left office. "I 
talk to Tony more than Gordon. But then Tony keeps in contact. Gordon switches 
off. I'm not going to tell you what I think about that, 'cos you'll bloody well 
print it. But we hear more from his wife than him, don't we? What is it with 
this wifeocracy? All the wives! Cherie Blair. Even Cameron's wife. They're all 
running round the fashion shops giving their political views. It's a 
wifeocracy! They're not elected by anybody! I mean, bloody hell, you've only 
got to talk about the Speaker's wife, haven't you? They only get on 'cos of who 
they're married to! They might not like this, but that's what it basically is."

Blair, in his memoir, describes Prescott as something of a dinosaur when it 
comes to his attitude towards women, and Prescott cheerfully admits, "I've 
never changed a nappy in my life." But then, unexpectedly tenderly, he adds: 
"But I do realise that was a mistake. Seeing my son David with his daughter, I 
see I was wrong. I lost the enjoyment. I don't put my arms round my sons today, 
and I think I made a real mistake. The macho style. I made many mistakes about 
family life." When did he last tell his sons – both in their 40s – that he 
loved them? "I don't think ever. I don't think I ever have."

He says it is not true that his own marriage has been radically reformed since 
his affair with his diary secretary was exposed in 2006. People may think his 
wife Pauline is now in charge, but he says that's nonsense. "She's had her 
changes, though," he chuckles. "Now she insists on sitting in the back of the 
car," and he mimics a royal wave. And she does have a much higher public 
profile – inspired largely by her show-stealing appearance in a documentary he 
made in 2008about social class 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2008/nov/04/johnprescott-socialexclusion>.

"That programme was supposed to be all about class and it turned out to be all 
about my wife! They cut out the parts about bloody class!" His wife now, he 
laughs, receives invitations to functions addressed to "Pauline Prescott plus 
guest". He says he doesn't mind that at all; in fact, it makes him very proud. 
He fears he may have underestimated her intelligence for most of their married 
life, on account of her having been a housewife. Then, quite abruptly, he stops 
and glares. "What's this bloody article about? You writing an encyclopaedia on 
social life or something?"

Truthfully, by now I'm not entirely sure what it is about, for it is very hard 
to maintain any train of thought in the face of Prescott's thundering stream of 
consciousness. I'd planned to ask all about his campaign to get to the bottom 
of the tabloid phone-hacking scandal, but he unleashes a 20-minute tirade on 
the subject, by the end of which I have no idea what's going on. It is 
literally incomprehensible. But he sounds as if he is loving the battle, and a 
war against Murdoch, Fleet Street, and the Metropolitan police must be the 
perfect storm for Prescott.

"I do love it!" he exclaims happily. "I don't have to worry about what Gordon 
or Blair or whoever will think if I do this or that now." He jabs a finger into 
his chest. "I'm speaking for JP now." And off he strides to the House of Lords, 
for a meeting with officials, to shout at them about his lack of secretarial 
support.
 