
John Bercow was tonight elected as the new Speaker of the House of Commons as 
he beat nine rivals to replaceMichael Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelmartin> as the most senior 
commoner in the land.

The maverick 46-year-old Conservative backbencher pipped fellow Tory Sir 
George Young <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeyoung> to the post to 
clinch the £146,041-a-year post, which comes with a grace-and-favour palace in 
the heart of Westminster.

Bercow, who confounded his critics and lead the contest from the outset, won 
by 322 votes to 271 in the final round.

The MP for Buckingham said the accolade was the "greatest privilege of his 
professional life".

He told the Commons: "I thank you from the bottom of my heart for the 
confidence you have placed in me.

"I want just to say this about the responsibility of the office. The Speaker 
has the responsibility to immediately cast aside all his or her previous 
political views. I said it and I meant it. My promise to this house is to be 
completely impartial, that is what it's about. I will do my best faithfully, 
honourably and respectfully to do my best in the months ahead."

Referring to the MPs' expenses scandal that led top the downfall of his 
predecessor, Bercow said many MP still felt "very sore and vulnerable" about 
the debacle but he added that sections of the public also felt very angry.

"The majority of this house are decent upright people who have come to this 
house because they want to improve the lot of their fellow citizens of this 
country," he said.

Bercow said his thoughts were with his wife and three children and his mother 
who had been "keenly interested in the proceedings".

Gordon Brown was the first to congratulate Bercow on becoming the 157th 
Speaker of the Commons.

The prime minister's comments were followed by similar words of praise from 
David Cameron, the Tory leader, and Nick Clegg, the leader of the Liberal 
Democrats.

The race for the Speakership took a dramatic twist earlier on when Tory veteran
Ann Widdecombe <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ann-widdecombe> was 
knocked out in the second ballot and three other candidates withdrew from the 
running, leaving Bercow and Young to fight it out in the third round. There 
were 592 votes cast.

Bercow, the MP for Buckingham, increased his lead over Young in round two with 
his support rising from 179 votes to 221. But momentum did seem to be shifting 
in favour of Young when the North West Hampshire MP racked up 62 extra backers 
to reach 174.

Announcing the result of the second ballot, Alan Williams, the father of the 
house, congratulated Bercow as he was dragged to the Speaker's chair by fellow 
MPs in accordance with tradition.

Bercow thanked Williams and admitted it had been "a very long day" and said 
those expecting a long diatribe from him would be disappointed.

He also thanked MPs who had stood in the election and said it had been a 
constructive process.

Labour's Margaret Beckett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaret-beckett>, Conservative Sir Alan 
Haselhurst and Liberal Democrat Sir Alan Beith stood down after the second 
round while Conservatives Sir Michael Lord, Sir Patrick Cormack and Richard 
Shepherd, and Labour's Parmjit Dhanda, were all eliminated in the first ballot.

Earlier, in his speech to MPs, Young had pledged to be impartial and fair if 
elected. "I have always been in the Conservative party rather than run by the 
Conservative party," he said, to laughter. "I want a more independent, more 
successful House of Commons."

Bercow also prompted laughter when he told MPs of a response he had received 
when asking for the support of an MP who said he would be a "disaster" because 
he was only 46. "You are not only too young, you are far too young," the Tory 
backbencher was told. However, Bercow claimed to have support from six 
political parties and promised radical reforms to MPs' expenses rules, to 
strengthen the role of backbenchers, and to ensure ministers made key policy 
announcements in the chamber.

"I am the clean-break candidate," he said.

Earlier today junior whips in the Labour and Conservative parties were accused 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/jun/21/speaker-commons-bercow-becket-young>
 of plotting with a large group of backbenchers to derail Bercow's chances and 
put in a "safe" candidate who had "suffered the pain" of the expenses scandal 
and would be more sympathetic to their plight.

There were also reports of collusion between some factions of the two main 
parties to promote Beckett in a bid to oust Bercow from the contest.

Harriet Harman, the leader of the house, denied a behind-the-scenes operation 
was being staged to make the former foreign secretary the third Labour Speaker 
in a row.

The 10 candidates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/jun/17/speaker-contest-who-are-candidates>
 each secured the required backing of between 12 and 15 fellow MPs, at least 
three of whom had to come from outside their own party.

Today's election marked the first time the Speaker was chosen by secret 
ballot, with MPs taking part in a series of rounds of voting that took up the 
whole of today's Commons business.

In each round, the candidate with the lowest level of support was eliminated, 
along with any receiving less than 5% of the vote. The winner was the first to 
secure more than 50% of votes cast in any round.

Bercow will now be charged with restoring trust and confidence in parliament 
in the wake of its battering over the expenses scandal.

The election takes place against the backdrop of potential criminal inquiries 
by the Metropolitan police into a number of MPs' expenses claims.

Martin, who became Speaker in 2000, formally stepped down as an MP today, 
after being forced out over his handling of the crisis.

The tradition that the new Speaker is dragged to his chair dates back to the 
days when it was the Speaker's job to communicate MPs' opinions to the monarch. 
Those who displeased the monarch did not live long to tell the tale.

The future for today's successor, however, is much brighter; the role comes 
with an annual salary of £146,041 and a grace-and-favour palace in the heart of 
Westminster.
 