
John McEnroe and Boris Becker are part of the Wimbledon furniture, and part of 
each other’s lives. What few people remember – even Ion Tiriac, who was 
Becker’s manager – is that the American, who won three titles here, briefly 
coached the German, who memorably wasthe youngest ever champion at the All 
England Club <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y5M1aR5pCgA>, at 17.

In the crossover of their playing careers, Becker – who was nine years 
younger, two stone heavier and four inches taller – prevailed eight times out 
of 10. Theirs was as unlikely a partnership as could be imagined. The doomed 
arrangement in 1993 lasted only a few months, after Becker split with Tiriac 
and while McEnroe, who had recently retired, was going through a divorce with 
the actor Tatum O’Neill.

Now they are facing each other again, but in radically different 
circumstances. Becker is the stern and silent adviser to world No1, Novak 
Djokovic, and McEnroe hasjust taken up a short-term grasscourt gig as a 
coach/consultant to Milos Raonic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/27/john-mcenroe-milos-raonic-coach-wimbledon>
, the Canadian perfectionist who has not yet cashed in on his talent.

BBC says controversial Wimbledon 2day will not return
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/07/bbc-wimbledon-2day-clare-balding>
McEnroe smiles as he remembers how he and Becker hooked up. “Boris called me 
20 years ago or more. He asked me to help him betweenWimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon> and the US Open, which is 
something similar to this with Milos,” says McEnroe.

“I should write a book about that. He never listened to a word I said. It’s 
funny because now all of a sudden he’s with Novak. It’s good, though.

“I’m glad he’s around. His body has broken down, he can’t really play, so this 
is a great way [to stay in the game]. There’s Novak: here’s a little rope, help 
him back to where he belonged. I think it’s been a win/win, so I’m happy for 
that. He was a tough guy, at least at that time. Other people did better. It 
was crazy.”

Becker has been with Djokovic for two years. McEnroe’s gig with Raonic might 
be as brutally short as was his stint with Becker, or go on to be an experiment 
that produces something special. As a thinker and commentator (he will dip in 
and out of the BBC commentary box), McEnroe is peerless – but as a coach on the 
tour, he is unproven.

He revealed a couple of weeks ago in Paris he might have entertained a 
coaching invitation from Andy Murray – who has not yet replaced Amélie Mauresmo 
– but none was forthcoming. It was hard to judge if he was entirely serious.

And McEnroe can be serious. Behind the quips and stage snarls – recycled down 
the years mainly for selling pizza, a rock career that went nowhere or his new 
tennis academy – there is a dedicated lover of the game. The rebel who would 
not be silenced, who was the focal point of one of the great press room brawls 
at the All England Club between UK and American journalists, the scourge of 
umpires and linesmen, the genius who ranted and raved his way through a career 
that brought him almost as much opprobrium as honours, is now an avuncular 
sage, albeit with rough edges.

“I was probably uncoachable,” McEnroe admits. “Towards the end of my career, I 
started reaching out. Honestly, I’m not sure if I did it because it seemed like 
that’s what other people were doing or because I thought it would actually help 
me. My discipline wasn’t what it could be.

“I initially reached out to people like Tony Palafox, who taught me how to 
play tennis, and [his doubles partner] Peter Fleming. We talked about it. I 
just had a hard time with people around me. I felt like I was carrying all 
these people around. I didn’t like it in a way. I’d be much more likely to 
handle it now – just to see how good I could have been.

“If you had told me at 18 I would win seven majors, three Wimbledons and four 
US Opens, and been a few points from winning the French and other things, I 
would have taken it in a heartbeat. But it would have been nice if I had 
maximised what I could have been. Instead I feel I left a little bit on the 
table.”

McEnroe thinks Raonic can get better, especially around the net, the part of 
the court that was pretty much his personal property. “He’s got some friends 
whose parents are friends of mine in New York [the founder ofRolling Stone 
magazine, Jann Wenner]. So I know him. He’s a good kid, very professional, very 
dedicated, wants to get better. He’s a type of kid who appears – at least to me 
– to leave no stone unturned. Like Murray.

“He’s the same type of guy. He’s going to do everything possible to get as 
good as he can be.

“He’s only been in the third round here, besides the one semi. If you had 
called me two months ago and said: ‘Name six or seven guys that can win 
Wimbledon,’ – and I think that’s how many can win Wimbledon – I would put him 
as one of those guys. Obviously at the moment he’s the sixth or seventh likely 
guy to do it. But things can happen and you never know. Hopefully I’ll make a 
positive difference.

“I don’t think it’s realistic to believe that in three weeks you’re going to 
turn a guy around. But, if you make a 1% difference at that level, possibly two 
but one, even, it could pay some kind of dividend, with a little bit of luck.

“Even though he’s not as fast as Andy Murray or Novak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic> for example, just the way he 
plays, he’s tougher to beat in a best-of-five. Also, mentally, he can get in 
your head with that serve. If he can play the style that most benefits him, he 
should be more difficult to beat in a tournament like Wimbledon.”

If, by guile or fortune, Raonic were to end up in the final against Djokovic, 
watching their respective minders live out every shot would be worth the price 
of a Centre Court ticket alone.

It is nearly 40 years since McEnroe got into the main draw at Wimbledon as a 
17-year-old amateur qualifier (having arrived from Paris as the mixed doubles 
champion, alongside Mary Carillo), and went on to reach the semi-finals, where 
he lost to Jimmy Connors. That is still, and for ever will be, the best 
performance in a slam by an unpaid kid. It has been some journey.
 