
My father, John Bate, a poet, librarian and father of 12, who has died aged 
95, was a private man who reserved expression of his deepest self to his poetry.

John was born in London, son of Leonard, a civil servant, and Maud (nee 
Banks). After leaving school, he went to work in Birmingham public library. He 
was 19 when the second world war started and he became a conscientious 
objector. He was put to work picking potatoes in Wales. Later on he joined a 
Sapper unit with other “conscies” and a group of them started Oasis, an 
underground magazine about the horrors of war. Lifelong friendships were formed.

John started to get his poetry published and to do readings, attracting a 
following of intellectuals. Among these was Peggie Banks, a teacher, whom he 
married in 1945. At this time, John converted to RomanCatholicism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/catholicism>.

After the war, John trained as a librarian through a correspondence course. 
But this romantic and idealistic young couple decided their main aim was to be 
“a soil for sons and daughters”. Their married life took them to live among 
other like-minded Catholics from Cornwall to the Scottish Highlands, where John 
ran a chicken farm. He then spent five years studying for a degree in geography 
and history at St Andrews University, and did his teacher training.

These skills qualified him for the post of chief tutor librarian at the Napier 
College of Science and Technology in Edinburgh (nowEdinburgh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/edinburgh> Napier University) and he and his 
family moved there in the mid-1960s. John was at the forefront of librarianship 
and created the first information science degree course for the study of the 
digitalising of information, for which he was appointed MBE in 1982.

Poetry <https://www.theguardian.com/books/poetry> was his lifelong love and 
his readings – especially of his anthology, Damaged Beauty Needs a New Design 
(1981) – were in demand at the Netherbow and the Roman Catholic Chaplaincy 
Centre in Edinburgh. His home became a hub of intellectual Catholic life. 

In 1985 John and Peggie retired to Oxford, where their home continued to be a 
haven for children, grandchildren, poets and Catholic thinkers. He was always a 
keen photographer and his walls were filled with pictures of his family 
throughout the years. 

His final move, in 2000, was to Berwick-upon-Tweed, where he would swim 
regularly in the sea well into his 80s.

 He is survived by Peggie, their 12 children, 27 grandchildren and 13 great- 
grandchildren, and by his sister, Dorothy, and brother, Alan.
 