
The most critically reviewed of all the virgin product since the writers' 
strike is the AmericanisedLife On Mars. Anyone who sneakily Bit Torrented the 
original pilot and suff ered through its leaden pace, glum lead actor, LA 
setting and absolute inability to translate the atmosphere of the original will 
be heartened by the salvage job that finally made it to the air. Now relocated 
to French Connection era New York with Gene Hunt played by a bullish Harvey 
Keitel whose sheer presence makes up for his mouth-full-of-marbles enunciation, 
the show is finding itself bathed in admiration not for how well it compares to 
the British blueprint but for acting as a companion piece to Mad Men. The same 
reviewers who swoon over Don Draper and the way his show reveals America's 
future by showing us its past have lavished similar praise on Sam Tyler. The 
only outstanding problem facing Life On Mars will be sustaining its concept 
through more than one season. The original could barely make it through 16 
episodes without the strain showing. Naturally, the American producers are 
confident they've hit on a way to keep the mystery fresh and challenging. Which 
is TV-speak for "We haven't thought beyond next week's episode." Scheduled 
directly opposite Mars is the Jerry Bruckheimered version of turgid ITV series
Eleventh Hour. This is the most expensive new show on TV: it's got tons of 
action, an apocalyptic theme and a potentially nutball lead actor in Rufus 
Sewell, yet it still sent me to sleep. And not just because I'm old and creaky. 
Partly, but not just. There's something about these Bruckheimer TV shows that 
sucks the life out of everyone involved. David Caruso is a national punchline 
now, but before CSI: Miami made him a multi-million dollar hack, he was kind of 
a live wire. But Bruckheimer drained it out of him, just like he's drained it 
from Sewell who plays the most unexciting aff able excuse for a renegade, 
break-the-rules scientist who ever raced against the clock to save the world.

Even before the American version of Kath & Kim premiered, the show pretty much 
laid its cards on the table. In the months leading up to the debut, commuters 
in all the major cities were assailed by outdoor advertising featuring quotes 
selected to emphasise the show's hilarity. "Paparazzi?" said one poster. 
"What's that? A new kind of pizza topping?" I can't claim to be a huge fan of 
the beloved Australian original but it, at least, had a point of view and a 
complete understanding of its characters. The NBC version, starring the 
super-gifted comic actress Molly Shannon and the actress Selma Blair, has no 
such knowledge. Clearly, the writers and performers are aware that they're 
involved in a show about white-trash women with almost heroic allocations of 
delusion. But that's not the show they've made. The American Kath & Kim is a 
long, laughless half-hour about a sullen daughter (Blair) who moves back in 
with her chirpy mum and mistakes paparazzi for pizza topping. Kath & Kim, I'm 
going to go out on a limb and predict, will be a distant memory to everyone but 
the outraged, unforgiving Australian audience.

When TV producers want to send a signal that their latest project is aimed at 
idiots, they'll say something like, "People turn to escapism in tough times." 
Which is exactly what the makers of the revivedKnight Rider have been 
announcing. NBC obviously learned a lot from its disastrous attempt to rejigger 
Bionic Woman for contemporary tastes. This time around, the motto is Leave Well 
Alone. The elements that worked in the original - bad actor, talking car - have 
been adhered to like they were carved in stone and handed down from the 
mountain. The only difference is the voice of the car. Last year's terrible, 
highrated TV movie was due to feature the dulcet tones of the great Will Arnett 
(Gob from Arrested Development) as a snarky KITT. In a hilarious 
vertical-integration conflict of interest, it transpired that Arnett made a 
decent crust doing voiceover work for General Motors, whereas Knight Rider was 
heavily sponsored by Ford. His last-minute replacement was Val Kilmer. In my 
list of ailing movie actors destined to enjoy a small-screen career turnaround, 
Kilmer ranked slightly below Kiefer Sutherland but a notch above Christian 
Slater (whose shot at a small-screen career turnaround we'll discuss next time, 
if - spoiler alert! - it's still around). But now I may have to drop him down 
beneath Dermot Mulroney because, even though I can't see Kilmer giving life to 
the voice of the fantastic car, his reading is so lifeless, so pained and 
devoid of hope that I sort of can see him. No matter how exciting the espionage 
case that the Poor Hasselhoff Substitute is involved in, no matter what 
incredible transformative tricks the car has just performed, all I am capable 
of visualising is Kilmer, alone in a recording booth - glasses perched on his 
nose, bottled water by his side - closing his eyes and remembering the halcyon 
days of The Doors and the life that lay ahead of him. Then a crackling voice 
comes over the speakers. The engineer says, "Ready, Mr Kilmer." And he leans 
close to the microphone and sighs, "We only have 10 minutes to save the Belgian 
ambassador's daughter, Michael. Turn my engines."
 