
Jonathan Trott has spoken of his "guilt" at leaving England's Ashes tour after 
one Test last November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/nov/25/jonathan-trott-leaves-england-ashes-tour>
, denied that his abrupt departure was triggered by Mitchell Johnson – and set 
his sights on an immediate comeback to international cricket in the one-day 
internationals against Scotland and Sri Lanka this spring.

In an extensive interview with the former England batsman Ian Ward, which will 
be broadcast on Sky Sports on Sunday night, Trott admitted that he was worried 
he might be regarded as a "nutcase" after flying home because of what was 
described at the time as "a stress-related illness" – but that he is now 
convinced was burnout, as opposed to the type of depressionthat led Marcus 
Trescothick to leave a previous Ashes tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/jun/21/marcus-trescothick-interview>.

"I remember day two or day three [of the first Test in Brisbane, where he was 
dismissed cheaply by Johnson in each innings andmocked by Australia's opener 
David Warner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/nov/23/jonathan-trott-poor-weak-david-warner>
], it was a bit of a blur," the 32-year-old recalled.

"I was getting headaches and all sorts of things and I wasn't eating properly 
towards the end and that's when the sleep started getting disruptive and 
emotionally that was probably when I was worst and it just boiled over," said 
Trott. "I had nothing left in the tank or the battery – mentally and 
emotionally pretty drained.

"In Brisbane I spoke to the doc [England's team doctor] and on one of the last 
nights I was there he said, 'You know if I was in the situation and I was a GP 
I'd sign you off for three weeks from work and say come back and see me in 
three weeks'. But we're on an Ashes tour and you can't do that, so I didn't 
have anywhere to go really, so I made the decision along with everyone else 
that it was the best option."

Trott had already left the country before his departure was announced by 
England's managing director, Hugh Morris, and the team director, Andy Flower 
,in a Brisbane hotel the day after the Test. "It was really weird," Trott said. 
"I woke up in Hong Kong and the news was about to break in Australia I'd left 
so it was really strange, and then the guys walked out at Adelaide [for the 
second Test] and things didn't go well and a feeling of guilt started kicking 
in.

"I'd experienced a lot of success with England and a lot of good times and not 
many bad times and seeing the guys struggling out there was pretty tough in 
that I should have been there going through the tough times. That was the 
hardest thing for me – to be in contact with the guys and them thinking he's at 
home with the central heating on and watching it on TV. That was probably the 
toughest thing being at home while the other guys are getting a bit of a 
barrage in Australia and I'm what felt like a million miles away from it."

He added: "It's pretty difficult to put into words the emotions to walk away 
from an Ashes tour – it's something I never thought I'd have to do and 
something I hope no cricketer has to do again. It was very difficult to do at 
the time, it was the right decision no doubt, it was something that came about 
through no one else's fault other than the situation I found myself in; wanting 
to do so well for England. I tried my hardest and ended up finding out myself I 
had nothing left to give.

"I wasn't helping anyone by being there so coming back was the only option, 
because on that kind of tour you can't carry anybody. It was very difficult for 
me to operate close to 100% or even 50% of what I was capable of. I didn't have 
the emotional energy or the mental energy to get there. Throughout the summer I 
was getting to 40 and 50 and I just couldn't watch the ball as hard as I 
normally do. It just wasn't there for some reason, whether I was thinking too 
much about cricket off the field and just burning myself out that way or just 
trying too hard."

Trott added: "It was difficult when I got home in that I switched on the TV 
when the guys walked out at Adelaide and I was a little bit worried about going 
out in public because people look at you and I'd been all over the press and 
you don't know what people are thinking. You know, they think 'There goes that 
nutcase' or whatever and you're not quite sure what people's perceptions are 
because anybody would want to go on an Ashes tour and play in an Ashes and he's 
just walked away from that and it was tough. People come up to you and say, 
'It's good to see you're out and about' and I'm like, 'I'm not crazy I was just 
burnt out'."

Asked by Ward about the more cynical interpretation – that he had been "duffed 
up by Mitchell Johnson [and] you just couldn't handle him", Trott answered: 
"I'm sure people will think that, and people have said it, but it didn't matter 
who was bowling, and that's the hardest part to accept. It doesn't matter if it 
was 100mph or 90mph or 60mph it all pretty much felt the same."

As a centrally contracted player, Trott has remained in close touch with the 
England medical staff throughout the winter, and certainly gives an impression 
of confidence that he will be recalled this summer. "I feel I've got a bit of 
unfinished business with England and also repaying people's trust and the work 
people have put in with me in the last four months," he said.

"I know there's a Scotland game at the beginning of May. That would be a good 
game to get back into the mix, back into the squad environment and then at the 
end of the month there's Sri Lanka. I don't want to be one of those cricketers 
who picks and chooses. I want to be available from the word go.

"I remember almost to the day, six weeks after I got back, I was driving and I 
remember thinking if I had to go out and bat now at Brisbane, six weeks later 
after no cricket, I'd feel a lot more confident than I did when I did go out 
there and play. I'll probably be under a cloud for a bit: that 'he left an 
Ashes tour, is he going to be OK, is he going to be able to come back?' and I 
certainly feel I can. I just hope I can prove it."

Trott is due to make his comeback for Warwickshire in a pre-season fixture 
against Gloucestershire at Edgbaston on 1-2 April.

Watch the full programme Jonathan Trott: Burn Out on Sunday, 16 March at 7pm 
on Sky Sports1
 