
Jonny Bairstow <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jonny-bairstow> played 
another eye-catching innings for England Lions at New Road but it was not 
enough to prevent them losing the Royal London Triangular One-Day Series to a 
strong New Zealand A team.

The Yorkshire wicketkeeper, one of several in the Lions team who have been 
working closely with the former England coachAndy Flower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andy-flower> this summer even before he took 
charge of the Lions, followed 123 in Bristol over the weekend with 77 off 84 
balls, after coming in with his team in deep trouble at 43 for four.

He was supported by an unbeaten 71 from 87 balls by the Lancashire all-rounder 
Tom Smith, allowing the Lions to post a total of 255 for eight in their 50 
overs, with New Zealand’s target revised after rain to 220 in 36 overs under 
the Duckworth-Lewis method.

But Hamish Rutherford made short work of a Lions attack missing Steve Finn, 
who played in their previous games in the tournament but was withdrawn 
following his inclusion in England’s fifth Test squad, in hitting 95 from 84 
balls as New Zealand won with six wickets and almost four overs to spare.

Toby Roland-Jones had respectable figures but Smith, David Willey and Craig 
Overton were all expensive, although the Lancashire spinner Steven Parry 
collected a couple of wickets.

It was the Lions batting that was the biggest disappointment as the openers 
James Vince and Alex Hales both failed to capitalise on decent starts, and Ravi 
Bopara, James Taylor and Jason Roy all fell for single-figure scores.

Afterwards Flower, who has scarcely spoken in public since stepping down from 
his role with England after the Ashes shambles, said how much he had enjoyed 
the experience of coaching a younger group of players.

His former England captain Andrew Strauss had expressed “surprise” during his 
Sky commentary duties that Flower was given the role. But Flower said to 
Cricinfo: “I’m a cricket coach so coaching a cricket team makes sense. It’s not 
my decision when I will do it again but my role is to work with the younger set 
of players. They were really energetic, even though they were coming off the 
back of a busy county season, and they were an exciting bunch of cricketers to 
work with, so I really did enjoy it.

“There is real talent in English cricket and this sort of learning experience 
is excellent for them. There are a few spots open for debate, I guess, and it’s 
the selectors’ job to make that decision.”
 