
Joseph Garland, who has died aged 88, was a historian and journalist who 
chronicled Gloucester, Massachusetts – its fishermen, its boats and its life. 
His best-known book was Lone Voyager (1964), which told the story of Howard 
Blackburn, a Gloucester fisherman who, despite having lost his fingers to 
frostbite, in 1899 sailed single-handed across the Atlantic to Britain in 62 
days. Joe was remarkably generous with his knowledge; the author Sebastian 
Junger spent afternoons with Joe discussing Gloucester before writing The 
Perfect Storm in 1997.

As a columnist for the Gloucester Times <http://www.gloucestertimes.com/>, 
Joe's often cantankerous voice championed the working traditions of the town, 
finding endless wonder in everyday life. He was to his small port what Studs 
Terkel was to Chicago, with immense empathy for its people and respect for the 
way they struggled against adversity. His positions – in favour of trade unions 
and the rights of small fishermen, against development and particularly against 
wars – were not always popular, but he never pandered to his audience.

His championing of peace was rooted in his own experiences during the second 
world war. His wartime diaries, recovered by another soldier after he was 
wounded, formed the basis of the last, and perhaps best, of his 24 books, 
Unknown Soldiers (2009), a remarkable memoir written decades after he had 
tracked down his former comrades, then faced writer's block when telling their 
stories.

Joe was born into a line of Joseph Garlands, doctors going back three 
generations. His father edited theNew England Journal of Medicine 
<http://www.nejm.org/>. Drawn to journalism, Joe evaded family tradition by 
flunking organic chemistry at Harvard, and enlisted in the army. His university 
background saw him assigned to an intelligence and reconnaissance platoon 
during the invasions of Sicily and Italy.

After the war, he began his chosen career in Minneapolis, where he worked for 
the Associated Press, and on papers in Providence and Boston. He joined the 
Gloucester Times in 1961, when he moved into a house built by his 
great-great-grandfather, a former mayor of the town.

I met Joe there 10 years ago at the wedding of one of his stepdaughters. He 
was scheduled to give away the bride, then fire his small ship's cannon on the 
minister's cue. The cue came, but no shot, and as Joe checked the fuse, the 
cannon backfired, leaving him with gunpowder embedded in his face. He did not 
miss a beat; wedding and reception carried on. We began a correspondence; few 
people could so easily recapture the energy and excitement of their 
conversation in writing.

Joe left another book unfinished, about the many boats he had owned. They 
included a sloop built by Blackburn, which Joe lost in a storm in 1980. Soon 
after he had returned home from hospital after suffering a stroke and was lying 
in bed overlooking Gloucester harbour, the schooner Thomas E Lannon sailed 
past. Joe's son-in-law fired the family cannon, and the Lannon returned the 
salute. A few minutes later, Joe died.

He is survived by his second wife, Helen Bryan, who had been his wartime pen 
pal; and by two daughters from his first marriage, three stepdaughters and a 
stepson. During the annual Gloucester schooner festival in September, which he 
helped to organise, the boats formed a semi-circle facing Joe's house, and 
simultaneously lowered their flags to half-mast.

•Joseph Everett Garland, writer, born 30 September 1922; died 30 August 2011
 