
Judy Murray's Great Britain side completed a superb four days in Israel by 
beating Austria to reach the World Group II play-offs in theFed Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/fed-cup>.

Victories over Portugal, the Netherlands and Israel in the pool stages had 
carried new captain Murray's team through to a Euro/Africa Zone Group I 
play-off against the Austrians. Impressive singles wins on Saturday forAnne 
Keothavong <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anne-keothavong> and Elena 
Baltacha swept Britain to victory, setting up the opportunity for them to climb 
into the second tier of world team tennis.

A play-off in April awaits the British team, who will face one of the losing 
sides from the World Group II matches. That could be the United States, if they 
lose this weekend to Belarus, who have Australian Open champion and world No 1 
Victoria Azarenka on their side.

Keothavong beat Patricia Mayr-Achleitner 7-6, 6-3 in Saturday's opening match, 
before the world No 57 Baltacha produced an inspired display to crush 
48th-ranked Tamira Paszek 6-1, 6-4.

Baltacha started superbly, claiming an immediate double break of serve to gain 
control. Another break early in the second set confirmed her superiority.

The British quartet, who also included the doubles pairing of Laura Robson and 
Heather Watson <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/heather-watson>, have the 
opportunity to take a significant step for the women's game in Britain by 
reaching a stage where the likes of Japan, France and Australia compete 
alongside the USA.

Britain will learn their opponents for their play-off, which takes place in 
April, when the draw is made on 14 February.

Murray, mother of the world No 4 Andy Murray, said: "Right now I'm absolutely 
over the moon that we've managed to win all of our matches, to win our group, 
and then win the play-offs and get ourselves a promotion play-off.

"It is everything that I would have hoped for and I'm just so proud of the 
team after what they've achieved this week. You'd be hard pushed to find a 
better No 1 than Bally.

"She's just such an incredible competitor. She leaves everything out on the 
court so it's exciting times ahead with the play-off match, and exciting times 
ahead for the future because Anne and Bally are playing the best tennis of 
their lives. The young players, Heather and Laura, are very exciting prospects 
and they will learn a lot from being around the older girls."

Baltacha said: "I went out there, I got so pumped. I thought 'Right, I'm going 
to do this,' and I played so well and was just really pleased that it didn't 
have to go to a deciding doubles. I'm never going to forget this day."

Keothavong said: "Since I made my Fed Cup debut 11 years ago, this is the 
first time we've managed to move up and advance out of this group and I'm just 
so pleased for the team."
 