
"I've met Idris Elba," says June Squibb, an edge of giddiness in her voice. 
"I've met Lupita [Nyong'o] and now we're friends. She's so sweet, a darling 
girl. I went up to her at a party and said: 'I'm June Squibb and we're in this 
together so I thought I should introduce myself.' Julia Roberts came and 
introduced herself to me – she's up for supporting this time around for Osage 
County." The day before we meet, Squibb went to the nominees' lunch. "All 270 
of us got our picture taken together. I was right by Steve McQueen!"

Squibb, 84, but feeling like a first-timer, is nominated for best supporting 
actress this year for her diamond-sharp role in Alexander Payne's melancholy 
road movieNebraska <https://www.theguardian.com/film/nebraska>. She's Kate, the 
abrasive wife of Bruce Dern's forgetful wanderer Woody Grant, who is driving 
cross country in search of an elusive million-dollar prize. Kate is what they 
used to call a doughty plains-woman, a squat, waddling fireplug of a grandma 
too old to care what comes out of her mouth or whom it offends. In a 
characteristic moment she stands with Woody over his dead sister's grave and 
carps in her piercing, querulous tone: "Oh, she was such a whore!" She's a 
chaotic, deliciously annoying life-force in the movie, forever chivvying along 
her wayward husband and her two glum sons (Will Forte and Bob Odenkirk). 
Elsewhere, recently, Squibb – perhaps proving there are better opportunities, 
to say nothing of a thinner field, for female actors over 80 than for those 
over 40 – has played Hannah's dying grandma in Girls and, in the HBO adaptation 
of Getting On, a surprisingly knockabout physical performance as a nasty, 
racist old redneck off her meds, given to puking into nurses' cleavages and 
screaming: "I'm from Bakersfield and I want my fucking dinner!"

That is decidedly not the lady I meet today. Squibb glides into the room with 
a svelte grace no doubt engrained by years spent singing and dancing in 1950s 
musical theatre. She is dressed rather regally in black, with elegant no-frame 
glasses, her white hair fluffed into a fuller bob than the tragic skullcap 
hairdo she gave Kate. And the voice is much softer and sweeter, uncannily like 
Ellen Burstyn's, with a tinkling laugh that rises to a little gurgle when talk 
turns risque or gossipy.

Nebraska is the second time that Squibb has been called on by Alexander Payne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alexander-payne> to play the wife of an 
ageing screen legend. Twelve years ago, it was her character's death early in 
Payne's About Schmidt that propelled Jack Nicholson on his improbable odyssey 
in that movie. Years later the call came again: "Alex called me up and said I 
gave you one icon in Jack Nicholson and now I'm giving you another in Bruce 
Dern," she laughs. "And somewhere in between I was in Welcome to Mooseport, 
which turned out to be Gene Hackman's last movie before he retired."

I ask her about working with Dern, an actors' actor for half a century, and 
also a respected teacher of acting. His performance is a miracle of concealment 
and non-revelation that seems to force the other actors all to reach toward 
him. "I think that actually Bruce and I work very much alike," she says. "His 
background is very much Actors' Studio, and I worked with three teachers, two 
of whom were very much of that group, and then my husband [the late acting 
teacher] Charles Kakatsakis. So to some degree we were always going to work 
well with each other. You work with what is there in front of you and if he's 
pulling away from me, then I either have to go after him or stay put. And then 
when shooting's done Bruce turns right back into himself. He can be wicked. His 
sense of humour is really wild and he teases me all the time."

The newcomer on set was Will Forte, the Saturday Night Live regular  
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2010/08/26/will-forte-leaving-snl-_n_695898.html#s131610title=Sen_Tim_Calhoun>
who has publicly wondered how on earth he ended up in the company of these 
"real actors". She laughs. "He wasn't nervous on set, but, especially when it 
was the three of us, Bruce, myself and Will, he'd keep saying, 'What am I doing 
here with you two? I mean, just look at you guys!' And Bruce and I would let 
that go on for a while and then say, 'OK, now you can relax and be quiet now, 
kid.' And we'd pat his little head! But whatever Alex thought he saw in Will, 
Will more than acquitted himself – and the whole movie turns around him and 
Bruce together, so you know he got it done."

For a player of her vintage, June Squibb may have a fairly short movie and TV 
career, her first film having been Woody Allen's Alice in 1990, but she is a 
true showbiz lifer, a greasepaint gal from way back. In her depression-era 
hometown of Vandalia in rural Illinois, where she was born a month after the 
Wall Street crash, she knew she was a bit different. "It was a small midwestern 
town in south-eastern Illinois, not a lot different from the places in the 
movie. I knew all those people in Nebraska, I recognised Kate completely. I've 
seen scenes like those groups of utterly silent men watching the football game 
on TV, or moments just like that, all my life, throughout my family and 
friends' households there. It was a normal small town of about 5-6,000 people, 
and I had lots and lots of friends, I was a cheerleader and a majorette and all 
those things you'd expect of a girl in the 30s and 40s. But the thing I always 
thought of myself as was an actress. I never thought: 'I want to be.' It was 
always: 'I am.' I felt that from an early age, and I always thought perhaps I 
don't really belong here."

She fetched up in 1950 at the Cleveland Play House in Ohio doing musical 
theatre for several years. "And already when I was there I felt a lot more 
comfortable and in the right place, finally. The director there decided I was 
going to sing. I didn't decide – he did. So I ended up doing all the 
comedienne's roles in the musicals. So in New York, that's the group I fetched 
up with, the musical theatre crowd. New York, oh my God, in my early 20s. I 
felt, this is home, this is really where I belong. And I did stay there, I had 
my own apartment there until about two years ago, when I moved out here to 
California."

And she was on Broadway back when Broadway was really Broadway – Sweet Smell 
of Success, huge audiences, flashbulb openings, the high tide of the American 
stage musical. She worked with Jerome Robbins in the original cast of Gypsy 
alongside Ethel Merman ("this wonderful, gossipy hausfrau"), knew Steven 
Sondheim, sang with Robert Goulet, and danced with Kenneth MacMillan and 
Charles Durning – both better known later in life as splenetic movie Irishmen, 
but both famously light-footed as young men. In the down season she and her 
friends would model for paperback covers and work the big conventions. "I was 
the Ortho Bug-Spray girl at one of those, and you can imagine what sort of 
outfit it was – antennae! And I got to talk to the kind of gentlemen who are … 
who are interested in Ortho Bug-Spray!" – another big chuckle.

Her husband persuaded her she had more in her than song and dance and they 
worked to sharpen her dramatic chops in the emerging off- and off-off-Broadway 
realms. She was busy, sort-of-famous and respected. "I always made a decent 
living." Likewise, since her move to TV and movies 25 years ago, you spot her 
in reruns all the time, once you know who she is.

Since Alice, she's appeared in Scent of a Woman, with Philip Seymour Hoffman, 
whom she remembers as "just a darling boy, I called him the Teddy Bear. I told 
my husband, even then, that he was going to become one of the best actors 
you'll ever see. Everyone knew it." A small role in The Age of Innocence got 
her close to Martin Scorsese, whom she liked "because he really directs you – a 
lot of them don't. What he really wanted was reality. All of them in fact want 
reality. Allen was like that. The first thing he said to me was: 'I don't care 
what you do – just be real.' And Scorsese, the same – they're small roles for 
me, but they're all very worked up and thought through, and important to the 
directors on their terms, no matter the size of the part."

June Squibb may top out at 5ft 2in. But in the middle of her ninth decade, 
we're finally clocking her as an acting colossus.
 