
As Justine Henin <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/justine-henin> flew home 
to Belgium today there would undoubtedly have been many thoughts flashing 
through her analytical mind. Disappointment, after missing out on a dream 
conclusion to her comeback; pride at what she was able to do and, most 
importantly of all, the beginnings of a plan to make sure that, next time, she 
returns a winner.

Her 6‑4, 3‑6, 6‑2 defeat by the world No1 Serena Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/serena-williams> in the Australian Open 
final yesterday ended her hopes of achieving what would have been a remarkable 
Belgian double, winning a first grand slam back after retirement, as Kim 
Clijsters did at the US Open last September. On the night Williams was just 
that bit more powerful, that bit more match-tight, and she fully deserved to 
win a fifth Australian Open title and 12th grand slam.

As the match wore on, it was tempting to wonder what may happen when those two 
and Clijsters arrive in Paris for the French Open in May. Immediately after her 
win here Williams said she wanted to get her hands on another title at Roland 
Garros but she has never been at her best on clay, winning it just once, and to 
do so again would be even more difficult now that the two Belgians are back.

Clijsters's early defeat here was a blip and she will be a factor at the other 
three grand slams, but in Paris it is Henin who will be the biggest danger. She 
has won the title at Roland Garros four times and on clay the effectiveness of 
Williams's power is reduced, so Henin is able to chase down shots that would be 
winners on faster courts.

Henin will now take a few weeks off to work on the areas of her game she feels 
are not yet up to scratch. When she returns, most likely in Indian Wells in 
March – which will be only her third event back after a 19-month absence – she 
will be given an official ranking. Her efforts here mean she is already assured 
of a place inside the world's top 40 and it seems inconceivable that she will 
not be in the 32, and therefore seeded at grand slams, in time for the French 
Open.

Henin's long-serving coach Carlos Rodriguez said she should be playing more 
like her old world No1 self by then. "She needs more matches," he said. "She 
needs to be in more emotional situations like the final and maybe in three, 
four months she'll be ready. She wasn't ready to beat somebody like Serena yet. 
We're going to stop now and work on the physical skills and more specific 
things. Not only a question of technique, but trying to manage the emotions and 
the tactics on serve. I cannot say it will be better but for sure we need to 
improve the serve and how she plays on the important points."

Williams, meanwhile, left with a satisfied grin after again defying the 
critics who had seen her less than brilliant play in the early rounds and who 
believed she would struggle to get the job done in the final. Yet again she 
saved her best for last, serving superbly as she moved alongside Billie Jean 
King on the list of all-time grand slam champions. Williams said it had been 
inspirational to have King watching from the stands but that the real 
motivation came from elsewhere. "I think everyone was [cheering] for Justine," 
she said. "But you know what really helped me out? This one guy was like, 'You 
can beat her, Justine; she's not that good.'

"I looked at that guy and I was like, 'You don't know me,' " she said, wagging 
a finger for extra effect. "I think I won all the games after that because 
that's totally rude."
 