
As markets await the latest US jobs figures, investors are helping pass the 
time by tucking intoJust Eat.

The online takeaway specialist is up 10% or 36.7p to 396.7p after it announced 
the purchase of four businesses from rivals Rocket Internet and foodpanda for 
€125m (£94.7m). The deals involve companies in Spain, Italy, Brazil and Mexico.

Just Eat said the businesses were complementary to its existing operations in 
the countries involved, where the takeaway delivery market is worth more than 
£8bn. Chief executive David Buttress said:

This transaction reflects our ambition to make strategic, value enhancing 
acquisitions that consolidate our leadership of the global digital marketplace 
for takeaway food delivery.

Jefferies welcome the deal and issued a buy note on Just Eat:

A great deal considering Rocket bought two of those businesses less than a 
year ago, and their November 2015 valuation had those two alone at €130m. We 
really like M&A that consolidates a competitive position, and brings forward 
the path to profitability. Today does exactly that for Just Eat.

Peel Hunt said:

Today’s bolt-on acquisitions are fully in line with the stated strategy and 
bolster existing leading market positions. On the face of it, the price looks 
full and there is a question as to whether Just Eat might just have left the 
businesses to fail. However, we see the deals as positive, with Just Eat taking 
control of its own destiny and ultimately, if £10m EBITDA is delivered, then 
the price is reasonable. Recent share price weakness suggests room for a 
rebound.

The company’s shares have been under pressure recently on competition fears, 
with downbeat notes from both Morgan Stanley and UBS.


Overall the FTSE 100 is currently up 31.16 points at 5929.92, with commodity 
companies among the gainers as oil steadies. Brent crude is unchanged at $34.46 
a barrel after further volatility in recent days.

But the index is still on course for a 2.5% loss for the week.

Among the gainers, Anglo American has added 30p to 358.3p while Antofagasta is 
up 12.6p at 442.9p.

Banks have edged higher after recent losses after reasonable results from BNP 
Paribas, withRoyal Bank of Scotland rising 5.6p to 247.4p.

Defensive stocks have fallen back, with United Utilities down 5p at 939p and 
National Grid 6.6p lower at 970p. 
 