
Miss Delaney brings real people on to her stage, joking and flaring and 
scuffling and eventually, out of the zest for life she gives them, surviving. 
Suffering, she seems to say, need not be tragic; anguish need not be neurotic; 
we are all, especially if we come from Lancashire, indestructible. If I tell 
you that the heroine was born of a haystack encounter between her mother and a 
mental defective; that a Negro sailor gets her pregnant and deserts her; and 
that she sets up house, when her mother marries a drunk, with a homosexual art 
student – when I tell you this, you may legitimately suspect that a tearful 
inferno of a play awaits you at Stratford, E. Not a bit of it.

The first half is broad comedy (comedy, perhaps, is merely tragedy in which 
people don't give in); almost too breezily so; and Joan Littlewood's direction 
tilts it over into farce by making Avis Bunnage, as the girl's brassy mother, 
address herself directly to the audience, music-hall fashion. The second half 
is both comic and heroic. Rather than be lonely, the gusty young mother-to-be 
shares her room (though not her bed) with a skinny painter who enjoys mothering 
her and about whose sexual whims ("What d'you do? Go on – what d'you do?") she 
is uproariously curious. Together they have what amounts to an idyll, which is 
interrupted by mother's return with her puffy bridegroom, who likes older women 
and wears an eyepatch; this brings him, as he points out, at least halfway to 
Oedipus. By the end of the evening he has left, and so, without rancour, has 
the queer. A child is coming: as in many plays of this kind, life goes on. But 
not despondently: here it goes on bravely and self-reliantly, with a boisterous 
appetite for tomorrow.

Miss Delaney owes a great deal to Frances Cuka, her ribald young heroine, who 
embraces the part with a shock-haired careless passion that suggests an 
embryonic Anna Magnani. This is an actress with a lot of love to give. There 
are plenty of crudities in Miss Delaney's play: there is also, more 
importantly, the smell of living. When the theatre presents poor people as 
good, we call it "sentimental". When it presents them as wicked, we sniff and 
cry "squalid". Happily, Miss Delaney does not yet know about us and our 
squeamishness, which we think moral but which is really social. She is too busy 
recording the wonder of life as she lives it. There is plenty of time for her 
to worry over words like "form", which mean something, and concepts like 
"vulgarity" which don't. She is 19 years old: and a portent.

Next week: Tynan on Terence Rattigan's Variation on a Theme
 