
Class is over for the day and Debrah Mwololo bounds down the dirt road and 
into a compound where rows of washing hang in front of 15 corrugated iron 
rooms. Kicking off her shoes she rushes through one of the doors to greet her 
mother, Christine, who has prepared lunch, and her father, Joseph, who has a 
rare day off.

Christine says grace and Debrah tucks in to her bowl of rice, cabbage, beans 
and meat.

"How was school?" Joseph asks.

"Nice," Debrah replies.

Christine smiles. Debrah is a good student, especially in maths. Teachers at 
the Faith Educational Complex have allowed her to skip a year to attend a more 
advanced class. Next year, when she is six, Debrah will begin her long journey 
through Kenya's formal education system.

Much has happened since her birth in a clinic in Kibera, Nairobi's largest 
slum, five years ago – both for the family and their country.

In late December 2007, violence erupted when results of the presidential 
election were delayed. Kibera is within the constituency of Prime Minister 
Raila Odinga, who many people believe was robbed of victory. Protests were soon 
accompanied by ethnic clashes.

At the time Christine and Debrah were visiting relatives in Machakos, about 
two hours away. Joseph locked the family's tiny room in Kibera, and joined them.

After a peace deal two months later, Joseph returned to Kibera and found their 
possessions intact. "I still thank God that nothing was stolen," he says. But 
he and Christine had already decided that they did not want Debrah to grow up 
in such a potentially volatile environment. Their landlord recommended a new 
estate – or slum – called Maasai Village, just off the main road to Mombasa, 
near the international airport.

The estate sprung up in 2005, and has no government services such as schools 
or clinics. It has been laid out in a more orderly manner than the congested 
inner city slums, but there's no escaping the poverty. Plastic bags and other 
rubbish foul the dirt streets, and there is a strong smell of sewage.

The compound where the Mwololos live is opposite the iron-sheeted Hope of 
Glory church. They occupy a single room, about four sq metres. The two beds 
leave only a tiny space for cooking and sitting. Rent is 1,200 shillings (£10) 
a month.

The 15 families in the compound share a communal toilet. Water comes from a 
tap outside, and costs 5 shillings (4p) for 20 litres. A kerosene lamp provides 
light. The lack of electricity means the small television topped with a couple 
of soft fluffy toys next to the door is a mere ornament.

But power is coming – the landlord has arranged a mains connection, and within 
a month tenants paying an extra 300 shillings a month will have electricity. 
Maasai Village is quiet – and safe. Debrah has many friends, and her parents 
have no fear of her playing outside. On weekends the Mwololos sometimes walk to 
the Nairobi national park, which borders the estate, to watch animals – mostly 
giraffes, zebras and ostriches – through the fence.

"This is a peaceful place," says Christine. "It's so good."

They have been other changes too. The family has grown; Dorcas, a baby girl, 
was born in December 2008. Unlike Debrah, who has never had a serious health 
scare, Dorcas was admitted to hospital for several days last year with 
pneumonia. She recovered well however, and her constant activity keeps her 
parents on their toes.

Joseph still works as a baker, but he has changed jobs twice since 2005. He is 
now employed in a cake factory in downtown Nairobi. He works six days a week, 
from 7.30am to 5pm. His monthly wage is 9,000 shillings (£72), nearly twice 
what he used to earn at the bakery in Kibera.

But is it enough to live on?

"No!" says Christine, laughing.

Indeed, since 2005, the cost of living in Kenya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/kenya> has spiked significantly, especially 
for food. After paying rent, the fees of Debrah's private school, and helping 
out both their mothers, there is seldom money left towards month end. To save 
cash, Joseph often walks for nearly 2 hours to work instead of taking a bus.

Christine has not worked since Debrah was born, but is keen to do so.

Her dream is to open a small shop, perhaps selling clothes, or charcoal. 
Capital is the stumbling block.

"As you know, money speaks," she says.

Factfile: Kenya

Under-fives mortality (per 1,000 births): 128

Population on under $2 (£1.28) a day: 39.92%

Debt per capita: $137.36 (£87.73)

Life expectancy: 54

% children in education (F/M): 88.9/91
 