
Settling-the-score autobiographies are nearly always a source of regret to 
their authors in the end. They stain the legacy, with memories of all those 
wonderful wins swamped by waves of whingeing. WhetherKP: The Autobiography will 
eventually fall into this category remains to be seen.

For the moment Kevin Pietersen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kevin-pietersen> must be cock-a-hoop. His 
slick PR machine has delivered the most stupendous performance, the likes of 
which the England and Wales Cricket Board’s marketing and communications 
department can only envy. Last week it was impossible to escape Pietersen. He 
was everywhere, on every screen, on all the airwaves and in all the newspapers. 
He despises most journalists now – and sometimes the feeling is mutual – yet 
acres of newsprint have been devoted to Pietersen, whose books are now falling 
off the shelves. And yes, here is another column (my last about him until he 
becomes chairman of selectors) to add to the morass of verbiage. In my defence 
I have been encouraged, but not bullied, to deliver something.

The timing of Pietersen’s book launch was especially adroit. Last week was 
dire for the sports sections: there was no Premier League football, no 
Champions League, no Ryder Cup; the highlight was England’s football match 
against San Marino. Pietersen effortlessly filled the void. Consequently the 
royalties will soon be rushing in.

As ever the ECB has unwittingly added to his riches. In Pietersen’s book it is 
fair to say that theECB <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ecb> receives more 
flak than gratitude and yet the board has always contrived to ensure that his 
bank balance is ever more buoyant.

The one decision made by the ECB, which caused Pietersen – and English cricket 
– incalculable damage waswhen they made him captain in 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/jun/27/englandvnewzealand2008.englandcricketteam2>
. That was a momentous appointment and the most vivid example of the dangers of 
tunnel vision, demonstrated by Hugh Morris, Geoff Miller and Peter Moores. Yes, 
Peter Moores. It seems amazing now that Moores should ever support such an 
appointment. It was also amazing to Pietersen at the time.

“Moores called me and said I want you as captain and I wondered if he was in a 
phone box with a gun held to his head,” writes Pietersen. He adds later with 
rare objectivity, “I shouldn’t have been captain.” That appalling decision, 
driven by the misguided desire to have a leader for all formats, left so many 
scars. It may have all ended in tears anyway but the pain and confusion 
triggered by that episode would never leave Pietersen.

Thereafter he and the ECB were often at loggerheads yet he usually landed with 
his bum in the butter (although this is rarely his interpretation). In 2012he 
was banished – along with England’s chances of winning the tournament – from 
the World T20 in Sri Lanka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/21/kevin-pietersen-england-world-twenty20>
. What happened? He was promptlyoffered a lucrative TV deal with ESPN  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/24/kevin-pietersen-media-role-world-twenty20>
to comment on a hapless England team, a role he fulfilled rather well.

In 2014 after the Ashes debacle he was sacked, rather than dropped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/09/kevin-pietersen-ecb-england-alastair-cook>
. So he signed deals to play in the entire IPL, in the Caribbean T20 tournament 
and the Big Bash. “My income from playing cricket has tripled,” he says. In 
addition the bastion of the establishment, theDaily Telegraph, promptly offered 
him the most generous of contracts to become another of their columnists. 
Moreover, thanks to the absurd confidentiality agreement hatched with the ECB – 
and then broken by it – there was the perfect opportunity to plan the launch of 
the book with the maximum impact. So where did it all go wrong, Kevin?

Of course, leaving aside the income stream, it did go wrong in the end despite 
those 104 Test appearances for England. Those coming to the end of high-profile 
careers invariably want to be loved. In fact, Pietersen always yearned to be 
reassured of how wonderful he was as a cricketer, an undertaking that was never 
second nature toAndy Flower <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andy-flower>. 
Pietersen was obviously more sensitive than we first imagined. At one point he 
says, “You have to have a really thick skin to be on Twitter day after day. I 
qualify on that basis.” Did he really?

His problems now should never be financial but the wider legacy that just 
about every public figure craves, whether a sportsman or a politician, will be 
badly tarnished. He paints such a miserable and lonely picture of being an 
England cricketer. It came to mind while reading this book that it was just as 
well that Pietersen played in one of the most successful sides that England 
have ever fielded. It could all have been a bit gloomy otherwise.

Unusually the triumphs, the brilliant innings beyond the scope of any of his 
peers, are barely chronicled – nor for some strange reason is Andrew Flintoff 
(just four mentions). Instead there are unrelenting assaults on Flower and Matt 
Prior in particular, which may ultimately tell us more about Pietersen than his 
prey.

He may have had high hopes of both of them. Both had southern African 
connections, yet he soon memorably brands Flower – or perhaps this is the work 
of a very capable ghostwriter – as “contagiously sour, infectiously dour”. He 
has Flower constantly conspiring against him and gives him no credit even 
though he is arguably the most successful England coach there has ever been. He 
lampoons Prior ruthlessly, albeit for behaving rather like himself on 
occasions. One of the problems in that dressing room was that Pietersen would 
go on and on about the virtues of the IPL. Apparently Prior did the same when 
he finally got a Big Bash contract.

No doubt there are many truths in his book, significant revelations about how 
the England team functioned, but it is hard to believe that this isthe truth. 
The accusations of bullying produced the headlines on one of the days of last 
week’s PR extravaganza. England were painted as a dysfunctional team, albeit 
the best one in the world for a time. If that label fits, it could just as 
easily be applied to the Australian Invincibles of 1948, the all-conquering 
Yorkshire sides of the 60s or the Australians of the 90s.

Professional dressing rooms have always had cliques and cabals as well as the 
odd bully. And the most successful teams have often contained difficult, 
self-obsessed, yet supremely gifted cricketers who have been worth their place 
despite everything – from SF Barnes to Geoffrey Boycott to Pietersen.

“Dysfunctional” dressing rooms are only a true source of concern in this era 
when there are half-a-dozen exasperated support staff employed to ensure that 
all is peace and light.

What now? Pietersen, the greatest batsman to appear for England in his 
generation, will never play for his country again. With this publication boats 
are burnt, no matter who is chairman of the ECB. Moreover Pietersen is mortal 
and is in inevitable decline. Eventually the ECB hatches will be unbattened 
with a new chief executive, Tom Harrison, and a relatively new hierarchy in 
charge of a new team. They will plough on and along the way perhaps they should 
take note of some of the more temperate observations in the book.

As for Pietersen, despite the polish of the launch and the expertise of his 
ghostwriter, this is a sad, ugly, lucrative way to go. He was so much more 
entertaining when demolishing opposition bowlers with his bat than England 
colleagues with his book.
 