
There are few sports that have the complexity of cricket, where a whole series 
of contests, one on one, ultimately are embraced within a team context. In 
cricket, the individual performance matters, but always, for the greatest 
impact, it has to be channelled towards the collective end.

Individuality alone is insufficient in the long term. So it was instructive to 
find that towards the end of the inevitable circuit of soft, carefully tailored 
interviews and appearances to promote his book, the most telling remark to 
Kevin Pietersen, the only one that cut through the PR pap, came from the
chatshow host Graham Norton 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/b04l3xyw/the-graham-norton-show-series-16-episode-3>
. It was an uncomfortably gauche appearance by Pietersen, sat on a sofa 
alongside a worryingly unfunny John Cleese and an utterly bemused Taylor Swift, 
and towards the end Norton, who did not appear to much care for his guest, cut 
to the chase. “I want to put this nicely,” he said to Pietersen, “but reading 
the book, it strikes me that maybe, just maybe, team sport’s not for you?”

Now there is a withering truth. Imagine, say, Nick Faldo with Seve’s flair and 
you get the picture of Pietersen the golfer. Pietersen has been a sportsman of 
supreme gift, a unique batsman, a fearless seat-of-the-pants player capable of 
transforming a match perhaps like no other of his generation. To a great extent 
he has done so by marching to the beat of his own drum, for which, while he was 
at his peak, allowance was made.

I once likened him to a trapeze artist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2013/dec/20/ashes-kevin-pietersen-england-australia>
, with death-defying tumbles and turns, but operating with a safety net 
brilliantly provided by players such as Andrew Strauss, Alastair Cook and 
Jonathan Trott. If he fell, there was minimal damage, but if the tricks came 
off, how the audience gasped at the sheer audacity and daring. No one who has 
had the privilege of watching him at close quarters since his memorable debut 
series can fail to say they were not the best of times.

With the exception of Andy Flower, wisely keeping his own counsel, and, despite
his notorious inadvertent comment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/05/andrew-strauss-kevin-pietersen>, 
Andrew Strauss, no one has emerged from the past nine months with dignity 
intact. Even given the strength of their case against Pietersen, which extends 
way beyond the pathetic leaked charge sheet, in terms of public relations, the 
England and Wales Cricket Board has been knocked into a cocked hat by 
Pietersen: whoever he employed has earned their corn 10 times over.

Unquestionably, he deserved a better exit than the back door, although I do 
know that the intention was to have feted him properly when the dust settled.

His legacy, though, should be his stellar performances, rather than the tawdry 
tome flying off the shelves. I find it impossible to believe that such an 
eminent writer as his ghost, David Walsh, did not countenance rather more 
restraint when telling his story, but in the end the paymaster calls the tune: 
that drumbeat again. As Strauss has pointed out, Pietersen does not warrant 
being remembered as a sour, vindictive man: but neither do Flower, a coach of 
immense achievement for England, orMatt Prior 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/matt-prior> – a cricketer of such esteem 
that he has claim to a place alongside Pietersen in an all-time England XI – 
deserve to be traduced in the withering manner they have.

Of the plethora of columns written about him this year, one of the most 
sensible came from the former player, now a writer and commentator, Ed Smith, 
who suggested that when a genius performs as a genius, the accommodation is 
wholesale, but when that player regresses to become only very good, then, well, 
there are a few of those who come without his baggage.

And this is the nub of things. Pietersen’s career can almost be divided into 
two halves. In the first, involving 45 Tests, up until when he lost the 
captaincy at the end of 2008, he averaged more than 50 and scored 15 hundreds. 
Since then, a further 59 Tests, when he should have been at his peak, brought a 
decline to an average of 44 and only eight hundreds (gradually hampered by 
achilles and knee problems, although what centuries some of them were) against 
averages of 49 for Cook and Ian Bell, with 18 and 12 hundreds respectively, and 
one of 46 with nine hundreds from Trott. The safety net was still there but the 
twists and flips were fewer.

Riches elsewhere manifestly began to intrude on and take precedence in his 
thoughts. It could be argued that this second period of his career coincided 
precisely with the Flower era, a man whom Pietersen had actively tried to get 
sacked and with whom there was mutual antipathy from the start. And it is here 
that I take issue with those who postulate management failure in Pietersen’s 
decline. It would appear then that there has also been management failure at 
every stop on the journey, from Natal, via Cannock, Nottinghamshire, Hampshire, 
and England. Is there not a common element here?

In that same period, Flower managed in excess of 50 other England cricketers 
with a disproportionate amount of time devoted to Pietersen, particularly from 
2012 onwards. So I would suggest that the question to ask is not how did 
England fail to manage him, but how on earth did they get 104 Tests, not to 
mention 136 ODIs, out of such a singular heliocentric individual?

Pietersen, meanwhile, cuts a sorry, if wealthy figure, hawking himself round 
the franchises of the world, playing mediocre cricket by his standards in 
mediocre teams in India and the Caribbean. This year he has faced precisely 76 
overs worth of bowling in 27 matches for Delhi Daredevils, Surrey and St Lucia 
Zouks, Twenty20 the lot aside from the additional 50-overs MCC celebration 
match. There can be no real fulfilment in that, not for him.

He will not play for England again and to suggest otherwise is just 
delusional. How did it all come to this? That, Kevin, is a question you should 
ask yourself, not of others. Maybe one day you will realise.
 