
Former amateur heroes Amir Khan and Audley Harrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/audley-harrison> have spent a good deal of 
their professional lives attempting to convince people that they could play 
alternative roles. In that sense they are UK sport's answer to Mark Hamill and 
Christopher Reeve.

Khan has been pigeon-holed as a high-speed yet brittle boxer whose instinct in 
a tight spot is to slug rather than play safe. It is this Butch and Sundance 
homage that has led to his undoing on several occasions already. One of life's 
great dreamers, Harrison has long protested that he would achieve more than his 
extreme fragility has frequently implied. Unfortunately for both, they reverted 
to type at Sheffield's Motorpoint Arena on Saturday night.

Khan managed to creep home against former lightweight world titlist Julio 
Diaz, but once again he was dipped in and out of a dark fog along the way. 
Diaz, from Coachella in California by way of Michoacán de Ocampo in Mexico, had 
been pegged as a respectable but safe opponent. Halted by the likes of Rolando 
Reyes and Kendall Holt over recent years and, now aged 33, "The Kidd" seemed 
like the perfect foil for Khan's rehabilitation.

While Khan uncorked rat-a-tat combinations in the opening round, Diaz calmly 
put his feelers out and landed a hard right that snuck home over Khan's left 
shoulder. The Mexican landed a solid left hook in round two and while Khan's 
often frantic activity banked him a two-point lead, Diaz had just about 
calibrated his aim. A farrago on fast-forward at times, Khan, 28-3 (19), nicked 
the third despite fielding further telling shots before Diaz, decked out in 
blue shorts that had his name stitched along the reverse of his beltline, 
managed to break through in round four.

As Khan dallied in range after landing a jab, Diaz, 40-8-1 (29), smashed him 
with a left hook that froze him to the spot. With his legs too close together 
for him to manoeuvre, a second left hook put him down. Up in a flash but wobbly 
with it, Khan managed to ride out the round but looked an accident waiting to 
happen.

Khan circled and swooped on Diaz from range over the next two rounds after 
trainer Virgil Hunter realigned him in the corner. The former junior 
welterweight world titlist looked to have turned a page in the seventh when he 
nicked Diaz above his right eye and scored with an authoritative left hook.

Diaz, though, was far from done. As Khan lost concentration in round 8 in 
launching three consecutive right hands, Julio rolled underneath and then fired 
back with a short stabbing right of his own that jellied Khan's knees once 
again – but he was unable to capitalise.

Back on red-alert, Khan fenced assuredly in the ninth but he hadn't yet had 
the worst of it. Diaz cracked him with a left hook in round 10 that softened 
his legs. Khan, in yet another moment of career crisis, enveloped Diaz in a 
bear-hug. It was reminiscent of the tactics the post-Marvin Hagler version of 
Thomas Hearns would often use in order to clear his head, and while it bought 
Khan some time, Diaz bossed the remainder of the session.

As the pair tore into one another in the penultimate frame, Diaz put Khan back 
on Queer Street with a volley of violent head shots that had the Bolton man 
skittering and moon-walking about the ring. Diaz coolly stalked after him and a 
subsequent short right and winging hook left Khan dangling over a crevasse.

Showing a newfound compulsion to grapple rather than skirmish, Khan possibly 
should have been docked a point for excessive clinching – but it got him 
through his toughest stretch of the fight. Diaz hunted his man from a crouch in 
the final round and he clocked Khan with another meaty right as the sands 
drained away but it would prove to be too little too late.

Phil Edwards scored the bout 114-113, Steve Gray 115-113 and Terry O'Connor 
115-112. The Queensberry Rules had it 114-112 for Khan. The referee was Marcus 
McDonell of Twickenham. "Julio was tough. He's a tough, tough Mexican fighter," 
Khan admitted afterwards.

Diaz was magnanimous in defeat. "I think I gave up too many rounds trying to 
break him down," he said. "This guy has a lot of hear. People don't see that, 
but he does". Khan will need every bit of it, if he hopes to gain revenge over 
Danny Garcia and Lamont Peterson.

Heavyweight Deontay Wilder torpedoed Audley Harrison in just over a minute 
with the first right hand punch that he tried. After sizing up Harrison, 
Wilder, from Alabama, walked his circumspect opponent into a neutral corner and 
into position for his pay-off punch. Harrison sensed that it was coming and 
turned away and to his left but it buried its way into the point of his chin 
regardless.

Instantly discombobulated, Harrison covered up along the ropes but he was 
tagged again with a right hook and the contest was as good as over. As Wilder 
hacked at his man like a bushwhacker, Harrison sank to the canvas with 
howitzers fizzing and bombing overhead. Referee Terry O'Connor did everyone a 
favour in waving it off after Audley hauled himself back up to his feet.

"I'm a beast," the likeable Wilder, 28-0 (28), claimed post-fight. "Mentally, 
I already had Audley before he stepped into the ring. I saw it in his eyes". 
"The Bronze Bomber", an intriguing boxer in an evolving division, desperately 
needs more rounds – if anyone can stand up to him long enough in order to 
provide them, that is.

Humiliated once again, the 41-year-old Harrison, 31-7 (23), has reached the 
end of an unforgiving road. "It looks terrible on my part," he admitted. "I 
kept myself quiet this time, focused on training – felt great, felt 
comfortable, felt calm – and I get banged out".

Something of a national joke, it is to be hoped that he can find success away 
from such a cruel stage. Like Khan, he carries a glaring weakness that makes 
boxing an uphill task against those that aren't similarly encumbered.

English junior lightweight champion Gary Sykes scored a 10-round decision over 
Ashton under Lyne's Jon Kays lower down on the bill. Dewsbury's Sykes had too 
much experience for Kays and took a unanimous decision 97-94, 98-94 and 98-93. 
He moves to 24-3 (5) while Kays slips to 16-3-1 (4).

Olympic bronze medallist Anthony Ogogo made an exciting debut at middleweight. 
The Lowestoft man knocked out Telford's Kieron Gray in the 2nd round with a 
chopping right hand. Gray falls to 5-14-1. Khan's younger brother Haroon also 
made his professional bow in a four-round super flyweight contest but looked 
less polished in outscoring Fenton's Brett Fidoe 40-37.

Manchester southpaw Terry Flannigan moved to 20 fights unbeaten (6 inside 
schedule) after he forced former lightweight king Nate Campbell to quit at the 
end of four rounds. Campbell was a mere husk of the fighter that once warred 
with the likes of Juan Diaz and Robbie Peden and Flannigan probably showed him 
too much respect, despite scoring at will. Campbell, Jacksonville, Florida, 
fell to 36-11-1 (26).

• This is an article from our Guardian Sport Network 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/series/guardian-sport-network>

• This article first appeared on The Queensberry Rules 
<http://www.queensberry-rules.com/>

• Follow Andrew Harrison on Twitter <https://twitter.com/safesideOTR>
 