
When Abbas Kiarostami's Certified Copy premieres at the Cannes film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cannesfilmfestival> this month, all eyes will 
be on the director's first movie made outside his native Iran.

Just as intriguingly, though, Juliette Binoche's co-star in the movie will not 
be Robert de Niro – who was rumoured to have been in talks for the part – but 
rather, an unknown British man.

Unknown, that is, in cinema circles. William Shimell is in fact a respected 
opera singer, a bass-baritone who has sung at the Met, La Scala and the Royal
Opera <https://www.theguardian.com/music/opera> House over the course of a long 
and distinguished musical career.

But Shimell had never acted in a film before working on Certifed Copy. In 
fact, he had never acted in straight theatre of any kind.

When his agent suggested he work with the celebrated Iranian auteur, who won 
the Cannes Palme d'Or in 1997, he confessed he had never heard of him. 
Investigating the director's work on DVD, he was initially "a little confused – 
I'm not a film buff – just as you would be, actually, if you came to the opera 
for the first time".

He had heard of Binoche – just about. "I don't go to the cinema very often. I 
take the kids to see the latest Pixar movie, and that's about it," he said. "I 
had to go out and borrow some DVDs of her films; I'd never paid that much 
attention to her career."

Shimell, 57, first got to know Kiarostami when he sang Don Alfonso in Così Fan 
Tutte at the Aix-en-Provence festival in 2008, which the Iranian, in his 
operatic debut, directed. And now he will star at the 63rd Cannes film 
festival, which opens on Wednesday.

Shimell's Farsi is not too hot, and Kiarostami's English is a 
work-in-progress, but the singer found the director "a delightful man" and 
found, even without the help of an "astonishingly good interpreter", that "we 
managed to understand each other".

According to Shimell: "During rehearsals for the opera, Kiarostami said, 'Do 
you want to be in a film?' I thought, 'Oh yeah?' I never thought it would 
happen, and when I found out it was going to haveJuliette Binoche 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/juliette-binoche> in it, I thought she'd say, 
'I don't want to work with this person.'" He added: "Abbas was taking a great 
leap of faith. As was Marin Karmitz, the producer. I could see the doubt in his 
eyes, and I had a great deal of sympathy with him, as he'd lined up a list of 
quite famous actors, but Abbas was adamant."

Shimell said: "I had nothing to lose but my dignity. And God knows I had 
little enough of that left after 30 years as an opera singer."

Certified Copy begins with an English author, played by Shimell, delivering a 
lecture on the significance of copies and fakes in art in a town in Tuscany. 
Binoche's character is a French gallerist who attends the talk; they decide to 
spend the day together. At a cafe, Shimell's character is taken to be Binoche's 
husband, a mistake she does not trouble to correct. In characteristic 
Kiarostami style, the narrative questions authenticity and artifice in art and 
life.

When filming started in Tuscany last summer, according to Shimell, "I was 
learning on the hoof. It was a steep learning curve, but everyone was very kind 
and helpful. I know it sounds as if I've got that written on a piece of paper 
as something I am supposed to say, but it it's true.

"My experience in opera was no use at all. I had to forget it – even though I 
try to make my characters in opera as real as possible, which doesn't always go 
down well. Opera singers are expected to overact."

The experience, he said, has whetted his appetite for more work in film: 
"Fifty-seven is a good age for a career change – or, if not a career change, to 
shake things up a bit."

For the Cannes premiere, Shimell has managed to wangle a couple of days off 
rehearsals at the Royal Opera House in London, where he is preparing to sing 
the part of what he calls "dirty old man" De Brétigny in Massenet's Manon from 
22 June. "It would have been a little churlish if they'd decided not to let me 
go," he said.

Other highlights of the 63rd Cannes film festival will be Ridley Scott's Robin 
Hood, which opens proceedings, as well as Mike Leigh's Another Year, starring 
Lesley Manville and Jim Broadbent; Rachid Bouchareb's Outside the Law, about 
the Algerian campaign against the French, which has already sparked controversy 
in France; and Doug Liman's spy thriller Fair Game, with Sean Penn and Naomi 
Watts.

Stephen Frears's adaptation of Posy Simmonds's Guardian comic strip, Tamara 
Drewe, will screen out of competition.

Two British women will present films at the festival: Sophie Fiennes, with 
Over Your Cities Grass Will Grow, which screens out of competition, and Alicia 
Duffy, with All Good Children, which forms part of theDirectors' Fortnight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/apr/20/cannes-directors-fortnight-new-blood>
 section of the festival.

A taste of Kiarostami: a potted history

Abbas Kiarostami, 69, came to the attention of the west in the early 1990s 
with films such as And Life Goes On and Through the Olive Trees, both set 
around the earthquake-devastated village of Koker in his native Iran. The Taste 
of Cherry, about a suicidal man driving round the outskirts of Tehran, trying 
to find someone willing to bury him, won the 1997 Palme d'Or, and The Wind Will 
Carry Us won the Silver Lion at the Venice film festival in 1999. At the 
forefront of the Iranian new wave, he is one of the world's most respected 
cinematic artists. For the past 12 years and more, none of his films has been 
released in Iran, where he continues to live. Last year, he was set to direct 
his production ofCosì Fan Tutte at English National Opera in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/jun/01/cosi-fan-tutte-eno-kiarostami-review>
, but frustration with the bureaucracy surrounding his visa application led to 
his withdrawal.
 