
I watched the Public Administration Committee hearing into Kids Company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/live/2015/oct/15/kids-company-face-grilling-by-mps-live>
 with an increasing sense of disbelief. The amounts of money flowing into the 
charity from celebrity backers, philanthropists and government was just 
staggering.

Between 2009 and 2013, its income increased from £13m to £23m. A £3m Cabinet 
Office grant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/sep/10/mps-question-how-3m-taxpayer-funded-grant-was-given-to-kids-company>
 was given to Kids Company just days before it collapsed. This is a sum of 
which most charities could only dream.

I know, because I run a small youth employment charity myself. We are by no 
means perfect, but with a staff of fewer than half a dozen we have helped 
hundreds of young people into jobs since we began our work during the financial 
crash of 2008. Our running costs total around £200,000 a year, but even so my 
trustees are very tough on me. Every time we meet they ask me two very straight 
questions: “Should we still exist?” and “Are we still doing what we set out to 
do?” I find it mystifying that Alan Yentob appeared not to have been doing the 
same atKids Company <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/kids-company> in his 
role as chair of trustees.

I can understand why people were seduced by Kids Company. There is a certain 
glamour attached to helping vulnerable young people who may also be on the 
fringes of criminality. I remember visiting the charity myself as a reporter 
during its early days in the 1990s and being impressed by the work going on 
there.Camila Batmanghelidjh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/camilabatmanghelidjh>, its charismatic 
founder, had identified a genuine problem, of children being effectively 
abandoned by the traditional structures of society: family, schools and the 
local authority. She moved into the gap vacated by those institutions and has 
been celebrated as a result.

She argued that some of the children she was working with were “suicidally 
uncaring”. The abuse they had suffered was such that they had become used to 
pain and inflicting pain. Batmanghelidgh was on to something, but I have always 
wondered whether she could control the phenomenon she had identified.

In Thursday’s hearing, the Kids Company witnesses gave examples of suicides 
and a murder they believed had happened after the closure of the charity. It is 
impossible to know whether there is any causal link. But what surprised me is 
that neither Yentob nor Batmanghelidjh was prepared to take any degree of 
responsibility for the collapse of the network of support that Kids Company 
undoubtedly provided. Perhaps they had been advised by lawyers to take this 
approach, but surely they have to take some of the blame for what happened.

No charity has a right to exist and trustees have a duty to question the 
operational decisions of charity staff

No one comes out of this well. David Cameron certainly saw Kids Company as a 
flag-bearer for the big society, but his Labour predecessors began the 
myth-making that built the charity’s brand as the model third-sector 
organisation. I was not the only journalist approached by Prince Charles’s 
outfit Business in the Community to promote the work of Batmanghelidjh.

Two decades on, the organisation is so toxic that everyone who supported it 
has been poisoned: Yentob himself, the celebrities who poured their money into 
the charity, the journalists who did its PR, and above all, the politicians who 
saw it as the perfect model of the charitable sector moving in to take over the 
functions of the state.

But no charity has a right to exist, and trustees have a duty to question the 
operational decisions of charity staff – especially where they are working with 
a client group as vulnerable as those in the care of Kids Company.

Batmanghelidjh is right to feel aggrieved. She is the classic scapegoat. Her 
original observation was profound – that traditional state structures (schools, 
the police, social services, the care system) were failing young people on the 
margins of society. Kids Company could have been part of the answer, but it was 
never the whole solution. That is its tragedy.
 