
The closure of Kids Company was a tragedy waiting to happen and trustees 
should take full responsibility for this (Kids Company chiefs ignored cash 
warnings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/aug/06/kids-company-directors-were-warned-to-build-up-reserves>
, 7 August). The fact thatAlan Yentob was chair for 18 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/aug/07/pressure-alan-yentob-kids-company-loses-cool-on-channel-4-news>
 suggests that there were no fixed terms of office for trustees so no new blood 
was being recruited to the trustee board. Usually in this situation trustees 
get complacent.

Had Kids Company <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/kids-company> reflected 
recommended best practice in governance, its closure might have been avoided. 
Most charities are well managed with regular board effectiveness reviews and 
skills audits to ensure that trustees have the skills required to lead the 
charity to achieve its mission. If this is not the case, then new trustees 
should be recruited to a skills specification that will ensure its continued 
success.

Hopefully, the Charity Commission will strengthen its regulatory role.
Olga Johnson
Associate director, Trustees Unlimited

• As chair of trustees of a small voluntary association struggling to survive 
in an increasingly hostile environment, I am amazed at the behaviour of the 
trustees of Kids Company. Their first responsibility, surely, is to the 
survival of the organisation, the only protection available to its vulnerable 
clients and those employed to serve them. This demands that they hold 
sufficient reserves to meet all exigencies and consequently rein in the 
ambitions of even the most charismatic of leaders. If the organisation is 
incapable of meeting all the demands of those without adequate social and 
emotional support, then it must resort to campaigning, rather than indulging in 
short-term bountiful behaviour, which, as we see, has far more extreme 
consequences than those provided by fiduciary discipline.
Diana Neslen
London

• So Kids Company is criticised and forced to the wall because it refused to 
build up any cash reserves. Yet the small charity my partner works for – 
focusing on people with learning disabilities and mental health issues – is 
unable to attract funding because itdoes have cash reserves through being 
prudent, but is constantly told: “Spend your reserves and then we’ll think 
about it.” As they say: Go figure!
Prof Paul Kleiman
Manchester

• When the private providers of essential services fail for any reasons, be it 
incompetence, financial mismanagement or even outright fraud the services do 
not cease to be provided. The money is found and the questions of blame and 
future safeguards are then dealt with.

Leaving aside any argument about public/private provision for the moment, this 
is surely how it should be.

How then can we as a society countenance the closure, in similar problematic 
circumstances, of an organisation previously acknowledged to have been 
providing an excellent service helping vulnerable, neglected, abandoned and 
even abused children and young people? Do we not deem such a service essential?
Derek Leon Elton
Todmorden, West Yorkshire

• Your editorial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/05/the-guardian-view-on-the-fall-of-kids-company-a-social-policy-morality-tale>
 (6 August) highlighted the key role of trustees in the proper management of 
charities but that really isn’t the critical problem.

If Kids Company had operated overseas it would long since have started 
describing itself as an NGO. Organisations that domestically describe 
themselves as charities are often, in effect, delivery arms of government 
development policies. There are good reasons for this but it is not without 
drawbacks.

Kids Company was similar. It had effectively replaced local authority delivery 
of a statutory duty – hence the government grants – but without any of the 
(boring but important) oversight, scrutiny and fiduciary and fiscal care. There 
are many other charities who have made similar pacts with the devil.

In the light of the tragic demise of this charity we need much greater clarity 
over which charities are, in effect, arms of government and either a revised 
Charity Commission mandate to oversee them or a new form of supervision 
entirely. Alternatively, the state could go back to delivering statutory duties 
itself – wouldn’t that be a revolution.
Simon Diggins
Rickmansworth, Hertfordshire
 