
Kim Clijsters <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kim-clijsters> left Melbourne 
tonight with a fourth grand slam trophy and, much to her relief, a full head of 
hair. The Belgian had made a bet with her coach, Wim Fissette, that she would 
shave her head if she won the title here. She beat Li Na of China 3-6, 6-3, 6-3 
in the final but it seems she got away without doing the deed.

When she won the US Open in New York last September, Clijsters shaved 
Fissette's head, to honour an initial bet. But when she revealed that he might 
be able to return the favour if she was victorious here, it did not go down too 
well with her husband.

"I said if I win another one I'll shave my head but my husband wasn't too 
happy with that one," she said.

Some grand slam champions like to crack open the bubbly and others hit the 
dance floor but Clijsters celebrated her latest victory in a slightly odd 
fashion, after receiving an invitation, via Twitter, from the men's doubles 
champions, the American twins Bob and Mike Bryan. Anyone wandering around 
Melbourne's favourite haunts might have bumped into threeAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> winners, all enjoying 
themselves after their respective triumphs.

"Last night we caught up with the Bryan brothers for a little bit and [we 
were] trying to find a place we could go," Clijsters said. "We didn't find 
anything, but we walked the streets of Melbourne for about an hour, just 
laughing and talking."

Having dashed Li's hopes of becoming the first Chinese player to win a grand 
slam singles title, Clijsters now has four such titles of her own. On the 
evidence of the past fortnight, she could well win several more.

Eighteen months into her "second career," after two years of retirement during 
which she got married and gave birth to her first child, Clijsters has won the 
past two grand slam titles and is the best player in the world. That the 
official rankings do not show that yet is simply because she has not played 
enough tournaments to hit the top.

Clijsters, who will be back in action next weekend, when she plays in Antwerp 
in Belgium's Fed Cup tie against the United States, will take the No2 ranking 
from Russia's Vera Zvonareva tomorrow. She plays her next WTA Tour event in 
Paris next month. Reaching the semi-finals or better there would take her above 
Denmark's Caroline Wozniacki, to become the world No1 for the first time since 
2006.

When she first returned to the tour in the summer of 2009, Clijsters said she 
would not look past her first three tournaments, unwilling as she was to tempt 
fate by committing herself too far into the future. A year and a half and three 
grand slam titles on, she will go into the French Open in Paris in May as the 
favourite, even if clay is not her best surface.

With Justine Henin having retired for a second time last week, because of an 
elbow injury, and with Serena Williams, the only other player able to match 
Clijsters, still out through an injury of her own, the Belgian's path could be 
clear for a run in Paris.

Brad Gilbert, one of Andy Murray's former coaches, believes it is possible. "I 
think Kim's going to be the big favourite for the French Open," he said, "and 
if she wins there, can you imagine, we could be looking at the 'Kimpressive 
slam'."

Clijsters has never won the French Open or Wimbledon and it is the latter, a 
tournament that as a child she dreamt about winning, that continues to drive 
her on. "As a young girl when I played juniors there, that was one of my 
biggest dreams, to winWimbledon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon>," 
she said. "If you can have one on your CV, then that's the one."
 