
Ansel Adams/Mircea Cantor Modern Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Oxford, to 1June

Nightfall in the New Mexico desert. A passing photographer notices a weird 
face in the moon and an even stranger conjunction of darkness and light 
igniting the horizon behind a lonely graveyard. He leaps from his car and, 
without even checking the aperture, takes a single image. There is no time for 
another before the scene passes, no time to find his light meter. It is 1941 and
Ansel Adamshas caught in a split second one of the great images of history.

Moonrise, Hernandez is Adams's most famous photograph, more popular than any 
of his other classics: the eerie sandstone pinnacles of Arizona, the ancient 
marvels of Yosemite, redwood forests like fan-vaulted cathedrals. It is now the 
most lucrative fine art photograph ever taken, sold and resold at auction, 
blown up into zillions of posters: the moon standing guard over the dead kings 
of the wild frontier - an American legend printed up as an epic.

But go to Modern Art Oxford and you will see that it is a humble image, so 
small that the bone-white graves are barely discernible in the sepulchral 
half-light. It remains extraordinary that Adams, inching his way through the 
vast American wilderness, could frame so much of it in an 8x10 without any loss 
of grandeur. But Adams's art is still unsurpassed for wonderment and for its 
sense of wonder; nothing looks familiar through his eyes.

A desert crag, baked in the American heat, turns into a parchment scroll. 
Grass blades on a pond in morning dew become sparklers flourished against 
midnight darkness. Every millimetre absorbs the eye, from the distant spill of 
a waterfall, like sand through a mountain hourglass, to the flutter of aspen 
close up. You look into his world and are amazed to discover that near is 
really far, that this minutely detailed agate is in fact the whole of a canyon 
wall in Colorado.

Adams left what he called his Museum Collection: an entire career condensed in 
80 images for anyone who wanted to display his work in public for free. This is 
the first time his self-selected portfolio has been shown in Britain, and it is 
both a perfect introduction and a summary of his work.

What strikes, over and again, is the awesomeness of Adams's America: a 
semi-heaven here on rocky earth. His photographs represent untouched nature 
with meticulous fidelity, as it seems, and yet they appear to belong to the 
world-in-a-grain-of-sand poetry of painting.

Take his view of Moon and Half Dome, Yosemite, from 1938, with its rhythmical 
striations of rock and chasmic shadows. The moon rides high in the dark sky 
above a crystal mountain and you have the powerful sense of looking down on a 
bare, lonely planet. And yet there is an equally strong sense of looking up at 
another one - is it the moon, or Earth above? Are we in some mysterious 
visionary universe?

Adams, that great romantic, may have been in thrall to ever-changing nature 
but he also viewed it in relation to the flat rectangle of the picture. A visit 
to Taos in 1929, where he saw the paintings of John Marin among others, made 
him mindful of the abstract qualities of his own medium of photography. This is 
especially apparent in the great Surf series, wave on changing wave of pure 
shape, and in his images of sand dunes pleated and folded by the action of 
wind, rising in knife-edge triangles one behind the other, nothing but form: 
the merciless geometry of Death Valley abstracted.

But no matter how his images are conceived, designed, Adams's depth of feeling 
is always apparent. In Oxford, beautifully juxtaposed, you can see two 
contrasting photographs that express his emotional experiences of nature.

In Aspens, a few pale glimmering trees approach gingerly out of darkness. You 
look: they appear to look back at you. In Redwoods, the tree columns rise 
instead like ancient architecture holding up the sky. People and cathedrals: 
each metaphor is achieved through extreme variations of depth of field or 
contrast.

Adams could get such glittering blacks and platinum-bright whites, and so many 
half-tones in between, that it sometimes looks as if his monochrome photographs 
are breaking into colour. You sense reds and golds that can't be there, just as 
you imagine moods and presences that aren't literally evident in the landscape.

Adams was a supreme technician both outdoors and in the darkroom; he could get 
two dozen greys out of a negative. But if his universe sometimes feels too 
rich, almost implausibly biblical, then this is consistent with the workings of 
memory. For like Wordsworth, Adams's epiphanies are recollected in 
tranquillity, put through the filter of thought in the studio. But, unlike 
Wordsworth, Adams did not believe that words could ever 'convey the moods of 
those moments' - only music and photography.

Modern Art Oxford has serendipitously arranged it that the Moonlight Sonata 
steals up intermittently from the gallery below, where the British artist Katie 
Paterson has a sound installation marrying Beethoven, rather tendentiously, 
with a recording of splintering icebergs. But the main contemporary show is by 
the Romanian artistMircea Cantor

Cantor has a gift for bringing metaphor to life - literally in the case of the 
peacocks in a succession of golden cages, one inside the next: two birds as 
astonished as you by this live encounter. The cages, from vast to bird-sized, 
create an optical illusion; from certain angles it seems that we are imprisoned 
and the birds are free. Nearby, a flying carpet patterned with angels and 
aeroplanes hovers in mid-air and a Transylvanian tree appears to have blossomed 
into a sculpture. Halfway up, the trunk mysteriously opens into a starflower.

Cantor has a lyrical sensibility and an unusually light touch. These 
overlapping elements - magic carpet, gilded cage, miraculous tree - seem rooted 
in eastern European fairy tales but separately return you to modern reality. 
What tradition weaves aeroplanes into carpets, how long will that tree in the 
photograph survive or those birds endure the larger prison of an art gallery?
 