
Krys Lee’s debut novel, How I Became a North Korean, opens with a description 
of a lavish banquet hosted in Pyongyang by the dictatorial “Dear Leader”. The 
guests wear fur coats and Rolex watches, and sit at a mahogany table, eating 
delicacies flown in from the Tokyo Tsukiji fish market by private jet. 
Following the meal, the host raises his hand: “a glittering disco globe came 
down from the ceiling and the Joy Brigade began strutting in pink hot pants to 
a banned American pop song”. One couple, a senior party official and his wife, 
whose story we are following, are among those obliged to dance. Suddenly the 
mood changes, and the evening ends with the official shot dead, and his wife 
and son, Yongju, forced to flee the totalitarian state across the heavily 
patrolled border into China.

Yongju’s tale of escape is told alongside those of two other fugitives in the 
border area: Jangmi, a young North Korean woman who has become pregnant after a 
relationship with a married man; and Danny, a Korean-American. Betrayal, 
cruelty and violence lie ahead of them, as well as the possibility of 
salvation, in different forms. All three face desperate hunger; Jangmi trades 
sex for survival. When we meet, Lee says that halfway through writing her 
characters’ interlinked narratives, she wasn’t sure herself whether they were 
going to make it.

North Korean defectors see American dream deferred as reality sets in the US
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/13/north-korean-defectors-america-reality>
Lee, whose book of short stories, Drifting House, deservedly won much praise 
when it was published in 2012, has been active for more than a decade helping 
defectors from North Korea, and draws on this work in her novel. She writes in 
English, having been educated in the US and the UK, but was born in Seoul,South 
Korea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-korea>, and has lived there for 
some time. “I am always going to be on the side of people who have survived,” 
she says, “and who have experienced things that most of us are lucky not to 
have faced.”

North Korea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/north-korea> is the site of one 
of the world’s refugee crises, and Lee’s novel is, among other things, a timely 
exploration of the fate of individuals who take desperate and perilous journeys 
away from persecution or extreme hardship. Over the years, she has listened to 
many nail-biting accounts of flight: the usual escape route for North Koreans 
is across the Tumen River, but because the DPRK is an ally of China, the 
Chinese authorities hunt down defectors and often send them back – where they 
face torture, detention, even execution. They are thus forced to remain in 
hiding, while brokers and agencies – with luck – organise their onward journey.

Lee is keen to convey that behind the Orwellian grotesqueries of the North 
Korean dictatorship there are “ordinary” people, with family and community 
ties, aspirations and memories. (The title of the novel hints at the political 
identities imposed on us all.) She is scathing about China’s human rights 
record on refugees from the DPRK and tells of South Korean activists being 
tortured by electrocution and even dying in Chinese jails. In contrast, she has 
always been protected by her US passport. “The meaning of citizenship has 
troubled me for a very long time, why certain people have rights and privileges 
and others don’t.”

Lee is in no way a polemical writer, but the knowledge that informs How I 
Became a North Korean is hard-won. “The starting point for the novel was when 
North Koreans became part of my world,” she says. “I did whatever I could, and 
then I got threats, which changed everything.”

The threats came from an unlikely source – a Christian missionary, someone 
ostensibly involved in a good cause, setting up hideouts for defectors. Lee and 
the missionary were working together to help a refugee, but when, on a rare 
occasion, the man “was left alone with me, he got on his knees and begged me to 
get him out of the country,” Lee recalls. “He said: ‘You’re different from the 
others.’” It turned out that the missionary wanted to keep him locked up in 
China, and – claiming a conversion – to use him to solicit donations.

Lee had always assumed that “human rights and Christianity were on the same 
side in the border area, but it’s often not the case”. After she had acted 
alone in organising a way out for the refugee, the missionary began to call 
her. “He was furious, screaming at me, saying I wasn’t going to get away with 
it. He was intent on revenge: I had stepped on his toes, his territory.” Soon 
she began to receive calls from gangsters within South Korea, who knew where 
she lived. She was terrified, decamped to the US for months, and on returning 
to Seoul, moved house.

She still sees the refugee regularly, and has now taken her own form of 
revenge. A central figure inHow I Became a North Korean is Missionary Kwon, who 
appears to rescue the three fugitives, and installs them in a safe house. But 
they are effectively imprisoned, never see daylight, and are forced to memorise 
passages from the Bible. Kwon won’t let them continue their journey until he 
believes their souls have been saved; his sadistic, exploitative nature is 
gradually revealed.

Writers always return to their obsessions, Lee has said, and she counts 
religion – along with violence, power and inequality – among hers. In one of 
the stories inDrifting House, “A Pastor’s Son”, the narrator’s charismatic 
religious father abuses his new wife, pushing her head into a river. Another of 
the stories, “The Believer”, which features murder, insanity and incest, 
begins: “For Jenny, G was always for God. God was there, God was everywhere.” 
“Religion has always been both something that’s really close to me, and 
troubling to me,” Lee has said; her father, I discover in talking to her, was 
both a violent man and a charismatic Christian pastor.

“I write fiction to get away from myself, only to learn that this is 
impossible,” she has admitted. Lee completed first drafts ofDrifting House 
fully believing she “wasn’t writing anything related to myself at all”. As a PK 
(preacher’s kid), she was “always supposed to be good, and never to reveal 
anything – everything in my life was a secret”. Only in revising them did she 
realise that “the stories are the most honest version of me”. When we talk at 
her sister’s house in a small city in California, two nervy dogs, one named 
Havoc, the other Mayhem, have been put outside, and spend much of the time 
desperate to get back in.

The collection is eloquent on such subjects as the tearing apart of Korea by 
the cold war; the wrenching dislocation felt by emigrants; and the traditional, 
patriarchal Korean family. “My father was a God to me,” she remembers. He 
“would say to me all the time: ‘You are my property.’” Lee realises now that 
writing the stories was “partly an exercise in trying to understand” her 
parents’ generation: “Why were they the way they were? Why were so many people 
– us and those around us – so incredibly damaged?” In “The Pastor’s Son”, the 
narrator begins to understand “the violence that my father had grown up with 
and passed down to us”.

Living in a house where things were violent, you never knew what was going to 
happen, you were always afraid

Lee was four when her family moved from Korea to San Jose, California. At 
least she thinks so: “My parents’ version of events is rather slippery.” Her 
father had deserted from the harsh Korean Naval Academy, and claimed he had to 
leave the country because of his pro-democracy activities. He later said his 
phone had been tapped – which was common in the context of late 1970s and early 
80s South Korea. Lee doesn’t know whether that was genuinely the case, “but I 
believe his paranoia was real”.

Her father had a strong Christian faith: in South Korea the church has long 
been connected to progressive views and social aspiration. Under its auspices, 
he emigrated to the US to study religion, later spending all the money the 
family had to bring out his wife and two daughters to join him. They all shared 
one bedroom in a basement in a pastor’s house, and spent the next decade moving 
every few years, always short of cash. They went to the US “in search of a 
better life, but ended up failing rather spectacularly. I’ve always been 
haunted by the spectre of that failure and its repercussions.”

Lee grew up “intimate with violence” and remembers those years vividly; the 
easier times since “seem a little like a dream”. Her father was “a deeply 
troubled man, who hurt everybody around him”. “The problem with living in a 
house where things were violent and unstable,” she says, her fluency for a 
moment checked by emotion, “is that you never knew what was going to happen, 
you were always afraid; always tense.” Books were one vital way out. “Both my 
sister and I had a desire not to be us. Books meant becoming other people. Like 
the wardrobe to Narnia or the rabbit-hole to Wonderland, they provided a 
gateway to another life.”

She was also a good student; schoolwork was “one thing I could control”. Lee 
got a scholarship to UCLA; her mother, who had been ill with cancer for a long 
time, with no health insurance, died during Lee’s student years. She felt an 
inappropriate but overwhelming sense of guilt (“when you grow up Christian, in 
a traditional Korean family, guilt is your third sibling”) and, as soon as she 
could, got away, leaving for the UK on an exchange student programme, “to 
escape my own history, and to allow me to discover who I was, without all the 
sadness and starkness”.

Drifting House by Krys Lee - review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/mar/09/drifting-house-krys-lee-review> 
She studied and wrote poetry at the University of York and became engaged to 
be married: “I was too young, but I was desperate to find a man who was a 
decent human being. The most recent decades of my life have been in part about 
learning that not all men are terrible or dangerous.” The engagement was broken 
off when she went to Korea for a short-term trip: “It felt right; I started to 
understand my family and myself better; I needed to stay.” She studied Korean, 
worked as an editor, and found enough stillness to be able “to fully imagine 
another world … Stories began to come to me that I felt compelled to write.” 
Following a scholarship to an MFA programme in the US and a couple of writing 
workshops in California, she found that publishers were bidding in an auction 
to buy her first book.

The glowing reception given to Drifting House emphasised Lee’s precise style, 
cool tone and her stories’ “small moments of beauty and connection” (her 
publishers compare her writing to that ofJhumpa Lahiri  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/31/jhumpa-lahiri-in-other-words-italian-language>
andChang rae-Lee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/18/chang-rae-lee-interview>). She 
is a fierce editor of her own work, stripping pages away, and revised her novel 
for four years.How I Became a North Korean, though it recounts harrowing 
journeys, is, she says, “a more hopeful book” than her collection of stories: 
“When I look back and see my own patterns, I realise that I was in a much 
darker place when I wroteDrifting House.” The novel is suspenseful, beautifully 
written and in its deft realisation of character, offers a reminder that each 
refugee in the totality of a “crisis” has a unique set of circumstances – as 
well as a personal response to displacement and, so often, the bitter loss of 
family.

Lee now teaches creative writing at Yonsei University in Seoul, and as a 
professor is treated with far more respect by an older generation of Korean men 
than she is as a woman writer. She has decided, for the moment, not to have 
children with her partner, but regards it as a “lifelong goal” to help 
teenagers who have come from violent homes; she wants to be “somebody they can 
turn to”.

Still not fully part of Korean culture, Lee is now “at home with not being at 
home”. She is also at work on her second novel, which depicts a group of people 
who live underground, believing the world to have ended. The idea came to her 
in a dream about a couple making love on their knees in a confined space, with 
dirt falling in their eyes.

Having moved from poetry to short stories to the novel, Lee is getting used to 
the “generosity” of the novel form; the next book will have “an explosion of 
voices”, she says. Perhaps before too long she will again be praying – as she 
did when writingHow I Became a North Korean – that her characters, like her, 
will survive.

 * How I Became a North Korean, published by Faber, is available from 
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/how-i-became-a-north-korean.html> at £10.65.
 