
Svetlana Kuznetsova has strongly criticised the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> organisers' decision to 
close the stadium roof mid-way through her 5-7, 7-5, 6-1 semi-final defeat by
Serena Williams.

The Russian eighth seed was a set up against the second-seeded Williams, who 
looked to be struggling in heat. The temperature had reached 43C (109F) when 
play was suspended and the Rod Laver Arena roof closed, following the 
implementation of the extreme heat policy in which all matches on the outside 
courts were suspended.

When the players returned Williams, rejuvenated in the cooler conditions, went 
on to win the remaining two sets to secure victory, although Kuznetsova had 
unsuccessfully served for the match at 5-4 up in the second.

"I was definitely angry," she said. "Why should I not be? The game was going 
my way. I'm fine playing with the roof open. I think the guys yesterday had the 
same weather. Everybody was playing with the roof open. Why today [did] they 
have to close it? I didn't get it, that was why I was angry.

"It's two different games. One you play inside, one you play outside. She has 
a big serve. She was using it well when the roof was closed. I guess it was in 
her favour very much.

"Serena was tough. She's playing great and I give her credit. But I don't get 
this rule."

Williams, who moved into a semi-final against Olympic gold medalist Elena 
Dementieva, described playing in the heat as like having an out-of-body 
experience. "I was in a lot of trouble but I relaxed and I really wanted to 
fight, to at least go three sets," she said. "Before I was having an 
out-of-body experience, it was so hot."

"I felt I was watching someone play in a blue dress, and it wasn't me, because 
it was so hot out there," said Williams. "I kept trying to tell myself that 
'it's not hot', but it got hotter."

The denouement appeared unlikely after the first set, an intriguing, 
topsy-turvy affair, with both players trading breaks of serve back and forth. 
Having twice taken and then squandered the upper hand, Kuznetsova eventually 
served to take the set, but play was halted soon after to close the roof.

With a barricade from the heat in place, both suddenly found it easier to hold 
serve, Williams in particular with a combination of power and panache. But 
Kuznetsova was on top, a wonderful backhand shot earning her three break points 
- Williams saved the first two, but found the net on the third point.

The pair then each held in their next two games, Williams forcing the Russian 
to serve for the match. Kuznetsova, though, froze, now wary of the enormity of 
the task in front of her. Her serves lacked zip, and Williams, smelling blood, 
forced two break points. Kuznetsova saved the first with an ace, but she sent 
an easy volley wide to keep Williams' hopes alive at 5-5.

The momentum was now Williams'. With Kuznetsova now serving to stay in the 
set, a cracking return from Williams gave her two set points, and she 
despatched a fierce forehand winner to draw level at one set all.

Kuznetsova was visibily demoralised at the start of the final set, and in her 
second service game, Williams's power gained her three break points. Again an 
ace saved the first, before Williams directed a backhand into the net. But she 
was not about to waste the third, as her low shot asked too much of Kuznetsova 
who, despite not managing to get her volley over the net, put the ball very 
much in Williams' court.

Now it was the Russian's turn to mount a challenge, seizing two break points. 
Luck, though, was not on her side, as Hawkeye came to the rescue of Williams on 
the first count, before an accurate forehand down the line brought the game to 
deuce, from where she eventually held serve to go 4-1 ahead. With Kuznetsova 
now offering minimal of resistance, Williams broke again, and she served out 
the match in style.
 