
Kyle Edmund beat Gilles Simon in three sunlit sets to join Andy Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/14/andy-murray-ivan-lendl-queens-win>
 and Aljaz Bedene in the second round at Queen’s, a statement not as bland as 
it seems, given the dire history of British men’s tennis in recent, well, 
decades.

Bedene – still trying to convince the International Tennis Federation he is 
British enough to play Davis Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/23/aljaz-bedene-davis-cup-great-britain>
 – faces Murray on Thursday, weather permitting, so the ranks will be reduced 
by one. Edmund plays the talented Frenchman Paul-Henri Mathieu.

Until Dan Evans fell to Mathieu in three close sets there was a moment when it 
could have been four British players in the second round for the first time 
since 2005. The quartet that year was Tim Henman, Greg Rusedski, Murray and his 
recently appointed year-round coach, Jamie Delgado.

Andy Murray wins at Queen’s in first match since reuniting with Ivan Lendl
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/14/andy-murray-ivan-lendl-queens-win>
Edmund was worth his 6-4, 3-6, 6-1 winin an hour and 42 minutes, even if there 
was the uncomfortable spectacle of his opponent suffering from a serious attack 
of the yips on his serve. His three double faults arrived in the third set and 
Edmund made the most of the gift, serving out in style. Edmund took all three 
break points that came his way and saved two of three against him in an 
impressive performance.

Evans, despite his sometimes relaxed attitude to his craft, is an upbeat 
character and he thinks British tennis is getting back to where it needs to be, 
however slowly. “I had a lot of chances in all the sets,” he said after Mathieu 
hung on to beat him 7-6, 6-7, 6-3 in just over two and a half hours of 
entertaining tennis. “I just missed opportunities.”

He added: “I think British tennis is on a high. Everyone is doing well, 
winning matches in better tournaments than we are used to seeing. Like Alex 
Ward [awarded a wild card to Wimbledon on Wednesday], those guys are doing 
well, Broads [Liam Broady]. It’s going to be good. Sooner or later we’ll have 
more players competing in these tournaments.”

While the other three here had the flickering benefit of some sunshine, Bedene 
snuck through in the dark on Tuesday evening to beat another Frenchman, Benoît 
Paire, 7-6, 6-7, 6-4.

Bedene, ranked No58 in the world, is, naturally, thrilled to be playing Murray 
– the world No2’s first home opponent on the Tour since he lost to Henman in 
Bangkok in 2006, a statistic every bit as revealing as the current resurgence.

“It’s going to be full, full crowds and hopefully better conditions,” Bedene 
said. “I’ve just got to try to adapt on grass. The main thing is to enjoy it, 
put my game on the court and see what happens.”

The some times diffident Bedene arrived in London from the Netherlands not 
exactly bursting with confidence after a tough time on the grass of 
’s-Hertogenbosch, where he went out to Bernard Tomic in straight sets in the 
second round. He has had little time to practise on grass and will do well to 
stay with Murray.

“He’s a great player. To stand a chance, I have to play great,” was Bedene’s 
simple view of his task.
 