
More than 1.5 million low earners could be automatically signed up to their 
workplace pension schemes to ensure they save for old age under plans being 
considered byLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour>.

Rachel Reeves <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/rachel-reeves>, the shadow 
work and pensions secretary, is considering whether to extend the government's 
policy of "auto-enrolment", which currently applies to workers over the age of 
22 and earning more than £10,000.

Under the new proposal, Labour is thinking about applying this to all workers 
who earn more than £5,773 – the current lower earnings limit for National 
Insurance. Two-thirds of some of the lowest earners who would benefit from 
pension contributions from their employers are women.

Reeves will set out the idea in a speech to the Resolution Foundation, 
suggesting that any costs in additional pension tax relief would be met out of 
savings made elsewhere in the budget of the Department for Work andPensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions>.

She will warn that far too many are people are facing insecurity when they 
retire, with the rise of zero-hour contracts, part-time roles and low-paid jobs 
storing up huge problems for the future.

"The latest government figures show the amount the country saves is set to 
fall across the next parliament and, for millions, the cost-of-living crisis 
could continue well into their retirement," she will say.

"The Pensions Commission established by the last Labour government set out a 
plan to help people save into a workplace pension. But the government left out 
1.5 million people from workplace pensions, including more than a million women 
in poorly paid work, when they increased the level of earnings to qualify for 
auto-enrolment.

She will add: "The government's failure to encourage more people to save 
threatens to store up huge costs for taxpayers in the future with a rising 
benefits bill. A Labour government would back people who do the right thing, 
work hard and save for their retirement. We are considering detailed proposals 
which could ensure the 1.5 million workers excluded from workplace pensions are 
able to save for their retirement."

Under automatic enrolment, a portion of an employee's pay packet is 
automatically diverted to a savings pot for their pension. The employer must 
also add a minimum contribution and the employee will get tax relief.

Since the policy was introduced in October 2012, only around one in 10 workers 
has opted out of their pension scheme, suggesting it is helping people to save 
more for the future.

However, millions of the lowest paid were excluded from the auto-enrolment 
system in a move condemned at the time by the then TUC general secretary, 
Brendan Barber. He said it would have the disastrous "unintended consequence of 
excluding a significant proportion of women workers from pensions saving".

The Department of Work and Pensions defended the decision by arguing that 
including those earning less than the income tax threshold in automatic 
enrolment "could take vital money from the household budgets of a group that 
would not get the added benefit of tax relief".
 