
Labor and the Greens have rejected a “ridiculous” offer from the government to 
allow just one person from each party to view secret reports of the trade union 
royal commission, as theCoalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> tries to clinch Senate 
support for a tough building industry watchdog.

The government had previously offered a private viewing to several crossbench 
senators whose votes will be crucial to the passage of the bill to reintroduce 
the Howard-era Australian Building and Construction Commission (ABCC), 
prompting complaints from Labor and the Greens about about the special 
treatment.

Late on Monday the government relented and offered the shadow attorney 
general, Mark Dreyfus, and the leader of the Greens,Richard Di Natale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/richard-di-natale>, access to the 
confidential volumes, on the condition they not take any notes or communicate 
“the details or nature of the material” to anyone else.

Dio Wang aims to create 'national Icac' by amending building watchdog bill
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/01/dio-wang-aims-to-create-national-icac-by-amending-building-watchdog-bill>
The employment minister, Michaelia Cash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/michaelia-cash>, said the 
government had found “a pathway forward” and the parties would accept the offer 
if they genuinely wanted to inform themselves.

But Labor and the Greens, which oppose the ABCC legislation on the basis the 
building industry should not be treated differently from other sectors,swiftly 
rejected the terms of the access proposal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/feb/02/building-watchdog-bill-first-up-as-parliament-resumes-politics-live?page=with:block-56aff676e4b0975c2aa8c481#block-56aff676e4b0975c2aa8c481>
 conveyed on the eve of the resumption of parliament on Tuesday.

The Labor leader, Bill Shorten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten>, said the 
government’s handling of the issue had turned into a “circus” and Dreyfus said 
it was “beyond farcical”.

Dreyfus said the government had become tangled “in a huge mess because it 
wanted to play politics with this report”.

“It’s either confidential or it’s not,” Dreyfus said.

The Greens MP Adam Bandt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adam-bandt> said his party had also 
decided to reject “the government’s ridiculous offer”.

“The Greens party room has decided today that we won’t be having a bar of the 
government’s attempt to create two classes of members of parliament, where some 
who are the chosen few get to see a secret document and aren’t allowed to talk 
about it, otherwise they might face a penalty, and others are forced to take 
the word of the government that this document is what it says,” Bandt said.

“If they think they can try and pressure one or two crossbenchers into voting 
for it by allowing them to see this report, we want everyone in parliament to 
see the report so we can debate it and work out whether it is as serious as the 
government says it is. I suspect it is not.”

The final report of the trade union royal commission contained six volumes, 
the first five of which were published late last year. The commissioner, Dyson 
Heydon, recommended that the final “confidential” volume not be released.

Heydon’s interim report in December 2014 also contained a secret volume which 
purportedly dealt with “grave threats to the power and authority of the 
Australian state”. He said it should remain confidential “in order to protect 
the physical wellbeing of those witnesses and their families”.

Four crossbench senators – Jacqui Lambie, Glenn Lazarus, Ricky Muir and Dio 
Wang – have requested access to the confidential volumes and it is understood 
these viewings could be arranged some time this week. In a letter to Di Natale 
last week, Cash relied on the fact that the fate of the ABCC legislation rested 
with the crossbenchers.

“Given the significant public interest in both this legislation and the need 
to address the behaviour referred to in the volumes, the government has agreed 
to provide access to these senators only, under strict confidentiality 
provisions,” the minister wrote on 29 January.

“In contrast, the grounds put forward by the Greens for providing such wide 
access to the confidential volumes do not demonstrate a public interest that 
would outweigh the risks to witnesses and investigations that could arise in 
providing access in the manner you have proposed.”

On Monday, Cash wrote again to Di Natale to offer him inspection of redacted 
versions of the volumes, on the condition it was done in the presence of an 
officer of the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet; no other 
individuals were permitted to view the volumes; no notes could be taken or any 
material copied; and none of the material could be removed from the room.

Brandis wrote to Dreyfus to extend him the same offer. But in a written 
response, Dreyfus and Labor’s workplace relations spokesman, Brendan O’Connor, 
accused the government of “policy-making on the run” and “the most base 
transactional politics”.

“Offering to brief selective parliamentarians about a report which the 
government purports to rely on to justify this legislation is a contempt of the 
parliament itself and a violation of the system of representative democracy 
established under the constitution,” Dreyfus and O’Connor said in a letter to 
Cash on Tuesday.

Cash said the reports had been made confidential “for very good reasons” 
including to avoid prejudicing police investigations, and she had rejected 
Labor and the Greens’ previous demands “based on the fact that it was a 
wide-ranging request”.

“We’ve now looked at how we can get a pathway forward if they really want to 
see the report, if they are genuine that they need to see this report to 
actually inform themselves,” she told the ABC’s AM program.

Heydon’s public report called for a special regulator for the building and 
construction industry “with compulsory investigatory and information gathering 
powers”.

The Coalition reintroduced its previously blocked ABCC legislation to the 
House of Representatives as its first order of business on Tuesday.

Push to bring back ABCC building industry watchdog blocked by Senate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/17/push-to-bring-back-abcc-building-industry-watchdog-blocked-by-senate>
The government needs support from six out of eight crossbench senators to pass 
the legislation. A decision by the Senate to block the bill would present the 
government with another potential trigger to call a double dissolution election.

The independent Victorian senator John Madigan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/john-madigan> said the government’s 
approach had “more than a whiff of ideology about it” and he would “not be 
bullied” by double-dissolution threats.
 