
A group of allotment-holders at a 118-year-old site in Watford have won a 
landmark legal victory to save their plots from redevelopment, in a judgment 
their lawyers say could have important implications for similar sites around 
the country.

Gardeners from the historic Farm Terrace allotments, in the shadow of Watford 
FC’s Vicarage Road ground, successfully blocked a second decision by the 
communities secretary,Eric Pickles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eric-pickles>, to allow the site to be 
built on by a consortium of Watford borough council and a developer.

The minister’s initial ruling to grant permission to an earlier application 
had been overturned by the high court, and now a judicial review of that 
verdict has sided with the plot-holders, in what one of their number described 
as “a victory for the little people”.

The verdict, believed to be the first time the courts have overturned a 
decision to allow development on allotments, means the 128 plots will not be 
ripped up to build housing and a car park. Land adjacent to the site is likely 
to be built on, but the campaigners argued that by the council’s own admission 
its scheme, which includes space for the potential expansion of a local 
hospital, was viable without destroying their plots.

There were tears, hugs and shouts of “We bloody well won!” at the allotments 
on Friday morning when the judicial review result was revealed to several dozen 
plot-holders and supporters, a number of whom have lovingly tended their plots 
for decades.

Swallowing tears, spokeswoman Sara Jane Trebar said the group was thrilled by 
the decision, which vindicated its two-year campaign funded by hundreds of 
small donations from gardeners and allotment groups around the country.

“This is a huge victory, not just for allotment holders but for the average 
person who feels let down by their councils and government,” she said. “It 
shows that it is possible to fight injustice and win.”

Pete Baillie, who for 15 years has been growing “just about everything” on his 
small patch, said: “I have lived in Watford all my life and I just knew that to 
take this lovely place and turn it into houses and a car park was totally, 
totally wrong.

“But this is not my plot, I’m just the custodian, and when I give it up 
someone else in Watford will take it on and make it theirs. Why destroy that?”

In a statement, Watford borough council said it was disappointed by the ruling 
and would consider appealing. “We remain resolutely determined that the 
allotments are key to providing a scheme which will deliver on its promise to 
regenerate west Watford providing new homes, business and community facilities 
and much-needed space for Watford hospital.”

Under the Allotments <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/allotments> Act 
1925, councils can only develop statutorily protected allotment land with the 
permission of the secretary of state, and only if strict criteria are met. In 
reality such requests are rarely turned down.

Overturning Pickles’ decision in the judicial review, Mr Justice Ouseley found 
the council’s plans for the development had changed significantly after it had 
applied for consent, but that it had not informed the minister of the changes, 
and so his decision could not stand.

Adam Hundt of Deighton Pierce Glynn, representing the campaigners, said the 
ruling “strikes a very important blow” for others in a similar position. “I 
have been contacted by lots of allotment groups since this process stared 
saying: ‘If only we had known we could do something about our development, and 
now it’s too late.’”

In a statement, communities minister Stephen Williams said the government had 
taken its decision “based on the evidence provided by the council at the time”. 
“Since 2010, where this government has consented to the disposal of allotments, 
alternative plots have been provided, and the total amount of allotment 
provision has actually increased as a result.”
 