
Unwell, behind bars and stripped of his fortune, the billionaire financier Sir 
Allen Stanford <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/allen-stanford> is facing 
yet another headache – a Las Vegas casino is suing him for $258,480 (£160,000) 
in unpaid gambling debts.

The Bellagio,on the Las Vegas Strip, has filed a lawsuit in Nevada's Clark 
County district court accusing Stanford of running up gaming losses in January
barely a month before the US authorities raided the Houston headquarters of his 
Stanford Financial Group and charged him with fraud 
<http:////www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/feb/17/allen-stanford-fraud-sec-federal-agents-houston>
.

Details of the suit, according to the Las Vegas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/las-vegas> Sun newspaper, say that 
Stanford signed for 14 gambling markers, which are cheque-like instruments 
allowing regular customers to open up a temporary line of credit with a casino. 
The casino, which is owned by MGM Mirage, presented them for payment at a Miami 
bank on 19 February, just as Stanford's business empire was beginning to 
collapse, but all 14 of the markers bounced. The Bellagio's lawsuit seeks 
payment of the alleged debt, plus interest calculated at an annual rate of 18% 
and recompense for legal costs.Court documents include a copy of the 
identification provided by Stanford to the casino – a driving licence giving 
the address of his Caribbean estate in the US Virgin Islands.

For Stanford, the latest legal challenge comes at a miserable moment. The 
59-year-old, best known in Britain for bankrolling cricket's Twenty20 
tournaments, has been refused bail while he awaits trial for fiddling thousands 
of investors out of $7bn in savings. The US Department of Justice alleges that 
his bank defrauded customers by lying about its track record of returns and its 
investment strategy, and that Stanford used clients' funds to bankroll his own 
jetset lifestyle.

He was rushed from his Texan prison cell to hospital last week suffering from 
an accelerated pulse rate . Doctors diagnosed him with an aneurysm in his leg – 
a condition which is not considered to be life threatening – and he was 
returned to jail after five days of treatment.

In an email to The Guardian, Stanford's Houston-based lawyer, Dick DeGuerin, 
said his client had been unable to pay the Bellagio because of a freeze on his 
assets imposed by the Securities and Exchange Commission. DeGuerin said the 
casino ought to sue the receivers of Stanford International: "It's a valid 
personal debt and should be honoured, but the receiver is interested only in 
selling all the assets for a fraction of their worth, and billing $30m [so far] 
for his efforts."

Prosecutors scored a breakthrough last week when the chief financial officer 
of Stanford International, James Davis, pleaded guilty to two counts of fraud. 
Davis is helping prosecutors with their investigation in return for a more 
lenient sentence.
 