
Airborne laser technology has uncovered a network of roads and canals, 
illustrating the remains of a bustling ancient city linking Cambodia's famed 
Angkor Wat temples complex.

The discovery was announced late on Monday in a peer-reviewed paper released 
early by the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences journal. The laser 
scanning revealed a previously undocumented formal urban planned landscape 
integrating the 1,200-year-old temples.

The Angkor temple complex, Cambodia's top tourist destination and one of 
Asia's most famous landmarks, was constructed in the 12th century. Angkor Wat 
is a point of deep pride for Cambodians, appearing on the national flag, and 
was named a Unesco world heritage site.

Archaeologists had long suspected that the city of Mahendraparvata 
<http://www.theage.com.au/world/the-lost-city-20130614-2o9k7.html> lay hidden 
beneath a canopy of dense vegetation atop Phnom Kulen mountain in Siem Reap 
province. But the airborne lasers produced the first detailed map of a vast 
cityscape, including highways and previously undiscovered temples.

"No one had ever mapped the city in any kind of detail before, and so it was a 
real revelation to see the city revealed in such clarity," University of Sydney 
archaeologist Damian Evans, the study's lead author, said by phone fromCambodia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cambodia>. "It's really remarkable to see 
these traces of human activity still inscribed into the forest floor many, many 
centuries after the city ceased to function and was overgrown."

The technology, known as lidar, works by firing laser pulses from an aircraft 
to the ground and measuring the distance to create a detailed, 
three-dimensional map of the area. It is a useful tool for archaeologists 
because the lasers can penetrate dense vegetation and cover swaths of ground 
far faster than they could be analysed on foot. Lidar has been used to explore 
other archaeological sites, such as Stonehenge.

In April 2012, researchers loaded the equipment on to a helicopter, which 
spent days crisscrossing the dense forests from 800 metres above the ground. A 
team of Australian and French archaeologists then confirmed the findings with 
an expedition on foot through the jungle.

Archaeologists had already spent years doing ground research to map a 3.5 sq 
mile section of the city's downtown area. But the lidar revealed the section 
was much bigger – at least 14 sq miles – and more heavily populated than once 
believed.

"The real revelation is to find that the downtown area is densely inhabited, 
formally-planned and bigger than previously thought," Evans said. "To see the 
extent of things we missed before has completely changed our understanding of 
how these cities were structured."

Researchers do not yet know why the civilisation at Mahendraparvata collapsed. 
But Evans said one current theory is that possible problems with the city's 
water management system may have driven people out.

The next step for researchers involves excavating the site, which Evans hopes 
will reveal clues about how many people once lived in the city.
 