
Pentagon anthrax blunder reveals 'chain of errors' in government lab protocols
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/29/anthrax-pentagon-labs-regulations>
One week after the terrorist attack in New York on 9/11, another attack on the 
US began.Letters containing spores of anthrax 
<http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/history/famous-cases/anthrax-amerithrax>, a 
weaponised bacterial agent, were posted to the offices of several newspapers 
and two Democratic senators. Twenty-two people were infected. Five died.


Anthrax is a bacterium often found in soil, according to Jerrold Leikin, a 
doctor who co-edited a book on “toxico-terrorism 
<http://www.amazon.com/Toxico-terrorism-Emergency-Response-Biological-Radiological/dp/0071471863>
”. Its spores are one to five microns across – small enough to get into human 
lungs. The initial symptoms of infection look like flu, but quickly progress to 
sepsis, hemorrhagic meningitis and death. Once it progresses to those last 
stages, the fatality rate is around 95%.

Over the last few weeks, it was revealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/03/pentagon-live-anthrax-us-laboratories>
, anthrax was sent to 52 laboratories in 18 states plus South Korea, Canada and 
Australia. Thirty-one people received treatment for possible exposure. In 2014, 
a similar incident saw 75 people possibly exposed to the pathogen.

The difference is this: the first incident was a terrorist attack. The second 
and third were accidents. Samples of the pathogen that were supposed to be 
inactivated were sent to laboratories by the Center for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC) in 2014 and the Department of Defense most recently.

The origin point of this year’s accident was Dugway proving ground in Utah, a 
military facility which produces anthrax in industrial quantities for the 
purpose of military research – detection, mainly, and as a countermeasure.

The post-9/11 era saw a huge expansion in the security state. The bioweapon 
industry was no different. After the 2001 anthrax attacks – known to some as 
“Amerithrax” – there was a 20- to 40-fold increase in the number of 
institutions and individuals working with biological weapon agents like 
anthrax, according toRichard Ebright 
<https://www.waksman.rutgers.edu/ebright/richard-h-ebright>, a molecular 
biologist and biosecurity expert at Rutgers university.

In response to questions from the Guardian, a spokesperson for the CDC said 
there were 181 “organizations or entities” such as Dugway registered as working 
with live anthrax, and 321 in total working with live pathogens.

Within those 321 entities, according to the Government Accountability Office, 
there are some 1,495 laboratories accredited under the Federal Select Agent 
Program to work with live pathogens such as anthrax, and a much larger number 
working with inert versions of the same pathogens.

There is no official government body to oversee production and research of 
bioweapons that does not – as the CDC does – engage in its own active pathogen 
research, and no apparent fixed official guidelines regarding their handling.

Human beings are relatively resistant to anthrax compared to smallpox. But 
that’s not something we should rely on
Stephen Morse 
After the CDC’s own accident with anthrax in 2014, it said it would hold an 
official investigation and issue a set of binding guidelines. No such 
comprehensive set of guidelines appears to have been issued and it is unclear 
exactly under what authority the CDC could bind, for example, the Department of 
Defense. A spokesperson for the CDC told the Guardian that it “and [the US 
Department of Agriculture] work jointly on regulating and overseeing the work 
done on select agents”.

However, a 2013 Government Accountability Office report found “a continued 
lack of national standards for the design, construction, commissioning, and 
operation of high-containment laboratories” and said “no single federal agency 
was responsible for assessing overall laboratory needs”.

According to Ebright, basic rules, such as having at least two people in a lab 
at any one time, or even that accredited laboratories should have CCTV cameras, 
do not exist in many such facilities.

Information regarding the latest breach is relatively scarce. Army chief of 
staff Raymond Odierno told reporters “the best I can tell there was not human 
error”.

“The fact that this has been obviously happening for some time and perhaps at 
several different places hints at a systemic issue,” saidStephen Morse 
<http://www.mailman.columbia.edu/our-faculty/profile?uni=ssm20>, a professor of 
epidemiology at Columbia University’s Mailman School of Public Health.

Morse, who also worked at the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency 
<http://www.darpa.mil/> (Darpa) between 1995 and 2000 on biodefence, speculated 
that the process by which machines irradiate the live pathogens, inactivating 
them, might be “poorly calibrated”.

“Luckily for us, human beings are relatively resistant to anthrax compared to 
smallpox,” said Morse. “But that’s not something we should rely on.”

Indeed, according to Ebright, military contracted laboratories across the US 
routinely work with other, more dangerous pathogens than anthrax – including 
several virulent strains of avian flu. A mistake with one of those, instead of 
anthrax, could have devastating results, including “a global pandemic”.

Nominally all such labs are working on defences against these pathogens. But 
it has become, Ebright said, “all pork-barrel”, with at least one lab in every 
single state.

“[It’s] spending that can’t possibly be defended on any rational basis,” he 
said.

“With each of the incidents in the past there has been a notable absence of 
responsibility. They know if you mess up, nothing happens; the programmes 
aren’t reduced, the personnel suffer no consequences. So it’s all about the 
worst you could possibly have: no one watching, no rules, and no 
accountability.”

But according to Ebright, the real issue isn’t a question of danger to the 
public from the accidental sending itself. It’s the chance that the pathogen – 
which was the same strain used in the 2001 attack – could fall into the wrong 
hands.

It's all about the worst you could possibly have: no-one watching, no rules 
and no accountability
Richard Ebright 
“Even one spore is a sufficient seed stock from which an amount could grow to 
mount a biological weapons attack,” Ebright said. “The sad circumstance is that 
this massive effort since 2001 has dramatically increased the chances of a 
biological weapon attack on the US, precisely by distributing a highly lethal 
strain of the agent with no structure and no ability to record where they have 
gone.”

Nor is this the only slip-up that has been made at Dugway. In 2011 the base 
was placed on lockdown for several hours after a vial containing a deadly 
“nerve agent” went missing, theBBC 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-us-canada-12295554> reported at the time.

“The major concern is the security breach, that the material will be 
transferred to domestic terror and international terror and be used as the seed 
source for a bomb or weapon,” said Ebright.

“It would be disappointing if the Department of Defense becomes the supplier 
for al-Qaida that enables a bioweapon attack.”
 