
San Francisco today marks what the city's mayor has officially designated 
Michael Tolliver Day. The object of this honour is not the usual city luminary 
or sporting star but a fictional character - moreover, one who had disappeared 
for 18 years.

Tolliver is one of the key players in Tales of the City, the sprawling 
newspaper series turned set of six novels byArmistead Maupin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/armisteadmaupin>, which, between 1976 and 
1989, chronicled the tangled lives of a group of characters centred around the 
US city's colourfully bohemian gay scene.

The first new book in the series in 18 years is published today, finally 
bringing Maupin's millions of readers worldwide up to date with the likes of 
former Ohio innocent Mary Ann Singleton, pot-growing landlady Mrs Madrigal and 
- most of all - Michael Tolliver himself.

The new novel, Michael Tolliver Lives, is a first person narration by the 
title character, whose life in many ways resembles that of his creator.

At the start of the series a guileless young man energetically exploring San 
Francisco's then-burgeoning gay nightlife, Michael is now in his mid-50s, 
slightly arthritic and HIV-positive.

"I wanted to tell the story of a gay man getting older -- especially one who 
thought death was imminent and is now confronting normal mortality," Maupin, 
63, told the Associated Press in an interview marking the publication of the 
book.

This was an important theme, he said in a separate interview with the San 
Francisco Chronicle, the newspaper that printed Tales of the City as a column.

"Age is the last closet you come out of in the gay world," he said. "There are 
such gloomy visions of gay men aging. But if you worship beauty above all else, 
if you worship sex above all else, you're in trouble. If you're not working on 
your heart every second, you are going to have a very sad old age."

A former journalist, Maupin became famous and wealthy through the series of 
novels, which were later made into a popular TV miniseries.

Michael Tolliver's life still mirrors Maupin's own - both are newly married to 
much younger men they first spotted on internet dating websites and then bumped 
into by chance and both have settled down to a routine of generally cosy 
domesticity.

However, while Maupin's husband has been welcomed by his family, in the new 
book Michael has to introduce his partner to relatives who are born-again 
Christians, a plot theme that reflects the author's distaste for conservative 
politicians moralising about gay people.

"We've made progress from utter invisibility 30 years ago to prominence in the 
cultural scene, but with that prominence has come a more rampant form of 
homophobia," Maupin told AP.

"My hope is that we're close to the time that homophobia takes on the status 
of racism today -- normal, mainstream people don't accept it."
 