
There was to be no suicide pill, no bullet in the brain, no heroic martyrdom. 
Instead, it is claimed, there was a humiliating slap on the cheek andLaurent 
Gbagbo <https://www.theguardian.com/world/laurent-gbagbo> was hauled from his 
bunker and paraded before the TV cameras.

The fall of the African strongman came after one of the most drawn-out 
election results in history. Gbagbo was finally prised from his palace in the 
formerIvory Coast <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ivory-coast> capital four 
months after the votes were cast against him.

Backed by French tanks, forces loyal to Gbagbo's opponent, Alassane Ouattara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alassane-ouattara>, said they stormed his 
underground bunker at the presidential residence in Abidjan, interrogated 
Gbagbo then carried him away with his wife, Simone, and his son Michel.

"We attacked and forced in a part of the bunker," Issard Soumahro, a 
pro-Ouattara soldier at the scene, told the Associated Press. "He was there 
with his wife and his son. He wasn't hurt, but he was tired and his cheek was 
swollen from where a soldier had slapped him."

The 65-year-old former history professor, who once dismissed the beheading of 
France's Louis XVI as public "ebullience", could be seen wearing a military 
flak jacket and flanked by two soldiers. His son was beaten and bleeding, 
according to an Ouattara spokesman.

Gbagbo was then reportedly taken to the city's Golf hotel, where Ouattara's 
government-in-waiting has been encamped under UN protection since Gbagbo's 
intransigence plunged the country back into civil war.

Speaking on TCI television, Ouattara later said Gbagbo would face justice. He 
said he would establish a truth and reconciliation commission to investigate 
accusations of atrocities against civilians by both sides in the conflict. He 
also called for calm and urged militias to lay down their weapons. "I call my 
fellow country men to abstain from all form of reprisal and violence," he said. 
"Our country has turned a painful page in its history."

The US secretary of state, Hillary Clinton, said dictators should take notice 
that "they may not disregard the voice of their own people in free and fair 
elections". The British foreign secretary, William Hague, called for Gbagbo to 
be treated with respect and tried in an orderly manner.

After months of diplomatic stalemate and two weeks of military defiance, it 
took one last big push to force Gbagbo out of his bunker. And it was clear that 
foreign intervention had played a decisive role in breaking the deadlock.

On Sunday night, French and UN helicopter gunships pounded Gbagbo's residence 
for the second time, claiming they were taking out heavy weapons that had been 
used against both the UN and civilians. Then on Monday morning a convoy of 25 
French military vehicles, including tanks and armoured personnel carriers, set 
off in the same direction.

But Ouattara's forces claimed they carried out the final offensive alone.

Gbagbo's camp insisted he was taken by French special forces. The French deny 
Gbagbo's repeated accusations that they were plotting a coup in their former 
colony. Major Frederic Daguillon, a French military spokesman, insisted they 
were responding to attacks on civilians. "We deployed along the strategic axis. 
One of these was a road that led to the residence of Mr Gbagbo. Mr Gbagbo was 
arrested by the Ivorian forces. Not one French soldier was in the residence of 
Mr Gbagbo. Mr Gbagbo was arrested by Ivorian forces, not French."

What happens next to Gbagbo, once a firebrand marxist lecturer, is not yet 
clear. Officials at the Golf hotel were said to be waiting for him to sign a 
document that formally hands power over to Ouattara. Television footage showed 
Gbagbo in a white sleeveless undershirt, then donning a colourful print shirt.

Apollinaire Yapi, a spokesman for Ouattara's military commander, Guillaume 
Soro, said: "He'll stay at the Golf hotel for now, and will be handed over to 
the UN or French, but his ultimate destination is justice."

The international criminal court prosecutor Luis Moreno-Ocampo has begun 
preliminary examination of possible war crimes and crimes against humanity in 
Ivory Coast, including accusations levelled against pro-Ouattara forces.

On Monday night there were celebrations in pro-Ouattara neighbourhoods, where 
guns were fired into the air. But in other areas French troops were stoned by 
angry pro-Gbagbo youths.

It remained unclear whether Gbagbo's supporters would launch a backlash or 
melt back into the population. He won 46% of the vote in the election. With 
youth militias still roaming, the potential for counter-insurgency is evident.

But Youssoufou Bamba, Ivory Coast's ambassador to the UN, predicted the 
fighting would stop. "The nightmare is over for the people of Ivory Coast," he 
said.

In western Ivory Coast, rebels fired into the air in jubilation in Duékoué, 
causing a panic among refugees who fled in all directions or dropped to the 
ground in terror. In villages to the east of Duékoué, people danced in the 
streets, waving tree branches. In one village, young men paraded with the 
orange, white and green Ivorian flag.

"It's a victory ... considering all the evil that Laurent Gbagbo inflicted on 
Ivory Coast," Ouattara's ambassador to France, Ali Coulibaly, told France-Info 
radio. He emphasised that the man in power for a decade would be "treated with 
humanity".

Coulibaly added: "We must not in any way make a royal gift to Laurent Gbagbo 
in making him a martyr. He must be alive and he must answer for the crimes 
against humanity that he committed."

The power struggle in Ivory Coast has cost an estimated 1,500 lives, though 
the real figure is probably much higher, and a million people have been 
displaced from Abidjan alone.

Ban Ki-moon, the UN secretary general, said: "This is an end of a chapter that 
should never have been. We have to help them to restore stability, rule of law, 
and address all humanitarian and security issues." He said Gbagbo's "physical 
safety should be ensured".

Daniel Bekele, the Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> director 
of Human Rights Watch, said: "Laurent Gbagbo has been credibly implicated in 
crimes against humanity and other atrocities for which he should be held to 
account. He should not be granted a golden exile in a country that would shield 
him from national or international prosecution."

• The following correction was printed in the Guardian's Corrections and 
clarifications column, 14 April 2011. A front-page story about the capture of 
Laurent Gbagbo said that, in their assault on the former president's residence 
in Abidjan, his opponents were "backed by French tanks". French forces in the 
Ivory Coast conflict are using lighter armoured vehicles. A recent editorial 
reminder circulated by the readers' editor noted: "Not everything with a very 
large gun that moves is a tank".
 