
Laura Robson broke down in tears, with a towel draped over her head, her 
match-adrenalin sapped in killing heat, after fighting back to within three 
points of forcing the sixth seed Karolina Pliskova into a third set in the 
girls' final of theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>.

She was distraught, but could have no argument with the story of the score: 
6-1, 7-6 (7-5) in favour of the composed Czech girl, a baseline prowler of 
consummate skill. Pliskova, whose unseeded twin sister lost miserably to Robson 
in the semi-finals the previous day, is two years older than the Melbourne-born 
Londoner and clearly will be a force on the tour when she leaves the junior 
ranks.

This was a reprise of last year's final for Robson, who lost then to the 
strong Russian Ksenia Pervak, a player similar to Pliskova in strength and 
class. But the future for Robson might be with the grown-ups now.

While she has done fantastically well, breaking into the big time when she won 
the junior girls' title at Wimbledon, she might profit from making the most of 
the 12 senior tour appearances she is allowed (three of them wild cards, one of 
those, surely, reserved for Wimbledon, if needed).

She has done her apprenticeship, and has felt the power of adult players when 
featuring in the mixed doubles alongside Andy Murray in the Hopman Cup. She 
also beat María José Martínez Sánchez, at the time ranked as the 16th best 
female player in the world, in Perth - so she is ready to leave the kids behind.

Robson will be an elegant contender at senior level one day and, at times 
today she produced some stunning winners, but too often she built her game 
intelligently only to blow the point with a hastily taken killer shot. She was 
increasingly angry with herself.

The first set was one-way traffic as Pliskova, the sixth seed, steadily 
capitalised on Robson's repeated errors, most of them unforced.

The second set was going the same way until Robson dug deep. She broke back 
twice and took the match to a tie-break, with momentum in her favour. All 
looked good for Robson, as she raced to a 4-1 lead - and then she wobbled.

She struck an ordinary shot into the net, double-faulted then hit long to give 
Pliskova two match points on her serve. Robson hit the shot of the match, a 
scorching forehand into the corner, to save one of them but, when the serve 
came back to her, she double-faulted and gave vent to her frustrations.

She was inconsolable in the immediate aftermath and said later, "I'm tired, 
just tired. She served really well all match and I was just trying to take my 
chance to break. Overall it's been a great month for me, getting to the final 
in Perth, the quarter-finals in doubles here and the junior final."
 