
Only a week or so ago Laurent Gbagbo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/laurent-gbagbo> was still being offered the 
opportunity to go into exile somewhere in Africa in a deal that would probably 
have assured him immunity from prosecution. Now, he has no chance.

Currently being held at the same hotel where his rival, Alassane Ouattara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alassane-ouattara>, was under siege for much 
of the time since November's election, Gbagbo will be waiting to see where he 
is to be tried – and for what crimes.

Ouattara said he wanted a truth and reconciliation-style process in Ivory Coast
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ivory-coast> to address the causes and 
effects of the crisis that has plagued the country for more than a decade. It 
is early days, but at this stage it seems unlikely that Gbagbo will be offered 
any sort of amnesty deal.

"Internationally, no one will be pushing for him to be left alone," said 
Rinaldo Depagne, westAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> senior 
analyst at the International Crisis Group. "Everyone saw how be was offered 
several chances at exile, but he refused."

The international criminal court has been monitoring the situation in Ivory 
Coast and could launch an investigation into crimes against humanity, with 
Gbagbo being one of the key suspects. But that process could take a long time – 
a few years perhaps.

Another option would be a special international tribunal, such as the one for 
Sierra Leone where the former Liberian leader, Charles Taylor, is on trial. 
This could be an option if it is felt a local trial could threaten peace and 
security.

But a domestic trial is still a possibility, especially if Ouattara is not 
vindictive and Gbagbo and his family are treated decently.

"First and foremost, Ouattara must ensure the immediate personal safety of 
Gbagbo, and then hold him in conditions where his safety is assured," said 
Richard Dicker, director of Human Rights Watch's international justice 
programme.

"It is then up to the Ivorian authorities, under Ivorian law, to charge Gbagbo 
with the crimes for which there are reasonable grounds for believing he 
committed. This should also adhere to international fair trial standards."

He added that Gbagbo should be joined under investigation by his wife, Simone, 
who was captured with him, and youth minister, Charles Blé Goudé, who are both 
alleged to have been associated with the violence of the past few months.

Members of the forces that supported Ouattara and committed human rights 
abuses, including murder, should also be brought to trial, Dicker said. "This 
cannot simply be victor's justice."
 