
Laurent Gbagbo <https://www.theguardian.com/world/laurent-gbagbo>, whose 
refusal to step down as president of Ivory Coast plunged the country into 
violence, has been captured in Abidjan and is in the custody of opposition 
forces.

News of his detention came after a column of more than 30 French armoured 
vehiclesclosed in on his residence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/apr/11/gbagbo-attack-ground-assault> in 
the city and amid initial reports that he had been seized by French special 
forces.

But both the French government and military insist that Gbagbo was taken by 
troops loyal toAlassane Ouattara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alassane-ouattara>, who won last year's 
presidential election.

A French foreign ministry source said Gbagbo had been arrested by Ouattara's 
forces backed by UN and French forces, while a French military spokesman was 
even more adamant, telling the Guardian: "There was not one French soldier at 
the scene when Gbagbo was taken."

Other news sources, meanwhile, have reported that Gbagbo may have been handed 
over to the French by his own "presidential guard".

Gbagbo and his wife are now understood to have been taken to a hotel in 
Abidjan.

A spokesman for Ouattara told the Guardian: "It's true. Gbagbo has been taken 
to the Golf hotel by republican forces. Our forces went to the residence this 
morning and took him out."

Gbagbo's spokesman, Ahoua Don Mello, told Reuters: "President Laurent Gbagbo 
came out of his bunker and surrendered to the French without resistance."

While the details of the capture remain unclear, it is possible that the 
French and UN soldiers attacked the building, surrounded it and then waited for 
Outtara's forces to go in, as France may not have the mandate or legal basis to 
make the arrest.

Gbagbo's detention followed missile strikes on his compound by ONUCI, the UN 
force inIvory Coast <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ivory-coast>, which 
partially destroyed the building.

One western diplomat in Abidjan said that keeping Gbagbo at the hotel could 
prove to be a security risk.

"I think they'll put him on a chopper as soon as possible but nowhere in 
Abidjan is safe," said the diplomat. "There are legal problems about taking him 
abroad."

Celebratory gunfire has been heard on the streets of the city and there are 
reports that Ouattara's camp is preparing to parade Gbagbo on television to 
prove his capture.

Henri Guaino, special adviser to the French president, Nicolas Sarkozy, said 
the French actions had been designed to avoid a bloodbath and not to 
"militarily chase" Gbagbo.

But Gbagbo's supporters have accused France of wanting to assassinate him. 
Mello said they had "no other objective. All the rest is nothing but a pretext."

Residents reported heavy fighting on Monday morning between forces loyal to 
Ouattara and those backing Gbagbo around Abidjan's Cocody and Plateau 
districts, still controlled by Gbagbo loyalists.

Hundreds of pro-Ouattara troops massed at a base camp just north of Abidjan, 
where a small bus arrived, filled with new Kalashnikov rifles still in their 
transparent blue wrappers.

The French armoured vehicles, each carrying four to eight men, left their base 
in the south and headed towards central Abidjan early in the morning.

France, the former colonial power in Ivory Coast which has more than 1,600 
troops in the country, has taken a lead role in efforts to persuade Gbagbo to 
relinquish power, infuriating his supporters who accuse Paris of 
neo-colonialism.

Gbagbo's refusal to step down after Ouattara won November's election, 
according to results certified by the UN, reignited a civil war that has 
claimed more than 1,000 lives and uprooted a million people.
 