
Lawrence Ferlinghetti, the poet who was tried on obscenity charges after 
publishing Allen Ginsberg's Howl and Other Poems in 1956, is to release his own 
travel journals, covering more than 60 years of his life.

Ferlinghetti, who at 94 is known as one of the last living connections with 
the Beat generation, sold the journals to Liveright Publishing, part of WW 
Norton, via Jack Kerouac's literary agent Sterling Lord,the New York Times 
revealed 
<http://artsbeat.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/03/16/ferlinghetti-travel-journals-to-be-published/?_php=true&_type=blogs&_r=0>
. Covering 1950 to 2013, and including travel journals and notebooks, the books 
tell of Ferlinghetti's travels to Cuba during the Castro revolution, to Africa, 
Haiti and Mexico, to Franco's Spain, Soviet Russia and Nicaragua under the 
Sandinistas, as well as the time he spent in Italy and France.

They will be brought together and published in September next year as Writing 
Across the Landscape: Travel Journals (1950-2013), said the New York Times, and 
will shed "as much light on Mr Ferlinghetti's political passions as on his 
relationships with the Beat writers", also covering his encounters with major 
writers such as Ezra Pound and Pablo Neruda.

"It shows a much more political Ferlinghetti, a voice for the poets of 
dissent," editor Robert Weil told the paper. "It is hardly just the Beats. It's 
a real engagement with much of the 20th century, although there are portraits 
of the Beats that we've never seen." The deal also included two out-of-print 
travel books by the author, 1970's The Mexican Night and 1984's Seven Days in 
Nicaragua Libre.

Ferlinghetti, born in 1919 in Yonkers, served in the US Navy during the second 
world war before studying at Columbia University and the Sorbonne. In 1953, he 
co-founded the City Lights Bookstore in San Francisco, launching the City 
Lights publishing house two years later. In 1956, he released Ginsberg's Howl, 
which opens with the famous line, "I saw the best minds of my generation 
destroyed by madness, starving, hysterical, naked", and was arrested on 
obscenity charges, going on to be acquitted at trial.

Today, City Lights is seen as the heart of the Beat generation, and 
Ferlinghetti himself is the author of over 30 poetry collections, including the 
million-copy-selling A Coney Island of the Mind, released in 1958. In the poem 
Constantly Risking Absurdity, he writes that a poet's role at that time was: 
"Constantly risking absurdity / and death / whenever he performs / above the 
heads / of his audience / the poet like an acrobat / climbs on rime / to a high 
wire of his own making".

Ferlinghetti is also a painter, a translator, a playwright and a novelist and 
the recipient of a host of awards, including the Author's Guild Lifetime 
Achievement award. In 1994, San Francisco renamed a street in his honour.
 