
Paul Nicholls started the day here with a very uncharacteristic strike rate of 
12% in December but on the evidence of the Mitie Novice Chase there isnot a 
great deal wrong with the champion trainer’s luck. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/12/paul-nicholls-old-guard-cheltenham-peace-and-co>
 Le Mercurey, his runner in the Grade Two event, was three lengths behind Amore 
Alato, a 40-1 outsider, on the run to the final fence and making little 
impression. Two seconds later Amore Alato was riderless and Nicholls and his 
stable jockey, Sam Twiston-Davies, had yet another Graded winner on the board.

It was a fortunate success but a useful boost for both trainer and rider 
before a much more significant day atAscot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ascot>, when their runners include Saphir Du 
Rheu, a leading contender for the Grade One Long Walk Hurdle. Twiston-Davies 
suggested earlier this week that he may remodel his riding style after being 
unseated twice last weekend by horses that jinked without warning. This was a 
reminder that when fortunes change in jumping, it often happens without 
warning, too.

Horse racing quiz of the year 2015: Win a £100 bet!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/18/horse-racing-quiz-year-2015> 
Harry Skelton, the rider of Amore Alato, watched the closing stages from three 
different angles on the big screen as he trudged back down the course. The way 
Skelton smacked his whip against his leg after the third replay suggested he 
could still not quite accept what he was seeing. Amore Alato jumped every other 
fence in the race with a speed and accuracy that defied his starting price but 
at the last he did not take off at all, giving Skelton no chance to keep the 
partnership intact.

Nicholls was not at Ascot to see Le Mercurey’s success but Tom Jonason, his 
assistant, suggested that the winner may follow Ptit Zig, who took the same 
race for the stable last season, and run next in the Dipper Novice Chase at 
Cheltenham on New Year’s Day.

“Sam thought as they were coming to the last that with a good jump he still 
might pick him up,” Jonason said. “He was quite weak last year and it was quite 
difficult for him as a four-year-old who was bought as a chaser. He had a wind 
op in the summer, which helped him, and he had to step up again today. He has 
and I wouldn’t call him a fortunate winner. We’ve always thought that he needs 
a trip so he would have galloped all the way to the line.

“Paul said the Dipper was a possible target when I spoke to him just now and 
that seems like a logical progression.”

Festival quotes for Le Mercurey were thin on the ground afterwards and a more 
likely contender for a race at the season’s showpiece meeting in March is 
Yanworth, the winner of the Grade Two Supreme Trial Novice Hurdle, perhaps 
better known and remembered as the Kennel Gate.

Alan King’s five-year-old did no more to beat four rivals than his starting 
price of 1-3 would imply but he had the quality to finish fourth in the 
Festival Bumper in March and has added a quick, natural jumping style to his 
armoury this season. Yanworth has already beaten several subsequent winners and 
is the 14-1 (from 20-1) fourth-favourite for the Supreme Novice Hurdle on 15 
March.

Several bookmakers also quote Yanworth for the Neptune Novice Hurdle but he 
seems likely to stay at two miles.

“I don’t see any reason to go any further,” King said. “He’ll have a break and 
we’ll look for something in February but off the top of my head I can’t think 
of anything at the moment. Everything he’s bumping into seems to come out and 
win.”

British Horseracing Authority projects deficit after optimistic forecast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/17/british-horseracing-authority-project-loss-so-beloved-glorious-goodwood>
Le Mercurey and Yanworth were the only winners on the card at single-figure 
odds as the four remaining contests went to runners at 33-1, 20-1 and 16-1 
twice. The last of those, in the concluding Listed bumper, was Coeur Blimey, 
who beat contenders from several major yards to win for the mother-and-daughter 
team of Susan and Lucy Gardner.

Lucy Gardner, who was claiming 3lb, was up against Twiston-Davies on his 
father’s previously unbeaten Ballyandy in the closing stages but both Coeur 
Blimey and Gardner were good value for the one-length success.

“We have to have two horses to gallop with him at home,” the rider said 
afterwards. “One up one time and one up the second time because there’s nothing 
else that can live with him. It was a good race but I thought he deserved to 
take his chance even though he was an outsider.”
 