
There’s an increasingly good case for saying that newspaper editorial 
endorsements, pro- or anti-Brexit, don’t matter so much these days – for 
reckoning that columnists bearing particular torches or front pages booming 
away carry more clout with readers than what “the composite editor” in hisex 
cathedra pronouncement slot has to say. But never forget that these leader 
lines are also a useful internal way of telling your staff, your columnists, 
your headline writers, where the paper stands – what particular cause they’re 
responding to this week.

Much of that, to be sure, is predictable, and heavily conditioned by what your 
readers expect. Thus theTimes, still trailing distant clouds of its “top 
people” memories, sees two-thirds of its readers backing Remain. Guess who’ll 
get the eventual thumbprint there – while theBun, two-thirds Leave, is pretty 
predictable too.

But what, pray, about the Daily Mail (which sometimes these days seems 
guest-edited by Matthew Elliott, co-founder of the Taxpayers’ Alliance and 
current chief of Vote Leave)? And what of theMail on Sunday, one floor away in 
the Kensington atrium, but growing ever more likely to plump for Remain as 
editorial unease turns to front page blasts over far-right infiltration of the 
Leave campaign?

In theory, if titles means anything, Paul Dacre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/pauldacre>, editor-in-chief of both papers, 
should be in the running for a Nobel peace and harmony prize. But, actually, 
this seems more a case of writs failing to run. George Greig at theMoS has a 
proprietorial licence to roam. Jonathan and Claudia Rothermere watch his back. 
Which is rather brave, because the profile ofMail daily and Sunday readers 
isn’t so very different: and the millions of them who treat both as their 
bibles must wrestle with total confusion, not total control.

■ Here’s a very fine line. If, like BuzzFeed US, you’ve got $1.3m in space 
reserved for Republican campaign ads but (like Jonah Peretti, the Big Buzz) you 
think Donald Trump is “as much a health hazard as smoking”, would you tell the 
GOP where to go with its tainted cash?Good for Peretti, he did 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/06/buzzfeed-scraps-trump-ad-deal-saying-candidate-is-hazardous-to-health>
. But the ethical problem for an American media scene short of money but long 
on libertarian values is which foot to start hopping on thereafter. Is 
advertising freedom a part of media freedom? BuzzFeed exists on native ads 
(which duck under ad-blockers because it’s sponsored editorial). But do you 
ever want political propaganda that looks like proper journalism? Much buzzing 
in the metaphorical marsh. It almost makes Brexitprop seem simple.
 