
Ahead of the Activate New York Summit 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/activate-new-york>, Zach Sims, 
co-founder and CEO of Codecademy, spoke to us about learning to code and the 
endless possibilities that programming offers.

Can you tell us a bit about Codecademy?

Codecademy <http://www.codecademy.com/> was founded by Ryan Bubinksi and I to 
address the mismatch we see in the labour market. Traditional education is 
proving ineffective in equipping people with the skills they need for the 
modern workforce. We wanted to provide an accessible and effective way people 
could learn what they needed to achieve their goals.

Can you tell us the reasons for founding Codecademy? Where did the idea come 
from?

When we were doing Y Combinator <http://ycombinator.com/>, we realised that my 
programming abilities weren't quite where they should have been. I had done 
some CS at the college level, but I wanted to be able to contribute more. I 
tried the traditional ways of learning – reading books, watching videos, etc 
but none really worked for me.

Codecademy was originally built for someone like me to learn how to code. Now, 
we want to help provide an easy way for people to get the programming skills 
they need to learn skills, start businesses, and find new jobs. We're all 
looking to make learning as interactive and fun as possible and to continue 
helping our users change the world.

How does Codecademy differ from other ways of learning to code?

Most other programming instruction companies teach by using videos or 
text-based approaches. We think the best way to learn how to code is to learn 
by doing – to actually code. Codecademy is different because it's focused on 
this principle of learning by doing and is community-based.

With Codecademy, learning is fun, interactive, and helps students build things 
almost immediately, eliminating the barriers to progress and comprehension. All 
of our courses are created by our users, so they're relevant and bring a 
different flavour than a normal educational institution that would only allow 
their teachers to create content.

What level of coding do you think people need?

It's hard to say whether there is a specific level that is needed to be a good 
coder. The best coders come from a wide range of backgrounds – a number do not 
have formal CS backgrounds and are self-taught. Like being good at anything, 
persistence is obviously important. Other than that, enjoying the logic of 
coding and the thrill of building something would also be helpful.

Your website states that over a 'billion lines of code have been submitted to 
Codecademy'. What factors do you think have contributed to the academy's 
success?

I think there are a number of factors. First, our site is really fun and easy 
to use. You're coding straight on the landing page and the feedback mechanism 
is great. Second, the product is effective. People have learned a lot and 
continue recommending it to their friends. Third, there is a growing 
recognition that learning how to program is a really valuable skill as 
technology grows in importance in our personal, professional and social lives.

At the moment, Codecademy is free to use. Do you have plans to monetise the 
service in the future? If so, what does this look like?

We have no plans to charge for our courses. We do plan to be the place people 
go to learn skills that help them make things and find jobs. Programming is the 
foremost of those skills, and we'd like to teach the world the concepts behind 
programming and the basics of code. We think that doing so will create a more 
skilled workforce, new companies and innovations, and a smarter population 
capable of thinking about the world in different ways.

What's next for the Codecademy?

We're here to serve all those eager to learn to code. We have millions of 
users, some as young as 13 to those in their 80s, whose abilities range from 
beginners just getting started, to intermediate folk looking to level up, to 
experienced folk looking to learn new languages. And, over 60% of these users 
are learning to code with Codecademy outside North America.

The best way we can help inspire and create innovative change is to 
demonstrate the endless possibilities that learning how to program has, and 
that it's a lot easier to get started and to produce cool things than most 
people think.

Zach Sims is the co-founder and CEO of Codecademy <http://www.codecademy.com/>

Get more articles like this sent direct to your inbox by signing up for free 
membership <https://register.theguardian.com/media/> to the Guardian Media 
Network <https://www.theguardian.com/media-network> – this content is brought 
to you byGuardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. 
 