
For Leicester City the Champions League anthem seems to have the effect of 
smelling salts. Two thrashings in the Premier League have been followed by 
victories in Europe’s premier club competition and, in the wake of thedrubbing 
at Chelsea on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/15/chelsea-leicester-city-premier-league-match-report>
, the challenge for Claudio Ranieri’s players is to clear their heads once 
again and repeat the trick for a third time.

FC Copenhagen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fccopenhagen> are 
Leicester’s opponents at the King Power Stadium on Tuesday night in a game that 
cannot come quickly enough for the English champions on the back of another 
chastening defeat. They have lost all four Premier League fixtures on the road 
this season, conceding 13 goals in the process, and it would have been 
interesting to be a fly on the wall when the players got their heads together 
for a meeting on Sunday.

“We’ve had a chat, things have been said and resolved and we move on,” Kasper 
Schmeichel said. “It’s a long old season. We’ve had some bad performances away 
from home. We started badly in the first half in games and we haven’t been able 
to recover. But we’re definitely confident that we’re going to turn this 
around.”

Marc Albrighton insists Leicester City players realise they have to fight more
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/16/marc-albrighton-leicester-city-danny-drinkwater-claudio-ranieri>
Ranieri, for his part, seems relaxed. The Italian made the point, with a 
smile, that Leicester’s defensive record at the same stage last season was 
actually worse – they had conceded 15 goals after eight matches compared to 14 
now – and brushed off a question about whether the season could turn into a 
relegation battle.

He also reminded everyone that he saw this domestic blip coming. “At the 
beginning of the season I said it’s normal when the team loses something when 
you play in Europe for the first time,” Ranieri said. “They [the players] are 
human, they are not machines.”

At the same time, Ranieri expects better in some areas. He stressed the 
importance of showing greater concentration when defending set pieces – Diego 
Costa’s goal in Chelsea’s 3-0 victory was the fifth shipped from a corner this 
term – and the manager would also like to see a bit more of the Leicester of 
last season, in terms of their sense of togetherness as much as anything else. 
“I think my players made the world crazy with what happened last season – they 
showed fantastic character and spirit, it was a fairytale,” Ranieri said.

“I’d like them to continue to show this. The result is not important for me. I 
want them to show their strength, their love for football, the team, for 
Leicester – and for this reason I want more.”

Leicester’s problems are not confined to defence. They have averaged only a 
goal per game in the league and Jamie Vardy has now gone seven matches without 
scoring, prompting some harsh criticism fromAlan Shearer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alan-shearer>, who accused the England 
international of “sulking” and a “lack of effort”.

Quick to leap to Vardy’s defence, Ranieri blamed his own tactics for the 
striker’s approach against Chelsea. “I think the ex‑player can say everything,” 
Ranieri said. “Shearer was a fantastic goalscorer, but he knows there are 
months when you can and can’t score.

“If he is speaking about the Chelsea match, I spoke with Jamie and said stay 
with David Luiz, don’t run and don’t press. For me it was important to have a 
point of reference for my players to try to counter-attack and leave him 
against David Luiz. That’s what happened, it’s not his fault, it’s my fault 
maybe.

“Jamie for us is very important. I am very confident in him. For me it’s 
important he stays calm and keeps going, and sooner or later he will score a 
goal.”

Riyad Mahrez and Islam Slimani are set to return against Copenhagen after 
being rested at Chelsea – a decision that Ranieri defended on the basis that the
Champions League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> “in 
this moment is the priority” – as Leicester go in search of the win that would 
put them within touching distance of the knockout stages.

Copenhagen will be no pushovers. Stale Solbakken, who had an unsuccessful 
six‑month stint in charge of Wolverhampton Wanderers in the 2012-13 season, is 
Copenhagen’s manager and has presided over a 23-match unbeaten run. The Danish 
champions are top of their domestic league and sit second in Group G after 
drawing 1-1 at Porto and thumping Club Brugge 4-0.

Leicester, however, have demonstrated this competition is to their liking. The 
bigger question surrounds their league form. “I don’t think it’s a time to 
worry or panic at all,” Schmeichel said. “You look at the last few seasons, we 
haven’t been the quickest of starters.

“We come good during the middle of the season and we become really good 
towards the end. At the moment we’re working hard on a few things and it will 
come, I’m sure.”
 