
Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie

I will be taking on holiday Colson Whitehead's novel Sag Harbor (Harvill 
Secker), which is about an African-American boy's summer in upstate New York. 
I've heard him read an excerpt, which I thought was very good – he says this 
novel should have been his first, because it is autobiographical in a way that 
his other novels are not.

I've been meaning to read Lola Shoneyin's wonderfully titled novel about a 
polygamous family in Nigeria,The Secret Lives of Baba Segi's Wives (Serpent's 
Tail). So that will come with me too.

William Boyd

It is both tempting and mischievous to conjoin for a summer read William 
Golding and Anthony Burgess. They represent opposing maverick wings of 
20th-century English fiction. They had a lot in common as individuals (similar 
age, late starters as novelists – both in their 40s – heavy drinkers and 
smokers, musically accomplished) and yet remained entirely distinct as writers 
of fiction. Towards the end of their writing lives they generated one of the 
more intriguing literary feuds at the 1980 Booker prize. Burgess and Golding 
were head-to-head favourites: Burgess withEarthly Powers (Penguin) and Golding 
withRites of Passage (Faber). Burgess refused to attend the award dinner unless 
he was declared winner. He wasn't, so he didn't. John Carey has recently 
written a superb authorised biography of Golding,William Golding: The Man Who 
Wrote Lord of the Flies (Faber), and Andrew Biswell's biography of Burgess, The 
Real Life of Anthony Burgess (Picador), expertly rearranges and re-establishes 
the facts that Burgess tried to blur and obscure. Why not add the novels to 
these exemplary biographies and see for yourself, with the full benefit of 
hindsight, how a Booker prize jury managed to get it wrong once again?

AS Byatt

The two books I'd take on holiday are Dostoevsky: Language, Faith and Fiction 
by Rowan Williams (Continuum), andThe Hare with Amber Eyes by Edmund de Waal 
(Chatto & Windus). The archbishop's book is an absorbing critical account of 
Dostoevsky's work which uses his real understanding of how Christian ideas 
shaped Dostoevsky's world and people. He is particularly good on the Devil. De 
Waal's memoir of his very rich Jewish ancestors, the civilisations they 
inhabited in Paris, St Petersburg and Vienna, the art they collected and their 
fate with the coming of the Nazis, is wise, strange and gripping. Two different 
worlds. Two grippingly readable books.

Alastair Campbell

You do not have to be a cricket fan – though it helps – to enjoy Duncan 
Hamilton'sHarold Larwood (Quercus), a wonderful account of the life of one of 
our greatest fast bowlers. It's as much a story about class and the gulfs 
between people often on the same side as it is about sport in a very different 
era.

David Plouffe helped to run Barack Obama's presidential campaign, and his The 
Audacity to Win (Viking USA) gives as close an account of its ups and downs – 
admittedly from a very pro-Obama stance – as you are ever likely to get.

Margaret Drabble

I recommend Why Not Socialism? by GA Cohen (Princeton), who died last year. 
This tiny book will fit in any pocket, and it gives a neat summary of the 
arguments against private greed and for the communal interest. It may lead you 
to his brilliant workIf You're an Egalitarian, How Come You're So Rich? 
(Harvard). He has answers to both his questions.

For a terrifying description of what happens to us without communal interest, 
try Roberto Saviano'sGomorrah: Italy's Other Mafia (Pan). This is ideally 
unsettling reading for anyone taking a holiday anywhere near Naples, although 
it also sheds lights on what goes on everywhere from China to Aberdeen. Violent 
and courageous, this piece of reportage is far more thrilling than any thriller.

Helen Dunmore

Tim Dee's birdwatching memoir The Running Sky (Vintage) is as unexpected as it 
is brilliant. Birdwatching may or may not hold any appeal for you, but read it 
anyway. It's a moving, powerful meditation on the natural world that envelops 
us, even in the heart of our cities. Dee is a very candid writer, as observant 
about his own idiosyncrasies as he is about those of storm petrels in Shetland 
or peregrine falcons riding the air-currents by the Clifton suspension bridge. 
The book makes you want to travel to the places he describes so compellingly, 
but also to look up at the sky from wherever you are.

The characters in Simon Armitage's fire-cracker collection of tall tales and 
urban myths,Seeing Stars (Faber), are more likely to be seeing stars because 
they have been knocked out in a grudge fight than because they are gazing at 
the constellations. "I hadn't meant to go grave-robbing with Richard Dawkins / 
but he can be very persuasive", begins one extravagant but perfectly pitched 
story of mayhem in the cemetery. Sharp, ironic, deadpan and light enough to 
slip in a backpack for those moments of holiday torpor.

Richard Ford 

For starters, think of Flem Snopes with a law degree. Better yet, think of a 
whole US state full of Flem Snopeses with law degrees. InThe Fall of the House 
of Zeus (Harmony) Curtis Wilkie, a former crack political writer for the Boston 
Globe, and a Mississippi native (it helps), follows the money from the coffers 
of Big Tobacco and asbestos into the pockets of some of the wiliest and 
crookedest good-ole-boy plaintiffs' lawyers in America and, from there, right 
down the rat-hole to infamy. It makes addictive reading for anyone interested 
in shameless greed, hilariously rotten behaviour, inept skulduggery and just 
plain bad manners.

Walks with Men by Ann Beattie (Scribner) is a seemingly modest little novel 
about either a perversely bad or, if you prefer, a perversely satisfying modern 
marriage. But there's nothing modest about Beattie's talent: razored 
perceptiveness, discomforting wit, self-implicating pity and an unstinting, 
empathetic intelligence about contemporary life. Once you finish it (in about 
an hour and 10 minutes) you'll want to march right back around to the front and 
read it again. Ann Beattie's just that good, and she always has been.

Jonathan Franzen

Many reliable friends have been urging me to read Roberto Bolaño's The Savage 
Detectives(Picador) for the sheer pleasure of it, and I've been thinking that 
Nietzsche'sBeyond Good and Evil (Penguin Classics) might make the perfect beach 
read this summer – it has those nice, short sections and those cool, dark 
depths.

John Gray

The first of the two very different books I'd take with me on a long summer 
holiday is that solitary classic of British shamanism,The Peregrine by JA Baker 
(Collins). First published in 1967, the book recounts Baker's observations of 
peregrine falcons, made over 10 winters, during which he lost something of his 
human personality and at times came to feel he had become one of the birds he 
was watching. "Unconsciously," he writes, "I was imitating the movements of a 
hawk, as in some primitive ritual; the hunter becoming the thing he hunts." It 
has just been republished in a magnificent new edition that includes Baker'sThe 
Hill of Summer and his Diaries, with an introduction by Mark Cocker. In all of 
them, Baker's personality is systematically effaced and very little is actually 
known of his life. Yet the near absence of any human being in these books goes 
with an extraordinary individuality of vision, producing some of the most 
arresting and beautiful prose in the English language.

György Faludy's autobiography My Happy Days in Hell, translated by Kathleen 
Szasz (Penguin Classics), is an account of a life passed pleasantly in the 
dangerous human world. First published in 1962, this is the Hungarian-Jewish 
poet's story of his flight to France and Africa, his years fighting as a 
volunteer in the US air force, and his return after the war to Hungary, where, 
after refusing to write a celebratory poem for Stalin's birthday, he was 
interned, emerging years later as one of a very small number who survived. 
Often at risk of death, even flirting with it in his encounters with Nazis and 
communists, Faludy revelled in the sheer sensation of being alive. Born in 
1910, Faludy spent most of his highly productive later life in Canada and died 
in 2006. An exultant sensuous verve jumps from the pages of this sometimes 
bleak, never deceived and yet always life-affirming book.

David Hare

A campus novel, a modern reimagining of the film The Blue Angel, in which a 
professor is brought low by a creative writing student. Doesn't that sound 
awful? But Francine Prose's hypnoticBlue Angel (Allison & Busby) belongs, with 
Fellini's8½ and Wallace Shawn's My Dinner with Andre, to that select category 
of great works which, in prospect, ought not to succeed. You will even think it 
worth damaging your eyesight on the ridiculous ant-like print of the paperback.

When the film director John Hughes died, Molly Ringwald put professional 
writers to shame with a tribute in the New York Times, comparing her own 
experiences with Hughes to those of Jean-Pierre Léaud with Truffaut. It was a 
smashing rebuke to the tedious journalistic libel that film actors are stupid. 
Here was just one who, for a start, writes far better than they do. That's why 
I'm taking Ringwald'sGetting the Pretty Back (It Books) on holiday, hoping it 
will be just as good.

Michael Holroyd

Dan Rhodes's Little Hands Clapping (Canongate) is a macabre, brilliant and 
terrifying novel that comes highly recommended by Douglas Coupland as being 
"totally sick". This sickness arises from the eating habits of its characters, 
which range from swallowing live spiders in bed at night to the systematic 
devouring (after a spell in the freezer) of suicide victims from a museum 
somewhat desperately dedicated to optimism. Good strong stuff.

Richer, more appetising fare (including beef jerky, guinea pigs and maca 
cocktails) is offered by the travel writer and art historian Michael Jacobs's 
wonderfulAndes (Granta). Jacobs is such a vivid writer that you can feel 
yourself completing intrepid journeys while sitting safely in your armchair.

Jackie Kay

I'm planning to pack David Remnick's The Bridge: The Life and Rise of Barack 
Obama (Picador), a meaty and fascinating biography that you need a whole 
holiday to pore over. Remnick is compulsive reading because he combines a 
fiction writer's pace with a biographer's psychological depth. He shows how 
Chicago's complex racial legacy shaped the young Obama, how he crossed the 
personal to the political to become who he is today, and how his journey 
illuminates the journey of our whole society.

Certainly Harper Lee would never have imagined, when she wrote To Kill a 
Mockingbird (Arrow), that 50 years later Obama would be president. I'm packing 
that too, because I want to reread it, to revisit the small town of Maycomb, to 
remember the words of Tom, the accused black man: "If you was a nigger like me, 
you'd be scared too." I like to think of the conversation that Lee would have 
with Obama, or, even better, that Atticus Finch would have with Obama, and to 
think what can happen in the long and short time of half a century.

AL Kennedy

Portrait of an Addict as a Young Man (Jonathan Cape) is a beautifully written 
and elegantly frank memoir by Bill Clegg. Once an upwardly-mobile young 
Manhattan literary agent, Clegg collapsed into suicidal crack addiction – in 
flight from his loves, his promise, his past and himself. The book is 
desperately honest about his childhood afflictions and his appetites without 
making excuses or appealing for pity – there are no easy fixes and no 
flinching; there is simply a lyrical, funny and shattering narration of a long, 
hard path. Clegg's subsequent entry into a process of recovery is handled with 
dignity, and his return to the world of books – one of his deepest and earliest 
loves – along with the act of creating the book itself are quietly and 
wonderfully redemptive.

My second recommendation is a public-domain reprint of Marmion Wilard Savage's 
The Bachelor of the Albany, which I'd been meaning to read for a while. It's a 
gently witty and intelligent fantasy from 1848 – benevolent merchants, giddy 
twins, Christmas interiors of which Dickens might be proud, complicatedly 
estranged relatives, a young widow and, of course, the initially impregnable 
bachelor. It's a book that enjoys itself companionably and contains some lovely 
passages of exuberantly virtuoso description – the one concerning the Albany 
itself along with its denizens would probably stand to this day.

David Kynaston

We sometimes forget that two notable writers died on 22 November 1963, that 
otherwise slow news day. So for a coalition of dead white males, to complement 
our public schoolboys in Downing Street, I'm plumping for a long-overdue 
reading of Aldous Huxley's novelPoint Counter Point (Vintage), by all accounts 
a reminder of when conversation still mattered, and a re-reading of CS Lewis's 
autobiographical, only dimly rememberedSurprised by Joy (HarperCollins), with 
his conversion to (or was it from?) Hegelianism on a bus going up (or was it 
down?) Headington Hill in Oxford.

David Lodge

I've been saving up Martin Amis's The Pregnant Widow (Jonathan Cape) for the 
Mediterranean holiday I'm about to start, and not just because it's about the 
sexual shenanigans of young people on vacation in Italy 40 years ago. I always 
relish the witty inventiveness of Amis's style and have read the first 20 pages 
of this one chuckling happily. My interest was quickened by his account, in a 
recent BBC4 interview with Mark Lawson, of the novel's theme: that the rampant 
sexual revolution of the 1970s was not on the whole good for young women, a 
view with which, as an observer rather than a participant, I am inclined to 
agree.

Pope Benedict is coming to England in the autumn to, among other things, 
preside over the beatification of Cardinal Newman, the first stage to 
sainthood. Disputes about Newman's sexuality and the alleged miracle on which 
his beatification depends have already generated controversy. So, another book 
I aim to read this summer isNewman's Unquiet Grave: The Reluctant Saint 
(Continuum), a timely biography by John Cornwell. He admires Newman, but seeks 
to save him from hagiography and to remind us that he was a great and 
independent Christian thinker – one of the first, for instance, to accept the 
idea of evolution – and a master of English prose.

Amis and Newman are certainly an odd couple, but they have one thing in 
common: they both wrote novels. Denying that he was a saint, Newman said: 
"Saints don't write tales." Amis would no doubt agree.

Caroline Lucas

I loved Barbara Kingsolver's The Poisonwood Bible, because it worked on so 
many levels – historical, philosophical, political and literary – so I have 
high hopes of her latest novel,Lacuna (Faber). With fictional characters 
interwoven with historical figures – Frida Kahlo, Diego Rivera, Leon Trotsky – 
and set against the McCarthy era in the US, it sounds as though it has all the 
ingredients for another great novel.

A bit closer to work, my husband and I are currently tussling over our one 
copy of Chris Mullin's diaries,A View from the Foothills (Profile), the way 
that any couple fight to get the weekend papers first. Mullin is both playful 
and precise with language, as well as admirably irreverent ("the spooks are 
livid about the sixth-form essay on Saddam's chemical arsenal cooked up by No 
10"), and his book offers a fascinating insight into parliamentary life. What 
have I let myself in for?

Richard Mabey

I'll need a long summer break just to finish Jerry Fodor and Massimo 
Piattelli-Palmarini's dense but explosively excitingWhat Darwin Got Wrong 
(Profile). The celebration of the great scientist's bicentenary last year 
courteously sidestepped the fact that most cutting-edge biologists now regard 
natural selection as little more than cosmetic tweaking in the process of 
evolution. What's happening is far more philosophically thrilling: creatures 
are doing it for themselves. The authors show how ancient "managerial" genes, 
self-organising systems in cells and the inherent tendency towards symmetry in 
living structures all help to generate new organisms fully pre-adapted to their 
environments. Wings already pre-balanced for flight!

It will be a relief to relax with an account of how, in some hapless 
organisms, evolution often gets it spectacularly wrong. As a fellow-sufferer 
from what might be called hydraulic dysfunction, I shall relish Tim Parks's 
account of his rebellious bladder and his heroic quest for a cure.Teach Us to 
Sit Still: A Sceptic's Search for Health and Healing (Harvill Secker) was, 
fortunately, an unsuccessful odyssey, otherwise we wouldn't have this maverick 
book about the stand-off between aspiration and biological constraint – one of 
the kinds of negotiation that drive evolution, whatever view you have of it.

David Miliband

Mark Oaten's Coalition (Harriman House) is a history of coalition-making since 
1850 and has a fascinating chapter looking forward to the election just gone. I 
think we're all asking ourselves whether this coalition can work, and I've 
heard that Mark slowly became disenchanted with the whole concept of coalitions 
during the writing of the book. Essential reading for anyone who wants to be 
the next leader of the Labour party, but probably best enjoyed travelling back 
from holiday to get you back into the work zone.

The Pregnant Widow, Martin Amis's new and controversial novel (Jonathan Cape), 
couldn't be further removed from Oaten's book. The reviews have been mixed, but 
I'm a strong believer in the only way to find out is to read it yourself. I 
don't think you can ever be disappointed with an Amis novel – his ability to 
draw you into his writing is second to none. It's definitely one to be enjoyed 
on holiday, with a cold beer, when the children have gone to bed.

Ed Miliband

I've been reading David Plouffe's The Audacity to Win (Viking USA) – a book to 
restore your interest and faith in politics. Plouffe, Barack Obama's campaign 
manager, provides a behind-the-scenes account of how Obama inspired Americans 
to join his movement, and shows it is possible to win office by combining 
strategic canniness and a commitment to a politics based on values. One to give 
to your friends who are cynical about what politics can achieve.

Henning Mankel's novel Depths (Vintage) is one of my favourites. It transports 
you into a Nordic landscape of intrigue, suspicion, deceit and murder. Part 
thriller, part psychological fantasy and part political-philosophical tract, 
it's totally absorbing.

Pankaj Mishra

Having grown up in India, which has far too many sunny, hot days, I find a 
sofa in a cool dark room more congenial than a crowded beach during July and 
August; it happily enables a diverse amount of reading.A Visit from the Goon 
Squad (Knopf), the new novel by Jennifer Egan, a seemingly unassuming but 
stunningly resourceful writer, sits on top of my fiction pile. I hope also to 
indulge my weakness for doorstopper biographies of American plutocrats with TJ 
Stiles's acclaimedThe First Tycoon: The Epic Life of Cornelius Vanderbilt 
(Knopf).

Blake Morrison

Two very different memoirs, one about discovery, the other about loss. In Red 
Dust Road (Picador) the poet and novelist Jackie Kay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jackie-kay> tells of her tense reunions with 
her birth parents, whom she finds again in mid-life – her mother has 
Alzheimer's, and her father, a born-again Christian desperate to forget past 
sins, wants to keep her a secret from his Nigerian family. It might have made a 
sad story but, told as it is with zest and humour, it becomes a love song to 
her adoptive parents.

Jim Perrin is better known as a climber than as a poet, but West (Atlantic), 
written in the aftermath of the suicide of his son and the death of his wife, 
has a lyrical intensity few poets could equal. By immersing himself in wild 
landscapes and all the memories they contain, Perrin finds solace in his grief. 
As well as his magical thinking, he offers a robust, anarchic hedonism that's 
more like Byron (or the Johnny Byron of Jez Butterworth'sJerusalem) than 
Wordsworth.

Kate Mosse

My first choice is the powerful new book from Fergal Keane, which tells the 
harrowing story of one of the forgotten battles of the second world war.Road of 
Bones: The Siege of Kohima 1944 (Harper Press) takes us to Rangoon, to the 
dying days of empire and a particular siege, and a massacre, that reflects all 
human history through the story of the men and women who died on the road of 
bones.

For the daylight hours, though, something lighter: the poetry impresario Daisy 
Goodwin has a novel coming out in August.My Last Duchess (Headline Review) is a 
love story, set between New York and England in the 1890s, involving an 
American heiress and her search for a British aristocratic husband.

Andrew Motion

One very English memoir/elegy, Blood Knots by Luke Jennings (Atlantic), which 
beautifully evokes the landscape and lore of his postwar rural childhood, with 
all its country orthodoxies (especially fishing) intact; and one 
Canadian/postmodern memoir/elegy,Nox by Anne Carson (New Directions), which in 
form and procedure is about as radical as book-publishing gets these days. They 
describe different kinds of loss, in enormously different ways, yet they 
converge on the same spot, where every kind of articulation is defeated. 
Holiday reading if you're heading for a stony beach.

David Nicholls

For some reason I had a notion of Penelope Lively as a quiet, conventional 
writer, but clearly I was wrong.Moon Tiger (Penguin) is a remarkable novel, 
evocative, heartbreaking, formally experimental but entirely gripping. 
Switching between past and present, first and third person, it's a dream-like 
kaleidoscope of memories and encounters, and yet it never feels disjointed or 
episodic. It's a book that will stay with me for a very long time.

I'll also be starting the third volume of Paul Murray's Skippy Dies (Hamish 
Hamilton), his saga of love and death at a shabby Dublin boarding school. At 
nearly 700 pages it's that rare thing, a comic epic, but the prose and 
characterisation are so detailed and funny that it rarely drags. Murray is a 
brilliant comic writer, but also humane and touching, and he captures the 
misery and elation, joy and anxiety of teenage life.

Audrey Niffenegger

I recommend The Magicians by Lev Grossman (Arrow) for the beach, followed by 
Joan Didion'sThe Year of Magical Thinking (Harper Perennial).

The Magicians is set in a sort of Harry Potteresque dystopia: our hero, 
Quentin Coldwater, is obsessive and whiny but has unsuspected magical talents 
that waft him into a super-secret college of magic in upstate New York. Many of 
the students are devoted to a series of children's books about a magical land 
called Fillory, and Grossman explores the boundaries between fiction and 
reality with great imagination when the students discover that Fillory is real 
and they can visit it. This is a dark, well-written book that takes the wizard 
genre into thoughtful places.

The Year of Magical Thinking is an anguished and eloquent account of Didion's 
grief following the death of her husband, the writer John Gregory Dunne. She 
recounts with great precision her loss, her disbelief, her memories. It's is in 
no way a beach read, but it does give the reader a heightened sense of the 
pleasures of simply being alive.

Joseph O'Connor

I will be revisiting two acclaimed masterworks by leading English storytellers:
TheAlastair Campbell <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alastaircampbell> 
Diaries (Hutchinson) and Ian McEwan's On Chesil Beach (Vintage). One is a 
somewhat controversial work about a tender love affair, a troubled honeymoon 
and the loneliness of marriage. The other isOn Chesil Beach.

David Peace

Not one person in the United Kingdom voted for the present "coalition 
government". So every cut, every budget, every single piece of legislation that 
this "coalition government" proposes has no mandate from any single member of 
the electorate. Equally, every single penny of every single pound that we pay 
in taxes then goes to this unelected "coalition government" – a "coalition 
government" with no authority whatsoever. A "coalition" of a lust for power and 
a contempt for democracy. A "government" of the richest 10%, for the richest 
10%. And so my "coalition books" remain theHoly Bible and its fifth gospel, The 
Communist Manifesto (Oxford); here is a coalition you can vote for, and vote 
for today: the Shield of Marx and the Sword of Christ.

Fred Pearce

Marek Kohn's Turned Out Nice (Faber) is an intimate and stylish geographical 
romp through the near-permanent summers of Britain's future under global 
warming. Kohn reckons we will get off lightly. What I really like is the way he 
puts future change in the context of past transformations of our varied 
landscape. On holiday in Sussex, I will take this to explore the South Downs 
and the beautiful Cuckmere valley with new eyes.

Beer provides its own intimate geography of Britain, as Roger Protz highlights 
in his new edition of300 Beers to Try Before you Die (Camra Books). Most of his 
(and my) favoured British brews are rooted in the local landscape that provides 
their ingredients. And they seem to have been around nearly as long as the 
places they celebrate. I will be following Protz's tracks to taste Harvey's 
Sussex Best and Fuller's London Pride; Pendle Witches Brew and Orkney Dark 
Island.

Annie Proulx

If food for thought is what you like, here are two savage banquets. Bill 
McKibben'sEaarth (Times Books) is a chilling look-what-we've-done-to-the-planet 
review that says the globe on which we wasteful, spoiled consumers grew up is 
gone and in its place is this damaged human-world, eaarth. Yet McKibben focuses 
not on an endgame, but on new beginnings in response to our narrowing choices. 
Those new beginnings revolve largely around hunger and food supplies and a 
return to a simpler life.

Very different is the riveting new book by John Vaillant, The Tiger, to be 
published by Knopf in August, and to be made into a film. Fans of Kurosawa's
Dersu Uzala may know that the source for his film was the 1921 book of the same 
title by Russian explorer-naturalist Vladimir Arsenyev. Vaillant explores the 
same fascinating geography: Russia's wild, far-eastern taiga, near the Chinese 
border, populated by a variety of ethnic groups, ginseng hunters and poachers. 
The book focuses on the threatened Siberian tiger, a strangely spiritual animal 
that in legend and fact harbours grudges and takes vengeance. The story is told 
through the men who work to protect the tigers, and those who kill them. In 
Arsenyev's day the local people lived with the tigers in something resembling 
harmony and did not kill them. The tigers recognised human individuals, and, in 
Vaillant's book, they still do.

Ian Rankin

I recently asked my followers on Twitter if they could recommend new books and 
writers to me. I've now ordered half a dozen of the suggested titles. The first 
to turn up wasThe Romantics by Pankaj Mishra (Picador). I can't tell you much 
about it except what the jacket tells me, so I know it's about a young man who 
arrives in Benares hoping to do a lot of reading, but who finds himself 
affected by his location in strange and wonderful ways. I visited India for the 
first time this year and am hoping to learn more about the country from this 
novel.

One city I know pretty well is Belfast – my wife was brought up there and we 
make regular visits back, so my summer reading will also comprise the latest 
offering from my favourite Belfast crime writer, (Colin) Bateman. His first 
name has to go in parentheses, as his publishers want us to ignore it, for some 
reason. Bateman writes about the real city, so much so that his hero inThe Day 
of the Jack Russell (Headline) owns a bookshop called No Alibis – a shop I know 
to be real. He also holds meetings at the cafe across the road from it, a cafe 
I also know very well. This adds an extra layer of pleasure whenever I read 
(Colin). He is a terrific guide to post-Troubles Belfast and is also very 
funny, though if he keeps losing names at this rate he'll soon be called Anon . 
. .

Helen Simpson

Side by side in the holiday suitcase are Indignation by Philip Roth (Vintage) 
andToo Much Happiness by Alice Munro (Chatto & Windus). These very different 
writers, now well into their 70s, both seem recently to have extended their 
already awesome reach. Roth's short furio-comic novel is inflamed by the 
narrow-minded strictures forced on the young in 50s America by a system which 
also recklessly sent them to war. The monologue of a dead 19-year-old 
remembering his short life, this masterly spiralling rant works by means of 
repetition and recapitulation.

Munro's latest collection also deals with the work of memory – with the past 
and how to digest it – in breathtaking style. She is subtler but bolder, too, 
than Roth in her handling of fictional structures, in stories that show how we 
change (and continue to change) until the day we die. She grows ever more 
daring in her treatment of the non-stop different versions of events that time 
produces as perspectives shift and slide.

Hilary Spurling

My ideal book for total immersion on the beach is Katharine McMahon's The 
Crimson Rooms (Phoenix), the story of a young female lawyer caught up in her 
first murder case in the aftermath of the first world war. It is one of those 
books so intensely alive in the past that it makes the world you actually live 
in feel flimsy and thin. McMahon combines a thriller writer's grip, pace and 
punch with the true novelist's depth and warmth of feeling.

For a long, slow, lingering read, try Candia McWilliam's What to Look for in 
Winter (Jonathan Cape), a strange and startling memoir slung between the 
central poles of writing, alcoholism and blindness. It is a kind of literary 
origami trick, where the author folds in on herself in tight, dense, intricate 
coils, then unfolds herself again with miraculous lightness and delicacy.

Tom Stoppard

In 2000 the Clay Mathematics Institute, a non-profit organisation based in 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, offered £1m – each – for the solution of seven 
problems that had continued to resist the best efforts of the best brains. Two 
years later, a Russian mathematician, Grigori Perelman, proved the Poincaré 
conjecture, which people had been working on for 98 years. Then he refused the 
million dollars. He felt insulted and betrayed. Perelman and the world of 
Soviet maths training make a fascinating, moving tale, and inPerfect Rigor 
(Houghton Mifflin Harcourt), Masha Gessen tells it brilliantly. Among recent 
novels,Brooklyn by Colm Tóibín <https://www.theguardian.com/books/colmtoibin> 
(Penguin) is faultless.

Colm Tóibín

If you need a book that people will laugh at you for reading anywhere from the 
airport to the beach, and that you in turn can laugh at for its mad details and 
its sheer barking insanity, then I suggest you follow my example and move 
around the world with William Shawcross's biography ofQueen Elizabeth the Queen 
Mother (Macmillan). There are certain beaches especially (and indeed certain 
airports) where the sight of someone reading this book will cause people to 
gather their friends and form a circle and simply howl.

On the other hand, if you want to look like a rock of good sense, a person who 
is deep and wise and worried, then I suggestWhoops: Why Everyone Owes Everyone 
and No One Can Pay by John Lanchester (Allen Lane). It not only looks good and 
solid, but it explains with casual wit and total clarity why everything went 
wrong and makes sense of the most complex financial matters. If only the Queen 
Mother were still alive, it would make sense even to her.

Rose Tremain

Bill Clegg's audacious Portrait of an Addict as a Young Man (Jonathan Cape) – 
read, preferably, with a poolside hangover – could shock you into lifelong 
sobriety. I've never read anything about crack addiction as painful as this. 
Luckily for Clegg, he was saved by the love and patience of his friends and is 
once again a (still-young) literary agent working in Manhattan.

He and others might take as their night-time read Peter Matthiessen's classic 
The Snow Leopard (newly reissued by Vintage, with an introduction by Richard 
Mabey) to remind themselves how man can be liberated from himself in other 
ways. After the death of his wife in 1978, Matthiessen joined his explorer 
friend, George Schaller, on a trip to the Crystal Mountain in Nepal, in search 
of the elusive snow leopard and of some way forward for his interrupted life. 
To say that this is a gripping and awesome journey is to sell short the whole 
magnificent and complex endeavour. As Mabey writes, Matthiessen did want to 
glimpse the leopard, but he was also "desperate for it to remain invisible, 
secretly itself, untouched by his cravings".

Sarah Waters

One of the books I'll be taking on holiday I've actually just finished, but 
it's such an impressive, enigmatic, multi-layered novel that I want to read it 
all over again. It's Austin Wright'sTony & Susan (Atlantic; see review, page 
9), a page-turner of a literary thriller that explores the dynamics of family 
life, of love and betrayal – ultimately, of the reading experience itself. Not 
since Cormac McCarthy'sThe Road have I been so gripped and unsettled by a piece 
of fiction.

The other book in my suitcase – a new biography of Emily Dickinson – may sound 
more gentle; but that, perhaps, is because we've inherited a view of Dickinson 
as weedy and reclusive – the ultimate fey "lady poet". Lyndall Gordon'sLives 
Like Loaded Guns: Emily Dickinson and Her Family's Feuds (Virago) promises to 
cut through the stereotype to expose the dramas and passions of life in the 
Dickinson home, and sounds like a brilliant, gob-smacking read.

Compiled by Ginny Hooker.
 