
Men with guns are littering Ivory Coast with corpses while my female 
companions in P.A's Ribhouse in downtown Monrovia outline inspired, achievable 
solutions to ending that conflict. In the same gentle voices that cajoled 
Liberia's bloodstained dictatorCharles Taylor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/charles-taylor> into resigning his 
presidency (he is now facing war crimes charges at the Hague) they explain 
their plans.

These women understand only too well the violence taking place across the 
border. These lawyers, businesswomen, human rights activists, community leaders 
and village elders and even a Nobel nominee are the traumatised victims of 
their own brutal civil war. But they are also the victors.

It wasn't the African Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africanunion> 
or the UN but Liberian women who brought the warring sides to the peace talks 
and subsequently, on the back of that success, have played a major part in 
conflict resolution in Sierra Leone, Sudan and Rwanda. Now they're worrying 
about Ivory Coast, the festering sore threatening to pollute the bloodstream of 
a whole region.

They have good reason to be afraid. The 11-year civil war in Sierra Leone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/sierraleone> claimed tens of thousands of 
victims. In Liberia, under the bloody reign of Charles Taylor, women and 
children were brutalised, sexually violated and murdered.

Now in Ivory Coast, the battle for supremacy between the Catholic, polygamist 
Laurent Gbagbo, who lost the last election, and the widely recognised winner, 
the MuslimAlassane Ouattara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alassane-ouattara>, has created an

ethnic division that threatens to plunge the region into a similar orgy of 
bloodletting. Eight hundred people under UN protection were found dead in one 
village alone, thousands have died in Abidjan and mass graves are being 
uncovered in the west of the country. "The rebels have guns, they rape women 
and take children to go and fight," said an eyewitness.

Meanwhile, gruesome images of people being set alight and macheted are an all 
too grim reminder of the unprecedented anger among a divided population that 
won't simply disappear when their leader is forced from the presidential 
palace. As a result, the refugee crisis on the Liberian border, with thousands 
of traumatised Ivorians arriving daily, is creating resentment among 
desperately poor people only just recovering from their own war. It's a power 
struggle that has the potential to create unbearable tensions in a region which 
had only just begun to believe in peace.

Yvette Chesson-Wureh, of the Angie Brooks International Centre for Women's 
Empowerment, Leadership Development, International Peace and Security 
<http://www.angiebrookscentre.org/activities/>, a grand title for a small, 
ambitious project training women in those desperately needed skills, has 
organised this women's lunch to discuss plans and share concerns about the 
situation over the border. "We begin with grassroots women's groups and work up 
to the leaders' wives and then the leaders themselves. You have to have support 
from the bottom to the top to stop the fighting," Yvette explains.

This isn't specious guesswork. Their combined track record in conflict 
resolution is impeccable. From Sierra Leone toLiberia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/liberia> and Rwanda, they have proved that 
when it comes to encouraging and facilitating peace they have unique skills.

So why are they having to lobby the AU and the UN just to be "allowed" to 
participate this time? they ask. Why are those charged with maintaining peace 
only now turning to women's groups such asFemmes Africa Solidarité, 
<http://www.fasngo.org/> with a history in ending conflict, when innocent blood 
has already begun to flow again in the streets of West Africa?

To the frustration of my companions, the AU and UN appear to have more faith 
in bureaucrats from far-away continents and well-intentioned Scandinavian 
negotiators than the women on the ground who know the issues intimately and 
have experience in ending the killing. They want these lumbering, patriarchal 
institutions to wake up to the fact that when it comes to peace building and 
maintenance there are no better advocates or custodians than the 50% of the 
population who will otherwise, along with their children, make up the majority 
of the victims of war.

The day before my meeting with the peacemakers, I'd watched women from all 
denominations and political persuasions, including Charles Taylor's estranged 
wife, applaud the achievements of Liberia's President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf and 
her recent gong, the FAS African Gender Award, at the City Hall in Monrovia. It 
was inspiring to witness their determination to collaborate across the 
political, cultural, tribal and religious divide to raise their children in 
peace and achieve gender equality.

There are thousands like them on this continent, eager to participate in the 
future stability of their countries and the management of peace, yet training 
facilities are rare and international support for their initiatives hard-won. 
Major-General Patrick Cammaert, former UN peacekeeping operation commander in 
the Democratic Republic of Congo, said: "It is now more dangerous to be a woman 
than to be a soldier in modern conflict." Doesn't that earn them the right to 
have a voice, an amplified one at that, at every negotiating table?

Mariella Frostrup is a trustee of The GREAT Initiative 
<http://www.thegreatinitiative.com/> (Gender Rights & Equality Action Trust), 
hosting its launch event on 19 May in aid of Femmes Africa Solidarité's 
PanAfrican Centre for Gender, Peace & Development and the GREAT and FAS Gender 
Awards
 