
Provide affordable inputs for farmers

The most interesting role of agribusiness in development will be providing 
affordable inputs in ways accessible to poor farmers. By this I mean that both 
the price and the accessibility of the inputs must be tailored towards the 
poorest farmers as well as the less poor (currently it is usually uneconomical 
to address the poorest of the poor's needs, from an agribusiness perspective). 
This is where it will be important for agribusiness and governments to work 
together to provide incentives to agribusiness to address the needs of the 
poorest farmers.

Improving accessibility may be as simple as reducing the size of the bags in 
which inputs, such as fertilisers are sold, to make them affordable to farmers. 
It may also include supporting co-operatives where groups of poor farmers can 
pool their money to make larger purchases feasible. If these can be supported 
by agribusiness, virtuous circle situations can arise where poorer farmers pull 
themselves out of poverty, and agribusiness acquires customers with increasing 
incomes and more surplus income to spend on increased inputs. Credit schemes 
where the needs of the poorest farmers are prioritised should also be promoted 
with strong oversight by government to ensure that no situations where farmers 
become victims of credit (perhaps to do with climate vulnerabilities or pest 
reducing yields meaning credit cannot be paid back) occur.

Climate change and perhaps more importantly changes in climate variability 
must also be taken into consideration to provide products that farmers can 
benefit from. Assessing the types of crops and their temperature and 
precipitation requirements/ranges necessary for productive farming across 
spatially variable landscapes will be a skill required as we face changing 
climate: uncertain rain, longer droughts and stronger heatwaves.

Nicholas Molyneux

Beware of the big suppliers 

If we want healthy food on an enduring basis then the solution is small scale 
mixed farming.

The promises of huge rewards for industrial agriculture have failed. Even the 
large farms have made only temporary gains, while their soil is ever more 
depleted and contaminated with chemicals and their animals treated appallingly. 
And equally bad are the noxious substances brought this way into our food.

However the biggest threat is the power and might of the global suppliers who 
manipulate the system to have their products accepted and brainwash politicians 
and the public with their propaganda.

The simple and immediate solutions to feed the world's hungry are to reduce 
meat consumption and to reduce waste.

Anson Allen

Business and sustainability consultant in Wales

Views and reviews is a weekly space to share the correspondence we get from 
our readers and also for our members to tell us what global development books 
you are reading. Sign up here to become amember 
<https://register.theguardian.com/global-development/>
 