
Lord Justice Leveson has requested a full breakdown of the security vetting 
status of recent top Downing Street media advisers to find out if revelations 
thatAndy Coulson <https://www.theguardian.com/media/andy-coulson> received only 
mid-level security checks before starting work in government represented "a 
smoking gun".

The judge asked Lord O'Donnell, the former head of the civil service, to 
provide the information after he was cross-examined over Downing Street's 
decision not to subject the former News of the World editor to rigorous 
"developed vetting" (DV) checks when he became David Cameron's director of 
communications in May 2010.

O'Donnell told the Leveson inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry> the checks would have 
investigated whether there was anything in Coulson's background that might make 
him susceptible to blackmail, as well as any shareholdings that may have caused 
a conflict of interest. Coulson was only cleared to a more rudimentary 
"security check" status but told the inquiry last week he had unsupervised 
access to top-secret papers and attended meetings of the national security 
council.

O'Donnell confirmed that DV checks would have involved Coulson signing a form 
to disclose any shareholdings that could lead to conflicts of interests. 
Coulson told the inquiry that he held shares in News Corporation, worth 
£40,000, while working as the prime minister's press chief.

"A form was signed but it didn't disclose shareholdings and it should have 
done," O'Donnell said.

O'Donnell struggled to say whether previous holders of Coulson's position had 
been subject to DV. He said he thought Tony Blair's press secretary,Alastair 
Campbell <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alastaircampbell>, was vetted to 
DV status, but he did not know about others.

Following O'Donnell in giving evidence on Monday, Campbell told the Leveson 
inquiry he was subjected to the highest level of security vetting before 
entering No 10.

He went through so call "developed vetting" which involves scrutiny of his 
personal life, his financial health and anything else that might make him 
"blackmailable".

The Guardian understands that Campbell and Dave Hill, who ran No 10 
communications for Blair, and Michael Ellam, who did the same for Gordon Brown, 
were all subject to DV. Craig Oliver, Cameron's current director of 
communications, and Gabby Bertin, Coulson's former deputy and now the prime 
minister's official spokeswoman, have both undergone checks.

"It might be worthwhile identifying if and when each of the comparative 
equivalent holders of that particular post received the higher level of 
vetting … only to demonstrate that there isn't a smoking gun here," Leveson 
said.

O'Donnell, who was in charge of the vetting system when Coulson was appointed, 
told Leveson it was not a simple job to work out which roles were analogous to 
Coulson's and that it was routine for people in similar positions to start 
their work without being vetted to the highest level.

"Some people who operate in that job would say: 'Look, what I really want to 
do is get involved in the economy,' a whole set of issues which basically 
didn't go into the kinds of things where regular top-secret access was 
required, and they just wouldn't want to go there. It quite often turned out 
that they would start off with that view, or, in this case, the No 10 permanent 
secretary [Sir Jeremy Heywood] would have that view, and then, as events 
changed, they would realise the first big terrorist event came along and then 
there would be a lot of papers which, by their nature, were all top secret, and 
then you would say, actually, this isn't working, we need to give access to 
this."

O'Donnell said that even if Coulson had undergone DV when he started work, it 
"wouldn't have gone into enormous detail about phone hacking". He said the 
vetting was concerned with whether you were "blackmailable, your financial 
position and your personal life".

• This article was amended on 14 May 2012 to correct a misspelling of Alastair 
Campbell's name.
 