
Downing Street has been asked to explain whether Andy Coulson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andy-coulson> is the only senior press 
adviser to recent prime ministers to have been spared high-level security 
vetting.

Lord Justice Leveson <https://www.theguardian.com/law/lord-justice-leveson>, 
whose judicial inquiry is examining relations between the government and the 
media, in particular News Corporation, said he wanted to find out whether the 
issue represented "a smoking gun".

The former head of the civil service Lord O'Donnell also told the inquiry that 
the culture secretary, Jeremy Hunt, should have known if his special adviser 
was giving feedback to News Corporation on its controversial £8bn takeover bid 
for BSkyB.

The judge requested a full breakdown of the security vetting status of recent 
top Downing Street media advisers following revelations that the former News of 
the World editor received only mid-level security checks before starting work 
forDavid Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> in 
government.

O'Donnell was responsible for security vetting when Coulson became the prime 
minister's director of communications in May 2010. He oversaw the decision not 
to subject Coulson to rigorous "developed vetting" (DV) checks that involve 
testing whether there is anything in an individual's background that might make 
him or her vulnerable to blackmail.

The Cabinet Office saidon Monday it was preparing a full list for the inquiry. 
Downing Street sources conceded it was likely to show that most of the previous 
incumbents of the role were subject to DV, or its equivalent, under earlier 
systems.

Coulson was allowed to operate with a mid-ranking "security check" level of 
vetting that allows only supervised access to the most secret documents. He 
told theLeveson inquiry <https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry> 
last week that he nevertheless had unsupervised access to top-secret files.

The Guardian understands that most, if not all, of the senior media advisers 
to prime ministers from John Major to Gordon Brown were cleared to a higher 
security level than the former News International employee.

They include Sir Christopher Meyer, who worked for Major; Alastair Campbell 
and David Hill, who worked for Tony Blair; and Michael Ellam and Simon Lewis, 
who worked for Gordon Brown. Coulson's successor, Craig Oliver, has also had DV.

Appearing after O'Donnell at the Leveson inquiry on Monday, Campbell said he 
underwent DV "very early on" in his job in government.

"It was just assumed that I would have to be," he said. "In the transition 
there had been discussions and it was assumed that we would be involved in all 
the sensitive areas that Tony Blair would be taking charge of."

Downing Street sources argue that the decision to exempt Coulson was made by 
Sir Jeremy Heywood, then Downing Street permanent secretary, as part of a wider 
policy of reducing the number of special advisers who had access to the most 
secret documents in order to improve the handling of sensitive intelligence and 
because the process was expensive.

O'Donnell told the inquiry a more rigorous DV of Coulson "wouldn't have gone 
into enormous detail about phone hacking" but he said it would have 
investigated whether there was anything in Coulson's background that might make 
him susceptible to blackmail. He said the vetting was also concerned with "your 
financial position and your personal life".

He also said that as part of other routine checks, Coulson should have signed 
forms disclosing any shareholdings that could lead to conflicts of interest. It 
emerged last week that Coulson held shares in News Corporation, worth £40,000, 
while working as No 10 press chief. "A form was signed but it didn't disclose 
shareholdings and it should have done," O'Donnell said.

When O'Donnell said he couldn't recall which of Coulson's predecessors had 
been subject to developed vetting, Leveson said: "It might be worthwhile 
identifying if and when each of the comparative equivalent holders of that 
particular post received the higher level of vetting … only to demonstrate that 
there isn't a smoking gun here. If there is, then there is."

O'Donnell claimed that "quite often" press secretaries would start working for 
prime ministers with a lower level of security clearance than developed vetting.

"Some people who operate in that job would say: 'Look, what I really want to 
do is get involved in the economy,' a whole set of issues which basically 
didn't go into the kinds of things where regular top-secret access was 
required, and they just wouldn't want to go there," O'Donnell said. "It quite 
often turned out that they would start off with that view, or, in this case, 
the No 10 permanent secretary would have that view, and then, as events 
changed, they would realise the first big terrorist event came along and then 
there would be a lot of papers which, by their nature, were all top secret, and 
then you would say, actually, this isn't working, we need to give access to 
this."

Simon Lewis, Coulson's immediate predecessor, director of communications for 
Gordon Brown from June 2009 to May 2010, told the Guardian on Monday he 
underwent DV as soon as he took up his post. "To do my job I needed certain 
levels of access," he said. "That was make very clear to me upfront. It was put 
to me that there are certain jobs that are so close to the prime minister that 
by definition you need it [developed vetting]."

Lewis said he was interviewed and had to submit names of friends and family 
who would also be contacted.

Sir Christopher Meyer also confirmed that he was cleared to the highest 
security level before he started as John Major's press secretary in 1994 
because he had previously worked as the deputy ambassador to Washington.
 