
If you're wearing a new pair of worn-looking jeans, there's a good chance 
they've been blasted with sand to give them that perfect distressed look.

Sandblasting is just one of the techniques used in the apparel industry to 
make denim and other fabrics look fashionably faded.

Done under the right conditions, this can be a perfectly safe process. Done 
with inadequate health and safety protections in place, workers can be exposed 
to hazardous crystalline silica and the threat of contracting fatal lung 
disorders, such as silicosis.

Levi Strauss & Co has safely used sandblasting in the past with proper 
controls in place to protect workers in its supplier factories.

But this is by no means common practice. Sandblasting is still widely done in 
factories without adequate safety controls, particularly in counterfeit 
operations.

Realising that it would be difficult to enforce proper safety standards across 
the world, Levi Strauss and fashion retailer, H&M, decided the best way to 
protect workers was to push for a total worldwide ban on sandblasting. In 
September 2010 they both announced they would end sandblasting in their own 
supply chains.

The group is policing its own ban using enforcement and factory checks. A team 
of factory assessors, based close to suppliers around the world, has been 
employed. They conduct regular inspections to make sure factories are complying 
with the ban, now included in Levi Strauss' terms of engagement.

The terms were drawn up in 1991 to make sure all suppliers met a range of 
standards, including health and safety, child labour and freedom of 
association. Pioneering at the time, such standards are now commonplace in the 
industry.

The challenge now is to persuade others in the industry to join the ban so 
that sandblasting can eventually be eliminated.

Simon Beavis is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 