
Li Na <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/li-na> is champion of Australia at 
last. She already had the adoration of the people after two visits to the 
deciding match of the women's championship and she sealed the love affair with 
a 7-6, 6-0 beating of Dominika Cibulkova in the final.

The superstar of women's tennis in China will have held an estimated 
television audience of 70 million enthralled, and the potential for the sport 
to spread across the biggest market in the world is again invigorated.

Having failed in two previous finals, Li was, understandably, relieved as much 
as elated – "one more step", as she put it. She added: "This is my fourth 
final. I have more experience. I care about what I should do on the court, not 
about what I did in the past.

"At the start of the tournament everybody was talking about my age. I would 
like to say age is nothing. I still can win a grand slam. So I'm pretty happy 
about my age."

The figures of growth have yet to convince, but Li is doing her bit. The first 
set went to a tie-break and took one hour and 20 minutes. Cibulkova could not 
win a game in the second, which did not quite last half an hour.

Cibulkova looked as if she might be swamped at the beginning but got ahead in 
the score in the seventh game after half an hour, at just the moment when Li 
dispatched her ever-smiling husband, Jiang Shan (whom she calls Dennis, to 
rhyme with tennis) to the stringing room to fix her racket. He no doubt marked 
her down for a ticking off over that one, later.

It did seem as if the former two‑time finalist was looking for excuses as her 
game faltered, however, as her forehand let her down under pressure and 
Cibulkova's confidence – already high – grew by the point.

Throughout the tournament, the Slovak, ranked 24 in the world, has been an 
effervescent ball of energy, punching her shots hard and direct from all parts 
of the court – and from a vantage point of 5ft 3in. She was not only the 
smallest player in the women's draw; she was bidding to become the shortest 
winner of a major in the game's history.

Cibulkova does not rely on her height for her stature, though. She brought 
muscle and purpose to her tennis that was way too strong for the sophisticated 
game fifth seed, Agnieszka Radwanska, and won their semi-final with ridiculous 
ease, 6-1, 6-2.

None of the odds favoured her: as with Stanislas Wawrinka's 0-12 mark against 
Rafael Nadal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/24/rafael-nadal-beats-roger-federer-australian-open>
 in the men's final, Cibulkova had not taken a set off Li in their four 
matches. But, whatever the perception, her pedigree and form are sound, and she 
had the comfort of knowing her place on the rankings board was guaranteed at 13 
by making the final.

It was Li who came under pressure first in the opening set, having to ace to 
stay in the set at 5-5. There was not much Cibulkova could do about that one, 
but there was plenty Li could do about her ground strokes, 22 of which up to 
that point had gone awry without significant influence from her opponent.

The crowd seemed to slightly favour the Chinese veteran, whose quirkiness 
on-court and in interviews has made her a favouritesince she announced her 
arrival in the 2011 final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/jan/29/australian-open-kim-clijsters-li-na>
, and the stadium rose as one when Cibulkova netted a backhand and Li served 
for the set at 6-5. Cibulkova – brave with a rare drop shot – fought to break 
point, needed a second one to level after an exchange of points – and was 
relieved when her opponent netted a backhand for 6-6, and a tie-break. Li 
wrapped it up 7-3 in an engaging struggle.

Dramatically, the fight that had sustained Cibulkova through the tight first 
set drained from her racket in a quick second session as Li found another 
level. She raced to 5-0 as the Slovak's game unravelled under pressure, and the 
end shocked the underdog, who was powerless to respond.

Having gifted Cibulkova 25 unforced errors in the first set, Li found some 
discipline down the straight and barely gave her bewildered opponent a look. 
Cibulkova saved one championship point at 15-40 and 0-5 down, but an overcooked 
forehand ended the agony for her. It was a curious curtailment to what had 
earlier promised to be a solid battle.
 