
Nothing should stop you going to university if you have the ability and the 
aspiration. It will be a life-changing, transformative experience and the 
opportunities that arise from being part of an academic community are huge.

You need to think ahead, plan and budget – but it will be a hell of a lot of 
fun, and you'll make friends from all walks of life.

Don't let fear of debt be the reason you don't go to uni. The loan is a 
complicated financial product but it is not a financial barrier, and it's very 
safe and available to everyone, means-tested against household income. You will 
repay your loan back at 9% over £21,000; it is written off after 30 years, and 
graduates are faring best in the employment market.

When deciding where to study it's important to visit the universities you are 
interested in. Don't just pick a place from a prospectus – see it for yourself, 
get a feel for the atmosphere and talk to the students.

Think about whether you want to live on campus, or in a city, or at home. Do 
you prefer to learn in a work-based style or tutorial style? Do you do better 
with exams or continuous assessment, large lectures or small tutor groups, and 
how long are terms and semesters?

Think about what your educational needs are – studying at university is very 
different to school. In terms of subject choice, what do you really enjoy?

When I applied to uni I was going to study physics and law, but I did some 
work experience at a firm of lawyers and decided that law was not for me. I 
chose physics because I enjoyed it, and although I'm not now doing anything 
directly related, I think the skills I learned are transferable. I learned 
about analysing problems, decision-making, how to construct and present 
information, and improved my numeracy and literacy in IT. These are the skills 
that companies want. They also want people who are inter-disciplinary – so 
think about how flexible your course is.

Take your studies seriously – you will get so much more out of being 
self-disciplined. There is a huge volume of work and a lot of it is 
self-guided. And remember, most students have to balance their studies with 
working part-time to boost their finances.

But university is not just about work: one of the best things that will happen 
is that you will meet so many people. There are so many opportunities – sports 
clubs, societies, studying abroad, work experience in the long summer months.

And get involved in your students' union – the NUS is a campaigning 
organisation and we are fighting to get more money in students' pockets. It is 
one of the strongest networks in the country and you can learn so much from it.

Interview by Sarah Jewell

• Liam Burns, 27, is president of the National Union of Students, and 
studied physics at Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh 
 