
It seems that Bernard Madoff's wife, Ruth, has told the taxman 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=20601087&sid=aDNzDQ7orRzc&refer=home> 
that the couple's beachside retreat in Palm Beach, Florida, is her main 
residence.

Ruth, a sometime author of kosher cookery books 
<http://www.amazon.com/Great-Chefs-America-Cook-Kosher/dp/0964125226>, clearly 
likes the sun in her hair and has kept the lowest of profiles since her 
husband's little brush with the law began in December.

She hasn't conformed to the usual role of supportive spouse played by wives in 
other white-collar fraud cases. She didn't turn up to look emotional at any of 
Bernie's court hearings – including the one last week in which he was 
handcuffed and escorted to the cells, probably never to see freedom again.

The usually attentive New York media hasn't snapped any opportunistic photos 
of Ruth out shopping or lunching on Fifth Avenue while her husband battles for 
his freedom. Perhaps she's been in Palm Beach all along?

If so, she might find some sympathy among the neighbours. The Madoff 
residence, on North Lake Way, is just 15 minutes' drive, according to Google 
Maps, from South Ocean Boulevard – where a certainLord and Lady Black 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/conradblack> maintain a residence. You 
just head south, take a left on Wells Road and take the second exit at the 
roundabout.

Perhaps Ruth can form a supportive alliance with Conrad Black's wife, Barbara 
Amiel, who is going through exactly the same ordeal as her husband endures 
porridge for thieving from investors?

The two millionairesses could carpool on visits to prison, or collaborate on 
baking cakes with files inside. They could swap tips on how to protect their 
assets from the zealous efforts of the courts to snatch recompense for their 
husbands' victims.

It's truly a lunch date made in heaven.

0 God

Visiting Seattle this week to see the folks from Starbucks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/starbucks>, I stayed in a quirky place 
called the Hotel Max. The building has impenetrable modernistic artworks on its 
walls and instead of "do not disturb" signs on the room doors, there are signs 
reading simply "yep" or "nope".

But the oddest feature was a "spiritual menu" on the bedside table, imploring 
guests to dial 0 to have the religious book of their choice delivered.

The Book of Mormon, a Buddhist bible, the Koran, the Torah, a King James bible 
or a book on Scientology were available at the touch of a button. As were the 
Bhagavad Gita, for any Hindu visitors, and the Tao Te Ching for any budding 
Taoists. The hotel implored: "Order your favourite or try something new!"

After three years in the US, I still can't tell when Americans have their 
tongues in their cheeks – particularly when it comes to their relationship with 
God. I briefly considered dialling 0 and asking for Richard Dawkins' The God 
Delusion. Probably a bad idea.

Recession advertising

Anxious to keep customers slurping lattes in spite of the recession, Starbucks 
has tentatively dipped its toes into the world of television advertising for 
the first time in its 38-year history. But the coffee chain is adopting an 
unconventional strategy.

The first of its ads ran in November, just before the US presidential 
election, during an episode of Saturday Night Live. Themed on participation, it 
offered a free cup of coffee on polling day as a reward for anyone who had 
voted.

Starbucks' second ad aired around Thanksgiving and, again, it highlighted a 
charitable initiative with barely any mention of coffee beans or Frappuccinos. 
It promised a five cent donation to charitable causes in Africa for every 
purchase of a promotional "Red" range of drinks.

The common thread is that both ads aired only once on television. The sole 
appearance of the second ad, bizarrely, was on the Weather Channel.

Having put the commercials into the public domain, Starbucks allowed social 
media to do the hard work and, sure enough, both ads rapidly became big hits on 
YouTube as "viral" social media spread the word.

It's a curious glimpse of how cost-conscious companies can spread their 
message at little cost in this dawning age of the blogosphere and the 
Twitterati.

Starbucks' boss, Howard Schultz, has direct access to authoritative wisdom on 
the subject of social networking. The chief operating officer of Facebook, 
Sheryl Sandberg, has just been elected to the coffee firm's board.
 