
Aleksandar Hemon <https://www.theguardian.com/books/aleksandar-hemon> sold his 
first book, a dazzling story collection called The Question of Bruno - written 
in his second language, English - in the closing minutes of the 1999 Champions 
League final. Manchester United were playing Bayern Munich. ("Manchester United 
isn't my team, Liverpool is my team, but I hate Bayern Munich," he says.) 
Hemon's agent, Nicole Aragi, had organised an auction, and had been calling the 
35-year-old writer with reports on its progress. "She called me five minutes 
before the end of the game: 'I've got some great news.' And I said: 'I cannot 
talk to you right now, I'll call you back,' and hung up. And then Man United 
scored two goals." A smile drifts across Hemon's face at the memory. "So I 
called her back, and said: 'Listen, what was so important that you had to call 
me in the middle of a fucking game?'" Hemon bounces his cranberry juice on the 
table at the punchline. "The Question of Bruno," Zadie Smith once remarked, "is 
all right I suppose if you appreciate multilingual genius types who learn the 
language in six months, write with great humour and style and then get compared 
to Nabokov in the New York Times."

A big handsome man dressed as a shy fat man - long-sleeved T-shirt into which 
his hands retreat, several shapeless acres of trouser - Hemon looks as though 
he has just completed a heavy session of computer programming; he has the 
awkward power and bulk of a man built by doughnuts. He is, in fact, an 
obsessive footballer who has been unable to play since spring, when he injured 
his knee. Perhaps because of this, his demeanour communicates a strange mixture 
of gentleness and an intense desire to kick something.

Since his first book, Hemon has produced two further pieces of fiction in 
English. The second, Nowhere Man, published in 2002, picked up the story of 
Josef Pronek, a Hemon-like figure (a Sarajevan stranded in Chicago by the war) 
who first appeared in The Question of Bruno. Nowhere Man, which narrates 
Pronek's history from several angles, "was something between a book of short 
stories and a novel". Hemon feels there is too much categorisation in talk 
about writing. "To me there's no difference between a book of stories and a 
novel - they're just slightly different shapes," he said. "I resist when 
someone calls me a novelist: it implies some kind of inherent superiority of 
the novel. I'm not a novelist, I'm a writer."

As the jacket photograph for Nowhere Man testifies, Hemon once had thick, 
dark, writerly hair; his scalp is now shaved brutally close. His heavy glasses 
spend most of the time on top of his stubble, where they make a black accent 
above the round edge of his skull, like a caron over the curved top of a letter 
O. Other faces seem suddenly skimpy by comparison. (Noses - especially Pronek's 
- get a hard time in Hemon: Pronek has "a rotund nose, which seemed swollen"; 
elsewhere he observes himself to have "a tubernose".) When Hemon slides his 
glasses down over his eyes, a different man, a superimposed humorist, appears: 
he looks like a caricature of a man wearing glasses. Nothing is fixed, identity 
is fluid - a point his fiction makes repeatedly and that he reluctantly 
concedes in discussion, politely suppressing a wince at the simplistic nature 
of this observation. His new book, The Lazarus Project, published to adoring 
reviews, continues to play with real and fictional identities (its protagonist, 
Vladimir Brik, is a Bosnian writer living in Chicago). Unlike its predecessors, 
it is unambiguously a novel, although Hemon "didn't utter the word" until it 
was finished. "I called it 'the big book'."

Hemon has two countries and two languages, caused in his case by the 
Yugoslavian civil war. He was born in 1964 and grew up in Sarajevo, in a flat 
that his family still owns in a "five-storey socialist-ugly apartment 
building". He stays there on trips back to the city (his parents now live in 
Canada). His parents worked at a state-owned company 10 minutes from their 
home: his mother as an accountant, his father as an engineer. The family - 
Hemon, his parents, and his younger sister Kristina - would eat lunch together 
every day at four, and listen to the radio news, with a special hush at 4.25 
for the weather forecast. (The weather obsession has followed his parents to 
Canada, perhaps, Hemon thinks, because "it's a comfortable way to imagine the 
future" after the upheaval of emigration. "They have a nice house, a garden, 
but somehow time is still completely out of joint.")

Circumstances in Sarajevo in the 1970s and 80s were not as syrupy sweet as 
Pronek remembers them in Nowhere Man ("The boys were handsome, the girls 
beautiful, the sports teams successful, the bands good, the streets felt soft 
as a Persian carpet"), but life was steady; there was, at least - Hemon uses 
this word a lot - "an infrastructure" that was penetrable to its citizens. 
"Even if it's hard, sometimes, even if it's a bureaucracy, it's consistent. You 
go to get a personal ID, you know they're going to fuck you for two weeks, two 
months - but it's your choice, when to go back, you know what they're going to 
do, you can look for connections, you know how it works."

Hemon's books are full of people who have been taken out of one context and 
put down in another and can't, now, see how it works - his parents standing 
mute in a lift as they're cheerily addressed by their American neighbours, 
Russian intellectuals rendered stupid by English lessons. His fiction 
understands the nature of such losses. Many of his stories remember life before 
loss, a child's world - Hemon says the move to America "amplified" his 
childhood memories. More obliquely, some of his fiction's vividness and 
freshness comes from his exploitation of a child's angle of view: objects loom 
large. Hemon remembers feeling close to the ground, "in the literal sense, in 
that I would see what was on the ground; things that were on the ground 
attracted my attention". Things on the ground attract his attention still, 
often as signifiers of losses too awful to confront directly. In The Lazarus 
Project, a black leather glove floats in a puddle of porridge after a pogrom. 
The story "Blind Josef Pronek and the Dead Souls", from The Question of Bruno, 
opens with Pronek arriving in America and realising, instantly and forlornly, 
that he has lost his scarf. In "A Coin", Sarajevans running from snipers litter 
the street with their belongings: "A black leather wallet, probably empty. A 
purse, agape like a mouth. A white plastic water-vessel, with a bullet-hole at 
its centre. A green-red-brown shawl ornamented with snowflakes, dirty. A wet 
loaf of bread, with excited ants crawling all over it, as if building a 
pyramid."

Hemon was a teenager when Tito died in 1980, and the writer grew interested in 
political journalism, and ideas such as freedom of speech, which turned out to 
be a more effective way to bait his parents than wearing ripped jeans. In the 
Hemon household, a principled stand tended to impede individual progress. "I 
would fight for my right to go out in torn jeans, and they'd say absolutely 
not. My sister would just put on her torn jeans and leave when they weren't 
paying attention." Thanks to his own and his mother's principled refusal to 
pull any strings, Hemon carried out his year of military service in a grimly 
distant part of eastern Macedonia. ("Some of my friends served as ski 
instructors in the mountains of Belgrade. I was at the border with Bulgaria.")

His time in the army was miserable, his instructor a "spectacular bastard" 
whom Hemon fantasised about murdering with an icicle after the man had marched 
them through nipple-deep snow. "I got horribly ill and spent a week in the 
sanatorium with a temperature, kind of hallucinating, and I kept devising the 
perfect murder, how could I kill this man ... somehow I thought if I could put 
a piece of ice in a weapon, and shoot him in the heart, the ice would melt, 
leaving no trace. I had a fever, and all I ate was plum juice and plum compote, 
and I would run this film of a perfect ice murder in my head and then I'd pass 
out."

Pronek's time in the army, in Nowhere Man, is equally cruddy, though he 
blithely lies to his parents on his return, "presenting his army experience as 
one of bonding with other young men from all across Yugoslavia". Hemon himself 
maintains that he cannot lie (he looks me very seriously in the eye when he 
says this), due to a family affliction: "When we're upset, our vocal cords 
tighten and we can't speak. And when I lie - well, I can't lie, because the 
same thing happens - everyone who knows me knows that when I start squeaking, 
I've started lying."

Army service was followed by a degree in English at the University of 
Sarajevo. Hemon read Nabokov's Lolita in translation (he still remembers the 
shelf on which the book sat in the library), then worked as a journalist for 
the Sarajevan youth press. In the winter of 1992, an organisation called the 
American Cultural Centre brought him to the US on a programme for young 
journalists. He was 28; the trip was to last a month or so, with a visit to a 
friend tagged on afterwards. The war began in April. He was supposed to fly 
back from Chicago on May 1; the siege of Sarajevo started on May 2. "I didn't 
go back," Hemon says.

Hemon's second life now began. Pronek lives a version of it in The Question of 
Bruno and Nowhere Man - working minimum-wage jobs, learning English. From June 
1992 to September 1994, having acquired a social security number, Hemon wrote 
nothing at all, but worked as a canvasser. "I don't know what possessed me to 
do that," he says; the job is mercilessly satirised at the end of Nowhere Man, 
with Pronek knocking on unfriendly doors for Greenpeace ("Do you care about the 
dolphins?"). He dictated several columns by phone to his old magazine in 
Sarajevo. "But I found out after these pieces that I could not write in 
Bosnian. What was I going to tell them - you should go and see this movie? 
People under siege. I felt entirely helpless, and stupid."

His much-discussed feat of teaching himself English by reading Nabokov took 
place around this time. As he describes it, it sounds an entirely sensible 
approach to the challenge, a kind of highbrow Berlitz course. "I didn't know 
half the words. At the beginning I would start underlining the words I didn't 
know on the page, but then I started underlining too many, so I started writing 
them out on notecards, and whenever I read, I made lists of words and then 
looked them up in the dictionary." He read other Nabokov too. "But Lolita ... 
Lolita is the bomb." Reading Lolita in English, after reading it in translation 
"was like the difference between listening to an orchestra live and through a 
phone".

The book helped Hemon to transform himself from a man speaking what he 
describes as "tourist English" (though it is a stretch to imagine the brooding 
presence in front of me ever having engaged in the formulaic purchase of a 
double room with a bath or two return tickets), to a writer of prose that the 
critic James Wood recently described as being "remarkable for its polish, 
lustre, and sardonic control of register". His writing, as many have observed, 
is reminiscent of Nabokov's. Both fizz with similes; animating the inanimate, 
reimagining the commonplace. Here is a slug in Hemon: "The dew on its back 
twinkled: it looked like a severed tongue." A defecating horse's anus opens 
slowly, "like a camera aperture".

With his new language in place, Hemon enrolled on a graduate degree in English 
at Northwestern University. While he was there, chewing up Shakespeare and 
Marlowe, a professor remarked on the quality of one of his essays and suggested 
he submit his fiction to the literary magazine Triquarterly. A story in another 
magazine, Ploughshares, followed, which got him his American agent. He finished 
The Question of Bruno during his PhD, but he never finished his doctorate. 
Academia had been "plan B"; he was now able to focus on plan A, and write 
full-time.

A $500,000 MacArthur "Genius" award in 2004 allowed him to organise his life 
around writing (and football) rather than survival. The Lazarus Project is a 
product of this time. His previous books were written "in pieces"; the new book 
was of a piece from the outset. The novel was inspired by a non-fiction 
account, by Walter Roth and Joe Kraus, of the case of Lazarus Averbuch, a 
19-year-old Russian Jewish immigrant who was murdered by the Chicago police in 
1908. One photograph in particular caught Hemon's imagination. It shows 
Averbuch (dark hair, dark jacket, jug ears) sitting upright in a chair. A man 
standing behind him supports his chin. Averbuch is already dead.

Hemon's "big book" flips between two narratives: an imagining of the events 
around Averbuch's life and death; and a road story tracing the efforts of the 
writer Brik and his friend Rora, a photographer, to uncover Averbuch's world 
through visiting his birthplace in Kishinev (then in Russia, now in Moldova; 
the pair also decide to visit Ukraine, while they're at it, and fetch up in 
Sarajevo). Hemon made the same journey himself with his photographer friend 
Velibor Bozovic, who supplied some of the photographs that appear, uncaptioned, 
at the start of each chapter, further complicating the relationship between 
reporting and invention. Like all his books, The Lazarus Project has Hemon in 
it, but like all his books it resists any transformation into straightforward 
autobiography. Hemon is uninspired by what he calls "the memoir craze". "I hate 
it beyond words. It's a crisis of the imagination," he says, looking wildly 
over my head, perhaps hoping to find a smarter reader up there.

Despite his writhing, his tone is patient: the idea is important. "The way I 
work, I start from the personal space, then expand outwards ... I'm everyone in 
my books. That's the whole fucking point."

Hemon on Hemon

"Then there was silence. The electricity of violence and fear in the room. The 
down from torn pillows floating, like souls, through the fog of what had just 
happened. The air reeking of sweat and blood, of smashed furniture and shards 
of glass, of spilled food and fear ...

A horse whinnied outside. The wind came in through the windows, but nothing 
inside moved.

No one moved: Papa's face pressed against the floor in a puddle of blood; 
Mother lying on her side, facing the wall next to the kitchen door; Chaia 
curled up, her knees to her chest, the hem of her dress touching her ear; Roza 
on her back still; rivulets of blood spreading away from Lazarus's nose and eye 
sockets, across his cheeks and mouth, down to his neck.

He is dead; they are all dead, I thought. The horrible fear rushed from my 
stomach to my head. They killed them all. Here it is, then."

It's a furious book. In fact, it used to be more so but I've toned it down. 
Basically, I've been angry with America for the past eight years. It's part of 
a wider pattern of anger over the Bosnian war and war crimes. Some people sit 
and weep; I rage about the injustice of it all.

If you write outside history, as so many novelists seem to do, then you end up 
writing confessional fiction, which I can't stand. That's partly why my novels 
play around with form. For me, history, memory and the imagination are part of 
the same continuum.

· Extract from The Lazarus Project by Aleksandar Hemon, published by Picador
 