
John Parkinson, Calke Abbey

Calke Abbey was built in 1704 for Sir John Harpur. It was built on the site 
of a Tudor building, which in turn had been built on the site of a medieval 
priory. It was never an abbey – the Harpur Crewe family just added that to the 
name to make it sound grander. I came to work here as a house manager in 1997, 
and most of my family has grown up here.

I was particularly attracted to the property because of the huge collection of 
artefacts it houses. Various generations of the Harpur Crewe family were very 
reclusive. They were true hoarders and collectors and the house is full of 
natural history specimens, such as taxidermy, minerals and butterflies.

When Vauncey Harpur Crewe died in the 1920s, the family retreated to a small 
corner of the house and closed the door on the rest. Much of the collection was 
sold, and a lot of the staff were laid off.

The last occupants of the house were two brothers without any direct family. 
Due to continuing problems with death duties, the family finally gave the 
property to the National Trust. The trust took it on as a really good example 
of a country house in decline, and we've been trying to preserve it in the 
state we found it in ever since.

The baroque facade of the house has been covered by a later, Greek-revival 
portico affair. At one point there was a staircase up to the portico, and the 
main entrance to the house was on the first floor. The original 1704 building 
is still very much evident in the layout, the size of the rooms and certain 
details, such as some of the down pipes, which still have the date on them.

We had serious flooding in June 2007 after a sudden heavy rainstorm, which 
overwhelmed the gullies and downpipes. When subsequent repairs and improvements 
were made to the drainage of the courtyards, we uncovered some skeletons – 
their feet were underneath the foundations of the house, so they obviously 
pre-dated the present house. We decided to leave them in the ground as we found 
them and divert the drain around them. We covered them up again and left them 
in peace.
 