
Secret agents are, let's be honest, absolute bellends. Good-looking, talented 
and wealthy, they exist in a bubble of ego that allows them to embark on 
one-night stands, lay waste to cities with their gizmos, and generally act 
disreputably in the name of safeguarding our freedom. The only reason more 
people aren't wise to this reality is because our TV and film overlords manage, 
via judicious editing and expensive tailoring, to make spies look alluring 
rather than arselike.

At least, that was the case until Sterling Archer came along. The protagonist 
of Archer, the filthy and brilliant animated comedy which begins its fourth 
season in the UK this week, Sterling is an immensely gifted, immensely 
attractive secret agent. He's also monstrously irresponsible, a narcissist, 
womaniser and bully; the likely outcome, says the show's creator Adam Reed, of 
being "rich and handsome and getting to travel everywhere, and not ever having 
to deal personally with any consequences of what you do". In other words, he's 
king of the bellends. Think Bond berating a barmaid for stirring not shaking 
his Martini, or Napoleon Solo throwing a tantrum because his sports car is the 
wrong shade of midnight blue.

Reed honed his comedic style at Cartoon Network's anarchic late-night offshoot 
Adult Swim, where he devised underwater adventure series Sealab 2021 and 
superhero parody Frisky Dingo. Both shows had outwardly action-packed set-ups 
but frequently ditched them in favour of having their characters arse about, 
argue with each other and generally do anything other than actual work. Archer, 
which Reed originally pitched to the FX channel as "James Bond meets Arrested 
Development" takes this premise – the comedy of displacement activity – and 
runs with it.

"We wanted a backdrop of global espionage, and then the goal was to ignore it 
as much as possible to focus on people bickering," Reed explains. The show's 
characters, workers at international secret intelligence agency ISIS, are more 
likely to be found drinking or hurling pop-culture-referencing insults at each 
another than doing spy work. Even when they are doing spy work, they tend to 
bicker at the same time, battling Russians or eco-terrorists while debating the 
merits of Kenny Loggins.
 Archer. 
The result is a show whose rapid-paced, ultra-acerbic dialogue is as funny as 
anything on television at the moment. Rather than an animated comedy with adult 
content, Archer feels like a proper adult comedy that just happens to be 
animated. To this end, the show's graphics feel far more realistic than most 
cartoons. Everyone is anatomically accurate, and when people get shot, 
harpooned or beaten to a pulp, they bleed. A lot.

The person causing much of that bleeding is Sterling Archer himself, a figure 
informed not only by secret agents such as Bond and Matt Helm, but also by 
George MacDonald Fraser's literary soldier-scoundrel Flashman (who Reed reckons 
makes Archer "seem like a social worker"). Reed wanted Archer to be "as much of 
a dick as possible", but to still remain sympathetic. To this end, he handed 
the part of Archer to H Jon Benjamin, a comic actor with a history of providing 
the voices for animated deviants, even, as in American Dad!, a talking cabbage. 
"There's just something about Jon's voice. You can put the worst words in his 
mouth, and he's got such a disarming delivery that it sounds OK coming from 
him," enthuses Reed.

Benjamin talks with relish about playing a character as morally suspect as 
Archer. "It's fun to be juvenile and arrogant and awful," he says. "And it's 
fun to be very aggressively mean to everybody else around me." Archer's most 
caustic barbs are often reserved for his mother, Malory – the permanently 
inebriated head of ISIS – who returns his put-downs with interest. Malory is 
voiced by Jessica Walter, best known for her role as Arrested Development's 
ruthless matriarch Lucille Bluth. Like that character, Malory – or "Mother" as 
Archer coldly refers to her – is emotionally abusive towards her offspring. A 
pioneer of the parenting technique of "negative reinforcement", Malory was 
absent for most of the key events of Archer's childhood, leaving his upbringing 
to his decrepit manservant Woodhouse, whose loyalty Archer repays with abuse 
(sample quote: "I'll rub sand into your dead little eyes… I'll also need you to 
go buy sand").
 Archer's mum, Malory. 
The show's cast list is often swelled by the presence of some high-profile 
guest stars: the first season featured Ron Perlman, while Burt Reynolds 
(voicing an animated version of himself) and Bryan Cranston appeared in season 
three, and Timothy Olyphant and Jon Hamm pop up in season four. Reed says that 
many of the show's guest appearances are the result of meetings at press 
events, where he puts people he admires on the spot "until they're sort of too 
embarrassed to say no". This isn't the parade of guest stars that has weighed 
down The Simpsons in recent years, though – no guest star ever feels bigger 
than the show itself.

Aside from big-name guest stars, Reed promises the usual globe-trotting antics 
in season four, including people-trafficking in Mexico, a visit to Turkmenistan 
and a crossover episode with animated series Bob's Burgers, to which Benjamin 
also lends his voice.

But what about real-life events? Are there any plans to tackle, say, the NSA 
scandal in the near future? Reed is doubtful. "Archer was always supposed to be 
totally detached from reality, which is why we set it in a vague time period," 
he explains. That's why the show contains both 60s-style decor and up-to-date 
gadgets. It's also why the primary villains are the KGB rather than al-Qaida or 
China. "But then US-Russian relations have really started to go downhill since 
Archer went on the air," notes Reed, chuckling. "Hopefully we haven't caused 
that. Hopefully there's not in a memo somewhere in the Kremlin saying, 'Get 
these jerks!'"

Archer returns on Mon, 11.20pm, 5★
 