
Micky Stewart, the first coach of the England cricket team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/england-cricket-team> who is now a sprightly 
81, did not much enjoy watching the Ashes drubbings in Perth and Sydney at 
first hand but he did allow himself a small chuckle every morning. "An hour 
before play on each day it looks like an invasion has taken place, with all the 
people on the park," Stewart said. "That's as it should be. Definitely a bit 
different to having a fag in the dressing room."

A contrast, also, to the situation Stewart inherited when he was appointed 
team manager for the Ashes tour of 1986-87. "I had a management team of one – 
Lawrie Brown, our physio," he said. "He was tremendous. He knew nothing about 
cricket [Brown, a Scot, had joined Lancashire having worked at Manchester 
United.] but he was great with people. If somebody was down and I was giving 
them stick, he'd be the one who put an arm around their shoulder."

Almost three decades on, and Andy Flower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andy-flower> had a nutritionist and a sports 
psychologist among his extensive support staff as team director on England's 
latest Ashes tour. Flower has now gone and the England and Wales Cricket Board 
has advertised for a head coach, who will be the eighth man to fill the 
position when he is appointed in April.

Before the 1986-87 Ashes trip under Stewart, the function of England's 
managers had been primarily administrative, althoughKen Barrington 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/england/content/player/9014.html> was highly 
valued as a coach despite his title as assistant manager on several tours. No 
one was sought to fill that breach after Barrington's death in the West Indies 
in early 1981 but five years later Australia appointed their former captain Bob 
Simpson to ease the load on Allan Border. After home series defeats by India 
and New Zealand in the summer of 1986, England decided to follow suit.

"I was interviewed, I think Raymond Illingworth was interviewed, and David 
Brown from Warwickshire," Stewart said. "The job came to me but I said if I got 
it my title would have to be team manager going to Australia in that winter of 
86-87, and not assistant manager as they wanted. I think they wanted to steer 
away from anything that sounded like football, because obviously they knew I'd 
got a background in football. [Stewart had played professionally for Charlton 
Athletic.] I felt very strongly about that because, as I saw it, the 
preparation of the side was vital."

Stewart had already been attempting to introduce more professionalism at 
Surrey in seven years as their team manager. "People knew my views. The England 
side and setup revolved around a group of four selectors who were elected 
annually. So there was no consistency, and secondly the domestic programme, 
with all the three-day games finishing on the Tuesday, meant players would 
arrive on the Tuesday evening for a net on the Wednesday, and the next day 
would be the [Test] match. Straight after the match on the following Tuesday 
they'd be off to their county for a game on the Wednesday, and so the treadmill 
began.

"It needed consistency of selection, and it needed proper preparation, if we 
were going to succeed at Test match level."

Stewart argues that West Indies were the trailblazers, when they recruited 
Dennis Waight <http://www.espncricinfo.com/blogs/content/story/619835.html> 
from Australian rugby league during the Kerry Packer's World Series. "West 
Indies had started it when Clive Lloyd was captain, from the physical point of 
view and the fielding point of view. At that point, while we had good players, 
as a team we were in Division Two."

After an excellent start, as the team who famously couldn't bat, bowl or field 
early in the tour retained the Ashes in what remained England's last series win 
in Australia until 2010-11, Stewart stayed in the post until 1992 – making him 
the most durable appointment to the role until England's first foreign coach, 
Duncan Fletcher, served from 1999-2007. Keith Fletcher (1992-95), Illingworth 
(1995-96) and David Lloyd (1996-99) had come in between.

Lloyd recounts that things had progressed sufficiently for him to inherit a 
coaching team from Illingworth – Peter Lever had worked with the bowlers on the 
previous winter's tour, and Graham Gooch with the batsmen. Having innovated 
regularly in his summers in charge at Lancashire, Lloyd brought in new fitness 
and conditioning specialists such as Dean Riddle and Wayne Morton, from British 
rugby league, to augment the cricketing nous of Gooch, Bob Cottam and Alan 
Knott.

It was managing the workload on the England players that remained one of 
Lloyd's greatest concerns. "At that stage in the late 90s, when [Lord] 
MacLaurin had come on board, we started talking about the central contracts," 
Lloyd said. "My point to the board then was that the players were managing us.

"Micky Stewart, Keith Fletcher, Raymond Illingworth had all tried to get more 
professionalism into it but the players were employed by the counties so there 
was a limit to what they could do. You'd have lads who couldn't physically get 
there a couple of days before the game because they'd been playing for their 
counties and had other things to do, collecting their kids or their dad, all 
sorts. There was no Team England. David Graveney was chairman of selectors and 
we had to go cap in hand to get lads rested.

"So that was the main difference, and it's evolved under Fletcher and Flower, 
so that now the coach seems to be the boss."

During his tenure, Lloyd had worked primarily with two captains, Mike Atherton 
and Alec Stewart. "At that time the captain ruled the roost, he was the boss 
really, and you were there to support him. So I wouldn't cross either of the 
captains I worked with, Athers or Stewart."

Nasser Hussain, Fletcher's first captain in 1999 after England appointed the 
Zimbabwean on the back of his work with Glamorgan, soon discovered that things 
would be very different. "I thought I would be starting off as the senior 
partner with the perceived upper hand in our relationship because I was the one 
who had played a lot of Test cricket," Hussain has recalled. "I thought he 
would be coming to me saying, 'What's he like?'. How wrong could I have been? I 
soon realised Duncan knew everything about everyone."

That description also rings true of Flower, who took on the new title of team 
director when he was appointed as the permanent successor to Peter Moores in 
April 2009, having originally taken charge on a challenging West Indies tour as 
caretaker coach. Shane Warne, of all people, led the praise not only for the 
appointment but also for the nomenclature.

"At international level, the coach shouldn't be coaching," Warne said. 
"Players don't need to hear about high left elbows and all that rubbish. 
Basically, you want a good communicator who creates an environment where 
players feel comfortable and can play their own way knowing they will get 
support."

Yet according to Stewart, Lloyd and Marcus Trescothick, who was a stalwart of 
Fletcher's England teams, hands-on coaching remained part of the job – as it 
clearly did under Flower, who continued to work closely with the batsmen.

"I worked really closely with Duncan improving my game, particularly against 
spin," Trescothick said. "He was a very good man manager too, in terms of 
getting players in the right frame of mind to do well. When him and Nasser 
started, the situation of the team was very different, and needed a bit more of 
a severe control. I've not played under a team director but I would say it's 
still more of a coaching setup – Duncan was heavily involved in net sessions, 
as I'm sure Andy Flower would have been."

Now the ECB would appear to have gone back to the future, advertising 
specifically for a head coach – although it has yet to stipulate how that will 
differ from Flower's previous role as team director. Lloyd is not convinced.

"I saw it more as playing at that level, they didn't need too much coaching. 
You'd have specialist coaches and you were more the overseer, like Andy Flower.

"Now I think it's developed again. My own views, and I've spoken privately to 
Michael Vaughan about this, are that we should have an England manager; in a 
nutshell like football. He employs the coaching staff and they select the team, 
there's no need for separate selectors. I'd see him being suited, not 
tracksuited.

"When I did the job, it was very much tracksuit – you'd go out nicking before 
play. Riddle said to me once, 'What are you doing, you should be sat up in the 
stand watching everything that's going on'. When you think about it, he was 
dead right. So I firmly believe it should evolve again."

Who's in line for the job?

Ashley Giles
The incumbent, and still the favourite, having been appointed as the one-day 
coach to work under Flower in September 2012. But the vacancy has cropped up 
earlier than England had envisaged, which might cause them to rethink their 
succession planning.

Peter Moores
Flower's predecessor, who was effectively driven out of his position in early 
2009 by Kevin Pietersen, a captain with whom he would never have chosen to 
work. Played a key role in developing the ECB's performance centre in 
Loughborough, and gets on well with Alastair Cook.

Tom Moody
One of the few overseas names originally linked with the job who has not 
subsequently ruled himself out (such as Gary Kirsten and Mickey Arthur), the 
tall Australian was seen as Flower's closest rival in 2009, and has since 
enhanced his coaching reputation.
 