
Music video director Emil Nava has worked with the likes of Jessie J, Tinchy 
Stryder, Ed Sheeran and Paloma Faith. Here he shares his experiences of a 
highly sought-after career, and gives advice on how to break into the industry.

What does your job involve on a day-to-day basis?

I write pitches for music videos and commercials, which involves coming up 
with an idea from a brief from the record label or a script from a commercial 
agency. I then work with some other members of the team to collect the right 
picture references for the idea so whoever I'm pitching to gets the idea 
visually.

If we win the pitch for the video, then we go into pre-production, and get 
into the full swing of making it. I could be choosing cameramen, casting, 
finding locations, working with the art department, working with a storyboard 
artist or meeting the clients. This is very full-on. It's all about making 
decisions and leading the team to deliver what the client wants — while making 
sure it's something I'm truly happy with artistically.

Then we have the shoot days, which are intense as there isn't much time and a 
lot to film. It is always stressful, but I try to make it as fun as possible 
for everyone. I try to have a lot of energy on set to keep the crew, artist, 
and the clients happy and ready for the long day.

The last stage is the post production, where it all calms down a bit and we 
focus on editing, CGI, sound and colour grading. There is a lot of time spent 
looking at monitors and crafting the piece into the final film.

Did you always want to be a music video director?

At school I actually wanted to be an actor, but I found out that at drama 
school you had to wear a leotard and sing and dance — that turned me off. So I 
left school at 16, did a cooking apprenticeship and worked in a kitchen for 
just over a year.

I really wanted to have a fall-back plan, as I knew there would be hard times 
in the industry and I might need another job – better to have something I 
enjoyed and was slightly skilled.

When I was about to turn 18, I started making tea and running on film sets. 
And that's when I decided that working on music videos was what I wanted to do.

What training did you have?

I didn't have any training. I always believed that hard work and learning with 
practical experience was how I wanted to tackle it. I have never been good with 
theory so being in the thick of it would be the best way for me to learn. 
Though if there was anything I would like to have trained in it would have been 
photography, as I would have liked to learned a bit about the technicals of 
camera and lighting.

How did you climb the ladder to get your current career?

My first experience on set was a music video for the girl group Mystique. I 
was working as a runner – making tea and helping all the departments. As I had 
come from the kitchen, where the work is really hard and at the bottom they 
work you to the bone, the film set seemed a lot less hard. I ran around getting 
involved and just wanted to help all departments to really learn.

I did this for about two-and-a-half years until I became an assistant 
director, where you manage the set and are the mouth and logistical side of the 
director. I also started making my own little videos and building my reel. 
After about six videos I started taking my showreel round to companies in 
London. I got signed at 23 to a company and the directing started. But it was 
still hard to get work as the competition is very stiff and there are a lot of 
people doing it. I moved company after a year and then the work really started 
picking up.

How did you get your big break?

I did a video for Tinchy Stryder's Take Me Back. I had been trying to make too 
complicated videos before then, but for this one I was pushed to do something 
simple and stylish.

It was low budget and urban. The song and video went really big and the song 
got to number three. The next one we did went to number one and things got 
really busy after that. But you need to keep getting breaks to keeping growing. 
I guess my next big one was with Jessie J: I did all of her videos bar one and 
it really elevated things.

What skills are important to the job?

The one skill you really need in this industry is people skills. You need to 
be good with your crew, the artists, the clients. It is all about working with 
people. Your team around you are so important and without them you can't make 
anything, so you have to be polite and engaging to get the best out of people. 
Being rude will get you nowhere. Who wants to work with someone who is not nice 
to work with?

I have never really liked the term networking, but it is great to meet people 
and try and further projects. People can be very inspiring.

What advice would you give people who want to work in the industry?

Keep making things and keep learning. Whether it is filming your friends, or 
making short films or music videos, it's good to keep making stuff. Every time 
you make something, you will learn more, develop your own style and find the 
route you want to take. The exposure you can create for yourself now with 
YouTube is huge and being able to just upload your work is great. If something 
you make goes viral its the best thing that could happen.

Emil Nava is a director with Pulse Films <http://www.pulsefilms.com/> and has 
recently directed a series of music videos for MasterCard's Priceless Remakes. 
He tweets@emilnava <https://twitter.com/emilnava> 

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 