
When I'm on tour, I feel less of a sense of season than I do in real life. It 
can be any time of year backstage or onstage. To remind myself that it's 
winter, I wander with my bandmates to the Munich Christkindlmarkt. Under our 
feet, the sycamore leaves are as clear and dry as the cold air. We cross the 
tram tracks to the ice rink at the foot of the grand Justizpalast building. 
Schlager Euro-beat propels Münchners politely clockwise around the ice. 
Toddlers learn to stay skating upright by pushing a plastic bear on skis.

There's a smell of smoke and spices in the air. Paul, our drummer, dribbles 
onion sauce from a Schweinenackensteak over his leather gloves. He gives me a 
bite of a corner and it's good - a pork-chop sandwich with a spicy and intense 
taste, like boar. I spot an odd couple of middle-aged women warming their hands 
on paper cones of chestnuts. One has a pink pom-pom that trembles as she 
laughs; the other is sour-faced in sable collar and cuffs. I grab a cone and 
crack them as we walk towards the Rathaus - the town hall -around which the 
wooden cabins of the market are clustered. One contains a couple of copper 
cauldrons brimming with Glühwein. Standing in a circle, we sip and blow clouds 
of cloves and cinnamon at each other and munch on Lebkuchen: soft gingerbread 
cakes sealed in a very thin wafer then dipped in chocolate and icing sugar. 
It's the same wafer that is used for communion and is wrapped around the cakes 
to preserve them through the winter.

The stall next door sells Nussknackers, the most elaborate nutcrackers I've 
ever seen. Like Chitty Chitty Bang Bang extras, a platoon of 
foot-and-a-half-tall wooden soldiers stand to attention with open, toothy 
mouths. Put a nut between their teeth, yank their arms and they'll spit out the 
cracked pieces for you. I'm still hungry and find more Munich street 
delicacies. Leber Kas is liver cheese and looks like a loaf of bread, but is 
really a baked pâté. A slice is tasty in a roll, covered in sticky sweet dark 
mustard. I follow it with a slab of Krustanbratan - pork crackling that looks 
like varnish under a heat gun.

Everything smells and feels like December should. A man with a face pink from 
the cold hides a smile under a huge curving moustache. His felt hunter's hat 
has a twig of mistletoe tucked into the brim. He has a beatific calm about him, 
as if he knows he has found the purpose of his life - standing in the Christmas 
cold, blue eyes twinkling as he warms Bavarian bellies with baked apples.

· Alex Kapranos is lead singer with Franz Ferdinand.
 