
Rail Link, the winner of last season's Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/prix-de-larc-de-triomphe>, was yesterday 
ruled out of this year's race. "The colt has suffered a tendon strain and will 
not run this year. A decision on his future will be announced shortly," said 
Teddy Grimthorpe, racing manager to Rail Link's owner, Khalid Abdullah.

Trained by Andre Fabre, Rail Link has not been seen since his defeat of Pride 
at Longchamp last October after suffering a setback during the winter, but 
connections had been hoping to get him back on the racecourse soon.

Rail Link has won five of his seven starts, including last year's Grand Prix 
de Paris. He had been 5-1 second favourite for the Arc, a position that has now 
been taken by Zambezi Sun, who carried the Abdullah colours to victory in last 
Saturday's Grand Prix de Paris at Longchamp.

Authorized remains Coral's 7-2 favourite for the Arc, but the Derby winner 
continues to be opposed in betting on the King George VI and Queen Elizabeth 
Stakes at Ascot on Saturday week. Peter Chapple-Hyam's colt is out to 9-4, from 
7-4, with Totesport, who make Dylan Thomas their new King George favourite.

"If money talks, we won't be seeing Authorized lining up at Ascot," said the 
firm's spokesman Damian Walker. "He's been friendless in the market and all the 
money has been for Dylan Thomas."

Chapple-Hyam, who was unavailable yesterday, expressed a willingness to run 
Authorized immediately after the colt's controversial defeat behind Notnowcato 
in the Coral-Eclipse at Sandown. The three-year-old looked to have a hard race, 
but his subsequent form at home suggests he has, in fact, taken his exertions 
well. In 1987, Derby winner Reference Point bounced back from defeat in the 
Eclipse to win the King George at Ascot.

Ron Cox's tip of the day

Officer 8.20 Sandown

Equipped with a visor for the first time, Officer can step up on his three 
outings to date on his handicap debut. Seventh behind Walking Talking over 
track and trip last time, Officer gets in on a handy mark and horses trained by 
Sir Michael Stoute can improve with a visor. Allegretto, Chord and then Duchess 
Royale last week were all recent Stoute winners visored for the first time.
 