
For all that she was once a keen student of gender studies, film director Lisa 
Cholodenko isn't much of a one for hand-wringing. Ask her about Hollywood and 
she looks you hard in the face and tells it like it is. Yes, it's plastic. Yes, 
it's sexist. But what is a girl to do? Moaning will you get nowhere. Besides, 
the simple truth is that she just does not have any particular desire to make, 
say, a film about an alien invasion, featuring laser guns, copious gloop and 
plastic body suits.

"You know, I get asked why there aren't more female directors all the time," 
she says. "I'm kind of reluctant to talk about it. That's not because I think 
the question is irrelevant or stupid. It's just that there are so many 
mitigating factors. Here, the dollar is the final frontier and it's men who are 
typically attracted to the kind of material that brings in the masses: comic 
books, thrillers, special effects. Women tend to be more interested in 
character, in psychology. Are there women out there who are rabid to make those 
[more macho] kind of movies? I don't know. Maybe. Maybe they just can't get 
into the system. But that's not at all my sense of what's happening."

When, last March, Kathryn Bigelow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/kathryn-bigelow> became the first woman to 
pick up a best director Oscar – she won for her tense Iraq drama,The Hurt Locker
 – Cholodenko felt only mildly pleased. "It was cool," she recalls. "I mean, 
I'm glad it went to her and not to James Cameron [forAvatar]; if that had 
happened, it would have been too weird. But, on the other hand, it felt so long 
overdue, the announcement itself was almost…dusty. I liked Kathryn's film. I 
liked that it was quite macho. But I still think that it's lopsided, the value 
we give to things. Why should a film have to have all thatstuff in it: the 
guns, the special effects? Why does a film like, say,Lost in Translation by 
Sofia Coppola get called 'petite'?

"Of course, this whole Oscar thing is so political. It's about how much a film 
grosses, and who's in it, and how well it has been promoted. But still, the 
more salient point is: do we value highly enough the aesthetic to which women 
are attracted? We valued it in the 70s, when films likeThe Graduate, Five Easy 
Pieces and Coming Home got made. But now? I don't think that we do."

Cholodenko's new movie, The Kids Are All Right, was made for just $4.5m. 
Extremely funny and replete with deft and touching performances, it has so far 
made about $21m at the box office. The American critics loved it and there is 
already talk thatAnnette Bening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/annette-bening> will receive an Oscar 
nomination for her role. Cholodenko says she would be disappointed, now, if the 
film was not to be nominated in some category or another. But is she hoping it 
will be her ticket to working for a big studio? Not even remotely.

The Kids Are All Right is about what happens when two children who were 
conceived by artificial insemination decide to bring their donor father (Mark 
Ruffalo) into their lives, and the lives of their lesbian mothers (played by 
Bening and Julianne Moore), and it is probably fair to say that no studio would 
have looked at the script twice given its subject matter. Cholodenko believes 
she can only make the movies she wants to make in the independent sector, 
though even there it's hardly easy.

"Oh, it was super-painful to get it made," she says. "Even after Annette and 
Julianne were attached, when it came down to people wanting to write a cheque… 
well, there were a lot of conversations, but they just never committed."

If, by some miracle, a studio had been involved, it isn't too hard to work out 
how much tweaking there would have been to Cholodenko's script. A joke about 
oral sex between two women? No thanks. We have audiences in the midwest to 
consider. A scene in which two women get off on watching male gay porn? Ditto. 
As for the film's ending… suffice to say thatThe Kids Are All Right does not 
have a Hollywood ending, at least not in the heterosexual sense of the term; 
Cholodenko would doubtless have been asked to rewrite it. "I wanted to make a 
film that was not sentimental, sanctimonious or apologetic; so did Annette and 
Julianne. So that's what we did. It is a political film, in the sense that it's 
saying: this marriage is as messy and flawed and complicated as any other 
marriage. I couldn't have done that anywhere other than in the independent 
sector."

A studio might also have been tempted to mess with casting. Hollywood is 
nothing if not obsessed with youth, though, alas, this passion extends only to 
female cast members (positively ancient men still get to play opposite women 
young enough to be their daughters; Bening is 52 and Moore is 49).

"I was painstaking about casting. I thought, if this isn't spot on, it isn't 
going to work. When I was talking to my casting director [about a particular 
actor], I would say, has she hadwork? And if they told me 'maybe', I would say, 
in that case, no. I wanted the film to say this is what a 52-year-old woman 
looks like and she's still sexy. It took me so long to cast. I mean, I didn't 
want to cast Kate Winslet. Who would buy that she had an 18-year-old daughter? 
And I like Helen Mirren, but she's just sointent on being older and sexy…

"The problem is that most of them [Hollywood actresses] have had work and it's 
just horrible! There's no way you can say that they don't look different. They 
don't even look younger – they just look weird. They say, oh, my eyes are 
drooping. But is it really any better to have them so high to your forehead?"

The shooting of The Kids Are All Right took just 23 days and Bening and Moore 
spent very little of that in make-up. "When the film was finished, Annette 
watched it with her husband [Warren Beatty] and a few other people. I was, 
like, for fuck's sake! I hope she isn't pissed. I hope she doesn't say, I 
didn't know you were shooting me like that, or, how dare you show my arms? But 
she just loved it. Bravo to her. She is so cool."

Cholodenko and her co-writer, Stuart Blumberg, began working on their script 
in 2004. But the delay in getting the film made wasn't only to do with the 
laborious process of financing. In 2006, Cholodenko and her partner, Wendy 
Melvoin, had a baby by a sperm donor themselves and though the project had by 
then been given the green light, she put work on hold while she was pregnant. 
The film, then, deals with something that Cholodenko might one day have to cope 
with herself, though unlike Nic and Jules, the characters in her film, 
Cholodenko did not use an anonymous donor. I had worried that she would want to 
separate her life and the film quite decisively, but she is delightfully 
straightforward when it comes to it.

"I think the loss of anonymity for all donors eventually [in the US, as in the 
UK, children can now trace their fathers when they reach 18] is great," she 
says. "I'm all for openness. It's not important for the parents. But it is for 
the kid. In the US, you can choose [initial] anonymity or you can choose to 
have an open donor. I feel sad when I talk to moms who are, like, 'Ugh! I don't 
want anything to do with that person.' Really? Because I don't think your kid 
is going to feel that way. They will want to feel complete, that their life is 
OK. I have a massive dossier on my donor, he has committed to being available 
one day, and I know, too, that my kid has half siblings and it's all much less 
sad. It's a modern world out there!"

All the same, doesn't the possibility of this man one day appearing on her 
doorstep make her feel anxious? In her film, Nic's world is turned upside down 
by the arrival of Paul. She doesn't think so.

"It's not that I'm more noble [than Nic]. I'm just trying to be mentally 
healthy about something that I do think is challenging. It's a fact of my life. 
I wanted to have a kid. We thought about all our options, different guys we 
knew. But we felt there wasn't anybody we wanted to build a family with. In any 
case, a friend, another person in the mix – that's really complicated.

"This was the safe way to go for us in terms of keeping the integrity of the 
family together. My son Calder is going to want to know that guy, but my sense 
is that the guy probably won't be living in the same city and is not going to 
want to have brunch with him every Sunday. It's going to be more, oh, I met my 
donor dad. There'll be a connection he can process."

That said, she concedes that, just as in her film, the absent parent is often 
seen as the more glamorous parent, simply by dint of the fact that he has not 
had to do all the hard parts of parenting; we only have to look at divorced 
couples to know this much. "Yeah, that is painful. Raising a teenager – that's 
where the work is, not just in donating your seed."

Did she always want to have children? "No, I didn't. But it became more and 
more of a drive in my thirties. I guess I'd thought about it when I was 
younger, and I said, in an offhand way, that I would do it somewhere down the 
road. But it was always the last thing I felt prepared to do. I had a nutty 
career. I was living in New York. Then I got to an age where my friends and 
sister were having children and I started to think I needed to orient myself 
towards a world where it could happen.

"So I came back to Los Angeles, where my family is, and then I met Wendy, and 
I guess I pushed the idea along because, by then, we were in our late thirties. 
But it is complicated. We both wanted to have a child [as Nic and Jules do in 
the film] and we both tried. We thought if we both get pregnant, well, that's a 
bit gnarly, but we can ride it out. If not, one of us will get pregnant and 
then, hopefully sooner rather than later, the other one will. The vision was 
always to have two kids. There were a couple of miscarriages and then I got 
pregnant with Calder and it stuck, and then – wow! – we were playing the odds 
game. We evaluated and we stopped. I'm sure it could have happened, but trying 
was painful and we began to think we would be better off with one kid."

I wonder if this experience unbalanced their relationship. In her movie, both 
women have had a child and this is important when their relationship is tested. 
Cholodenko doesn't deny that it is complicated. "One of you is pregnant and 
it's not even with your partner that you're getting pregnant by. You have to 
absorb a lot of tricky psycho realities.

"One thing that kept me grounded through it, and made me feel like it wouldn't 
become divisive, was that we both made finding Calder's donor our project. It 
was a Sunday. I was the logistics person, and I said we needed to pick someone 
else; I want to start trying again this month. We were going through the 
catalogue. We each went to our private spaces. I was in the bedroom, she was in 
the office. I walked in and I said, 'I found someone I think might be really 
good.' She said, 'I did too.' And it was the same person.

"In a certain way, this is really hard, but I also feel like we wouldn't have 
the kid that we have unless we were in it together. I've tried always to look 
at it on the metaphysical level." And are they now equal partners? "We have had 
to negotiate some things, like whose way of parenting is better. But 
emotionally investing in him, cooking for him and what not has never been the 
issue. Wendy has really stepped up and become a total mommie." She smiles. 
"It's quite something."

We meet at Chateau Marmont, the Hollywood hotel so beloved of the rich and 
famous – it was here, among many other events, that James Dean hopped through a 
window to audition forRebel Without a Cause – and, though it is a regular haunt 
of hers, Cholodenko looks almost as out of place as I do, not least because in 
this carb-free zone, she eats bread with her lunch. No wonder she seems still 
to be mildly surprised to be back in Los Angeles, a city she once wanted 
nothing more than to put behind her. Cholodenko had a comfortable suburban 
childhood in the Valley.

"When I was small, it was nice. There was space; you could run around until 
dark-thirty. But by the time I was a teenager, it had become… dystopian for me. 
It felt totally placid, it was without any refinement, it was isolating and, on 
top of everything else, I was coming out. In high school, I was having this 
mad, passionate romance. I felt very secretive about it and it was stressful 
because she was a year ahead of me and leaving to go to college. It was 
torture." Did her parents know? "They knew I was not into sharing, but after 
she left, I was pretty obviously bereft. I wasn't doing the best job of hiding 
it. My mother was, like, balls out. She just asked me, 'Are you in love with 
this girl?' I said that I was, and she asked if I would like a counsellor, and 
I did because I felt burdened. It was the 80s. It wasn't as accepted as now. 
They were very generous, very liberal. They wanted to make sure I was OK."

Leaving LA was a big deal. Cholodenko went to San Francisco State University, 
where she did a "crazy integrated major" that consisted of ethnic studies, 
women's studies and anthropology and became a teaching assistant to Angela 
Davis, the activist and academic (in the 1960s, Davis was associated with the 
Black Panthers; she was also famously tried and acquitted of suspected 
involvement with the 1970 abduction and murder of Judge Harold Haley in Marin 
County, California).

"I was a radical leftie liberal. I wasn't running around with a communist 
flag, but I was interested. It was exciting to be out of the box. LA is 
conventional to a hyper-real degree. It's plastic." All the while, however, her 
interest in film was growing, thanks largely to a flat-share with a woman who 
was on the university's film programme.

After San Francisco, she travelled to India and Nepal before winding up in 
Jerusalem, where she lived with her then girlfriend, who was considering 
becoming a rabbi. It was the time of the first intifada and Cholodenko worked 
for a lawyer in the justice department whose job it was to rebut the charges 
laid down in reports by the likes of Amnesty International. "It was 
interesting, but it was hard. As an American Jew, I feel protective of Israel, 
but it was horrible defending things I felt were basic human rights abuses." 
After 18 months, she returned to Los Angeles.

By now, she knew she wanted to make films, so she began working in editing 
rooms. Her first jobs were onBoyz n the Hood, starring Ice Cube, and Beeban 
Kidron'sUsed People. Encouraged, she applied to film school and, at Columbia 
University in New York, where she studied for her masters in screenwriting and 
directing, she was lucky enough to be mentored by the director Milos Forman (
One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest).

"I was developing my first film, High Art. I remember one incredible 
conversation at his apartment. He was smoking a cigar, I was smoking a 
cigarette, and he told me he loved my script. That was a huge thing for me. A 
shot in the arm."High Art, starring Ally Sheedy and Radha Mitchell, came out in 
1998. "Of course, it was a different time. It was the apex of the whole 
independent film movement that was happening in New York and it was infectious. 
You felt,I can do this. It was the era of Miramax. People were going out and 
making films at the weekend that would sell for millions of dollars."

It was thanks to her second film, Laurel Canyon, which came out in 2002 and 
starred Christian Bale and Kate Beckinsale, that she met her partner. Wendy 
Melvoin, the guitarist and singer-songwriter, is best known for her work in the 
80s with Prince's band, the Revolution, and for being one half of Wendy & Lisa, 
a collaboration with her former girlfriend, Lisa Coleman. "She got in touch 
because she and Lisa wanted to score the film. They kept calling. They were 
relentless. I was, like, leave me alone! I had no recollection of them, except 
as these girls who might have been black or Puerto Rican dancing behind Prince.

"But my editor told me to go and meet them. We had a great yack, but I figured 
they were married. In fact, they were no longer a couple. Wendy and I traded 
numbers and when I was finally done with New York after a decade, I found it in 
my wallet on the plane back to LA. I thought, I should call those nice 
lesbians. That might make me feel better. So I called and she came alone to 
pick me up for dinner and that was kind of it. We got together pretty quickly."

Cholodenko has no idea what she will work on next, though it is nice finally 
to be in a position where she is being sent scripts and ideas, so many, in 
fact, she feels almost paralysed by choice. "An embarrassment of riches," she 
says, with a grin. What she would really like to do is earn some money; this 
has not ever happened before. To that end, she has signed a two-year 
"housekeeping" deal with HBO where she will develop television projects. Is she 
really sure that she can't see herself doing some big studio picture? She 
shakes her head.

"It would be fascinating to have that many people see your work. But beyond 
that, I can't feel optimistic about it. I've never heard anything good about 
it. Only one out of every 20 films moves me anyway and I need to find something 
I care enough about to spend two years of my life on. You make a big sacrifice 
when you make a film. It's brutal in ways you wouldn't expect, and the only 
thing that makes it worth it is if you feel it is meaningful, stirring and 
moving to other people, but also to you."
 