
In February 1955, the music that would become known as rock'n'roll was still 
latent. Bill Haley and the Comets were in the pop top 20 with Dim, Dim the 
Lights. Elvis Presley had recently released his third Sun Records single, 
Milkcow Blues Boogie. Fats Domino was nearing breakthrough. It was there, in 
the clubs, on the jukeboxes, and on the R&B charts, but it was not yet named.

During that month, several men – and one woman in her mid-20s – were in a New 
Orleans studio trying to make a record. Producer Robert "Bumps" Blackwell knew 
the singer, the 22-year-old Little Richard (AKA Richard Wayne Penniman), was a 
star, but the music wasn't happening. Richard had already been through two 
record labels, RCA and Peacock. Time was running out.

After five so-so songs, they took a lunch break. Richard took over the piano 
and started hamming it up, pounding out his forte riff. As he later told his 
biographer, Charles White: "One song which would really tear the house down was 
Tutti Frutti. The lyrics were kind of vulgar: 'Tutti Frutti good booty – if it 
don't fit, don't force it/You can grease it, make it easy …'"

Richard was well aware of the song's risque connotations. Fascinated by all 
kinds of sex and – by his own account – a compulsive voyeur, he had 
immersed himself in the subterranean gay world of his native deep south, 
meeting along his travels legendary characters such as the eldritch rocker 
Esquerita (Steven Reeder) and the female impersonator Bobby Marchan.

Blackwell spotted a hit, and a record that finally caught the lightning- rod 
personality of the singer. The lyrics, however, were impossible: a flamboyant 
gay performer singing about anal sex was too much. He enlisted Dorothy La 
Bostrie, who was attending the session to watch Richard recording one of her 
songs, to write some new words on the spot. They then nailed it in three takes.

Released in October as Little Richard's debut on Speciality Records, Tutti 
Frutti – with its sensational and often disputed catchphrase, 
"Awopbopaloobopalopbamboom" – made the US pop top 20 in early 1956, surviving 
even the sales lost to Pat Boone's anodyne cover version. (The thought of the 
whiter-than-white Boone singing a song with these connotations is exquisitely 
ironic.)

Covered by Elvis Presley, Tutti Frutti catapulted Richard into the front rank 
of the new movement. Over the next four years, he released a sequence of 
explosive records that were hits both in the US and the UK: Long Tall Sally, 
Rip It Up, Slippin' and Slidin', Lucille, Jenny Jenny, Keep A-knockin', Good 
Golly Miss Molly, Ooh My Soul – all holy writs of rock'n'roll.

In the UK, Richard was massive, partly thanks to his appearance in The Girl 
Can't Help It (1956) – the greatest rock'n'roll film ever – which he stole with 
his pompadour and his manic commitment to the big bad beat. Even after he 
temporarily quit pop music to become a preacher, in October 1957, his records 
still made the charts for a couple of years: Baby Face, Kansas City.

In retrospect, all the great founding rockers were extraordinary characters, 
but Richard was one of the wildest of them all. Jerry Lee Lewis might have been 
a force of nature, Gene Vincent a contorted street punk, but Richard combined 
camp, androgyny and the toughest, most monomaniac rock into a look, a feel and 
a sound that would have a massive influence in the decades to come.

In the early 60s, Richard – who had returned to the devil's music – toured 
with both the Beatles and the Stones. In 1962, he taught Paul McCartney his 
trademark holler, and McCartney repaid the debt with two of the Beatles' most 
ferocious covers, Kansas City/Hey-Hey-Hey-Hey! and Long Tall Sally – the song 
that closed their last-ever public live show in August 1966.

Richard's influence is immense and can be felt in performers as diverse as 
John Lennon, Sam Cooke, Smokey Robinson, Otis Redding, Mick Jagger, David 
Bowie, Elton John and Jimi Hendrix – the latter played with him during 1965 and 
cut a record that year, I Don't Know What You've Got But It's Got Me. Through 
Hendrix, there is the influence on performers such as Prince, among many others.

Now approaching his 80th birthday, Little Richard has seen his innovations 
become part of the mainstream. All the major stars – including Freddie Mercury 
and Michael Jackson – that have made androgyny and flamboyance part of their 
appeal owe him a debt. He embodies the original promise of rock: that the 
marginal, the weird and the outcast should have their place in the sun.
 