
The nightmare Andy Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> 
endured against Stanislas Wawrinka in the third round of the US Open two years 
ago ought to be a dim memory when they meet in the first round of the Olympic 
tournament next week, but thereafter in the tournament he has a demanding 
assignment.

That day at Flushing Meadows found the Scot at a low ebb, physically and 
spiritually, and the victorious Swiss on a high. However, both are in a 
different place now, Murray coming off a determined effort in the final of 
Wimbledon only three weeks ago against Roger Federer, while Wawrinka has 
struggled for consistency this year.

Overall he has lost to Murray six times in 10 meetings, including a gripping 
five-setter under the Wimbledon roof in 2009. But having risen steadily in the 
rankings after his New York success, Wawrinka has slipped to No26 in the world, 
roughly back to where he was in 2010.

Also, Murray has another reason to be confident, as the Great Britain team 
manager Paul Hutchins revealed: "Andy has been practising with Wawrinka all 
week, so they will certainly know each other well," he said. "It's a tough 
draw, but Andy is the seeded player and will be looking to do very well here. 
It's a tough draw for both players."

The threat of Wawrinka apart, todayThursday's draw was a challenging one for 
Murray, as is to be expected in a 64-player field, albeit one weakened by the 
withdrawal through injury of the world No3 and reigning Olympic champion Rafael 
Nadal.

While there are only 16 seeds with few hiding places, there might be a brief 
respite in the second round for Murray, against either Jarkko Nieminen or 
Somdev Devvarman. He beat Devvarman in the first round of the US Open last year 
then Nieminen while guarding a bad back in the second round at Roland Garros.

However, 16th seed Richard Gasquet lurks in the third round, with world No4 
Tomas Berdych, who has beaten Murray four times out of six, a likely 
quarter-final opponent, before a probable meeting with world No2 Novak Djokovic 
in the semis. That is as tough a path as Murray could have expected.

Then there is the prospect of revenge against Federer in the final. The new 
world No1 plays Alejandro Falla, the Colombian who nearly pulled off one of the 
great Wimbledon upsets when he took the first two sets off Federer in the first 
round in 2010. It would be surprising if the world No51 repeated that effort. 
The fourth seed David Ferrer, Juan Martín del Potro (eight) and John Isner (10) 
are in Federer's half of the draw, so nobody is getting a free ride in this 
tournament. The second seed Djokovic meets Fabio Fognini in the first round, 
with the fifth seed Jo-Wilfried Tsonga waiting in the quarters.

All the leading seeds should be available to take part in Friday's opening 
ceremony, given they will not be playing the following day. Warwinka has no 
choice; he is carrying the Swiss flag. Murray, Britain's only representative in 
the men's singles, will join his brother, Jamie, in the doubles, along with 
Ross Hutchins and Colin Fleming, all of whom who qualified by right.

Anne Keothavong <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anne-keothavong>, Elena 
Baltacha and late addition Heather Watson are in the women's singles, drawn in 
the first round against the former world No1 Caroline Wozniacki, Agnes Szavay 
and Silvia Soler-Espinosa respectively. A late injury withdrawal would get 
first reserve Laura Robson into the singles draw.

Robson and Watson are a wild-card entry in the doubles, but they face a 
daunting task against Angelique Kerber and Sabine Lisicki. Keothavong and 
Baltacha will face another German pair, Julia Görges and Anna-Lena Grönfeld.

In the men's doubles, Andy and Jamie Murray will play the Austrian pair Jürgen 
Melzer and Alexander Peya, while Fleming and Hutchins meet the Frenchmen 
Gasquet and Julien Benneteau.

The 16-team mixed doubles draw will be made on Tuesday, after entries have 
been finalised. Hutchins said: "Whoever plays will need a wild card I would 
imagine and we will go for two wild cards. Over the next few days we will sort 
out who those two pairs are and put them up to the InternationalTennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Federation, and I would imagine we 
would be strong candidates to get at least one."
 