
A pill that releases its medicine for two weeks after being swallowed is being 
hailed as a potential game-changer in drug treatment.

In future, similar forms of longterm oral drug delivery could put an end to 
regimens requiring numerous repeat doses, which may be missed or found too 
inconvenient.

The prototype capsule was tested with a malaria drug called ivermectin. Used 
in mass treatment campaigns, it could aid eventual elimination of the disease, 
say experts.

Long-acting pills could be especially helpful for elderly patients or those 
with mental conditions who often fail to follow prescription instructions.

Prof Robert Langer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/17/robert-langer-nanotechnology-pioneer-willy-wonka-revolutionising-medicine>
, a member of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) team that 
developed the pill in the US, said: “Until now, oral drugs would almost never 
last for more than a day. This really opens the door to ultra-long-lasting oral 
systems, which could have an effect on all kinds of diseases, such as 
Alzheimer’s, or mental health disorders.”

The pill has a star-shaped structure with six arms that can be folded inwards 
and encased in a smooth capsule. Drug molecules are loaded into the arms. After 
the capsule is swallowed, stomach acid dissolves its outer layer, allowing the 
arms to unfold and release their payload.

Once expanded, the “star” is large enough to stay in the stomach and resist 
being pushed further down the digestive tract. However, it is not so large that 
there is a risk of blockage. Eventually, the arms break off and the pieces are 
expelled naturally.

Tests in pigs showed that the pill could keep releasing its medicine in the 
stomach for two weeks. Future versions of the capsule are expected to provide 
even longer-lasting drug delivery, spanning a month or more.

Co-author Dr Giovanni Traverso, from Harvard Medical School, said: “We want to 
make it as easy as possible for people to take their medications over a 
sustained period of time. When patients have to remember to take a drug every 
day or multiple times a day, we start to see less and less adherence to the 
regimen. Being able to swallow a capsule once a week or once a month could 
change the way we think about delivering medications.”

A new US company spun off the research, Lyndra, is now developing the 
technology with a view to focusing on neuropsychiatric disorders, HIV, diabetes 
and epilepsy.

Dr Andrew Billinger, chief scientific officer at Lyndra, said longterm 
delivery of ivermectin using the pill could assist malaria elimination 
campaigns based on treating whole populations. “Getting patients to take 
medicine day after day after day is really challenging,” he added.

Andrew Boaden, senior policy officer at the Alzheimer’s Society, said: “Seven 
in 10 people with dementia have at least one other health condition such as 
diabetes or heart disease, which often means they are taking a cocktail of 
different drugs throughout the day.

“Innovations that allow treatments to be taken less frequently have the 
potential to help people with dementia avoid missing their medication and 
falling sick.

“It’s important to note that we don’t yet know whether this method could be 
used for specific medications and dementia treatments – this would require 
further testing.”

The research is reported in the journal Science Translational Medicine 
<http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/8/365/365ra157>.
 