
It took more than a year for a dogged Texan lawyer, Brent Coon, to get the 
formerBP <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bp> boss Lord Browne to answer 
questions on the legal record about the Texas City oil disaster. It turns out 
that the noble lord's knowledge of the tragedy was fuzzy, to say the least.

A transcript was made public this week of an hour-long deposition given by 
Browne about the notorious 2005 tragedy at BP's Texas City refinery 
<http://texascityexplosion.com/> in which a group of exhausted labourers 
overfilled a dilapidated vertical drum with chemicals, causing an explosion 
which showered burning liquid over accommodation trailers nearby. The blast 
shattered windows on houses three quarters of a mile away.

The most common phrase in the 76-page deposition? It's a toss-up between "I 
was not aware" and "I don't recall".

The fire, which killed 15 people and was America's worst industrial accident 
for a generation, took place on Browne's watch. The day after it happened, he 
flew straight to the plant to give a press conference in which he declared that 
it was the worst tragedy he had known in 38 years atBP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bp>.

"The full resources of BP will be made available to investigate the causes of 
this tragedy," Browne told local people. "There is no stone left unturned in 
making sure all events are investigated and remediation is done after the 
event."

Since then, all events have duly been investigated thoroughly – and the 
findings were often damning about BP's internal safety culture. But Browne 
seems to have stayed oddly detached from such revelations, even beforehis 
resignation in May last year for lying to a court about his personal life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2007/may/01/bp>.

While Browne was still in situ, the US Chemical Safety Board 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2007/mar/20/oilandpetrol.news> published 
its findings – which said three of the people involved in the accident had 
worked 12-hour shifts for more than 30 days on the trot.

"Warning signs of a possible disaster were present for several years, but 
company officials did not intervene effectively to prevent it," said the board, 
which found "organisational and safety deficiencies at all levels of BP 
corporation".

This is strong stuff – but Browne wasn't aware just how strong because he 
never bothered to read the report. In his deposition, he told Coon that its 
contents had been "described to me in a meeting", adding: "It was very, very 
long, I believe."

It was indeed quite long – 327 pages, to be precise. And it's clear that 
Browne has little grasp of the contents. When Coon asked him if he was aware 
that BP had been overworking staff at Texas City, Browne replied: "I wasn't 
aware of that at all."

Coon pressed on: "You were not aware that the person charged with operating 
the gauges that day had worked 30 days consecutively, 12 hours or longer 
shifts?" Browne answered: "No, I wasn't aware of that."

He obviously wasn't reading daily newspapers either – because The Times and 
The Guardian both reported this fairly crucial detail.

BP empanelled an independent body of its own to examine its safety culture, 
headed by the former US secretary of state James Baker. The veteran American 
politician wasn't entirely free of BP-related ties – Baker is a partner at a 
Houston law firm, Baker Botts, which has done work for BP and his Baker 
Institute think-tank had put BP's then head of refining, John Manzoni, in 
charge of an energy taskforce.

"I would imagine it's not possible to find anyone who has done nothing – who 
has done absolutely nothing with BP. The question is one of degree," Browne 
said in his deposition, defending the panel's independence.

In the event, Baker proved to be both independent and scathing, describing 
deficiencies in "process safety" at BP and finding a culture in which "serious 
deviations from safe operating practices" are tolerated.

Browne is a bit hazy on these findings too, though. He did at least read the 
Baker report but 13 months later, he couldn't recall much about it, telling 
Coon: "I am aware of – I can't recall, but I read the Baker panel report. I 
can't recall its content now. So I am aware – I was aware at one stage what was 
in that."

Oil is a dangerous business <https://www.theguardian.com/business/oil> and 
tragic accidents happen from time to time. But it's hard to overstate just how 
high feelings run in parts of America on the subject of Texas City, which 
countless reports have suggested was an avoidable tragedy. Browne got a taste 
of that anger at the end of his deposition, when he was handed an envelope from 
Eva Rowe, who lost her parents in the disaster. The envelope contained pictures 
taken in a morgue of the bodies of her mother and father.

According to the Houston Chronicle 
<http://www.chron.com/disp/story.mpl/nb/bay/news/5900904.html>, more than 4,000 
blast-related legal claims have arisen from the accident. BP has been working 
its way through them and after the settlement of a batch in mid-trial this 
week, just seven more are outstanding.

Coon, who has represented scores of injured victims and bereaved families, 
bowed out of the saga this week. He described it as "the most overwhelming case 
I've been this deeply involved in during my 20-year legal career".

Three years on, it's hard to escape the conclusion that the Texas City 
disaster remains a dark stain on BP's reputation and an ugly tarnish over 
Browne's legacy.
 