
To become a miners' MP in October 1978 was to enter parliament in a moment of 
calm in a decade marked by ferocious industrial conflict. Geoffrey Lofthouse, 
who has died aged 86, won the byelection at Castleford and Pontefract, West 
Yorkshire, following the death of the sitting MP, Joseph Harper. The wage 
restraint established by the Labour chancellor, Denis Healey, and the main 
union leaders was sticking, inflation falling, the International Monetary Fund 
seen off. Prime MinisterJames Callaghan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/mar/28/guardianobituaries.politics>'s 
attempt to push that restraint to breaking point was a year off. And in the 
coalfields, the militancy promoted by Arthur Scargill was dormant.

Lofthouse represented the miners devotedly. They were the key workforce of the 
constituency and he had been one himself, starting work at the Ackton Hall 
colliery in his native Featherstone at the age of 14. This had not stopped the 
National Union of Mineworkers (NUM) from seeking to impose its nominee when the 
seat fell vacant. Lofthouse's success in seeing him off was an act 
of disrespect that sparked a campaign to unseat him.

However, with a general election on the horizon in 1979, Lofthouse was tough 
and resourceful enough to get his local party sufficiently onside for him to be 
reselected from a shortlist of one. At that time, he was seen as a moderate, an 
impression underlined by his soft-spoken, gentle manner.

In the Commons, he quietly argued for every local and mining interest. In the 
course of achieving better compensation for the victims of emphysema, he 
introduced five bills. And he was a bitter critic of Margaret Thatcher's man at 
the National Coal Board (NCB), the Scottish-American Ian MacGregor, accusing 
him early on of planning a general assault and dismemberment of the industry.

Lofthouse belonged to a tradition that thought of the strike as a weapon best 
left hanging on the wall, but periodically pointed to in negotiations. He also 
believed in proper trade union procedures, which meant balloting the 
membership. When Scargill jumped that particular gun and initiated the 1984-85 
strike in response to the announcement of pit closures, miners' MPs and 
regional miners' leaders were left as the prisoners of solidarity while sharing 
an intense dislike of Thatcher and MacGregor.

Accordingly, Lofthouse bitterly criticised police tactics, which included 
having mounted men making cavalry charges. He also accused Thatcher's ministers 
and MacGregor's management team of trying to resist compromise and seek the 
unqualified victory that indeed they eventually achieved. In his view, the 
government had an essential ally in Scargill, president of the NUM from 1982, 
who rejected a compromise deal put forward by the colliery union Nacods, 
involving an independent review body for pit closures. This would have given 
the pitmen a victory on points, but it was felt to be impossible to criticise 
Scargill's folly without seeming to break faith with those whom he led into 
joblessness and debt.

Lofthouse, like many others in the mining world, was left a helpless spectator 
during the strike and a grieving seeker of mitigation afterwards. In 1985, 
after the end of the strike, he joined miners marching back to Prince's pit in 
his constituency.

A critic of further nuclear reactors, he attacked the government's readiness 
to import coal, the increased risk of injury in private pits and the weakening 
of safety regulations. It was a melancholy and depressing task for a decent man.

Lofthouse was the youngest of five children. When his father, a farm labourer, 
died in 1930, his mother and the children were evicted within two days. After 
attending schools in Featherstone, Geoffrey entered mining as a haulage hand, 
later serving as an NUM official.

In 1957 he went to Leeds Univeristy and gained a BA in political studies. 
When, in 1970, he became a personnel manager for the NCB, he moved to the 
clerical union Apex. He had been heavily engaged in local affairs, serving 
on Pontefract council (1962-74) with a year as mayor in 1967, and on Wakefield 
council (1974-79).

Lofthouse's personal life had been stricken at the end of the miners' strike 
by the death of his wife, Sarah. They had married in 1946, and had a daughter.

He was a deputy speaker of the Commons under Betty Boothroyd from 1992, 
knighted in 1995 and stood down at the 1997 election, after which he was 
elevated to the peerage as Baron Lofthouse of Pontefract. From 1998 he was 
a deputy speaker of the Lords. Mild, competent and steady, Lofthouse was 
ideally suited to the chair, ignoring its opportunities for personality 
excursions. In the less strident era of John Major's administration, it was 
easier for an MP from the coalfield to function in a non-partisan post.

A rugby league and cricket follower, he produced two autobiographies, A Very 
Miner MP (1986) and Coal Sack to Woolsack (1999). He kept his home in 
Pontefract at all times, and in recent years had campaigned against hospital 
closures with his successor as MP, Yvette Cooper.

• Geoffrey Lofthouse, Lord Lofthouse of Pontefract, politician, born 18 
December 1925; died 1 November 2012
 