
Cologne sets itself aside by the way they serve beer. In the rest of Germany 
it froths over the lips of heavy dimpled steins, like thick glass buckets with 
a handle on the side. Kölsch is served in a slender tumbler called a 
Kölsch-Stange that looks more like a test tube. I'm drinking with Parker, our 
sound engineer, on a bench outside the Pfaffen Brauerei on the corner of the 
cobbled Heumarkt. It's drizzling and full inside, so we look for somewhere else 
to eat.

The Brauhaus Sunner Im Walfisch is also full. The head waiter twirls the 
handles of his moustache, waving four plates of sausages and potato. "They came 
from Denmark. I am sorry." He squeezes us into a heaving bench below a 
wrought-iron two-headed Byzantine eagle clutching a light bulb in each claw.

We order a Kölsch Tower, three litres tall, like a beaker from a chemistry lab 
with a tap at the bottom. The three people sitting on our left like that we 
like Kölsch. "You like Kölsch?" Yes. This is very funny. They laugh with big 
Santa Claus ho-ho-hos. We order Kölsch Kaviar. It's a cold black pudding, rusty 
red with square flecks of white fat, mildly spicy and delicious on slices of 
onion and rye. The jolly Germans notice we're eating. "You like German food?" 
Yes. This is also very funny. Ho ho ho.

My Rhineland roast is intense: slices of beef with thick sticky raisin jus and 
potato dumplings that have the texture of large gnocchi. Parker has a pork 
knuckle - a large primal bone of oven-twisted meat and crackling, glued to the 
plate with potato mash that is more butter than potato.

Eating it is a physical activity. He carves with the serrated blade and slips. 
A ball of gristle ricochets from his plate, bounces off the table on to the 
floor. The jolly munchers explode. Guffaws of food bits and happy spittle rain 
through the air. "Fast Eddie!" Ho ho ho. "Fast Eddie!" We join in the laughter 
briefly. We don't get it. "Fast Eddie!" Yeah. Ho ho ho.

We pour another Kölsch and finish our food. They're still laughing, beaming at 
us as if we're going to be funny again. We're not. We talk about Parker's new 
digital mixing desk. Their mood sinks. They put their glum coats on. One turns 
back hopefully.

"Fast Eddie?"

Parker forces a smile.

"Fast Eddie." 

· The writer is the lead singer with Franz Ferdinand.
 