
Louis van Gaal has said Manchester United are in the market for a new 
full-back this month afterrevealing Ashley Young could be out for the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/22/manchester-united-ashley-young-groin-injury>
. Young has been playing full-back for United following injuries to Antonio 
Valencia, Marcos Rojo and Luke Shaw but pulled upduring the win against 
Liverpool last Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/17/liverpool-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
 with what his manager described as a severe groin injury.

“He must have an operation and you can never tell how quickly the player might 
return after that,” Van Gaal said. “First of all you have to see if the 
operation is a success, then you have to make a recovery and see if there is a 
reaction. It is not something that can be done in a month; it might take longer 
than that.”

Manchester United v Southampton: match preview
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/22/manchester-united-southampton-match-preview>
Van Gaal has promoted Cameron Borthwick-Jackson to the first team in recent 
weeks but feels he needs a more senior and experienced defender to slot in 
alongside Matteo Darmian. “I like to use young players when possible but the 
level ofManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> is high and it is 
difficult for youngsters to deliver what we ask of them all the time,” he said.

“They are still learning and developing. It is difficult for them to achieve 
consistency and that is why we are looking for replacements. It is not easy to 
find players good enough to fit in at Manchester United though. They must be of 
a certain quality because I do not want to buy players just for the sake of 
buying, and I do not want to bring in players as short-term solutions. I am 
only here for the short term but I shall always do everything with the club’s 
long-term future in mind. I want to sign the sort of player who will still be 
at Manchester United after I am gone but such players are not easy to locate.”

Danny Simpson credits Alex Ferguson for Leicester’s winning mentality
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/22/danny-simpson-leicester-city-alex-ferguson>
Asked whether United might have been interested in diverting Ashley Cole’s 
move from Italy to the United States, Van Gaal regarded the questioner with one 
of his most withering looks. “He has not played for a year, so that is a silly 
question,” he said.

Van Gaal is unwilling to discuss his personal plans for the future with the 
press, whom he accuses of trying to get him sacked during the club’s run of 
poor results around Christmas, though contrary to some reports this week he 
intends to see out his original three-year contract and expects to be in charge 
next season.

The possibility remains that Van Gaal could stay for longer, though that would 
depend on the level of success he could bring to the club. He was talking up 
United’s title chances after the victory at Anfield, yet in terms of the side’s 
performances on the pitch and position in the table that looks a long shot and 
Van Gaal is already beginning to sound more circumspect.

“Four clubs are above us and it will be difficult to get past them, but not 
impossible,” he said. “In various leagues you have seen this sort of thing 
happen before and at this stage we just have to believe we can do it. The first 
thing to do is start winning games and if you can keep doing that then you can 
start to put pressure on others.

“You also need luck to go on a long winning run and at the moment we have 
seven injuries, including four full-backs. I was hoping to have Phil Jones and 
Bastian Schweinsteiger back for the game against Southampton – unfortunately 
they will not be ready.”

At least United look a happier outfit than they did a month or so ago and by 
all accounts they enjoyed themselves at Anfield, with injured players mingling 
with the crowd, Wayne Rooney giving the half-time team talk and the rest of the 
side making a racket in the away dressing room after Rooney’s late goal 
delivered a welcome three points.

“That was good. I like it when players take responsibility on themselves,” Van 
Gaal said. “I have always encouraged my players to do that. As long as it is 
the right moment it helps the manager. What was a little bit crazy about 
Anfield was that I only mentioned it once in a press conference earlier in the 
week then suddenly at half-time it was happening.

“I have always said Wayne Rooney is not just important as a player but as a 
captain and he is now encouraging other players to follow his example.”
 