
Louis van Gaal still hopes Ángel Di María may stay at Manchester United, 
though the manager has no wish to keep any unhappy player so will allow the 
forward to be sold toParis Saint-Germain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain> should the deal suit.

At a meeting a few days ago Van Gaal told Di María that he believed the 
27-year-old should remain for at least another season in English football 
following last term’s disappointing showing.

Memphis Depay: I turned down Bayern Munich to join Manchester United
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/15/memphis-depay-bayern-munich-manchester-united-louis-van-gaal>
Yet Di María has become unsettled in Manchester and the Argentinian has 
informed Van Gaal that he and his wife are minded to leave. The manager, 
although reluctant to allow that, is targeting PSG’s Edinson Cavani, following 
the departure of Robin van Persie to Fenerbahce, so Di María’s situation could 
provide leverage.

If Di María remains unmoved in his desire to depart he could be used as part 
of any deal for Cavani, the 28-year-old Uruguayan who has often been asked to 
play out of position at PSG by Laurent Blanc to accommodate Zlatan Ibrahimovic.

If Di María were to stay at United it would constitute a surprise. Van Gaal is 
understanding of the player’s situation and respects that he is also concerned 
about his wife’s well-being. The Cheshire home they rented was the subject of 
an attempted break-in in March while the family were there. This caused them to 
relocate and is a factor in Di María considering his future.

Although Di María was also troubled by injury last year his erratic form was a 
disappointment considering he cost a British record £59.7m. After making his 
debut at Burnley on 30 August his beginning at the club was bright. There were 
three goals in the opening four starts from Di María. But he managed only one 
more strike all season for United – against Yeovil Town in an FA Cup tie. After 
being sent off in United’s 2-1 quarter-final defeat by Arsenal in the 
competition on 9 March, Di María struggled to regain a starting berth as Van 
Gaal discovered his strongest XI.

Following suspension for the dismissal he was left out of the starting line-up 
until the final outing of the season, the 0-0 draw at Hull City on 24 May. This 
meant Van Gaal did not consider him as vital for the key games against 
Liverpool, Manchester City and Chelsea, being limited to substitute appearances 
in all of these.

What is Manchester United's best XI?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/who-scored-blog/2015/jul/15/manchester-united-best-xi-schweinsteiger-schneiderlin-depay-darmian>
Di María is not with United on their pre-season tour of America as he is 
resting after his participation in the Copa América. Víctor Valdés did not make 
the journey either and Van Gaalhas revealed the Spaniard was left out for 
refusing to play for United’s second team, and will now be sold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/15/manchester-united-sell-victor-valdes-refusal-reserves>
.

David de Gea is with the travelling party even though his future remains 
unclear. Reports in Spain claim Real Madrid’s strategy may now be to wait and 
sign the goalkeeper on a free next summer.

De Gea’s contract expires then and, as he his refusing to sign a lucrative new 
deal worth at least £150,000 a week offered by United, the Spaniard could talk 
to any prospective foreign club from January.
 