
Ever taken the time on holiday to scan the couples sharing your bar or 
restaurant? There they are, in a setting that the brochure described as 
"perfect, idyllic, romantic", sat at their beachside candlelit tables in 
silence, unmoved, looking more miserable than they ever did eating a microwave 
dinner on a wet Tuesday back home. While gangs of women and men get drunk, 
flirt and treat the whole trip as "a laugh", couples are wont to whinge their 
way around the world: they find the aeroplane seats cramped; blame each other 
for forgetting the camera/snorkel/credit card; argue about the hotel. Seeing 
others around them having a great time just makes everything more unbearable.

The main problem with holidays with partners is that we take the outcome for 
granted. We believe that our holiday simply needs the right ingredients to make 
it romantic: a beach, a bit of culture, a good book, good food and some time 
together. But even a strong relationship, stripped of its habits and 
distractions, can become vulnerable in a far-off place. We subconsciously 
believe that our partners will turn into brochure models, the human equivalents 
of the tropical beach. But the experiences that couples go through abroad are 
likely to be new, unpredictable and intense, and when the real trip turns out 
to be way below the fantasy, well, you've got to blame someone. We are shocked 
when it happens, even though, deep down, we know that holidays with a partner 
can be a challenge.

"You'll be together 24 hours a day, sleeping badly, possibly eating badly, 
unable to speak the language, with nothing to do," a friend warned before I 
embarked on a train trip around eastern Europe with a new girlfriend. He was 
right. We felt constrained by each other and angry at sharing splendid cities, 
not to mention a five by five compartment, with such ill-chosen company. 
"Nothing to do", that dreamed-of empty time, became a gaping chasm of mutual 
contempt. The fact was, we hardly knew each other and all the little 
differences that normally seep out over months came raining down on us in days.

Knowing each other well isn't necessarily better. Sabine Siedenburg of 
goRomantic.com, a tour operator specialising in travel for couples, says that 
men and women often approach holidays differently. "A lot has to do with 
women's expectations and men not noticing the need to fulfil them. He may just 
want to chill and get away from work, while she sees the holiday as 'time 
together', to talk about dreams for the future."

Holidays are ripe for unearthing jealousies and frustrations, not to mention 
unflattering contrasts: ski instructors, surfers, lifeguards, aerobics 
teachers. Your own and your partner's imperfections are thrown into detestable 
relief by the gods and goddesses lounging by the pool.

Where, then, do you go? Siedenburg tips Barcelona as ideal for a short break: 
"Sun, the beach nearby, a city and lots to do. But if the holiday is about 
spicing up your life, the whole thing needs to build up to this. That means 
sitting in cafes and strolling, not ticking off the sights. Sightseeing makes 
couples tired and kills sex."

A word of warning, though, if you're already planning that trip to Barcelona: 
there's nothing less romantic than finding yourself surrounded by thousands of 
other couples trying to be romantic.
 