
So you thought Leonardo DiCaprio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/leonardodicaprio> and Tilda Swinton in an 
adaptation of Alex Garland's The Beach will make an odd couple. This is 
nothing. These movie couples make Chas & Di look as well matched as Chas & 
Dave: Charlotte Rampling and Max (Max Mon Amour). Domestic bliss with a 
chimpanzee. Even Jane Goodall never went this far.

Ice Cube and Elizabeth Hurley (Dangerous Ground)

My man Cube, the Dude with the William Hague ghetto cap, meets a foxy 
crack-smoking stripper ho' with skirts up to here from straight outta, er, 
Cheltenham in strange thriller set in Johannesburg.

Bud Cort and Ruth Gordon (Harold And Maude)

A couple with shared interests - they both love funerals and death. So what if 
Cort's a teenager and Gordon's 80? A refreshing change from all those Hollywood 
films that pretend starlets just naturally fall for facelifted 60-year-olds.

Steve Martin and a brain (The Man With Two Brains)

The perfect cerebral affair - there's no doubt Dr Hfuhruhurr has found his 
true love after dumping scum queen Kathleen Turner in the mud. The greatest 
platonic affair since Trevor Howard and Celia Johnson.

Arnold Schwarzenneger and Emma Thompson (Junior)

After this pairing, the idea of Arnie getting pregnant seemed relatively 
believable.

Clint Eastwood and Clyde (Every Which Way But Loose)

Clint's perfect partner at last - a cute redhead that drinks beer, flips the 
finger and doesn't have much to say. Sadly it all went sour when Clyde the 
orang-utan sued for ruining his career by putting him in the sequel, Any Old 
Pile Of Cack.

Boris Karloff and Elsa Lanchester (Bride Of Frankenstein)

The most disastrous first date ever. One look and Hollywood's most fabulous 
hairstyle let out a scream unmatched this side of ...

Fay Wray and Kong (King Kong)

Although, as Wray points out, Kong was only 12 inches tall, and it should have 
been him in her hand doing the shrieking and squealing.

Farrah Fawcett and a robot (Saturn 3)

The robot gets its circuitry in a twist over Charlie's girl. Her other partner 
in the film is Kirk Douglas, so it's a close thing which is least likely.Rock 
Hudson and Doris Day (Pillow Talk and similar). Only in retrospect of course, 
but no wonder she stayed a virgin for so long.

Kenneth More and Jayne Mansfield (Sheriff Of Fractured Jaw)

Our primary overgrown boy scout and the B movie sex bomb? In a Western? Jayne 
must have forgotten to say "Ask my agent".

Jack Lemmon and Joe E Brown (Some Like It Hot)

Perfect rhumba partners, moonlight trysts on a yacht. Could anything go wrong? 
Oh, well. Nobody's perfect.
 