
Luke Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/media/lukejohnson>, the outgoing 
chairman of Channel 4, is to help choose the broadcaster's chief executive.

Though Johnson is leaving on 31 January to make way for Lord Burns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/lord-burns>, the former Treasury permanent 
secretary and Abbey National chairman, he will be part of the panel 
interviewing candidates for the post next week.

Channel 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> confirmed Johnson would 
play a part, but it is not known how much of a say he will have – the key 
relationship will be between Burns and Duncan's successor.

Two new candidates understood to have made it to the short list are Alex 
Graham, who is the founder of the independent producer Wall to Wall and a 
former chairman of industry body Pact and David Abraham, the low-profile chief 
executive officer of UKTV, who led the rebranding of digital channel Dave. They 
join Kevin Lygo, the Channel 4 director of television and content; Caroline 
Thomson, the chief operating officer of the BBC; and Lorraine Heggessey, the 
chief executive of Talkback Thames and former controller of BBC1, asreported by 
MediaGuardian.co.uk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/dec/24/channel-4-chief-executive-frontrunners>
.

The Channel 4 panel at this stage is not believed to have approached Peter 
Fincham, and nor is Fincham thought to have applied. Other qualified 
candidates, such as Roly Keating – the former controller of BBC2 who is now in 
charge of the BBC digital archive – are also not thought to be in the picture. 
But there may be dark horse candidates in the running.

After Burns was appointed in November by Ofcom, the regulator immediately 
parachuted him on to the Channel 4 board and gave him the task of overseeing 
the appointment of a replacement forAndy Duncan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andyduncan>, who left in November with a 
handsome pay-off.

But Johnson had already started the selection process, telling the Cambridge 
Broadcasting Convention in September that the new chief executive must have a 
strong grasp of digital media developments.

Others on the interview panel include the Channel 4 deputy chairman, Lord 
Puttnam – who is thought not to see eye to eye with Johnson – and board members 
Tony Hall, the chief executive of the Royal Opera House, and Martha Lane Fox, 
founder of lastminute.com and government digital inclusion champion.

A key issue for Channel 4's new chairman is how much change the buffeted 
broadcaster can handle, whether the chief executive needs to be an outstanding 
creative leader, and how much the advertising model needs to be shaken up.

Lygo, as an internal candidate, stands for a degree of continuity, and would 
plot a future for Channel 4 as a standalone commercial public service channel. 
This would mean no more begging for handouts or for a subsidised deal with BBC 
Worldwide – hopes of such a partnership are said now to be have been dashed.

Channel 4 has never in its 28-year history appointed a chief executive from 
its ranks, turning to the BBC for talent since its founder Sir Jeremy Isaacs 
quit in 1987.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 