
Luke Brattan and Tommy Oar are among seven new faces in an extended 30-man 
squad named by Socceroos coach Ange Postecoglou for next month’sWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> qualifier against 
Thailand.


All 23 players who were part of the squad that drew with Saudi Arabia and 
Japan have been recalled, along with Brattan, Oar, Josh Risdon, Jason Geria and 
overseas-based trio Nathan Burns, Milos Degenek and Aziz Behich.


Sydney FC 'ignored' by FFA with Melbourne City to host cup final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/26/sydney-fc-ignored-by-ffa-with-melbourne-city-to-host-cup-final>
Postecoglou will trim the squad back to 23 after watching this weekend’s 
matches, effectively challenging the seven new faces to show why they deserve 
to survive the cut.


“We have players who are in the squad or on the fringe, including those 
playing in the A-League, that are just starting their seasons and with the 
tight turnaround from Japan to Thailand I wanted to have another look at them 
after they have showed good signs in the opening rounds,” Postecoglou said.


“It is yet another good sign of the depth we are creating and when we announce 
the team after this weekend there will be players who miss out that are playing 
well enough to be part of the squad.”


Brattan, who was part of a Socceroos camp last year but failed to win a cap, 
has made a strong start to the A-League season with new club Melbourne City 
while Brisbane Roar winger Oar has not made a national team appearance for 
nearly 12 months.


The duo are among five A-League players in the squad, along with Perth Glory’s 
Josh Risdon, Melbourne Victory’s Jason Geria and City’s marquee star Tim 
Cahill. Risdon, Geria and Degenek all play at right-back, which has recently 
emerged as a problem position forAustralia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia>.

The inclusion of Burns, who was left out of the last Socceroos squad, comes as 
no surprise after Postecoglou name checked him earlier this month as one of few 
players capable of challenging Mathew Leckie and Robbie Kruse for a wing spot.


Left-sided defender Behich, meanwhile, is in line for his first Socceroos 
involvement since last year’s 2-1 win in Kyrgystan.


The Socceroos are second in Group B and cannot afford to slip up against a 
winless Thailand, whose chances of World Cup qualification for Russia 2018 
appear shot.


The clash in Bangkok will proceed as planned despite the recent death of 
Thailand’s king, although supporters have been asked to treat the match as a 
solemn occasion.


“We will be in Bangkok for a longer than usual period as we only have one 
match in this window so we will have a good lead in to ensure we are well 
prepared,” Postecoglou said.


Australia: Aziz Behich, Luke Brattan, Nathan Burns, Tim Cahill, Milos Degenek, 
Adam Federici, Jason Geria, Alex Gersbach, Apostolos Giannou, Craig Goodwin, 
Chris Ikonomidis, Jackson Irvine, Mile Jedinak, James Jeggo, Tomi Juric, Robbie 
Kruse, Mitchell Langerak, Mathew Leckie, Massimo Luongo, Ryan McGowan, Mark 
Milligan, Aaron Mooy, Tommy Oar, Josh Risdon, Tommy Rogic, Mathew Ryan, Trent 
Sainsbury, Brad Smith, Matthew Spiranovic, Bailey Wright.
 