
Luna Rossa have pulled out of the America’s Cup after teams voted to reduce 
the size of boats to be sailed in the 2017 regatta in Bermuda.

The event’s organisers said a majority of teams favoured the move from 62ft 
(19m) catamarans to 48ft (14.65m) boats, with the change being pushed through 
only after voting rules were amended, to the fury of the Italian team

The change needed unanimous consent but the organisers, led by the two-times 
defending champions Oracle Team USA, said last week they had agreed with the 
other squads to amend the rule to change the boat size with a majority vote.

Luna Rossa, who are backed by the fashion house Prada, said: “Team Luna Rossa 
indeed considers illegitimate the procedure adopted and founded on an evident 
abuse of process by surreptitious use of procedures to modify the protocol in 
order to overturn the class rule, which instead requires the unanimity of the 
teams entered.

“This is an attempt to introduce boats that are substantially monotypes and in 
total contrast with the ultra-centennial tradition of the America’s Cup, not to 
mention a two-month extension period to introduce further modifications to the 
rules, decided by the majority.”

The rule change was passed despite Luna Rossa saying they would be obliged to 
withdraw if the boats were downsized. Team New Zealand supported the Italians.

While the downsizing was considered a cost-cutting move, Luna Rossa were 
believed to be at an advanced stage in their development of a larger boat.

“This radical change also implies a waste of important resources already 
invested based on the rules that were sanctioned in June last year,” Luna Rossa 
said. “Luna Rossa frequently advanced proposals aimed at containing costs that, 
however, would not have changed the nature of the boats, but these proposals 
have systematically been rejected by the defender.”

It is not the first time Luna Rossa have followed through on a threat. In July 
2013, they sat out the opening race of the challenger trials on San Francisco 
Bay to protest rules changes, leaving organisers with the embarrassing scenario 
of Team New Zealand sailing around the course alone.

“Sometimes it is necessary to make decisions that are painful but must be 
clear-cut,” the team’s principal, Patrizio Bertelli, said. “As only these can 
make everybody aware of the drifts of the system and therefore set the basis 
for the future: respect of legality and sportsmanship.”

Luna Rossa said they would honour all of their contractual obligations to team 
members. “I want to thank the whole team for its hard work during this past 
year,” Bertelli said. “Regretfully, this effort has been frustrated by this 
manoeuvre that is unprecedented in the history of the America’s Cup.

Their withdrawal could also put in jeopardy the opening event of this year’s 
America’s Cup World Series, scheduled for Cagliari, Sardinia, in June.
 