
Jasper Conran is picking broad beans from his well-stocked kitchen garden. His 
aunt, Priscilla Carluccio, is helping. Actually, they are busy bossing each 
other around. They do this a lot. There's a lot of banter involved with Jasper, 
and Priscilla can give as good as she gets.

They are the first beans of the season, still small and tender, and Jasper 
wants to eat them raw. Buster the dog wisely keeps out of the way, happily 
gnawing on his Gucci bone. Aidan, Jasper's Man Friday, who has just arrived 
with a stack of freshly laundered shirts for Jasper, is hauled in to help. He 
seems a little reluctant. Being at Jasper's beck and call must be quite tiring.

Back in the kitchen, Antonio Carluccio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/antonio-carluccio> is sitting at one 
end of the huge old table, peeling asparagus. We are in Suffolk, where 
asparagus is sprouting all around, but he is using white asparagus, flown in 
from Italy. 'To avoid any colouring, it is cultivated in tunnels, in sandy 
soil. They cut it with a special knife and pull it out of the ground before it 
has contact with air,' he explains. This stops it turning violet. It will be 
served with melted butter and grated Parmesan 'for a little flavour'. Carluccio 
looks quite at home, his huge hands carving away, while he surveys the rest of 
the ingredients. Lunch will be eight courses, each sounding more mouth-watering 
than the next. Jasper's pals, the fashion legend Mary Quant and the 
entrepreneur Ivan Massow are the guests.

Massow arrived the night before, and is roaming around the grounds of Jasper's 
magnificent country home, pretending to read a book. He points apologetically 
to the cover - Snobs: A Novel, by Julian Fellowes, the scriptwriter for Gosford 
Park.

The house, Jasper tells me, has been adapted over the years. It is essentially 
a mix of medieval and Elizabethan, but has been continuously inhabited since 
1070. The moat (yes, it has a moat, complete with a rowing boat that Jasper 
likes to tootle about in) is 10th-century. It is an extraordinary place, quite 
the most beautiful, idyllic house you could imagine. The chimneys all lean in 
different directions, and the old-fashioned roses ramble over the walls. 'It 
just grabbed me when I saw it,' says Jasper. 'It's not at all what I was 
looking for. I wanted something Queen Anne. He breathes in contentedly. 'It's 
wonderful here. In the morning and evening there's the sound of birdsong.' In 
between, there is hardly any other noise at all.

This is Jasper Conran's bolt hole, his refuge from London and a business that 
spans his fashion collection, his hugely successful J line for Debenhams and 
his work for Waterford Crystal and Wedgwood. The tableware has been such a hit 
that he has designed new ranges for baking and breakfast, to be launched soon. 
He bought the house two years ago and has been in love with it ever since. 
'When I'm in London, all I think about is my house and garden, and will the 
beans be ready? I've always wanted a kitchen garden.'

His father, Sir Terence Conran, is of course no stranger to a row of beans. 
'I've seen it in my father's house and, yes, I aspire to that.' Now they 
compare notes on their fruit and veg and bond over the season's harvest. 'We 
ring each other and gloat. It's really grown into a very loving friendship - 
which is probably about time at 44! But you have to be rebellious and cross for 
as long as possible.'

As well as the vegetables, Jasper is justly proud of his flower garden - a 
symmetrical series of herbaceous borders which are brimming with huge, 
frilly-edged poppies, lofty lupins and irises so dark and satu rated with 
colour they look as though they have been dipped in ink. Forget Milan, Paris 
and New York: given the option, he likes nothing better than an afternoon 
dead-heading the flowers. Or sprinkling lupin seeds around the country lanes 
near by. 'I have an alter ego,' he tells me. 'She's 78 and a bit ditzy.'

The doorbell rings and Aidan pops his head out through the medieval porch to 
announce that Mary Quant has arrived. She's wearing a tweedy fishing hat over 
her trademark bob. Jasper takes her off on a guided tour of the gardens. 'Well, 
f*** France, Jasper!' she explodes. 'This is unbelievable.' Later, she explains 
that both she and Jasper (who she says she has known 'forever') have been in 
love with south-west France for years, and have farmhouses 40 minutes' drive 
apart. 'When I saw this beautiful palace I realised it was the end of his love 
affair with France.' Her howl was in response to the fact that she knew she 
wouldn't be seeing much of him there this summer.

Although Jasper is wearing an apron, he hasn't done more than pick the beans 
and open a bottle of champagne (a favourite tipple before lunch, or indeed at 
almost any time, day or night). He says he likes to cook Italian food but today 
thought it would be better to leave it to the master himself, his uncle Antonio 
Carluccio.

Antonio and Priscilla have been busy fetching bags from the car. Despite the 
multiple courses, Antonio seems impossibly calm, partly because he has done a 
lot of preparation in advance, and partly because one of his chefs from the 
Neal Street Restaurant arrived this morning to help out. The lamb is cooking in 
the Aga; the plin (which Priscilla tells me means 'pinched') - little pasta 
parcels filled with meat - are all lined up and ready to go; and all that's 
left to make is the peaches in wine. In between showing me the artichokes that 
have been stuffed with breadcrumbs, parsley, capers and a little milk and 
cooked in oil until meltingly tender, Antonio even has time to tinkle the 
ivories on the grand piano in the music room.

Outside, the table is being laid - quite casually, as the name of Jasper's 
Wedgwood plates (Jasper Conran Casual) suggests - and everyone is getting a 
little restless. Ivan even attempts to make himself a piece of toast to stave 
off the hunger. And then the food begins to appear: the artichokes, with the 
glorious addition of plump, pink prawns, flown in from Sicily; pickled 
mushrooms, and cold melon soup with Parma ham.

Mary is having a fine old time. She punctuates each mouthful of food with 
appreciative grunts and groans. She pops one of the plin, served simply with a 
grating of white truffle, into her mouth. 'The taste, the texture, the smell!' 
she sighs in ecstasy. 'It's orgasmic - one of the most amazing things I've ever 
eaten.'

Meanwhile, a heated debate erupts between Ivan and Priscilla about GM food. He 
is for and she is against. 'It's quaint Luddism,' says Ivan, arguing that GM is 
necessary if we are to feed the world. He might as well have stepped into a 
bullring and waved a red flag. Priscilla is on a roll. 'There is adequate food 
in India. The grain goes bad because of poor distribution.' Jasper is on his 
aunt's side. 'I see the future of farming in this country as being organic,' he 
declares. 'The fields should get smaller and the hedges fatter.'

Ivan and the rest of the party agree to differ and as the lamb is served, the 
conversation turns to Mary's son's wedding, the joys of grandchildren (Mary has 
recently acquired two in quick succession), email versus letter writing, and 
the fact that Jasper's mother made him walk in heels. After the peaches in 
wine, Mary has another When Harry Met Sally moment when Antonio encourages her 
to dip her cantucci into her glass of dessert wine. 'Pure honey,' she purrs.

Happy, Antonio ambles off to try out the hammock. Within minutes, he is snor 
ing. Just to finish everyone off, grappa is served. Ivan has to leave to catch 
a train back to London and a peaceful calm hangs over the table. 'That was one 
of the most memorable, delicious meals,' says Mary. 'Good food is as good as 
really good sex. Slightly different, but as good.'

It's late afternoon and the birds are starting to sing. 'You get that bliss 
moment here,' says Jasper. 'I sometimes get very overwhelmed.' And, with the 
combination of the magical house, the fragrant gardens, the champagne and 
wines, the delicious food, not to mention the heady fumes of the grappa, it's 
really not at all surprising.

Recipes

Sicilian imperial prawns

serves 6


18 prawns

olive oil

lemon juice


Peel off the hard scale on the body of the prawns, leaving the head and tail 
intact, then immerse them in salted boiling water for three to four minutes. 
Drain then, toss them in olive oil and sprinkle them with lemon juice. Serve 
with the stuffed artichokes, below.

Artichoke alla Romana

serves 4-6


8-12 (depending on size) young, fresh artichokes, firm to the touch

juice of 1 lemon

4 tbsp fresh breadcrumbs

2-3 free-range egg yolks

4 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil

4-5 fresh mint leaves, shredded

10 salted capers, desalted in water

30g freshly grated Parmesan cheese

olive oil for cooking

salt and pepper


Cut the top and bottom of the artichokes and discard the tough outer leaves 
until you reach the tender ones. Beat the artichokes gently with your hand so 
that they open just enough for you to see if there is any choke. If there is, 
it should be removed with a melon baller, although if it is very small, then 
it's probably tender enough and can be eaten. Squeeze lemon juice over the cut 
edges or immerse in the acidulated water.

Mix together the breadcrumbs, egg yolks, extra-virgin olive oil, mint, capers 
and Parmesan to obtain a soft mixture, using a little water if necessary. Add 
salt and pepper to taste, then use this to fill the cavities of the artichokes. 
Put them in a shallow pan, big enough to fit them all in tightly together. 
Cover with olive oil and cook very gently with a lid on for 20-30 minutes, 
depending on the size, without letting the oil bubble.

To test if they artichokes are tender enough to eat, just put a knife into the 
side of one, and if it penetrates easily, it means they are cooked. You can eat 
them hot or cold. You can use the superfluous oil for another meal.

Panna cotta with raspberry salsina

serves 4-6


1 leaf of gelatine

500ml single cream

45g caster sugar

seeds of 1 vanilla pod

1 tsp vanilla essence

1 tbsp dark rum

150g fresh raspberries

2 tbsp caster sugar

juice of half a lemon


Soak the gelatine leaf in a little cold water until soft. In a heavy-based 
pan, mix the cream with the sugar and vanilla pod, essence and rum. Bring to 
the boil, take off the heat and add the soaked gelatine and the rum. Stir well 
until the gelatine has dissolved. Pass through a fine sieve and pour into four 
or six dariole moulds, putting into the refrigerator to set.

Put the raspberries (save some for decoration) in a little pan, add sugar and 
lemon and cook gently until all dissolved. Cool and serve in a little pool in a 
plate. Position the panna cotta on top and decorate with a raspberry.

Agnolotti del plin


For the Agnolotti del plin, as ravioli are called in Piedmont, I need the help 
of Andrea, my chef at the Neal Street Restaurant.

serves 4-6 (a dozen per person) 

60g roasted pork

60g roasted veal

60g mortadella

60g fresh luganica pork sausage

1 small onion, finely chopped

2 stems of celery

1 carrot, finely diced

a few leaves of black cabbage and/or outer leaves of a Savoy cabbage, all 
finely cubed and chopped

3 tbsp olive oil

50g freshly grated Parmesan

1 whole beaten egg


for the dough:


300g double flour

2 whole eggs

a little water

60g butter

50g freshly grated Parmesan

few drops of truffle oil - Carluccio's, naturally!

60g summer truffle, very thinly sliced


Start by making the dough. Mix the flour with the eggs and, eventually, a 
little water. Work the dough quite well, either with your hands or in a 
machine. It needs to be smooth and elastic - the same feeling you get when you 
pinch a young person's bottom!

Wrap the dough in foil and rest it for a couple of hours. Meanwhile, if you 
have not already roasted the pork and veal, start from scratch by putting the 
onions, celery, carrots and black cabbage into a casserole with a little olive 
oil and water, and letting it become soft. In another casserole, put the 
luganica sausage, free of skin and reduced to crumbs, and a little oil and fry 
until it starts to brown. Add the coarsely chopped pork and veal and a little 
salt and pepper and fry gently until it too becomes brown.

Add a little of the liquid from the vegetables to the meat and let it simmer 
for between five and 10 minutes on a moderate heat. Now add the mortadella and 
process to obtain a soft, but not too wet, mixture. Taste for salt and pepper 
and add the Parmesan and egg.

Now go back to the dough and flatten it a little to obtain a thin band of 
pasta, 1ft long and 1.5" wide. It now requires a little skill to put small 
amounts of the filling in the middle of the pasta band, an inch apart. Wet the 
borders of the pasta with water so they become sticky. Pinch together the two 
sides of the pasta, then cut between the agnolotti and pinch together the sides 
as well, to create a sealed little pocket. Sprinkle with flour so they don't 
stick together and place on a clean cloth.

Bring the water to the boil - 1 litre per 100g of pasta and 10g of salt per 
litre. When it is boiling, add the pasta. If it's fresh, it will cook in five 
to six minutes. Put the butter and a few drops of truffle oil (no more or the 
flavour will become too intense) into a pan. Scoop in the agnolotti and add the 
Parmesan cheese. Toss a couple of times and serve with a few slices of summer 
truffle.

Should you be too afraid to make the ravioli, then buy some of good quality, 
but the result will be totally different.

Roast baby lamb

serves 8-10


2 legs of good new Welsh lamb

olive oil

3 bulbs of garlic, unpeeled

rosemary

450g new potatoes

a dozen new red onions

a large bunch of peeled white asparagus

melted butter

grated Parmesan cheese

salt and pepper


Sear the legs of lamb on each side, then pat with the salt, olive oil and put 
into the oven (around 180 c/gas 4 or 5) for one and a half hours with the 
garlic and rosemary twigs.

Quickly boil the new potatoes, cut the new red onions and toss them all with 
the leftover olive oil from the artichokes, add salt and lots of pepper and put 
into the oven for an hour (temperature as above). Boil the white asparagus for 
20 minutes in salty water, then serve with a little melted butter and a little 
freshly grated Parmesan cheese on the tips.

· For Antonio Carluccio's Neal Street restaurant and Carluccio's Caffés visit 
www.carluccios.com <http://www.carluccios.com>
 