
In another time, another place, Sai Ram might have escaped serious harm. But 
he died in great pain last week, a casualty of a bitter, barely reported 
conflict that still claims many lives every year.

Ram, 15, was a goatherd in a village in the poor eastern Indian state of 
Bihar. He was a Dalit, from the lowest rung of the caste hierarchy that still 
defines the lives, and sometimes the deaths, of millions of people in the 
emerging economic power.

His alleged killer, currently being held by local police, is from a higher 
landowning caste. He took offence when one of the teenager’s goats strayed on 
to his paddy field and grazed on his crops. Ram was overpowered by the 
landowner and a group of other men. He was badly beaten.

Then petrol was poured over him and lit, Ram’s father, Jiut Ram, said. “He was 
crying for help, then went silent,” the 50-year-old daily wage labourer told 
the Guardian.

The incident took place at Mohanpur village, about 125 miles (200km) 
south-west of Bihar’s capital, Patna, in an area known for caste tensions. It 
was the latest in a series of violent incidents that have once again 
highlighted the problems and discrimination linked to caste, particularly in 
lawless and impoverished rural areas.

Earlier this month, five Dalit women were allegedly gang-raped by upper-caste 
men in central Bihar’s Bhojpur district. In September, hundreds of Dalit 
families were forced from their homes in two other districts of Bihar after a 
man from the community tried to contest a local election against higher caste 
candidates.

Several political, social and economic factors usually lie behind such 
upsurges in caste-related violence. One reason for Bihar’s recent incidents may 
be the appointment in May of Jitan Ram Manjhi, a Dalit, as the chief minister 
of the state.

Since taking power Manjhi has announced measures to help other Dalits in 
Bihar, one of India’s poorest states, and is reported to have urged the 
community to have more children to become a more powerful political force.

Dalits account for some 15% of Bihar’s population of 103.8 million.

The chief minister’s call was not well received by members of other castes, 
local observers said.

Sachindra Narayan, a prominent Patna-based social scientist with the National 
Human Rights Commission in Delhi, said: “The prime reason [for the violence] is 
that [Dalits] feel empowered after seeing someone from their community at the 
head of the state and have begun to assert their rights. This is purely a 
retaliation from the dominant social groups.”

Manjhi claims a temple in northern Bihar was ritually cleaned and idols washed 
with holy water after his visit to the shrine 
<http://ibnlive.in.com/news/temple-was-washed-after-i-visited-it-says-bihar-cm-jitan-ram-manjhi/502685-3-232.html>
. Such ceremonies are still performed by upper castes to eradicate “pollution” 
left by lower-caste visitors.

“A deep-rooted bias prevails against … those from the downtrodden sections of 
society … I have myself been a victim of caste bias,” the 70-year-old said.

Opponents claim Manjhi was stoking caste tensions for political advantage.

In the vast neighbouring state of Uttar Pradesh, caste is also a major 
political issue, with power contested by two parties that broadly represent two 
different caste communities. That of Mayawati explicity campaigns for Dalits, 
while the ruling Samajwadi party is seen by many as representing the Yadav 
community, once pastoralists.

Caste became a factor in recent national elections too. The prime minister, 
Narendra Modi, comes from a poor family from the lower-caste Ghanchi community, 
which is associated with selling oil. His rise from humble origins to leader of 
1.25 billion people has inspired many – but also provokedscorn from elite 
politicians 
<http://www.ndtv.com/article/india/in-congress-war-room-rahul-gandhi-cites-mani-shankar-aiyar-s-chaiwallah-remark-480131>
 who have mocked his background.

The origins of caste are contested. Some point to ancient religious texts, 
others to rigid classifications of more local definitions of community and 
identities by British imperial administrators. The word “caste” is of 
Portuguese origin.

Regardless of its origins, the word still has the power to stir controversy. 
Arundhati Roy, the Booker prize-winning author, recently accusedMahatma Gandhi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mahatma-gandhi>, India’s revered 
independence leader, of discrimination and called for institutions bearing his 
name to be renamed because of his attitude to caste.

She said: “It is time to unveil a few truths about a person whose doctrine of 
nonviolence was based on the acceptance of the most brutal social hierarchy 
ever known, the caste system … Do we really need to name our universities after 
him?” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/18/arundhati-roy-accuses-mahatma-gandhi-discrimination>

Sociologists say the rapid urbanisation of India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> has weakened the caste system as the 
realities of living in overcrowded Indian cities make reinforcing social 
separation and discrimination through rituals or violence much harder.

But if change is coming to places like rural Bihar, it is often accompanied by 
violence.

Last October a roadside bomb killed Sunil Pandey, a landowner who was alleged 
to be a senior figure in a militia formed in 1994 to enforce the interests of 
higher castes in the state, but which has been largely dormant recently.

The Ranvir Sena militia, formed by men of the Bhumihar caste of landlords, is 
held responsible for aseries of massacres of Dalits in the 1990s 
<http://www.hrw.org/reports/1999/india/India994-06.htm>. These murders, in 
effect reprisals against local Maoist guerrillas, who have also killed many, 
reached a bloody climax with the deaths of 58 men, women and children with no 
connection to extremism in the village of Lakshman Bathe in 1998. Ranvir Sena 
and Pandey were blamed.

Last year 24 men had their convictions for that massacre overturned by Bihar’s 
high court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/19/bihar-caste-war-maoist-india>, 
prompting renewed clashes.

The authorities have pledged rapid justice for Ram, the 15-year-old burned to 
death last week. But of nearly 17,000 pending trials in Bihar involving charges 
of violence against Dalits only a 10th were dealt with last year.

“We are going to … start speedy trial of the case,” Chandan Kumar Kushwaha, 
the local superintendent of police, said, while the chief minister told 
reporters he was taking a personal interest in the case.

“I have talked to the state’s director general of police and district 
superintendent of police concerned, and ordered them to … deliver instant 
justice to the victim [sic] family,” Manjhi said.

For the teenager’s father, nothing can compensate for the death of his son. 
“My entire world is lost now,” he said.
 