
Macleod's Tables, Isle of Skye

Classification Hill scramble

Distance 5.6 miles (9km)

Typical duration 4hr 30min

Height gain 720m

Starting point 1.5 miles along B884 from Dunvegan

OS grid reference NG 243 462 (Explorer map 407)

Walk in a nutshell

Getting out to Skye may not be the work of a moment, but this walk is actually 
fairly straightforward - although a day taking in both of Macleod's Table tops 
still involves over 700m of climbing, which is more than that involved in 
climbing many of Britain's larger hills. The walk heads gently uphill, 
following a small gorge across open moorland towards the top of Healabhal Mhor 
(north table), before a bit of down-and-up across to Healabhal Bheag (south 
table). From here there are stunning views of the island. The return down along 
the Osdale River is also pretty straightforward as hill scrambles go.

Why it's so special

Not many isolated upland challenges can boast a multiple-award-winning 
restaurant and small hotel a couple of miles up the road - but the quality of 
food and service at The Three Chimneys restaurant and House Over-By hotel, on 
nearby Loch Dunvegan, is well worth making the trek for.

Keep your eyes peeled for

The Outer Hebrides - if the weather is good they should be easily identifiable 
from our walk's two peaks. Note also the jagged ridges of the Cuillin range to 
the south; these may be taller and more renowned, but Macleod's Tables are 
striking alternatives.

But bear in mind

Stout boots and appropriate warm and waterproof clothing are vital in a region 
noted for the speed that its weather can change.

Impress your companions

According to legend, the flat summits of Macleod's Tables were created after 
St Columba visited Skye - and was refused hospitality by the island's chief. 
Distinctly unimpressed, St Columba threw a wobbly, the skies darkened, there 
was an almighty crash and lo, he had a table to eat at and a bed to sleep on. 
We must stress, though, that such a ploy won't work if you turn up unannounced 
at The Three Chimneys.

Recover afterwards

... In foodie heaven: the restaurant serves exquisite seafood, while lamb, 
beef and game dishes also feature strongly, all using perfectly fresh local 
produce. And for those who fancy a snack with St Columba during the walk, there 
is also a range of soups, puddings and home-baked breads which is nearly as 
famous as the lunch and dinner menus.

And if it's tipping down

Up until the end of October (when it closes for the winter) you could head for 
Armadale Castle Gardens and Museum of the Isles at Sleat (though it is a fair 
drive down to the southern tip of Skye). This 20,000-acre Highland estate, once 
part of the traditional lands of Clan Donald, has been well restored and the 
museum, which opened in 2002, traces the history of this and other Highland 
clans from medieval times to the present (although the genealogy centre is open 
only by appointment).

1-3. From B884 Dunvegan to Glendale road, follow track through gate towards 
ruin at Osdale (½ mile). Pass it and start to head uphill behind it. To pick up 
path of sorts, head uphill to corner of fence on your left and cross little 
stream just beyond it.

4-6. Continuing uphill, you come to a gorge. Follow on its right-hand side 
(facing up) for ½ mile until you can cross it. After crossing stream, head up 
through hollow and on to open slopes until hilltop 3/4 mile away (Macleod's 
Table North). Summit is towards far side of flat plateau, marked by cairn.

7-9. To reach Macleod's Table South, walk south for 200m, where there is an 
abrupt drop towards a flattish col (3/4 mile). Descent is easier than it looks. 
Beyond this col, follow more obvious ridge ½ mile over small top and onwards to 
Healabhal Bheag (south table). Summit is marked by a trig point and cairn. 
Another Cairn is 100m north-east of summit.

10-11. Continue north-east past second cairn until you see prominent ridge - 
follow this for ¼ mile. NB this ends in a steep nose so you should descend 
easier slopes on your left as you follow ridge. After dropping off side of 
ridge, you can pick your own line - heading for Osdale River about a mile away.

12. Best return route is to keep close to river until it begins to meander 
quite widely (not far from the white building) and then take a direct route 
back to road.

How to get there

By car The walk starts just beyond bridge over Osdale River 2km along B884 
from Dunvegan. There is plenty of parking near this bridge. Public transport is 
limited, so best other option is to walk from Dunvegan.
 