
“In an old house in Paris that was covered with vines …” If you know these 
lines at all you cannot help but know more of them; the rhythm practically 
defies you not to continue: “lived twelve little girls in two straight lines. 
In two straight lines they broke their bread and brushed their teeth and went 
to bed.”

And the smallest of them all, of course, is Madeline. When I started reading 
the Madeline books to my daughter it was well over 30 years since they had been 
read to me by my mother – and yet all the lines were there in my head, waiting. 
Before my daughter was three, we were batting them back and forth on car 
journeys: “She was not afraid” “…of mice!” “She loved winter, snow?” “… and 
ice!”; “To the tiger in the zoo, Madeline just said?” “… pooh-pooh!”

And that, as well as the rhythm, is a huge part of the appeal of these books 
by Ludwig Bemelmans, which I not only read to my daughter, but give to friends 
who have daughters. Madeline is a great character: she’s the smallest, and 
she’s the bravest. She’s the one most inclined to create trouble and mischief – 
but also fun. She knows what’s right, often in defiance of the grownups. She’s 
different from everyone else – but clearly in a good way. She’s all of these 
thingsand a girl.

As a child I had no real idea about the economic and parental arrangements – 
apart from the fact that there was an off-stage papa, no mother at all, and 
clearly enough cash to fly a horse between Paris and London (where, in Madeline 
in London, the girls go to visit Madeline’s sidekick-in-mischief Pepito, the 
son of the Spanish ambassador). I thought the old house was an orphanage – it’s 
not, it’s a boarding school. Energetic line drawings place the girls amongst 
all the great buildings of Paris – Sacre Coeur, the Place Vendome, Notre Dame – 
but she’s not French; she’s apparently Texan. I did not know that Bemelmans, 
who drew all the pictures, showed in New York galleries and created New Yorker 
and Vogue covers, though the cosmopolitan sophistication, skill and lightness 
of touch in the illustrations in fact makes that no surprise. He still 
considered himself an artist rather than a writer, despite his nearly 50 books, 
which included memoirs, travelogues, Hollywood scripts, and fiction for adults.

Bemelmans ended his life in New York, a successful artist and well-connected 
bon vivant. But the settings of the books, and their undercurrents of sadness 
apparent to an adult reader, hint at less charmed things. He was born in Meran, 
in what was then Austria-Hungary, in 1898, the son of a Belgian artist and a 
German brewer’s daughter who split up when he was six. He was cared for by a 
French governess, but she, pregnant with his father’s child, killed herself 
when he set up home with someone else. His mother, also pregnant, took him to 
Germany. “He didn’t speak any language without an accent,” his grandson once 
said, “I don’t know that he really had a first language.” And “He was the 
littlest kid in class. He always felt like an outsider.”

At 16, Bemelmans was apprenticed to an uncle in the Austrian hotel business, 
but this did not go well: one story goes that he shot at a waiter. He was given 
a choice between a reform school that trained German boys for the merchant 
marines, and America. He chose America. His father, who had already moved 
there, failed to meet him at Ellis Island when he arrived on Christmas Day 
1914. “I have forgotten so much of youth, and much of it was not experienced,” 
he once wrote to a friend. “In me a whole portion of it is missing – it is like 
a floor in a house where there is no furniture.” And, in another letter: “In 
the middle of the night, I often wake up – and stare at the open doors through 
which I cannot walk and at the closed ones that I can’t open – and the 
children’s books that keep me from blowing out my brains are created in this 
hour.”

The middle of the night is when things often happen in these books, but 
signally, there are adults there to save children from harm. “In the middle of 
one night / Miss Clavel turned on her light / and said, ‘Something is not 
right!’” In the first book Madeline is rushed to hospital with appendicitis, 
which turns out, after the operation, to be quite a pleasant experience, 
because “outside were birds, trees, and sky – / and so ten days passed quickly 
by”. And there are toys from papa too (if not an actual papa). In the third 
book, Pepito moves in next door. His parents are clearly extremely wealthy and 
he is, just as clearly, extremely lonely. Madeline and the Bad Hat is a study 
of a child acting out because he needs attention and love – and Madeline is the 
one who sees it: first she tells him off for torturing animals and catapulting 
stones at his new neighbours, then she says: “‘I know what to do.’ / And 
Madeline told Pepito that / He was no longer a BAD HAT. / She said, ‘You are 
our pride and joy, / You are the world’s most wonderful boy!’”

Madeline’s Christmas is the last book published in Bemelmans’s lifetime (there 
was a posthumous collection of stories published in 1999), and it is nowhere 
near as good as the first ones. But again it’s interesting for how these 
tensions play themselves out. It’s the night before Christmas and everyone in 
the old house in Paris, even the mouse, has a terrible cold – except Madeline, 
who struggles under the weight of housework and bowls of soup for sick 
children. A merchant arrives at the door carrying what turn out to be magic 
rugs. Abracadabra! “And twelve little girls were on their way / To surprise 
their parents on Christmas Day.” The picture on this page is a hugely poignant 
one, of tree and toys and warm nuclear family, and Madeline on her father’s lap 
– but Miss Clavel very soon rings a bell, “Which quickly broke the magic spell 
/ And now we’re back, all twelve right here”– the tone is like a smile 
valiantly reapplied — “To wish our friends a Happy New Year!”

 