
In this difficult market, you need to think about your job search habits and 
focus yourself on a smarter approach.

If you're like most job seekers, you follow a set of routines in looking for 
work. You check the ads in the newspaper, or in professional journals related 
to your field. You write a nice cover letter and enclose your CV. You practise 
for interview questions. And then you hope for the best.

The key to any successful venture, though, is to understand as much as 
possible about how the system works. You can't improve the performance of a car 
without knowing something about engines, and you can't hone your job 
applications without knowing how hiring decisions are being made. I'll talk 
generally about how you can leverage a basic understanding of the way 
applicants are selected, though it is worth finding someone who makes hiring 
decisions in your industry to get more specific details.

For any position, the person or committee doing the hiring is going to get a 
stack of cover letters andCVs <https://www.theguardian.com/careers/cv>, and 
perhaps a portfolio of your work. That first read through the large stack is 
going to be done quickly. How can you stand out in that initial crowd?

One thing you can do is to be familiar. For 50 years, psychologists have known 
that people tend to like things that they have been exposed to before. That is 
why the crowd at a rock concert cheers loudest for the song that has been 
playing on the radio. That song may not be the best one, but it is the most 
familiar.

So find a way to make yourself more familiar to the people doing the hiring. 
Ask them questions. Find an event that the company is sponsoring and volunteer. 
Take a tour of the company facilities to find out more about what they do and 
try to get an introduction to people in human resources. The key is to give 
your application just a little boost of familiarity when people are reading 
through it. That will help you make the first cut.

Another thing you can do is to work your network. Many first-time job seekers 
want to get a job on their own to prove that they can do it themselves. But, 
the real goal is to get a job. A few months after you land the job, nobody will 
care how you got there. They'll only be thinking about whether you're right for 
the job. So, go out and do some networking. Make use of the alumni from your 
university. Find every industry related meeting and go to it. Participate. Help 
to organise events. Use your contacts to make recommendations. Your CV will 
look a lot better when it comes along with a personal recommendation than it 
does by itself.

Third, hone your pitch. If you have the chance to talk to someone about your 
strengths, what will you tell them? Research on smart thinking makes clear that 
most people will remember roughly three things about any new meeting, book, or 
encounter. That rule of three applies to what employers will remember about 
you. So find three things about yourself that you want to highlight. Focus all 
of your communications on those three elements. Mention them in your cover 
letter. Highlight those core strengths in your resume. The more effectively you 
stay on message, the better your chances of landing that job.

Ultimately, knowledge is power. Learning about the way the world works is 
helpful for finding a job, and it is even more helpful in succeeding after you 
land that job. So, make yourself familiar, work your network, and hone that 
pitch. And good luck. Because the last thing to remember is that there is a lot 
in any job search that is out of your control. So don't let rejections get you 
down.

Art Markman is a professor of psychology and marketing at the University of 
Texas at Austin. He studies the way people think and make decisions. His latest 
book,Smart Thinking: How to Think Big, Innovate and Outperform Your Rivals  
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Smart-Thinking-Innovate-Outperform-ebook/dp/B0068PHXV0>
is published by Piatkus.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox, sign up for our weekly Careers update 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 