
"Peace wanted alive" is painted on a boundary wall in a neat, yellow script; a 
sort of minimalist graffiti. Dozens of slogans like it adorn the corrugated 
walls of Kibera slum in Nairobi, all written by Solo7, a well-known local 
artist. His nom de guerre – or perhaps nom de paix – suggests more than 
solitary artistic expression: it represents a lone, rational voice when the 
airwaves were congested with partial messaging and sensationalist reporting as 
Kenya was ambushed by violence in what should have been that most basic, yet 
ultimate expression of democracy: an election.

On 27 December 2007, Kenyans went to the polls in record numbers after a 
closely fought campaign. Domestic and international media predictions placed 
the opposition leader, Raila Odinga as the favourite to win a narrow victory. 
The media had unprecedented scope to cover the election with the first ever 
live coverage of an Election Day and subsequent vote-counting.

Restrictions on freedom expression have been progressively relaxed since 
Kenya's old dictator, Daniel arap Moi, was ousted in 2002. Journalists have 
been freer to criticise the political process and the public has enjoyed more 
space to voice their views. In addition to corresponding to an improved rating 
on the Economist Intelligence Unit's democracy index, this increasing space for 
expression coincided with an information explosion: burgeoning internet access 
in Kenya, increase in community radio stations and an increase in television 
viewers.

"In Kenya, politics has become the national sport", remarks a well-known 
television news anchor, who credits the information explosion as leading to 
increased interest in participation – and with it, an associated responsibility 
of the fourth estate to relate unbiased, impartial information. By and large, 
the media are purportedly living up to these expectations with a Steadman Group 
survey report last year indicating that the media is the most trusted 
institution in Kenya. Journalists throughout Nairobi seem to take this 
seriously.

Jonah, a reporter from Majengo slum community radio station, Ghetto FM, sees 
himself as the "custodian of the truth", incumbent on him to give an accurate 
representation of "what is happening on the ground". Furthermore, he and other 
journalists believe that in Nairobi media circles, these ethics are pervasive.

However, when the news finally broke – a full week after the election itself – 
that President Mwai Kibaki was being returned to power, violence erupted across 
the country, with local radio stations in rural areas in many cases fuelling 
tribal conflict and encouraging violent confrontations. The Commission of 
Inquiry into Post-Election Violence recorded that many witnesses "recalled with 
horror, fear, and disgust the negative and inflammatory role of vernacular 
radio stations", inciting violence along ethnic lines, simultaneously revealing 
a weakness in government monitoring. This is in direct contrast to the role 
slum radio stations in Nairobi – and in some rural areas – played in appealing 
for calm and an end to violence.

The aftermath of the Kenyan election has drawn two conflicting and powerful 
lessons for media's role in peace and democracy. The first is that the media is 
central to expanding the democratic space for people to not only access 
information on parties, politicians and policies, but to express an opinion in 
the public sphere. The second is more sinister: that a grossly partisan media – 
in this case the vernacular radio in some rural areas – has the potential to 
undermine democracy through prioritising identity politics and circumventing 
impartiality under the sway of political patronage and personal bribery.

These issues are universal concerns about the role of media the world over. 
While they are important, there is a third issue that arises in the wake of the 
post-election violence on the role of media in countries undergoing a 
democratic transition: peace-building. The calm, positive messaging relayed by 
community radio stations in Nairobi caught the attention of international 
donors – including the UK and USA – who are investing in peace-building efforts 
throughout the country.

Ghetto FM has been commissioned to conduct a series of public education 
messages on peace and democracy. With media ethics requiring unbiased 
reporting, does this present a conflict of interest, even if it accepted as 
positive? "No, I don't think so," Jonah says, "But the role of the radio has 
changed since the violence. We realise that community radio has a special role 
to play. It is often the only education people will have on a daily basis." 
With the limited reach and resources of other local organisations, Jonah's 
point is all the more important. Add to that, a high-profile freelance 
journalist, Gary, expresses faith in journalist's capacity for self-censorship, 
claiming this will regulate the inevitable bias of peace messaging.

As for the politicians, they have so far supported these initiatives, 
resisting the temptation to suggest that international sponsorship is just 
another form of patronage. However, citing the media's role in the 
post-election violence, a law was introduced in the middle of last year to curb 
some media freedoms. In January this year, the President called for a review of 
this legislation – six days after signing it – due to international and 
domestic pressure. The outcome of the review remains to be seen, with many 
fearing a return to the prohibitive regulation of the Moi regime, drawing back 
democratisation further still.

But Gary disputes this fear, arguing that there is no going back. "There are 
still threats – in the form of self-censorship and politicians buying 
journalists to stifle image-breakers; but we are on the right track and freedom 
of expression will keep on getting stronger". Clearly, the media will be 
central to that process – partnering with Kenyans and politicians – with the 
ultimate aim, in Solo7's words, to "keep peace forever more".

This longlisted article was published on 23 July 2009. It was written for the 
Guardian's International Development Journalism Competition between 1 April and 
22 June 2009.
 