
Locating Innocent Smoke, the child born just yards from the gates of Africa's 
largest tobacco warehouse in February 2005, needed two days' criss-crossing
Malawi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malawi> in a 4WD pick-up, the 
resources of international aid agency Concern Worldwide, an interpreter and a 
local guide. Innocent, his dad Boy, mum Lenita and his four brothers and 
sisters had moved from Maenje village on the outskirts of the capital, 
Lilongwe, in 2006. The family Smoke's new home, said a friend, was "near" the 
village of Simulemba in Kasungu province – 100 miles north of Lilongwe in one 
of the most remote and least populated areas of the southern African country. 
The young family had left their smallholding inside the boundaries of the 
capital city before they were evicted by a multinational construction company 
which owned the land on which their village was built.

From being a peasant farmer earning at most 60p a day, who did a bit of 
building to make ends meet in the nearby city, Boy Smoke had – suitably for his 
name – chosen to become a tobacco farmer in the middle of nowhere, dependent on 
world commodity prices.

It sounded a risky move but in Malawi, where land in some areas is still cheap 
and plentiful, it has paid off. The Smoke family have, in just four years, 
lifted themselves out of grinding poverty. With just £170 capital saved from 10 
years' farming, the Smokes bought six acres of wild, red-earthed scrubland to 
start a new life.

Where most of Malawi's rural peasantry has barely improved its lot in the last 
five years because they must depend on minute landholdings and just one crop, 
maize, the Smokes are a success story. They used to rent a mudwalled, 
straw-thatched two-bedroom house with a leaky roof, but they now have four 
rooms, a tin roof, glass in the windows, two sofas and a minivan. And Lenita 
has had two more children.

"It has been like a new start," she says. "It was wonderful when we came. 
People nearby helped us so much. They thought, 'Here is a poor family from the 
city,' so we must help them. People do not scramble for things here like they 
do in the city."

Innocent is well, says Lenita, but prone to malaria in the rainy season.

"He is in class 1, and is doing well in school. I think he is intelligent but 
sometimes he is very quiet. He can express what the teachers are saying."

Both parents say the last five years have been physically draining and 
mentally tough, and that unless things improve they will return to the city. "I 
made all the bricks and built the house myself. It was the hardest thing to 
cultivate the land. It took two years before we could even plant the tobacco. 
The land had never been opened up before. I am also dependent on the rains. 
Luckily there has been no drought," says Smoke.

For Lenita, with three children under the age of five, it's been especially 
taxing.

"Just to get water is hard. It's 2km away. The health clinic is 4km away. When 
a child gets sick in the night, it's very hard. Possibly the children would get 
a better education back in Lilongwe. When I was in Lilongwe I could also grow 
our own vegetables. Here there is not enough water and it's a mile or more to 
the nearest shop," she says.

"If things do not get better then I think we may move back," she says.

Smoke concurs. "Yes, I think if I have the money in five years' time, I would 
go back to Lilongwe. Maybe I would have less land but I would like to buy a 
plot of land, build a house and sell it for a profit. I don't think I want 
Innocent to become a farmer."

Lenita is certain of one thing. "We are stopping now. I don't want any more 
children," she says.

Factfile: Malawi

Under-fives mortality (per 1,000 births): 100

Population on under $2 (£1.28) a day: 90.45%

Debt per capita: $23.16 (£14.78)

Life expectancy: 53

% children in education (F/M): 54.5/53.5 (2007)
 