
"I've got some exciting news," I announce as my wife loads the children's 
supper plates into the dishwasher. "I've been asked to write a travel article 
for the Guardian. They're going to arrange for you and me to spend a week in a 
luxury resort in the Maldives. It's the holiday of a lifetime!" All day I've 
been imagining Sarah jumping up and throwing her arms around me at this point. 
Perhaps we'll twirl around the kitchen. Instead, she turns back to the 
dishwasher and says, "Don't take this the wrong way, but why would they ask 
you?"

"I don't know, Adam and Joe <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00876k2> stuff, 
maybe my hilariousYouTube videos <http://www.youtube.com/user/AdamBuxton>?" I 
offer, struggling to take it the right way. "Look, it doesn't matter why they 
asked me, aren't you excited?"

"Hmm. Will it be like the film Couples Retreat 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1078940/>?"

I think about this. "We'll be retreating, as a couple, to a tropical island, 
but I've told Vince Vaughn and Jon Favreau they won't be welcome."

This fails to lighten the mood and Sarah sighs. "It's just that I've got so 
much to do, and who's going to look after the children? I don't know if I could 
leave them for a week."

This isn't going how I imagined. "We don't have to go." I shrug. "Maybe I 
should take Joe."

Upstairs it's bath time. There's water all over the lino and… is that pee 
round the base of the toilet again? I go nuts at the boys and my two-year-old 
daughter hugs my leg to calm me down.

"I'll clean it up," says Sarah, with another sigh.

"They can flipping clean it up! They're six and eight – they should have 
mastered basic aiming by now. And why are you sighing reproachfully at me? I 
came back early to offer you the holiday of a lifetime and it's been a litany 
of sighs ever since."

"I'm just knackered. You get on, I can deal with this," Sarah says, then adds 
pointedly, "I usually do." It's the cue for a delightful evening of simmering 
tension and resentment.

Next morning I find Sarah at my laptop. She's looking in awe at the website 
for the Diva resort in the Maldives. "Sorry about last night," she says. "I was 
being a prat." Actually, she doesn't say this, but I'm sure that's what she's 
thinking. What she does say is, "Mum says she can take the children for a week. 
I think we need to retreat. As a couple."

Two weeks later we're in a Twin Otter seaplane en route from Malé airport to 
Diva. It's too noisy to talk, so we hold hands and gaze down at the dark 
lagoons, coral circles and sandbanks of some of the 26 atolls of the republic. 
Around them the Indian Ocean shimmers, as crazily blue as one of the Na'vi 
forest people fromAvatar <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0499549/>. Twelve hours 
earlier we'd been having a drink at Café Rouge in rain-lashed Gatwick and we 
thought that was fun, but this is something else. I had worried vaguely that we 
might be unable to converse about anything other than the children on this 
trip, but luckily that doesn't seem to be the case. In fact, every moment of 
being alone together for the first time in about nine years is intensely 
enjoyable.

It's a blazing hot Monday morning on Diva as we step on to the jetty where a 
line of staff in smart khaki uniforms stands ready to greet us. A youngHalle 
Berry <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000932/> lookalike introduces herself as 
Dolores, Diva's Italian head of public relations; she shows us to the electric 
cart that will take us to our room.

We trundle down the verdant shady central track that runs the 2km length of 
the island and discover, with mild relief, that we are staying in a "beach pool 
villa" (a bungalow on the beach with a little plunge pool out back), not in one 
of the rows of huts on stilts over the lagoon. Instant snorkelling is great, 
but a good beach is hard to beat.

The villa isn't too shabby either, and once we're alone we dance about like 
simpletons, marvelling at the toiletries, the room service menu, the exotic 
fruit bowl, the minibar prices ($170 for that little bottle of rum?) and the 
fact that the white bedspread has been carefully arranged into the shape of a 
heart over which red hibiscus petals have been scattered. Later Dolores tells 
us a guest once complained when an overeager staff member arranged the towels 
and some of her clothing into the shape of a smiling baby. "They don't do that 
any more," she adds. Overexcited and overtired, we sweep aside the petals, 
collapse on to the bed and, with a warm breeze blowing in, fall fast asleep.

When I wake I've forgotten where I am and stare at the ceiling fan before 
remembering, with a frisson of pleasure. I sit up and gaze at the bleach blue 
sea before us. I can hear marimba music and step out to the terrace to see 
who's playing it, before I realise it's the alarm on my phone. We're due to 
meet Dolores for a tour of the resort.

For the next couple of hours we hop on and off a cart that takes us from one 
end of the island to the other, stopping at restaurants, bars, a gym, shop, 
infinity pool and health spa, all seemingly named by a new-age ponce. We have 
a table booked for tonight at Senses, Diva's Lebanese/Indian restaurant, and 
tomorrow we'll experience a sea shell massage at Infinity, but now it's time 
for a cocktail at Noo. While I'm waiting for my drink to arrive, I visit the 
Noo loo, a moodily lit marble paradise within a vanilla-scented rock garden 
secreted behind the bar. It's the most effeminate gents I've ever been in and I 
love it. I would pay to come on holiday to these toilets alone. They missed a 
trick not naming them, though. How about La'Vi, or Peepoopi for starters? 
Perhaps I'll suggest it.

Back at the bar Sarah is looking a little odd. When Dolores gets up to take a 
call, she leans over and whispers, "What's this about a renewal of vows 
ceremony?" Ah yes, I'd forgotten about that. It was suggested before we came 
out, as a way to make the trip more memorable, and it sounded like a good idea. 
Days before we left, however, a story broke 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/oct/28/maldives-apology-marriage-vow-couple>
 about a couple at a nearby resort who found out their ceremony, delivered in 
the local language of Dhivehi, was actually "a cascade of sexual and xenophobic 
slurs". By way of reassurance, I say, "I think they're going to deliver ours in 
English, so if anyone makes any comments about your breasts, we'll know." Sarah 
is unamused. "Come on, it'll be great," I say. "They lay on a beautiful 
ceremony, then we plant a coconut tree and have a torch-lit dinner on the 
beach. You like Twilight films, for goodness sake, I thought you'd love this!"
 'I suggested we keep our vows short and quite stupid. "Like you," Sarah 
said.' Photograph: Mohamed Azmeel for the Guardian 
"Reading out made-up vows while someone takes pictures for a newspaper is not 
the same as sexy vampires," hisses Sarah, for whom ostentatious displays of 
emotion, public speaking and being photographed are as enjoyable as cystitis.

"Look, we don't have to do it. I just thought it would be fun. Let's decide 
later in the week."

The next day brings one of the resort's most popular activities: the whale 
shark safari, a boat trip to find and swim with the biggest fish there is. 
After about an hour of pleasant motoring between islands, our guide cuts the 
motor and shouts, "Put on your snorkel gear, quick!" An ecstasy of fumbling, 
and a minute later we're in the warm water, swimming alongside a 4m whale 
shark. There are 10 of us buzzing around this lovely creature like paparazzi 
following Angelina Jolie. It swishes along a metre or so below the surface, 
hoovering tiny sea creatures with its amiably daft, distended mouth as we 
follow bewitched. A Japanese couple dive down to take pictures of each other 
flashing V-signs beside the beast. One can't resist briefly stroking the dorsal 
fin, though we've been asked not to touch. I sympathise. It's hard to believe 
it's more than just a 2D image; you want to prod and poke to prove it's really 
there.

Communing with these marine celebrities is thought by many to have real 
therapeutic value and certainly we return to Diva aglow with a sense of 
profound wellbeing, but are we sufficiently relaxed? "There are three things 
you really must do during your stay here," says the charming resort manager on 
our arrival. "Number one, you must relax. Number two, you must relax and number 
three…" I want him to say, "You must learn to street dance" but he says, "You 
must relax" again.

Midway through our week we decide the Noo bar is our favourite place to do the 
manager's bidding. Here we sit and watch outrageous sunsets, sipping 
deceptively strong, brightly coloured cocktails. If the wind gets up, we find a 
sofa under cover, dig our feet into the sand and play word games on the iPad in 
the soft orange glow of the giant chandeliers. One night, conversation turns to 
what, if anything, could be done to improve our stay.

Before we came out, I read an online review of the resort by a Chinese woman, 
entitled Terrible Service, Staff Told Lies. Her opprobrium seemed based on the 
time it took to be picked up by a cart when traversing the tiny island and the 
fact that the free polo shirt in her room was too large and was not swapped 
before her departure. "It made my honeymoon trip like crap," she concludes.

We draw up a list of similarly insane gripes. The sand is a little too sandy. 
The sea is perhaps a degree too warm and not sufficiently bracing. Returning 
every cheery, "Hello!" and, "Good morning!" from the staff is a chore. The 
crabs that dart across the beach are cheeky and defiant.

Ironically, while compiling this list, we encounter the first experience at 
Diva that could genuinely be thought less than ideal. A musical trio arrives 
and, with harshly amplified electric guitar, keyboard and reverb-drenched 
vocals, starts belting out hits from Satan's jukebox. Simply The Best, More 
Than Words, Fernando. Still, it's not exactly Guantánamo and a couple more 
cocktails leave us remarking on the quality of the singer's Agnetha impression 
as we walk the moonlit path back to the bungalow.

Every morning we wake too late for the sumptuous buffet breakfast at East, a 
restaurant that sits on stilts over the lagoon. Instead, we shrug off the Noo 
cocktail fug by snorkelling or putting on life jackets and lying suspended in 
the sea with our legs tucked under each other's arms, creating what I call a 
"wiferaft". When we get weird looks from the young Japanese couples and Russian 
oligarchs on the beach, we swim to the nearby sandbank and lie there with the 
waves lapping at our legs.

I close my eyes and everything goes orange. Warm wind blows across my face, 
and suddenly it dawns on me that I am perfectly happy. I wish the children were 
here, I think, but the next moment my mind has wandered to the bathroom at home 
where I imagine my youngest son urinating with aimless abandon. "Get back to 
the Maldives this instant!" I tell my mind, but it seems reluctant to stay in 
the moment, as if trying to stop me getting used to a life I can't have. "We're 
going to look back on how much fun this holiday was for the rest of our lives," 
Sarah says, reading my mind, "and it's actually happening right now!" We hear 
the growl of the seaplane returning to deposit more newcomers at the jetty and 
lift back into the clouds those whose time is up. With a sense of ineffable 
sadness, I realise it will be coming for us in just two more days. But first, 
we've got vows to renew!

Sarah acquiesced about the vows one afternoon as we ate a glorious lunch on 
our terrace. We decided to write them there and then, and I suggested we keep 
them short and quite stupid. "Like you," Sarah said. When the time finally 
comes to read them out, however, no amount of shortness and stupidity can 
prevent Sarah's face from crumpling, just three words in. She's a crier.

We're stood on a sandy promontory with the manager, Dolores, the photographer 
and various white-clad staff, one of whom has conducted (in English) a simple 
service that makes no mention of our bedroom kinks. Still, the gods seem 
displeased, and Sarah's tears as I read my admittedly moving and well-crafted 
vows mingle with big drops of rain. I rush to finish before we're hit by 
lightning and Maldivian romantic tourism takes another blow. After the tree 
planting, it's time to stuff our vows into a coconut shell and hurl them 
symbolically into the sea. I lob with all my might; it lands a few feet away in 
the shallows, then the heavens open and we run for cover. The coconut washes, 
not symbolically I hope, back on to the beach.

The next few hours are spent waiting for a break in the clouds, but the 
weather seems to be telling us something. You've had your fun, your marriage is 
safe, now get back home to your children.

The excitement of seeing them again mitigates the back-from-holiday blues, as 
does a farewell from the handsome young Maldivian who drives us from the 
seaplane to the airport at Malé. I note from his Diva name tag that his name is 
Adam. "Your name is Adam, too!" He beams at me.

"That's right – how did you know?"

I'm expecting him to tell me all Diva staff must learn the names of every 
guest, but instead he replies, "I have seen your videos on YouTube! Very 
funny." I look at Sarah, who is grinning at me. She knows I'm trying to stop 
myself hugging the guy. I don't think I've ever been so happy.

• Kuoni <http://www.kuoni.co.uk> offers seven nights on room and breakfast 
basis at Diva, Maldives, in a deluxe room, including British Airways flights 
from Gatwick with transfers. Prices for 2011 start from £1,668 based on two 
sharing (price based on travel in May).
 