
JM Coetzee <https://www.theguardian.com/books/jmcoetzee> could become the 
first author ever to win a hat-trick of Man Booker prizes, after his latest 
novel Summertime was this morning shortlisted for the literary award.

In a lineup with a strong focus on historical fiction, favourite Hilary Mantel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/hilary-mantel> also made the final six, 
alongside Sarah Waters, but perennial Booker bridesmaids Colm Tóibín (who has 
been shortlisted twice before) and acclaimed Irish novelist William Trevor 
(shortlisted four times) failed to make the cut. Surprise longlist selection Me 
Cheeta, James Lever's "memoir" of the chimp who starred in the Tarzan films, 
was also overlooked.

Instead, the panel of judges, chaired by James Naughtie, plumped for another 
former winner of the prize,AS Byatt <https://www.theguardian.com/books/asbyatt>
. Byatt won the Booker in 1990 for Possession, and is in the running this time 
for The Children's Book, set at the turn of the 20th century and centring on a 
"successful authoress of magical tales" for children.

Coetzee, the first author to win the Booker prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booker-prize> twice – for Life and Times of 
Michael K and Disgrace - is shortlisted for the third volume in his trilogy of 
fictionalised memoir that began with Boyhood and Youth. Summertime tells the 
story of an English biographer, writing a book about the late author John 
Coetzee.

But Coetzee will be facing tough competition if he wants to win the prize a 
record third time: Mantel's Wolf Hall, a piece of historical fiction set in the 
court of Henry VIII and centring on the character of Thomas Cromwell, has been 
so heavily backed by literary punters that its selection will cost the bookies 
dear. William Hill said yesterday that it hoped the judges would leave the book 
off the shortlist. "95% of the bets we have taken so far have been for Wolf 
Hall, so we would be delighted to see it fail to get on the shortlist, but I 
fear it will be there, having already been backed from 8/1 to 6/4 - and I have 
no doubt that it will become the hottest favourite ever to win the award, and 
the first book to be odds-on to do so," said spokesman Graham Sharpe. "It could 
become our first ever six-figure payout if it wins."

Waters, meanwhile, twice shortlisted for the Booker and the Orange prize, 
could find that this is her lucky year: her ghost story The Little Stranger, 
set in post-war Warwickshire, is far and away the bestselling novel on the 
longlist.

As well as Byatt, Mantel and Coetzee's historical reconstructions, judges 
completed their final six with Simon Mawer's Czechoslovakia-set historical 
novel The Glass Room, and poet-novelist Adam Foulds's The Quickening Maze, a 
reconstruction of the meetings of John Clare and Alfred Tennyson at a lunatic 
asylum in Epping Forest.

According to the prize's literary director Ion Trewin, four of the titles had 
widespread support from four of the five-judge team – something which he said 
had been unprecedented in his time as the prize's director. Revealing details 
of the shortlist meeting – where each judge was asked to sum up their feelings 
after a second reading of the 13-strong longlist – Trewin said that it became 
apparent that the arguments this year would centre around the remaining two 
books which needed to be selected for the shortlist.

"Ballot forms had been prepared. Each judge was asked to put an x against six 
titles they thought should go through. I had the fun, and the responsibility, 
of acting as teller and returning officer. The forms were anonymous, but it was 
clear immediately that the debate would, as one judge had suggested, be about 
which two would join the four titles so universally approved," Trewin said. "It 
has always been Man Booker practice not to reveal individual voting 
preferences. But let me say that in the end the debate was over three books of 
which only two could go through."

At independent book chain Foyles, Jonathan Ruppin said he'd be backing Byatt 
to win, praising the judges for selecting a shortlist where "strong 
storytelling" seems to have been their primary criterion for inclusion. "Some 
may feel that the Man Booker is better awarded to something exquisitely 
beautiful, along the lines of recent winners such asJohn Banville's The Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/johnbanville> or Anne Enright's The Gathering
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/apr/28/featuresreviews.guardianreview17>
, but as world's best-known literary award, the Man Booker has a more popular 
mandate," said Ruppin.

"It's noticeable that this year the majority of writers in contention all have 
a few books to their names already, which perhaps underlines the fact that most 
outstanding authors are like vintage wines, developing a fuller, richer appeal 
as their careers progress. For bookshops, winners with a few books under their 
belt already tend to be better for sales: this gets people buying more books by 
that author and, we hope, encourages them to start exploring beyond the 
bestsellers at the front of the shop."
 