
Plan your spending carefully: the aim is simply to ensure less goes out than 
comes in. The ruination of many a budget is usually down to either an 
overestimation of income or an underestimation of outgoings. Money escapes 
constantly, even when you don't see it, so add in the phone bill and the gas 
and electricity direct debits or you'll end up spending money on the weekly 
shop that is already spoken for.

It is, of course, much easier to pray your debit/credit card doesn't get 
declined than to sit down with your receipts and some good intentions, and for 
most people the boredom of doing the money maths means most budgets assume a 
vague "typical week". But the problem is such a week doesn't exist; there is 
always something extra to take account of. Allow for unexpected costs because 
the tortuous times for a bank balance are those months when everyone leaves the 
hot water boiling, or the nights tequila gets involved. Leave a fiver spare 
each week for unforeseen splurges and emergencies.

With a weekly spend established and the concept that 
"it's-a-limit-not-a-target" understood, take out the money you'll need in cash 
and lock your card away. Watching your bank notes in a wallet get eaten up by 
receipts is an efficient way of stopping impulse spending – and ending those 
"little" purchases. You might feel smug by avoiding big buys but it's the 
couple of quid spent on travel or snacks or the cheeky extra drink that 
ultimately stings the most.

Bargain hunt like it's daytime TV, adjust your habits and all but refuse to 
ever pay full price: rather than pop to the supermarket as and when, head there 
after 9pm, when food is covered in discount stickers. Whether you're online or 
not, finding the cheapest prices is unquestionably a chore but there are lots 
of money-saving sites which do the dull part for you; follow on Facebook and 
the deals and freebies are pointed out to you, no effort required.

Budgets are easy to overspend in the rush of freshers' week and the early days 
of socialising but you will pay the consequences at the end of term, by which 
point you may find yourself stranded with a weekly shop and no way to pay for 
it… which is mortifying, believe me. So grab that notepad now and get going on 
that spreadsheet of outgoings.

David Ellis is editor of Student Money Saver 
<http://www.studentmoneysaver.co.uk/>

Financing your studies: don't be put off by scare stories

Headlines screaming about the £100,000 university degree make it easy to be 
wary of the cost of an undergraduate education. But it's important to see this 
in perspective.Although tuition fees can now be charged at a maximum of £9,000 
a year, they are not paid up front – and you may not even have to pay back the 
full amount at all.

On top of this, there are bursaries and grants available that could help to 
cut the cost. So make sure you know the full finance details. Here's a quick 
summary to guide you through the basics

• Tuition-fee loans

This year, the average university tuition fee is £8,500 a year, according to 
the government's Office for Fair Access. But you don't have to pay this up 
front because loans covering the entire cost of tuition fees for English or EU 
students are available from the government, and are paid directly to your 
college or university. The loan, plus interest, is repayable once you have 
graduated and are earning more than £21,000 a year. Each month you pay back 9% 
of any income above £21,000. There's a helpful cost calculator at 
gov.uk/student-finance-calculator. 

• Maintenance loan or grant

Full-time students from England can also receive a maintenance loan (worth up 
to £7,675 for students living in London, away from home) to cover the cost of 
living. Almost two thirds of the loan is available to all, but the extra 35% is 
only available to those with lower household incomes. The loan is repayable, 
but there are also maintenance grants (worth up to £3,250 for 2013 freshers) 
available for students who come from a household with a total income of less 
than £42,611.

• Other funding 

Disabled students may be eligible for the Disabled Students' Allowance (DSA), 
which pays up to £5,161 for specialist equipment and up to £20,520 a year for 
assistance for note-taking and other tasks. Most universities also offer 
scholarships and bursaries, the former based on merit and the latter via 
means-testing. Depending on the institution, the bursaries could take the form 
of reduced fees, discounted accommodation or cash payments. 

Lucy Tobin
 