
1) Never mind the title, City may not finish in top four


The Stretford End serenaded Manuel Pellegrini 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manuel-pellegrini> with the inevitable 
chant of “Sacked in the morning” once Juan Mata put the derby beyond doubt and, 
though his employers insist that is not the case, this demoralising defeat will 
surely prompt some soul-searchingin Abu Dhabi should it contribute to his 
side’s failure to qualify for the Champions League. Forget retaining the 
Premier League title, City’s vision of a permanent place among the European 
elite is in jeopardy on current form. Pellegrini’s side have now won only four 
of their last 15 fixtures in all competitions, an appalling return from 
defending champions who were joint top on New Year’s Day, and Liverpool can 
close the gap to four points with a home victory over struggling Newcastle 
United on Monday. In keeping with City’s performance at Old Trafford, the 
Chilean’s defence is weak.

2) English winger outshines his Spanish rivals

One would have got long odds last year on Ashley Young 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ashley-young> being the most effective 
winger in a Manchester derby featuring Juan Mata, David Silva and Jesús Navas 
but the 29-year-old eclipsed the Spanish trio with a hugely influential display 
at Old Trafford. Young’s equaliser – only his second goal of the campaign – may 
have been fortunate and City’s defence gave him far too much room to cross for 
Marouane Fellaini’s header but his first goal plus assists in a game in over 
three years were reward for a dominant display down United’s left. Louis van 
Gaal’s current preference for Young over the club’s record signing, Ángel di 
María, appears to have infused the England international with confidence and 
United reaped the benefits. “He was our best player,” said the Dutchman.

3) A result that underlined the contrast in character


Many teams might have folded under the relentless pressure and movement that 
Manchester City applied at the start of the game. Sergio Agüero’s eighth-minute 
goal had been coming from the off. InsteadManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> dug in, held their 
nerve and ground their opponents into submission with their workrate and spirit 
as much as the quality of their play. Van Gaal’s inherent belief in his methods 
is clearly shared by his players at Old Trafford and that has driven them four 
points clear of their local rivals.

City’s willingness to fight for victory, by contrast, was painfully lacking as 
was their willingness to take any defensive responsibility throughout the game. 
“Maybe it is something we can be concerned about,” the City manager said. “The 
spirit wasn’t our real spirit.” That condemns Pellegrini just as much as their 
results in recent months.

4) Captain Kompany could do with an extended rest

Opinion was split on tribal lines over whether Vincent Kompany’s shin-high 
foul on Danny Blind shortly before half-time deserved a red card, although 
there could be few complaints over Mark Clattenburg’s decision to give the City 
captain the benefit of the doubt and only book him. The referee was also 
correct to ignore City protests when Fellaini caught Martin Demichelis with a 
flailing arm to the face in the second half. Of greater concern to Pellegrini 
will be the increasing evidence that injuries are catching up with Kompany, who 
was replaced at the interval due to another problem, and result in the Belgian 
arriving into too many challenges a fraction late. The 29-year-old gripped his 
thigh before sliding into Blind and clearly needs a tournament-free summer to 
recuperate.

5) Fellaini and Jones encapsulate industry of Van Gaal’s United


Old Trafford rose in unison – with the exception of the away corner, of course 
– to applaud Phil Jones and Fellaini from the pitch when they were replaced 
late on by Marcos Rojo and Radamel Falcao respectively. The standing ovations 
were for two commanding performances. Neither the Belgium midfielder nor the 
England defender will ever meet the Old Trafford criteria for players of 
finesse but both epitomised the strength and tenacity behind United’s first 
home derby win in four seasons. Jones’ appreciation of the danger behind him 
remains a work in progress but the timing of his challenges was immaculate, as 
well as his authority in the air. As at Anfield, Fellaini demonstrated he has 
become a big-game asset for Van Gaal.
 