
Louis van Gaal believes a mounting defensive injury crisis could wreck 
Manchester United’s slim hopes of forcing their way back into Premier League 
title contention.Ashley Young 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ashley-young> has become the fourth 
United full-back to be ruled out due to injury and the Dutchman admits it will 
be “difficult” to plug the gap before the end of the transfer window.

Young requires surgery on a serious groin injury and could be ruled out for 
the rest of the season, joining Antonio Valencia, Luke Shaw and Marcos Rojo on 
the sidelines. “Ashley Young has a severe groin injury, it shall be operated 
on, so he’s [out] for a long time,” Van Gaal said on the club’s official 
website.

It means the youngster Cameron Borthwick-Jackson might have a big role to play 
as United look to shrug off their problematic start to the season and close the 
gap on the leaders, Arsenal.

Van Gaal said: “I have used youngsters a lot of times and they are doing great 
but the level of Man United is high and to give a high performance every week 
is very difficult for the youngsters. That’s why we have to look especially in 
the transfer period for replacements but the difficulty is we ask for a level, 
so we are looking but it is not easy.”

To make matters worse for Van Gaal, neither Bastian Schweinsteiger nor Phil 
Jones has completed their expected recoveries and are ruled out of Saturday’s 
home clash with Southampton. Van Gaal must hope his side’s shortcomings can be 
made up for by the kind of spirit encapsulated in the recent re-emergence of 
Wayne Rooney.

Five goals in the last six games have turned round Rooney’s difficult 
campaign, showing the leadership qualities his manager requires to keep the 
club in Champions League contention.

Van Gaal added: “Since Rooney has started scoring we have won our games and 
drawn at Newcastle away, so there is a parallel. I have said always that he is 
not only important as a player but as a captain so I am very happy with him.

“I think it is not only Wayne Rooney – there are several players doing that 
and that is what I want because the players themselves are responsible. 
Responsibility for the result and commitment to get that result is very 
important. It is important that your team is showing that and they are showing 
it now.”
 