
Reading this on mobile? Click here to view the video 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/video/2013/mar/01/manchester-international-festival-video>

A string of world premieres will be among the highlights of this summer's 
Manchester international festival <http://www.mif.co.uk/>. Events will include: 
a ballet featuring 11 tonnes of bone dust instead of dancers; a concert 
inspired by the poems of Michelangelo; and a performance of Percy Bysshe 
Shelley's savagely political 1819 poem The Masque of Anarchy – within a stone's 
throw of the site of the Peterloo massacre which inspired it.

Several of the events have already sold out. Tickets for Kenneth Branagh's 
return to Shakespeare and toManchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester> after more than 10 years, playing 
Macbeth in a deconsecrated church, went in four minutes and almost crashed the 
festival's website.

The festival's last night, 20 July, will be relayed live on a big screen to 
5,000 people in a nearby car park – but those tickets are also expected to sell 
out instantly. All the concerts by the group the xx have also sold out – 
unsurprisingly since they are performing not in an arena, but in a specially 
built 60-seat room.

Slightly to his surprise, festival director Alex Poots has found that this 
fourth biennial festival – of which the Guardian is a media partner – will be a 
darker affair, with many of the artists concerned with a world that looks 
bleaker to them in terms of politics, power, freedom and money – or the lack of 
it.

The stage and screen actor Maxine Peake, star of Silk, and Shameless, will 
perform Shelley's great 91 verse epic – without a book, she confirmed nervously 
– a shout of rage against the authorities who in 1819 sent a cavalry charge 
into a crowd of 60,000 unarmed men, women and children demonstrating for 
electoral law reform, killing 15 and injuring hundreds more, and incident she 
called "a bedrock of Manchester's history of radical politics". The event also 
led to the foundation of the Manchester Guardian, which in turn became the 
Guardian.

The performance on 6 July will be preceded by a debate hosted by the economist 
and BBC presenter Evan Davis, entitled Are we Powerless?.

Peake, who recently returned to live in Salford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/salford>, challenged her peers to do more to 
support the regional arts. "They won't like me for saying this, but if instead 
of sitting in London and signing petitions against arts cuts, they actually got 
back out into the provinces and made performances, made exhibitions, we could 
bring about a real change."

The festival has a track record of seeking out unconventional new spaces, 
which Poots admitted has led to him stalking the streets shaking doorknobs and 
peering through hoardings – which is how he found a huge half-derelict former 
train station, the Mayfield Depot, abandoned since 1986, which will come back 
to life as a vast festival venue.

The depot will house a spectacular performance, Massive Attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/massive-attack> v Adam Curtis, which will 
incorporate a concert – the band's first since 2010, and their only UK show 
this year – in an event being created by Robert del Naja of the band, the 
film-maker Adam Curtis, designer Es Devlin, and Felix Barrett of theatre 
company Punchdrunk.

The depot will also house one of the more startling events, a centenary 
performance of Igor Stravinsky's chilling score for The Rite of Spring, with a 
100-piece orchestra flown in from Russia. The original ballet, choreographed by 
Nijinsky, sparked riots. This reimagining by the theatre director Romeo 
Castellucci will replace the dancers with 11 tonnes of bone dust eddying and 
billowing in a giant glass box.

Another legendary director, Robert Wilson, will be working with the actor 
Willem Dafoe, and the dancer Mikhail Baryshnikov, who is better known to some 
as a silver-haired character of Aleksandr Petrovsky in Sex and The City. They 
will be working on The Old Woman, based on a 1930s absurdist novella by a 
Russian writer, Danill Kharms, who would die a few years later in a prison 
camp, aged just 36.

It will be more of a home coming for Josie Rourke, who will be bringing her 
new Donmar Warehouse company in a play based on the epic match between the 
chess master Garry Kasparov and the computer Deep Blue. Although she comes from 
Salford, the last time she worked in Manchester was as an office temp trying to 
pay off her student loan. Rourke told me her grandmother died last year, and 
she was sad she would not see her first play directed in the north.

• Manchester International Festival, 4-21 July 2013. This article was amended 
on 6 March 2013 to clarify a remark by Josie Rourke, and make clear that 
tickets are still available for many shows.
 