
"Chaos reigns," declares a mangy fox about midway through Lars von Trier's 
Antichrist <https://www.theguardian.com/film/antichrist>. The audience guffaws 
and then – whoops – we are pitched headlong into the abyss. Until then I'd been 
standing toe-to-toe with the film, which casts Charlotte Gainsbourg and Willem 
Dafoe as a bereaved couple going off the rails at their shack in the woods. But 
after that I'm senseless; my thoughts in tatters. There are squawking crows and 
pitch-black holes and an abattoir's worth of mutilation that I could only peer 
at through splayed fingers.

Chaos reigns. I stumble out in a daze, momentarily unsure whether I loved it 
or loathed it. Abruptly I realise that I love it. Von Trier has slapped Cannes 
with an astonishing, extraordinary picture – shocking and comical; a funhouse 
of terrors (of primal nature, of female sexuality) that rattles the bones and 
fizzes the blood before bowing out with a presumptuous dedication to Andrei 
Tarkovsky that had sections of the crowd hooting in fury. If he had dedicated 
Antichrist to the Queen Mother he could not have insulted them more.

Outside I run into Geoff Andrew, head of film programming at the BFI 
Southbank. He informs me that the mangy fox was apparently voiced by the 
ex-husband of Amy Taubin, film critic on the Village Voice. Christ alive. 
Imagine sitting through a film like that, struggling to hang on to your mental 
moorings, only to have your ex-husband show up in the guise of vermin to tell 
you that chaos reigns. They'd have had to carry me out in a straitjacket.

Chaos reigns. The exterior of the Carlton hotel has been conjured into a 
winter wonderland – all fake snow and fir trees – to promote the 3D A Christmas 
Carol. It shimmers like a mirage in the Mediterranean heat. Walking on the 
Croisette, I am genuinely unsure whether a gold-coated statue is real (ie dead) 
or fake (ie living). Inside the cinema, the big blond guy I'd always assumed 
was Harry Knowles, uber-geek founder of Ain't It Cool News, turns around and 
starts speaking German, which means it can't be him after all.

We lug the Guardian dinghy up and down the seafront, dragging it into plush 
hotels and round and round the international village. The security guards are 
incandescent; I think they want to kill us. Word of advice: if you want to be a 
pariah at theCannes film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cannesfilmfestival>, just show up with a 
dinghy.

Chaos reigns. The festival is accelerating and the screenings pass in a blur. 
I see Ang Lee's Taking Woodstock, which is amiable but insipid. I see Ken 
Loach's Looking for Eric (also amiable, but with a little grit in its soul). 
Jacques Audiard's Un Prophète (A Prophet) deals out a searing, old-school 
prison epic about an illiterate Arab kid recruited as a general factotum by the 
Corsican mob. Pound for pound, this is surely the strongest film of the 
competition so far. Why, then, is it Antichrist that keeps me awake last night, 
whirling like a dervish in the darkness of the room?
 