
The Maoist insurgency in India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> has 
its roots in a 1967 rural uprising in Naxalbari, a village in West Bengal, and 
in a simultaneous series of splits in the powerful Indian Communist party.

By the early 1970s the Indian state had crushed the first wave of agitation, 
led largely by university educated urbanites.

But violence has surged again with the unification of two extremist factions, 
the People's War Group, and the Maoist Communist Centre, which formed the 
Communist party of India (Maoist) in 2004.

The aim of the movement, according to Indian government officials, is the 
overthrow of the Indian state through a protracted armed campaign lasting many 
decades. The Maoists' own literature says their targets include 
"eco-imperialist exploitation" by multinational companies, and the "social 
oppression" of India's caste system.

Many of the Maoists' recruits are from India's marginalised tribal communities 
who have gained nothing from their country's recent economic growth. The 
group's leaders are largely educated and have urban backgrounds.

From their stronghold in the southern districts of the state of Chhattisgarh, 
the Maoists have been trying to expand operations into West Bengal. In all, 
there are believed to be several thousand hardcore Maoist fighters and many 
tens of thousands of active supporters. Most weapons are stolen from security 
forces or made in basic workshops. Some are bought on the black market.

The number of incidents relating to the insurgency has been rising, from 1,533 
in 2004, to 2,239 last year. In 2009 586 civilians were killed, as well as 317 
members of the security forces and 217 insurgents, according to the Indian 
government.

In April, 76 policemen were killed in an ambush. Only a handful in the 
cornered force escaped.

The Maoists have been able to establish "liberated zones" in parts of the 
south, centre and eastern regions of India where government authority is almost 
non-existent. The government says there are Maoists in a third of all districts 
in India, though many analysts believe their presence is often minimal.

Though the insurgents appear not to be a strategic threat to such a large 
country, their activity worries investors and advertises India's deep 
inequalities.

The Maoists have won the sympathy of many leading Indian intellectuals, 
including the writer and activistArundhati Roy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/arundhatiroy>, who have been accused of 
ignoring the more unsavoury aspects of the Maoist campaigns, such as the 
kangaroo courts, killings of alleged "informers", and the civilian casualties.

Critics also say the Maoists do not physically attack the businesses they 
accuse of unfairly exploiting mineral resources but extort money from them 
instead.
 