
Just three months ago, at the end of February, I was sitting in a bar in the 
Chicago Hilton, discussingRay Bradbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/ray-bradbury>. I was staying at the Hilton, 
and in a moment Bradburian in its weirdness, I had been put into the suite 
where President Obama saw on TV that he had just won the US presidential 
election. On that occasion the immense, many-roomed suite must have been full – 
of family, of security folks, of political staffers – but I was in it all 
alone, and it was not the best place to be while dwelling on things Bradburian. 
It was too easy to imagine that there was someone in the next room. Worse, that 
someone might be my evil twin, or myself at a different age, or it might 
contain a mirror in which I would cast no reflection. It took some self-control 
not to go in there and look.

In February, however, the Chicago Hilton was not crawling with secret 
servicemen talking into their sleeves, but with 4,000 writers, would-be 
writers, students of writing, and teachers of writing, all of whom were 
attending the conference of theAssociation of Writers and Writing Programs 
<http://www.awpwriter.org/> where I was to give the keynote address, and every 
single one of whom would have known who Ray Bradbury was.

In the Hilton bar with me was Bradbury's biographer, Sam Weller 
<http://listentotheechoes.com/>. It was the first time I'd met him, in person 
that is, though I felt I already knew him. He'd contacted me on Twitter – this 
is a 21st-century story – to see if I'd like to contribute to a tribute volume, 
edited by himself and byveteran horror writer Mort Castle 
<http://www.writerswrite.com/journal/nov98/castle.htm>. The brief: to write a 
short story in Bradburyesque mode, whatever that might be; or whatever those 
might be, since Bradbury's work came in many modes. I enthusiastically agreed 
to take a crack at it, and so did 25 other writers, including Neil Gaiman, 
Alice Hoffman, Harlan Ellison, Dave Eggers, Joe Hill, Audrey Niffenegger, and 
Charles Yu. Each one of us had responded because we'd been influenced in some 
way by Ray Bradbury.

What Sam and I were discussing was the launch of the collection, which was to 
be published by HarperCollins, and was to be calledShadow Show – from the 1962 
Bradbury novel,Something Wicked This Way Comes 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Something_Wicked_This_Way_Comes_(novel)>. Ray 
himself had written an introduction, and it was hoped that he could be present 
at the grand celebration that was to take place at ComicCon, the vast gathering 
of graphic artists, comics writers and their fans, plus related enterprises and 
genres, that was slated for San Diego in mid-July. Five of us were going to do 
a Bradbury panel there: Sam, Mort Castle,Joe Hill <http://joehillfiction.com/>, 
me and Ray himself.

But Ray had been feeling a little frail, said Sam; it was possible he might 
not make it. In that case, the four of us would do the panel, and Sam and I 
would visit Ray in his home, webcast him to the world, connect him with 
his fans, and ask him to sign some covers of the book for them on the 
Fanado.com website I'd been involved in developing. Ray was keen to do it, said 
Sam, despite his qualified distrust of the internet. His enthusiasm for his 
many devoted readers and his fellow writers never waned, and if using the 
questionable internet was the method of last resort, then that is what he would 
do.

I was greatly looking forward to meeting a writer who had been so much a part 
of my own early reading, especially the delicious, clandestine reading done 
avidly in lieu of homework, and the compulsive reading done at night with a 
flashlight when I ought to have been sleeping. Stories read with such 
enthusiasm at such a young age are not so much read as inhaled. They sink all 
the way in and all the way down, and they stay with you.

But now Ray Bradbury has died. He was 91, but still – as with everyone who has 
always been in your life and is then not there any more – his death seems 
impossible. People don't die as such in his work; or they don't die in the 
ordinary way. Sometimes they melt – the Martian in the story of that name 
dissolves, like the Wicked Witch of the West inThe Wonderful Wizard of Oz 
<http://www.literature.org/authors/baum-l-frank/the-wonderful-wizard-of-oz/>, 
one of Bradbury's influences. Sometimes they are done to death by aliens, as in
The Martian Chronicles  
<http://www.raybradbury.com/books/martianchronicles-hc.html>story, "The Third 
Expedition". Sometimes they are hunted down by mechanical hounds for the crime 
of reading books, as inFahrenheit 451 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/classics/9780006546061/fahrenheit>
. Sometimes people don't entirely die: revenants and vampires are not unknown 
in Bradbury's work. But Bradbury's people seldom just expire.

Any writer who delves as deeply into "horror" writing as Bradbury did has a 
complex relationship with mortality, and it's not surprising to learn that Ray 
Bradbury as a child was worried that he would die at any moment, as he tells us 
in "Take Me Home", a sidebar in this June's New Yorker ScienceFiction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/fiction> issue. "When I look back now," he 
says – in what, ironically, was going to be his last published piece – "I 
realise what a trial I must have been to my friends and relatives. It was one 
frenzy after one enthusiasm after one hysteria after another. I was always 
yelling and running somewhere, because I was afraid life was going to be over 
that very afternoon."

But the flip side of the mortality coin is immortality, and that 
interested him as well. At the age of 12 – as he tells us on his website – he 
had a definitive encounter with a stage magician called Mr Electrico. This was 
in the age of travelling circuses and the like, and Mr Electrico had a unique 
act: he sat in an electrified chair, thus in turn electrifying a sword he held, 
with which he in turn electrified the spectators, making their hair stand on 
end and sparks come out of their ears. He electrified young Bradbury in this 
manner, while shouting, "Live Forever!" The child had to go to a funeral the 
next day, a close encounter with death that led him to seek out Mr Electrico 
once more to find out how this living forever thing was to be done. The old 
carney showed him around what used to be called the freak show – complete with 
a tattooed man who was later to morph into the Illustrated Man – and then told 
him that he, Ray, contained the soul of Mr Electrico's best friend, who had 
died in the first world war. You can see how all this would have made an 
impression. Right after his baptism by electricity at the hands of Mr 
Electrico, Bradbury started writing; nor did he stop until his own death.

How do you live forever? Through other people, it seemed: those whose souls 
turned up in your body. And through other voices, the voices that spoke through 
you. And through your written words, the code for those voices. At the end of
Fahrenheit 451, the hero finds – in a world of destroyed books – a group of 
people who have become the vanished books by memorising them: a perfect 
embodiment for the knot of mysteries presented to young Ray by Mr Electrico.

This evening – in the middle of writing this eulogy, for that is what it is – 
I had to break off in order to attend a poetry event. At the party afterwards, 
I told a writer friend that Bradbury had died. "He was the first writer I read 
all of," he said. "When I was 12 or 13. I read every single book – I sought 
them out. I read them cover to cover." I said I thought that a lot of writers – 
and a lot of readers – had most likely had the same experience. And that they 
would be writers and readers of the most diverse kinds – poets and prose 
writers, all ages, all levels of brow, from low to high.

What accounts for Bradbury's reach – his scope, his influence? And – dreaded 
question, but one that critics and interviewers are always asking – where would 
you locate him on the map of literature?

My own view is that, in his best work, Bradbury sinks a taproot right down 
into the deep, dark, Gothic core of America. It's no accident that he was 
descended from Mary Bradbury, convicted as a witch in 1692, during the notorious
Salem witchcraft trials 
<http://law2.umkc.edu/faculty/projects/ftrials/salem/salem.htm>, for, among 
other things, assuming the form of a blue boar. (She was not hanged, as the 
execution was delayed until the craze was over.) The Salem trials are a seminal 
trope in American history, one that has repeated itself over and over in 
various forms – both literary and political – throughout the years. At its 
heart is the notion of the doubleness of life: you are not who you are, but 
have a secret and probably evil twin; more importantly, the neighbours are not 
who you think they are. They might be witches, in the 17th century, or people 
who will falsely accuse you of being a witch; or traitors, in the 18th century, 
at the time of the revolution; or communists, in the 20th; or people who will 
stone you to death, inShirley Jackson's "The Lottery" 
<http://www.neatorama.com/2011/04/14/the-lottery-by-shirley-jackson/>; or 
terrorists, in the 21st. In the 19th century, Nathaniel Hawthorne – himself 
connected to the Salem trials through his ancestor, a hanging judge – wrote
"Young Goodman Brown" <http://www.online-literature.com/poe/158/>, a perfect 
expression of this theme. (Puritan Brown discovers, or perhaps dreams, that his 
godly neighbours are all members of a satanic coven.) Henry James has his own 
version: "The Jolly Corner", in which a Europeanised American encounters the 
ghost of himself as he would have been had he remained in America, a sort of 
rich monster.

Vladimir Nabokov said, in Pnin, that Salvador Dalì "is really Norman Rockwell 
<http://www.nrm.org/about-2/about-norman-rockwell/>'s twin brother kidnapped by 
Gypsies in babyhood". But Bradbury was also a twin brother of Rockwell, 
kidnapped in babyhood by some darker force – Edgar Allan Poe, perhaps, whom he 
read avidly at the age of eight. Poe's "William Wilson" opposes two twinned 
selves, and Bradbury can almost be said to have acted them out: the bright 
self, all sunshine and front porches and lemonade; and the dark one, the one 
who could imagine two children luring their own parents to death in "The 
Veldt". Two of theMartian Chronicles stories twist these skeins together 
admirably. In "The Martian", an American family has moved to Mars to try to 
create a new life after the death of their son. But the dead son shows up, just 
as he used to be, and father, mother and son settle into a Rockwell normality. 
The son is really a Martian, a shapechanger who reflects the desires of others; 
and the story spirals down into tragedy, with the equivalent of a mob lynching 
at the end.

In "The Third Expedition" – called, originally, "Mars is Heaven" – space 
explorers from Earth find that the mellow, prewar hometown of their childhood 
is now on Mars, complete with old friends and family members, including dead 
ones. What a fine reunion they all have, until it turns out that the town and 
its inhabitants are mirages, devised by the Martians to lull the invaders – 
perceived by the Martians as harmful – so that they can be exterminated. Who 
can you trust? Dang near nobody. Or dang near nobody who claims a Rockwellian 
normality, which is bound to be a façade.

But nostalgia for the same Rockwellian normality is very real in Bradbury's 
work, the detail lovingly rendered. He was born in 1920 in Waukegan, Illinois, 
and it is this town and this time – the 20s and 30s of his youth – that appears 
again and again in his work, sometimes on Earth, sometimes on Mars. You can't 
go home again, said Thomas Wolfe – another American nostalgist – but you can 
get back the past by writing about it, maybe, as Wolfe and Bradbury both did. 
However, the charm lasts only until midnight strikes and things fall apart. The 
shadow of the black-shrouded clock from Poe's "Masque of the Red Death" is 
never far from Bradbury's world, even at its sunniest: time is the enemy.

As a writer, Bradbury grew up in the "golden age" of science fiction – usually 
thought of as the 30s – and built his career, initially, on the platform that 
existed then and for several decades thereafter: an extensive popular-magazine 
market for short fiction. Though he would end by publishing in the respected 
New Yorker, he began in 1938 by publishing in an amateur fan magazine, then his 
own magazine, Futura Fantasies; then he published in the pulps, including Super 
Science Stories and Weird Tales. You could make a living at that, then, if you 
wrote a lot, and Bradbury did. He wrote every day, and once vowed to write a 
story a week – a feat he accomplished. His income was helped along by 
adaptations for the comics, then by screen and TV adaptations. He worked his 
way up to the glossies, including Playboy and Esquire. Writing was both his 
vocation – he was called to it, and wrote intuitively – and his career, by 
which he supported himself and his family; and he was proud of both of these 
aspects.

He ducked classification and genre corrals as much as he could: as far as he 
was concerned he was a tale-teller, a writer of fiction, and as far as he was 
concerned the tales and the fiction did not need to have labels.

The term "science fiction" made him nervous: he did not want to be shut up in 
a box. And he, in his turn, made "science fiction" purists nervous, as well he 
might. Mars in his hands, for instance, is not a place described with 
scientific accuracy or even much consistency, but a state of mind; he recycles 
it for whatever he needs at the moment. Space ships are not miracles of 
technology, but psychic conveyances, serving the same purpose as Dorothy's 
whirlwind-borne house inThe Wonderful Wizard of Oz, or the trance of the 
traditional shaman: they get you to the Otherworld.

Ray Bradbury saw his writing as a way of living on after his death, and it 
will certainly perform that service. But then there's Bradbury as a person. All 
who knew Bradbury testify to his generosity towards others. His imagination had 
a dark side, and he used that dark twin and its nightmares in his work; but to 
the waking world he presented a combination of eager, wonder-filled boy and 
kindly uncle, and that was just as real. In an age of writing classes, he was 
self-taught; in an age of spin, his was an authentic voice, straight from the 
heartland; in an age of groomed images, he was a natural.
 