
Formula One scarcely needs the macabre tones of Halloween as it arrives in 
Texas this week. F1 comes to the USdeep in crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/oct/27/us-grand-prix-formula-one-mario-andretti-f1>
 – withtwo teams already missing from the paddock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/27/marussia-administration-formula-one-us-grand-prix-caterham>
 and several more facing challenging immediate futures within a broken business 
model. America, however, the capital of the glass-half-full philosophy, is 
precisely the right place for Formula One to be right now.

The Circuit of the Americas, where the US Grand Prix will be raced on Sunday, 
is the 10th track to stage grand prix action Stateside. In the past, the sport 
has let itself down with its demands for a bigger share of the money pot. The 
Americans have been to blame, too, though, with a lack of investment and their 
insularity making them unwilling to embrace the most complex form of motor 
sport, when racing around an oval track is so much easier to understand.

Given the history of Formula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone>
 in the US, the future of the Austin race remains in danger, most of all 
because of the excessive charges made by the sport, but F1 has finally found 
its American home, according to Mario Andretti, the world champion of 1978 who 
is the official ambassador for this year’s event.

“We’ve tried Long Beach, Detroit, Dallas, Phoenix, Indianapolis and other 
places,” he says. “It looked like Watkins Glen would be our real home and we 
were there for 19 years. It was extremely successful but we did not reinvest 
and reconstruct or comply with safety and other standards, which was a very big 
mistake.

“Formula One has been a Gypsy in the US since it left Watkins Glen. It 
migrated to Long Beach, where it was very successful, but there were other 
financial considerations [F1’s demands for more money].”

Andretti added: “Formula One would go some place else for a year or two and 
then disappear. We thought it had found a good solid base in Indianapolis but 
the ambiance wasn’t there. There was something lacking because of the dual 
facility. Indianapolis is for oval racing, has been for 100 years. F1 was not a 
good fit, unfortunately, but here, it is. This is a venue built by today’s 
standards. It looks good on TV, drivers love it – all of the good things.

“From the spectators’ standpoint there are so many good qualities – with the 
viewing, the accessibility. A lot of good work has been done to provide a good 
home for the US GP and I’m proud of it.”

The theme for this year’s race is “How the West was Formula One”. There are 
bars everywhere decorated in cowboy clothes.

Andretti was 15 when he came to the US in 1955, the year his great idol, 
Alberto Ascari, was killed in an accident at Monza. As with many other young 
immigrants in the last century Andretti changed the face of the nation – he has 
Italian blood running through his veins but he does a nice line in slick 
American one-liners. When, talking about a particularly unpopular figure in F1, 
he was asked: “What makes him tick?” Andretti replied: “A bomb, let’s hope.”

Now, at Austin <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/austin>, Andretti feels 
the sport is ready to settle down. “This venue has established itself. We can 
look forward to a Formula One race from now on. It’s quite a scene. There’s a 
lot to look forward to.”

The Texas circuit has become established in other fields since staging its 
first US Grand Prix in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/nov/18/lewis-hamilton-us-grand-prix>. 
It has generated a reported $897m for the Austin area in 2014. It has held the 
MotoGP Grand Prix of the Americas, ESPN’s X Games, the FIA World Endurance 
Championships and countless concerts at the venue’s Austin360 Amphitheatre, 
winner of Pollstar’s best new major concert venue for 2013.

Austin, for Andretti, however, is much more than a racetrack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/nov/10/f1-american-grand-prix-mario-andretti>
. “Austin is a very eclectic city, culturally very rich. It’s the live music 
capital of the world and people come from all over the world to see it, to 
attend live music events. The median age there is 30, so it’s a very young and 
vibrant place. The city opens up very nicely and becomes part of the entire 
event. Entire blocks will be full of parties. It will be quite a scene. There’s 
something for everybody to enjoy, keen race fan or not.”

Even rumours that the US may stage other Formula One events in California, 
possibly San Diego, does not worry Andretti. “There are potential projects 
being talked about. America is a big country. It can definitely host two races, 
in my opinion. It’s always a financial decision.

“There’s talk about San Diego but it would be a temporary facility – and we’ve 
seen what that does. I’d like to see it, as a fan of the sport, but we’ve seen 
the project in New Jersey fall apart. When the cheque needed to arrive it got 
lost in the mail but more F1 action in America can only be a good thing.”

The circuit’s president, Jason Dial, says: “There are rumours about F1 races 
in other places but that speaks about increasing the brand awareness, 
increasing audience engagement in a time zone in which folks can watch it on 
Sunday afternoon instead of very early in the morning. Then we are really 
building an audience.”

Dial is not worried about the prospect of next year’s new Mexican Grand Prix 
stealing fans from Austin – although it undoubtedly will. “Not at all. We’re 
calling it the Tex-Mex Two Step. The races are only a week apart and we think 
that is a positive. I’ve talked to people in Europe who intend to come to both 
race weekends.”

Dial added: “My crystal ball broke years ago but we want this to be 
long-standing. The US market is very important to F1 – and F1 is very important 
to Austin. It’s here to stay.”

In the famous poster for the film Easy Rider “A man went looking for America 
and couldn’t find it anywhere”. Formula One has been looking everywhere for a 
permanent home in the US. It just might have found one.
 