
Even a glance at Maria Sharapova 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/maria-sharapova> moving across the tennis 
court suggests the Russian might have been a prima ballerina, lithe and loose 
yet programmed, with a volatile temperament constantly held in check by the 
need to minimise errors, to give the illusion of perfection.

Her every gesture on court appears premeditated: the rhythm of the ball 
bounces when serving, followed by that extraordinarily high ball toss, the 
finger-swipe to keep stray wisps of hair in place, and those dainty steps away 
from the baseline when about to receive, her back to her opponent as she plucks 
at her racket strings, bends her right knee as if launching a dance step then 
swivels to rejoin battle – at her moment of choosing.

She is passionate – about tennis, certainly – yet her demeanour is glacial.

Her hauteur does not invite anything more than routine inquiries and, when she 
announced after beating Petra Kvitova 6-2, 3-6, 6-4 on Thursday to reach the 
final of theAustralian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> 
against Victoria Azarenka that she would not follow the tradition of giving a 
second pre-final press conference the day before Saturday's match, it did not 
come as a surprise to seasoned observers.

Azarenka, who accounted for Kim Clijsters 6-4, 1-6, 6-3 in the earlier 
semi-final, had no such problem and will accommodate the media on Friday while 
her opponent retreats to her training bubble.

What Sharapova did say after beating Kvitova in revenge for losing to her in 
the Wimbledon final last year, was polite, to the point and unsurprising.

"It means so much to be back in a grand slam final [after winning here four 
years ago]," Sharapova said. "To get that far again after losing so early the 
last couple of years means a lot to me. I played someone that's just had really 
great results and has beaten me the last couple of times. I just really wanted 
it today. I fought to the last point. She had so many opportunities in that 
third set, and I just hung on and really went for it."

Asked if she thought Azarenka would be nervous in her first grand slam final, 
she was as quick on her feet as in a match: "Well, I played Petra in her first 
grand slam final. She played really high-quality tennis. It didn't really 
affect her."

Putting her interrogators in their place comes easily to Sharapova. She is 
nearly always in charge – and there is no real warmth or familiarity in the 
exchanges. It is as uneven a battle as was her domination of Kvitova in the 
final game.

However, the small contingent of Russian journalists who follow her around the 
circuit say what the rest of the world's media see is misleading. "She feels 
comfortable with her own, of course," one Russian journalist told me, "and she 
will laugh with us. But, today, for instance [at her main post-match press 
conference], she was cut short. She had more to say, I think.

"It is unfortunate. We see her all the time and she enjoys that, I am sure."

Sharapova and Azarenka are both considerably more voluble when going about 
their business and there will be sound and, no doubt, fury when they collide in 
what promises to be the loudest women's final in the history of this tournament.

It ought also be one of appropriate excellence on the evidence of their 
semi-finals. Both matches lasted exactly two hours and 12 minutes, and, while 
Azarenka was generally considered to have won the screaming award during her 
three-sets win over Clijsters, Sharapova probably played the more convincing 
tennis, with the volume slightly down from her normal output, in accounting for 
a nervous Kvitova.

Kvitova started the day favourite to win the title, ahead of Azarenka and 
Sharapova; logic suggests the Czech's conqueror should assume that status, and 
there would be no argument on that from this vantage point.

The first match, on a very warm rather than unbearably hot day on Rod Laver 
Arena, reached a peak at the end, as opposed to the rather limp conclusion to 
Sharapova's win.

"It was a really difficult third set," Azarenka said. "There were a lot of ups 
and downs, but in a good way. She was coming with some incredible shots; I was 
really going for it. I have one more match to go. I have to stay humble and 
stay focused."

Staying "humble" is a curious concept in sport but what the Belarus player 
probably means is she doesn't want to get ahead of herself, to raise 
expectations too early – especially on her first visit to the big stage.

For Clijsters, defeat was tough to take in a place where she is so loved. "I 
felt like I have given it my all these last two weeks, and it's unfortunate." 
In truth, there was no issue of good or bad fortune.

Clijsters, Lleyton Hewitt's ex and cheered on as "Aussie Kim" every time she 
returns here, could not deliver for the well-wishers because, as the Belgian 
admitted, "she [Azarenka] was playing very aggressive tennis, moving really 
well. She deserved to win." Now that's humble.

So, who will prevail between the sisters of scream? Azarenka has been in 
superb form in this tournament and the lead-up, but Sharapova can almost taste 
victory. Like Roger Federer, she became used to success and does not much like 
the extended lack of it. She is one of five active players to have won multiple 
slam titles, a member of the old guard, almost, alongside the Williams sisters, 
Svetlana Kuznetsova and Clijsters.

She won in Rome and Cincinnati last year but her last major was here in 2008. 
As she steps up, she gets better and here that has been her story. She conceded 
the fewest games, five, of anyone in the last 16 during the first three rounds. 
Before Thursday, she had given up just 21 games – as had Azarenka.

Sharapova pulled out of the Brisbane warm-up tournament and her sore ankle did 
not noticeably inconvenience her against Kvitova, so fitness ought not be a 
problem.

If she does win – and I think she will – maybe she'll share a smile with us, 
albeit a measured one.
 Soundwave clips of Victoria Azarenka, left, and Maria Sharapova, right, 
showing the decibel levels of their respective shrieks during matches. 
Sharapova's reaches 105 decibels and Azarenka's 95, but the Belarusian's has a 
longer duration with the average grunt lasting 1.5 seconds. Image: Guardian  