
The radio crackled into life. An ominous, drawling American voice addressed 
the enemy below: "Libyan ship or vessel, remain anchored. Do not leave port. 
The Gaddafi regime forces are violating a United Nations resolution ordering 
the end of hostilities in this country. If you attempt to leave port, you will 
be attacked and destroyed immediately. For your own safety, do not leave port."

The voice repeats the warning in French and then Arabic. The threatening 
message is purportedly from a US Air Force warplane circling a rebel-held 
Libyan port city on 20 March. Hours later, the broadcast had been transmitted 
online by a Dutch hacker using an audio-sharing app known asAudioboo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/audioboo>.

Mark Rock <https://www.theguardian.com/media/mark-rock>, Audioboo's founder 
and chief executive, wears a satisfied smile as he recalls his most memorable 
"boos". "There's some mad Dutch hacker who scans radio frequencies, based in 
Holland. He's got a 30ft aerial sticking out of his roof somewhere and he's 
been capturing the bombing raids over Libya. He's getting massive, massive 
coverage," says Rock. In many ways, it is the neo-liberal extension of his 
company's grand ethos: "democratising radio".

Described as a Twitter for audio, Audioboo lets you record short bursts and 
publish them online directly from your smartphone. Stephen Fry is one of its 
most devoted users – but even he has been outstripped by the sounds of crises 
and uprisings. The Libya recording is the most listened-to boo of all time. 
Like the most enduring moments in radio, Audioboo has come to the fore at times 
of conflict. Three weeks after its launch in March 2009, the site was almost 
brought down by 250,000 listens in one day during London's G20 protests.

Social networks


"The whole history of Audioboo is really about proving that the spoken word 
can go social," Rock says. "We were the first people to take the brave – or the 
stupid – step and say that radio hasn't really innovated in the past 60 years. 
Conversation has become very private since the telephone, and the rise of 
social networks really was an opportunity to innovate in the audio space. So 
that's what we did."

For a man who sold his first business (the interactive TV firm Static2358) for 
$60m (£36m) in 2001, the 47-year-old Rock plays down his triumphs at every 
turn. "I was the ninth richest person in British media at one point, which I 
found hilarious," he says. Last year, Rock parachuted into the MediaGuardian 
100, judged the 14th most powerful person in UK media.

He studied politics at the University of Sussex but quit after a year – "I 
didn't want to be a civil servant" – then went to study photography at the 
University of Westminster – "I can gabble on for ages about French 
existentialism, but I can't really take a picture" – before taking six months 
out to build an extension on his then-girlfriend's house.

He was stuck in a late 80s rut when the Apple Macintosh SE/30 came along and 
changed his life. "I was entranced, because I'm completely talentless, really. 
I can't do anything," he says. A graphic design job followed – "I wasn't very 
good at it" – before he took the plunge and set up Static2358 in 1997. Is he a 
hands-on chief executive? "I don't code. I'm very hands-on in an emotional way."

But Rock, a father of four, is in a hurry. His list of 26 things to do is 
being impeded by institutional lethargy – from big media partners and the 
British attitude to enterprise – and his stateside ambition seriously 
threatened by "two guys in a garage". Today, Rock's thinking is mostly occupied 
by Audioboo's iTunes-style micropayments model, set to be introduced later this 
month. "It should have happened six months ago," he gripes.

Unlike most other two-year-old startups, Audioboo is to begin charging its 
heaviest users. The company is finalising plans to charge a modest sum each 
year for extra recording time – it is currently limited to five minutes – and 
"other benefits". It will later introduce what it claims is a painless 
micropayments system to charge its most avid listeners. Rock also has his mind 
on the company's second round of funding, pencilled in for this summer. He 
wants to raise £2m – double what was received from a coalition including UBC 
Media, Imagination Technologies and three angel investors this time last year.

Significantly, the funding round will allow Rock to take on the US – and to 
boost his team of seven engineers to 15. "Part of the investment strategy is to 
get some presence in America because I always go to sleep thinking that some 
young guys in a garage in California will come up with something better than 
us," he says. "We're taking small steps [into the US market] – but this is the 
kind of place where you can't afford to make too many small steps."

Despite the almost deafening buzz around the new generation of young social 
internet firms – including TweetDeck, the London-based company purchased by 
Twitter for an estimated £25m last month – attracting investment in the capital 
has been far from easy. Typically, venture capitalists will dismiss Audioboo as 
"too early" to invest in, says Rock. He believes the "English obsession with 
failure" is holding back London's brightest tech firms.

"In the UK you meet a lot of VCs and it's all about 'where's the money at? 
What am I investing in?' English VCs don't really understand the internet. 
They're used to investing in factories and things – whereas in the US it's like 
'that could go huge!' They don't realise how disruptive the internet really is."

Yet, Rock could help a bit too. Several attempts to persuade the chief 
executive to reveal any traffic or usage data end in failure. How many people 
use Audioboo? We don't know; although presumably he'd be willing to tell 
prospective investors a little more.

It is a similar British institutionalism that has made relations with 
"traditional" media companies agonisingly difficult. The BBC – whose lower-tier 
departments, like Radio 1 and Radio 6 Music, he credits with "fantastic usage" 
– appears to be the most impenetrable of all. " There is a reluctance to 
officially endorse Audioboo as a tool that the BBC can use," he says.

Corporate culture 


"My gripe with the BBC is that they're more than happy to support the 
big-reach American companies, such as Twitter and Facebook, and yet not support 
small, focused, British startups." Rock puts this down to "not-invented-here 
syndrome" – the reluctance to adopt a product or idea because it originates 
from outside the existing corporate culture. "The latest I've heard from the 
BBC is that they will look at it again in 2012 ."

Despite some emphatic gripes with London life, Rock is passionate that 
innovative technology firms can expand out of the UK and bats away any notion 
of a move to the US – or even north of the river to Silicon Roundabout. For 
now, Rock can steam through his 26-point to-do list on Tower Bridge Road – 
though his next headache will be finding a much bigger office.
 