
An exuberant Saturday evening panel from Marvel Studios provided confirmation, 
if any were needed, that the studio is the boss of Hollywood atComic-Con 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/comic-con>.


In a climactic session played out in a giddy party atmosphere, Marvel paraded 
the cast of Avengers: Age Of Ultron, showed a sneak peak of Ant-Man and 
announced a sequel toGuardians of the Galaxy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/guardians-of-the-galaxy>.

In so doing, the studio made good on the promise delivered at Comic-Con 2013, 
when Tom Hiddleston appeared in character as Loki and had the massed ranks of 
Hall H eating out of his hand.

While that remains possibly the most momentous stunt ever pulled by a studio 
and elevated Hiddleston to the status of semi-deity,Marvel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/marvel> maintained the highest standards 
with Saturday’s show.

The 6,500-strong crowd had been chanting “We want Marvel” and slow 
hand-clapping at least 10 minutes before the house lights went out and 
attendees screamed in accompaniment to a showreel of prior Marvel glories, 
culminating in footage from the imminent Guardians of the Galaxy.

Studio chief Kevin Feige arrived and ushered the cast of Ant-Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ant-man> to the stage. Paul Rudd and fellow 
Con debutants Michael Douglas and Corey Stoll walked on, alongside Peyton Reed, 
who recently replaced Edgar Wright as director.

Douglas quipped “I’ve popped enough cherries” before launching into a story 
briefing. He plays scientist Hank Pym, who gives a serum he has concocted that 
shrinks a man’s size while retaining his strength to Rudd, while Pym’s 
embittered former partner Daniel Cross plots a bank robbery.

Rudd becomes Ant-Man and Feige revealed that Cross morphs into the villainous 
Yellow Jacket. The former Lost star Evangeline Lilly, no stranger to the Con, 
took her seat on the stage – she will play Pym’s daughter.

Production will begin in two weeks' time, in Atlanta. However, that did not 
preclude Marvel from assembling a sequence that was heavy on voiceover and 
light on actors’ faces in which a suited Ant-Man sprints through a street at 
night and saddles up on a wasp.

Feige told the crowd he wanted to talk about 2015. Ant-Man will open in July 
and is arguably the poor relation to the May release, Avengers: Age of Ultron.

Hall H knew something was coming and within seconds sections of the crowd 
stood up and the screaming resumed. Then Robert Downey Jr walked on stage, 
tossing red roses while Michael Jackson’s Don’t Stop 'Til You Get Enough blared 
out from the speakers.

The party started and with barely a pause, Jeremy Renner walked on, followed 
by Mark Ruffalo, Chris Hemsworth, Cobie Smulders, Samuel Jackson andChris Evans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/chris-evans>.

Then came the newcomers: a buff Aaron Taylor Johnson as Quicksilver, 
bespectacled Paul Bettany as The Vision, James Spader as Ultron and Elizabeth 
Olsen as Scarlet Witch. Each spoke about their experience on the franchise. 
Bettany, who until now has voiced Tony Stark’s computerised assistant Jarvis, 
said: “I used to turn up in a dark room for 45 minutes and get a bag of cash 
and now I have to work for my money.”

When Hemsworth was asked what he would still like to do as Thor, he said: 
“Turning into a woman” – a reference to the pre-Con decision by Marvel Comics 
to trumpet its upcoming next iteration of the god of thunder as a woman. “It 
could be my Oscar,” he said.

Josh Brolin ambled on, wearing a fearsome gauntlet as Thanos. The character is 
in Guardians Of The Galaxy and was now confirmed as a part of Avengers: Age of 
Ultron.

There were two notable absentees. Joss Whedon was stuck in London after a knee 
operation while Scarlett Johansson, pregnant, was also unable to come.

She recorded a message and purred at Feige to show Hall H something special. 
He duly obliged and the crowd was treated to the first look at Age of Ultron, 
starting with a witty interchange between the Avengers as each, enjoying a 
drink and dressed in civilian clothing, tries to lift Thor’s hammer.

The mood changes when a robot messenger controlled by Ultron arrives and mocks 
the superheroes, moments before a horde of raiders smashes into the building.

There followed a montage of action, with a brief flash of Ultron in all his 
Terminator-esque robotic glory, before a final glimpse revealed the shattered 
bodies of Avengers strewn across a rocky plateau in space.

Audience members cried out in what seemed like genuine shock. The pantomime 
came to an end and the cast departed

Finally, in another plug for Guardians Of The Galaxy, Feige introduced a video 
of Chris Pratt and director James Gunn who accidentally on purpose revealed 
that a sequel has already received the green light and will open through 
Disney, as all Marvel films do, on 28 July 2017.
 