
Gary Lineker has launched a passionate defence of Match of the Day by 
suggesting that the BBC's often maligned football highlights programme still 
"sets the tone" and "leads the way" in its coverage of the game. He also voiced 
his belief thatenduring criticism of the programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/sep/06/alan-hansen-match-of-the-day-horrible>
, which the former England striker began to present in 1999, has been led by 
the Daily Mail, and "their anti-BBC issue".

Scrutiny of Match of the Day has intensified since the emergence of Gary 
Neville <https://www.theguardian.com/football/gary-neville> as a trenchant 
football pundit at Sky. Lineker admits "I wish we had [Neville] on Match of the 
Day", but points to the fact that the BBC programme is still much more widely 
watched than Sky's football shows and that "we generally hit between six to 
seven million [viewers] every weekend".

Lineker's comments, in an exclusive interview with the Guardian, follow the 
announcement that the BBC's leading football pundit, Alan Hansen, will leave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/sep/05/alan-hansen-bbc-motd-retired> 
after the World Cup next summer.

"Match of the Day has fundamentally improved since we got the [TV rights] 
contract back in 2003," Lineker said, "but football is so emotive and that's 
why people are never going to be entirely satisfied.

"But our audiences have improved year on year. We're bucking the trends on 
highlight shows for sport – audiences are down everywhere and, considering the 
excessive football on TV, it's remarkable we rarely go below four million on 
Saturday night, with another couple of million on Sunday morning. We generally 
hit between six to seven million every weekend, despite the current climate and 
amount of channels."

Acknowledging the "exceptional" impact of Sky, Lineker said: "It's so much 
easier when you can just spread yourselves but so many more people watch our 
show than any of theirs. It's important to remember that. We still set the 
tone. You see how so much of our analysis will be copied on the Sunday and 
Monday and you think, 'Oh yeah …' We still lead the way, I think."

He also resisted the charge that there is widespread dissatisfaction with 
MOTD. "I don't think there is. I think it's a Daily Mail thing and their 
anti-BBC issue. I get massive feedback on Twitter and the vast majority is 
incredibly positive. The only thing that has been levelled consistently against 
MOTD, particularly in the Daily Mail, is that there's a cozy atmosphere and 
it's the same people every week.

"A lot of people like familiarity as well, but we're changing things now. 
We've already seen about seven different pundits this season. [Last] Saturday 
we had Danny Murphy and [Everton manager] Roberto Martínez. So we shake it up 
but there's no need to change the fundamentals."

Lineker also defended the programme's comparative lack of analytical depth. 
"You cannot get involved in debate on MOTD," he said. "You can do it on Sky 
because they've got hours and hours. We've got a couple of minutes. It's a very 
disciplined show. Our primary purpose is to show the action and the analysis is 
very secondary. We have lots of people who would prefer no analysis. We have 
lots of people who would prefer more analysis. We have to find a balance."

In considering Neville's work as a pundit Lineker said: "The only difficult 
thing for him is that when it comes to analysing England players he's involved 
with them as [an assistant] coach. There have already been a couple of 
occasions when he's avoided it. But he's very good and, well, I wish we'd had 
him on MOTD."

Lineker defended Alan Shearer, whose relatively bland persona and knowledge of 
European football has been questioned consistently. "Personally, I think he's 
really good," Lineker said. "He's improved a lot. I think the problem is that 
when players start, with the odd exception, they need a transition and they can 
be a little guarded. But if you listen toAlan Shearer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alan-shearer> now compared to four years 
ago he's become very strongly opinionated. He's as strong as anyone and 
understands the game really well. We do lots of research and he's generally in 
the top three of who people rate."

Lineker also suggested his colleague had been misunderstood when, in 2010, 
Shearer said of Hatem Ben Arfa "No one really knows a great deal of him" after 
the France international performed well for Newcastle United. "That was so out 
of order," Lineker said. "He obviously meant Newcastle supporters in general. 
It's so easy to turn around and say: 'Oh, he doesn't know anything about 
football.'

"He quite clearly meant that we, as a nation, do not know much about Hatem Ben 
Arfa – outside of us in the game who obviously do lots of research and watch 
foreign football all the time. Alan's a competitive soul and he works really 
hard. All the guys do."
 