
• To the FT’s summer party at London’s German Gymnasium, an unusual venue 
Monkey can’t help but think was meant to send a message: just before the 
paper’s takeover last year by Nikkei was announced, it mistakenly and comically 
reported that Axel Springer was the successful suitor instead, in what may have 
been a Freudian slip - and editorLionel Barber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/lionelbarber> oddly makes a point of saying 
he “speaks German” on his Twitter profile. Barber did, to be fair, make 
reference in his party speech (which also included a scholarly spanking aimed 
it appeared at David Cameron for his botched referendum, involving an arcane 
play on “PPE” and “PPI”) to “our new partners at Nikkei”. Yet strangely the 
official list of VIPs attending included not one Japanese name, nor (amidst 
myriad business bigshots) a representative of Nikkei or any other 
Japanese-based company, though Monkey is assured senior figures were in 
attendance, including Nikkei senior managing director Mr Hirotomo Nomura.

• Nor were there sushi morsels to snack on or Sony gizmos or manga books for 
Barber’s lucky guests to take away with them: they “enjoyed Moet champagne and 
canapes”, the press release trills, before leaving with “goody bags that 
included a custom FT branded Ettinger wallet, mini Moet and Chandon champagne, 
Green & Black’s chocolates ...” - all seemingly adding up to a poignant 
farewell to the Pink ’Un’s luxuriant European past, and possibly a reluctance 
to greet an Asian future that might be rather more austere.

• Joey Jones, Sky’s former deputy political editor, only joined Theresa May’s 
team as spokesman in May, and now is in line to be her spinner as PM just four 
months later if she wins. By Monkey’s reckoning this would be a reporter’s 
fastest conversion from hack to top Downing Street flack - in Jones’s case, 
from standing outside No 10 to working inside it - for 47 years, since Harold 
Wilson as incumbent PM recruited the Sun’s Joe Haines in 1969. Alastair 
Campbell, in contrast, spent three years spinning for Tony Blair in opposition 
after leaving Today.

• Meanwhile, Jones’s former Sky colleague Adam Boulton - Boulton was political 
editor, Jones his No 2, before the former was converted to an anchorman - found 
himself in a spot of undignified bother last week after apparently criticising 
Laura Kuenssberg’s pool interview withMichael Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove> on Twitter. “Are you 
suggesting I gave a Tory an easy ride, chubby chops?” asked @bbclaurak_, to 
which @adamboultonSKY unwisely replied “yes you did, a free advert in fact”. 
Luckily, other tweeters soon alerted Boulton to the fact that he was arguing 
with a prankster’s fake account (Kuenssberg’s verified account is @bbclaurak). 
The pseudo-Laura’s not-very-BBC tweet “Sounds to me like someone’s not had his 
afternoon nap. @adamboultonSKY #chubster” may also have been a helpful clue.

• Could it soon be curtains for Sarah Vine at the Daily Mail? Friday’s front 
page was distinctly ominous for her chances of remaining its most pampered and 
promoted columnist, as it combined an early endorsement ofTheresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> with condemning Vine’s 
husband Michael Gove (previously championed by the paper, which mistrusts Boris 
Johnson) for “treachery … savage blood letting … as Michael Gove knifes Boris”. 
Chiefly, no doubt, it dropped Gove so instantly and furiously for the reasons 
identified in its leader, that his betrayal and preceding porkies made it no 
longer possible to see him as a man of “consistency, strict adherence to 
principle and ... trustworthiness”. But somewhere in the mix of motives must 
have been Vine’s “Lady Macbeth” email leaked to Sky, which awkwardly portrayed 
Rupert Murdoch and Paul Dacre as plotters behind the scenes influencing the 
Tory leadership vote. Unsurprisingly, the email has yet to appear (or be 
mentioned) in the Mail itself, which may be considering whether it should dump 
Mrs Gove too.

• At least Vine has one loyal supporter in the form of Sky’s afternoon anchor 
Kay Burley. Brought on to discuss the leaked email, Jacob Rees-Mogg MP waffled 
genially that some people (No 10 or BoJo aides, he presumably meant) would be 
no doubt comparing her to Lady Macbeth; to which Burley reacted as if to a 
disgusting swear-word or insult, passionately defending Vine in literal-minded 
fashion as a “civilised” person no one sane could conceivably compare to 
Shakespeare’s murderess.

• Last week’s events also pose problems for the Spectator, where deputy editor 
Mary Wakefield is married to Gove’s sinister, ranting guru Dominic Cummings 
(also the puppet-master of the Leave campaign) and columnist Toby Young - 
strongly allied to the former education secretary as a supporter of his schools 
reforms - is an ardent Gove fanboy (as he tediously told everyone he ran into 
at the FT party). Yet other staffers on the Tory weekly retain a strong 
allegiance to Boris Johnson, and are unlikely to easily forgive the assassin - 
as the array of anti-Gove content on the Speccie’s website since his shock 
announcement suggests - for slaying their ex-editor.

• Channel 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> has always been an 
innovation station open to fresh talent and particularly outsiders, free from 
the sense of an establishment recruiting people in its own image (and even its 
own children - the Grades, the Cottons, the Snows etc) - that is the curse of 
older broadcasters. Still mostly true, but not in the case of C4’s remarkably 
swift appointment of a successor to drama chief Piers Wenger, after he was 
poached to do the same job at the BBC. Beth Willis, his replacement, has a 
longer TV pedigree than any Dimbleby, as she’s not only the daughter of former 
C4 director of programmes John Willis, but also the granddaughter of Ted 
Willis, a prolific screenwriter best known for the gentle long-running cop show 
Dixon of Dock Green. Those pitching projects to the new drama supremo, however, 
would probably be best advised to avoid saluting her on arrival with the words 
“Evenin’ All”, or dressing up in a 1960s copper’s uniform in an effort to 
ingratiate themselves.

• The BBC’s Wimbledon subtitlers know precious little about tennis and seem to 
be better at vowels than consonants, judging by Monkey’s spasmodic 
text-overlayed viewing in the gym. At least gaffes involving calling Andy 
Murray’s coach Ivan Lendl “Ivan Lewis” (a Labour MP) and former ladies’ 
champion Ann Jones “Dan Jones” (a male medieval historian) were swiftly 
corrected; but there was so such revision when a passionate cry of “Yes!” from 
veteran commentator Barry Davies was translated to viewers as a plaintive 
“Jeff!”

•This article was amended on 4 July 2016 to clarify that though they were not 
included in a list of VIPs, senior figures from Nikkei and Japan did attend the 
FT summer party

 