
• For some, the top story in last week’s half-yearly magazine ABC figures was 
the spectacular performance of Private Eye; for others, the overall circulation 
decline or the woes of Richard Desmond’s mags and other weeklies. For the 
Independent, however, what stood out was that “the Spectator’s combined print 
and digital sales [have reached an] all-time high”. Its piece – 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/media/the-spectators-combined-print-and-digital-sales-reach-all-time-high-10452055.html>
 mysteriously written by Indy editor Amol Rajan himself, although media editor 
Ian Burrell is back from his hols – gushed that “the magazine is being read by 
more people that at any time in its 187-year history”, listed controversial 
columnists, cited followed-up reports and ladled praise on editor Fraser Nelson 
and publisher Andrew Neil, seeing the results as “vindication” of Neil’s 
decision to introduce a metered paywall (Neil was not slow to gratefully 
retweet this peculiar paean). Monkey will be on the lookout for future 
developments that might explain, with the benefit of hindsight, why Rajan both 
felt a sudden urge to turn media correspondent and got so carried away.

• In case you were away and missed it, this was the Times grovel on Monday 
that instantly took pole position in the contest for correction of the year: 
“Karol Wojtyla was referred to in Saturday’s Credo column as ‘the first 
non-Catholic pope for 450 years’. This should, of course, have read 
‘non-Italian’. We apologise for the error.” Hopefully, when the winner is 
chosen, the judges will have the paper’s godly Faith Register page from 8 
August in front of them, as the context adds to the merriment. At the foot of 
it is a feature about a book tracing the gradual disappearance of “mishap-prone 
priests”, as reflected in TV sitcoms; at the top, the guilty Credo column by 
the Rt Rev Stephen Platten, a rector and associate bishop, showing that 
mishap-prone priests are not yet entirely a thing of the past.

• Even though the DCMS team may sometimes look like mere servants obliged to 
do the bidding of George Osborne, irritating the junior culture minister 
doesn’t seem a particularly wise option when the BBC’s future is supposedly 
under threat. A viewer told Ed Vaizey he was “disappointed” that he was not 
present to defend the government’s policy on libraries in a BBC report. “So was 
I,”tweeted Vaizey <https://twitter.com/edvaizey> in reply. “@BBCBreakfast never 
asked me to go on. Guess they only wanted a one-sided story.” Vaizey will no 
doubt now be deluged with invitations from the BBC’s multiple news outlets.

• Barely a week currently goes by without news of some new initiative or post 
reflecting Tony Hall’s commitment to a more diverse BBC, and some of these 
innovations appear to be practical and sensible – yet finding sensible names 
for them remains a problem. Hard on the heels ofthe news in in-house online 
newsletter Ariel <http://www.bbc.co.uk/ariel/33637666> that the Beeb now has a 
“head of diversity, inclusion and succession” comesanother Ariel story 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/ariel/33802165> about a scheme called Real Inspiration 
for Staff at Every Level, which can just about be forced into the official 
acronym Rise (which happens to be the name of a failed Channel 4 breakfast 
show), although to simian eyes it looks more like Risel, Rifsel or Rifsael. Not 
for the first time, W1A’s creator John Morton may feel much of his next series 
is helpfully being written for him.

• Would all the hoohah about Harper Beckham’s dummy have happened at all 
without the feud between the Mail and the Mail on Sunday? On Monday, the daily 
title controversially put the four-year-old alone, dummy in mouth, on its front 
page, and showed her again with David Beckham on page 9, under the headline“Why 
does Harper, four, still use a dummy?” 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-3191650/Why-does-Harper-four-use-dummy-Experts-warn-David-Victoria-Beckham-s-little-girl-end-speech-dental-issues-continues-use-one.html>
 – and grateful columnists, stuck for saner material in the silly season, 
continued to discuss the Beckhams’ parenting for the rest of the week. Readers 
of both titles, however, will have recognised the images as part of a playful 
set taken of father, daughter and son in West Hollywood, another of which the 
Mail on Sunday had used very differently: a wholly sunny piece accompanied its 
photo of David rugby-tackling Brooklyn as Harper “shows them both a clean pair 
of heels”, with even the mention of what’s in her mouth (she “seems to be 
sucking on a dummy, which in true Beckham style is colour coordinated”) treated 
in positive fashion. Twenty-four hours later, its sister paper 
characteristically took a much angrier view, perhaps motivated in part by its 
long-standing itch to show up the Sunday paper as soft on celebs.

• As Donald Trump thunders and blunders his way through the Republican party’s 
nomination process, the issue of what to do about him has opened up a divide 
between 84-year-old Rupert Murdoch and his 75-year-old Fox News chairman Roger 
Ailes, who for a decade have seemed ideologically inseparable. “When is Donald 
Trump going to stop embarrassing his friends, let alone the whole country?” 
Murdoch tweeted last month, and after Trump’s recent misogynistic attack on 
star anchorwoman Megyn Kelly he lined up firmly with her and other Fox 
journalists: “Baier, Kelly, Wallace great job Thursday. Fine journalism, no 
more, no less. Friend Donald has to learn this is public life.” Ailes, however, 
has shown himself much less willing to unequivocally back his team and condemn 
the property tycoon, whom opponents see as (like Sarah Palin previously) a Fox 
creation. Ina piece 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2015/08/fox-news-picked-trump-over-megyn-kelly.html>
 headlined “How Roger Ailes Picked Trump, and Fox News’ Audience, Over Megyn 
Kelly”, New York magazine details the lengths he went to in order to mend 
fences, including “muting” the network’s defence of Kelly and repeated, 
undignified but eventually successful pleas for Trump – who at one point said 
he was “never doing Fox again” – to be friends again. If the original star of 
The Apprentice continues to be the front-runner in the party nomination race, 
the Murdoch/Ailes split looks likely to become more pronounced.

• As he prepares to leave the Today programme at the end of the year – “I will 
probably cry”, he tells Radio Times – James Naughtie is being increasingly 
helpful to whoever is asked to compile gaffes for his leaving tape, which will 
naturally have his mangling of Jeremy Hunt’s name as its climax. A few weeks 
ago his faffing forced an impatient Sarah Montague to tell listeners the time 
instead of him; andon Friday <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b0651nty> he 
introduced the Sports Desk presenter at 6.25am as “Karthi” [Gnanasegaram], only 
to have to apologise profusely on being crisply told that “it’s Sonali [Shah], 
actually”. This is not the first time a British Asian woman’s name has given 
the programme’s senior gents cringe-inducing problems. After Mishal Husain’s 
debut in 2013, a clearly bamboozled Garry Richardson thanked “Mishal” after a 
handover, although it was Montague who had introduced the Sports Desk veteran.
 