
'My liege! I have found another slipper!" "What? Another one?" Prince Charming 
had held some pretty wild Christmas balls in the past, but never before had so 
many glass slippers been left behind. He clearly should have taken theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> director general's advice and cancelled 
the free bar.

The slipper had "Channel 4 chief executive" written on a tiny sticky label on 
the bottom. "So that's another senior executive position in the UK commercial 
television sector that I've got to fill," thought the prince, not altogether 
snappily. At least the headhunters were going to have a happy Christmas, he 
reflected, making a mental note to use the ones hired by ITV.

A giant's stone's throw away, TweedleDuncan and TweedleJohnson were hopping 
mad, having lost an item of footwear each. This had the unfortunate consequence 
that they were only able to hop around in circles, meaning they were destined 
to talk about CelebrityBig Brother 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/big-brother> forever.

Meanwhile, Cinderella was ironing Simon Cowell's socks. Why doesn't he wear 
red ones like me, she wondered. What a year it had been. She'd promised the 
ugly investors (they could have been sisters – it was hard to tell this far 
away) a slap-up content led-recovery. But she had opened the oven door only to 
discover a stinking £2.7bn loss. The ugly investors fed it to the dog. They 
said it was a dog's dinner.

The socks were by Calvin Klein, and the iron was a Morphy Richards 42288 
Jetstream Elite.Simon Cowell <https://www.theguardian.com/media/simoncowell> 
smokes Kool menthol cigarettes. Well, thought Cinderella, I'm damned if I'm 
going to leave ITV without getting a bit of product placement in here 
somewhere. Alas, it still wouldn't raise enough cash to pay for another series 
of Kingdom. Or The South Bank Show.

It had been quite a year for Dawn Whittington. For one thing, she hadn't 
changed jobs in the last 12 months. But something was nagging her. And it 
wasn't Gerhard Zeiler. "Turn again, Whittington, once chief executive of 
Channel Five! Turn again, Whittington, twice chief executive (and chairman) of 
Five! Turn again, Whittington, thrice chief executive of Five!"

Hmmm. Did that mean she was going to leave – and come back again? Dawn 
Whittington, ITV chief executive. Got a certain ring to it, hasn't it? No, no, 
don't be ridiculous. If only she could see, say, six months into the future, 
she thought. Like in FlashForward, but with better acting. But then, we would 
never have had Live From Studio Five. Whittington did not have a cat, as you 
might have expected. She had a talking Woolfe.

"The wolves are at the door!" cried Jack. He was in something of a panic 
because commercial TV bosses were trying to top-slice his beanstalk. You 
remember, the beanstalk that led to the goose that laid the golden egg. The 
licence fee payer. There was only one thing for it – send in the Lyons!

"Any attempt to top-slice the beanstalk to subsidise commercial operators 
would weaken the BBC, threaten its independence, reduce accountability to 
licence fee payers … " You could forgive Jack for tuning out around this point: 
as the BBC director general, he had heard it all from theBBC Trust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-trust> chairman several times before.

It had been a tough year for Jack, but then it had been a tough year for Jack 
as long as anyone could remember. Not quite so tough that he had to rely on 
advertising for income, of course. Jack had got into trouble for paying his 
bean-counters too much. Didn't they know that his top management team could 
earn a lot more beans in the private sector than they did devoting their lives 
to public service? Jack knew this for a fact – he had recently been down the 
market, where they had offered him 58% more beans than the £834,000 he 
currently earned a year.

"Fee-fi-fo-fum, I smell the blood of an 87-year-old publicly funded 
broadcaster operating under a royal charter and agreement!" Crikey. It's Ben 
Bradshaw! Or is itJeremy Hunt <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-hunt>
? It was getting increasingly hard to tell these days.

Jack shoved his royal charter into his back pocket before the giant could rip 
it up and ran into the woods to shelter at his grandmother's house.

"My, what a big satellite dish you have!" said Jack. "Yes," replied his 
grandmother. "All the better for watching high-definition TV."

"My, what a big salary you have!" said Jack. "Yes," replied the grandmother. 
"You were absolutely right in what you said about people being able to earn 
more money in the private sector."

"My, what big subscriber figures you have!" said Jack. "The only reliable, 
durable and perpetual guarantor of independence is profit!" bellowed Jack's 
grand ... hang on a second, it's a Murdoch in grandmother's clothing! Jack 
whacked the wolf with a set-top box (HD) and ran all the way to Salford.

Back at the palace, the prince was trying to listen to BBC 6 Music on his DAB 
radio but unfortunately there was no signal in his neck of the woods so he 
watchedTop Gear <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/top-gear> on BBC 
iPlayer instead.

A year that had begun in uncertainty now felt less certain than ever. And 
there were still two empty slippers. But who to fill them? Peter "Fincham" Pan? 
Little Red Riding Heggessey? Baron Pluthero? Caroline Thomson in Boots?

There was one bit of good news, though. 2009? "It's behind you!"

Once upon a time …

Your pantomime players this year were: 

Prince Charming Monkey

TweedleDuncan Andy Duncan

TweedleJohnson Luke Johnson

Cinderella Michael Grade

Ugly sisters investors

Dick Whittington Dawn Airey

Jack Mark Thompson

The wolf James Murdoch
 