
• Worst (Freudian?) graphics gaffe: The BBC’s caption for the Paisley and 
Renfrewshire South (“Renfrewshite South”) result was a clear winner.

• Most peculiar poser: won by Kay Burley’s “have you ever had three Shredded 
Wheat?” to David Cameron, in the same bizarre campaign curtain-raiser that also 
saw her co-hostJeremy Paxman <https://www.theguardian.com/media/jeremy-paxman> 
asking Ed Miliband (post-interview but audibly) “are you all right?”

• Silliest headline: collected by the Mail on Sunday for its widely-mocked 
“May: SNP/Lab Pact ‘Worst crisis since Abdication’” - Theresa May in fact 
claimed it would be the biggest constitutional crisis - which rated the pact as 
worse than the second world war, Suez, the Falklands, Iraq, etc. (The misquote 
duly became a hashtag, as in: “Christopher Biggins has hinted he won’t be doing 
panto this year #WorstCrisisSinceTheAbdication”).

• Worst cautionary example of news anchor reading jokes off autocue: Jeremy 
Paxman, who is not used to ad breaks, greetedChannel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> viewers after one with “I’m David 
Dimbleby, this is BBC1, and you’re drunk”. It must have sounded better in 
rehearsal.

• Jay Hunt award for fastest-talking self-justification: Independent editor 
Amol Rajan’s gabbled defence of his paper’s election leader (which hoped for 
another Con-Lib Dem coalition) on Newsnight, when those able to keep up 
gathered that he was partly disowning his own editorial by signalling, via 
mantra-like repetition of liberal or Lib Dem, that he only backed one of the 
parties.

• Most semi-detached news executive: Newsnight editor Ian Katz, who urged his 
Twitter followers to watch More4’s The Vote on Thursday; or, in other words, 
not to bother with the prestigious natural history documentary on BBC1 or the 
expensive spy drama on his own BBC2.

• Most assiduous service to Brasenose College, Oxford: won by Telegraph editor 
Chris Evans, who was a contemporary of David Cameron’s at the said college in 
the 80s and couldn’t have done more - tabloid-style slogan headlines, embedded 
reporters at the PM’s side, day after day of front-page stories that might have 
been dictated by Lynton Crosby - to bring further glory to it by furthering his 
fellow-alumnus’s cause.

• Silliest sidelining: Andrew Neil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andrew-neil>, who presents more hours of BBC 
political television than anyone else, should have got the gig of doing the 
Beeb’s set-piece leader interviews (conducted by Paxman until he quit 
Newsnight) but instead they were assigned to Evan Davis, produced no news 
stories and ranged from dullness to disaster. Neil had to make do with 
election-night teasing of Paddy Ashdown over his hat-eating promise, which at 
least was an improvement on the Scot’s 2010 role: captain of the Ship of Fools.

• Best look: Julie Etchingham’s stunning white outfit when hosting ITV’s 
seven-leader debate, which aptly made her look like a psychiatric nurse running 
a group therapy session.

• Worst look: while other broadcasters’ presenters and reporters were avoiding 
politically coded (indeed any) colours, the BBC’s Emily Maitlis chose a cabin 
crew-like red for poll night - and so, weirdly, did her colleagues Sophie 
Raworth and (after dawn, having originally worn white) Laura Kuenssberg.

• Daftest gimmick: as well as pointlessly duplicating the graphics Maitlis was 
“firing up” indoors, Raworth’s tiled open-air map of Britain hopelessly counted 
on vox pops from passersby, although it was too cold for anyone to want to hang 
around to talk to her. Putting it outside New Broadcasting House was a bad idea 
too, as viewers associate the entrance area with W1A and hence surreal Beeb 
bungling.

• Naughtiest inter-channel zinger: Sky Arts’ live behind-the-scenes coverage 
of, er, Sky News’s coverage of the election labelled the news channel in a 
recurring caption as “one of the UK’s top 3 news broadcasters” - up there with 
theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> and ITV, then, but with Channel 
4 News implicitly dismissed as B-stream. The feud continues.

• Best impression of Howard Beale (“I’m mad as hell and I’m not going to take 
it any more!”) in the film Network: C4 News’ Alex Thomson furiously exposing 
election pseudo-events and the ostracising of non-favoured correspondents like 
him in his blogs and reports.

• Columnists most in need of backing from anti-censorship campaigners: the 
Prisoners of Rothermere (think padded dungeon lined with bookshelves and 
supplied with claret), Peter Hitchens and Simon Heffer, respectively punished 
by a pre-poll Mail on Sunday column failing to appear, and being only allowed 
to write about the past, not present-day politics in the Daily Mail, as both 
despise Cameron. Piteous dissidents indeed: too rightwing for the Mail titles!

• Best interview: BBC deputy pol ed James Landale’s day with Cameron in Witney 
produced the early scoop that the PM will not seek a third term; setting the 
tone for a campaign in which informal questioning by lesser names (eg Nick 
Ferrari) gained results but formal sit-down interrogations by Davis, Bradby, 
Humphrys etc produced nothing.
 