
Four-letter Gill

"Wonky cock documentary" is AA Gill's term for Channel 4 shows like 
Embarrassing Bodies, Monkey discovered during the Sunday Times TV critic's 
interview with BBC's Storyville editor Nick Fraser at theSheffield Doc/Fest 
<http://sheffdocfest.com/>. But when media journalist (and Guardian 
contributor) Kate Bulkley tried to defend the broadcaster for what she believed 
was legitimate public service broadcasting he proved a more-than-succinct 
debater. "Fuck off," was his only response. Monkey wasn't quite sure how 
Bulkley felt about this. Or indeed how this tallied with Gill's later assertion 
that television "at the moment is in the process of being very abusive to its 
audience. It used to be quizshows where people were respectable and say thank 
you and give them a cuddly toy. Now it's much more abusive." Unlike, say ... 
conference sessions chaired by Gill.

Not digging Giles

Gill wasn't a big fan of his friend Giles Coren's BBC2 show Giles and Sue Live 
the God Life, either. He used his session to outline his belief that the 
programme – in which the Times journalist and his sidekick Sue Perkins 
recreated the much-loved 1970s TV comedy – was phoney and falsely pretended 
there was a "frisson" between the two. But it also emerged that Coren didn't 
think much of the programme either. "I gave this a terrifically bad review and 
at 10pm I got a text from Giles saying 'You were right," Gill said. Not sure 
Coren was quite so honest in the pre-transmission publicity, but there you are.

Channel 4's word play

The word "heterozygosity" may be a mouthful but it seems to be the new 
buzzword for Channel 4's head of specialist factual,Ralph Lee. Apparently it 
refers to wildly different kinds of genes which come together and make the 
whole stronger.Or something like that 
<http://www.thefreedictionary.com/heterozygosity>. Lee used the term three 
times describe a TV landscape populated by such diverse offerings as Junior 
Doctor, The Only Way is Essex, Pineapple Dance Studios and Great British Bake 
Off." If we had a job called head of heterozygosity I would put my name 
forward," said Lee. Monkey's note to self: never, but never, agree to play 
Scrabble with Ralph Lee.

Factual fashion error

Monkey doesn't expect to see Pippa Middleton: A Year in the Life anytime soon 
on the BBC. Not necessarily because the access is unlikely to be granted in a 
month of Sundays. More because influential BBC commissioning executiveEmma 
Willis isn't a fan, apparently. "I didn't like the dress. I liked the wedding 
dress, but not the bridesmaid's dress," she said of the Duchess of Cambridge's 
sister, apropos of not very much at a session on factual entertainment. So, 
Emma, we're assuming you're not among the 232,667 who "like" thePippa Middleton 
Ass Appreciation Society Facebook page 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/royal-wedding/2011/04/29/pippa-middleton-bridesmaid-dress-sparks-facebook-fan-page-for-her-bottom-115875-23096432/>
.

Parenti guidance

"Go out there," chirruped the enthusiastic American digital artist and thinker,
Michael Parenti, when asked about the financial constraints of documentary 
film-making. "Shoot it and if it's good theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> will come knocking on your door." 
Monkey expected cheers and applause from the dazzled throng at a session about 
WikiLeaks and not what we actually got: the firm voice of Nick Fraser. 
"Unfortunately that's not the case," he said. As editor of the BBC's doc strand 
Storyville we think we'll trust the Beeb's man on that one.

Fi and the F-word

"Eek". That is the high-pitched sound Fi Glover gave when chairing a panel at 
which someone uttered the phrase "We didn't want to fuck about". "Sorry it's 
the BBC in me," she explained.

Rear guard action

Bruce Parry has his bum tanned. Yes, you read that right. And that is the news 
that is ringing out from Sheffield (an image of which Monkey cannot quite get 
out of its head) after the explorer and presenter of BBC2's Tribe disclosed 
that he has recently been applying fake tan to his posterior after reading a 
critique in the New York Times that "kept on going about what a white bum I 
had". After all the stuff you've been through for TV, Brucie –the projectile 
vomiting, for starters <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WRms5xMHCO4> ("I have to 
drink about 4 litres ... but the taste is so disgusting it triggers my gag 
reflex...") – Monkey thought you'd have developed a thicker, more leathery, 
skin about what's written in newspapers. Apparently not.

Blades' sharp wit

Going to Sheffield isn't all about screenings and panel discussions with the 
UK's factual programming-making elite. Oh No. Sometimes you actually get to 
meet some locals. So Monkey would like to thankBob, who hails from the Owlerton 
area of city and who informed us of the local name (or rather anagram) for the 
former Sheffield United manager Neil Warnock who led his side to relegation in 
2007 is ... Colin Wanker. Well it made Monkey laugh anyway.
 