
✒Friday's news that Chris Blackhurst is to be the new editor of the 
Independent seemed to go down well with staff. But Blackhurst himself was 
nowhere to be seen at Northcliffe House, the west London offices the Indy 
shares with the Mail titles and the London Evening Standard, where he is City 
editor, on the day his appointment was announced. The reason? He was 
luxuriating in the south London sun at Wimbledon as a guest of insurance giant 
Prudential. A lazy day at the All England Club sounds like the perfect way to 
celebrate gaining entry to that other exclusive club of national newspaper 
editors. Given that his proprietors Alexander and Evgeny Lebedev move in high 
society these days, perhaps Blackhurst will find himself in the Royal Box next 
year. Give us a wave, Chris!

✒The Blackhurst CV includes some strange patches, and none stranger than in 
2000 when he and the Spare Rib and Virago founder Rosie Boycott – then editing 
the Daily Express for left-of-centre Lord Hollick, with Blackhurst as her 
deputy – found they had a new proprietor called Richard Desmond. Hollick's 
decision to sell the titles was not all bad news, as the pair reportedly 
received £40,000 apiece from him, and then collected a lot more from Desmond 
when they left. But both were disgruntled because Desmond openly talked about 
the confidential payoffs: "I paid [Boycott] £330,000 to go," he said in the 
Times. "She had a lapdog called Blackhurst, I paid him £180,000." Among 
Blackhurst's more onerous duties as deputy, reports from the time suggest, was 
making enquiries after a vengeful former Express staffer tricked his way into 
Boycott's home in her absence and left an olfactory seafood timebomb under her 
bed.

✒Boycott and Blackhurst had come across as a mixed doubles team in 1998 from 
the Independent titles, where the former's campaign for the legalisation of 
cannabis led to inevitable nicknames on arrival at the stuffier Express 
Newspapers in Blackfriars: the Junkie and the Flunkey. Thirteen years on, 
relations with his predecessor Simon Kelner, who remains editor-in-chief 
(presumably ensuring the survival of his wife Sally Ann Lasson's cartoons), 
will not necessarily be warm, as Kelner chose Tristan Davies to edit the 
Independent on Sunday in 2001 when Blackhurst was a contender.

✒Interviewed in the New Statesman, Evgeny Lebedev, who switched Blackhurst 
from Standard to Indy as owner of both, still seems in denial, despite the 
recent ruling against an advert for his 20p digest i, in which an alleged 
reader claimed to buy it because of the absence of celebrity froth. "He wants 
his papers to have loftier aspirations," the profiler reports, "and says that 
is why he likes the Independent, because it 'stimulates thought', rather than 
sullying its pages with celebrity gossip." Somehow i's daily page of celeb 
silliness, the reason for the hand-smacking ruling, and the Standard's similar 
diet (in its diary column and elsewhere) continue to elude his lofty gaze. In 
the same interview, he declined to offer a view on making the Independent free 
like the Standard ("we're not ruling anything out ... but we haven't reached a 
decision yet"), a matter of some interest to Blackhurst as it would inter alia 
entail killing the infant i and so remove a large chunk of his job.

✒To BSkyB's summer reception at the Foreign & Commonwealth office on Thursday 
evening, where the famous (Nasser Hussein), the powerful (James Murdoch, 
Rebekah Brooks) and Louise Redknapp ate mini fairy cakes, roast beef and 
scallops in the opulent – and perhaps suitably imperial – surroundings of 
Durbar Court. Only the imitation grass underfoot, which made the floor resemble 
the Astroturf pitch at Kenilworth Road circa 1985, detracted from the 
atmosphere of grandeur, as News Corp had been granted permission earlier that 
day to take full control of Sky. The bigwigs, including Brooks and Murdoch Jr, 
disappeared soon after the party began, but Sky chief executive Jeremy Darroch 
was still chatting amiably to guests long into the evening. He was still there 
when Monkey made his excuses and left, at 10.45pm, just as rumours of an 
after-show party in Leicester Square began to sweep the room. Other guests 
included Mariella Frostrup, who stuck close to Brooks, PR supremo Roland Rudd, 
who celebrated his 50th birthday in lavish style last month, and newsreader 
Dermot Murnaghan. Strangely, however, the Sky News contingent seemed to be in 
less celebratory mood. Could that be because Sky News is about to be thrown out 
into the corporate jungle, without Rupert Murdoch's millions to support it? It 
will be interesting to see whether the loss-making Sky News can afford its own 
lavish summer party this time next year.

✒Viewers of This Week, Andrew Neil's late-night politics show, may have had 
their usual slide into sleep disturbed on Thursday by Enter the Boulton, a 
segment showingAdam Boulton <https://www.theguardian.com/media/adam-boulton> 
dressed in a black tent as the world's bulkiest ninja – a ploy explicitly 
referring to the Sky News political editor's distinctive willingness to pose a 
tough question to Wen Jiabao at the press conference during the Chinese 
leader's visit to the UK, but also drawing on the bruiser image buffed up by 
his post-election kerfuffle with Alastair Campbell. Rarely accused of a 
reluctance to draw attention to himself, the portly pundit was seen tussling 
with a Chinese warrior – whose main asset, lacked by his opponent, seemed an 
ability to move – while rounding up the week's political news, offering a 
double mystery: not just why the stunt, but what the Sky man was doing on BBC1 
when (with a job vacant, once Laura Kuenssberg leaves) there are any number of 
in-house political hacks eager to show they can mix antics and analysis.

✒When Kelvin MacKenzie <https://www.theguardian.com/media/kelvin-mackenzie> 
completes his unlikely, seemingly Richard Littlejohn-duplicating, transfer from 
the Sun to the Daily Mail, one source of comfort will be the old friends he 
will find among his fellow-columnists. There's Janet Street-Porter, who 
included him earlier this year in a "shit list" of hated figures she hopes to 
take revenge on, following their rows at Mirror Group when she was running the 
doomed cable station Live TV and MacKenzie was her boss (he took it over after 
her exit, introducing – does Paul Dacre remember? – topless darts, a stripping 
City tipster and the News Bunny). And then there's Amanda Platell, about whom 
he once wrote: "In the time I knew her she didn't have a thought in her head, 
but had the uncanny ability to say 'Quite right, boss' in 127 languages." The 
move also reflects an unusual capacity to forgive in the former Sun editor, as 
it was the Mail's sister title, the Mail on Sunday, that years ago tracked him 
to a Caribbean lair and papped him with his then lover, a Wapping secretary.

✒Like its rankings for travel journalists, Press Gazette's league table of 
food and drink writers (based on lists sent by journalists in the sector) seems 
likely to create a stir. Relative unknowns make it into a top 10 headed by an 
Observer pair, Jay Rayner and Nigel Slater, and the Sunday Times's reviewer AA 
Gill, while big names - Giles Coren (12), Fay Maschler (16), Hugh 
Fearnley-Whittingstall (17), Matthew Norman (22) - languish mid-table amid 
lowly retail reporters, beer-guzzlers and radio contributors. Most humiliating 
of all, TV's Oz Clarke just scrapes in at 48 and the Independent's Simon 
Hopkinson - a legendary chef turned reviewer, about to start a BBC1 series - 
brings up the rear at 50.
 