
The telecommunications sector has never been known as the most entertaining in 
the City – the products are technical and so are the jokes – but there has 
always been something mildly intriguing about MegaFon, Russia's second largest 
telecoms group, which counts Arsenal investorAlisher Usmanov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alisher-usmanov> as a top shareholder.

You'll recall it's the firm that caused a bit of a fuss 18 months ago by 
floating on the London stock exchange – an offer that proved too sensational 
for the investment bank Goldman Sachs, which withdrew as an adviser after 
supposedly feeling rushed over its due diligence. Simultaneously, Usmanov 
assuaged investor concerns by stressing it would be the giant oligarch himself 
– rather than his partners Vladimir Skoch and Farhad Moshiri – who would 
control MegaFon votes.

Anyway, the company announces numbers this week, before again meeting 
shareholders at an extraordinary general meeting in early June, when it is 
asking for permission to do a deal with Usmanov.

That will be the sixth MegaFon EGM in nine months, so they're not wildly 
extraordinary. Meanwhile, it also provides MegaFon non-exec Lord Myners with a 
fresh challenge, now he's concluded his musings on the Co-op's unorthodox 
governance. Who says these people don't have a sense of humour?

Nuts and bolts of housing market


Another week, another unavoidable of debate about the UK's housing market 
which – after the weather and debating which A-road to take to avoid the 
traffic on some gyratory – seems to be the favoured conversation topic of one 
corner of England.

We will get the Nationwide house prices survey, data from the Bank of England 
on the funding for lending scheme and – in perhaps slightly less trailed news – 
there is also Wednesday's AGM at Travis Perkins, the building materials group 
that sounds more like a pair of butlers.

Strangely, after all the talk of a boom and a stellar 2013 for Travis shares, 
investors have suffered 11% losses this year. Still, analysts at Westhouse 
reckon the company is less susceptible than housebuilders to two big risks: the 
timing and speed of interest-rate rises and any change to the Help to Buy 
scheme should Labour win power.

Meanwhile, there is also plenty of sympathy that – for the moment – talk of 
corrective action in the housing market may be premature and that the so-called 
bubble is a problem only in the south-east. That's in terms of prices and 
constantly talking about it.

Tricky call for Glencore


Swiss Toni, the appalling car salesman from comedy sketch programme The Fast 
Show, used to love comparing everything to sex. "Having therapy is very much 
like making love to a beautiful woman," he would say. "You get on the couch, 
string 'em along with some half-lies and evasions … and then hand over all your 
money."

He was deliberately a dinosaur even when the show first aired, 20 years ago, 
but the corporate world insists on persevering with real-life versions, such as 
the executives inhabiting the boardroom at commodity trader Glencore – the last 
FTSE company to maintain an all-male board.

Last week, at its base in Zug, Switzerland, the company held its annual 
general meeting, at which new chairman "Swiss" Tony Hayward reiterated the 
company's previous pledges to hire a female director (although not necessarily 
much before the end of the year).

The excuse for its inaction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/20/vince-cable-blasts-glencore-xstrata-women-board-tony-hayward>
 so far has been that there are not many female candidates suitable for a 
company like Glencore – and it is certainly tricky to name many women who can 
boast a CV comparable to those of the current directors, who have presided over 
a 38% decline in share price and a £5bn writedown. Still, the search for that 
elusive beast continues this week.
 