
Melbourne Victory return to Australia having broken the back of their Asian 
Champions League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/asian-champions-league> 
qualification campaign with a 1-1 draw against Suwon Bluewings.


The A-League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> champions need 
just one more win to secure qualification for the last 16 for the first time in 
their history after Kosta Barbarouses’ fine equaliser in Korea on Wednesday 
night, when Victory spent long periods beating back the K-League side, falling 
behind after half-time.

Sydney FC still have tough Asian Champions League task ahead, says Graham 
Arnold
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/06/sydney-fc-still-have-tough-asian-champions-league-task-ahead-says-graham-arnold>
If they’d paused to ponder it, Kevin Muscat’s side would have been staring at 
a challenging path out of the continental group. Instead they rebounded, 
finding a response within two minutes of Kwon Chang-hoon’s opener and securing 
the away point so crucial for their qualification hopes.

Delighted coach Kevin Muscat showed his passion, leaping from his seat at the 
60th minute goal from their soon-to-be-departed winger, and praising his side 
after the full-time whistle.


“I’m very proud of my team. It wasn’t an easy game,” he said. “We controlled a 
lot of possession but we also had to defend very well. To come back from 
conceding a goal very quickly was an impressive result. It showed good spirit, 
good character.”

Central to their performance was reinstated first-choice goalkeeper Lawrence 
Thomas, who made seven saves in a colossal performance. “I try to stay away 
from highlighting individuals but it’d be difficult to do that tonight,” Muscat 
said. “[Thomas] was outstanding and made some crucial saves at crucial times.”

The group dynamics mean a win either of Victory’s final two matches – Shanghai 
SIPG (A) or Gamba Osaka (H) – will guarantee progression. The ACL’s rules 
separate teams on the same points tally by their head-to-head records rather 
than goal difference.

A win over Shanghai on 19 April would lift them out of Gamba’s reach and mean 
Suwon could only level their points haul but fall short because of Barbarouses’ 
goal. Defeating the J-League side on 3 May would also see them progress but 
Muscat warned against thinking the job was done.

“We’re only in a good position come final whistle matchday six if you’re in 
the top two,” he said. “But we’ve travelled twice. Both times undefeated. We go 
to Shanghai in the next game with a great deal of confidence.”
 