
Brazilian forward Leonardo dished out another piece of Asian Champions 
heartache forMelbourne Victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/melbourne-victory> and put Jeonbuk Motors 
into Asia’s last eight. The A-League club tumbled out of Asia on Tuesday in 
Jeonju, South Korea, losing 2-1 on the night and 3-2 on aggregate to the 
K-League giants.

Sydney FC bank key away goal in Asian Champions League draw with Shandong
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/19/sydney-fc-bank-key-away-goal-in-asian-champions-league-draw-with-shandong>
It was not to be for Victory’s departing trio of Archie Thompson, Kosta 
Barbarouses and Matthieu Delpierre, who will now leave the club. Victory were 
stretched and ultimately dissembled by Jeonbuk, who boast a formidable record 
in the elite continental competition.

Just as he did in Melbourne, Leonardo proved lethal, scoring twice to decide 
the tie. Besart Berisha’s late volley from substitute Jai Ingham’s cross gave 
Victory seven minutes to find a second, which would have put Victory ahead on 
away goals, but the hosts held on.

How Kevin Muscat’s side must hate Jeonju. The loss came in the same city where 
their 2014 Asian campaign ended in the group stages.

In this tie, Leonardo’s class made the difference. After equalising last week 
with an unstoppable free-kick, the Brazilian put Jeonbuk ahead from another set 
piece. Jason Geria’s foul after 29 minutes gave Leonardo the chance to strike 
from an acute angle and he made no mistake, bending the ball around the wall 
and with just venom that Lawrence Thomas’ weak glove could not stop it.

The goal put Victory on the back foot but Jeonbuk looked more likely to add to 
their tally and so it proved after 71 minutes. Substitute Ricardo Lopes 
produced a fine cutback for his compatriot, the highest paid player in Korea, 
to thunder home a second.

Muscat added a dash of youth, bringing on Ingham, Jesse Makarounas and Connor 
Pain as he chased the contest. Ingham’s dash down the right for Berisha brought 
Victory a way back into the game but there was to be no equaliser, as the
A-League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> side again saw their 
hopes dashed at the hands of Jeonbuk.

Muscat said he was “bitterly disappointed” to crash out, ruing early chances 
not taken by Thompson.

“We had our opportunities early on ... two good chances at 0-0 which would 
have made the game fairly different,” he said. “To go behind to another free 
kick made life hard for us. In Melbourne we should have won that game and we 
made this game very difficult but I’m extremely proud of the group to get as 
far as we have.”
 