
Australia will send two clubs to the knock-out phase of the Asian Champions 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/asian-champions-league> for the 
first time after Melbourne Victory and Sydney FC’s breakthrough triumphs on 
Tuesday night.

Both sides reached the last 16 for the first time in their history; Victory on 
their fifth Asian campaign and Sydney on their third. 

Western Sydney unlikely to lose points over flares at grand final, says FFA 
chief
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/03/western-sydney-unlikely-to-lose-points-over-flares-at-grand-final-says-ffa-chief>
Victory won through after a 2-1 home win over Gamba Osaka on Tuesday night. 
After securing progression coach Kevin Muscat showed genuine emotion to succeed 
where he had failed three times as a player and once before as manager.

“It’s great for the football club. We’ve managed to create some history,” he 
said. “I’m so elated for the group. We’ll enjoy this one. I’m immediately 
focused and turning my attention to the opponents for the next game.”

First-half goals from Besart Berisha and Archie Thompson earned Victory the 
win. Victory will discover their opponents on Wednesday night, when China’s 
Jiangsu Suning, FC Tokyo of Japan and Korean club Jeonbuk Hyundai fight for two 
places.

All possible opponents feature Australian players; Trent Sainsbury is with the 
Chinese Super League club, Nathan Burns is in the Japanese capital and Erik 
Paartalu plays for Jeonbuk.

While Victory will play the Group E winner, Sydney FC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sydneyfc> finished on top of their group 
and play Group F runner-up Shandong Luneng. Graham Arnold’s side will travel to 
Jinan in a fortnight’s time before returning for the home leg a week later.

“Top of the group of death. Great achievement! Thanks to the fans who 
travelled. Bring on the round of 16,” defender Matt Jurman tweeted after their 
match, a 1-0 loss to already-eliminated champions Guangzhou Evergrande.

Victory will tackle the ties in reverse fashion, hosting their opponent first. 
While home ground advantage in the final leg is generally considered most 
advantageous, Muscat said he could make a case for hosting first.

“Our opponents have got to come out here and they’re the ones travelling 
twice,” he said. “Everyone wants to play second but in this situation ... 
whoever it is has got to come out, play a game and fly back, play a domestic 
game and play us [again].”
 