
I first read Melmoth the Wanderer more than a decade ago, after stumbling 
across a battered copy I picked up for a few pounds in a secondhand bookshop by 
the sea. Although its author,Charles Maturin 
<http://www.libraryireland.com/biography/CharlesRobertMaturin.php>, might not 
be as well known as his near contemporaries – Shelley, Bram Stoker – he 
succeeded in producing a gothic horror so mind-bogglingly sophisticated that he 
certainly should be. I was staying in a bed and breakfast in Suffolk at the 
time, and in the day I walked along the beach, while my nights were spent in an 
armchair in the corner of my room, reading the book. I remember it was a warm 
December, and in the evenings I would sit with the windows open. The curtains 
would flap and a salt breeze would blow into the room, and as I read I could 
hear the whisper of a name on the wind.

Maturin was a protestant Dubliner and an eccentric priest, prone to 
sermonising and fond of dancing. In 1820, he wrote to his friend the author 
Walter Scott, to say that he was working on a novel so terrifying that it would 
succeed in “out-Heroding all the Herods” of the German school of gothic authors 
– Schiller, Hoffmann, Goethe – who were enjoying popularity at the time.


Melmoth the Wanderer opens with a student, John Melmoth, leaving college to 
attend to his uncle’s deathbed in a house on a clifftop by the coast. John sees 
a painting of a distant relative on the wall, dated several centuries back – a 
painting with cold, dead eyes. John enquires about the subject, and his uncle 
tells him that “the original is still alive … you shall see him again”.


It becomes apparent that John’s ancestor, in proto-Dorian Gray fashion (it is 
no coincidence that Maturin was Oscar Wilde’s great-uncle) has made a Faustian 
pact with Satan for 150 extra years of life. However, unless Melmoth can 
convince someone to agree to take his place, at the end of the 150 years he 
will be consigned to burn in hell for eternity. Melmoth has all the devil’s 
powers at his disposal, and he spends his years roaming the earth, looking for 
someone to take the curse from him, moving in and out of locked cells, floating 
across seas and continents.


The night after John’s uncle’s death there is a storm. John watches in horror 
from the house as a Spanish sailing ship crashes on the rocks. He looks across 
the cliffs and sees a shadowy stranger laughing maniacally as the wreckage is 
smashed upon the rocks. The next morning, one of the survivors of the wreck – a 
Spanish sailor – sits with John and tells him his story. He has, he explains, 
been visited by a shadowy stranger while being held by the Spanish Inquisition 
in Madrid. After escaping, he comes across a manuscript that details the murder 
of a woman in the same city. In that manuscript, the woman’s father meets a 
shadowy stranger at an inn, who tells him the story of a starving man on the 
verge of murdering his family. The starving man is visited by another shadowy 
stranger, who offers him food and salvation, for a price. Stories, within 
stories, within stories.


Melmoth is a gothic matryoshka of fictions inside one another, and the common 
thread is the Wanderer, moving through every level, never present but always 
there – spoken of in whispers and hearsay. He is terrifying in his absence, 
moving through a Daedelian nightmare of narrative strands that twine into one 
another. The novel is not linear, like “beads on a string” (an analogy he 
borrows from Aristotle) but instead, like the Wanderer, jumps back and forth – 
diabolically outside of time.

Although eventually I shut the book and left the house, it has stayed with me 
ever since. I remember the phrase Melmoth whispers to John on the night of the 
shipwreck, during a nightmare. “You have burned me, then; but those are flames 
I can survive – I am alive – I am beside you.”

 