 Paul Merton beat the disgraced former Have I Got News for You presenter Angus 
Deayton to win a Bafta television award last night.
Merton was one of nine BBC Bafta winners, with the hit BBC2 sitcom, The 
Office, repeating its double success of last year. The dramas Spooks and The 
Gathering Storm were also rewarded.

ITV also had its successes, with Coronation Street beating EastEnders to win 
best soap, while reality show I'm a Celebrity - Get Me Out of Here! was named 
best entertainment programme.

Merton, who revealed on Parkinson on Saturday that he and Deayton never got on 
during 10 years working on Have I Got News for You, was named best 
entertainment performer at the award ceremony in London last night.

Merton told Parkinson it would be "odd" if Deayton won the Bafta award, for 
which both were both nominated, along with The Kumars At Number 42 stars 
Sanjeev Bhaskar and Meera Syal.

Merton said he would run on stage and steal the award if Deayton won, adding: 
"We know how he'd celebrate though, don't we?"

In the event, Merton spat out his beer in surprise when his win was announced 
and he ran to the stage to collect his prize.

He still managed a further jibe at his rival: "They say the closer you sit to 
the stage, the better chance you have of winning.Angus Deayton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/angus-deayton> is sat in Row G - at 
the Theatre Royal Drury Lane."

Deayton, who in fact attended the ceremony at the London Palladium with his 
partner, Lise Mayer, was sacked as host of the show by the BBC last autumn, 
after tabloid revelations that he had taken cocaine and had sex with a 
prostitute.

The Office saw off the challenge of Channel 4's Phoenix Nights to win best 
sitcom. Ricky Gervais was named best comedy performer for his portrayal of 
deluded boss David Brent in The Office.

It was the second consecutive year that the critically acclaimed BBC2 comedy 
had picked up these two awards.

Spooks was named best drama series. Albert Finney received the best actor 
award for his portrayal of Winston Churchill in The Gathering Storm. Julie 
Walters won the best actress category.

Conspiracy, BBC2's drama about the second world war meeting at which Nazi 
officials planned the Holocaust, won best single drama. Channel 4's Shackleton 
which, like Conspiracy, starred Kenneth Branagh, won the other drama award, for 
best serial.

The other BBC winners were Alistair McGowan's Big Impression, named best 
comedy programme, and the BBC's coverage of the Commonwealth Games, which won 
the Bafta sports award.

David Jason was awarded a Bafta fellowship for his work in TV over the past 30 
years in shows including Only Fools and Horses, A Touch of Frost and Open All 
Hours.

The Lew Grade audience award, voted for by Radio Times readers, went to 
Foyle's War, the ITV1 drama starring Michael Kitchen as a second world war 
English detective.

BskyB-owned channel Sky News won the Bafta news award for the second year 
running for its coverage of the Soham murders in August last year.

Last year Sky News picked up the award for its coverage of the September 11 
attacks on the US.

 Best actor Albert Finney (The Gathering Storm, BBC2) 

 Best actress Julie Walters (Murder, BBC2) 

 Best entertainment performance Paul Merton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/paul-merton> (Have I Got News For You? BBC)

 Best comedy performance Ricky Gervais (The Office, BBC2) 

 Best single drama Conspiracy (BBC2) 

 Best drama series  Spooks (BBC1) 

 Best drama serial  Shackleton (C4) 

 Best soap  Coronation Street (ITV1) 

 Hugh Wheldon award for factual series or strand  The Trust (C4) 

 Flaherty documentary  Feltham Sings (C4) 

 Best features  Faking It (C4) 

 Best sport  The Commonwealth Games (BBC1) 

 Best news coverage  Soham August 16/17 (Sky) 

 Best current affairs  Young, Nazi And Proud (C4) 

 Radio Times Lew Grade audience award  Foyle's War (ITV) 

 Best entertainment programme or series  I'm A Celebrity, Get Me Out Of Here.
 