
Have I Got News for You star Paul Merton has spoken for the first time about 
the sacking ofAngus Deayton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/angus-deayton>, revealing the pair 
were never that friendly and claiming the show would have been "finished" if 
the disgraced host had not been fired by the BBC.

Merton told Michael Parkinson that the show became a "nightmare" last year, 
after tabloid revelations that Deayton had snorted cocaine with a call girl, 
and that he and team captain Ian Hislop had "stabbed [Deayton] in the front".

In a sideswipe at Deayton, he likened him to the least known Marx brother: "I 
sometimes feel like the Marx brothers, we lost Zeppo - it's not a big deal".

Merton said that he, Hislop and the HIGNFY production team hoped the problem 
would go away after the initial revelations, but following further tabloid 
stories about Deayton's wayward behaviour last autumn, the situation became 
untenable.

"The person in the middle can't do jokes about Jeffrey Archer if people then 
say 'yes, but what about you?'," he added.

"Like when Christine Hamilton comes on the show and the producer said to me, 
'whenever Angus mentions Christine Hamilton's husband, he's going to say "the 
disgraced ex-Tory MP".' So, she got narked by this and she said 'well if he's 
disgraced, what are you?'. And all he can do is shrug his shoulders and say 
'well yes, I suppose I'm disgraced'," Merton said.

"And you think, well, comedically, what can we do now? We can't keep talking 
about it... because it's not going to go away and every guest is going to 
mention it. Then it's a nightmare, so theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> made a decision which I have to say we 
all supported, because the show would have been finished."

Merton dismissed the claims made in the media that he and Hislop had stabbed 
Deayton in the back.

"We stabbed him in the front. Over the years I used to have a go at him and he 
used to take it in good part, but in the last recording I said 'perhaps you 
should just resign'. It's compromising, it would compromise the show entirely," 
he said.

Asked by Parkinson if he liked Deayton, Merton replied bluntly "no", 
confirming what many HIGNFY fans will have wondered for many years. He added 
that he gets on with Hislop better.

"We weren't friends particularly. People sometimes think that people in 
showbiz all live together in lovely house; Dale Winton's doing the cooking and 
Judith Chalmers is upstairs clearing out the drains or whatever," he said.

"We didn't really get on, but it worked for the show because there was an 
animosity there and that was OK. I get on with Ian a lot better than I did with 
Angus really. I like Ian," Merton added.

Merton and Deayton are both nominated for best entertainment performance at 
the Bafta TV awards on Sunday night, and he joked that if the former HIGNFY 
host won, he would "get up on stage before him, grab the Bafta and make a run 
for it".

"It would be odd if he won it this year I would say. Well if he wins, we know 
how he's going to celebrate don't we?," Merton quipped.

HIGNFY is due to begin a new series on BBC1 later this spring, with Merton and 
Hislop joined each week by a different guest host.

But the BBC and HIGNFY producer Hat Trick is planning to appoint a new 
full-time host for the series after next.
 