
Shoppers piling out of Holborn tube station on their way to Covent Garden 
today will be greeted by an unusual sight: a bank open for business on a 
Sunday. Metro, the first new bank to open on the UK's high streets for more 
than a century, will be hoping at least a few of them wander into its large 
hall on what will be just its fourth trading day, even if only out of curiosity.

Metro, a privately owned operation and the brainchild of US banking veteran 
Vernon Hill, whose fondness for dogs means that biscuits for customers' canine 
friends are one of his marketing gimmicks, is one a of a number of new banks 
determined to inject fresh competition into the high street following the 
disruption caused by the banking crisis.

Others with the same idea include experienced City figures such as Lord Levene 
and Sir David Walker, who are looking for financing, while Spanish bank
Santander is poised to take control of 318 Royal Bank of Scotland branches this 
week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/jul/29/santander-buys-rbs-branches>. 
Virgin Money is also promising to offer a range of banking products, while 
Tesco is preparing a full-front assault on the industry.

When banks reveal interim figures this week they are expected to report a rise 
in profits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/jul/30/banks-profits-boosted-high-street-customers>
 in their high-street arms after a period of losses caused by the financial 
crisis, which also wiped out traditional competitors in the markets. Halifax, a 
fierce rival, was gobbled up after being rescued by Lloyds. Northern Rock was 
wiped out after the group was nationalised.

Within three minutes' walk of the imposing glass-fronted Metro branch – or 
"store" as Hill would have it known – are branches of Barclays, NatWest and 
Lloyds. Each tells a story. The NatWest branch, part of the bailed-outRoyal 
Bank of Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup>
 group, and the Lloyds one are classic in appearance with their brick walls and 
high windows. Staff remain hidden inside, despite the party on the pavement a 
few metres away. Both banks were bailed out by the taxpayer.

The Barclays <https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> branch, though, is 
light and airy, with floor-to-ceiling glass walls. Its staff are getting into 
the spirit of things, embarking upon guerilla marketing tactics with a town 
crier shouting Barclays' wares and bikes decked out in the bank's corporate 
blue zipping up and down the street. They appear to be taking the Metro threat 
seriously – or at least seeing it as a marketing opportunity.

Deanna Oppenheimer, the Barclays executive who runs the branch, is an American 
familiar with Hill's business model – service rather than price. While the 
focus of the world for the past three years was on the crisis in the banking 
sector, Oppenheimer was redesigning the bank's branches, "the window of 
Barclays on the world".

The makeovers were meticulously planned at a warehouse in Nottingham, where 
there were long debates about the "choreography" of where to place the tellers, 
cash machines and the areas for private discussion. Attention was paid to every 
little detail. Oppenheimer also hired executives with retail experience, 
particularly fromTesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco>.

But, as is often the case, banking has been here before. Longer opening hours, 
one of Metro's major market propositions, have already been tried by other 
players. NatWest has long-styled itself "SatWest" to trumpet Saturday opening. 
Some branches also open on Sundays and a handful open on bank holidays.

Hiring retailers has also been done before. A decade ago Halifax appointed 
Andy Hornby, later to become chief executive and at the helm when the bank was 
rescued by Lloyds, from Asda to add a bit of spark to the staid world of 
banking. HSBC followed, hiring Joe Garner from Dixons. For a while the Halifax 
tactics worked as it promised to the "eat the big four's lunch" with sharply 
priced products, marketed in a quirky way.

But some think there is a need for a "new Halifax" after the HBOS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/hbos> rescue by Lloyds formed a banking 
mammoth with market shares of 30% in some business lines. Ian Gordon, banks 
analyst at Exane BNP Paribas, points out that other competitive forces such as 
Northern Rock, nationalised and still in rehabilitation, have also disappeared.

Others argue that the banking crisis has allowed new competitors to thrive, 
notably Santander, which bought Abbey National six years ago but has only begun 
to grow dramatically since acquiring banks wounded by the banking crisis – 
Alliance & Leicester and parts of Bradford & Bingley. It is now taking the bold 
step of scrapping the individual branding and hanging its red flame logo 
everywhere. Santander also knows how important a high-street presence can be. 
Queues formed out of the doors when it launched a market-beating 3.5% Isa in 
March. It also knows what happens when a product is too popular: the bank was
recently bottom in a Which? survey 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/money/article-1298320/Santander-fails-test-customer-satisfaction-hits-lowest-mark.html?ito=feeds-newsxml>
 of customer satisfaction.

While Santander sees itself as "challenger" in the market, other new 
competitors will have to emerge as a result of demands from EU regulators that 
RBS sell 318 branches and Lloyds more than 600 of its network in return for the 
£75bn of taxpayer funds they have received. Northern Rock, which had to wind 
down its mortgage business for a time, could also become a force again once it 
is sold, possibly this year.

Again, Santander stands to benefit by buying up branches RBS is being forced 
to sell. Its network will become bigger than HSBC's if the deal can be pulled 
off, and crucially it will allow Santander to take a huge leap in banking to 
small businesses, something business secretary Vince Cable is determined to 
promote during the economic downturn.

While competition in retail banking is under scrutiny, generating competition 
in small-business banking is notoriously tricky. But, by buying the RBS 
operations, Santander's market share in this field will jump from 3% to 8% 
overnight.

It is an area that Santander's Abbey arm has tried to crack but in which it 
has been thwarted by regulatory changes recommended under Labour's major review 
into the industry by Don Cruickshank. Price controls were imposed on the 
incumbents, leaving Abbey and Halifax without any means of competition.

Bankers cite this episode as a warning to the coalition government's banking 
commission, which could also come up with additional proposals to inject more 
competition into the system. TheOffice of Fair Trading's review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/may/26/banking-oft-competition-review>
 of barriers that may stop new banks being set up is also looking at how 
important an extensive branch network is to running a successful bank. The OFT 
is scrutinising "whether the importance of branch networks has changed over the 
last few years, for example due to increased use of the internet and mobile 
banking".

The telephone, internet and hole-in-the-wall machines are the other ways to 
allow customers to get their hands on their money. "If you look at the 
choreography in the branches, are you expected to go and queue, go to the cash 
machines... [it's about] what is the customer experience going to be?" says 
Steve Davies of Pricewaterhouse Coopers.

This is where Metro is determined to make its mark, rather than competing on 
price. Its single store in Holborn should be joined by three others in a year 
and there are plans for a 200-strong stable. It is largely a proposition aimed 
at the south-east of England, a move that Ben Steer, a director of consultants 
GfK Financial, believes is crucial.

"London current account holders are prime targets for Metro Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/metro-bank>," he said. "They are the UK's 
most dissatisfied customer group."

Even so, he is sceptical about how willing customers will be to move their 
accounts, as is Stephan Butscher, managing partner of consultancy firm Simon 
Kucher & Partners, whose office overlooks the Metro branch: "I think there's 
enough competition. I don't think they will make a huge difference."

Labour tried to tackle this problem of current account inertia by forcing 
banks to co-operate when customers wanted to switch accounts by helping with 
the mechanics of shifting direct debits. Even so, Steer notes that just 1.2m 
out of 60m current account holders moved their bank last year.

Watching the jamboree outside Metro – mobbed by camera crews at its three-day 
launch party – Butscher remains sceptical: "They are getting a lot of 
headlines, but after a week that will go. They just don't look like a 
competitor."Metro is refusing to listen to detractors. Since opening at 8am on 
Thursday, it insists there have been queues outside and that hundreds of new 
accounts have been opened by dissatisfied customers of other banks. It is 
reluctant to indicate how many it hopes will sign up today, the first time it 
will get a feel for whether there is a mass appeal for its promise of 
seven-day-a-week opening.
 