
The Australia captain, Michael Clarke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/michael-clarke>, admits the language he 
directed at James Anderson during his side’s Ashes whitewash of England was 
“unacceptable” but he does not regret standing up for his players.

Clarke told Anderson to get ready “for a broken fucken’ arm” 
<http://www.nets247.com/news/get-ready-for-a-broken-fucken-arm-how-michael-clarke-got-ruthless>
 during the first Test, a move many saw as defining a new, tougher Australia 
team.

"Maybe I hadn't said exactly what I said to James Anderson [previously], but 
I'd stuck up for my players on a number of occasions and it's never been picked 
up on the stump mic. Nobody has ever spoken about it," Clarkesaid in an 
interview with cricket.com.au 
<http://www.cricket.com.au/news-list/2014/5/21/michael-clarke-reflects-on-infamous-james-anderson-ashes-sledge>
 "And when I say I regret it, I regret the language I used and I regret that I 
said it over the stump mic.

"The last thing I want is for boys and girls watching cricket to be going and 
playing club cricket and saying things like that to opposition players. I think 
it's unacceptable that the Australian cricket captain is setting that example. 
But I don't regret standing up for George Bailey one bit.

"I don't regret being extremely honest with James Anderson and telling him 
what Mitchell Johnson's plan was. I don’t regret that, I just regret that 
everybody heard it and the language I used."

Clarke also denied claims that the incident was due to bad blood between 
himself and Anderson. "The media like to do up that we have history," Clarke 
said. "The only history I have is that England kept beating us, and he 
[Anderson] was a part of England and I was part of Australia."

Johnson, who took 37 wickets at 13.97 during the series, is now seen as 
Australia’s spearhead but Clarke says it is Ryan Harris who is the first name 
on the teamsheet.

“[Harris is] the first selected player in the team, there's no doubt about 
it," Clarke said. "He's a fighter, he's got a heart of gold, he's a very 
important member of our team and not just for his bowling. He's a leader around 
the group, he's a senior player and he loves representing Australia.

"I think he's a great example as an ambassador for our sport ... and he's 
still got that fight in him to play for a lot longer yet. Hopefully the 
surgeons, the doctors, the physios can keep him on the park. If I have anything 
to do with voicing my opinion on selection, then Ryano will be at the top every 
single time."

Despite his history of injuries, Harris said he hopes to play a part for 
Australia in both the one-day and Test formats. "I've been wanting to play 
one-day cricket for a long time but I guess playing Test cricket, they've 
pigeonholed me a little bit," Harris said. "It's going to be tough for me to 
get back into that side, but it's going to be great fun. I've been part of a 
T20 World Cup – I want to play and win a 50-over World Cup before I retire.”
 