
Can I ask you why so many of your books are about war? Like Adolphus Tips and 
War Horse and Shadow and Private Peaceful. Thank you.

AnnaTheSpanner (big fan of yours)

I was a war baby, born in 1943. As I grew up, I soon learned how war had torn 
my world apart. I lived next to a bombsite, played in it because we weren't 
supposed to, and because it was the best adventure playground imaginable. But I 
soon learned that much more than buildings was destroyed by war. My parents had 
split up because of it. I knew my uncle Pieter, killed in 1940 in the RAF, 
through a photograph, through the stories I heard of him, through the grief my 
mother, his sister, lived every day of her life. I missed him and I'd never 
known him. All I knew was what I'd been told, that he'd given his life for our 
freedom. I thought the world of him for that. I still do. War continues to 
divide people, to change them forever, and I write about it both because I want 
people to understand the absolute futility of war, the "pity of war" as Wilfred 
Owen called it. With Shadow, I was inspired to write about a contemporary 
conflict. But writing about a war that's still going on, it's even more 
difficult to keep the story centre stage rather than issues of the war. I am 
conscious of the fact that there are families of soldiers who are fighting in 
the war and dying in it. So there is a sensitivity that is raw and I have to be 
very careful about that. I have often written about wars that have taken place 
long ago and the problem with that is that it makes it seem, because of the 
distance of time, rather irrelevant to younger readers, whereas with present 
conflicts, there is no question of it being irrelevant. It is now and it is 
happening.

How involved were you in the creation of the theatre adaptation of War Horse?

Josh 

I can't really claim any of the credit for the theatre adaptation of War Horse 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q-bni4QqSv4>, though I did offer advice and 
suggestions where I could. It was the director Tom Morris's mother who 
originally discovered my book and urged him to read War Horse. He did, and so 
began a sequence of events that would transform the fortunes of War Horse. At 
first, I have to confess, I was sceptical. How on earth, I wondered, could a 
convincing drama of the first world war be made using life-size puppets of 
horses? Pantomime horses came to mind all too easily. But this was the National 
Theatre. Maybe they knew what they were doing. For a year or more Tom Morris 
and Marianne Elliot workshopped the story with Basil Jones and Adrian Kohler 
from Handspring and the rest of the team – designers, musicians, writers – to 
explore how it could be done. They came down to Devon, where I live, to see the 
landscape of the story and watch horses working the land. We went to visit the 
King's Troop of the Royal Horse Artillery to discover how soldiers worked with 
horses and guns. There were some tense moments during the previews when it was 
obvious that the play was too long, even clumsy in places, but in the end they 
got it together somehow. Press night was a triumph. There were five-star 
reviews almost everywhere and the War Horse buzz began.

Would you do the same as Charlie in Private Peaceful?

kcorbett

I often ask myself this question and wonder if I would ever have the courage 
that Charlie had. I try in all my stories to put myself in the head and heart 
of my characters and Charlie is no different. I become my characters, and then 
try to allow events in the story to take their own course. I try not to play 
God, but to let them work out their own destiny. I understand his love for his 
brother and how he would do anything for him, but I'm not sure that when the 
time came, I would be able to do what he does.

My best friend and I - who are both massive Michael Morpugo fans - thought of 
these questions, and it would be amazing if he answered one of them: In Private 
Peaceful, why did you choose the song Oranges and Lemons as Tommo's (and in the 
end, Charlie's) song? Does it have any personal significance to you?

peace_love_books (and Michal)

Oranges and Lemons was a nursery rhyme I grew up with, and always loved. I 
grew up mostly in London near the sound of those bells, and I remember looking 
forward as a little boy to the end of the song. I never understood why there 
was a chopper coming to chop off my head. But I loved it anyway!

I am Lottie and I am seven years old. Since I started reading long books you 
have become one of my favourite authors. I have noticed in all your books that 
I have read that there is a mixture of happiness and sadness. All the main 
characters in the books that I have read have either a disability or something 
sad in their lives, like Bertie in the Butterfly Lion who was so unhappy at 
school and Billy Bush in Little Foxes. My Grandma said that Rosemary Sutcliffe 
also writes books with the main character having a disability  because Rosemary 
Sutcliff had polio when she was little. I would like to know why you write 
about people who have a big sadness in their lives. I think your books are 
amazing. Please take care of yourself so that you will be able to write lots 
more lovely stories.

Lottie Longshanks

Thank you Lottie for your really interesting question. I grew up just after 
the second world war, playing in the bombsites, seeing all around me the 
sadness that war can cause. I saw the sadness in my own mother's eyes as she 
mourned the loss of a beloved brother. I saw other people who had lost loved 
ones. I always try to write from the heart, to tell it as I find it. I think I 
write at my best when I feel my story most intensely, when I write with a 
passion about something I care about deeply. It may be about loss and grief, 
war and sadness. But wherever my story takes me, however dark and difficult the 
theme, there is always some hope and redemption, not because readers like happy 
endings, but because I am an optimist at heart. I know the sun will rise in the 
morning, that there is a light at the end of every tunnel. And by the way, I 
love Rosemary Sutcliff's books, like your Grandma, but then I'm a Grandpa 
myself and we grew up with her, just as you're growing up with my books.

If you had to choose only one book to recommend to a reluctant reader which 
title would you choose?

Charlie

For a boy perhaps it would be Cool and for a girl The Butterfly Lion or Why 
the Whales Came. I was a reluctant reader myself. And then I taught a lot of 
reluctant readers, so when I wrote stories, I knew they had to work for me and 
them, as well as those who take to reading more easily.

How do you pick your characters' names?

NewYorkGirl

The names of my characters come from the things I see and hear about me. For 
example when I was writing Kensuke's Kingdom, I was stuck for a name for a 
Japanese man. I couldn't think of one that was original or worked for my story. 
Then I got lucky, I was doing an event at a school in London when a tall 
Japanese boy came up to get his book signed. I asked him his name and he 
replied, "Kensuke." And I had the name of my character. Animal names are 
trickier. It was a boy who came to our farm in Devon with his school who told 
me the name of his own dog – Stella Artois – an Alsatian. It was a genius name 
for a dog and I shamelessly borrowed it!

In Kensuke's Kingdom you gave the main character your name. Is there a reason 
you did this and if so why?

Crystal

I'm always doing that. I shouldn't really. Two reasons, I think. First, I find 
it really hard to think up another name. And second, and much more importantly, 
I really like to feel I'm there at the heart of the action in my stories. 
That's also why I write so many of them in the first person. I like to live the 
story as I write it, be there.

Why are many of your main characters, like in the Butterfly Lion and Kensuke's 
Kingdom, called Michael? Are they a made-up person or do you put yourself in 
the books?

TJ

See my answer to Crystal above. They are made-up people, but there's a little 
part of me in every one of them, I suppose.

Which of your books, if you can pick one, did you get the most fun out of 
writing?

OlivahJami

That's a good question and not one I get asked very much. If I am really 
honest I probably have more fun writing retellings of classic stories. When I 
am retelling a well-known ancient poem, like Gawain or Beowulf, or a folk tale 
or a some ancient legend, I try to find a way of telling it in my own voice, as 
if the listener of today was right in front of me. So, I have to use language 
that will be readily understood, but if I can I try to echo the tone and rhythm 
of the original text - if there is one. I do not keep strictly to every detail 
of the old story either. I try to interpret it in such a way as to make it 
exciting and meaningful, both to me and to a modern audience. When I am writing 
a retelling I do feel in some way that I am like an actor. The story is not 
mine, but I am the one living it, interpreting it. So I tell it as I see it, as 
I feel it. I really enjoy this feeling.

Retelling is also a wonderful exercise for me in between my other books. These 
old stories have stood the test of time, thousands of years sometimes. I can 
learn from them, just as an artist can learn from copying great pictures. Each 
time I do this, it reminds me how the best of storytelling should be, and I 
find that truly inspirational, and instructive too. When you are writing, you 
should be learning all the time and hopefully having fun if you can. There is 
so much I can learn from these amazing stories. The next one of mine you can 
read will be The Pied Piper of Hamelin, out next year, wonderfully illustrated 
By Emma Chichester Clark.

You often write about animals - why are they so important to you and which is 
your favourite animal?

TJones

and

I love reading your books about the relationship between animals and 
people. You write a lot about animals, can you tell me why you write so much 
about them?

Irish Eyes

I am really interested in the relationship between animals and humans. Animals 
are sentient, intelligent, perceptive, funny and entertaining. We owe them a 
duty of care as we do to children. Animals, like children, aren't in a position 
of power as we are as adults, and it is our duty to care for them. I think they 
often bring out the best in us because they listen without passing judgment and 
accept us for who we are without prejudice. For some people, this can be the 
most important relationship – a loving and uncomplicated one. I think my 
fascination with animals also came partly from my life. Many years ago my wife 
and I moved to Devon with our children to set up an educational charity, called 
Farms for City Children, that would welcome children from the inner cities to 
come and live and work on a farm for a week. We would have school groups of 30 
to 40, and with their teachers, they would effectively become farmers, milking, 
feeding pigs and calves and mucking out the sheds. Watching these children and 
the animals they were caring for and living amongst, I was inspired to write 
many of my stories, including War Horse,

Which one of your books have you read the most times?

Skywalker

Probably Private Peaceful, or War Horse, or The Best Christmas Present in the 
World, or On Angel Wings, or The Mozart Question. This is because I perform 
concerts of these books either with orchestral musicians – most recently the 
London Pilharmonic Orchestra with The Mozart Question, or with Coope Boyes and 
Simpson who are wonderful folk singers, and also in the case of War Horse, with 
two amazing musicians, John Tams (the songmaker in the play of War Horse) and 
Barry Coope. I read the stories and they weave songs around my words. Keep your 
eye onmy website <http://www.michaelmorpurgo.com/> to see where the concerts 
will be this year.

How do you know when your writing has enough detail in it or when it becomes 
over the top and uninteresting? How do you resolve writer's block?

Tjala 

First, I don't get writer's block. If I feel I'm going nowhere, I go for a 
long walk to think things through, to the sheep sometimes! It you believe in 
writer's block, you'll get it! Best cure for writer's block. Tell you story out 
loud to some sheep. They'll listen to anything!! As for knowing when to stop: 
well, that's a difficult one. I write quite instinctively, telling the story 
down onto the page, trying not to worry about it. Then after a chapter I'll 
read it out aloud – very important for me – and that usually tells me where 
I've gone on too much. I find I often have to cut my favourite bits out. Really 
annoying that. But writing isn't about showing a reader how clever you are with 
words. You're just telling a story!

What was your favourite story as a child?

Kcorbett

I loved Treasure Island by Robert Louis Stevenson. I was not an avid reader at 
all. I liked comics and being read to, and listening to stories. This was the 
first real book I read for myself. Jim Hawkins was the first character I 
identified with totally. I lived this book as I read it.

If you weren't a writer, what job do you think you would be doing?

Readaholic

When I was younger I would have said a rugby player. I loved rugby – still do. 
But if I am honest I would love to be an actor. My real father was an actor, as 
was my mother, and it's in my blood. I love the theatre which has made the 
journey for War Horse from my original story to the successful play all the 
more incredible for me.

Have you got a special room for writing? Do you wear special clothes or do 
special things before you write?

Adrii

We have built a special tea-house in the garden, which is very light and airy 
and a great place to write. It's quiet there too as there's no phone. I write 
upstairs in the tea-house sitting on a bed, with lots of cushions supporting my 
back and arms. I often write in the morning and then go for a long walk in the 
fields around our home in the afternoon with my wife. It really helps to have 
this time for the stories to weave themselves in my head.

Poet laureate Carol Ann Duffy has said that she wouldn't be in the position 
she is now if it hadn't been for public libraries. What are your views on 
proposals to close libraries nationwide?

Tara

I am horrified by the proposals to close libraries. Libraries are central to a 
civilised world and for the future of our society and our children. We all know 
that reading can transform people and change lives, and libraries play a vital 
role, especially for those children who don't have books at home. And for old 
people too libraries are so important.

If you could have a famous grandma, who would it be? Dead or alive. 

Amber 

Freya Stark – a great travel writer. She'd have some stories to tell! I met 
her once too, by accident.

Do you have any mad hobbies?

Wookie

I like making mash potato and am actually quite good at it. Don't ask me why 
but there's something relaxing about mashing spuds!

If you could have dinner with any person, dead or alive, who would it be and 
why?

Kcorbett

It would be great to have dinner with my Mum. She died many years ago now. 
There's a lot I'd like to say to her, thank her for. I expect she'd have a 
thing or two to tell me too!.

If you were stranded on a desert island like the one in Kensuke's Kingdom what 
would you do?

JosephP

Make myself as comfortable as I could. Learn how to fish really well, and play 
on the water-slide I'd take with me!! To keep myself occupied and cheery.

If you had two minutes to talk to the world, what would you say? What are you 
passionate about besides writing?

D'Artagnan

I was lucky enough to be able to give the Dimbleby Lecture for the BBC 
<http://www.michaelmorpurgo.com/news/read-michaels-dimbleby-lectur/> earlier 
this year and I had a chance to say some things that are really important to me 
about children and their rights. I tried to speak about the fact that millions 
of children still live in poverty, have no access to health care or education, 
and are denied survival and liberty. That we can still imprison children, deny 
their basic right to freedom and to an education puts us all to shame.

What do you think is most important in life? In many of your books the 
characters are in bad situations, but they keep going and don't give up. They 
think of things important to them, like their family, to keep going.

Penguin 

You are right, the things that keep my characters going in difficult 
situations are the things that matter most to me. The memories of happier 
times, of beloved family members, of home and friendship. These are the most 
important things in life and the things worth hanging on to.

• This article was amended on 3 March 2011. The original said Rosemary 
Sutcliffe. This has been corrected.
 