
The education secretary, Michael Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove>, is to shake up the A-level 
system as he moves to introduce the principles of the international 
baccalaureate (IB) to schools in England.

Students hoping to attend the elite Russell Group of universities will be 
expected to write dissertations of up to 5,000 words and to show an academic 
breadth of knowledge.

Anyone studying arts subjects, such as English and history, would be expected 
to choose a "contrasting" subject in the sciences or maths. Those studying the 
sciences would be expected to take a "contrasting" arts subject. The changes 
are designed to answer universities' complaints that too many students have a 
narrow outlook and often lack basic literacy skills.

Gove's latest move follows his announcement last month that he is to scrap 
GCSEs in favour of what he regards as a more academically rigorousEnglish 
baccalaureate <https://www.theguardian.com/education/english-baccalaureate> 
(EBacc) system.

In the next stage of reforms, Gove is not planning to scrap A-levels, but is 
hoping to drive up standards by developing an overall framework known as the 
ABacc. Students would still sitA-levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels>, but there would be major 
changes:

• It is expected that A-level modules would eventually be scrapped. Gove has 
done this with GCSEs and is minded to do so again with A-levels, though he is 
expected to move at a slower pace.

• Students would be stretched by being asked to write dissertations of up to 
5,000 words. This would probably be in addition to their A-levels and would 
give them a higher overall ABacc grade. Many universities have complained that 
students often struggle to write longer essays.

Liz Truss, the new education minister who campaigned in favour of improving 
the teaching of maths in her days as a backbencher, has advocated longer essays.

While Gove is introducing the principles of the IB, he does not want to 
introduce the actual IB system across English schools, although it is favoured 
by many public schools. The qualification is managed from abroad and demands a 
breadth of subjects that would stretch many schools.

A Department for Education spokesman stressed that the plans, first disclosed 
in the Times, were at an early stage. "A-levels will not be replaced under any 
circumstances. There are public consultations about reforming A andAS-levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/aslevels>. There are also numerous 
suggestions about new ABacc league table measures but no decisions have been 
made." The Times said the mix would also include voluntary work.

Stephen Twigg, the shadow education secretary, said: "We support the concept 
of an ABacc. However, Labour would ensure it includes a broad range of subjects 
and sits alongside our proposed vocational courses. If these changes include 
community work, an extended project and a wider range of courses, then that is 
welcome.

"Unfortunately, Michael Gove seems to be ignoring important subjects like 
computing and engineering which are critical for the modern economy. The 
government must address the big challenges to ensure a One Nation education 
system – ensuring a gold standard route for vocational education and every 
pupil studying English and maths until the age of 18."
 