
"Hey," a man called out as I was walking down Castro Street, "You're supposed 
to be dead."

Who was this guy?

"You are Michael Tolliver?" he continued hesitantly. And then I remembered. 
Not his name, but his dick. How its less-than-average length was made 
irrelevant by its girth.

That's the problem these days. Thirty years after writing about gay sex and 
Aids, no one is really interested any more. Everyone is writing about sex and, 
thanks to the drug cocktails, a lot of us didn't die. So what's the story?

Well there isn't one really, but my publisher thought you might like a 
follow-up and I could kind of use the money, so here we go. We might as well 
start with Ben. I met him via the internet - CLEANCUTLAD4U - and he's 21 years 
younger than me. But we fell in love and got married. Perhaps I shouldn't have 
started with Ben, after all. Because what's there to say, other than we're 
blissful? So maybe I mention the phone call I got from my brother, Irwin. 
Neither he, nor his nutty religious wife, Lenore, have ever been able to stand 
gays, so a phone call was unusual.

"Mum's dying," he said. "You may want to come out to Florida to say goodbye." 
It's weird, this. I always expected to die first. So now I find myself having 
to prepare for other people's deaths and worrying about dying of something 
other than Aids. This might be an interesting subject, so I'd better trivialise 
it.

I'm lying on my front, pushing my ass up towards Ben. "You will be careful 
about how you stick it in, won't you?" I said teasingly.

Ooh, what a dirty mind you've got! Ben was only giving me my weekly 
testosterone injection. Sweet. A man needs all the help he can get at my age.

I suppose you also want to hear about all the old characters who used to hang 
out at Barbary Lane. My LOGICAL family, rather than my BIOLOGICAL family. 
Geddit? Well, Brian's still around and he's bought a Winnebago. Ben thinks he's 
hot, but Brian's always been dead straight, so no chance there.

Anyway, ever since Mary Ann left, Brian's been worried about bringing up their 
daughter, Shawna. But he shouldn't be. He's done a great job. She's working in 
a strip club - a mastaburtorium she calls it - and she's about to move to New 
York to publish her sex memoirs. She's worried how her dad will feel about her 
leaving San Fran, but I told her he'll get over it. Hmm, maybe that's not so 
fascinating.

Well then, there's dear old Anna Madrigal. At 85 - having spent half her life 
as a man and the other half as a woman - she's still our mummy. But she's taken 
to talking enigmatically so she'll probably die at some point.

What else? There's a friend of mine called Jake who's a transsexual. "I 
haven't had the addadictomy," he purred. "I said, I haven't had the addadictomy"

"I heard you the first time," I said.

"Well, it's my only gag and I didn't want you to miss it."

So we fly to Florida to see Mum, and it's all kind of bitter-sweet. She 
doesn't like gays that much, but she loves me and Ben and gives us power of 
attorney to stop Irwin and Lenore prolonging her life.

We also get to hear some great gossip on how Mum twice nearly left Dad, and 
how Dad once got it on with Lenore. Imagine! I couldn't, but people are 
supposed to reveal family secrets on their deathbed and this was all I could 
come up with.

Mum is taking her time to die, so we fly back to San Fran to do a bit more 
gardening and the bathhouses, when my arthritis allows, and then Irwin calls 
again to say she really is on her way out. But then I hear that Anna is dying 
so I stay with my LOGICALs and even Mary Ann turns up from New York to say 
goodbye. And that's all there is to it, really.

The digested read, digested: Michael lives and Tales of the City die.
 