
In 1997, when Tony Blair became prime minister, I was invited to a celebratory 
party at 10 Downing Street (a miscalculation never made again). I remember 
being checked by the police before entering the barred and guarded street and 
then walking past ranks of blankly staring photographers. It was not an 
exclusive party – the rooms on the first floor were densely crowded with people 
I almost recognised but did not know. When I was introduced to Blair, I noticed 
a brief shadow of bewilderment flit across his face before he – and I – were 
rescued by the arrival of a pop group whom he escorted into another room to 
have their photos taken.

Meanwhile I fell into a conversation with a scholarly civil servant who 
revealed himself as a VAT expert. Discovering that I was a writer, he came up 
with a novel idea. Had I ever thought of writing about VAT? Perhaps an opera, 
he suggested. The subject was full of hidden plot and drama, criminal 
enterprise and economic subtlety. It resembled a chess game between highly 
skilled opponents, he said, and its subtle history was impatiently waiting to 
be told.

My accountant had taken a different line when, in a rush of financial 
optimism, I registered for VAT. "I am sorry to hear the dreadful news," he 
wrote to me. And then he broke into verse:

The whole thing will bore you
But I'll do it for you
And try to ensure you won't suffer.
With Inspectors inspecting and Collectors collecting
You're bound to need me as a buffer.

When VAT was invented I had advised the Society of Authors to campaign for the 
exemption of writers on the grounds that their collective incompetence would 
foul up the whole system. If we could not gain exemption, I argued, we must at 
least settle for being zero-rated. Insofar as books and newspapers were 
concerned, we were successful in gaining a zero rating. But a minority of 
authors, who prided themselves on not being innumerate and believed that VAT 
would bring them additional income, triumphed: and so we were all entangled in 
the scheme.

I was obliged to employ a chartered accountant to manage the micro-mathematics 
of my ins and outs every quarter in addition to dealing with my income tax each 
year. This meant additional money for him and the treasury, but not for me. My 
accountant believed that this "vexatious taxation" was absurd because: "The 
money you get someone else has to pay / And they get it back in a roundabout 
way. / Nobody wins at the end of the day."

Preparing special VAT invoices for universities and festivals (the few that 
offered a fee) was peculiarly complicated, involving many forms in convoluted 
jargon. There were other disappointments too. I remember buying a car on the 
assumption that I could afford it because, being registered, I would have the 
VAT handed back to me. But VAT does not operate as pleasantly as that, and I 
got nothing back. Recently I have been arranging to de-register. Someone 
gloomily told me it might take two years to achieve this.

Like VAT, cars have also become a problem. I used to park my car pretty well 
where I wanted near my home in London. I could gently whirl away whenever I 
liked and then steer my way home at any time of the day or night. The rules 
were easy: keep to the left and halt at red lights. To make things simpler 
still, I got an automatic car which changed gears for me. Delegation is the 
solution to many problems. Sitting at the wheel of my car, I felt I understood 
life and was even in charge of it sometimes.

Memories of these days vividly came back to me while I have been writing a 
short book about my cars and those belonging to my biographical subjects. But 
as the years advanced, my sense of freedom has diminished. I have become hedged 
around with bureaucracy. Today I can no longer park without many permits. The 
car window has become crowded with them. I am just outside the congestion zone 
and must arrange to pay each time I stray into it. Being inside the zone as I 
used to be had one surprising advantage: the burglars were so reluctant to pay 
the charge for entering the zone that they went burgling elsewhere. Now I am 
outside it, they have come back.

When I was young I could walk along Downing Street freely. The streets of 
London now seem crowded with obstacles. When visiting my dentist I must park at 
a meter which insists I use a mobile phone. I fear my teeth will not benefit 
from such restrictions.

The other day I conducted a small experiment. The result was: 4, 4, 0, 0.5, 6 
and 7. These figures mark the number of minutes that passed between getting 
into my car and hearing the frantic sound of bells, sirens and horns from 
ambulances and police cars (the zero records a police car that sailed noisily 
past me as I was getting into my car).

Until I reached my 50s I was an optimist and thought of change as being 
generally for the better. Now I sometimes feel threatened by it. Does this make 
me a pessimist or a realist? Or is it merely a symptom of second childhood?
 