
It is understandable that the prime minister should try to ease the pain of 
the families who lost their loved ones at Stafford hospital by promising to 
hold individual managers to account (People suffered and died in a hospital 
obsessed by its status 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2010/feb/24/brown-wants-hospital-managers-answers>
, 25 February). However, this should not be the only course of action. It is 
the problems at the heart of the organisation's entire management culture that 
need to be addressed if Stafford hospital and the wider NHS are to avoid 
repeating the mistakes of the past.

The report cites a "fundamental breach of NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> values" in which targets were 
prioritised above everything else. There is pressure to deliver more for less 
and in a culture obsessed with targets, managers, fearful of reprisals should 
targets be missed, are likely to cut corners. The report also revealed a 
climate of fear, in which staff were subjected to bullying and too afraid to 
speak up. There was a total lack of employee engagement, owing to a deficient 
training and development programme. Managers, like the clinicians they work 
with, need to be properly qualified to do their jobs. Only one UK worker in 
five holding a management position is professionally qualified and Stafford 
hospital is an example of why this needs to change urgently.

There have been dozens of previous examples of patient services suffering as a 
result of similar shortcomings. The wider NHS has much to learn from the 
failings in Mid Staffordshire and must take urgent action to ensure that such a 
scenario never occurs again. Singling out individuals may ease the pain, but it 
won't fix problems endemic to the health service as a whole.

Ruth Spellman

Chief executive, Chartered Management Institute 

• You report that Hamish Meldrum is calling on "the government and all 
hospital managers to learn the lessons from Staffordshire and put patients 
first" (BMA attacks "tick-box culture" rooted in fear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2010/feb/24/nhs-midstaffordshire-francis-reaction>
, 25 February). I am sure that both government and managers have much to learn, 
but why is Dr Meldrum not calling for clinicians to do the same? The Francis 
report made it quite clear that in addition to there being many systemic and 
leadership failings, there was also individual culpability – nurses and doctors 
who behaved in the most appalling way towards patients. Whatever the pressure, 
it is inexcusable to walk past the cases described in the report. When 
clinicians saw patients lying on the floor in their own waste and sobbing in 
humi­l­iation, of course they should have blown the whistle and they need to 
feel safe in doing so. But first they should have helped the patient up. That 
does not require much more than human decency.

Robert Francis says: "Unhappily, the view of nearly the whole board can be 
characterised as one of denial." The BMA appears to be doing the same.

Stephen Hill

London

• So Gordon Brown <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gordon-brown> is going 
to "strike off" those hospital managers at fault for the Mid Staffs debacle. 
That betrays either astonishing cynicism or a gross lack of insight. The 
managers were doing their jobs as directed by the Department of Health, and 
failure to achieve financial targets was widely viewed as a P45 offence, 
leading to sacking.

The scandal of Mid Staffs dwarfs – in both numbers and wider implications – 
previous medical scandals, including Bristol, Alder Hey and Shipman, but this 
time the government is understandably less keen to get to the truth. Government 
policies were ultimately responsible for what happened and similar things are 
still going on around the country. Gordon Brown needs look no further than 
Whitehall for those who bear the responsibility for what happened in Mid Staffs.

Dr Jacky Davis 

Co-chair, NHS Consultants' Association

• The recommendations of Robert Francis QC's report may well make a difference 
to future hospital care but, as usual, the views of family carers and relatives 
are not mentioned. Patients' needs and grievances are to be respected, but 
patients are often too ill and/or too frightened to complain. If the views of 
carers had been seriously listened to in the past, the problems in 
Staffordshire would have come to light much earlier, saving lives and a lot of 
suffering.

Cathleen Palmer

St Albans, Hertfordshire
 