
Mido will miss tomorrow's African Nations Cup final after being suspended from 
international football by the Egyptian federation for six months for his 
touchline altercation with the country's coach Hassan Shehata during Tuesday's 
semi-final victory over Senegal.

The Tottenham striker left the Egypt squad's hotel in central Cairo yesterday 
morning and was believed to be en route to London last night, which could bring 
him into contention for Spurs' Premiership match at Sunderland on Sunday.

Although the terms of the suspension may seem tough, tomorrow's game is the 
only competitive fixture Egypt have scheduled for six months. That might hint 
at clemency but, despite a day of debate, the Egyptian football federation is 
adamant that Mido will not face Ivory Coast. "Sportsmanship is more important 
than one player," said the president Samir Zaher. "His behaviour was 
unacceptable. The ban is necessary to restore respect for structure and 
discipline."

Mido later apologised to the Egyptian fans, despite them chanting "Mido out" 
following the altercation, but would not back down in his dispute. "I was angry 
when Shehata decided to replace me," he said. "I was not that bad and, if I had 
stayed on, I would have scored a goal."

Mido, having missed the quarter-final with a groin injury, was a doubtful 
starter for the semi-final but managed 79 minutes before Shehata decided to 
replace him with Amr Zaki. The striker engaged in a finger-wagging tirade 
against the coach as he stormed from the pitch and then had to be restrained by 
Hossam Hassan before taking his place on the bench. Zaki almost immediately 
proved the wisdom of Shehata's decision by heading in the winner with his first 
touch.

Although a poll on a Cairo radio station indicated most Egyptians believe Mido 
deserved his punishment, several of his team-mates are less convinced. "He 
tried to say sorry but the officials at the federation have made the situation 
worse," said Hassan, the 39-year-old forward who is likely to replace him in 
the starting line-up tomorrow.

"Mido isn't the only one to suffer. It's the whole team, the fans and all of 
Egyptian football. I've known him since he was a kid and he was just desperate 
to play. I've seen this happen before with other stars. People get upset but 
we've made a problem for ourselves. I'm really frustrated by this because 
without Mido we're weaker."

Mido was randomly selected to provide a sample for a drug test on Tuesday 
evening but rejoined his team-mates a little over two hours after the final 
whistle. It is understood that he pleaded then to be allowed to remain with the 
squad, even if he was not selected for the final.

"He said that he wanted to stay with us," said Mohamed Barakat, the BBC's 
African player of the year in 2005. "He asked them not to exclude him, even 
though he had made a mistake. That was the right thing for him to say. In my 
opinion what happened when he was substituted was about jealousy and love. 
Maybe he was out of line but it was just a misunderstanding with the coach.

"This is a big disappointment for all of us. Without Mido we are not so 
strong. He is a great player who can do many things on the pitch but we have to 
accept that he is not going to be with us. We must look to what we have and 
anybody who comes in for him must do their job. We have other forwards like 
Hossam Hassan, Emad Meteb and Amr Zaki so, inshallah, we will win, even without 
Mido."

The 22-year-old striker returned to the international scene for the World Cup 
qualifier against Libya last March, having fallen out with the previous coach 
Marco Tardelli, a World Cup winner in 1982 with Italy. Martin Jol seems to have 
provided him with a measure of stability at Tottenham but his club career 
before moving to White Hart Lane on loan last January was turbulent.

Ajax suspended him in 2003 after he criticised the team selection of their 
then coach Ronald Koeman and, after a loan spell in Spain with Celta Vigo, he 
lasted only one year at Marseille before being offloaded to Roma.

"He is still young and inexperienced," the defender Wael Gomaa admitted, "but 
what he did was wrong. When I saw what was happening, I thought we would lose 
for sure."
 