
The Labor candidate for Eden Monaro, Mike Kelly, has resigned from the army 
reserves after he received an instruction to stop using photos of himself in 
uniform in campaign material.

Kelly told Guardian Australia it was “a really sad day, it ended nearly 30 
years of attachment to the Australian army, an institution that I love dearly”.

He was instructed on Thursday by the Australian Defence Force not to use 
photos of himself in uniform in campaign materials.

Kelly said he had “worked hard not to compromise neutrality of defence” by not 
using the uniform in TV, corflute or billboard ads, and only using photos in 
uniform by himself in “low-key biographical materials”.

Andrew Hastie defiant after sacking from army reserve for wearing uniform in 
ads
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/09/andrew-hastie-sacked-from-army-reserve-for-wearing-uniform-in-campaign-ads>
Kelly said he believed his use of materials was within the rules because he 
didn’t campaign in uniform and the rules only forbid using images of multiple 
defence force members, not the candidate alone.

But Kelly said he respected the chief of the army’s decision that that use was 
outside the rules. Kelly resigned and will continue to use material showing 
himself in uniform.

“My concern was that I spent $10,000 on material which in previous campaigns 
was material I had used without concerns. I was really concerned that 
lower-income earners had contributed to pay for it, and I couldn’t in good 
conscience allow it be wasted.”

It comes after the ADF terminated Liberal MP Andrew Hastie’s service in the 
reserves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/09/andrew-hastie-sacked-from-army-reserve-for-wearing-uniform-in-campaign-ads>
 because he refused to stop materials showing himself in uniform.

Guardian Live election special event with Lenore Taylor and Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-live-australia/2016/may/10/guardian-live-election-special>
Kelly said, “There’s a bipartisanship around defence, we’re all proud of our 
service and see it as a continuation of serving the country.”

Labor’s candidate for Brisbane, Pat O’Neill, has decided to take down 
billboards depicting himself in army uniform.

O’Neill told Guardian Australia: “I put them up to talk about my background 
and history, it’s 18 years that I’ve worked full-time in the army, since I left 
school”.

“But we want to focus on policy and issues; I didn’t leave a good job in the 
army to talk about billboards but rather things that make life better for 
Brisbane and across the country.”

Asked about the army’s decision to sack Hastie, O’Neill said, “I have known 
Hastie for about a decade, we worked together up in Darwin, and he’s got my 
support.”

“He spent the majority of his life serving the country, so he’s got my support 
and I hope to see him in Canberra.”

“As we’re two former defence members he has my personal support – I think it’s 
sad what’s happened over the last 24 hours.”

O’Neill defended the use of campaign materials showing the uniform.

“It’s important to know the background and experience of a candidate, and for 
them to be from a broad background and experience – that’s what Andrew [Hastie] 
and I can bring to the parliament.”
 