
 Pensioners who are locked into an annuity to provide them with retirement 
income may be allowed to sell the policy under measures reportedly being 
discussed by ministers on Friday.

The 2014 budget announced new freedoms for retirees who, from 6 April 2015, 
will be able to withdraw all of their pension savings as they wish, instead of 
having to buy an annuity contract from an insurer.


However, as things stand millions of people already locked into annuities will 
be unaffected by the new rules.


The Financial Times reported 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/e29b4934-c7ce-11e4-8210-00144feab7de.html> that 
proposals were being discussed to allow those who have annuities to resell them 
for a lump sum. The idea had been proposed by the pensions minister,Steve Webb, 
who in January said pensioners and insurers were interested in the plan 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/personalfinance/pensions/11323621/Sell-your-pensions-for-cash-in-retirement-Steve-Webb-says.html>
.


A consultation on the idea could form part of Wednesday’s budget announcement, 
it is thought.


Ros Altmann, a pensions expert and the government’s older workers champion, 
said such a change would benefit people who had purchased an annuity because 
they had no choice but now needed the money to repay debts or pay for health or 
care needs or other urgent spending.


“Many of these people have written to me complaining that they didn’t want or 
need an annuity and would much rather have a cash lump sum to spend as they 
wish, rather than an income for life that has no inflation protection,” she 
said.


People who had purchased small annuities might also wish to take advantage of 
the change, she said. “Someone with a £5,000 pension fund who bought an annuity 
at age 60 might have less than £5 a week for life, whereas having a few 
thousand pounds straight away could make a real difference to their lives,” she 
said.


Altmann said there were risks that people would be offered poor value and 
charged unfairly high sums to cash in their annuity.


“There are risks that people will cash in their annuity, spend all their money 
and then have to live on state benefits as they become poor in retirement. This 
risk is no different to that which exists under the new pension rules and it 
just helps remove some of the unfairness between the past and the future.”


Tom McPhail, head of pensions research at financial firm Hargreaves Lansdown, 
said there was not enough time for meaningful action to be taken before the 
election. “However if the idea proved popular it could be resurrected by the 
next government and in the meantime it could be a vote winner for the 
coalition,” he said.


McPhail said the idea could make sense “for a minority of existing annuity 
investors”.


“There are likely to be significant costs and risks involved and these may 
well outweigh any potential benefit,” he added. “The chances of this idea ever 
getting off the ground appear slim but a consultation would at least present 
the opportunity to explore it in more detail.”

Since the chancellor announced the new rules on pension access, sales of 
annuities have plummeted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/feb/20/annuity-sales-to-people-in-poor-health-nosedive>
, as retirees have chosen to wait and take advantage of the freedoms.

Withdrawals, which can only be made from defined contribution pensions, will 
be subject to tax and charges, and not all savers will be better off taking 
their cash.

Annuity provider Partnership said the idea of allowing consumers to resell 
annuities could make them more attractive purchases for savers.


The firm said it would consider entering the market as a buyer of annuities 
“if we believed it was appropriate for our business and we were able to offer 
the best rate for consumer”.


Partnership’s chief executive, Steve Groves, said: “The devil is, as always, 
in the detail, and this proposal would inevitably require the development of a 
mature market and appropriate regulations to safeguard consumers. We will 
monitor this closely and contribute to any future consultation. However, in 
principle, Partnership is broadly supportive.”

 