
He was a recent college student with an interest in computers who had worked 
part-time as a private security guard. He was said to be an honor student in 
high school. And he had nothing more than a minor traffic citation on his 
record.


But on Saturday, for reasons still unclear, authorities say Dahir Ahmed Adan 
put on a security guard uniform and went into a centralMinnesota 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/minnesota> mall armed with what appeared 
to be a kitchen knife. In an attack that took just minutes, he injured 10 
people before he was shot and killed by an off-duty police officer.

 Those who know Adan, 20, say he was a calm, cool guy with a good head on his 
shoulders. They are trying to come to terms with what happened and figure out 
what pushed him to violence.

 “We have a thirst for answers,” said Abdul Kulane, a community advocate in 
the St Cloud area. “What was his motivation? What happened?”

 Authorities have released little information about Adan but say they are 
investigating the attacks as a potential act of terrorism. An Islamic State-run 
news agency claimed the attacker was a “soldier” for the group.

 One victim, Ryan Schliep, told WCCO-TV  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/minnesota-mall-attack-victim-says-no-emotions>
that Adan “just walked right at me” before quickly stabbing Schliep in the head.

 “He looked just blank in the eyes like he wasn’t even there,” Schliep said. 

 St Cloud police chief Blair Anderson has said the man reportedly made at 
least one reference to Allah and asked a victim if he or she was Muslim before 
attacking.

 Jama Alimad, a Somali community advocate and friend of the family, told the 
Star Tribune 
<http://www.startribune.com/st-cloud-mall-closed-until-monday-is-crime-scene-after-stabbings/393872071/>
 that Adan was more into sports than religion, describing him as “the most 
assimilated kid in the neighborhood”.

 “He was an A student. He was a tutor. He was employed,” Alimad told the 
newspaper.

 A spokesman for the family, Abdi Wahid Osman, read from a statement 
expressing condolences for the injured and anyone else who was impacted.

 “As we mourn the death of our son, Dahir Adan, who was very dear to us, we 
are in deep shock as everyone else is in the state of Minnesota,” the statement 
said.

 Adan had recently been employed part-time by the security firm Securitas, and 
he was assigned for a few months to an Electrolux factory near the mall, 
Electrolux spokeswoman Eloise Hale said. A statement from Securitas said he 
resigned from the company in June.

 A spokesman for St Cloud State University confirmed Adan was a student 
majoring in information systems, but hadn’t been enrolled since the spring 
semester.

 Anderson said the attacker began stabbing people right after entering the 
mall. The victims included eight men, one woman and a 15-year-old girl.

 Anderson also said the attack appeared to be the work of one person and there 
was no sign the attacker was radicalized or communicated with any terrorist 
group.

 The Islamic State-run news agency claimed the attacker was a “soldier of the 
Islamic State” who had heeded the group’s calls for attacks in countries that 
are part of a US-led anti-Isis coalition. But it wasn’t immediately known 
whether the extremist group had planned the attack or knew about it beforehand.

 FBI special agent in charge Rick Thornton said the attack is being 
investigated as a“potential act of terrorism” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/18/minnesota-mass-stabbing-mall-fbi-terrorism-investigation>
. Authorities were digging into Adan’s background and possible motives, looking 
at social media accounts and electronic devices and talking to his associates, 
Thornton said.

 Haji Yusuf, who is part of UniteCloud, a local group founded to tackle racial 
and ethnic tension in the city, said he spoke with Adan’s parents and was told 
Adan went to the mall to pick up an iPhone. Yusuf said Adan seemed happy when 
he left the home, and that was the last time his parents saw him.

 A person at the T-Mobile store where Yusuf said Adan had gone declined to 
comment or take a message for his supervisor.

 If the stabbings are ultimately deemed a terrorist act, it would be the first 
carried out by a Somali on US soil.

 Barack Obama said the stabbings had no apparent connection to weekend 
bombings in New York and New Jersey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/new-york-bombing-suspect-ahmad-khan-rahami>
.

 Minnesota has the nation’s largest Somali population, an estimated 57,000 
people. Both Anderson and Governor Mark Dayton warned against a possible 
backlash due to the stabbings, especially in St Cloud, where Somalis in the 
65,000-resident city about 65 miles (104km) north-west of Minneapolis have 
spoken about mistreatment in the past.

 “It’s going to be tough times. We know it’s going to be a long winter for 
this community,” said Yusuf.
 