
It remains one of the greatest mysteries of the Golden Age of Flight: what 
happened to the American pioneer aviatorAmelia Earhart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/amelia-earhart> when she disappeared over 
the Pacific Ocean 72 years ago?

The question might finally be answered by a forthcoming expedition to a tiny 
archipelago where researchers believed Earhart might have lived as a lonely and 
doomed castaway on a desert island.

In order to test their theory, the expedition, organised by The International 
Group for Historic Aircraft Recovery (Tighar), has obtained DNA samples from a 
member of the Earhart family and will compare them to any findings they make on 
isolated Nikumaroro Island. "I am quite optimistic. We have every reason to 
believe that we can find some material there and now we have a sample to 
compare it with for the first time," said Ric Gillespie, director of Tighar.

Earhart was a hugely popular figure of the 1920s and 1930s as the fledgling 
aviation industry became a national obsession. As a woman in a man's world of 
derring-do she became famous for her tomboyish adventurism.

She hit the headlines as the first woman to command a flight across the 
Atlantic, although her plane was actually piloted by a man. She then toured the 
country performing flying feats and organising cross-country races for female 
pilots. In 1932 she duplicated Charles Lindbergh's famous solo flight over the 
Atlantic, becoming only the second person to fly alone from America to Europe.

But tragedy struck in 1937. On an epic round-the-world flight Earhart's plane 
got into trouble over the Pacific. Earhart radioed that she was running out of 
fuel and then, it is believed, she ditched her plane somewhere near Howland 
Island, part of the same chain as Nikumaroro Island. A massive air-and-sea 
search, ordered by President Franklin D Roosevelt, turned up nothing.

Gillespie's team has been working on Nikumaroro for almost a decade, following 
up reports from 1940 when British officials, who were clearing the then 
uninhabited island for a coconut plantation, discovered a camp site and 
skeletal remains of a castaway. Those remains were lost, but their measurements 
indicated they could be of a Caucasian female. In 2007 Gillespie found the site 
and uncovered early 20th-century make-up and two pieces of broken glass that 
could have come from a 1930s-style compact mirror.

Gillespie said that modern DNA analysis techniques meant that any other human 
artefacts recovered could now be swabbed for the tiniest traces of DNA and 
compared to the Earhart family sample. His team will be looking for traces of 
mitochondrial DNA, which breaks down less easily than the chromosomal DNA of a 
cell's nucleus. Gillespie said that the mission, which will begin next summer, 
has every chance of success: "It is the intellectual challenge of finding out 
what happened. It is the thrill of the search. There is rarely any chance in 
archaeology to have an Indiana Jones experience - it actually all happens in 
the lab or at your desk when you finally figure something out."

The mission is controversial with some Earhart enthusiasts. It is partly based 
on a theory that Earhart was able to send distress signals from somewhere on 
land after she had crashed her plane, the Lady Lindy. Tighar believes those 
signals show she ditched her plane and survived by making it to an isolated 
island. Others, including searchers at the time, believe that those calls were 
cruel hoaxes and misunderstood radio signals.

What is not in doubt is the continued fascination Earhart holds in the popular 
imagination. She was a character in the movie Night at the Museum 2 earlier 
this year and in a few months' time a Hollywood biopic of her life starring 
Hilary Swank will be released. However, Gillespie said that he is actually not 
a part of the Earhart fan club, just a scientist trying to get to the bottom of 
a mystery. "We recognise her tremendous accomplishments, but we are scientific 
investigators. We have to recognise her failings. She ended up where she did 
because she was not paying enough attention," he said.
 