
South Africa proved on Thursday it is not only the England top order that is 
unable to cope withMitchell Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mitchell-johnson> in full flow when the 
Australia fast bowler ripped through the home batting order on the second day 
of the first Test at Centurion.

Johnson, who took 37 wickets as Australia regained the Ashes with a 5-0 
whitewash earlier this year, removed the South Africa captain, Graeme Smith, 
his opening partner, Alviro Petersen, Faf du Plessis and Ryan McLaren to leave 
the world No1 Test side reeling on 140 for six, 257 runs shy of the Australian 
total, at stumps.

"I started better today than at the start of the Ashes in Brisbane," said 
Johnson, who ended the day with impressive figures of four for 51. "To come out 
and get three wickets quickly is definitely a great start."

The Queenslander's anticipated contest with Smith – whose hand he has broken 
on two previous occasions with nasty deliveries – lasted just two balls before 
Smith fended at a bouncer and was caught for 10. Johnson said he had a plan to 
bowl a little wider at the crease and use the angle.

"It is nice when a plan comes off," the 32-year-old said. "I think that [the 
broken hands] is definitely in the back of his [Smith's] mind, but it was just 
one of those balls that took off.

"I think I'll try and keep bowling like that to him and try to keep producing 
those kind of balls. When I was batting I could sense the extra bounce in the 
wicket, so when I started bowling I tried to hit the deck as hard as I could. I 
didn't feel the wicket was swinging but there were cracks to work with.

"I'm trying to be as intimidating as possible."

Resuming on 297 for four in the morning, Australia eased to 331 before losing 
Steve Smith for a round 100, his first Test century against a team other than 
England, Brad Haddin for a duck and Shaun Marsh for a magnificent 148, in the 
space of five overs. Some entertaining lower-order strokeplay from Johnson, who 
made 33, and Ryan Harris, who made 19, took the tourists to 397 all out just 
after lunch.

Then came the onslaught. Graeme Smith was caught by Marsh in the slips off 
Johnson's fourth ball, a brutal bouncer that reared up to hit the bat handle. 
Petersen was caught behind by Haddin four overs later and when another bouncer 
– this one clocking in at 93mph – was enough to have Du Plessis caught by 
Michael Clarke in the cordon, South Africa were staggering at 23 for three.

Things looked bleak when Peter Siddle trapped Hashim Amla lbw to leave the 
home side 43 for four, but JP Duminy and AB de Villiers steadied the ship with 
a partnership of 67. However, Johnson took a fine tumbling catch to dismiss 
Duminy off the bowling of Nathan Lyon, then clean-bowled McLaren for eight to 
peg South Africa back.

De Villiers remained resolute in the face of the barrage, even pulling Johnson 
over fine leg when the bowler returned for his second spell, and when rain 
brought a premature end to proceedings the world's No1-ranked Test batsman was 
unbeaten on 52.
 