
Steel giant ArcelorMittal will be accused of leaving a trail of environmental 
destruction in its wake this week when campaigners descend on Luxembourg to 
protest at its annual meeting.

Run and part-owned by Britain's richest man, Lakshmi Mittal, ArcelorMittal has 
received more than $500m in taxpayer-backed loans over the past decade, from 
development lenders including the London-based European Bank of Reconstruction 
and Development.

Bankwatch, a network of local campaign groups that monitors the activities of 
the EBRD, says the steelmaker has used the cash to boost its bottom line, 
instead of mitigating the environmental and social impact of its plants.

Protestors will present Arcelor's shareholders with a 40-page dossier of 
evidence about the firm's behaviour across the globe, from Orissa in India to 
Vanderbijlpark in South Africa. Pippa Gallop of Bankwatch said the firm had 
grown rapidly by buying up former state-owned steel plants without investing 
sufficiently in cleaner technologies: 'The main problem is the aggressive 
cost-cutting strategy of this company.'

Jan Syrtr, a Czech lawyer involved in bringing a test case against the company 
over pollution levels from its Ostrava plant, said people in the local district 
of Radvanice a Bartovice have to use magnets to clear the steel dust from 
inside their homes. 'Depending on the state of the weather, you can really 
smell that you're in Radvanice,' he said. 'We don't want money; we just want 
this to stop.'

Liz Ilg, from Citizen Action in Cleveland, Ohio, will demand the company put 
more effort into cutting pollution at her local works. She said: 'This is the 
most urban steel mill in the US: they've got more people living around them 
than any other plant - 390,000 within five miles.' Mittal took over the plant 
from International Steel Corporation in 2004.

'The main message is: start to look at pollution prevention at your 
facilities. The best way to do that is to sit down and talk to community 
members,' said Ilg. She has collected 34,000 signatures on a petition, but says 
the company has so far refused to meet local people.

A spokeswoman said: 'ArcelorMittal takes health and safety and environmental 
issues very seriously. During 2007, we spent approximately $500m on health and 
safety and environment-related projects and since 1990 we have successfully 
reduced the CO2 footprint of our steelmaking by over 20 per cent.' She added 
that the company was drawing up plans to reduce emissions from the Czech plant.

Gallop said it was difficult for civil society groups to monitor whether the 
EBRD's loans to ArcelorMittal have been well spent. 'In many cases, the 
improvements are completely unverifiable, because the action plans have never 
been released,' she said. An EBRD spokesman said the bank had clear policies 
'to assess the impact of our loans'.
 