
I know there’s a difference between black and white sesame seeds – the black 
seeds are unhulled and aren’t quite as nutty as the white – but the reason I 
often sprinkle both on a dish has less to do with taste and more to do with the 
way the two look together. Against certain backgrounds – cubes of white tofu, 
say, or a beige rice – it’s the black sesame seeds that help make a dish 
attractive and tempting. It’s what happens when two (or more) ingredients 
combine to produce a result that is more than their sum.

Likewise, I know there’s a difference between a violin and a viola, though my 
credentials for explaining that are are far less apparent. What I do know, 
however, is thatMozart’s duo for the two instruments 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rk1i69F94x4> is a very special interplay 
between similar-but-different instruments, working off each other to great 
effect. Let’s not stretch the culinary-musical analogy too far, though (I 
wouldn’t dream of suggesting that a sprinkle of sesame seeds on a dish belongs 
on the same planet as a Mozart duo). Suffice to say, this sort of interplay is 
why I adore seed, spice and herb mixes, which often use pretty much the same 
ingredients to produce remarkably different results.

Take those sesame seeds: they’re a key player in two of my favourite spice 
mixes, Middle Eastern za’atar (in which they’re mixed with dried hyssop, sumac 
and salt) and Egyptian dukkah (in which they are combined in an aromatic seed, 
nut and spice mix). Panch phoran, baharat and garam masala, meanwhile, are 
three entirely different spice mixes that all use cumin seeds to entirely 
different ends. Left whole in the east Indian panch phoran (combined with brown 
mustard, fenugreek, nigella and fennel seeds), they are ground in the Arabic 
baharat and north Indian garam masala to spread their warmth.

Cumin seeds also feature in ras el hanout, one of the most complex of all 
spice mixtures, which is found in various forms in Tunisia, Algeria and 
Morocco. The term loosely translates as “top of the shop”, and this particular 
spice mix is less a set list of ingredients as an invitation for shopkeepers to 
showcase their own personal best-of-the-best spice mix. As a result, ras el 
hanout can feature anything from eight to 80 separate ingredients, making it 
the Philharmonic Orchestra of the spice world. Spice shakers and music makers, 
seed grinders and opera singers (and, yes,Sibyl Sanderson 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/11209552>, too): this one’s for you.

Bruschetta with dukkah egg and slow-roasted tomatoes

Use as many tomatoes you can get hold of for this, of all shapes and sizes, 
and in various shades of red and yellow. Just make sure the net total for all 
the tomatoes is the same. Serves four.

225g vine-ripened tomatoes, cut in half
300g mixed red and yellow cherry tomatoes, cut in half
220g sunburst tomatoes, cut in half
125g whole tomberries
4 cloves garlic, peeled, 3 thinly sliced and 1 crushed
2 tbsp fresh oregano leaves, roughly chopped 
Salt and black pepper
100ml olive oil
10g parsley leaves, finely chopped
4 large 2cm-thick slices sourdough
4 eggs, poached just before serving
50g dukkah
150g soured cream
5g picked coriander leaves

Heat the oven to 140C/285F/gas mark 1. Put all the tomatoes cut side up on a 
large, parchment-lined baking tray. Sprinkle over the garlic slices, oregano, a 
third of a teaspoon of salt, plenty of pepper and two tablespoons of oil, and 
roast for an hour and a half, until the tomatoes have caramelised and dried, 
but still retain a bit of moisture. Remove and set aside. (You can prepare the 
tomatoes well in advance, but they need to be warm when serving, so return them 
to the bottom of the oven when you are grilling the bread, to warm through.)

Raise the oven temperature to a 220C/425F/gas mark 7 grill setting. In a small 
bowl, mix the remaining oil with the crushed garlic and parsley. Brush this 
over both sides of the sourdough and lay them out on a large baking tray. Grill 
for three to four minutes, turning halfway through, until golden-brown on both 
sides. Spoon the warm tomatoes on top, followed by a poached egg, sprinkle with 
dukkah and serve at once with a dollop of soured cream on the side and a few 
coriander leaves.

Sticky pork ribs with shichimi togarashi and sticky rice

It’s probably wrong to use the same word twice in a recipe title, as well as a 
bit of a tongue-twister, but there you go: you’ll have sticky fingers by the 
time you’ve finished eating this as well. Schichimi togarashi is a Japanese 
spice blend of ground red chilli, sansho pepper, roast orange peel, sesame and 
hemp seeds, ground ginger and nori. It’s well worth seeking out, but if you 
can’t get any, use dried chilli flakes instead, roughly ground to extract the 
heat. It’s not the same as the togarashi, but there is enough going on with the 
rest of the dish to be able to get away with it. Serves four.

1.8 kg rack of pork ribs, cut into 4 equal portions (ie 3-4 ribs per portion)
1 tbsp shichimi togarashi, to serve
Salt
Sticky rice, to serve

For the stock
6 whole star anise
4 large cinnamon sticks, broken in half
½ tsp whole black peppercorns
1 medium onion, peeled and finely chopped
3 medium celery sticks, finely chopped 
Zest of 1 whole orange, shaved off in long, thin strips
200ml dry white wine
60ml mirin
3 tbsp rice vinegar
3 tbsp soy sauce
2 tbsp tomato ketchup
3 tbsp maple syrup
200ml orange juice

Put all the ingredients for the stock in a large saucepan for which you have a 
lid, add a litre of water and half a teaspoon of salt, place on a high heat 
and, once boiling, lower in the ribs. They need to be submerged, so add more 
water if you need to. Turn down the heat to medium, cover the pan and simmer 
the ribs for an hour, turning them over from time to time, so they cook evenly. 
Remove the lid and leave to simmer, uncovered, for another 30 minutes.

Heat the oven to 200C/390F/gas mark 6. Remove the ribs from the pan and 
transfer to a large, high-sided, parchment-lined baking tray (25cm x 35cm). Put 
the stock on a medium-high heat and cook for 40 minutes more, stirring 
frequently to prevent it sticking, until you are left with about 500ml of 
thickened stock. Strain, discard all the aromatics and pour the liquid over the 
ribs.

Roast the ribs for 35-45 minutes, basting and turning them every 10 minutes, 
until caramelised and only about 150ml of thick, sticky sauce is left in the 
tray (if your sauce hasn’t reached to this consistency, leave in the oven for 
longer).

Remove from the oven, separate the ribs with a sharp knife and put on a 
serving plate. Dribble the sauce over, sprinkling on some togarashi and serve 
at once with sticky rice.

Roast carrots with panch phoron
 Photograph: Johanna Parkin. Food styling: Maud Eden 
This is glorious way to cook carrots, even if I do say so myself. Serves four.

10 large carrots, peeled and cut into 1.5cm x 7cm batons
2½ tbsp panch phoron
3 tbsp olive oil
4-5 sprigs curry leaves, picked
Finely grated zest of 2 lemons
3 mild red chillies, cut in half lengthways (and seeds removed, if you prefer)
2 tsp muscovado sugar
Salt
1½ tbsp lemon juice
15g tarragon leaves, roughly chopped

Heat the oven to 230C/450F/gas mark 8. In a large bowl, mix the carrots, panch 
phoran, oil, curry leaves, lemon zest, chillies, sugar and a teaspoon of salt. 
Tip this into two 30cm x 40cm parchment-lined baking trays (don’t try to cram 
it on to one tray), and spread out evenly.

Roast for 25-30 minutes, until cooked through and starting to colour, then 
remove and set aside to for at least 10 minutes: you want to serve this warm or 
at room temperature rather than hot. Stir through the lemon juice, tarragon and 
a quarter-teaspoon of salt, transfer to a platter and serve.

• Yotam Ottolenghi is chef/patron of Ottolenghi <http://www.ottolenghi.co.uk> 
andNopi <http://www.nopi-restaurant.com> in London.

Follow Yotam on Twitter <http://twitter.com/ottolenghi>.
 