
This week the Moby-Dick Big Read <http://www.mobydickbigread.com/>, which I 
have co-curated with the artist Angela Cockayne, reached Chapter 30, "The Pipe" 
– read by David Cameron. Last week Fiona Shaw tackled a chapter on whale oil; 
next week we have Will Self reading "The Whiteness of the Whale", with other 
readings, by Benedict Cumberbatch, Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall, Richard Hawley, 
China Miéville and Cerys Matthews, yet to come.

But this is a democratic crew, and such celebrated names are joined by 
fishermen, schoolchildren and a vicar. Equally, Angela and I have used works by 
contemporary artists, such as Anish Kapoor, Antony Gormley, George Shaw, Susan 
Hiller, Boyd Webb, Dorothy Cross and Alison Turnbull – some of them specially 
created for the project – to expand the readings into an audiovisual rendition 
of Melville's book. Indeed, given that he lacked an editor, and tried to cram 
everything he knew about whales and whaling between two covers, his work seems 
peculiarly suited to a digital age. In many ways,Moby-Dick was more like a 
Victorian blog, and I often think that if Melville had been writing his book 
today, he would never have finished it: he'd be perpetually entering "whale" 
into a search engine.

The Moby-Dick Big Read aims to mirror the wildly digressive nature of 
Melville's book, but also to reflect on its subversive sense of prophecy. The 
greatest American novel may also be one of the most unread books, dense with 
135 chapters of Victorian prose. Yet it is also wryly funny, violently exciting 
and, even now, politically charged. Indeed, the book is so freighted with 
hidden meaning and double entendre that it was difficult to find a reading that 
No 10 would accept. Chapters on whaling might appear to condone hunting; others 
mentioning "Muslim empires" have their own problems. But then, readingMoby-Dick 
is like having the future re-run before you. Witness this quote from the first 
chapter, read by Tilda Swinton: "Grand contested Election for the Presidency of 
the United States / WHALING VOYAGE BY ONE ISHMAEL / BLOODY BATTLE IN 
AFFGHANISTAN".

There are reasons why it is Barack Obama's favourite book; also Morgan 
Freeman's. Published not long before the American civil war, it has been widely 
seen as a comment on the internecine conflict over slavery – it is no 
coincidence that the whale is white. In the 1920s, DH Lawrence wrote that 
Captain Ahab is the "doom of our white day … And the Pequod is the ship of the 
white American soul." Thirty years later, the Trinidadian writer CLR James was 
clear on the subject. ReadingMoby-Dick during his enforced stay on Ellis 
Island, barred from entry to Manhattan, he mused that Ahab's madness is a form 
of imperialist critique. InMariners, Renegades and Castaways: The Story of 
Herman Melville and the World We Live In 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/literary-criticism/9781584650942/mariners-renegades-and-castaways-the-story-of-herman-melville-and-the-world-we-live-in>
, James drew a direct analogy between Ahab and Hitler, Stalin and other 
20th-century dictators who kept the masses in thrall to their personality cult: 
"He has at his sole command a whaling-vessel which is one of the most highly 
developed technological structures of the day. He has catalogued in his brain 
all the scientific knowledge of navigation accumulated over the centuries. This 
is one reason why he is so deadly a menace."

Other US writers and artists even saw Moby Dick as an avatar of the nuclear 
age. Writing in the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, the artist Gilbert 
Wilson saw the White Whale as an augury of atomic conflict, and Ahab's "insane 
pursuit of Moby Dick into the Sea of Japan" as analogous to America's 
"atrocious nuclear experiments and explosions in the same area".

Little wonder that, when the same New York Harbour view that James had seen 
was still smouldering from the 9/11 attacks, Edward Said declared in the New 
York Times that George W Bush was no better than a demented Ahab and the "war 
on terror" was an impossible pursuit like the captain's demonic hunt for the 
White Whale. Such interpretations have only increased in recent years. The 
book's exposition of the 19th-century Yankee fleets trawling the world for 
whale oil has been compared to our dependence on crude oil, and all that 
follows from it.

But it is not all doom and gloom. Melville, who was almost certainly gay, 
created one of the most homoerotic passages in 19th-century literature in the 
chapter "A Squeeze of the Hand". In it, Ishmael and his crew gather round a tub 
of sperm oil, squeezing out the lumps and, occasionally, each other's hands. 
(It's read for us by the playwright Tony Kushner.) Meanwhile America's 
arch-ironist, John Waters, reads "The Cassock", devoted entirely to the whale's 
foreskin. In earlier chapters, read by Stephen Fry and Neil Tennant, Ishmael 
and Queequeg cosy up in bed, declaring themselves husband and wife; a 
premonition of Cameron's support for gay marriage, perhaps? And I'd defy anyone 
not to be roused by Simon Callow's magisterial "The Sermon", or deeply moved by 
David Attenborough's reading of "Does the Whale Diminish?", an eerie 
foreshadowing of the desperate straits to which these beautiful animals would 
be reduced by acts of human dominion.

And just in case you thought Moby-Dick had no relevance to your life, remember 
who supplies your daily latte, named after Ahab's recalcitrant first mate: 
Starbuck. It is a wry irony that Melville would have appreciated, especially 
given the extraordinary trajectory of his art. His book vanished without trace 
in his lifetime; resurfaced in the 1920s when it was reappraised by Virginia 
Woolf, WH Auden and Lawrence as a work of modernism before modernism was 
invented; became seen as a critique of imperialism and the evil that men do; 
foresaw the destruction of the natural environment; and ends up supplying the 
world with a chain of coffee bars.

Herman, where art thou? Shrugging his shoulders, I'd say. "I've written a 
blasphemous book," he announced, shortly after theMoby-Dick launch party 
(attended by just one guest, Nathaniel Hawthorne), "and I feel as spotless as 
the lamb."
 