
Anyone want some home-grown courgettes, fresh picked from the lotty? At 6am 
this morning. Come on, if you don’t like courgette quiche you could do 
courgette wine, or courgette curry, there’ll be another sackful tomorrow, help 
yourself, try a courgette cake, apparently you can’t even taste the courgettes. 
Take a couple more, just cut those bits off, course they’re not rat bites, even 
the rats are fed up with courgettes, no seriously the allotment was amazing 
today, you pick up a trowel and the stress just drains away, then there’s the 
sheer satisfaction of producing your own courgettes, I mean produce.

So we’ve got onions, courgettes, potatoes, courgettes, beans, I think, if the 
rats haven’t got them, but that’s our first season, next year we’re doing 
salsify, kohlrabi, cavolo nero, daikon, patty pan squashes, you know how much 
those cost in Waitrose? No, me neither, but the saving’s incredible even when 
you factor in our time, plus the shed, the water butt, the compost maker and 
the manure – well, without it we’d never have courgettes this size, don’t 
worry, totally organic. Though you might want to wash them anyway, God knows 
how much weedkiller we sprayed on the couch grass and brambles from the last 
people.

Complete nightmare, don’t know if we’ll ever clear it, we’ve had to put carpet 
down everywhere and now the old boy next door’s complaining we’ve ruined the 
place, I’m like, seriously, we’re supposed to take lessons from a guy who’s 
never – I kid you not – heard ofDerek Jarman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/derek-jarman>?

Modern tribes: the pub quiz fanatic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/18/pub-quiz-fanatic-modern-tribes-catherine-bennett>
That’s what you don’t realise until you get one, the unbelievable stress of 
these ancient allotment dictators threatening to chuck you out if you’re not 
hoeing 24/7, when you’ve already told them you’re planning an arid sculpture 
garden that could take years of benign neglect. But it’s still fantastically 
rewarding, for an hour – or so – a day, why don’t you pick some courgettes 
while we’re away? While you’re there, there’s just the bit of watering and 
weeding we’ve promised to do to pass the inspection, wait – unless you’d be 
interested in taking it on?
 