
Most museum visitors would be hard-pressed to name a single British sculptor 
prior toHenry Moore <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/henry-moore>. Any 
number of pre-20th century designers might crop up in a game of Trivial 
Pursuit: Capability Brown, Josiah Wedgwood and Thomas Chippendale, for example. 
But sculptors? As the art critic Roger Fry wrote in 1934, "there is no name of 
sufficient resonance to rise instantly to our minds". It was only thanks to the 
international pre-eminence of Moore and various younger sculptors that there 
emerged in the 1950s a belief that there might be a distinctive and 
distinguished British school of sculpture. Moore's achievement seemed all the 
more remarkable because of the assumption that he was preceded by a sculptural 
dark age.

Our ignorance of the history of British sculpture is only partly due to the 
wholesale destruction during the reformation and civil war. Much of this early 
sculpture would anyway have been destroyed by the elements and even more by 
changes in taste. Before and after the iconoclastic purges, there is little 
evidence that, as a nation, we were especially hostile to sculpture. Our 
ignorance owes much more to the narrowness of purpose to which sculpture was 
put. In the 18th and 19th centuries, huge sums were spent by British patrons on 
sculpture commissions – far more than was spent on contemporary painting. But 
most went on commemorative portrait sculpture – whether busts, tombs, or (in 
the Victorian era) public statues. The results can be seen in churches, 
squares, public buildings and parks across the land.

The public nature of sculpture and its commemorative role has militated 
against its being treated artistically, and against its makers being known by 
name. Westminster Abbey contains one of the world's most concentrated and 
imposing arrays of sculpture, yet visitors go there for a lesson in history 
rather than in the history of art, and few discover the names of any of the 
sculptors. Visitors seem always to have spent more time reading the moralising 
biographical inscriptions than looking at the works, and inscriptions expanded 
in length exponentially to cater for the demand.

In Joseph Addison's Spectator essay "The Tombs in Westminster Abbey" (1711), a 
whole afternoon is spent "amusing myself with the tombstones and inscriptions". 
In an anonymous essay of 1761, surprise is expressed when an elderly gentleman 
admires "other beauties than the Inscription" on Roubiliac's monument to 
Admiral Sir Peter Warren, a huge marble pedestal surmounted by a portrait bust 
and attendant male and female allegories. This was no mean feat, as the 
inscription runs to hundreds of words, and covers the pedestal as if it were a 
white marble pamphlet. The development of Poets Corner further underscored the 
literary nature of the Abbey experience. It is telling that sculpture was 
collected by the history-centred National Portrait Gallery, but not by the 
aesthetic conscience of the nation, the National Gallery.

The catalyst for Henry Moore's post-war rise to pre-eminence was a solo show 
in 1946 at the Museum of Modern Art, New York, that toured to Chicago and San 
Francisco. By the 1970s Moore reckoned that over three-quarters of his work was 
in American collections. Another key event was the British Council exhibition 
at the 1952 Venice Biennale of Moore with several younger sculptors. The 
director of MoMA, Alfred Barr, wrote to this newspaper to point out that "it 
seemed to many foreigners the most distinguished national showing".

Moore's transformation from 1930s enfant terrible, whose pin-headed, 
perforated and determinedly anonymous biomorphs so shocked his contemporaries, 
into avuncular elder statesman, is an extraordinary chapter in the history of 
taste. The shelter drawings of swaddled Londoners seeking refuge in the 
underground played a crucial role in turning him into a sculptural counterpart 
to the new NHS. Moore became the National Health Sculptor, his figures damaged 
but unbowed survivors, their silence and solitude a manifestation of their 
stoicism.

Moore's mystique was enhanced by the fact that he seemed an immaculate 
conception – an art-god who appeared out of the thinnest cultural air. In his 
1955 Reith lectures, "The Englishness of English Art", the German émigré 
Nikolaus Pevsner was dumbfounded by Moore, firmly believing, like many before, 
that the English "are not a sculptural nation . . . if it is true that at no 
time in the past have they produced work that would emulate that of France, 
Italy and Germany, how can it be that the greatest sculptor now alive should be 
English, and on top of that, unmixed Yorkshire?"

If Moore was cast as British sculpture's Giotto, single-handedly taking us out 
of the sculptural wilderness, then he did at least acknowledge the pioneering 
martyr's role played by Jacob Epstein. Epstein paid his bills in the 
time-honoured way by making portrait busts, which is just as well as his more 
public commissions brought opprobrium and even destruction for their 
primitivism and sexual frankness. Moore famously said: "He took the brickbats, 
he took the insults, he took the howls of derision." Between 1939 and 1961, 
several of Epstein's greatest stone carvings, includingAdam and Jacob and the 
Angel, were shown at Louis Tussaud's waxworks on Blackpool pleasure beach as 
titillating modern art freaks. My aunt went there with her fiancé, in the same 
way one might go to the flicks.

Modern British Sculpture at the Royal Academy is the latest institutional 
attempt to claim a renaissance in the artform. The show is curated by Penelope 
Curtis, the new director of Tate Britain, and she has adopted a dictionary 
approach by including more than 120 sculptors, all but a tiny handful 
represented by a single work. The RA's British Art in the Twentieth Century 
(1987) included about half that number of artists, with most (including the 
sculptors) shown in much greater depth.

If there is a prevailing theme to Curtis' scatter-gun show, it may well be the 
currently fashionable one of globalisation and openness to influences. Thus 
salient examples of non-western sculpture in the British Museum and V&A studied 
by Epstein, Eric Gill, Moore andBarbara Hepworth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/barbara-hepworth> are included. Later 
on, a vitrine piece from the 1980s by New Yorker Jeff Koons is juxtaposed with 
one by Leeds-born Damien Hirst.

More surprising is the inclusion of ceramics by Bernard Leach, and 
"minimalist" Tang Dynasty pottery. Interest in ceramics was stimulated because 
British sculptors in the inter-war period prided themselves on making abstract 
and semi-abstract sculpture that had to be experienced "in the round" – in 
other words, that was subservient neither to architecture, nor to "pictorial" 
or "literary" ways of seeing.

Roger Fry claimed in 1920 that only African artists "really conceive of form 
in three dimensions", but the leading sculpture critic Herbert Read, who 
started out working in the ceramics department at the V&A, argued that small 
objects such as Chinese ceramics and rococo porcelain figures were also made 
fully "in the round". Such comments elicited a quip from Bernard Berenson that 
gasometers and industrial pipes are also "in the round" – a response that 
almost seems to presage the post-war industrial aesthetic of constructed and 
minimalist sculpture.

That sculpture has to be experienced by moving around it now seems 
self-evident, but for larger work the experience of landscape was to be even 
more crucial than the experience of pottery, for walking and climbing engages 
the whole body. Moore's ideal location for his work was the English 
countryside, and the reclining mode of so many of his pieces evokes undulating 
hills rather than the upright human figure. Moore's greatest student,Anthony 
Caro <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/caro>, espoused a comparable 
horizontality in his brightly painted steel sculptures, and he frequently chose 
pastoral titles, such asEarly One Morning and Month of May. Caro's assemblages 
have been compared to pieces of agricultural machinery. The American critic 
Clement Greenberg, said that he rather than Moore was the "Moses" of English 
sculpture who had "walked into the Promised Land and spread himself out in it".

During the 20th century, sculpture didn't just become a leading art form – it 
came to represent an ideal mode of consciousness. This, as much as individual 
talent and patronage, explains why it has loomed so large in our culture. Thus 
we revere "sculptural" architecture, furniture, fashion, poetry and thought.

The guiding principle behind one of the bibles of the swinging 60s, Marshall 
McCluhan'sUnderstanding Media (1964), was that today's cars, clothes, paperback 
books, beards, babies and beehive hairdos put the "stress on touch, on 
participation, involvement, and sculptural values". McCluhan must have been 
inspired by Read's emphasis on palpability – hugging, cuddling, fondling – in
The Art of Sculpture (1954). The actuality of sculpture was seen as proof of 
its authenticity, and a cure for social alienation. Suddenly traditional easel 
painting seemed merely to trade in tricksy illusionism, and many modern 
painters turned their pictures into workmanlike, three-dimensional objects. 
Frank Auerbach, with his inches-thick impastos, and Howard Hodgkin, with his 
chunky, reclaimed wooden supports, could easily have been co-opted into the RA 
show. John Latham, with his book-encrusted reliefs, is included: here the word 
is made three-dimensional.

For all the post-Moore visual pyrotechnics, the sculpture I'm most looking 
forward to seeing is a state portrait from the supposed wilderness years by 
Alfred Gilbert (1854-1934), the neurotic dark horse of British sculpture. Best 
known for the much maligned and sabotaged Eros fountain in Piccadilly, it was 
Gilbert as much as Epstein who took the brickbats. He ended up in exile in 
Bruges, bankrupt, hungry and alone. At the RA, he is represented by the 
magnificent bronzeJubilee Memorial to Queen Victoria (1887), commissioned for 
the city of Winchester and almost immediately vandalised and covered in 
tarpaulins; it ended up in a corner of the medieval Great Hall. It's a 
neo-baroque extravaganza at whose heart sits the queen, a brooding Buddha. It's 
as haunting as any of Bacon's popes or Hirst's sharks.

Modern British Sculpture is at the Royal Academy 
<http://www.royalacademy.org.uk/>, London W1, from 22 January to 7 April.
 