
I think I've always been drawn to the second person. When I was growing up and 
playing with my friends, the usual way we interacted with imaginary worlds was 
as characters: a bench was "your" boat, leaves on a lawn were the fins of 
sharks out to get "you". Make-believe storytelling, which is to say fiction, 
wasn't exclusively about being an observer – not for me, at least. There was 
this other strand as well, of being a participant.

Just before my family moved back to Pakistan, I encountered Dungeons and 
Dragons as a nine-year-old in California. That fantasy game was spellbinding 
for me. To understand the rules, you had to read books. But then you were free 
to create. It was collective imagining with a shared narrative. The Dungeon 
Master – a figure somewhere between an author and a referee – set in motion a 
tale that players spun together. It was as a DM, I'm pretty sure, that my 
proto-novelistic skills were first honed.

Of course, I read a lot too. There seemed to be a constant stream of asides 
directly addressing the reader in children's books, a sort of conspiratorial 
"you" that cropped up again and again. Then there were those hybrids of 
role-playing game and children's book: game-books like the Choose Your Own 
Adventure series, which briefly, in that time before computers, were readily 
available, occupied a full shelf of my neighbourhood bookshop in Lahore.

Slowly, from comic books and SF and swords and sorcery, my reading interests 
stretched out in my late teens to encompass Hemingway and Tolstoy and Márquez. 
When I moved back to America for college and signed up for a creative writing 
course, I had no idea I wanted to be a writer. When the semester ended, I 
didn't want to be anything else.

In my final year, as I was starting my first novel, I read The Fall by Camus 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Fall-Penguin-Modern-Classics/dp/0141187948>. It is 
written as a dramatic monologue, with the protagonist constantly addressing the 
reader as "you," and it changed how I thought books could work. I was amazed by 
the potential of the "you", of how much space it could open up in fiction.

The book I was writing then, back in 1993, became Moth Smoke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/may/01/moth-smoke-mohsin-hamid-review>, 
the tale of a pot-smoking ex-banker who falls disastrously in love with his 
best friend's wife. You, the reader, are cast as his judge. The story has what 
might be called a realistic narrative – there is no magic, no aliens – but the 
frame of the trial that it uses isn't realism. It is something else: 
make-believe, play, with "you" given an active role.

In my second novel, The Reluctant Fundamentalist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/mar/03/featuresreviews.guardianreview20>
, I wanted to explore this further, push the boundaries of what I knew how to 
do with "you". Camus's novel was a guide, but my project was my own: to try to 
show, after the terrorist attacks of 9/11, how feelings already present inside 
a reader – fear, anger, suspicion, loyalty – could colour a narrative so that 
the reader, as much as or even more than the writer, is deciding what is really 
going on. I wanted the novel to be a kind of mirror, to let readers see how 
they are reading, and, therefore, how they are living and how they are deciding 
their politics.

By the time I started work on my third book, I'd come to believe that novels 
weren't passive forms of entertainment. Novels were a way for readers to 
create, not just for writers to do so. Novels were different from, say, film 
and television, because readers got more of the source code – the abstract 
symbols we call letters and words – and assembled more of the story themselves. 
Novels didn't come with soundtracks or casting directors.

I thought my next novel should try to be explicit about this, about the nature 
of the reader-writer relationship, the notion that "you" could simultaneously 
be audience and character and maker. My growing sense was that a kind of 
self-expression (and self-transcendence, and even self-help) is central to what 
fiction does, both for writers and for readers. And soHow to Get Filthy Rich in 
Rising Asia 
<http://www.us.penguingroup.com/nf/Book/BookDisplay/0,,9781594487293,00.html> 
was born, a novel that is a self-help book that is a second-person life-story 
that is an invitation to create. Together.

We're born with an in-built capacity for language. It is wired into our 
brains, just as an in-built capacity for breathing is wired into our lungs. We 
need language. We need language to tell stories. We need stories to create a 
self. We need a self because the complexity of the chemical processes that make 
up our individual humanities exceeds the processing power of our brains.

The self we create is a fiction. On this point, religion and cognitive 
neuroscience converge. When the machine of a human being is turned on, it seems 
to produce a protagonist, just as a television produces an image. I think this 
protagonist, this self, often recognises that it is a fictional construct, but 
it also recognises that thinking of itself as such might cause it to 
disintegrate.

Maybe, therefore, it prefers to encounter itself obliquely. Maybe our selves 
are more comfortable exploring their fictional natures in stories that are 
themselves avowedly fictional – in novels, for example. Maybe novels are where 
our selves get to put up their feet, take off their clothes and makeup and 
dentures, cut loose with an echoing fart, and be a little truer to what they 
are for a bit, before they are once more pressed into service, sealed in their 
uniforms, and dispatched to face a reality in which they can't, for good 
reason, entirely believe.
 