
Quirky children’s animation series The Moomins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/moomins>, which features fairytale 
creatures who bear a close resemblance to hippos, is to be remade by the 
company behind hit Scandinavian drama The Bridge.

For many British viewers the 1980s stop animation version of the stories which 
aired on ITV, narrated by Richard Murdoch, will be fondly remembered from their 
childhoods. It aired from 1983 to 1986.

The original characters were created by Finnish writer and illustrator, Tove 
Jansson, in 1945 and were originally published in Swedish. The new series which 
hopes to bring the characters to life once again will be based on “original 
source material”.

Jansson’s stories have led to 13 books and 73 comic strips being published in 
40 countries and there have been three made for TV adaptations, most recently 
in 1990. Recent film adaptation Moomins on the Riviera was released in 2015.

The UK version from the 1980s was a Polish animation which was adapted for a 
British audience. A Japanese-European animation of the stories also aired on 
the BBC in 1990.

There is no word yet on whether the new production will make it to UK screens.

Jansson’s artistic upbringing was said to have inspired the Moomin characters 
including Moominpapa, Moominmama and Moomintroll. In the stories they are 
frequently visited by friends such as Snork and Sniff.

Swedish company Filmlance International have done a licensing deal with Moomin 
Characters and Bulls Licensing to bring the show back. Producers will work with 
the niece of Tove Jansson, Sophia Jansson, on bringing the stories to a global 
audience.

The series is to be directed by Steve Box who won an Oscar for best animated 
feature with Wallace and Gromit: The Curse of the Were-Rabbit. He will also 
lead the writing team on the show.

Cate Elliott, whose credits include Charlie and Lola and 2014 Bafta winner 
John Woolley, series producer of Shaun the Sheep, will produce.

Sophia Jansson said: “I am very confident that in their hands the Moomins will 
become something new and wonderful, created with great respect for Tove’s 
original stories and characters.”

Creative director Marika Makaroff said: “The series will honour Tove Jansson’s 
original style of illustration, as well as the original stories, while 
utilising the latest techniques and bringing those stories to present day.”

Though FilmLance is famous for The Bridge, and in Scandinavia and Germany for 
the long-running detective series Beck, it also has a long history making 
children’s films. The company is part of independent production groupEndemol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/endemol> Shine.
 