
More than 8,000 motorists have been caught drink-driving twice in the past 
five years.

Nearly 450 people were prosecuted three times, while two were caught on six 
occasions, according to DVLA data released in response to a freedom of 
information (FoI) request by the Press Association.

Edmund King, president of motoring organisation the AA, described the numbers 
as astonishing and suggested the process for returning licences after 
drink-drive bans had been served should be reviewed.

The figures relate to DR10 endorsements, which result in penalty points handed 
to drivers for driving or attempting to drive while above the legal alcohol 
limit.

Between 2011 and 2015, this is how many times drivers received DR10 
endorsements in Britain:

 * One – 219,008 drivers

 * Two – 8,068 drivers

 * Three – 449 drivers

 * Four – 46 drivers

 * Five – five drivers

 * Six – two drivers 
Motorists caught drink-driving face a ban of at least a year, an unlimited 
fine and in the most serious cases up to six months’ imprisonment, although 
some are offered places on rehabilitation courses to reduce the length of their 
disqualification.

Ministers ponder lowering England and Wales drink-drive limit to Scottish 
levels
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/10/ministers-ponder-lowering-england-wales-drink-drive-limit-to-scottish-levels>
King said: “The fact that more than 8,000 drivers have been caught twice in 
five years is all the more astonishing when they should have been off the road 
for a year or more.

“The repeat offender figures also suggest that a minority of drivers have a 
drink problem rather than a driving problem.

“Perhaps it is time to review some of the medical checks and rehabilitation 
courses before allowing these drivers back on the road.”

A spokesman from road safety charity Brake said: “It is appalling that 
offenders are being allowed to continue driving after being caught 
drink-driving multiple times.

“These are individuals who clearly have no regard for the lives of others. 
They have been granted ample opportunity to change their behaviour and should 
face the full force of the law.”

Drink-drivers not deemed to be high-risk offenders can apply to get their 
licence back once their ban is over by filling out a form, which includes 
questions about their medical condition.

The DVLA said it was duty bound to issue a licence when a driver had served 
the disqualification period, but it would investigate and take appropriate 
action if there was any indication of “an ongoing issue with alcohol”.

High-risk offenders – such as those caught drink-driving twice within 10 years 
or found to be at least two and a half times the legal alcohol limit – must 
pass an additional medical assessment which includes having blood tests, before 
a licence is returned.

The DVLA data shows the number of drink-drive convictions has fallen in recent 
years, from 53,885 in 2011 to 42,587 in 2015.

But Brake claims this demonstrates “a worrying lack of progress in drink-drive 
enforcement” and urged the government to put “serious investment” into road 
policing to protect law-abiding people from “hardcore drunk drivers”.

According to the RAC there was a 27% fall in the number of full-time dedicated 
roads policing officers in England and Wales (excluding London) between 2010 
and 2015.

Provisional estimates from the Department for Transport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> (DfT) show that between 200 and 290 
people were killed in drink-drive accidents on Britain’s roads last year.

The figure has remained stable since 2010 following a sharp drop.

The DfT’s annual campaign to highlight the dangers of getting behind the wheel 
after drinking at Christmas focused on young men this year, as it emerged 62% 
of drink-driver fatalities were males aged between 17 and 34.

The Scottish government reduced the alcohol limit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/oct/24/scotland-drink-driving-limit-reduced>
 for drivers from 35 micrograms (mcg) to 22mcg in every 100 millilitres of 
breath in December 2014, but the legal level in England and Wales remains 35mcg.

A recent survey of 1,000 drivers by Brake and insurance firm Direct Line found 
that 78% think the limit is too high – more than half (54%) of respondents 
believed the limit should be slashed to an effective zero tolerance level.

Figures obtained by the AA suggest that nearly two-thirds of drink-drivers 
arrested in the run-up to and during the past three Christmases were at least 
almost twice the alcohol limit.

FoI responses from 10 police forces in England revealed that from November to 
December in 2013, 2014 and 2015, some 64% of 5,621 drivers arrested after 
failing a breath test for alcohol registered at least 60mcg of alcohol per 100 
millilitres of breath.

King said: “These people knowingly got behind the wheel when drunk.”
 