
Women should not be put off studying for an MBA because of pre-conceived ideas 
that it is a "macho programme", Aston University business school will be told 
tonight.

Rebecca Wassell, who graduated from the business school in 1998, hopes her 
speech to an MBA forum will encourage more women to enrol for a programme.

 "Women don't put themselves forward enough," she told EducationGuardian.co.uk 
today. "Women should lose any pre-conceived ideas they may have, give 
themselves an equal footing with their male counterparts and go for their own 
goals."

Originally a microbiologist, Ms Wassell, now a company director of human 
resources, studied for her MBA in her early 30s after deciding she wanted to 
move from the public sector into industry. The qualification has, she said, 
paved the way to a good job, which she is happy with. And her salary has more 
than doubled. "Doing an MBA is a great opportunity to acquire a really good 
business awareness that will always stand you in good stead," she said.

According to the Association of MBAs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/mbas> only 27% of current UK MBA 
students are female. The figures have remained roughly the same for the past 
decade, and there is still a sense that programmes are a male preserve.

Statistics also show that the average age for most female MBA students on 
full-time courses is 30; on part-time courses it is 34. This may be one of the 
factors putting women off doing a course, because it is the age many women 
begin planning a family.

"You just need to find a way of working your personal life around your job," 
added Ms Wassell.

The Graduate Management Admissions Council (GMAC), however, suggests that 
women may be discouraged from studying an MBA because of some commonly held 
myths - that it is too analytical or mathematical, highly competitive and leads 
to a career that is too demanding. The council believes these myths are simply 
not true and that women should not let themselves be discouraged.

Nuncio Quacquarelli, spokesman from TopMBA, an information website for MBA 
applicants, added: "It is essential that women's needs are provided for." Mr 
Quacquarelli encourages women to enter a fast-track career path by taking an 
MBA.

TopMBA runs a world tour, which arrives in London on October 18. Women will 
have the chance to come along and hear what other female graduates have to say 
about courses. Women who attend the conference may apply for scholarships to 
study on female MBA programmes in the UK and abroad.

Ms Wassell thinks women should have a dream and make it reality. "Destiny is 
not a matter of chance it is a matter of choice," she said. "It's not a thing 
to be waited for, it's something to be achieved."

For further information on the world tour events, visit www.topmba.com
 