
More than 1,500 staff members across Australia’s mainland immigration 
detention centres have been trained to use force to control and restrain asylum 
seekers, official figures show.

A spokeswoman for the immigration department said 1,580 staff were listed on a 
central register. “All officers are trained in de-escalation, and this is how 
the vast majority of incidents are resolved.

“On the rare occasions where it is necessary, only approved control and 
restraint techniques may be used, as a last resort, where the safety of staff 
and detainees is at risk.

 “All officers are instructed in these techniques as part of their induction 
training course, and receive regular refresher training. They must also hold or 
earn a certificate II in security operations.”

On Wednesday the House of Representatives passed the maintaining good order in 
immigration detention bill.The bill has been criticised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/apr/08/government-seeks-immunity-over-use-of-force-in-immigration-detention>
 because it gives private contractors a broader mandate in the use of force, 
and will also significantly restrict asylum seekers from bringing personal 
injury claims against the commonwealth.

A former Victorian court of appeal judge has warned it would allow guards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/apr/16/new-immigration-powers-would-let-guards-beat-asylum-seekers-to-death>
 to “beat asylum seekers to death”.

The immigration minister, Peter Dutton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/peter-dutton>, said in parliament 
the bill included “appropriate instructions and administrative arrangements to 
guide authorised officers in the use of force.”

“The bill provides for appropriate assistance for a detainee who wishes to 
make a complaint,” he said. “It provides the force used must be reasonable 
force. Excessive force would always be beyond what is reasonable.”

Labor’s immigration spokesman, Richard Marles, said that while the opposition 
did not oppose more clearly outlining the powers immigration officers may use 
in detention centres, it could not support the bill in its current form.

Labor proposed to move amendments to the bill that accorded with a series of 
recommendations made by the Australian Human Rights Commission to tighten up 
the nature of the powers, and also to wind back the sweeping immunity the bill 
would give the federal government from court claims.

“In the event these amendments do not pass, Labor will not be supporting the 
bill in its current form,” Marles said.

If the federal government is unwilling to support Labor’s amendments in the 
Senate, they will need to negotiate with crossbench senators to gain the 
numbers to pass the bill.

The Greens also do not support the bill. Adam Bandt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adam-bandt> told the House of 
Representatives on Wednesday: “Prison guards and the Australian federal police 
are held to a stricter test than this … The breadth of circumstances in which 
force can be used is too wide, and wider than in any other comparable area in 
this country.”

A Senate report into the bill is due to be tabled in May.
 