
When a judge’s decision to allow a 14 year old to have her body preserved 
through cryonics after her death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/nov/18/teenage-girls-wish-for-preservation-after-death-agreed-to-by-court>
 hit the headlines, it promptednumerous opinion pieces 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/cryonics> on the rights of the dying and 
the dead anddiscussions about promises of life after death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/nov/18/top-uk-scientist-calls-for-restrictions-on-marketing-cryonics?CMP=twt_a-science_b-gdnscience>
. But while the technology might be changing, these debates are age-old, as 
humans have long attempted to ensure their place in the afterlife, or avoid it 
all together.


7000 years ago in South America, the Chinchorro people began to artificially 
mummify their dead, but it would be another 2000 years before there was any 
evidence that early human cultures believed in resurrection. The ancient 
Egyptians are the most well-known practitioners of mummification and while it 
was not strictly required for resurrection in the afterlife, it was seen to 
provide the best opportunity for a smooth transition from this life to the next.

Resurrection was not a core belief in ancient Greece and Rome, but we do have 
papyri from the 4th century that detail a form of it practiced by magicians. As 
the dead would only be resurrected for a short time, usually to assist the 
magician with their prophecies, there were no reasons to try and preserve the 
corpses though.

This unimportance of preserving the deceased is also seen in early 
Christianity. As bodies can be remade and refleshed at the time of 
resurrection, it does not matter if they decompose after death. It was the 
development of modern embalming techniques in the 18th century that led to an 
association of better preserved corpses offering the best chance to one day 
rise from the dead and ensure the soul could be reunited with the body.

In these and other beliefs the means to resurrect the dead is firmly in the 
hands of the gods. But as we began to learn more about human anatomy and 
medicine advanced, some began to wonder if we needed to wait for the next life 
at all, when maybe it was possible to resurrect the dead in this one.

Early resurrection attempts were more accurately efforts to resuscitate 
individuals. Knowing a beating heart and breathing lungs were vital to life, 
physicians and other scientists searched for ways to restart these processes 
after death had stopped them. However, everything from tickling corpses with 
feathers to blowing smoke up their orifices proved unsuccessful.

But experiments, such as those of Giovanni Aldini, began to change things. 
Moving beyond his uncle’s successful attempts to make frogs twitch after death 
using electricity, Aldini acquired human subjects and managed to contract their 
muscles during demonstrations. Those witnessing the display understood that 
simple movements were different from life, yet it now seemed a real possibility 
that the recently dead might be brought back and debates about the potential 
impact, especially concerning the involvement of the soul, began.

It would be another 150 years though, before a technique was developed that 
forced us to redefine our understanding of death. In the 1960s cardio-pulmonary 
resuscitation (CPR) achieved what we had been attempting for centuries – 
restarting the heart and lungs of the recently dead. We could now bring people 
back to life.

Over the last half century, the period after which a person can be revived has 
been extended. Current efforts involving therapeutic hypothermia have seen 
patients come back to life hours after they might have been declared dead in 
the past. Research on the processes that occur in the body after death suggest 
the period of being only ‘mostly-dead’ might be widened even further.

One of the earliest recorded intents to resurrect the dead using medical 
intervention also took advantage of the cold. When George Washington died in 
December 1799, his funeral was delayed to ensure he was not buried alive. When 
his friend William Thornton, a trained physician, arrived,in his ‘unspeakable 
grief’ he expressed a desire to bring Washington back from the dead 
<http://www.mountvernon.org/george-washington/the-man-the-myth/death-defied-dr-thorntons-radical-idea-of-bringing-george-washington-back-to-life/>
 by warming his body near the fire and rubbing it with blankets, performing a 
tracheotomy to fill his lungs with air from a bellows, and transfusing the 
blood of a lamb into his veins. But Washington’s family declined.

While this example had intent, we know there was no real possibility of 
success and there are many who feel that the modern practice of cryonics is not 
so different. Since the 1960sapproximately 200 individuals have been 
cryonically ‘suspended’ – and a further 2000 people have made plans to join 
them upon their death. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/nov/22/cryonics-business-british-teenager-murray-ballard-in-pictures>
 This is all despite there being no evidence that resurrection is possible – 
and if it does become possible, these people would only be resurrected to die 
again, at least until we have developed methods to reverse ageing or cure the 
diseases that caused their original death.

To bypass these biological complications, there are some who now see digital 
resurrection as the most promising means of achieving immortality 
<http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/virtual-reality-heaven-how-technology-redefining-afterlife-1532429>
. AI research suggests it is theoretically possible to convert the information 
held in a human mind into ones and zeros, but the requirements for copying 
consciousness remain unimaginably complex leading many say it will never 
achieved.

However, the precursor to digital resurrection might already exist. There are 
countless examples of digital representations of the dead appearing in a 
variety of forms. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/apr/10/bruce-lee-audrey-hepburn-ethics-digital-necromancy>
 Whether it’s Audrey Hepburn selling you chocolate or Bob Monkhouse warning you 
about the dangers of cancer, both the long and recently dead (or at least their 
fictionalised selves) continue to interact with us from beyond the grave. The 
possibility of Black Mirror-esque avatars may not be far away either,with 
scheduled post-mortem social media posts already a reality. 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-38154677> But without consciousness and awareness 
of these interactions, there are few who would argue these individuals have 
truly been resurrected. Rather than defeating death, we seem to be developing 
ways to avoid acknowledging it instead.

If, or perhaps when, science get us there, whether it is cryonics, digital 
minds, or maybe a simple chocolate-coated pill that makes resurrection 
possible, will society be prepared for an afterlife among the living?
 