
A man purporting to be the leader of the Sunni extremist group that has 
declared an Islamic state in territory it controls in Iraq andSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> has made what would be his first 
public appearance, delivering a sermon at a mosque in Iraq's second-largest 
city, according to a video posted online on Saturday.

The 21-minute video that is said to show Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-bakr-al-baghdadi>, the head of the 
Islamic State group, was reportedly filmed on Friday at the Great Mosque in the 
northern city of Mosul. It was released on at least two websites known to be 
used by the organisation and bore the logo of its media arm, but it was not 
possible to independently verify whether the person shown was indeed 
al-Baghdadi.

There are only a few known photographs of al-Baghdadi, an ambitious Iraqi 
militant believed to be in his early 40s with a $10m US bounty on his head. 
Since taking the reins of the group in 2010, he has transformed it from a local 
branch of al-Qaida into an independent transnational military force, 
positioning himself as a dominant figure in the global jihadi community.

Al-Baghdadi's purported appearance in Mosul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mosul>, a city of some 2 million that the 
militants seized last month, came five days after his group declared the 
establishment of an Islamic state, or caliphate, in the territories it seized 
in Iraq and Syria. The group proclaimed al-Baghdadi the leader of its state and 
demanded that all Muslims pledge allegiance to him.

In the video, the man said to be al-Baghdadi says that "the mujahedeen have 
been rewarded victory by God after years of jihad, and they were able to 
achieve their aim and hurried to announce the caliphate and choose the Imam", 
referring to the leader.

"It is a burden to accept this responsibility to be in charge of you," he 
adds. "I am not better than you or more virtuous than you. If you see me on the 
right path, help me. If you see me on the wrong path, advise me and halt me. 
And obey me as far as I obey God."

Speaking in classical Arabic with little emotion, he outlines a vision that 
emphasises holy war, the implementation of a strict interpretation of Islamic 
law, and the philosophy that the establishment of an Islamic caliphate is a 
duty incumbent on all Muslims.

He is dressed in black robes and a black turban, a sign that he claims descent 
from the prophet Muhammad. He has dark eyes, thick eyebrows and a full black 
beard with streaks of grey on the sides.

During the video the camera pans away to show several dozen men and boys 
standing for prayer in the mosque, and a black flag of theIslamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> group hangs along one wall. One man 
stands guard, with a gun holster under his arm.

Aymenn al-Tamimi, an expert on militant factions in Syria and Iraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq>, said al-Baghdadi had come under some 
criticism since unilaterally declaring the establishment of a caliphate, in 
part for not appearing before the people.

"He had declared himself caliph, he couldn't hide away. He had to make an 
appearance at some time," al-Tamimi said. Traditionally, a Muslim ruler is 
expected to live among the people, and to preach the sermon before communal 
Friday prayers.

The brazenness of his purported appearance – before dozens of people, and made 
public only a day after its occurrence – suggested the Islamic State's 
confidence in its rule of Mosul.

"The fact that he has done this without any consequences in Mosul's biggest 
mosque is a sign of [the Islamic State group's] power within the city," said 
al-Tamimi. He said it would be likely to boost the morale of al-Baghdadi's 
fighters, and deal a blow to the group's rivals.

A senior Iraqi intelligence official said that after an initial analysis the 
man in the video was believed to indeed be al-Baghdadi. The official said the 
arrival of a large convoy in Mosul around midday on Friday coincided with the 
blocking of mobile phone networks in the area. He says the signal returned 
after the convoy departed.

The official spoke on condition of anonymity because he was not authorised to 
brief the media.

A Mosul resident confirmed that mobile networks were down around the time of 
Friday prayers, and then returned a few hours later. He spoke on condition of 
anonymity because of fears for his safety.

Another aspect of the rule al-Baghdadi envisions was made clear in a series of 
images that emerged online late on Saturday showing the destruction of at least 
10 ancient shrines and Shia mosques in territory his group controls.

The 21 photographs posted on a website that frequently carries official 
statements from the Islamic State group document the destruction in Mosul and 
the town of Tal Afar. Some of the photos show bulldozers ploughing through 
walls, while others show explosives demolishing the buildings.

Residents from both Mosul and Tal Afar confirmed the destruction of the sites.

 