
As the hearse containing Boris Nemtsov’s coffin pulled away, mourners tossed 
flowers and chants rang out. “Russia will be free!” they cried. “Russia without 
Putin!”


Despite the fighting talk, however, there was an overwhelming sense of gloom 
among those who came to say a final goodbye to Nemtsov on Tuesday.

For four hours, his body lay in an open casket so mourners could pay their 
respects.


Thousands did, with many people waiting for hours on an icy Moscow day in a 
line that snaked further than the eye could see along the Garden Ring road.

Choral music played in the room as people filed past. Close friends and 
relatives stood vigil, including Nemtsov’s mother – who spent her 88th birthday 
standing beside the body of her son, listening to eulogies and angry tirades 
against the current political regime.


Photographs of the dead politician were hung on the wall: the bright 
Perestroika-era physicist smiling and joking, the 1990s political hope 
conferring with Boris Yeltsin, and the recent opposition figure, speaking 
through a loudhailer and grappling with riot police.

The 55-year-old opposition leader was shot dead late on Friday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/27/russian-opposition-politician-boris-nemtsov-shot-dead-moscow-reports>
 on a bridge next to the Kremlin.


Neither president Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin> nor prime minister Dmitry 
Medvedev came to pay their respects to Nemtsov, who was once Russia’s deputy 
prime minister before becoming one of its most outspoken opposition figures.

Putin has claimed the murder was a “provocation” designed to make Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> look bad. But many of those at the 
farewell ceremony blamed Putin, at least indirectly, for the murder.

Yevgenia Albats, editor of one of Russia’s last remaining independent 
publications, the New Times, said the killing had to mark a turning point for 
the liberal opposition.

She compared with the killing of Sergei Kirov in 1934, which Stalin used as 
the pretext to launch as massive wave of repression.

“This murder is on the conscience of Putin and all of the authorities,” she 
said.

“It is impossible to forgive. Either Nemtsov will become a new Kirov, or we 
must do something to finally change things.”

Investigators have effectively ruled out Nemtsov’s opposition stance as a 
possible reason for the killing, saying he was either killed by his rivals in 
the political opposition, or by Islamic extremists, or in a hit related to the 
conflict inUkraine <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine>.

On Tuesday, a source in Russia’s Investigative Committee told Izvestiya 
newspaper the working hypothesis was that Nemtsov had been killed on the orders 
of Adam Osmayev, a Chechen fighting in a volunteer battalion with pro-Ukrainian 
forces.


Osmayev was jailed in 2012 for allegedly attempting to kill Putin, charges he 
has always denied.

Osmayev, in a statement passed to the Guardian, denied he had anything to do 
with last week’s attack.

“Boris Nemtsov was a hero for the Chechen people, as he once collected a 
million signatures against the first Chechen war,” he said.

“He was also a hero for the Ukrainian people, as he was one of the few voices 
against Russian aggression in Ukraine.


“Unfortunately, all the people who publicly criticise the regime in Russia 
tend to die at the hands of these lowlifes, but we believe they will face 
justice sooner or later.”

Alexei Navalny <https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexei-navalny>, Russia’s 
most prominent opposition leader, wrote a blog entry directly blaming Putin for 
the hit.

“The only thing that could disprove my version is if they solve this killing 
quickly and find not only the gunmen but those who ordered it,” he wrote.


Navalny was denied permission to leave jail to attend the funeral. He is 
serving a 15-day sentence after he was arrested while handing out leaflets 
advertising a march he was meant to co-organise with Nemtsov, which had been 
planned for last Sunday.


The march was re-designated as a mourning march 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/01/boris-nemtsov-murdered-politician-march-moscow>
, and attended by more than 50,000 people.

While few in the Russian elite came to Nemtsov’s funeral, some European 
politicians who travelled to Russia to attend were banned from entering the 
country, apparently as part of a reciprocal sanctions imposed in response to 
western bans on Russian officials over the Kremlin’s actions in Ukraine.

The speaker of the Polish senate, Bogdan Borusewicz, was refused entry, as was 
Latvian MEP Sandra Kalniete, the country’s former foreign minister.


Kalniete said she spent the night in the transit zone at Moscow’s Sheremetevo 
airport. She was sent back to Brussels early on Tuesday morning.


Russia’s foreign ministry confirmed the politician was banned, for her 
“anti-Russian activities”. A spokesman for the ministry said Latvian 
authorities had been warned of the ban, so her visit was a “provocation”.

Martin Schulz, president of the European parliament, said the bans were “being 
applied without the slightest element of reasoning or any forewarning” and were 
a “high affront” toEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

Ksenia Sobchak, the socialite turned journalist and opposition politician, 
wrote on Twitter that while queuing to pay her respects to Nemtsov, she had 
been approached by someone who told her she was next in line to be killed.

Pro-Kremlin bloggers found the threat amusing, suggesting it had perhaps been 
the US ambassador who had made the threat. Some in Russia, including a host on 
Russia Today television have taken Putin’s “provocation” line and run with it, 
suggesting the CIA killed Nemtsov.

As the coffin containing Nemtsov’s body was en route to the cemetery, the 
blogger and journalist Anton Korobkov-Zemlyansky wrote on his Twitter account: 
“Sobchak called. Invited me for a walk on the bridge tonight.”

At the Troyekurovskoye cemetery on the far outskirts of the city, Nemtsov was 
buried later in the afternoon. Under a slate-grey sky and with an icy wind 
blowing, gravediggers lowered the coffin into the earth and covered it with 
sand and pine branches.

Amid quiet tears, the repetitive bangs of construction work nearby were a 
reminder that for much of Russia, little has been changed by the murder of a 
politician whom state TV had called a traitor.

“There is no more hope. Things now can only get worse,” said Dina Shevchenko, 
72, who had waited more than an hour to say goodbye to Nemtsov. “I’m scared 
about where our country is headed.”
 