
MPs have called for an inquiry into why former HBOS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/hbos> bosses were given almost £1m in 
"bonuses for going bust".

Seven HBOS directors collected cash bonuses of £914,000 in "change of control" 
payments when the bank was rescued by Lloyds and bailed out with £20bn of 
taxpayers' money in 2008.

John Mann, a member of the Treasury select committee, told the Guardian the 
payments were scandalous and said there "could not be a more blatant reward for 
failure".

He added: "This is taxpayers' money being used to pay bonuses to bankers that 
brought down their own bank and cost thousands of ordinary workers their jobs. 
These are bonuses for going bust."

Mann said the former bosses of the failed bank should pay the money back 
immediately and called for an inquiry to investigate why they were paid the 
cash.

"The money needs to be repaid, and if it's not, these people need to be 
drummed out of the financial services sector entirely," he said. "This is 
emerging as a full-blown scandal and warrants a full inquiry by the select 
committee. We need to know what due diligence was done."

Pat McFadden, a member of the parliamentary commission on banking and one of 
the authors of itsscathing report published last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/apr/04/bankers-brought-down-hbos>, 
said: "These guys are incredible. This sounds like amazing rewards for failure.

"The banking commission report showed the bank was pursuing an ultimately 
disastrous strategy that should result in them taking responsibility, not 
getting extra rewards."

McFadden also called for an investigation into the payments, which he 
described as "a reward for being taken over by us – the taxpayers". He said: 
"It's our money. We bailed them out for their failure – and they got bonuses 
for it."

On top of the cash bonuses, the seven directors received 8,600 share bonuses 
at an undisclosed price band. The bonuses were paid on top of salary, pension 
contributions, awards in lieu of pension and redundancy payments.

Andy Hornby <https://www.theguardian.com/business/andy-hornby>, the chief 
executive of HBOS at the time of its near collapse and takeover by Lloyds, 
collected £251,000 cash and 2,051 shares as a result of the change of control.

The others cashing in were Peter Cummings, the head of corporate lending who 
was fined £500,000 by the Financial Services Authority; Mike Ellis, former 
finance director; Philip Gore-Randall, former chief operating officer; Colin 
Matthew, who led the expansion into Ireland and Australia that cost the bank 
£14.5bn; Jo Dawson, former risk director; and Dan Watkins, her successor.

HBOS's 2008 annual report <> said the payments were awarded "in accordance 
with contractual entitlements". It said HBOS's remuneration committee excluded 
"payments in relation to the 2008 financial year [the year HBOS failed]", but 
allowed the directors to benefit from awards due to them for other years.

It said: "[When] these arrangements were settled, Lloyds did not own HBOS. All 
decisions with respect to the redundancy or severance terms applicable to 
departing HBOS senior executives, including pensions, were made by the HBOS 
remuneration committee or board of HBOS, prior to the acquisition by Lloyds."

A spokesman for Lloyds was unable to state why the bosses received the money, 
or if any have decided to pay the cash back. Hornby, now chief executive of 
bookmakers Coral, declined to comment.

The revelation of the change of control bonuses comes as pressure mounts on 
HBOS's former bosses to pay back millions of pounds of pension contributions 
collected from the bank after the parliament report blamed "a colossal failure 
of management" for the bank's near-collapse.

Sir James Crosby, the boss of HBOS until 2006 and the man described by the 
parliamentary commission on banking standards as the "architect of the strategy 
that set the course for disaster", hassaid he will give up his knighthood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/apr/09/james-crosby-give-up-knighthood-pension>
 and 30% of his £580,000-a-year HBOS pension.

David Cameron's spokesman said it was "a matter for their consciences and 
judgment" whether HBOS's other former bosses follow his example.

Matthew is collecting a HBOS pension worth £416,000-a-year. Cummings is on a 
£344,000 pension.
 