
An influential committee of MPs today criticised Channel 4 for the 
"unacceptably high" salary it paid to its former chief executiveAndy Duncan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andyduncan>.

A hard-hitting report by the Commons culture, media and sport select 
committee, published today, concluded the broadcaster was "wrong" to pay Duncan 
a loyalty bonus of more than £220,000 for agreeing to stay with the company for 
two years.

MPs said the amounts paid to former executives at Channel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> had risen to "indefensible levels" 
in recent years.

Kevin Lygo, the broadcaster's former director of television and content, who 
is now managing director of ITV Studios, was paid £1.18m in 2008, although he 
subsequently took a pay cut.

Duncan, who also voluntarily reduced his salary, resigned as chief executive 
in November 2009 and received total remuneration of £1.48m in his final year at 
the company.

MPs conceded that a new management team at Channel 4, which is chaired by Lord 
Burns <https://www.theguardian.com/media/lord-burns>, has taken steps to reduce 
salaries, however.

The committee questioned Burns and Duncan's successor David Abraham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/david-abraham> in July, a month after 
Channel 4 published its annual report for 2009.

Its report concluded that Channel 4's decision to drop its request for public 
money to help shore up its finances, a policy Duncan championed, was the right 
one.

But MPs also said Duncan and former chairman Luke Johnson exaggerated the 
extent of the threat to the broadcaster's finances, arguing that "management 
over-played its hand".

The Channel 4 board "ought to have challenged the previous management more 
strongly", they said.

However, the report warned the "self help" strategy implemented by Burns is 
not without risk, given uncertainty over future advertising revenues, despite 
Abraham's commitment to diversify the business.

It said that Channel 4 may therefore struggle to fulfil its public service 
duties in the future.

"We would not rule out reexamining Channel 4's funding regime in the medium 
term if, despite its best efforts, advertising revenues were to drop 
significantly," MPs said.

The committee also called on ministers to ensure Channel 4 falls beyond the 
remit of legislation currently going through parliament which will allow the 
government to scrap or merge quangos.

Channel 4 is not currently affected by the bill but it included on a list of 
around 150 organisations – schedule 7 of the legislation – that could be made 
subject to its powers in the future.

"We call on the government to explain why ... [Channel 4] is included ... and 
– unless there is good reason – to remove it", the report said.

A Channel 4 spokeswoman said: "Channel 4 welcomes the House of Commons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons> culture, media and sport 
committee's report and in particular the support of our redefined remit as 
enshrined in the Digital Economy Act and the call to remove Channel 4 from 
schedule 7 of the public bodies bill."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 