
Alasdair Roberts <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alasdair-roberts> gestures 
towards a large hotel on the main street of Callander, the small Scottish town 
famed as the gateway to the Highlands and the home of Rob Roy. "That hotel is 
meant to be haunted," he says. "Room 13 is supposed to be visited by the spirit 
of a lonely piper. Have I ever seen it? No." He sighs. "Actually, I think they 
made it up for the tourists." Nice as Callander is - it didn't win the FX 
Tourism best town award in 2000 for nothing - it is hard not to feel nonplussed.

I am here in search of Roberts's roots, the influences that shaped him into 
one of Britain's most original singer-songwriters. It seems a worthwhile 
exercise. His songs come steeped in tradition, drawing on the bleak folk 
ballads of England and Scotland, in which you're never more than a few lines 
away from a painful and tragic death. Perhaps a visit to his rural hometown 
could illuminate his unique take on the sort of music that most rock artists 
have spent the past 30 years studiously ignoring, lest they attract a chorus of 
derisive guffaws and hackneyed jokes about real ale and beards.

We have certainly found Roberts's roots: he has helpfully pointed out the 
house in which he used to live and the Chinese takeaway where he once worked. 
Nevertheless, this is some distance from what one might expect, not least 
because the publicity material released with his remarkable second solo album, 
2003's Farewell Sorrow, claimed that he was descended from a long line of 
gamekeepers, and was discovered performing at a ceilidh by Will Oldham - better 
known as Bonnie "Prince" Billy - while the US alt-country musician was 
holidaying on the estate that had been tended by Roberts's family for many 
generations.

The truth is rather less romantic. Roberts was indeed "discovered" by Oldham, 
but not at a ceilidh: he approached him with a demo tape at a Glasgow gig. Nor 
are his ancestors gamekeepers. His late father worked for British Rail and was 
a sometime folk musician. "I didn't start to get that serious about folk music 
until five or six years ago," says Roberts, "but in a way it was what I grew up 
around, because of my dad."

"It's kind of a twisting of the story," admits Oldham, on the phone from his 
home in Kentucky. "I have a friend who did turn me on to Irish and Scots folk 
music, and he does come from a long line of gamekeepers on an estate just 
outside Aberfeldy."

For his part, Roberts seems faintly incredulous that anyone believed his story 
in the first place. "I thought it was framed in such a way that it was 
obviously an untruth, but a lot of people seem to have been taken in by it. I 
suppose I was interested in the idea of making a myth up about my origins. It's 
the entertainment business," he concludes. "You don't have to be totally 
honest."

Admittedly, Roberts doesn't look much like a gamekeeper - but the songs he 
writes sound like the sort of thing someone who hailed from a long line of 
gamekeepers might come up with. When they are not inventing ways to dispatch 
their unfortunate lead characters - packing them off to war or drowning them 
seem to be particular favourites - they are hymning the joys of the bucolic 
life of hunters and poachers. Mention of this draws another slightly puzzled 
look. "Obviously I don't really go hunting," he says, confused as to how anyone 
could have drawn this conclusion from songs such as I Went Hunting. "I'm 
interested in it because it's problematic or ambiguous in the modern age, and 
I'm interested in exploring problems.

"It's quite a modern approach to think that everything someone sings about is 
true. It sort of bores me to hear songs that are straightforwardly 
autobiographical. You may as well confine them to a diary. That's why I like 
traditional ballads, they're so non-autobiographical, they're totally 
outward-looking."

He says he has "nothing to do with the folk scene", and certainly his stark 
sound and experimental approach has little to do with the cosy world of Radio 2 
and its folk awards. Rather, his lyrics betray a keen interest in linguistics 
(he may be the first musician in the history of rock to come out with the 
phrase "That's not to say I'm completely anti-Latinate" during an interview), 
while his last London gig saw his dolorous voice accompanied by grinding 
synthesised noise. "Folk music isnot supposed to be polite," he says. "I don't 
think what I do is particularly radical."

Nevertheless, he concedes, not everyone shares his enthusiasm for traditional 
song. Recently, when he was in Dublin, Roberts's taxi passed a Gypsy camp. "I 
asked the driver if they still performed the old Gypsy music," he says, "but 
apparently, they're all into Elvis now, which is quite funny but also quite 
sad." Today, on discovering that the Guardian's photographer hails from the 
Isle of Lewis, he begins to enthuse about the religious music of the Western 
Isles. This, it turns out, is the wrong thing to say to the photographer, who 
launches into a lengthy diatribe about being "forced to sing those songs every 
bloody Sunday by my father".

Roberts doesn't seem like a particularly depressive character, but nor does he 
seem abashed by the alarming mortality rate in his songs. Indeed, he is now 
thinking of recording an album of traditional ballads, which will make his own 
material look "joyful" by comparison.

"They talk about tragedy and suffering, but it's in quite an impartial way. 
It's not really about woe and sadness. It's quite clinically narrated, and 
you're left to draw your own conclusions from it. It could end up being an 
aural version of EastEnders or something. EastEnders fulfils that role nowadays 
- endless misery with the occasional ray of sunshine. Maybe my next album 
should have a note on the sleeve like those announcements at the end of 
EastEnders: "'If you have been affected by any of the issues on this record, 
please phone this hotline and they'll recommend a counsellor.' "
 