
In private conversations, executives at Rupert Murdoch's News Corp are 
acknowledging ongoing discussions with the US Justice Department about a 
possible settlement ofalleged violations of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/nov/20/news-corp-legal-threat-brooks-coulson-charges>
 that took place in Britain. Speculation by one knowledgeable News Corp source 
puts the size of the settlement as high as $850m; other sources say that it 
could go as high as billions.

A gallows humor has recently infected News Corp insiders and observers, who 
have taken to greeting each other with the question, "What's the number?"

The primary charges involve the activities of News Corp's newspapers in London 
– principally, the Sun and the defunct News of the World – and allegations of 
bribes paid to the London police for information, which emerged during 
investigations begun two summers ago into phone-hacking. The Foreign Corrupt 
Practices Act (FCPA) prohibits US companies from making undisclosed payments to 
government officials in foreign countries in order to gain favorable treatment.

From the company's point of view, the most favorable timetable for a 
settlement will occur after 28 June, when News Corp will be split into two 
distinct entities, a smaller newspaper-focused group, which will retain the 
name News Corp, and a much larger group, which will retain all of the present 
company's entertainment assets, to be called 21st Century Fox. But the company 
would also prefer that a settlement come before theSeptember trial date of 
several of its once high-ranking executives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/jun/07/rebekah-brooks-trial-september-phone-hacking>
, including its former chief Rebekah Brooks, the executive who is allegedly 
tied to the police payments.

The two new Murdoch-controlled companies have each agreed to absorb a portion 
of the liabilities involved with both the UK hacking and US FCPA prosecutions. 
The newspaper-focused group will bear the costs of criminal liabilities, such 
as an FCPA settlement, while the entertainment-focused group will take the 
civil costs, such as settlements with individual plaintiffs in the United 
Kingdom and shareholder suits.

In the split, the publishing company will receive, along with the newspapers 
and other assets, a surprisingly large $2.6bn cash grant. This has been 
portrayed as an acquisition fund – but it is, as well, a means of paying for 
the FCPA settlement. Although the Murdoch-controlled companies technically 
share a joint liability, 21st CenturyFox <https://www.theguardian.com/media/fox>
 executives prefer the perception that the settlement is with News Corp, the 
new newspaper company.

As for the Brooks' prosecution, the expectation is that the trial – which will 
also include former News of the World editorAndy Coulson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andy-coulson> (subsequently Prime Minister 
David Cameron's communication director) – will result in a further round of 
publicity about News Corp's culture and renewed public furor toward the 
company. Potentially, this might make a settlement in the US more difficult.

Brooks herself is still being paid by the company (it is not clear which of 
the companies will continue those payments), and continues to socialize with 
the Murdochs – in April, she was with Murdoch's oldest son Lachlan in 
Australia. But the company is said to be wary of potential further revelations 
about her relationship with government officials that might emerge at the trial.

Some observers wonder if there might not be a carrot in the negotiations – a 
way for the government to reach a rich settlement with the Murdoch companies, 
but at the same time not provide ammunition for challenges to its FCC licenses 
in the US. This might involve an agreement to settle without an admission of 
guilt.

Equally, the US government is likely using its very big stick, threatening to 
prosecute News Corp – and thus, also, 21st Century Fox, the surviving company 
with the majority of the assets. That might have untold effects on the latter's 
share price, acquisition efforts, television licenses, and the size of the 
ultimate penalty.

One aspect of the split of the company is an effort to portray the 21st 
Century Fox entity as a clean company, one without the taint of the Murdoch 
newspapers. But the unifying factors of the two companies, each controlled by 
the Murdoch family – withRupert Murdoch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/rupert-murdoch> remaining chairman and CEO 
of 21st Century Foxand chairman of the new News Corp – means that it will be 
difficult, both legally and as a matter of public perception, for the companies 
to escape the stain of what could be the biggest FCPA settlement in history.

Murdoch himself has been telling intimates for many months of his worry about 
the Justice Department's beefed-up FCPA staffing and its aggressive efforts to 
bring ever-more cases. In recent weeks, faced with revelations of a secret 
Justice Department investigation of Fox reporter James Rosen on charges of 
receiving a leak, the company has seemed to go out of its way to accommodate 
the DOJ, rather than fight it.

Although it transpired that the Justice Department may not have properly 
notified the company of the investigation 
<http://hotair.com/archives/2013/05/27/news-corp-no-the-doj-never-informed-us-of-the-rosen-warrant/>
, News Corp seemed to be at pains to downplay the issue. While acknowledging 
that such a notice would surely have raised alarm bells, the company 
nevertheless suggested that it might have been overlooked.

The greater fear, beyond even regulatory FCC issues in the US, is the effect 
that the settlement might have in London, where the enmity toward Murdoch and 
his family is much greater than in the US. While the new company will own the 
company's British papers – the Times and the Sunday Times, and the Sun – it 
will be 21st Century Fox that will own the company's 39% controlling interest 
in BSkyB, the satellite broadcaster that is one of the company's most 
profitable assets.

The scandal has already derailed News Corp's plan to buy the rest of BSkyB. 
Now, the fear is that possible violations of the FCPA (if admission is made of 
bribing UK police) could undermine the company's "fit and proper" status, and, 
hence, its license in the UK to operate BSkyB.

The thrust of much of the company's activities over the last year has been to 
portray itself as having gotten beyond the UK scandals. Most recently, this 
resulted in acover story in Business Week entitled "The Escape Artist" 
<http://www.businessweek.com/articles/2013-04-18/rupert-murdoch-news-corp-dot-dodge-phone-hacking-ruin>
, about how well Murdoch had sidestepped the train wreck that had seemed to be 
heading toward him.

In fact, Murdoch and his companies are still steeling themselves for the 
potential impact of both the fall trial at the Old Bailey in London and the 
outcome of the Justice Department's ever-advancing FCPA game in US.

 