
On stage in the Barcelona sunshine, Katy B 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/katy-b> and her MC are giving their 
shout-outs, big-ups and general thanks, and suddenly everything seems 
connected. No, it's not a sangria-and-sunstroke-induced trip out, just an 
insight into the rising pop star's web of affiliations, and how they serve to 
illustrate the way the 21st-century music industry works. As they thank "the 
Rinse family", "the Red Bull family", "the Sónar family", it's becoming clear 
that this isn't just a performer's hyperbole, but that these organisations do 
act as a kind of benevolent music mafia.

To explain: although Katy B is signed to Sony, it's through a deal with Rinse 
FM <http://rinse.fm/> – the pirate-turned-legit radio station, record label and 
rave promoters co-run by DJ Geeneus, who is also the main producer on the album 
Katy on a Mission – and her career has been intimately tied up with those of 
other Rinse-affiliated acts such as Magnetic Man and DJ Zinc.

She is also an alumnus of the long-running Red Bull Music Academy 
<http://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/> (RBMA), and the Sónar festival stage on 
which she is performing on is co-hosted by them. Both Rinse and RBMA have 
close, continuing relationships with one another and withSónar <http://sonar.es>
, which is itself more than a festival, with year-round industry conferences, 
art exhibits and other outposts globally.

It doesn't stop there. Later the same evening, she will play another set, this 
time to tens of thousands, on theAnnie Mac Presents 
<http://www.anniemacpresents.com/> (AMP) stage in Sónar's sprawling night-time 
rave. The AMP brand has a life of its own, semi-independent from theAnnie Mac 
show on Radio 1 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006wqdc>, both as an 
influential blog and in creating lineups for various festivals and clubs, 
as well in as Annie's own tours and Ibiza residency.

Throughout the weekend, events on the RBMA stage are broadcast online by 
Boiler Room <http://boilerroom.tv/>, a fast-growing internet TV station, but 
also a hub around which hip record labels and artists congregate. After Sónar, 
Boiler Room will move on to broadcasting Gilles Peterson'sWorldwide festival 
<http://www.worldwidefestival.com/> – another global brand extension from a 
well-connected Radio 1 DJ, occasional RBMA and Sónar participant and longtime 
supporter of Rinse FM artists – and so it goes on.

These brands tend to be run by very small teams, yet they are also global 
concerns with large and influential audiences, able to parley with major 
labels and promoters from a position of strength, secured by their success at 
nurturing talent. They also all operate in ad-hoc, informal ways, with artists 
forming loose affiliations with one, two or many of them. It all brings to mind
Robert Fripp's 1974 prediction 
<http://www.elephant-talk.com/wiki/Interview_with_Robert_Fripp_in_Melody_Maker_%281974%29>
 that the future of the music industry lay with "small, independent, mobile, 
intelligent units".

Each of the these groupings is rooted in a part of international club music 
history, whether it's the mainstream (Annie Mac Presents), London's jungle and 
other pirate radio scenes (Rinse FM), arty techno and electronica (Sónar) or 
jazz-funk (Gilles Peterson Worldwide). But these are not the monolithic 
superclub or superstar DJ-led brands of the 90s, and nor are they underground 
crews with sketchy business practices and hedonism as their prime object – each 
seems to be determined to create something diverse and sustainable.

Sónar's head of media, Georgia Taglietti, is unequivocal in saying that Sónar 
and its allies are trying to create a new model. "We are doing something not to 
replace the mainstream industry," she says, "but maybe to exist on top of 
it. A major record label is beyond the point of impersonality because it has so 
many layers of administration – we don't have that, and the kind of labels and 
brands we are friends with don't have that. So our links are direct and 
personal, even across the word, in a way that technology allows now." This is 
echoed by Annie Mac, who says: "I would love people to trust AMP as a brand in 
the same way they do Rinse FM, and the personal touch is vital for that – so I 
try and speak to musicians personally to get them involved."

"A modern artist like Katy B," Taglietti continues, "or before her Goldfrapp – 
who is someone Sónar had a close connection with from the beginning – can use 
the admin power of major labels but still keep their connections to the other 
networks that they feel they are a part of." She cites Goldfrapp's label Mute, 
as well the likes of Warp and Ninja Tune, as precursors and inspirations for 
what Sónar and its affiliates do.

It's not just post-rave music that benefits from these methods, though. Think 
of Pitchfork, Vice, SXSW: far more than a blog, a magazine and a festival 
respectively, these have each become points around which indie/rock bands 
congregate, not just for exposure but to plug into something wider. The 
footwear brand Converse has just announced the opening of aBrooklyn recording 
studio <http://play.converse.com/blog/2010/10/05/rubber-tracks/> that bands 
will be able to use for free, similar to facilities that Red Bull now operates 
for mainly electronic artists in various cities worldwide.

And venturing upmarket, The Rolex mentor and protégé arts initiative 
<http://www.rolexmentorprotege.com/en/index.jsp> has lately branched from 
supporting high culture into the new music world, with a mentorship scheme 
aimed at building long-term relationships between musicians.This year it has 
pairedBrian Eno  
<http://www.rolexmentorprotege.com/en/music/brian-eno/brian-eno-biography.jsp>
with the Icelandic-based Australian noise musician and multimedia artist 
Ben Frost.

Rolex's "head of philanthropy", Rebecca Irvin, is quick to point out that 
it had no intention to engage with or upstage any part of the music business: 
"It's purely a chance for us to support two artists who are great in their 
field and allow them to learn from each other," she explains. However, it's 
telling that Rolex shifted from classical music – "where we found there is 
already a very structured set of ways of connecting and mentoring talent" – to 
new music, "where nothing like that really exists".

Ben Frost is far less circumspect. "The music industry is like an ecosystem," 
he says, "one that has been completely ravaged by all the changes that have 
happened in recent years. And when that happens, new organisms, new ways of 
organising things naturally come about. Obviously something like this scheme is 
the oldest model in the world in some ways – it's simply apprenticeship and 
patronage – but in this new context it may grow to have a very important 
role that the traditional industry just can't provide."

Inevitably there are some who find the new models distasteful. One producer 
who prefers to remain anonymous has misgivings, despite having benefited from 
association with more than one of the above-mentioned brands. "It can get a 
bit shadowy," he says, "there was one industry conference meeting that was 
called Indie Illuminati, and I'm not sure it was even a joke. It really can be 
like secret societies, and you never quite know what the rules that govern 
whether you're 'in' or 'out' are, so it can feel a bit like there are mindgames 
going on, like you're being psychologically assessed."

The avowedly anti-corporate Matthew Herbert – whose own projects and 
Accidental label <http://www.accidentalrecords.com/> have long flown the flag 
for networked, collaborative working – is alarmed at the self-description of 
these new industry entities as "brands", and the blurring of boundaries between 
grassroots organisations and sponsored schemes. "What's wrong," he asks, "with 
just calling Sónar a festival? Even the language of marketing pollutes the 
discourse surrounding these issues. The sponsor will be telling a different and 
parallel story at the same time, making connections on your behalf. The 
fundamental integrity of the relationship between the medium and the message 
has then been broken."

Thorsten Schmidt of RBMA vigorously defends the academy's commitment to music. 
"A look into our list of lecturers or alumni, our signature events, the 
selection of music on RBMA Radio and the mere fact that we've been around and 
growing for more than a decade should speak for a different approach. If it was 
merely about selling cans of drink, there surely must be more efficient ways 
than fostering forward-thinking culture." Certainly, almost without exception, 
RBMA alumni speak less about the material benefits they have gained from Red 
Bull's involvement than about the ongoing and lasting connections they have 
made via the academy. Their sense of involvement seems greater, even, than most 
artists' with their record labels.

"The people who listen to this music can see past branding now," says 
Taglietti. "They are much more aware of the way companies work now, and judge 
by the results they see, not by the marketing message." And she reiterates that 
whether these brands have their roots in pirate radio, the international techno 
scene or an Austrian fizzy drink company, "there is a common goal in creating a 
new support network for artists."

Whether this can create a lasting structure to replace or rebuild Ben Frost's 
"ravaged ecosystem", though, and whether more Katy Bs can emerge from this way 
of working into the mainstream, nobody knows. Irvin cautions against hype. 
"Good artists work in the long term," she says, "so if what we're doing by 
connecting artists together does help create new ways of working, we won't know 
for a decade, maybe two."
 