
There are many different ways in which people come to atheism. Many come to it 
in their early adult years, after a childhood in the church. Some are raised in 
atheism by atheist parents. Some come to atheism after years of religious 
study. I came to atheism the way that many Christians come to Christianity – 
through faith.

I was six years old, sitting in my frilly yellow Easter dress, throwing black 
jelly beans out into the yard, when my mom explained the story of Easter to me. 
She explained Jesus’s crucifixion and resurrection as the son of God, going 
into great detail. And when she was finished telling me the story that had been 
a foundation of her faith for the majority of her life, I looked at her and 
said: “I don’t think that really happened.”

It's time for atheists to stop debating God's existence and decide what to do 
about it | Adam Lee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/15/atheists-god-existence-social-justice>
I didn’t come to this conclusion because the story of a man waking from the 
dead made no sense – I wasn’t an overly analytical child. I still 
enthusiastically believed in Santa Claus and the Easter bunny. But when I 
searched myself for any sense of belief in a higher power, it just wasn’t 
there. I wanted it to be there – how comforting to have a God. But it wasn’t 
there, and it isn’t to this day.

The same confidence that many of my friends have in the belief that Jesus 
walks with them is the confidence that I have that nobody walks with me. The 
cold truth that when I die I will cease to exist in anything but the memory of 
those I leave behind, that those I love who leave are lost forever, is always 
with me.

These are my truths. I don’t like these truths. As a mother, I’d give anything 
to believe that if anything were to happen to my children they would live 
forever in the kingdom of a loving God. But I don’t believe that.

But my conviction that there is no God is nonetheless a leap of faith. Just as 
we have been unable to prove there is a God, we have also been unable to prove 
that there isn’t one. The feeling that I have in my being that there is no God 
is what I go by, but I’m not deluded into thinking that feeling is in any way 
more factual than the deep conviction by theists that God exists.

I keep this fact in mind – that my atheism is a leap of faith – because 
otherwise it’s easy to get cocky. It’s easy to look at acts of terror committed 
in the names of different gods, debates about the role of women in various 
churches, unfamiliar and elaborate religious rules and rituals and think,look 
at thesefoolish religious folk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2009/jun/26/religion-philosophy>
. It’s easy to view religion as the root of society’s ills.

But atheism as a faith is quickly catching up in its embrace of divisive and 
oppressive attitudes. We have websites dedicated to insulting Islam and 
Christianity. We have famous atheist thought-leaders spouting misogyny and 
calling for the profiling of Muslims. As a black atheist, I encounter just as 
much racism amongst other atheists as anywhere else. We have hundreds of 
thousands of atheists blindly following atheist leaders like Richard Dawkins, 
hurling insults and even threats at those who dare question them.

Look through new atheist websites and twitter feeds. You’ll see the same 
hatred and bigotry that theists have been spouting against other theists for 
millennia. But when confronted about this bigotry, we say “But I feel this way 
aboutall religion,” as if that somehow makes it better. But our belief that we 
are right while everyone else is wrong; our belief that our atheism is more 
moral; our belief that others are lost: none of it is original.

Perhaps this is not religion, but human nature. Perhaps when left to our own 
devices, we jockey for power by creating an “other” and rallying against it. 
Perhaps we’re all part of a system that creates hierarchies based on class, 
gender, race and ethnicity because it’s the easiest way for the few to 
overpower the many. Perhaps we all fall in line because we look for any social 
system – be it Christianity, Islam, socialism, atheism – to make sense of it 
all and to feel like we matter in a world that shows time and time again that 
we don’t.

If we truly want to free ourselves from the racist, sexist, classist, 
homophobic tendencies of society, we need to go beyond religion. Yes, religion 
does need to be examined and debated regularly and fervently. But we also need 
to examine our school systems, our medical systems, our economic systems, our 
environmental policies.

Faith is not the enemy, and words in a book are not responsible for the 
atrocities we commit as human beings. We need to constantly examine and expose 
our nature as pack animals who are constantly trying to define the other in 
order to feel safe through all of the systems we build in society. Only then 
will we be as free from dogma as we atheists claim to be.
 