
Q I work in a public sector organisation, and the senior staff in my 
department have all been there for 30 years or more. People have been promoted 
on longevity rather than merit, and there is a lack of progressive training 
allocated to the development of roles. If someone approaches something in a 
different (better) way, they are told they "don't understand the culture" or 
"don't fit in". There is currently a team of frustrated, but more efficient 
people, in the layers below covering up the mistakes and lack of attention of 
those at the top. My manager's workload has now been effectively transferred, 
by necessity, to myself and two other colleagues, but there is no cash for us 
to have appropriate increases in salary. There are known difficulties with the 
organisation of physical resources and budgets, but the senior manager refuses 
to have meetings to discuss these issues. I have written to him several times 
in the past year and even sat with him and told him about the difficulties I've 
had and the improvements I have made, but he still seems at a loss about how to 
address this. My question is, how can one deal with clear and persistent 
underperformance by staff senior to you?
JI

A There is nothing more frustrating than working with incapable people. 
Except, of course, working for incapable people. And there are a surprisingly 
large number of them about, working in surprisingly responsible jobs. (Don't 
think about that too much or you'll never leave your home again.)

So what to do? Well if it is just your immediate boss who is a complete 
backwards-looking idiot, then the course of action is relatively 
straightforward: talk to their boss, who will probably have noticed that their 
underling is not always super-smart.

You will still need to handle the situation sensibly - sending shouty emails 
demanding a meeting with a more senior manager BECAUSE THIS DOLT IS TOO STUPID 
TO GIVE ME A DECENT APPRAISAL is not the way to get things done. Ask instead if 
you could have a quick chat with a more senior boss - chat is less formal than 
requesting a meeting - and explain gently that you're worried you are not 
working to the best of your abilities.

Why? Well, the relationship between you and your boss can be a little 
strained, and sometimes things that need to happen for you to progress just, 
well, don't. Never be aggressive, try not to blame or undermine your manager 
too much, but be clear this problem is hurting the business (not to mention 
your ambitions).

Unfortunately for you JI, the situation you're in is more complicated. Not 
only is your boss a dolt, but so is the senior boss. Even in the shortened 
version of your letter above, one can feel the frustration sizzling off the 
page. In its full, unedited glory, I was practically shouting you on. Shouting 
you on to find a new job, that is. Because frankly, I think that's the only 
thing to do.

There are two ways to read the situation in which you now find yourself. The 
first is that you are up against a management that is unused to being 
challenged, and unprepared to change. You, as someone without any managerial 
power, are unlikely to be able to transform the way your whole department 
works, save by staging some kind of workers' revolution, which admittedly would 
be wildly exciting, but ultimately will probably mean you get sacked. With a 
bad reference to boot.

The second way to read your letter is more unflattering, I'm afraid. In it, 
JI, you are less a radical reformer and more a know-it-all who thinks that just 
because colleagues are older and less conversant in business speak, they must 
be incompetent. I'm hoping this isn't the case, but it might be for other 
readers. So, as well as all the reforming zeal I would voice this note of 
caution: don't start assuming you know best and bossing your managers in a rude 
and impatient way. You'll definitely get sacked. With a bad reference to boot.

So you see JI, whether it's because you are surrounded by idiots or indeed, 
are an idiot yourself, the only sensible course of action is to get a new job. 
(It's exceedingly frustrating that it should work out that way, but life 
doesn't always reward the good guy). But your current job has not been a waste 
of time - in fact it's told you exactly what you need in your next role. Look 
for businesses which embrace new thinking and technology; try and ascertain in 
interview whether your boss would be backwards- or forwards-looking. Challenge 
yourself when it comes to the level of role you're applying for too - if you 
think you can do the boss's job then apply for it.

Put your energy into battles that can be won next year. Being so frustrated 
and cross with your job doesn't make for a good, healthy approach to working. 
Just be careful how you talk about your current employers in interview: try not 
to slag them off too much. Stay reasonable, even when they aren't.
 