
A little more than two years ago, I was in the kitchen with my friend, Julia 
Jones, in a state of helpless sorrow. My father, John, was still alive then, 
although he was in his desolating last stages. His slow-motion dying had gone 
on for months and would continue for several more. While it endured we half 
wanted him gone, and when it ended, of course we wanted him back – a living 
ghost rather than a dead man who might haunt us but would never return.

My father’s drawn-out death lasted nine months: he went into hospital as 
someone living well with dementia; he came out quite lost and broken, and all 
the love in the world couldn’t have found him or put him together again.

It was Julia who suggested (and why hadn’t I thought of this before; why 
hadn’t it been obvious?) that carers of people living with dementia should have 
the same right to accompany them in hospital as the parents of sick children: 
that they should be welcomed by the bedside, to feed them, talk to them, hold 
their hand, stroke their hair, meet their gaze, be their memory, keep them 
safe, take them home whole. And after my father died, it was theObserver – 
which had 50 years earlier championed the demand by parents to be able do just 
that for their children – which gave me a place where my voice could be heard, 
and where sorrow, guilt and regret could be redeemed into change and rescue.

My father was beyond all help, but there are thousands of men and women with 
dementia who go into hospital each year and who come out diminished, through no 
fault of nurses and doctors, but because hospital is a hazardous place for 
those who are frail.

It was nearly two years since I wrote the piece in the Observer that launched 
John’s Campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/nov/29/nicci-gerrard-father-dementia-hospital-care-elderly>
. Founded and run by Julia and me, its aim is simply thatcarers should be made 
welcome in hospital <http://johnscampaign.org.uk/#/>. Its beginnings were in a 
kitchen, but it is now part ofa great movement  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/25/dementia-need-not-be-a-death-sentence>
for more enlightened and compassionate care for those with dementia.

At a conference last Wednesday dedicated to the campaign, tribute was paid to 
the paper’s honourable tradition of giving a voice to the voiceless, power to 
the powerless, hope to those in despair. The hall was full of generous people 
who had helped us on our journey – people with influence and connections, NHS 
leaders, consultants, chief nurses, heads of charities – but at the heart of 
the conference were the people whose voices are not usually heard, whose sorrow 
and anger and passion get drowned out in the great noise of the world.

As James Munro, chief executive of Patient Opinion, said: “Listening is the 
beating heart of healthcare” and in the act of listening “both speaker and 
listener are changed”.

In a session entitled “Voices”, 10 people, many of whom had never spoken in 
public before, courageously told of their experiences and were listened to. 
Sometimes what they said was hard to hear. Their stories, both the ones of 
anguish and the ones of kindness and optimism, illustrated why we started the 
campaign.

Tommy Dunne, who lives with dementia, described what it feels like to be in 
hospital, a “strange place surrounded by strangers”, where something tight 
squeezes your arm and something cold is put into your mouth; where a chicken 
pie is placed in front of you and then taken away, a mug of tea loudly offered 
and then removed; where, startled and scared, “you become dehydrated and 
delirium sets in … and the quick decline in your health begins. Yet no one 
knows or understands why.”

Several carers – partners, children, grandchildren, people who, as one of them 
had it, were the “voice and the memory” of the person with dementia – spoke 
about their experiences of heartbreak.

Teresa Canale-Parola’s partner, John, was 60 when he died. The hospital in 
which he spent his final days was too far away for her and her daughters to 
visit regularly, and – in spite of their battle to get this reversed – there 
were strict visiting hours, so that for much of the time he was quite alone. In 
his dementia, John had become violent and was placed under a mental health 
order. He was medicated and, even when he was placid, he was restrained.

He stopped eating and drinking. Soon he could no longer walk. Thirty-five days 
after his admission, Teresa had a call to say his health had deteriorated: she 
and her daughters found John, by now starved and badly dehydrated, “restrained 
in a chair, dying” . It was a brutal way for a man to go.

The death of someone with advanced dementia can be a sad blessing for those 
who have loved them, restoring that person to all the selves they have ever 
been – but a bad or lonely death makes mourning painfully difficult, full of 
anger and regret and terrible failure, of almost unendurable memories of 
distress. Not to be with them, not to comfort them, not to rescue them from 
abandonment and fear, not to accompany them up to the threshold.

Alongside stories of anguish, there were ones of hope: a junior geriatrician 
(of whom I am the proud aunt) spoke about being part of a cultural change in 
hospitals. Liz Charalambous – a nurse who has been fighting to get unrestricted 
visiting for carers for years – said that “one day we will look back in 
astonishment” at the time when carers were not made welcome.

Rebecca Myers, a health professional whose mother had dementia at a cruelly 
young age, spoke movingly about the “pragmatic empathy” that lies at the heart 
of healthcare: “One human being connected to another, in the moment, in the 
environment, for a shared purpose – to take care, of and with, each other.”

And Theresa Clarke, a former nurse from Northern Ireland now living with 
dementia, spoke with clarity and spirit about how people with the condition 
“need to be part of the conversation … not just spoken about, like an object, 
but talked with and to”. She certainly did not like her diagnosis, she said, 
and being left in hospital was “deadly, like being in deep space”, but she 
urged us all to remember that “we can live well with dementia, we can still 
contribute to society, our family and the world beyond”.

Seeing Theresa, this diminutive firecracker of a woman, hearing her talk, 
hearing Tommy’s vivid account, was a forceful reminder that people with 
dementia – who we often reduce to statistics, to costs, to problems, even 
(horrible words) to “bed blockers”, are not “them” but “us”, valuable and human 
and precious, withstories to tell and voices to be listened to 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/28/alzheimers-orwell-prize-societys-ghosts-johns-campaign>
.

The session ended with Kate Kellaway, of the Observer, beautifully and 
tenderly describing her father’s last weeks. Her words, republished here, 
illustrate the ideals of our campaign and show how, up and down the country, 
nurses and doctors are bringing extraordinary compassion and empathy to the 
lives of people who are vulnerable, and to their deaths: to live as well as we 
possibly can; to have, as they say in Ireland, a gentle passing.

‘My dad’s care made us believe in the goodness of people’


My father died five months ago at Whittington hospital in Archway, north 
London – he’d had a fall, broken a hip, had an operation, recovered and been 
discharged. Then he had another fall and had to be readmitted and it turned out 
he’d had a silent heart attack. He was 90. He had for some time suffered from 
chronic kidney disease.

So – a medley of misfortunes, including, towards the end, dementia. He had an 
intermittent belief he was back in the war and that there was a soldier in the 
bed next to him – he was determined to know the soldier’s name. I helplessly 
selected “Jim”, which seemed to pacify Dad. But, of course there was no bed and 
no soldier other than Dad himself, gallantly fighting on.

When it was clear he was dying, the Whittington found him a room to himself. 
And that was just the first of the blessings of being in that hospital during 
Dad’s final three weeks.

The care was, in every way, exemplary. The staff were happy to waive visiting 
hours without question. We could come and go as we pleased and sit up all night 
with Dad if that was what we wanted to do. The number of visitors at any one 
time was left to our discretion.

My brother, sister and I were bowled over by one nurse in particular and the 
compassionate intelligence with which she grasped the emotional picture. Sam 
Hunt talked to Dad with warmth, respect and gentle humour. She tried to find 
out how he was feeling. At one point, he admitted he was frightened and she 
listened, smiled and reassured. And she reassured us too – she made us believe 
in the goodness of which people are capable.

The doctor, Dr Mitchell, was outstanding – a model of intelligence, sympathy 
and tact. She was exceptionally clear in her information – impressive, in 
particular, in telling us what she was not sure of as well as informing us 
about whatever she knew.

Towards the end of his life, Dad had given us instructions about not 
prolonging his life unnecessarily – we had power of attorney. The staff 
listened to us but as Dad became less and less able to speak, Dr Mitchell never 
neglected to address him first: “Mr Kellaway, I’m just talking to your 
daughters about how we can try to make you more comfortable…”

The palliative care team was first rate: educating us in the art, or science, 
of dying comfortably.

And when Dad gently breathed his last – it seemed to me that it resembled what 
a friend of mine once described as pushing your boat out – I was with him, and 
when he was gone, it was the nurse and doctor I embraced. They had retained the 
necessary professional distance and yet had allowed us to feel, if only for a 
moment, that they were – almost – family.

Kate Kellaway
 