
Authors so often find films of their books a mixed blessing. My novel Madame 
Doubtfire had been under option for more than 10 years when Robin Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/robin-williams> finally closed the deal. 
I heard on the grapevine that a child's easy access to the noncustodial parent 
was an issue close to his heart. He certainly put a vast amount of feeling and 
energy into the film.

Children of separation and divorce find it easy to identify with the three 
youngsters on screen. My guess is that that's a large part of why the film 
became such a family favourite. So often over the last 20 years I've been told 
thatMrs Doubtfire is the film someone watched a thousand times for comfort 
throughout childhood.

Williams's performance is a hypnotising whirlwind of manic energy. But that 
was the man. Once I was asked to join him on Michael Parkinson's chatshow. I 
did explain, with some relief, that I'd been booked for almost a year to give a 
talk that night to 200 librarians, so couldn't go. But I reached home in time 
to watch the programme. There Williams sat, so wired with energy he'd almost 
levitated from the sofa. He talked in such a blue streak that Parkinson could 
scarcely get a word in. If I'd been there, I would have sat like a stuffed 
pudding, saying nothing, idiotic with laughter. I was glad to be so far from 
all the hype and fuss.

I owe the man the most tremendous debt. Because of Mrs Doubtfire's success, my 
novel – and plenty of others I've written – can now be read in more than 40 
languages. The film paid off my mortgage, and gave me the freedom to write what 
I want at my own speed. But I still avoid watchingMrs Doubtfire. Too much 
of what I put such effort into writing was junked or twisted round to make 
it work on screen. But everyone knows that the author is the last person who 
should be asked to judge an adaptation.

It's such a tragedy that someone who lifted other people's spirits 
so successfully, and gave so much pleasure, should lose his own hopes in the 
way Williams clearly did.

• Madame Doubtfire 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780140373554>
 is published by Puffin.
 