
I must admit that I had never heard of Ada Lovelace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ada-lovelace> until, fifteen years ago, 
the Literary Review magazine sent me a copy of her biography. Every month I 
illustrated the cover of the magazine with an image inspired by one of their 
book reviews. My bookshelves now groan beneath the weight of beautiful hardback 
biographies, histories and travel books that have been sent to me over the 
years. The Art of Italian Fencing, Beethhoven’s Symphonies, The Poetry of 
Philip Larkin… I’m never sure what is going to arrive in the post next!

That particular month I was sent a book about the only daughter of the famous 
poet,Lord Byron <https://www.theguardian.com/books/lordbyron>. And I was hooked.

Ada Lovelace was born on the 10th December 1815. A month later her parents’ 
marriage broke down and Lord Byron, famously described as ‘Mad, Bad and 
Dangerous to Know’, left England for good. Ada’s mother was terrified that her 
daughter would grow up to be as mad and bad as her father, so she arranged for 
Ada to have the best education possible, concentrating on mathematical and 
technological skills rather thandangerous poetry. 

Ada flourished, becoming a great mathematician and later, working with Charles 
Babbage on his‘Analytical Engine’ 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Analytical_Engine>, she wrote the first ever 
computer programme! This achievement is celebrated onAda Lovelace Day 
<http://findingada.com/> every year.

But what I love most about Ada Lovelace is that, despite her mother’s best 
efforts, she never lost her imagination – something she inherited from the 
father she never knew. When Ada was twelve years old she decided she wanted to 
fly so she set about investigating the subject. She wrote a book called 
‘Flyology’ with her friends, which concluded with a design for a steam driven 
mechanical flying horse! I think ‘Mad, Bad and Dangerous To Know’ Lord Byron 
would have been proud of his ‘poetical scientist’ daughter.

Years later, I remember the cover of The Literary Review as I was sitting down 
to write a follow up to myOttoline series – and those books became the Goth Girl
 series. My protagonist, Ada Goth, is the only daughter of Lord Goth, England’s 
most famous poet, who has a penchant for destroying garden ornaments (he gains 
a reputation for being ‘Mad, Bad and Dangerous to Gnomes’). Ada Goth is 
adventurous, intrepid and independently minded and with her friends, eager to 
explore the world around her.

I’ve written about Ada Goth in two Gothic novels now, with a third to follow. 
I hope that the twelve year old Ada Lovelace would have approved.
 Ada Goth, illustration by Chris Riddell Photograph: Chris Riddell/PR  