
To declare an interest, Emily Mortimer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/emily-mortimer> and I lived together at 
university. We used to run lines before auditions for student productions. I 
had a book of Woody Allen screenplays and we'd do the dialogue from Manhattan 
or Annie Hall. She was a brilliant ditz. Still, it was with disbelief that she 
called me last year to say Woody had picked her to be in Match Point, a society 
drama set in London.

'I had never dreamed of appearing in a Woody Allen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/woodyallen> film. I thought of him as 
strictly New York and it wasn't going to be for an English actress. When I got 
my first part in an American indie movie [Lovely and Amazing] I thought I'd do 
it a bit "Woody Allen", a bit neurotic. Woody saw it and it ended up being my 
only audition. I met him, he shook my hand, looked me up and down, and said 
goodbye. Next time I saw him was on set. The problem was that I was playing a 
character untypical to his work. It wasn't a comedy, I wasn't an uptight New 
Yorker in a hat and cool flares and it was all a bit of shock.'

I saw Emily at the premiere party held at Asprey, which features in the film, 
when she was wearing glittering Asprey earrings and a spectacular bracelet. 
'They were on loan and I had to give them back,' she said with a pout. 'I think 
[co-star] Scarlett Johansson got to keep hers.'

She is happy that her dad, John Mortimer, attended the premiere, even if he 
left the party early because Asprey is strictly no smoking. I wondered if Woody 
knew her father was a celebrated writer? 'I think he was told, and they did 
exchange a few words, but Woody never mentioned it during filming. He hardly 
says anything on set. You bring your interpretation of the character with you 
and he just does a couple of takes and everyone goes home for tea.

'It didn't help my confidence that Woody and Scarlett were like best buddies 
all through, probably as they were the New Yorkers in exile.'

I'd spoken to Emily before Cannes last year, where the film was having its 
world premiere. 'All I can remember is standing at the top of those red steps, 
Woody's arm around me, Scarlett on the other side and him grinning like a moron 
and muttering: "Remember, none of this is real, it can all end tomorrow."'
 