
When I started writing my book, two months after returning from the Amazon, I 
was already blocking out the hard times and selectively remembering an 
excitement-packed two-year adventure. But when I started to read the journals 
that I'd written in my hammock each night, I realised that I'd been pretty 
miserable for large parts of the journey.

My mission was to travel the length of the Amazon, from source to mouth. At 
one point, in Peru, I was in a totally closed off area of Amerindians. Few 
white people went in by river, and certainly none on foot – as I was with my 
guide Cho, a forestry worker who walked with me for 24 of the 28 months of my 
journey.

Some indigenous tribes in this part of the world consider themselves 
autonomous – they don't follow the laws of Peru. As we travelled, we used a 
high-frequency radio network to talk to the tribes as we approached, so we 
could ask their permission to come through. In this area, a tribe called 
Pensilvania said over the radio that they would kill any white people who came 
by. We were worried, but had no choice but to pass through this area. To try to 
avoid them, Cho and I paddled out to a shingle island in the middle of the 
river, then walked down it for two kilometres, hoping to avoid the Pensilvania. 
When we reached the downstream end of the island and were about to get back 
into our inflatable rafts Cho said, "Ed – look behind you". I turned and saw 
five canoes paddling up to us. The men were armed with bows and arrows or 
shotguns, the women with machetes.

I thought, this is it: we are going to be killed.

Luckily they weren't Pensilvania; they were a different tribe. But they were 
furious that we were trying to pass without permission and escorted us back to 
their community and made us take all our stuff out of our bags.

In general the tribes didn't want people walking through their land. This 
tribe was no different. They hadn't issued a threat, but they hadn't given us 
permission to pass either. They said they would only let us through if we hired 
the chief and his brother as guides. We pretended to be really put out by this, 
that it would be a huge inconvenience, but actually we were thrilled. We really 
needed local guides to help with introductions at subsequent communities.

Alfonso and Andreas walked for 47 days with us, and became really good mates. 
We could all speak enough Spanish to communicate. Cho and I were travelling 
with a pack raft – a small one-person inflatable kayak – each. With the extra 
company we had to double up, sitting in the rafts end to end. It felt like 
sharing a bath.

I was sharing a pack raft with Andreas and I accidentally dropped our last 
machete – which we really needed – into the water. Though not a disaster, this 
would inconvenience us greatly – but Andreas, the chief, and I had become good 
friends by this point and we just shared a guilty schoolboy grin. They ended up 
being really lovely, loyal friends: the same people that came out to defend 
their land and who were, I am sure, ready to kill us had we been aggressors. At 
the end of the trip we paid them, and were a bit worried that, like other 
tribesmen we had met, they would spend it all on alcohol, but these guys bought 
an outboard motor to take back to their community.

None of the tribes we met found what we were doing strange: they all enjoyed 
walking, and understood why we would want to go out and enjoy the forest, and 
write a book about it.

Even these really closed off communities have generators and watch TV. Theirs 
is a bizarre little world: it seems totally isolated, but then they're watching 
Brazilian soap operas set in Rio.

Many communities in Peru have suffered atrocities over the years – whole 
generations of men wiped out, and women violated. In Brazil we had less 
trouble: there is more money there, and more education. There were fewer 
communities, and we could go two or three weeks without seeing anyone. The 
latter half of the trip was more like that, and nicer for it. We had fewer 
problems – except for running out of food.

At one point we had been walking for 30 days through places with no human 
habitation, and I decided that we were eight more days from a community that 
was marked on our map. We worked out that we had just 450 calories a day to 
live on, so we walked for eight days, and on the last day there was nothing 
there. We had no food, we were in the middle of the jungle, our GPS had broken 
and we only had a compass and a map that was 1: 4m to navigate through Brazil. 
(That means 1mm was 4km – military maps are 1: 100,000.) We were really out on 
a limb. But the next day Cho found a tortoise. We'd made it a policy not to 
hunt, but that tortoise jerky saved us.

With food low and kit breaking, we had to increasingly live off our wits to 
survive. It became the part of the expedition that was the most memorable. 
Before I set off, everyone told me the challenge was impossible, but I was 
adamant it wasn't.
 Ed Stafford with Cho at journey's end – it was the first time Cho had seen 
the sea 
Although the real reason I came up with the idea was to have a big adventure, 
one of the most rewarding aspects of it was the relationship we had with 
schools around the world. I was writing ablog for the Prince's Rainforest 
Project for School's site <http://schools.rainforestsos.org/amazon-blog> and 
kids would send us questions. I would answer them by video and then upload the 
films. Teachers used it to spice up their lessons and bring the Amazon to life. 
Sometimes we were uploading films about the fact that we had run out of food 
before we managed to find any.

Another great thing to come out of the trip was my relationship with Cho. We 
walked for two years together and became good friends. He has since come back 
to the UK with me, and it would have been weird to leave him after showing him 
what the western world has to offer.

He applied for a visa to stay here but it's very hard for Peruvians to get 
one, and he was turned down. But at my book launch at the Royal Geographic 
Society, I spoke to Michael Palin about our trip, and he wrote to the 
ambassador on our behalf – and the visa decision was reversed. So now Cho is 
staying with my mum, who lives in Leicester, and has been learning English. 
He's not sure what he wants out of his future but he's keen to see more of the 
world. He's become a very loyal friend and I owe him a lot.
As told to Gemma Bowes 
 