 "For much of the time my work space is the Capital Studios in Wandsworth, 
filming Saturday Kitchen and Ready Steady Cook," says Worrall Thompson.
Saturday Kitchen is broadcast live on BBC2 and will soon be followed by a new 
programme, Saturday Brunch. "But the new show will be filmed in my kitchen at 
home," he says.

Worrall Thompson calls the Saturday programmes "one for the lads - we're 
between two sports programmes", and says that at many of his demos, about 30 
per cent of those who come along are men.

"We've definitely got some gender bending going on in the kitchen," he says, 
adding that over the past few years cooking for many people has turned into a 
hobby rather than being a necessity. Against chemicals and passionate about 
organic food, he is keen to join in the debate about how our food is produced 
but at the same time he isn't against supermarkets.

"Convenience is important. I am practical. Let's just try and improve the 
supermarkets. In Ireland they've campaigned against Tesco, for example - I love 
it when people get a bit feisty. In a future life, I'd like to be a Paxman."

One of his favourite work spaces was the great outdoors in I'm a Celebrity. 

"I loved the jungle. I thought there would be showers off camera but the 
toilet really was a tin can under a plank of wood," he says. "I'm not going to 
deny that I did it for exposure and it was a good commercial move. I know that 
I already had a good profile but you can always add to it," he laughs.

Worrall Thompson believes that as a celebrity you have a shelf life. "Everyone 
has. What's important is that you don't get bitter when it's all over."

His fellow chef friends include Ainsley Harriott and Brian Turner, but not 
Gordon Ramsay. "I have a constant battle with Gordon. It is a spat. He 
constantly damns us celebrity chefs. I think we'd get on a lot better if he 
admitted that he himself is a celebrity chef."

In the mornings, Worrall Thompson confides that he bounces out of bed. "Then I 
work like a dog. My wife says she's never met someone who works so hard."

Recently he has been building up his pension. "I've spent thousands of pounds 
on antique cookery books. I see them as an investment. I'm asset rich and cash 
poor."

Two to three nights a week you'll find him working in one of his restaurants: 
Notting Grill in Holland Park and Kew Grill. The vegetables for the restaurants 
are all grown at his home in Oxfordshire.

"My garden goes down to the river and I have a smallholding of about five 
acres. I've got my pal Jim who comes in and works here like mad. He's 72 and 
proof that if you have an active life you stay young."

By eating organically, he says he hasn't had a cough or a cold in eight years. 
"I've got Maran hens and Middle White pigs from which you get the best pork 
around."

All in all, Worrall Thompson is pretty much enjoying his life. What he'd still 
really like to do is a celebrity show on ice, either in the Antarctic or 
Arctic. "I love the idea of building an igloo and fishing from the ice."

"I'm a stress-free guy. I have fun and that's the main thing. Not a lot of 
people can say that."

· Saturday Kitchen Cookbook is published by BBC Books, £12.99
 