
We note with alarm the grave human rights crisis unfolding in Rakhine State, 
Myanmar. Your article (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/24/rohingya-flee-to-bangladesh-to-escape-myanmar-military-strikes>
, 25 November ) provides a timely spotlight on an increasingly desperate 
situation. The head of the local UN refugee agency describes a programme of 
ethnic cleansing. Other international experts point to indicators of genocide. 
At the very least, the alleged violations – the killings of hundreds, the rapes 
of many women, and the displacement of tens of thousands – amount to crimes 
against humanity. Aung San Suu Kyi’s government must respond, if a humanitarian 
catastrophe is to be prevented. Access for humanitarian aid, international 
media and human rights monitors is essential.

It is time for a unified diplomatic effort to call for humanitarian access. We 
urge UN secretary-general Ban Ki-moon to use his final weeks in office to lead 
an effort to secure this. We urge the UK to demand an international inquiry and 
unrestricted aid access. The international community cannot stand idly by while 
peaceful civilians are mown down by helicopter guns, women are raped and tens 
of thousands left without homes. If we fail to act, thousands may starve to 
death if they are not killed by bullets, and we may be passive observers of 
ethnic cleansing.
Lord Alton of Liverpool, Jonathan Ashworth MP, David Burrowes MP, Baroness Nye 
of Lambeth, Baroness Cox of Queensbury, Baroness Kinnock of Holyhead, Paul 
Scully MP, Valerie Vaz MP, Fiona Bruce MP

• One of the victimised Rohingya women said during an interview: “If the 
international community can’t help us, please drop a bomb on us and kill all of 
us.” This clearly indicates the escalation of violence againstRohingya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rohingya> Muslims in Myanmar. They have been 
shot, raped, and looted, and their houses have been torched to the ground by 
the Myanmar military. Many of the wounded attempt to flee to Bangladesh to 
escape the hell that Mayanmar has become. According to the UN, up to 30,000 
people have been displaced by violence, half of which occurred in the last week 
when dozens of people died in clashes with the military. What is more dubious 
is how Myanmar continues to deny this state of affairs, despite evidence to the 
contrary. It ought to be considered a humanitarian issue, not a Buddhist or 
Muslim, majority or minority issue. I urge the Myanmar government, as well as 
the international community, to play a significant role in making lasting peace 
with the Rogingyas and other ethnic communities.
Selim Reza Mridha
Chittagong, Bangladesh

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 