
Myanmar parliament’s official confirmation on Tuesday that Aung San Suu Kyi’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/11/aung-san-suu-kyi-myanmar-leader-htin-kyaw-president-military>
 aide –Htin Kyaw– is to be the presidential proxy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/15/myanmar-parliament-elects-htin-kyaw-as-first-civilian-president-in-53-years>
 ended months of hopeful speculation. Numerous articles and newspaper 
editorials had, excitedly, touched on the fairytale of a Burmese Mandela 
moment: the country’s most popular politician, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, assuming 
the highest office after years of relentless persecution, heroic perseverance 
and noble reconciliation.

Myanmar parliament elects Htin Kyaw as first civilian president in 53 years
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/15/myanmar-parliament-elects-htin-kyaw-as-first-civilian-president-in-53-years>
For those of us Burmese who know the military’s institutionalised disdain 
towards the woman who most of the country callAhmay, or Mother, we knew that 
western media was wasting ink on a foregone conclusion. The military will never 
letAung San Suu Kyi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/aung-san-suu-kyi> be the 
head of state, nor hold the reins of state power. They did not accept her when 
she first emerged in 1988 and they still don’t accept her leadership, 28 years 
later, on the verge of her 71st birthday.

The generals used to give their approval to derogatory references to her that 
appeared in the numerous Burmese-language publications run by the military 
intelligence services. Because she was married to a Briton, she used to be 
calledKala maya (or wife of a white nigger), or, worse still, Kala ma (female 
nigger). Against the backdrop of the Arab spring and Barack Obama’s offer to 
decriminalise “rogue regimes” should they cooperate with the Americans, the 
generals decided to change their tack in dealing with their nemesis, the 
darling of the west.

Shrewdly, they dropped crude and crass references to Suu Kyi and instead began 
playing nice and smiling broadly. In exchange, they got her to open doors for 
them in the private sector, to rekindle military ties at Sandhurst and West 
Point, and secure the acceptability and legitimacy of indirect military rule 
under its new management of media-friendly generals. But deep down, 
non-cooperation with Suu Kyi and her party remains the military’s default 
position, something the media andMyanmar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/myanmar> experts have overlooked.

10 years ago, a young colonel from military intelligence picked me up from 
Rangoon airport and asked me point-blank: “Do you think only Aung San Suu Kyi 
can bring democracy to our country?”, to which I answered bluntly, “No, 
absolutely not. Democracy is about the people, not the leaders, much less a 
specific leader.” Some ranking generals couldn’t even bring themselves to say 
her name, and often resorted to calling her “that woman”. That colonel now is 
among the top three generals in the country, and backed his former boss, 
ex-Lt-General Myint Swe, a hardliner, to be the military’s man as vice 
president.

A stormy road lies ahead. Suu Kyi's relationship with the generals has 
reportedly turned sour again

In her tireless efforts to secure cooperation from the military, Suu Kyi has 
repeatedly expressed her appreciation, respect and “genuine” affection for the 
Tatmadaw (feudal military), which her father founded under Japan’s fascist 
patronage in December 1942, much to the dismay of many minorities who have 
borne the brunt of the organisation’s ruthless policies. There has been no 
shortage of accusations of widespread war crimes and crimes against humanity 
against Christian and other minorities in eastern Myanmar and aslow but 
systematic genocide against the Rohingya Muslims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/oct/21/thousands-rohingya-refugees-flee-boat-looming-disaster-amnesty>
 in western Myanmar.

All her displays of love were, predictably, to no avail. A stormy road lies 
ahead. As her relationship with the generals has reportedly turned sour again, 
a game of tit-for-tat now awaits the country. For their part, the generals who 
retain the ultimate say in the country’s affairs are digging in their heels, 
having put Myint Swe, a former head of military intelligence, as an 
uncompromising counterbalance to Suu Kyi’s puppet president.

Still, Htin Kyaw’s assumption of the presidency is a symbolically important 
moment for the Burmese public, who have repeatedly expressed their desire to 
rid the country of their military overlords. For the first time in 53 years, 51 
million Burmese people have got a genuine civilian president who is not a 
general or ex-general in civilian clothing, and who can be expected not to 
promote the military’s interests.

Beyond this symbolic progress, the presidential politics of proxies in the 
high offices of Myanmar – the military with their ex-intelligence chief and Suu 
Kyi with her absolutely loyal former classmate – doesn’t augur well for the 
future of the country. But again, genuine democracy will require a renewed, 
hard and sustained push by all sections of the country.
 