
It was a brutally casual way to inform a man of his fate. After listening to a 
lengthy monologue by Bernard Madoff's defence lawyer on why the fraudster 
should remain on bail in his Manhattan penthouse, Judge Denny Chin waved away 
the prosecution.

"I don't need to hear from you because it is my intention to remand Mr 
Madoff," said the judge. He spoke almost as an aside, as if Madoff wasn't in 
the room.


There was a collective intake of breath. In the overflow room at New York's 
federal courthouse, full of hard-bitten hacks watching proceedings on a video 
link, a few people started clapping.The old man was finally going behind bars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/mar/12/madoff-jailed-after-guilty-plea>
.

If the 70-year-old fraudster himself was surprised at being sent directly to 
jail, he didn't show it. He would have been warned by his defence team that he 
ran the risk of instant incarceration by pleading guilty to 11 counts of fraud, 
perjury and money laundering.

In fact, throughout the 90-minute hearing, Madoff looked as if he had been 
drugged. He stared fixedly at some point in the middle distance, slouched 
slightly forward with his arms resting on a table. His speech of "apology" was 
delivered in a flat monotone.

The only time he showed any tangible reaction was when one of his victims, 
George Nierenberg, aggressively demanded that Madoff meet his eye, moving 
towards him and saying: "I don't know whether you've had a chance to turn 
around and look at your victims."

Madoff, rather reluctantly, swivelled round and briefly eyeballed his former 
client before Judge Chin ordered Nierenberg to cool off.

Being Bernie Madoff's defence counsel is a job from hell, even by the 
standards of white-collar litigation. Madoff seems to have been intent on 
self-immolation from the moment his $65bn (£47bn) fraudulent scheme came to 
light in December.

Many legal experts were flummoxed by Madoff's decision to confess to every 
criminal count on the table this week without any sniff of a deal with 
prosecutors. If he had gone with "not guilty", he could have bought himself 
another year of bail. Or by co-operating with the feds and by talking them 
through the paperwork, he might have won a delay and a shorter term. Instead, 
he's probably in jail until he dies.

The probable explanation is that Madoff hopes to take the bullet for his 
family and colleagues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/audio/2009/mar/13/bernard-madoff-prison>. 
Peter Henning, a former fraud prosecutor turned law professor at Wayne State 
University in Detroit, says: "I think he's protecting his family. Any plea deal 
would definitely have required him to implicate others."

During his words of penance to the court, Madoff was at pains to emphasise 
that while his investment advisory outfit was a fraudulent hole, his company's 
proprietary trading and market-making operations were "legitimately and 
honestly run businesses". His sons, Andrew and Mark, were senior executives on 
this "honest" side of the Chinese wall. Madoff's 63-year-old brother, Peter, 
was in charge of trading.

It is almost inconceivable that Madoff could have spent 20 years squirreling 
away clients' money in a Chase Manhattan bank account, conducting virtually no 
legitimate transactions, without anybody at Madoff Investment Securities 
smelling a rat – even if, as he asserts, he was deliberately employing 
under-qualified staff with no expertise in the securities industry.

For the feds, catching the kingpin before they get to any henchmen poses an 
unusual difficulty – because of his reputation as America's biggest liar, 
Madoff is a radioactive witness. Any evidence he gives in future trials can be 
easily and quickly discredited.

"He's the king of this fraud. That's not someone you'd ever want to use as a 
witness," says Sam Buell, professor of law at Washington University in St 
Louis. "You could never use him in court – a jury would be outraged at having 
this guy testify against somebody who's less culpable."

So there are virtually no grounds for clemency towards Madoff – he clearly 
isn't being very helpful and, even if he was, his aid is of dubious utility.

The record sentence for a white-collar crime in the US is the 24-year term 
handed to Enron's Jeffrey Skilling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2006/oct/24/corporatefraud.enron> in 2006 
(although an appeals court ruled this was too harsh and that it should be 
recalculated). Madoff could find himself exceeding that.

Some argue Madoff's crime is worse than those of the bosses of corrupt 
companies such as Enron, WorldCom and Tyco. After all, many of Madoff's victims 
lost their life savings. In the case of, say, Enron shareholders, the damage is 
spread relatively thinly among a larger number of people.

"In some ways, this is a worse kind of fraud – it's preying on individuals 
rather than a fraud on the market," says Buell. "The victims here run the gamut 
from the very, very wealthy to the not-all-that-affluent."

Federal inmates in the US have to serve at least 85% of their sentences before 
they qualify for early release on grounds of good behaviour. If Madoff, 70, 
gets a relatively lenient 20 years and lives beyond the age of 87, he could 
conceivably see daylight again. But it's not very likely.

To his victims, it's hard to extend forgiveness or compassion to somebody who 
won't help prosecutors unravel the details of his crime, irrespective of 
Madoff's claim that he is "deeply sorry and ashamed".

One investor, 71-year-old Judith Welling, raised her arm in a victory salute 
as she exited the courthouse on Thursday. She put $1.5m into Madoff's fund and 
thought her nest egg had grown to $2.5m until she learned that the financier's 
empire was based on a pack of lies.

"Frankly, in my book, he's the lowest of the low," she said.
 