
So much has been written and discussed about the possibility of Roger Federer 
being, or becoming, the greatest player of the modern era that Rafa Nadal's 
extraordinary career has hardly been considered in that light. Yet here he is, 
at 22 years old, having just won his sixth major at theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>. At this age ­Federer had 
won two. And now, having become the first male Spaniard ever to win a 
hard‑court slam the intriguing ­possibility has opened up of Nadal, and not 
Federer, winning the calendar slam, or at least winning all the four majors in 
his lifetime, something only five others players have managed – Don Budge and 
Andre Agassi of the US, Rod Laver and Roy Emerson of Australia, and Britain's 
Fred Perry.

The Spaniard's knees remain a long-term worry, although he continues to defy 
all prognostications. He is a quite phenomenal competitor of exceptional tennis 
gifts, and has wormed his way inside Federer's head to such an extent that the 
13-times slam champion must simply hope and pray that he will not be on the 
other side of the net when he again tries to equal Pete Sampras's all-time 
record of 14 majors, and then possibly to beat it. And Wimbledon still appears 
to be his best chance, even though Nadal halted his five-year winning run last 
summer.

Nadal's progression in the slams has been constant. He won the French Open at 
the first attempt in 2005 and has not relinquished the title since; while at 
­Wimbledon he reached the final in 2006, and then almost beat Federer the next 
year, before taking the title. As for the Australian Open he made the last 
eight in 2007, the semi-final a year ago, and is now the champion.

The one slam to cause him problems, principally because his knees have 
troubled him so much towards the end of the season, is the US Open, though he 
made the semi-finals there last year, losing over two rain-interrupted days 
against Andy Murray. For the moment, providing he stays healthy, nothing seems 
beyond him, even if he concedes he is unlikely ever to win the same number of 
slams as Federer. He has always deferred to the Swiss as the best player, while 
at the same time con­tinuing to beat him with a frequency that is now seriously 
damaging and ­undermining his confidence, as was so obvious here.

The hard courts were Federer's last bastion. He had won eight of his 13 slams 
on them and now Nadal, who took over from him as the world No1 last year, has 
turned him over on this surface as he did on grass. This 7–5, 3–6, 7–6, 3–6, 
6–2 victory was, in total, Nadal's 13th win against ­Federer in 19 meetings, 
and his fifth in seven slam finals.

Federer could not control his post-match emotions after he won the title here 
in 2006 and in front of his all-time hero Laver. The same happened again this 
time in a final finishing after midnight and with Laver present in the arena 
named after him. As Federer tried to force back the tears he abandoned his 
first attempt at ­thanking everybody: "Maybe I'll try again later. God, it's 
killing me." He might have been referring to Nadal, though it was the ­Spaniard 
who put a long arm around ­Federer's shoulders and managed to coax him back to 
the microphone.

This final had only snatches of the ­quality that had permeated their 
Wimble­don final last year, and it was a match ­Federer should have won. He had 
19 break points on the Nadal serve, ­managing to convert six, while the way he 
faded away in the fifth set spoke volumes of a deep‑seated lack of self-belief, 
all too obvious last year when he managed to win only four games in the French 
Open final, a brutal defeat, and then lost the fifth and final set 9–7 at 
Wimbledon. Nadal has now won their last five meetings on different surfaces.

Federer struggled off court, as well as on it, to rationalise this latest 
defeat. "I fought hard and I think I played well. I just wish my serve had been 
better." His overwhelming problem is that against Nadal it seems some facet of 
his game always fails to function properly. Such is the pressure the 
left-hander exerts, though these days it is a mental hold as much as anything. 
Federer might say he still believes he can beat him, but that belief appears to 
be waning sharply.

The argument that Nadal might be ­physically at a disadvantage always had to 
be weighed against his extraordinary physical capacity, though those Spaniards 
who watch him all the time felt he looked a little slower than usual and a 
little flat. His five-set semi- against a fellow Spaniard Fernando Verdasco — 
finishing at 1.10am on Saturday, and lasting 5hr 14min — had been remarkably 
intense and draining, and there were clear signs that Nadal was feeling the 
strain. Yet by winning the first set, despite being down 4–2, he undermined 
whatever confidence Federer brought into the final. And when it most mattered, 
in the fifth set, Federer's nerve went completely. He was terrified to attack.

Whereas it has seemed Rafa was physically living on the edge during the third 
set, the real truth was that Federer was emotionally on the brink throughout. 
"I played a ­terrible fifth set," Federer admitted, "and kind of handed it to 
him. But look, I love this game. It means the world to me, so it hurts when you 
lose. And it hurts even more if you are this close to victory, like at 
Wimbledon." The hurt was palpable. As was Rafa's joy.
 