
It will be the finish to the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> that many wanted though 
Fernando Verdasco, the conqueror of Andy Murray in the fourth round, played the 
match of his life as he fought to be the Spanish left-hander who would face 
Roger Federer on Sunday evening here.

Verdasco, who had never gone beyond the last 16 of a major, battled to his 
extreme limits in the longest match in the history of the tournament at 5hr 
14min, but it was Rafa Nadal, as almost everyone expected, who reached his 
first ever hard-court grand slam final 6–7, 6–4, 7–6, 6–7, 6–4.

Remarkably, at the end of an astonishingly intense game only a single point 
separated the two (193–192), Verdasco hitting a remarkable 93 winners: "I was 
taking more risks than him, and being more aggressive." He also served 
superbly, as he had against Murray, and it was cruel that his challenge ended 
with two double faults in his last game, including the point that gave his 
fellow Spaniard the match. Such is the pressure Nadal exerts.

And so there will be a repeat of last year's French Open and Wimbledon finals. 
The first of them produced a straight-sets drubbing of such severity for 
Federer that many felt the need to shut their eyes. The second was a classic, 
with Nadal winning 9–7 in a final set of extraordinary tension and overwhelming 
brilliance from both men. Nadal won his first Wimbledon, Federer lost his 
five-year hold on the title and the public were enraptured.

Nadal went on to claim the No1 spot, though it was Federer who won in New 
York. This showdown, their 19th, will not decide who is top of the rankings – 
Nadal remains assured of that – but victory for Federer would be colossal in 
terms of his confidence and status. The three-times Australian Open champion 
would not only equal Pete Sampras's record of 14 major wins; he would also gain 
some redemption for that Wimbledon defeat.

It took Sampras 52 tournaments to win his 14. This will be Federer's 39th, he 
is only 27 and, if he succeeds, there must be every chance he will claim the 
record this year at Wimbledon. It would imbue him the sort of supreme certainty 
that on occasions deserted him last year, notably here when his forehand 
malfunctioned and he lost in the semi-finals against Novak Djokovic.

No Spanish man has ever won a hard- court major; Federer has won eight. But 
Nadal is a phenomenon, as he proved on grass, and has wheedled his way inside 
Federer's head. In simple terms of preparation the Swiss will obviously have a 
distinct advantage. He rattled through his quarter- and semi-finals in straight 
sets and will have had an extra day's rest. Nadal's semi-final did not finish 
until 1.10am on Saturday here. Any normal player would be certain to feel the 
after-effects of such a titanic five-setter. Rafa is not normal.

Of their 18 meetings Nadal has won 12, including all four last year. In major 
finals – three on clay, three on grass – Nadal leads 4–2, while Federer holds a 
3–2 advantage on hard courts. It has developed into a classic rivalry. "With 
Rafa you need to win the points three times," said Verdasco. On clay that is 
almost impossible, given Nadal's astonishing physical endurance and 
athleticism. Then he proved he could do it on grass. Now comes the hard court 
test. And the test of what Rafa gremlins still lurk inside Federer's head.
 