 Fifty nameless babies whose bodies were secretly stored for medical research 
at Liverpool hospitals were buried in the city yesterday.
More funerals will follow every Thursday for several months as at least 1,000 
unidentified bodies, most of them foetuses less than 28 weeks old, are interred.

The remains were discovered during the inquiry into the Alder Hey organ 
retention scandal, in which body parts were taken from dead children without 
their parents' knowledge.

Seven of the unidentified babies came from Alder Hey but the rest were 
obtained from other hospitals. At yesterday's ceremony at Allerton cemetery, 
each baby was dressed in a lemon or white gown, was covered in a "blanket of 
love", and laid in an oak casket bearing a numbered plaque. The caskets were 
stacked in layers of 10, and all but one were already in the grave before the 
service began.

Mourners, many of them parents affected by the Alder Hey scandal, wept as the 
final casket was placed in the grave by a cemetery worker.

The 15-minute service was led by the Rev Dr Ian Lovett, a hospital chaplain at 
Liverpool's Aintree Hospital. The Alder Hey hospital chaplain, the Rev Dave 
Williams, the Bishop of Liverpool, the Right Rev James Jones, and 
representatives of the Roman Catholic, Muslim and Hindu faiths were also 
present.

Dr Lovett said: "Those of us gathered here represent all who have journeyed 
with these babies, a journey which brings us to this point today, a day filled 
with emotion and sadness.

"Our prayer is that healing love would surround, support and uphold all those 
who were affected by their death. May our gathering here today bring about a 
fitting conclusion to this time of pain."

The service was also attended by representatives of Liverpool University, the 
city council and members of Pity II, the support group set up by parents who 
discovered that their children's body parts had been taken during postmortem 
examinations.

At the end of the service, mourners lined up to scatter earth on the coffins. 
Flowers were laid at the graveside. The largest display, from the university, 
had a card which read: "At peace now".

Speaking after the service, Bishop Jones praised the Alder Hey parents for 
"adopting" the unknown babies.

"What they have done today is adopted these unidentified babies and said to 
them, 'You may be unknown, but we take you to ourselves and on behalf of the 
community we lay you to rest'," he said. "We hope this will be an end to this 
sad episode, but it is not an end to their memory."

Pity II co-founder Paula O'Leary, whose 11-month-old son Andrew had his organs 
taken following his death in 1981, plans to attend every service. "The moment I 
found out about these unidentified babies, it just broke my heart," she said. 
"We've had to fight all the way, but I couldn't rest until these babies were 
given the dignity they deserve."
 