
Naomi Alderman <https://www.theguardian.com/books/naomi-alderman> was 200,000 
words into her latest novel when she realised she was going to have to junk it. 
She’d started it in 2013, put it aside, then picked it up again the following 
autumn. “It was a dark time. I thought ‘I don’t know how to progress this’,” 
she recalls. “Then on 20 December, when the year was the darkest it could be, I 
decided I had to throw it all out.” She ran the decision past two writer 
friends who had read it. “They both said that it was very brave, but they 
didn’t say not to do it.”

Fewer than 2,000 words of that original draft have made it into Alderman’s 
fourth novel,The Power, but the earlier work is acknowledged with a private 
joke. The first version had a single protagonist called Christine. In the 
second, she’s been renamed Roxy, and demoted to one of four central characters. 
“Christine is her mum and she dies at the start of the book, which is probably 
how I thought of that first draft.”

The morphing of Christine into Roxy, and of that first moribund version into 
the toned and muscled machine that isThe Power is the stuff of superhero 
fiction – appropriately enough for a writer who spends half her day writing 
novels and the other half working on video games and TV pitches.

The Power by Naomi Alderman review – if girls ruled the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/02/the-power-naomi-alderman-review> 
In her north London home, where books jostle for wall space with DVDs and 
games, the 42-year-old writer crackles with the same energy and humour that 
fizzes from her novel. She’s aware that many early readers regardThe Power as 
her breakout work but is anxious not to jinx it, though it has already sent the 
television world into a bidding frenzy. She can’t reveal which of 11 offers she 
accepted, but confirms that the rights have been sold. “Ideally we’re looking 
at a 10 episode season for five or six seasons, because there’s a lot of world 
in there.”

The novel tells the story of what happens after a genetic mutation gives young 
women the power to electrocute people. What starts out as a fantasy of female 
empowerment deepens and darkens into an interrogation of power itself, its uses 
and abuses and what it does to the people who have it. The story is framed by a 
correspondence between two writers, one of them named Naomi.

Roxy, the daughter of a London gangster, is joined at its centre by an abuse 
survivor turned religious leader, a middle-aged female politician and a 
Nigerian photojournalist – the one male of the quartet – who has made it his 
mission to report on the geopolitical upheavals caused by this galvanising new 
female superpower.

The evolution of the journalist, Tunde, reveals a lot about Alderman’s 
creative process. He first emerged in a random scene about a man trying to get 
his passport back, and initially she had no idea where he was headed. It wasn’t 
until she tookThe Power back to the drawing board that she realised he belonged 
at the heart of the novel, adding a valuable male perspective to a narrative 
that had previously been exclusively female.

If I’m working every day it’s like pumping a pump. When you start, rusty water 
comes out and then it runs clear

She explains: “My aim is that mornings are for books and afternoons are for 
games. I write 100 words before getting out of bed and 800 words a day, which 
takes me to about lunchtime, unless it’s a really bad day.” The first hundred 
words can be about anything, and this was how Tunde arrived. “If I’m working 
every day it’s like pumping a pump. When you start, rusty water comes out and 
then it runs clear. I do it even if I get completely stuck.”

The only time she departs from this routine is during the two months of each 
year when she is working on a new season of the augmented reality game, 
Zombies, Run! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2012/mar/25/zombies-run-naomi-alderman-app>
 on which she is co-creator and lead writer, with games developer Six to Start.

Launched in 2012, Zombies, Run! is a fitness game that was created to “make 
exercise less bloody boring”. Each episode sends runners on a “unique mission 
in the zombie apocalypse”, which is dramatised in audio, with interludes for 
runners’ own music playlists. “There are currently more than 250 missions out 
there: each year we release a new season with 40 missions on it. Each mission 
takes 12 to 14 minutes. That’s the same as a season ofGame of Thrones,” she 
says.

Before the the full magnitude of this commitment has had time to sink in, 
she’s rattling on with all the other pursuits she packs into her days - such as 
nose-to-tail Open University courses. “I’ve done world archaeology and material 
culture. I’ve just finished one on human biology and started another on the art 
of the 20th century. It’s 45 minutes of studying and gives a very nice shape to 
my day.”

All this is par for the course for a woman who admits that “what some people 
describe as being a terrible swot really means I like working hard and learning 
things. I like putting something really brand new into my brain.”

Alderman’s passion for learning goes back to her earliest days as the daughter 
of an academic historian and an artist. Her parents are “unorthodox orthodox 
jews” who brought her up to be intellectually curious but culturally 
conservative. When she was seven, her father, Geoffrey, brought home a Spectrum 
48K computer which came with a booklet explaining basic programming. “I’d 
always really enjoyed playing text adventures so I did a bit of programming my 
own dungeons.”

She went from a state Jewish primary school in Colindale, “the poor man’s 
Hendon” in north London, to the highly competitive private secondary, South 
Hampstead High School. Her parents were both from solidly working class 
backgrounds. “We weren’t particularly wealthy so I was quite out of place,” she 
says. “What these schools do, if you come from a background like that, is 
essentially a process of deracination. For years I looked down on my mother for 
shopping at Asda, and now I feel very ashamed of it.”

Her home life in her teens was overshadowed by “a lot of shocks and alarms”, 
not least the suicide of her uncle when she was 14 years old, which traumatised 
her parents and “broke” her grandmother. “It meant that I didn’t have a 
significant period of adolescent rebellion. To rebel you need to feel safe that 
your parents will still love you and that they’ll be OK, and after my uncle’s 
death it was very clear to me that my family were not OK, so I was a very good 
girl. I remember sitting in the locker room at school to have a cry because I 
couldn’t do it at home.”

School, however, was “a very nurturing place”: she found a group of friends, 
wrote “two and a half chapters of a novel about a girl who could control 
probability”, and flourished academically. It wasn’t until she landed a place 
to read PPE at Oxford that she found out how hard it could be to live by 
different rules.

On arrival, she was excited to discover a room full of state-of-the-art 
computers. “I recognised it as my place: I thought I could go there and play 
these games I hadn’t played before, but I found it full of blokes swapping 
pictures of topless women, and I was this good orthodox girl.”

The college kitchens wouldn’t cook kosher food, so she ate at the Jewish 
Society six days a week and submitted to a double foil-wrapped baked potato on 
the seventh day so that she could have some vestige of college life. On the eve 
of each sabbath, she would leave her files in the library and her toothbrush in 
the bathroom, to avoid having to carry them around – from time to time she 
would find the toothbrush missing, her papers torn.

Many years later, at a college reunion, “this bloke sitting next to me turned 
to me and said, ‘Me and my friends used to mess with your Jewish stuff on the 
sabbath’, and I thought, what you are confessing to is antisemitic bullying. 
It’s really shocking to me that he didn’t start by apologising.”

She had enough confidence to write a novel in her first year (“It was not very 
good but I finished it”) but she found Oxford “an abusive place”, both socially 
and academically. “I think on some level I emotionally collapsed – not in a 
dramatic way, just a long, slow leeching out of my confidence in my abilities.” 
Surprisingly, she would go on to idealise it in her second novel,The Lessons, 
the story of a lonely physics student who becomes entranced by richer, more 
sophisticated friends. “A good read if not unique,”concluded one reviewer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/apr/04/lessons-naomi-alderman-book-review>
, perhaps intuiting that this was not the story she really needed to tell.

After university she briefly worked as a PA at a children’s publisher, then 
talked her way into a job editing publications for an international law firm, 
which sent her to its New York office. There she became involved in fan 
fiction, after receiving “a call from God” to attend a Buffy the Vampire Slayer 
conference in Nashville, Tennessee, “which changed my life by making me think 
of this show I loved in new, critical, ways”.

New York also introduced her to orthodox gay and lesbian people “who had these 
terrible stories: rabbis who said if you didn’t marry and have children you 
were completing Hitler’s work”. She returned for an MA at the University of 
East Anglia with the seeds both of serious religious doubt and of her first 
novel.

Disobedience 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/mar/04/featuresreviews.guardianreview20>
 was published in 2006, when Alderman was in her early 30s. It placed a New 
York Jewish lesbian at the heart of a novel set in the north London home of an 
orthodox rabbi, offering a rare glimpse into a hidden world. It won an Orange 
award for new writing and its longevity was recently confirmed when the film 
rightswere bought by Rachel Weisz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/05/rachel-weisz-rachel-mcadams-adaptation-naomi-alderman-disobedience>
.


Richard Dawkins calls God ‘an imaginary friend’, and it’s supposed to be 
insulting, but I hear voices all day long

The book caused some distress in orthodox circles. When one Jewish paper 
refused to review it, Alderman’s father – a leading authority on English Jewry 
– leapt to its defence in the Jewish Chronicle, though even he conceded that it 
was “perhaps just a little too authentic”. More importantly, it marked the end 
of her own life as a practising Jew. “I went into the novel religious and by 
the end I wasn’t. I wrote myself out of it.”

Looking back on why that decision was so long in coming, she says, “I think 
some people’s brains have more of a natural bent towards God than others. 
Richard Dawkins calls God ‘an imaginary friend’, and it’s supposed to be 
insulting, but I hear the voices of imaginary people talking in my head all day 
long. I don’t have a problem with it. Also I valued being able to look at the 
world slantwise. I have a suspicion of lockstep and everyone looking in the 
same direction: that’s a key character trait in me.”

Though no longer a believer, Alderman has continued to be fascinated by 
religion. Her third novel,The Liars’ Gospel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/sep/06/liars-gospel-naomi-alderman-review>
, published in 2012, told an alternative life of Christ in which Jesus has 
become the Jewish preacher Yehoshuah, son of Miryam, who may or may not be a 
worker of miracles. It, too, caused offence in some quarters. “I love a bit of 
blasphemy,” she jokes, though there was nothing superficial about her 
engagement with the Bible. “Hanging over the bare bones of Alderman’s 
revisionist narrative, like the perfume of roasting meat over a sacrifice, is 
the poetry of Christian doctrine and myth,” wroteGuardian reviewer Tom Holland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/sep/06/liars-gospel-naomi-alderman-review>
. “Before writing it I felt oppressed by Christianity because it’s responsible 
for so much persecution of Jews; since I wrote it I think of Jesus as my 
friend. I haven’t allowed him into my heart, just into my sitting room,” she 
says. She has two more scripture-wrangling stories in mind, one about St Paul 
and one about Constantine.


In The Power, a convent gives sanctuary to the newly empowered young women 
when the male establishment is hunting them down, and – despite the doctrinal 
problems that they pose – goes on to preserve their stories and to sanctify 
their conclusion that God must be female.

It is no coincidence that the novel seems Atwoodesque 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/margaretatwood> in its evocation of a closed 
order of women. It developed after Alderman was “adopted” by Margaret Atwood in 
a mentoring scheme for young writers, and is dedicated to the novelist and her 
husband Graeme Gibson, “who have shown me wonders”.

The Liars' Gospel by Naomi Alderman – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/sep/06/liars-gospel-naomi-alderman-review>
“The one thing Margaret directly suggested was the idea of a convent,” she 
says. It was a eureka moment which sparked one of the lateral synapse bursts 
that characterise Alderman’s way of being. “I’m really interested in who gets 
to tell the story, and of course the last time we rescued ourselves from dark 
ages, monks were very important. Think how much of what we do is just copying 
out the story again with different characters and a different place, and how 
much we are shaped by that. And God knows, Hollywood is full of repeated 
stories.”

Besides the games and the original fiction, she has also written a Doctor Who 
novel,Borrowed Time, which was published between her second and third books, 
and which she regards as a form of fan fiction. “The Doctor is god, by the way, 
in the same way that Apollo or Hercules are gods or demigods. He has his own 
agenda and has been to the end of time and been present at the creation of life 
on earth.”

Suddenly the morning is over and her afternoon “date” is on the doorstep, with 
whom she is developing ideas for TV. Do come to the book launch, she says, as 
she waves goodbye. “There’ll be hand buzzers and a plasma ball and I’ll be 
wearing one of those LED strips sewn into my sleeves.” If the mornings are for 
fiction and the afternoons are for games, in the evenings who knows what might 
happen.
 