
The creation of the 1.3 million hectare Sierra del Divisor National Park 
<https://news.mongabay.com/2015/11/a-critical-gift-peru-rejoices-as-a-new-national-park-is-born/>
 in the western Amazon in November 2015 generated considerable elation and 
Peruvian and international media coverage. Logging, gold-mining, coca 
cultivation and narco-trafficking were highlighted by some media as ongoing 
threats to the new park, but why such failure to acknowledge what is possibly, 
in the long-term, the most serious threat of all?

The sorry, alarming fact is that approximately 40% of the park is superimposed 
by an oil and gas concession run by a Canadian-headquartered company, Pacific 
Exploration and Production. This is despite Peru’s 1997 Law of Protected 
Natural Areas stating “the extraction of natural resources is not permitted” in 
parks, while 2001 regulations on Protected Natural Areas state “the 
exploitation of natural resources is prohibited.” In addition, Peru’s 1993 
Constitution “obliges” the government “to promote the conservation of 
biological diversity and protected natural areas.”
 Map showing how Pacific’s concession, Lot 135, with its boundaries in black 
and purple, overlaps the Sierra del Divisor National Park, with boundaries in 
red and sky blue. Photograph: Screenshot from July 2016 Perupetro map. 
Peru’s government is currently preparing a “Plan Maestro” - “Master Plan” - 
for the park and deciding how different areas within it will be used. Proposals 
seen by the Guardian, in Environment Ministry (MINAM) and Culture Ministry 
(MINCU) documents, are deeply concerning. While it is encouraging that almost 
the entire south-east part of the park is being proposed as a “strictly 
protected zone” because it overlaps theIsconahua Reserve 
<http://www.survivalinternational.org/news/11271> established in 1998 to 
protect indigenous peoples living in “isolation”, the whole north-east part of 
the park, which overlaps theproposed Yavari-Tapiche Reserve for other 
indigenous peoples in “isolation”, is not due to receive the same level of 
protection and instead is slated to be a “special use zone.”


Why? Compare a MINCU map of the proposed zonification with maps from Peru’s 
oil and gas sector and the reason is obvious: the proposed “special use zone” 
in the north-east corresponds to that part of the park overlapped by the oil 
and gas concession, Lot 135, where Pacific explored in late 2012 and 2013.
 2009 Pacific map showing the company’s interest in operating in part of what 
is now the Sierra del Divisor National Park, marked in dark green. The light 
green lines and black and yellow circles are the “areas of influence” of 
seismic lines and exploratory drilling. Pacific operated in what is now the 
north of the park in 2012 and 2013. Photograph: Screenshot from a Pacific map. 
The north-east is not the only part of the park where oil and gas operations 
are effectively being prioritised. According to MINCU’s map, the very southern 
tip of the park - and therefore the very southern tip of the Isconahua Reserve 
- will also be a “special use zone”, rather than a “strictly protected zone.” 
Why? Again, the reason is obvious: that part of the park and reserve 
corresponds to an oil and gas concession, Lot 138, which was held by Pacific up 
until December 2014.

It is a similar story in the far west of the park where one - admittedly tiny 
- area is also proposed as a “special use zone.” Yet again, the reason is 
obvious: that part of the park corresponds to an oil and gas concession too, 
Lot 31-B, ultimately controlled by the US-based Maple Resources Corporation.

Indeed, the west and north-west of the park fall within what would be the 
Sierra del Divisor Occidental Reserve, effectively proposed in 2007 as another 
off-limits area for indigenous peoples in “isolation” but which, like 
Yavari-Tapiche, has never been established. Only a small part of that proposed 
reserve now inside the park is due to be a “strictly protected zone.”

This zonification is being proposed by SERNANP despite Peru’s 2001 regulations 
clearly stating that a newly-created “protected natural area” must respect the 
“property rights and other acquired rights” of indigenous peoples in 
“isolation.” In addition, the regulations state that it must “promote 
mechanisms to make the objectives and aims of Protected Natural Areas 
compatible with their ancestral uses.”

Responses to the proposed zonification by indigenous organisations in Peru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/peru> have included accusing SERNANP, which 
sits within MINAM and runs Peru’s “protected natural areas”, of backtracking on 
promises made during the administrative process to establish the park and 
“misinforming” indigenous communities in the region. According to a declaration 
made in April this year by ORPIO, an indigenous federation representing more 
than 20 indigenous organisations in Peru’s northern Amazon:

Along with [indigenous organisations] AIDESEP and ORAU we supported the 
creation of the Sierra del Divisor National Park on the condition that the 
rights and protection of the indigenous peoples living there would be 
guaranteed by SERNANP, as much as in the law establishing the park and 
regulations for its management as in practice. . . Contrary to its commitments 
to acknowledge the proposed Yavari Tapiche and Sierra del Divisor Occidental 
Reserves for indigenous peoples in isolation and give them the highest level of 
protection by classifying them as strictly protected zones, SERNANP has omitted 
all references to such peoples and reserves in the law creating the park as 
well as in the proposed zonification, and has even failed to acknowledge the 
proposed reserves in its maps.

AIDESEP, an indigenous federation representing indigenous organisations across 
all Peru’s Amazon, has been extremely critical too. “SERNANP ignores existence 
of indigenous peoples in isolation in order to prioritise “economic rights”,” 
ran the title of an AIDESEP statement summarising ORPIO’s April declaration.

The very north of the park also overlaps an area considered by Matsés 
indigenous people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/andes-to-the-amazon/2014/nov/28/brazil-javari-valley-threatened-peruvian-oil-tribes>
 to be part of their territory. A statement released in April by Matsés from 
both Peru and Brazil said they reject any kind of oil and gas operations and 
demand Lot 135 is annulled. It also said the Matsés confirm the presence of 
indigenous peoples in “isolation” in the Yavari-Tapiche Reserve and claim the 
Brazilian government’s National Indian Foundation (FUNAI) has evidence of them 
- and that as a result the two governments, Peru’s and Brazil’s, should 
coordinate.

“Considering that part of the Sierra del Divisor National Park is the 
ancestral territory of the Matsés and peoples in isolation, we urge that the 
park’s Plan Maestro and zonification respects the presence of such peoples in 
the area proposed for the Yavari-Tapiche Reserve, as well as respecting the 
right of the Matsés’s traditional use of this zone and prohibiting activities 
by third parties,” the Matsés statement read. “We urge that the future control 
posts in the park in the River Yaquerana basin are run exclusively by the 
Matsés.”

More recently, in July, ORPIO took legal action against MINCU, filing a case 
with the Superior Court of Justice in Lima. According to ORPIO, MINCU is 
violating 2007 regulations by moving too slowly to create the proposed 
Yavari-Tapiche Reserve and four others, and, in the meantime, failing to 
“implement the necessary mechanisms and measures” to protect the indigenous 
peoples in “isolation” living there.

Asked to respond to the indigenous organisations’ accusations, SERNANP’s 
Mariela Huachillo told the Guardian that they plan “to implement the necessary 
mechanisms and measures to guarantee the protection of indigenous peoples in 
isolation and initial contact.” She says that national parks are intended to 
protect “cultural characteristics” “associated” with “intangible” eco-systems, 
that no “new rights” can be granted to exploit natural resources, and that the 
park will be monitored and protected from outsiders.

“However, SERNANP cannot impose restrictions, through the zonification, on 
other sectors for which it is not responsible,” Huachillo says.

According to Huachillo, SERNANP is developing the Plan Maestro “with the 
financial support” of CEDIA, a Peruvian NGO. CEDIA’s Lelis Rivera told the 
Guardian the funds have been provided by the US-based Rainforest Trust, and 
that, while his NGO has provided “technical and financial support”, the Plan 
Maestro is ultimately “the responsibility of SERNANP.” He says that the 
proposed zonification emerged from the administrative process establishing the 
park and can be traced back to 2012, that local indigenous communities agreed 
to the zonification, and that both AIDESEP and MINCU have been, from the start, 
part of the Ad Hoc Commission to develop the Plan Maestro and as a result the 
existence of the proposed reserves and the protection of the indigenous peoples 
in “isolation” “is being taken into account.”

“The zonification comes with conditions, rules and laws which justify each 
type of zone, what you can and can’t do where, and what are the special 
considerations for each space,” Rivera told the Guardian.

Just a few days after the park was created the US-based Andes Amazon Fund 
(AAF) announced it would provide $1 million, over five years, to help SERNANP 
to protect the park. AAF’s Enrique Ortiz told the Guardian the money, none of 
which has been disbursed yet, will not be spent “on the development of the 
Master Plan or zoning”, but that it will be spent on “protection activities” 
although they “are still working out exactly what those will be.”

“The zoning is a responsibility of SERNANP and we are not involved in it,” 
Ortiz says. “We would certainly believe that SERNANP should address those 
concerns of the indigenous organizations.”

But will SERNANP do so? Can the proposed zonification be improved? Can the 
Rainforest Trust, given that it is providing funds, wield any influence?

SERNANP’s Huachillo effectively dodged those first two questions, saying 
instead that the establishment of the park didn’t prohibit the Yavari-Tapiche 
and Sierra del Divisor Occidental Reserves from being created. CEDIA’s Rivera’s 
answer was more encouraging: “The law states that SERNANP can change the 
zonification at any moment, if reality requires it, for example, if an acquired 
right is annulled or a reserve for the indigenous people in isolation is 
established.”

Pacific told the Guardian it disagrees that the north-east of the park is not 
being proposed as a “strictly protected zone” because it is overlapped by its 
concession.

“Pacific does not accept that part of the park could eventually not be 
considered a protected zone simply because part of it is assigned to [our 
company] under block 135,” says Pacific’s Melissa Mackie. “We have sculpted our 
operations based on the existence of these environmental restrictions.”

Pacific signed the contract for Lot 135 in 2007 - for 30 years for oil or 40 
years for gas. A map sent to the Guardian purportedly showing proposed 
exploration suggests the company wants to operate inside the park, although 
Mackie says, “Block 135 is in force majeure and we are currently not developing 
any activity there. There is no exploratory drilling planned for 2016.”
 A map purportedly showing Pacific’s interest in exploring in the northern 
part of the Sierra del Divisor National Park, marked with green stripes. 
Photograph: Screenshot from a Pacific map. 
Recent public statements in Peru make it clear that the Sierra del Divisor 
National Park is far from the only national park that the government and oil 
and gas companies are eyeing. Newspapers El Comercio and Gestion reported that 
the government, under new president Pedro Pablo Kuczynski, will “revise” the 
1997 Law on Protected Natural Areas in order to promote oil and gas operations, 
while the president of Perupetro said in an interview with Gestion on 10 August 
that laws must be changed to permit operations in part of the Bahuaja Sonene 
National Park in particular and in “reserved areas” in general. Following that 
came a statement by the Peruvian Hydrocarbons Society calling for legal changes 
and claiming oil and gas operations are “compatible” with “protected natural 
areas”, and then an interview on Peru’s most popular radio station, RPP, with 
the new Environment Minister, Elsa Galarza, also talking up the compatibility 
of hydrocarbon operations with “protected natural areas.”

The Sierra del Divisor National Park is considered a unique part of the Amazon 
basin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/andes-to-the-amazon/2015/jul/29/peru-stalling-new-national-park-unique-amazon-mountain-range>
 and home to a tremendous range of flora and fauna, including jaguars and pumas.

Rainforest Trust did not respond to questions from the Guardian about the 
proposed zonification, but said instead that its work helps to protect 
“threatened tropical forests and endangered wildlife by partnering with local 
and community organizations in and around vulnerable areas.”

“Our unique, cost-effective conservation model for protecting endangered 
species has been implemented successfully for over 25 years,” says Rainforest 
Trust’s Marc Ford. “Our partners work closely with their national governments 
and local communities to formally establish reserves protecting the land.”




 