
Key performances of the National Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> of Scotland's Edinburgh Festival 
show,Caledonia, were almost sold out within two hours of the box office opening 
to the public yesterday. Alistair Beaton's take on the 1698 credit crunch that 
preceded union with England promises to tell "the story of a small, poor 
country mistaking itself for a place that is both big and rich".

Though nationalists may take issue with this portrayal of history, there is a 
clear appetite for the show directed byAnthony Neilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/anthonyneilson>, whose Wonderful World of 
Dissociawas a previous hit for the controversial company.

Although Caledonia is a historical play, the decision to showcase yet another 
contemporary work has fuelled an increasingly angry debate about the National 
Theatre of Scotland's lack of interest in past works by Scots playwrights. 
Critics claim the company is more interested in doing its own work than classic 
Scots plays.

A backlash from defenders – including playwright David Greig – paints the 
critics as racist "little Scotlanders" who object to the fact that most of the 
NTS senior management are English.

One of the most outspoken NTS critics, Paul Henderson Scott, said: "No one who 
knows me could say that I am anti-English. I admire the English. My complaint 
is that the people who are running our national theatre aren't all that 
interested in the Scots language or in Scots plays. In fact, I think they 
rather look down upon it."

Scott said he was disappointed that Vicky Featherstone, the artistic director 
of the NTS, has indicated she is not interested in reviving Sir David Lyndsay's
Ane Pleasant Satyre of the Thrie Estaitis.

Professor Ian Brown, a former drama director of the British Arts Council, gave 
Scott partial support recently when he argued that NTS management places too 
much emphasis on contemporary "total theatre" which breaks down the traditional 
narrative of drama. "Of course, some of the earlier internationally important 
Scottish texts offer challenges, but any director of quality would want to take 
those on for a modern generation."

The current debate was started by the commentator Alan Taylor who, in an 
essay, accused Featherstone of an attitude towards Scots drama that was 
"disrespectful, insensitive and crass".

The head of the Scots Language Society, David Purves, weighed in, alleging 
that the NTS had been using government money to "undermine" the use of Scots.

In its defence, the NTS argues that it has staged performances of past work, 
including Liz Lochhead'sMary Queen of Scots Got Her Head Chopped Off. It is 
currently rehearsing a new adaption of JM Barrie'sPeter Pan by David Greig.

Greig defended Featherstone, urging Scott and others to refrain from "cheap 
catcalling and daft criticism".

Drama critics have also come to the defence. Scotland's foremost critic, Joyce 
McMillan, said: "I'm at a loss. How people can say the NTS never does anything 
in Scots is beyond me. At least three-quarters of what they do has a strong 
Scottish voice."
 