
Most of the UK’s national newspaper websites saw their digital traffic slide 
in July followinga record-breaking month in June around the Brexit vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/21/newspaper-websites-traffic-brexit-independent-guardian-mirror>
.

Mail Online saw average daily browsers fall by 1.2% to below 15 million, while 
the Guardian saw a 6.9% fall in browsers, taking it back below 10 million, 
according to the latest Audit Bureau of Circulations figures published on 
Thursday.

The Telegraph and Independent sites saw even bigger falls, with the Telegraph 
down by 7.6% to 5.2 million browsers and the Independent down by 8.9% to just 
under 4 million. Traffic at the Express and the Sun also declined.

Though the record month for news websites in June set a high bar for newspaper 
websites, traffic could also have been affected by a change in Facebook’s 
algorithm at the end of June that prioritised posts from friends rather than 
publishers’ pages.


Only the Mirror, Metro and Daily Star saw traffic rise during the month. The 
Mirror site was up by almost 5% to 5.3 million unique browsers a day.

However, the real bright spot for Mirror owner Trinity Mirror was its network 
of regional sites. The figures for the first time include sites from Local 
World, the newspaper group acquired by Trinity in October last year, driving 
the number of average daily browsers up almost 60% to 3.9m. The network on its 
own now attracts almost as many browsers as the Independent, and combined with 
the company’s national titles provides an audience of 8.9 million.

Mirror Online editorial director Pete Picton said: “Back-to-back record months 
for Mirror Online is a fantastic achievement, testament to the team’s excellent 
reporting during an extraordinary period of news.

“It’s pleasing that Mirror Online is a source for a variety of news, with no 
single topic propelling us to the record number in July. Instead, we saw 
consistent big audiences spread across a number of stories.”
 