
A rift between the US and Pakistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan>
 appears to be widening at the Nato summit in Chicago – a dangerous development 
that could undermine Barack Obama's hopes for an orderly withdrawal from 
Afghanistan.

The US has said repeatedly that Pakistan holds the key to the future of the 
region but relations between Obama and PresidentAsif Ali Zardari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/asif-ali-zardari> have deteriorated in a 
standoff over supply routes to Afghanistan.

Pakistan closed the routes after a US air strike killed two dozen Pakistani 
troops in November.

Obama is refusing to see Zardari, possibly because he arrived in Chicago 
without a deal in his pocket on reopening the Pakistan-Afghanistan border to US 
transport. A White House spokesman said no bilateral meeting between Obama and 
Zardari at theNato <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nato> summit was 
scheduled.

Instead Pakistan is making a series of demands in return for reopening the 
supply routes, including a review of the US policy of drone attacks against 
targets inside Pakistan and a public apology for the killing of its troops.

Zardari was invited late to the two-day Nato summit, which will be dominated 
on Monday by discussion of the withdrawal of international forces from 
Afghanistan by 2014 and the retention of a modest armed presence in the county 
for a decade after that.

The Obama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> had high hopes that 
Zardari would arrive in Chicago prepared to announce the opening of supply 
routes essential to Nato. Zardari, in talks with the US secretary of state, 
Hillary Clinton, made a series of demands, offering to reopen the supply routes 
only if the US was prepared to pay a higher charge for each vehicle using it, 
doubling the tariff from $250 to $500 per vehicle. Sources later said Pakistan 
may be demanding up to $5,000 per vehicle. Zardari also wants a public apology 
for the killings.

The fact that Zardari had to settle for a meeting with Clinton rather than the 
president is in itself a snub.

General John Allen, the US commander in Afghanistan, told reporters at a 
briefing: "There have been some very positive indications of late with the 
government in Islamabad about an interest in entering into negotiations, which 
I think you're all aware of, to open the ground line of communications. I can't 
tell you when that will occur – obviously sooner is better than later."

A Pakistan presidential spokesman said Zardari told Clinton he wanted "to find 
a permanent solution to the drone issue as it not only violated our sovereignty 
but also inflamed public sentiments due to innocent civilian casualties". The 
US is using drone attacks on suspected al-Qaida and Taliban members.

The Obama administration is angry over the demand for increased payments given 
the level of aid America is already giving to Pakistan. US officials frequently 
portray Pakistan as pivotal to a peaceful resolution of the Afghanistan 
conflict.

The Nato summit is on course to agree details of a phased withddrawal of the 
130,000 international troops over the next two and a half years and to announce 
millions in dollars to maintain Afghan forces after 2014.

Pakistan has a crucial role in Afghanistan because of its close ties to the 
Taliban and other insurgent groups challenging the Afghanistan government.

Pakistan will regard it as a humiliation that Obama refused to grant Zardari a 
bilateral meeting, particularly as he met President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan 
in Chicago on Sunday an hour before the Nato summit opened.

The Obama administration has expressed regret over the killing of the Pakistan 
troops but is reluctant to issue an apology, concerned this will be portrayed 
by Republicans as a sign of weakness.

The Nato secretary general, Anders Fogh Rasmussen, said on Sunday that Nato 
realised it could not solve Afghanistan's problems without including Pakistan 
in the solution. He expressed hope the supply route issue would be resolved 
soon.

With the route through Pakistan closed, Nato has had to use supply routes to 
the north of Afghanistan, which are slower and more costly.

The White House national security spokesman, Ben Rhodes, asked at a press 
conference if Zardari had gone to Chicago under the misconception he would see 
Obama, replied that Obama's schedule was busy. He said issues such as the 
reopening of supply lines were not normally dealt with at presidential level. 
Rhodes said: "The invitation to attend this summit was extended by Nato of 
course. We obviously supported that. It's important for Pakistan to be here 
because as we contemplate the future of the region, they are obviously going to 
be a part of that picture.

"What I would say is, frankly, the types of issues that are being worked 
through about the reopening of the supply lines are not the type of issues that 
get hammered out at the presidential level. These are things that working-level 
negotiating teams sit down and address."

Rhodes did not anticipate a bilateral meeting between Zardari and Obama.
 