
Aaron Alexis, the former US navy reservist who shot dead 12 employees at a 
Washington military base last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/20/aaron-alexis-washington-navy-yard-shooter>
, was granted a secret-level security clearance even after an FBI database 
search revealed he had apparently lied on his application form, about an arrest.

An internal inquiry has established that when Alexis first enlisted, in June 
2007, he declared on a security questionnaire that he had never been arrested. 
However, a fingerprint check on an FBI database revealed thathe had been 
arrested three years previously, in Seattle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/17/washington-naval-yard-shooting-suspect-arrested-guns>
.

He was still granted a special security clearance, after attending an 
interview and claiming that he did not think he needed to declare the arrest. 
Alexis provided only a partial explanation of the incident in Seattle, in which 
he is now known to have used a gun to shoot the tyres of car belonging to a 
construction worker.

A summary of the quick-turnaround navy inquiry – one of three internal reviews 
announced after Alexis's killing spree at the Washington navy yard seven days 
ago – was provided to reporters by a navy official on Monday. The official was 
not authorised to go on the record because he was providing a detailed 
breakdown of Alexis's time in the military, between 2007 and 2011.

Defence officials have previously acknowledged that several "red flags" were 
missed in Alexis's background, allowing him to achieve and retain a secret 
security clearance and work as a navy contractor despite a string of 
police-related and behavioral problems.

The inquiry raises questions for both the navy, which granted Alexis 
security-level clearance, and the Office of Personnel Management (OPM), the 
federal agency responsible for conducting background checks on government 
workers. It was revealed last week that OPM had contracted out at least one of 
Alexis's background checksto USIS, a Virginia-based company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/19/aaron-alexis-background-checks>. 

The assessment of Alexis's suitability for security clearance appears to have 
overlooked the crucial details of the incident in Seattle, which occurred in 
2004. Alexis later told police he had shot the tyres of the construction 
worker's car after an "anger-fuelled" blackout. He was charged with malicious 
mischief, but the charge was later dismissed.

The Seattle police report which documented the incident did not feature in the 
OPM investigation, which was triggered after the FBI database revealed that 
Alexis had been arrested over an incident he failed to declare on his security 
questionnaire. Instead, it appears to have been based primarily upon an account 
of the Seattle incident provided by Alexis after he was called to an interview 
to explain himself. Detailing Alexis's side of the story, the OPM report says 
Alexis had an altercation with the construction worker "and retaliated by 
deflating [his] tyres". There is no mention of him having used a firearm.

In his interview, Alexis said he had chosen not to declare the arrest in 
Seattle on his application form, as required, because the charge had by then 
been dismissed. He also said his lawyer in Seattle had told him the incident 
would be removed from his record. However, one question on the application form 
specifically asks whether an individual has been arrested in the previous seven 
years, irrespective of charge or conviction.

"The subject committed this offense because he was retaliating for being 
intimidated by the male person," the OPM report concluded. "The subject does 
not intend to repeat this type of behavior because he would avoid any 
confrontation and notify authorities if a similar situation were to occur in 
the future."
 Aaron Alexis worked for Fleet Logistics Support Squadron 46. Photograph: 
Kristi Suthamtewakul/Reuters 
Months later, after reviewing that OPM report – but not the Seattle police 
report – the navy granted Alexis secret-level security clearance. There was no 
reference to the shooting incident, or to the the failure by Alexis to declare 
his arrest. The only caveat to the security clearance was a reference to his 
poor credit history.

Although Alexis's work in Fleet Logistics Support Squadron 46 did not require 
secret-level security clearance, new recruits are often put through the process 
in case they should need it in the future. Military security clearances of the 
kind granted to Alexis are primarily designed to detect whether a recruit is 
susceptible to disloyalty or bribery from an enemy force.

The clearance lasted 10 years and therefore applied when, in 2012, a year 
after leaving the navy reserves, Alexis obtained a job as an IT contractor 
working on navy installations. The official who briefed reporters on Monday 
said he could not say "definitively" whether Alexis would have been denied a 
secret-level clearance had the navy known that he had lied in in his 
application.

The navy official said the police report of the incident in Seattle and the 
version produced by the OPM after interviewing Alexis "depict two very 
different events". The inquiry has recommended that all future OPM background 
checks "include any available police documents", rather than simply relying on 
the account given by the person applying for clearance.

The inquiry, which was into Alexis's service record and performance during his 
three years in the navy, also established that his commander was on the cusp of 
throwing him out of the navy in late 2010, after he was arrested over a second 
firearm incident, in which he fired a bullet into the apartment of a neighbour 
in Fort Worth, Texas, after a dispute over noise.

Alexis's commander's legal officer wrote up a memo recommending Alexis be 
removed from the navy, but the letter was shelved after a decision not to bring 
charges against him. Alexis had told police he had discharged his gun by 
accident while cleaning it.

Alexis left the navy of his own accord. He requested to leave the toward the 
end of 2010, under a scheme designed to downsize sections of the military 
considered to be overmanned. He was honorably discharged in January 2011, after 
telling commanders he wanted to go to college.
 