
The man responsible for Monday's deadly rampage at the Washington navy yard 
was a subcontractor and former reservist who was arrested at least twice in the 
past for gun-related offences.

Aaron Alexis <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/aaron-alexis>, 34, was 
discharged from the navy in 2011 after an incident in which an upstairs 
neighbour complained that he had shot into the floor of her apartment.

But Alexis restored his connections with the navy when a professional services 
company subcontracted byHewlett-Packard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/hewlettpackard> employed him on a navy IT 
project. His ID badge gained him access to the navy yard base on Monday, the 
FBI said.

According to the US navy, Alexis, whose home was listed as New York City, 
enrolled in the reserves in 2007. He was a navy aviation electrician's mate 
third class from 1 February 2008 until he was discharged on 31 January 2011. He 
is listed as having received the national defense service medal and the global 
war on terrorism service medal.

In 2010, while he was based at Fort Worth in Texas, he was arrested after 
discharging a firearm. In 2004, police inSeattle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/seattle> questioned him after what they 
described as an "anger-fuelled shooting" involving the car of a construction 
worker.

Seattle police said on Monday that during their inquiries into the 2004 
incident, Alexis's father reported that he suffered from "anger management 
problems associated with PTSD, and that Alexis had been an active participant 
in rescue attempts on September 11, 2001".

The statement went on: "Following his arrest, Alexis told detectives he 
perceived he had been 'mocked' by construction workers the morning of the 
incident, and said they had 'disrespected him'. Alexis also claimed he had an 
anger-fueled 'blackout' and could not remember firing his gun at the victims' 
vehicle until an hour after the incident.

"Alexis also told police he was present during 'the tragic events of September 
11, 2001' and described 'how those events had disturbed him'," the police 
statement said.

According to a Texas police report, Alexis was arrested in September 2010 on 
suspicion of discharging a firearm in a municipality, but not formally charged.

The police report from the time states that an officer was dispatched to Orion 
at Oak Hill, a large, gated apartment complex in west Fort Worth, after a woman 
called the police and said that she believed someone had fired a shot into her 
apartment.

According to the report, the woman was "visibly shaken up". She said that 
Alexis was her downstairs neighbour, and that he had "called the police several 
times on her for being loud". The woman reported that Alexis had confronted her 
in the parking lot about making too much noise.

The report adds that the woman told the officer that she was "terrified" of 
Alexis and believed that the shot had been fired intentionally. The report 
states that the officer knocked on Alexis's door but did not receive a 
response. He only emerged after the officer called the fire department to get 
them to forcibly enter the property.

Alexis claimed to have discharged the gun accidentally, the report says. "He 
said that he was trying to clean his gun while cooking and that his hands were 
slippery," the witer of the report says. "He told me that he began to take the 
gun apart when his hands slipped and pulled the trigger discharging a round 
into the ceiling."

In both instances, Alexis was not charged. Court records reviewed by the 
Associated Press how he was released on the condition he not have contact with 
any of the workers. In Texas, it was determinded that Alexis had discharged his 
gun by accident.

After leaving the reserves, Alexis worked as a waiter and delivery driver at 
the Happy Bowl Thai restaurant in White Settlement, a suburb of Fort Worth, 
according to Afton Bradley, a former co-worker, quoted by the Associated Press.

Having travelled to Thailand, Alexis learned some Thai and could speak to Thai 
customers in their native language. "He was a very nice person," Bradley said 
in a phone interview. "It kind of blows my mind away. I wouldn't think anything 
bad at all."

A former acquaintance, Oui Suthametewakul, said Alexis lived with him and his 
wife from August 2012 to May 2013 in Fort Worth, but that they had to part ways 
because he was not paying his bills. Alexis was a "nice guy," Suthametewakul 
said, though he sometimes carried a gun and would frequently complain about 
being the victim of discrimination.

Suthametewakul said Alexis had converted to Buddhism and prayed at a local 
Buddhist temple. Ty Thairintr, a congregant at Wat Budsaya, a temple in Fort 
Worth, told the AP: "We are all shocked. We are nonviolent. Aaron was a very 
good practitioner of Buddhism. He could chant better than even some of the Thai 
congregants."

Thairintr said that Alexis told him and others at the temple that he had taken 
a job as a contractor and he indicated to them he was going to go to Virginia. 
He last saw Alexis five weeks ago. "He was a very devoted Buddhist. There was 
no tell-tale sign of this behaviour," Thairintr said.

Hewlett-Packard confirmed that Alexis worked for a subcontractor. It said in a 
statement: "Aaron Alexis was an employee of a company called 'The Experts,' a 
subcontractor to an HP Enterprise Services contract to refresh equipment used 
on the navy marine corps intranet (NMCI) network. HP is cooperating fully with 
law enforcement as requested."

It said the company was "deeply saddened" by the incident. "Our thoughts and 
sympathies are with all those who have been affected," the company said.

On its website <http://www.expertsit.com/home/experts-division_government.php>
, The Experts, whose headquarters are in Alexandria, Virginia, describes itself 
as providing "innovative and mission-critical IT, engineering and litigation 
professional services for federal, state and local governments and departments".

It said in a statement: "The Experts would like to express our deepest 
condolences and sympathies regarding the incident that occurred at the DC naval 
yards. We are actively cooperating with the FBI and other authorities in 
relation to the investigation on the suspect. Any additional information we 
have will be shared accordingly."

On Monday night, officers from the New York Police Department cordoned off a 
section of the tree-lined street in the Bedford-Stuyvesant neighbourhood of 
Brooklyn, where family of Alexis lives in a brownstone apartment.

A huddle of NYPD officers stood in the road outside the three-storey building, 
watched by a small crowd of reporters and TV crews. Earlier in the day, Anthony 
Little, the brother-in-law of the uspect, emerged from the house and told NBC4 
the family were "distraught". He said: "It's a shocking experience. Nobody 
expected this. No-one saw it coming. No-one knew anything. So all of this is 
just shocking."

Little, who is married to Alexis's sister, said he had never met him.

Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University, which offers online courses in aviation 
and aerospace, confirmed that Alexis was enrolled as an online student via its 
Fort Worth campus, started classes in July 2012 and had been pursuing a 
bachelor's of science in aeronautics. "We are cooperating fully with 
investigating officials," the university said.

The Associated Press contributed to this report
 