
An abuse survivor received no compensation from the Department of Veterans’ 
Affairs, even though his legal firm was awarded $70,000.

Michael Lysewycz, an assistant secretary at Defence Legal, told the child 
abuse royal commission on Monday it could find no way to compensate Glen 
Greaves, who was raped at HMAS Leeuwin in 1971, because he was already on a 
total disability pension for post-traumatic stress after Vietnam.

Greaves told the commission last week he had had to sign a deed of release 
that he would not pursue a further claim and if he did not sign his lawyers 
would not be paid.

Adair Donaldson, who led the Shine Lawyer team at the time of the negotiation, 
has told the commission that condition was never put to Greaves.

Former RAAF cadet accuses child abuse royal commission of a cover-up
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/21/former-raaf-cadet-accuses-child-abuse-royal-commission-of-a-cover-up>
On Monday Lysewycz said it was never a condition of the final agreement under 
which Greaves received an apology and signed a deed of release, but got no 
compensation.

He confirmed that Shine lawyers were paid $70,000 towards costs, but said this 
was because negotiations were long and complex and the Greaves case was a test 
case which “assisted a broader range of cases”.

Lysewycz said ADF lawyers in negotiation explored how to get around a 
“claw-back” provision which would have resulted in Greaves having to pay back 
the $54,000 a year disability pension he was receiving from the Department of 
Veterans’ Affairs for PTSD after Vietnam.

But there was no way around it because of complex rules and procedures.

In his evidence Greaves told of horrific abuse at the Perth naval training 
base.

He was penetrated with a broomstick on three occasions in his first six weeks 
there and told to “piss off” and “harden up” when he reported the assaults.

Lysewcycz said since the Greaves case the ADF had moved to a different model 
that did not require the deed of release, which was standard procedure at the 
time.

He agreed with the commission chair, Peter McClellan, that when Greaves 
finished negotiations with the ADF “he had less by way of rights than when he 
entered the mediation”.

McClellan asked: “What possible justification was there for that?”

Lysewcycz: “In hindsight, there wasn’t.”

The witness, who is defence’s representative on a commonwealth taskforce 
examining policy options from the commission’s recommendations on redress and 
civil litigation, said the matters could be revisited in light of evidence at 
the hearing.
 