
Police on Tuesday identified all 12 people killed by former navy reservist 
Aaron Alexis <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/aaron-alexis> in the 
Washington navy yard. They were aged between 46 and 73, and all were civilian 
staff rather than uniformed personnel. It was unclear whether Alexis had 
deliberately targeted civilian employees.

Michael Arnold, 59, of Lorton, Virginia

Navy veteran Michael Arnold worked on a team that designed vessels including 
amphibious assault ships. He retired from active duty in the navy as either a 
commander or lieutenant commander, and had been stationed in Pearl Harbor. His 
uncle told the AP that Arnold was building his first personal airplane at home.

He is survived by his wife Jolanda, to whom he had been married for more than 
30 years, and has two adult sons, Eric and Christopher. ''He was a loving son 
of his mother and his wife, and great father to his kids,'' said his uncle, 
Steve Hunter. ''It's tragic. How can you get up in the morning and go to work 
and have that happen? How do bad things like that happen to good people?''

He had visited his 80-year-old mother on Labor Day weekend in his home state 
of Michigan.

Martin Bodrog, 54, of Annandale, Virginia

Martin Bodrog was father to three daughters between the ages of 16 to 23 and 
was married to his wife, Melanie, for 25 years.

The New Jersey native graduated from the US Naval Academy in 1981 and went on 
to work as a surface warfare officer for 22 years. At the time of his death, he 
was a senior analyst. In his obituary, his family said he was: "a humble, 
loving father and neighbor" and a "source of great inspiration to his family 
and friends".

The family said he could "frequently be seen in all types of weather, even 
post-blizzard bitter cold, in shorts and his trademark Boston Bruins jersey, 
walking his dog and helping shovel all the driveways of his elderly neighbors."

He was active in the local church, to which he and his family had been going 
for 16 years. The family taught preschool and Bodrog was active in the 
high-school Christian outreach program.

Arthur Daniels, 51, of Southeast, Washington DC

Arthur Daniels was at the navy yard for his job as a subcontractor with a 
company that relocates and installs furniture in federal government buildings.

He has five children and nine grandchildren. His wife Priscilla Daniella told 
the Washington Post 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/special/local/navy-yard-shooting-victims/>
: "He was a good father and hard worker."

"All he did was go to work," said his son Arthur Jr. "That was his only crime."

Sylvia Frasier, 53, of Waldorf, Maryland

The second-youngest of seven children, Sylvia Frasier worked as a 
network-security administrator with Naval Sea Systems Command. Her siblings 
gathered at their parents home on Monday after learning of the shooting and 
hearing nothing about Frasier's whereabouts.

Wendy Edmonds, the youngest of the seven siblings, told the Washington Post 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/special/local/navy-yard-shooting-victims/>
 that the family placed several unanswered calls and voicemails meant for 
families of the victims and military support.

Just before 10pm, two siblings arrived home to tell the family that Sylvia 
Frasier had died.

Kathleen Gaarde, 62, of Woodbridge, Virginia

Financial analyst Kathleen Garde is survived by her two grown children and 
Douglass, her husband of 38 years. In an email to the AP he wrote:

''Today my life partner of 42 years (38 of them married) was taken from me, my 
grown son and daughter and friends. We were just starting to plan our 
retirement activities and now none of that matters. It hasn't fully sunk in yet 
but I know I already dearly miss her.''

Neighbor Patrick Bolton, 31, told the Washington Post he had played with 
Kathleen's son Christopher and was close to the family.

"The mother was just the kindest lady in the world," Bolton said. "I'm not 
even exaggerating. I've never seen her do anything but nice things for people."

John Roger Johnson, 73, of Derwood, Maryland

A neighbor told the Washington Post that John Roger Johnson had lived in the 
neighborhood for more than 30 years and was a civilian who worked for the navy.

"He always had a smile on his face," the neighbor said. "He loved children. He 
loved our grandchildren. No one could ask for a better neighbor."

Johnson's friend and co-worker William Venable told NPR 
<http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.wbur.org%2Fnpr%2F223342140%2Fas-victims-of-the-navy-yard-shootings-are-named-details-emerge&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNGEyJA2Ze89ocqylz0nao-NmJ3Scg>
 that the two had worked together in the IT department.

"I'm a 20-something-year-old black man, and he's a 70-plus-year-old white 
guy," Venable said. "You know, we had zero in common. But we had great 
conversations, and he was a great spirit; it was a spirit that you could 
connect with. He was one of my best friends in that place."

Mary Francis Knight, 51, of Reston, Virginia

Five years ago, Mary Francis Knight moved from North Carolina to Virginia, 
where she taught at a local community college. She had two daughters and worked 
as an information technology contractor inWashington DC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/washington-dc>, and taught at a local 
community college in the area.

"She was a great patriot who loved her country and loved serving the USA," a 
family spokesperson, Theodore Hisey, told North Carolina's WITN-TV. 
<http://www.witn.com/news/headlines/Fayetteville-Woman-Killed-In-Navy-Yard-Shootings-224081411.html?ref=411>

Frank Kohler, 50, of Tall Timbers, Maryland

Frank Kohler was at the navy yard on Monday for a meeting. He leaves two 
daughters and his wife, Michelle, an employee at the Naval Air Station Patuxent 
River.

Kohler was a past president of the Lexington Park, Maryland Rotary Club, his 
former boss at Lockheed Martin, Bob Allen, told the AP. Allen said Kohler was 
an avid golfer and loved to boat and fish.

"A great family man, a Christian, and a great friend," he said. "It just 
doesn't seem possible. I mean, you hear about these things all the time … But 
when you know somebody, it just makes it all the worse … It's a huge loss for 
southern Maryland."

Vishnu Shalchendia Pandit, 61, of North Potomac, Maryland

Vishnu "Kisan" Pandit moved from India to the US in his early 20s and worked 
as a civilian member of the navy. He raised two sons, Siddhesh and Kapil, with 
his wife Anjali.

"Kisan took great pride in being employed by the United States Navy, which he 
very proudly served in various capacities as a civilian for over 25 years," 
Pandit's family wrote in an obituary that one of his sons shared with the 
Washington Post on Tuesday. "Kisan felt extremely privileged to have 
contributed to the superiority of the US Navy and the country that he served."

His family called him "a kind and gentle man who loved his family, friends, 
dog, and job."

Neighbor Mike Honig told the Washington Post that Pandit and his wife lived in 
the neighborhood for more than 20 years. He said Pandit was "a very nice man 
with an Irish setter".

Kenneth Bernard Proctor, 46, of Waldorf, Maryland

Civilian utilities foreman Kenneth Proctor spoke to his ex-wife Evelyn 
Proctor, on Monday morning before going to work, as he did every day.

Evelyn Proctor said her ex-husband did not work in building 197, where the 
shooting took place, but routinely ate breakfast there. He had worked for the 
federal government for 22 years and still resided in Charles County, Maryland, 
where he was born and raised.

Kenneth and Evelyn were high school sweethearts and divorced this year after 
18 years of marriage.

''We were still very close. It wasn't a bitter divorce,'' Evelyn Proctor said. 
''We still talked every day, and we lived 10 minutes away from each other.''

Their son Kenneth Proctor Jr, 17, enlisted in the army and is in basic 
training in Oklahama, and their younger son, Kendull Proctor, is 15.

Gerald L Read, 58, of Alexandria, Virginia

Cathy Read said her husband, Gerald Read, was passionate about his family and 
his job as an information assurance specialist with the Navy Sea Systems 
Command.

He served in the Republic of Korea and at Fort Belvoir in Virginia during the 
wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, where he supervised efforts to supply overseas 
forces.

Gerald and Cathy Read have been married for 35 years and have one daughter and 
three grandchildren. His wife said he was a civil war buff and was often 
accompanied by his black lab, Roderick.

Richard Michael Ridgell, 52, of Westminster, Maryland

A father of two daughters, he worked for the Maryland State Police for 17 
years. He resigned at the rank of corporal.
 