
The US government ordered a clutch of security reviews on Tuesday as 
investigators attempted to find out why a troubled former reservist walked on 
to the oldest military installation in the United States with at least one 
weapon, opened fire and killed 12 people before he was shot dead.

A senior Pentagon official said the defense secretary, Chuck Hagel, intended 
to order a review of physical security and access at all military installations 
across the world. Military leaders were being consulted over the parameters of 
the review, which should be formally announced on Wednesday, the official said.

The White House separately announced a review of security procedures for 
private contractors after it was revealed thatAaron Alexis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/aaron-alexis> obtained clearance to work 
on the base despite having been arrested twice in the past for gun-related 
offences.

Jay Carney, the White House spokesman, said it would be conducted by the 
Office of Management and Budget and examine "standards for contractors and 
employees across federal agencies".

A third inquiry <http://www.navy.mil/submit/display.asp?story_id=76641> was 
announced by the navy secretary, Ray Mabus, who ordered a "rapid review" of 
security at navy and marine corps installations.

The FBI revealed on that Alexis was armed with just a shotgun on Monday 
morning when, acting alone, he entered the military compound using a valid 
security pass and began firing at other civilian contractors.

Valerie Parlave, head of the FBI's field office in Washington, dismissed 
reports Alexis used an AR-15 semi automatic rifle – the weapon used in other 
recent mass shootings in the US. Instead she said Alexs used only the shotgun, 
bought in nearby Virginia, when he entered building 197. "We also believe Mr 
Alexis may have gained access to a handgun once inside the facility and after 
he began shooting," she said.

The FBI is still seeking to determine his motive and Parlave would not comment 
on reports that Alexis was receiving treatment for mental problems. "We 
continue to look into Mr Alexis's past, including his medical and criminal 
histories," she said.

Police named the the 12 victims of the attack  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/17/navy-yard-shooting-victims-identified>
on Tuesday. All were civilian employees aged between 46 and 73. It was unclear 
whether Alexis, 34, had deliberately avoided shooting military personnel.

The metropolitan police department in Washington said Alexis was believed to 
have shot other employees at the compound from the lobby of building 197 to the 
third and fourth floors. He had several firefights with police before being 
killed by armed officers. Police chief Cathy Lanier said the succession of 
firefights lasted between 30 minutes and an hour before he was shot dead.

The company that employed Alexis said on Tuesday that his latest background 
checkrevealed only a minor traffic violation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/17/aaron-alexis-background-check-employer-gun>
. The Experts, a defence contractor, said the check on Alexis was carried out 
three months ago. The company said that had it known of his two arrests for 
gun-related offences, it would not have employed him.

A Virginia gun store and range also said it ran a background check on Alexis 
before selling him a gun and ammunition on Sunday. Sharpshooters Small Arms 
Range said that he passed the check.

In Washington, Hagel joined other military officials to lay a wreath at the 
navy memorial to honour those who died. The wreath was placed next to the 
statue of the Lone Sailor, to represent "all people who have ever served, are 
serving now, or are yet to serve in the United States navy".
 Chuck Hagel lays a wreath at the US navy memorial. Photograph: Keith 
Lane/Corbis 
There was still no clear motive for the killing spree, although a picture was 
emerging of a disturbed individual prone to sometimes angry outbursts, who may 
have been undergoing treatment for mental illness.

Although he was never convicted of a crime, Alexis had a number of encounters 
with police, two of which involved firearms, and had a history of disorderly 
conduct before he was granted an honourable discharge from the navy two years 
ago.

Police in Seattle said Alexis had been arrested in 2004 after shooting out the 
tyres of a car belonging to a worker on a construction site near his home. 
Alexis was said to have acted in an "anger-fuelled blackout", furious about 
where the car was parked.

Authorities in Fort Worth, Texas, said Alexis was arrested in 2010 when he was 
a navy reservist there, after an upstairs neighbour complained he had shot 
through the ceiling of her home. The police report said Alexis had complained 
about noise. He was not charged after police accepted his explanation that he 
had discharged the gun by accident.

The Associated Press reported that the Department of Veterans' Affairs had 
been involved in treating Alexis for a number of mental health issues since 
August. The police and the FBI, which is leading the investigation, declined to 
confirm or deny the report.

However, a number of friends and associates of Alexis suggested he had shown 
unusual behaviour. Gene Denby, a reporter at National Public Radio and a friend 
of Alexis's sister, recalled him apparently behaving strangely "six or seven" 
years ago.

Denby said that Alexis called his sister, incoherent, claiming "people were 
out to get him". Denby said: "She was unnerved, clearly unsettled by it."

There were growing questions over whether he should have been granted a 
security clearance. Thomas Hoshko, the chief executive of The Experts, which is 
headquartered in Florida and has a base in Alexandria, Virginia, said the US 
military granted him a "secret" clearance – providing him with a pass known as 
a common access card – and worked at six or more US military installations in 
July and August. "We had just recently re-hired him. Another background 
investigation was re-run and cleared through the defense security service in 
July 2013," he said.

The work in Washington, focusing on the navy and marine corps intranet, had 
only just begun. The FBI said Alexis had been staying in hotels in the
Washington DC <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/washington-dc> area since 
August 25, and checked into the Residence Inn hotel, near the facility in 
southwest Washington, on September 7.

On Tuesday, police were searching his room at the hotel, and appealing for any 
information that might provide insight into why Alexis opened fire on his 
co-workers.

It remained unclear whether the shootings would reignite the stalled debate in 
Congress over gun control. Calls for action came from an unexpected quarter, 
when the most senior clinician at a hospital that treated victims of the 
shootings broke away from giving updates about their medical conditions to make 
a powerful plea for Americans to eradicate the "evil in our society" that keeps 
her hospital so busy with shooting injuries.

"I would like you to put my trauma center out of business," Janis Orlowski, 
the chief medical officer at Washington hospital center, told reporters in the 
aftermath of the killing. "I would like to not be an expert on gunshots. Let's 
get rid of this. This is not America."

In follow-up comments on Tuesday, Orlowski said her plea had been a 
spontaneous reaction after she observed how similar the shooting injuries had 
been to victims of routine gun crime in Washington.

"I have to say it was direct from my heart," she said in a series of 
television interviews. "I must have poked the underbelly, because I have gotten 
quite a few comments and phone calls and emails and tweets about it."

Weaknesses in the military's system of background checks were further 
highlighted on Tuesday by the publication of adamning report 
<http://www.dodig.mil/pubs/documents/DODIG-2013-134.pdf> into a separate 
programme used for lower-level entry permits.

The report from the defense department's inspector general found that 
cost-cutting and bureaucratic bungles had resulted in a system that failed to 
pick up 52 "convicted felons [who] received routine unauthorized installation 
access, placing military personnel, attendants, civilians in installations at 
an increased security risk." Nine out of ten installations allowed contractors 
temporary access pending the results of background checks.

The Navy's Commercial Access Control System, under fire in the report, was 
designed to speed up routine access for contractors but Aaron Alexis went 
through a higher level of security clearance known as the Common Access Card.

"There is no indication that the findings in the report could have prevented, 
in any way, the tragic shooting at the Navy Yard," said rear admiral John 
Kirby, chief of information for the Navy. "The system they examined is not the 
system through which Mr Alexis gained access. Even if we had followed every 
recommendation in the IG report, we could not have prevented Monday's tragic 
events."
 