
Modern European and Asian people may owe more than skin or hair colour to 
Neanderthal ancestry. Interbreeding 50,000 years ago between two species of 
human may also have bequeathed a sunburn hazard called keratosis, addiction to 
nicotine, and a greater risk of depression.

That the forebears of modern Homo sapiens and the long-extinct Neanderthals 
lived side by side is well known: that they interbred, and that up to 4% of 
modern human DNA is inherited from the first Europeans, was confirmed only in 
2010.

Human-Neanderthal relationships may be at root of modern allergies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jan/07/human-neanderthal-relationships-may-be-at-root-of-modern-allergies>
 US researchers examined a database of 28,000 patients whose biological 
samples had been linked to versions of their medical records. Identities 
remained anonymous but the researchers could see how inheritance linked to 
medical history.

Then, they report in the journal Science 
<http://science.sciencemag.org/cgi/doi/10.1126/science.aad2149>, they matched 
the modern human database against a map of those groups of genes known to have 
been inherited from the big-boned, heavy-browed, red-haired humans whose 
ancestors had moved out of Africa long beforeHomo sapiens, and colonised Ice 
Age Europe.

“Our main finding is that Neanderthal DNA does influence clinical traits in 
modern humans,” said John Capra, an evolutionary geneticist at Vanderbilt 
University in Nashville, Tennessee. “We discovered associations between 
Neanderthal DNA and a wide range of traits, including immunological, 
dermatological, neurological, psychiatric and reproductive diseases.”

Sub-Saharan African peoples do not inherit Neanderthal DNA. The assumption is 
that the Neanderthals left Africa first, had time to adapt to a colder, darker 
and more difficult world, evolved paler skin colour to take advantage of less 
certain sunlight, and developed other traits that might have helped them 
survive changing conditions.

Early modern humans – more gracile, and perhaps quicker to adapt and take 
advantage of their environment – then migrated north from Africa to outpace and 
outlive the first Europeans. But, during the thousands of years the two species 
coexisted, they also interbred.

My Neanderthal sex secret: modern European's great-great grandparent link
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jun/22/my-neanderthal-sex-secret-modern-europeans-great-great-grandparent-link>
And these encounters passed on traits that might have been of some 
evolutionary advantage in an Ice Age world. But in changing conditions, the 
same lengths of inherited DNA contained greater health liabilities as well.

One of these, the researchers think, was a Neanderthal gene variant that 
increases blood-clotting. This would have sealed wounds more quickly, and 
prevented infection more easily. But in a modern western society, 
hyper-coagulation brings other problems, including greater risk for stroke, 
pulmonary embolism and pregnancy complications.

One length of Neanderthal DNA is now linked to increased risk of nicotine 
addiction, and several variants influence the risk of mood disorders, including 
depression. As tobacco was introduced into widespread use in Europe only 400 
years ago, the researchers were surprised at the number of Neanderthal genetic 
variants now associated with modern psychiatric and neurological disorders.

“The brain is incredibly complex, so it is reasonable to expect that 
introducing changes from a different evolutionary path might have negative 
consequences,” said Corinne Simonti, a Vanderbilt doctoral student and the 
study’s first author.
 