
Alexander Payne <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alexander-payne>, the 
director ofThe Descendants, Sideways and About Schmidt, has a new film, Nebraska
. It's simple and brilliant, beautifully nuanced, funny, well acted and 
generous. It's in black and white and begins with an old man walking down the 
side of a highway in cold weather in Billings, Montana. This is Woody Grant (
Bruce Dern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2013/may/24/nebraska-alexander-payne-bruce-dern-video>
), and he's planning to walk to Nebraska to collect his million dollars from a 
sweepstakes notice he's received in the mail. Every American adult has received 
such a notice. Printed like a deed, it says you've won a million bucks. Only in 
the fine print does it say you've won only if your numbers match. It's a trick 
to sell magazine subscriptions.

The movie refuses the idea that Woody's actions come from mental illness, 
dementia or Alzheimer's. When a woman at the sweepstakes office asks David, 
Woody's son, played by Will Forte: "Does he have Alzheimer's or something?", 
David responds: "He just believes stuff that people tell him." She says: 
"That's too bad."

Payne has gone straight for the American throat. Most US literature and cinema 
is driven by despair over money. It seems that Americans have somehow all been 
told something about what they're owed, and that they've believed it.

Think of Raymond Carver <https://www.theguardian.com/books/raymondcarver>'s 
stories; every one of his characters is driven by desperation over money. Earl 
Ober, for instance, inThey're Not Your Husband, is "between jobs" as a 
salesman. His worth is determined externally, through mimetic desire. When two 
men at the counter of a diner find his wife, Maureen, a waitress, undesirable, 
he tries to undo that scene, to make it not have happened. He puts her on a 
diet then returns to the diner to goad other men into saying what they think of 
her now. He's caught by another waitress, though, and in the end all eyes are 
on him, the story reversed, and the waitress asks, "Who is this joker?" and his 
wife responds, "He's a salesman. He's my husband," then goes to "total up his 
check". All of which is to say he's nothing. American fiction looks at the 
emptiness of the American soul when the outward look fails.

This is Payne's subject, this emptiness. Woody had planned to buy a new truck 
and compressor with that million dollars, restoring things lost or never had, 
and he wanted to leave something for his sons, a legacy. At the end of his 
life, he's come face to face with the terror of his utter meaninglessness and 
can look only to money for meaning, because this is all we have in America: 
money with an oblique reference to family. My Uncle Jim, fromNebraska 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/nebraska>, destroyed his life and his 
family's life in pursuit of instant riches through Amway, the pyramid scheme of 
product sales that is so aptly named American Way. He'd had a job with the 
government and a house and pool in a good neighbourhood in a lovely part of 
California but lost it all, went bankrupt, divorced and lived in a trailer 
until his heart ruptured from smoking. Or maybe he'd lost everything first 
through trying to sell real estate and Amway was supposed to be the recovery.

Either way, trying to sell things is how he lost everything. What I remember 
is going goose hunting with him and his friend Big Al, jammed between them in 
the pickup for 10 hours while they brayed and farted and the tape recorder 
blared out the Amway dream, something along the lines of "You can get that 
diamond ring! You can have that Mercedes!" The most uncomfortable part was 
selling to family and friends, since that's how the Amway business works, 
selling to people who don't really want to buy but feel obligated. He wanted to 
get me and my mother under him in the pyramid scheme, running our own arm of 
the business for him.

This relationship between family and money is where Payne's movie really 
sings. Woody's son agrees finally to drive his father to Nebraska to collect 
the winnings, and they stop in Hawthorne for a kind of family reunion. Once the 
family finds out about the money, though – and they won't believe David's 
insistence that there is no money, because of their great despair and need – 
there are some ugly and very funny scenes. What's demanded are essentially 
reparations, because money is supposed to make up for all we suffered and all 
we didn't become. Each of them wants a piece, and family means nothing at all 
beyond this.

Payne's last movie, The Descendants 
<http://www.foxsearchlight.com/thedescendants/>, was also on this theme. A 
family of many siblings that has inherited a huge piece of land in Hawaii wants 
to sell to developers, but one of the heirs, played byGeorge Clooney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/georgeclooney>, holds out and decides not to. 
There's an ugly moment when it becomes clear that family means absolutely 
nothing versus money, and his family becomes his enemy.

How is it we became like this? My falling out with my mother was over money. 
She wanted me to take loans for one part of my sailing business and use them to 
repay her for another part of the business, even though that would have been 
illegal and I wasn't in default on her loan. No amount of screaming on the 
phone between Greece and California could lead to understanding. Later, she 
refused me a very small loan I needed desperately, and I never quite forgave 
her. My heart is as hardened from money as any character's in this movie, and 
my family as damaged. My stepmother's family fell out over money from a will. I 
had a sour relationship with my uncle for many years because I sold him one of 
my father's rifles instead of giving it to him, and my mother had fought with 
him over how he handled my father's estate as executor. It took them probably 
30 years to partially patch that up, enough to be able to smile at my sister's 
wedding and not fight. I'm sure people fight over money in other cultures, too, 
but in America it feels like total decimation, because what else binds us 
together?

All the characters in Flannery O'Connor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/flannery-o-connor>'s stories and William 
Faulkner's stories are just as driven by money and its shadow form, class, but 
are also driven by racist rage, something even worse. Payne doesn't address 
race in his film, so he has only one hand on the American throat. In O'Connor's
Everything That Rises Must Converge, Julian imagines himself educated and free 
of prejudice but really wants a return to the family mansion and its slaves and 
the old south. "He never spoke of it [the old mansion] without contempt or 
thought of it without longing." His mother keeps reminding him that he's a 
Godhigh (the ironic family name). They're in "reduced circumstances", but can 
still remember "who they are". Julian is filled with rage because he knows they 
are, in fact, nothing now without the money.

Only money can truly amaze or change things. After Woody has been cheered in 
the bar of his hometown for his winnings, he asks his son: "Did you see the 
look on those fellers' faces?" And he has to repeat it, he's so struck. This is 
what he wanted, to be made something. He's offered publicity in the local paper 
and told that they're all proud of him. In a culture that is a wasteland, in 
which more than half of Americans don't read a single book in a year, money can 
become both accomplishment and self, and one almost literally doesn't exist 
without it.
 The emptiness of men: Will Forte (right) as David Grant, visiting relatives. 
Photograph by Merie W Wallace 
The men in Nebraska have no idea why they're alive or what they were supposed 
to do or be. The women have a better sense, but this film is focused on the 
emptiness of men. At the family reunion, they all sit watching a football game 
on a Sunday, all blank-faced. The only talk is of an old car one of them used 
to own, from 1979. One brother presents a thesis: "They don't make 'em like 
that any more. Those cars will run for ever. Say, whatever happened to it?" His 
brother responds, "It stopped running." The first brother says, "Yeah, they'll 
do that."

David asks his father about marrying his mother: "You must have been in love, 
at least at first." "It never came up." David has been hesitating about getting 
married, his girlfriend has moved out now, tired of waiting, tired of nothing, 
and his father has little wisdom to offer after a life lived unconsciously.

I won't say what happens in the end, except that the son lets his father have 
some dignity, to not be small and nothing, and that this can only be 
accomplished through buying things and then letting others see what's owned. 
The movie is only marginally a father-and-son story, but it had me wondering 
whether all such stories are about letting the father become something. It also 
had me wondering whether dignity is possible in American culture. The American 
sense of dignity comes from family values, but American families dissolve 
instantly when you add money; so if the only dignity left is money, is that 
enough?

Nebraska <http://www.nebraskamovie.com/intl/uk/> opens nationwide on Friday 6 
December

David Vann <https://www.theguardian.com/books/david-vann> is the author of a 
collection of stories, Legend of a Suicide, and the novelsCaribou Island 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780670918447>
 and Dirt. His third novel, Goat Mountain, came out in October.
 