
Neil Black hailed his record-breaking Great Britain team in Zurich on Sunday 
night by saying they had “smashed it” by bringing home a record number of 
medals at a major championships.

Five golds and three bronze medals on the final day elevated GB to the top of 
the medal table with 12 golds – eclipsing the nine won in Budapest in 1998 and 
Split in 1990. Their tally of 23 medals overall – the same as France who won 
fewer golds – bettered the record of 19 from Barcelona in 2010.

“Our athletes have converted it, smashed it, and we are all absolutely excited 
and chuffed to bits with it,” the BritishAthletics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> performance director said. “We 
came here wanting to be competitive and we have converted in so many 
circumstances where people had genuine medal prospects. It is unbelievable.”

Black admitted that from the moment Jo Pavey, the 40-year-old mother of two, 
won her gold in the 10,000m on Tuesday, he was constantly revising his targets 
upwards. “As the championships wenton, we went through the questions of ‘What’s 
the potential?’ and ‘Can we convert?” he said. “And as the days went on, the 
conversions were maintained.We started to realise that, if we did keepit up, we 
had the chance of becoming the top country in Europe and that is just brilliant.

“It is just great to see athletes performing strongly and those who had medal 
prospects convert. We all saw them looking confident, going out and holding 
their heads high competing for Great Britain.”

Black, who took over from Charles van Commenee after London 2012, also paid 
tributes to his athletes for their performances on what he called an 
“incredibly special Sunday”. “Seeing Mo celebrating on the track afterwards was 
terrific, and then there was the relays, and the 4x100m girls setting a British 
record,” he said. “You have to understand the effort, the pain and the trials 
and tribulations behind it. To get these guys confident, to get them slick has 
not been easy. They should be really happy and they should enjoy it for a few 
days, and just think, ‘We smashed it’.”

Black is aware that there is still plenty of work to be done as his young team 
prepare for next year’s world championships in Beijing and the Rio 2016 
Olympics. “Yes, these are the European Championships and we all accept that 
these are European as opposed to global, but there were still some seriously 
impressive results. I’m just chuffed. I think it’s incredible.”

Mo Farah <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mo-farah>, one of the expected 
British successes on the final day, also paid tribute to his team-mates. “This 
is a great team, with a great atmosphere,” he said. “It started off with Jo 
Pavey winning her gold medal and we have been collecting the medals ever since, 
fighting with the French.

“We have got a really young team, too,” he added. “What impressed me the most 
was the attitude ofAdam Gemili <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-gemili> 
– the way he looks at athletics, how humble he is, the fact that he just gets 
on with it. Someone from that age, coming from football – I’ve been running for 
12 years, and at 31 I’m only now at the top of my game. So Adam’s attitude is 
very impressive.”

Speaking about his individual victory, Farah admitted that had added some 
gloss on a frustrating year: “This means a lot for me for everything I went 
through this year, gone through the marathon, getting ill,” he said. “If you’d 
asked me two weeks ago I was so down and didn’t know where I was.”

The Olympic champion Greg Rutherford, who posted the two longest leaps in the 
men’s long jump to add European success to his Commonwealth Games gold, said he 
was not surprised by the team’s success.

“If you look at the athletes that we’ve got, it’s expected to a certain 
degree,” he said. “People like Martyn Rooney I completely take my hat off to. 
He’s had a lot of knocks and things go wrong for him over the years. We were on 
the European juniors together and everybody knew he was good enough to do it 
but it never went right.

“Now he’s come away with two gold medals in a European Championships. Things 
like that and top performances from so many people out there, it’s been 
fantastic. It started well with Jo and from there it rolled, like a snowball 
effect. Everyone wanted their gold medal.”
 