
A collection of specially commissioned five-minute plays grappling with 
freedom of expression in the arts, and written by some of the most influential 
names in contemporary theatre, will premiere inLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>.

The 12 pieces, by British playwrights including Caryl Churchill, April De 
Angelis <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/angelis> and Mark Ravenhill and 
American dramatist and film-maker Neil LaBute, will each tackle a past or 
recent issue around politics, censorship and boycotts.

Walking the Tightrope, organised by theatre company Offstage Theatre, will 
include plays dealing with controversial issues such as the heated protests and
allegations of racism that caused the Exhibit B live art exhibition at the 
Barbican 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/27/is-art-installation-exhibit-b-racist>
 to shut in September last year, as well as theboycott of the Jewish Film 
Festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/05/tricycle-theatre-jewish-film-festival-cancelled-israel-gaza>
 over its funding by the Israeli embassy.

Opening on Monday night and running every night until Sunday at Theatre 
Delicatessen in Farringdon, east London, the plays will be followed by a 
post-show discussion on the issues raised, led by a varying panel of political 
activists, artistic directors, academics and journalists.

LaBute acknowledged that inIn the wake of the recent terrorist attacks on the 
Charlie Hebdo offices in Paris, the overarching theme of freedom of expression 
running through all 12 new works under the umbrella title Walking the Tightrope 
is particularly prescient.

“Of course, in the wake of the Paris attacks the time is more ripe than ever 
for at least a really interesting conversation around freedom of expression in 
the arts,” said LaBute. “To perform to an audience who are already engaged with 
this subject, and possibly are even more conflicted about it than before, makes 
it a very interesting time to stage these plays.”

LaBute, who is known for his provocative and often misanthropic plays and 
films, said: “My work is specifically dealing with the issues that arose out of
Exhibit B <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/exhibit-b>. It deals with an 
artist who breaks the fourth wall and talks directly to the audience about that 
silent partnership when we walk into a gallery or see a movie or go to a play 
and say, ‘I’m engaging with this and if I’m offended by it, do I have the right 
to shut it down and prevent others from seeing it?’ And is it art simply 
because it is in a gallery – if it was out on the pavement, how would we see it 
differently?”

LaBute said while the intention of the short work was to raise questions 
rather than provide concrete answers, he said he did not agree with the 
decision to shut down Exhibit B and prevent the public from being able to make 
up their own minds.

“I would certainly liked to have seen Exhibit B,” said LaBute. “Yes I am a 
white American male so I couldn’t be in a worse box to say I have an opinion 
about Exhibit B and its content, but at the same time I do have an opinion 
which I believe is as valid as all those people who marched against the 
exhibition and felt compelled to get names on a petition to say we must stop 
this. I understand their perspective, and they have every right to express 
anger at the exhibition, but I find it troubling they then kept others, like 
me, from being able to make our own informed decision by actually engaging with 
the work.”

He added: “In the piece I’ve written, it is about an artist who is really 
pushing this idea of what constitutes art and asking the audience ‘is there a 
line, and if so, where is the line?’ I hope it’s a funny piece but unsettling 
is more what I was shooting for, that by degrees the audience becomes more 
complicit with it. Using that laughter to make the audience become comfortable 
but keep them on edge the whole time about where the piece might be headed. The 
laughs that kind of stick in your throat are probably the ones I savour the 
most.”British playwright April De Angelis, whose acclaimed play Jumpy was a hit 
for the Royal Court in 2011, said she had taken quite a different approach to 
the subject of art and politics and chose to look at apartheid South Africa in 
the 1980s.

“I used that moment to look at artistic boycotts and the dilemma of whether it 
is more effective be out there, trying to change the way people think, or is it 
more powerful to actually say no and not to show your art at all,” she said.

“It’s basically about a musician who is going to sing in Sun City and it’s 
just an examination of his decision to go. The argument for the boycott is 
never expressed in my piece, it is up to the audience to draw their own 
conclusion about the decision this character has made to defy the boycott and 
perform in Sun City. When I was a student I was an anti-apartheid campaigner 
and so I knew the politics of South Africa of the time so it felt like a 
familiar situation to go back to and so it came easily to me as a parallel for 
other more recent boycotts in the arts.”

De Angelis praised the immediacy of theatre, which ensured events such as 
Walking the Tightrope could offer such a diverse range of playwright’s 
perspectives on artistic censorship at a time when the debate is very much 
alive in the public consciousness.

• Walking the Tightrope: The Tension between Art and Politics, an Offstage 
Production in association with Theatre Uncut, will run 26 January – 1 February
 