
A few days ago, a miners' union leader was convicted 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-nottinghamshire-17602275> of stealing 
nearly £150,000 from a union charity. He will be sentenced to prison, the judge 
told him. Was there a frenzy of media attention on this "union corruption" in 
the run-up to the trial? Can we now expect a detailed exposé of the thief and 
his background?

Not a hope. Why not? Because the convicted criminal was once a darling of the 
Tories and the rightwing tabloid media, a man who helped wreck the miners' 
1984-5 strike against pit closures. Neil Greatrex is former president of the 
Union of Democratic Mineworkers.

Twenty-eight years ago, most of the National Union of Mineworkers' 170,000 
members went on strike to resist the closure of productive pits by the National 
Coal Board and the Conservative government. Greatrex and others led a 
strike-breaking operation which was the principle cause of the mineworkers' 
defeat. Based mainly in Nottinghamshire, the so-called "working miners" were 
hailed as heroes by Conservatives. After the strike, Greatrex and his pals 
broke away from the NUM to form the Union of Democratic Mineworkers. This 
ensured there was no hope of any future unity in Britain's coalfields when the 
Tories' final onslaught on Britain's deep coalmining industry came in 1993-94. 
The Nottinghamshire miners and their leaders swallowed assurances that there 
was no pit closures programme, and that their pits and jobs were safe.

The lies were revealed as the axe fell on the Nottinghamshire pits just as 
heavily as on the rest of the British coalfield. The "working miners" who 
wrecked the NUM's defence of the coal industry were thrown out of work with the 
rest. There were around 170 pits before the strike. Today there are five.

Contrast the media's tepid response in the run-up to Greatrex's trial with 
events when Arthur Scargill and Peter Heathfield, leaders of the NUM during the 
1984-5 strike, werefalsely accused 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/may/05/peter-heathfield-miners-num>
 of embezzling union funds. The shameful witchhunt went on for months. The men 
and their families were harassed at home, hounded in public. The accusations 
were lies of course, and years later were admitted to be so. Scargill and 
Heathfield were completely innocent.

Most of Britain's only long-term reserves of indigenous fuel – coal – have now 
been abandoned. Today we are ever more reliant on fuel supplies from abroad, 
including gas and oil that comes from, or crosses, some of the world's most 
unstable regions. We have the Tories, the Nottinghamshire strike-breakers and 
their leaders, including Greatrex, to thank at least in part for that. But when 
he goes down, you won't read that in the tabloid press.
 