
I spent the biggest election day in cannabis history streaming live from the 
roof of High Times headquarters in Los Angeles. I’d rolled nine joints in 
advance of going on the air – one for each state voting on legalization (adult 
use, or medicinal) – and vowed to smoke them all, on camera, if and when each 
ballot initiative passed. Needless to say, as a longtime marijuana journalist, 
and author of a book calledHow to Smoke Pot (Properly) 
<https://www.amazon.com/How-Smoke-Pot-Properly-Highbrow/dp/0147517087>, I was 
hoping to get really, really blazed by the end of the night.


And I did!

Voters in Maine, Massachusetts, Nevada and my home state of California all put 
up solid majorities in favor of ending the war on weed entirely, while medical 
marijuana swept the field, including garnering 70% of the vote in Florida, and 
posting impressive wins in some very conservative states – Arkansas, North 
Dakota and Montana. Only Arizona’s full legalization measure narrowly failed to 
pass, and that only after anopposition campaign <> of lies and distortions 
saturated the airwaves, bankrolled by a billionaire anti-marijuana zealot.

In fact, add up all the votes cast for cannabis on Tuesday night, and it 
quickly becomes clear that support for legalization dwarfs that for either 
major presidential candidate or political party.

So if there was any doubt left, the 2016 election cycle just demonstrated, 
once and for all, that a grassroots cannabis movement that was once ridiculed 
and derided by the entire political establishment has effectively taken its 
case directly to the people and emerged triumphant as a popular bi-partisan 
policy — one that’s set to spread like a grassfire.

US election bright spots: gun control, recreational marijuana and more
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/11/us-election-ballot-measures-marijuana-gun-control>
In a pre-election interview with comedian Bill Maher, Obama went so far as to 
predict that such a resounding victory would actually make federal prohibition 
of cannabis “untenable” going forward.

“The good news is that after this referenda … if, in fact, it passed in all 
these states – you now have about a fifth of the country that’s operating under 
one set of laws, and four-fifths in another,” Obama told the popular talk show 
host and well known cannabis enthusiast. “The Justice Department, DEA, FBI – 
for them to try to straddle and figure out how they’re supposed to enforce laws 
in some places and not in others … I don’t think legalization is a panacea, but 
I think that we’re going to need to have a more serious conversation about how 
we’re treating marijuana and our drug laws generally.”

My hope is that conversation will take place not just in the US but all around 
the world. America created the modern war on weed – a policy fueled by 
ignorance, xenophobia and a desire for social control over marginalized 
communities – and then exported it across the globe. So now, presumably, our 
moves towards compassion, science and common sense will give license to other 
countries eager to follow suit.

There’s just one problem.

In the same election, Americans brought to power a president-elect whose 
divide and conquer rhetoric frighteningly recalls the authoritarian impulses, 
disregard for reality, and disdain for immigrants, intellectuals and minorities 
that sparked America’s original herbal vendetta against marijuana back in the 
1930s.

Not that a rollback on legal weed is inevitable, or even likely. Donald Trump 
has previously expressed “100% support” for medical marijuana and recently told 
the Washington Post that “in terms of marijuana and legalization ... I really 
believe we should leave it up to the states” 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2015/10/29/trump-wants-marijuana-legalization-decided-at-the-state-level/>
.

Given these statements, the widespread popularity of legalization, and all of 
the money to be made selling this most wondrous weed, most cannabis reformers 
and industry leaders currently expect our next president to take a hands-off 
approach.

But then again, Trump’s currently busy surrounding himself with men like New 
Jersey governor Chris Christie and former New York City mayor Rudy Guiliani, 
both of whom have awful records on this issue, and either of whom could end up 
US Attorney General.

The revolution in cannabis law has begun, but Britain is stuck in the past | 
Simon Jenkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/11/revolution-cannabis-law-britain-california-war-on-drugs>
And what’s most troubling – for weed and everything else – is seeing the 
citizenry of my country support a man who consistently appealed to our worst 
nature, backed by a promise to make “restoring law-and-order” his top priority.

J Edgar Hoover, the legendary founder and head of the FBI for about 40 years, 
and a supposed public servant cut from this same cloth, once famously observed 
that “justice is incidental to law and order”.

Chilling words to consider at this viscerally frightening moment in American 
history. With the upshot being that despite all of marijuana’s exciting 
electoral victories this year, I’m feeling pretty despondent at the moment – 
not to mention extremely nauseous a full three days after the vote.

Luckily, I’ve got a fat sack of fully legal weed to get me through.

David Bienenstock is head of content at High Times magazine.
 