
Netflix <https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> is betting its reputation 
on a slate of new shows which include a blind superhero, a family with dark 
secrets and a fish-out-of-water comedy.

The streaming service has unveiled an ambitious lineup of original programming 
for this year which it hopes will build on the success ofHouse of Cards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/house-of-cards> and Orange Is the New 
Black.

From March subscribers will start finding an expanded roster of dramas, 
sitcoms, children’s shows, documentaries and films, totalling 320 hours of 
original programming, underscoring Netflix’s drive to create rather than just 
disseminate content.

The company also announced at a gathering of the Television Critics 
Association (TCA) in Los Angeles on Wednesday that it was renewing Marco Polo 
for another 10-episode run and expressed optimismArrested Development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/arrested-development> and Lilyhammer 
would also return.

Its chief content officer, Ted Sarandos, gave premiere dates for some of the 
flagship new shows.

Daredevil, Marvel’s first series for Netflix, will premiere on 10 April with 
13 one-hour episodes, starring Charlie Cox as Matt Murdock, a blind superhero 
who fights injustice by day as a lawyer and by night as a vigilante.

Marvel will produce another three Netflix original series – AKA Jessica Jones, 
also due this year, plus Iron Fist and Luke Cage – culminating in a miniseries, 
The Defenders, which will unite the characters.

The Los Gatos-based streaming service will also gamble on the sitcom 
Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt, featuring Ellie Kemper as a naive young woman who is 
rescued from a doomsday cult and starts life anew in New York.

It was created by Tina Fey and Robert Carlock, the team behind 30 Rock, for 
NBC but the network then balked,reportedly fearing low ratings in a drama-heavy 
mid-season schedule 
<http://www.vulture.com/2014/11/netflix-has-saved-nbcs-ellie-kemper-comedy.html>
.

Netflix snapped up the first season, which will debut on 6 March, and 
commissioned a second season. Fey joked that, freed from network constraints, 
the next season will include racier material – “mostly shower sex”.

Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt, like Orange Is the New Black, features a young 
woman plunged into an alien environment but appears to be a lighter, more 
conventional comedy. It was an updated take on the Mary Tyler Moore theme of a 
girl in the big city, said Carlock, and was written specifically for Kemper, 
who starred in The Office. “We like her face on camera. We reverse-engineered 
from her.”

On 8 May, Netflix will debut another comedy, Grace and Frankie, helmed by 
Friends creator Marta Kauffman. It stars Jane Fonda and Lily Tomlin as 
“frenemies” whose lives are turned upside down when their husbands fall in love 
with each other.

The company has invested heavily in Bloodline, a 13-episode family 
drama-cum-thriller which debuts on 20 March. A heavy-hitting ensemble cast 
includes Kyle Chandler, Sam Shepard, Sissy Spacek and Ben Mendelsohn.

Set in the Florida Keys, the story explores the tangled secrets of the Rayburn 
family after the black sheep eldest son, played by Mendelsohn, returns home.

It was created by brothers Todd and Glenn Kessler, and Daniel Zelman, who also 
created the political drama Damages.

“We thought it would be interesting if we could take the family drama and 
escalate it into a psychological thriller,” said Glenn, in an interview with 
the trio. “Our story is about a family that turns on itself.”

Viewers have the appetite for morally ambiguous, intricately plotted dramas, 
said Zelman. “There was a time when television was purely escapist. It would 
clean things up so that by the time you went to sleep at 10 everything was good 
in the world. Clearly people have an appetite now for something that’s a lot 
more cynical; to explore darkness and challenge those values.”

The absence of commercial breaks and the audience’s ability to binge on 
episodes let writers construct the series as a 13-hour film following 
Hollywood’s classic three-act structure, said Todd Kessler. “On network 
television it seems there are requirements about character likeability – 
removing certain areas of gray so you understand how you are supposed to 
process them. An audience is encouraged to decide early on what they feel and 
stick with that.”

A streaming model, in contrast, afforded greater storytelling density because 
audiences were more engaged and less likely to be making tea and ironing while 
watching, said Glenn Kessler. “It’s different now. It’s like you carve out time 
to not multitask and to soak in the experience that is going on in front of 
you. You are rewarded for total engagement to that hour.” Otherwise, he warned, 
“you might get very strong tea and a burnt shirt.”

Mendelsohn, the Australian actor who plays the son in Bloodline, said Netflix 
was riding a golden age of long-format storytelling which was luring big-screen 
actors. He echoed Kevin Spacey, an Oscar winner who stars in House of Cards: “A 
few years ago my agent would not even have considered letting me do something 
like this. But the game has changed. Now people are banging down the doors to 
do it.”

Unlike the Rayburn family’s secrets, there is little chance of viewers 
discovering the ratings for Bloodline or Netflix’s other shows. In his address 
to the TCA, Sarandosreaffirmed Netflix’s policy <http:// 
http://www.hitfix.com/the-fien-print/netflix-content-chief-talks-ratings-arrested-development-future-and-show-resurrection>
 of not revealing viewership figures on the grounds it did not sell advertising 
nor weight for prime-time viewing. “There’s no real business reason for us to 
internally or externally report those numbers.”
 