
Can Louboutins be recycled? And if so, via which bin? Not long ago, of course, 
any charity shop would have fallen upon them. But what woman, however desperate 
for chic, would now want to advertise, along with Louboutin's ever more vulgar 
red soles, a shared, "as worn by" aesthetic with Asma al-Assad, wife of the 
Syrian opthamologist-turned-assassin?The leaked emails 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/assad-emails> detailing Mrs Assad's recent 
online shopping have reaffirmed, indelibly, the close style affinity between 
Christian Louboutin and Mrs Assad, whose many on-trend accessories have long 
been associated, by those in the know, with a vibrant, modern political message 
of some description. Basically: how could someone this fash forward ever be 
mean? It's as if Wallis Simpson never happened.

Even before Vogue's Joan Juliet Buck 
<http://fashionista.com/2011/05/vogue-disappears-ill-timed-profile-of-syrias-first-lady/>
, in her unforgettable 2011 tribute to Asma, the "freshest and most magnetic of 
first ladies", discerned the philanthropic intent underpinning Asma's 
embellished heels, the Huff Post also detected something impressive in "her 
love for Christian Louboutin platforms".Paris Match called her a "ray of light 
in a country full of shadows" and, when reminded of Bashar al-Assad's 
brutality, Nicholas Sarkozy protested, with the authority of a lifetime steeped 
in bling: "With a wife as modern as his, he can't be completely bad". Asma's 
only rival, in on-trend politics, has been fellow autocrat's wife Queen Rania 
of Jordan, of whom her friend Wendi Murdoch said, in anotherVogue profile: 
"She's modern; she thinks being queen is a job". But that much could have been 
guessed, surely, from her shoes.

For the brands favoured by the dictators' wives, the bonuses – until recently 
– went beyond regular name-checks. While Mrs Assad hinted at a democratic 
passion simply by wearing the same platforms as Victoria Beckham, Angelina 
Jolie and Carla Bruni, Mr Louboutin responded with sympathy for Syrian 
materials and culture. Asma was spotted with "a Syrian silk Louboutin tote". 
Louboutin went one better with a Syrian house, in Aleppo. "Darling," he told a 
US interviewer, "I am totally broke, but it was love at first sight".

Happily for Mr Louboutin's post-Arab Spring weekend breaks, the town is 
reported to be so loyal to the Assads that rebels in Damascus have reportedly 
held up signs reading: "Aleppo wouldn't rise even if it took Viagra."

But how helpful to Louboutin, outside Aleppo, is continuing endorsement by the 
Syrian ray of light also known (by theSun) as "Sexy Brit bringing Syria in from 
cold 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/features/2514525/Sexy-Brit-bringing-Syria-in-from-the-cold.html>
"? Her loyalty at a time of national crisis cannot be faulted. One notable 
email, dated early February, around the time her family's home town of Homs was 
being smashed to pieces, finds Mrs Assad still determined to share her love for 
some all-crystal Louboutin heels for £3,795.

"Does anything catch your eye?" she emails a friend, adding: "these pieces are 
not made for the general public." Her correspondent – maybe more pragmatic, 
maybe slower on six-inch heels – says she loves them but no, thank you: 
"They're not going 2 b useful any time soon unfortunately".

Though it's possible Louboutin executives are celebrating this uncovenanted 
global publicity, so recent that the relevant trotters must still be in stock, 
it is easier to imagine them scouring the literature on brand damage limitation 
for appropriate strategies when aluxe name becomes aspirational only to 
would-be torturers.

What did Burberry do, way back, after its hideous checks were appropriated by 
proletarians? But that level of brand nuisance is probably as instructive to 
Louboutin as Abercrombie & Fitch's offer of a cash bribe to the makers of the 
reality TV showJersey Shore, whose cast have been draped in their shirts, to 
stop "distressing" A&F core customers – who are commonly, to judge from my part 
of north London, aged between 11 and 16, and dividing their time between school 
and the nearest off-licence.

Mercifully for most of the named suppliers to Assad HQ, their speciality is 
whatHow to Spend It (a magazine aimed at people Goldman Sachs has identified as 
"muppets") would celebrate as "under the radar" or, better still, "bespoke". 
Something bespoke is, necessarily, unaffordable by most non-muppets, and, at 
the same time, capable of being made yet more exclusive via the introduction of 
more exotic materials, eg beaten gold, refinements that may also be portrayed 
as creative. Minus her assocations with bloodshed, torture, and tyranny, Asma 
is patently its ideal reader. So much so that her name was dropped, by way of a 
powerful muppet attraction, in a recentHow To Spend It piece about "a niche 
brand" and "insider's choice" jeweller she had patronised: "Syria's first lady 
has been snapped wearing itsSabbia earrings, 
<http://www.londonjewelers.com/pomellato-sabbia-sapphire-earrings.html>" 
breathed the author.

Maybe, inhabiting this world, Asma commissioned her console table, a classic 
of shiny bespokeness, after reading about insider's choice, Adam Williams, in 
last October'sHow to Spend It. "Most people choose patinated bronze," Williams 
said, "although gold leaf is also popular."

And that seems to be just about all Mrs Assad has in common with the familiar, 
dictator's style codified by Peter York in his 2005 classic about 16 despots' 
interiors, "each with their own uniquely frightful chic". What may have confused
Vogue, Sarkozy and a host of Asma's admirers into thinking her a reformer is 
her defiance of York's thesis, to the effect that dictators have comically bad 
taste, which they share with "everyday rich folk in petro-dollar world". 
Helpfully – ifHow to Spend It does not routinely prove the point – her shopping 
lists indicate that evil does not, invariably, announce itself in quantities of 
marble, chandeliers and animal print, in a dictator's fat, gold-smeared bergère 
and his fat, matching wife.

Equally – the Assads' emails astonishingly confirm – fash-forwardness and 
style do not invariably attest to sincere, progressive values. If they did, the 
stylish Mrs Cameron, the patron saint of minimalist kitchens, would support a 
mansion tax, and Anna Wintour, chicest of them all, would be crushing the 
right, instead of using her magazine to sanitise a tyrant by depicting his wife 
as a reformer. Admittedly, to judge by last week's obsession with thegreat 
premiers' wives' fash-off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/mar/14/samantha-cameron-michelle-obama-fashion>
,Vogue's faith in designer dresses, belts and shoes as crucial signifiers of 
inner worth is already widely shared. Mrs Cameron's pink top was taken, for 
instance, to be a triumph of tactful diplomacy, while her black mac was 
declared creditably iconic, if a little black.

Appearing – in Chanel – at last-week's White House banquet, Wintour also 
upheld fashion's values, consigning the al-Assad embarrassment to history, 
along withVogue's equally incautious outburst of admiration for another 
allegedly modernising beauty, Queen Rania of Jordan: "Whether at a UN 
delegation or on YouTube, Queen Rania's persuasive style is changing attitudes,"
Vogue announced. She definitely changed a few last year when, following a 
spectacular party for 600 in which the number 40 was projected on to rocky 
outcrops, Bedouin tribesmen accused her of corruption and extravagance.

Mercifully for the Louboutin brand when it reaches the desert, they probably 
have no idea where she buys her shoes.
 