
The government’s new stalking prevention orders, announced last week by Amber 
Rudd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/07/amber-rudd-stalking-prevention-orders-stalkers>
, will offer more protection to victims of stalking then ever before. The 
asbo-style bans, which will be applicable in England and Wales, will 
particularly help those who are targeted by strangers, giving them similar 
protection to domestic abuse victims. Breaching an order’s conditions – which 
could include staying away from the victim or restricted internet use – will be 
a criminal offence with a maximum sentence of five years in jail. Police will 
be able to apply to the courts for an order before a stalking suspect has been 
convicted or even arrested. However, the ease with which stalking can be 
undertaken in the online environment suggests that victims may still have 
little protection from cyberstalking.

We have a stalking law – so why don’t the police use it? | Rachel Horman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/19/stalking-law-police-lily-allen-stalked-criminal-justice-system>
Research by the National Centre of Cyberstalking at the University of 
Bedfordshire suggests that as channels are closed down, stalkers turn to other 
methods to continue to inundate the person they are fixated on with contact, 
exposing their target to a loss of privacy, predictability or control over 
their own lives. People who become the focus of fixation for a cyberstalker are 
forced into a virtual proximity that equates to a relationship they have not 
invited or consented to.

Victims of cyberstalking who have participated in our research 
<https://www.beds.ac.uk/research-ref/irac/nccr> have given complex and 
disturbing accounts of their experience. Typically, many of the sustained 
attacks intrude on all aspects of life: an individual’s online reputation, 
their social lives, economic functioning and health. Others close to the victim 
often become targets as well.

As our lives become increasingly conducted in online spaces, and given the 
ease that online communication allows, it is no surprise that stalking 
frequently happens in a virtual sphere. This year the Suzy Lamplugh Trust found 
that37% 
<http://www.itv.com/news/2016-04-13/a-third-of-stalking-victims-now-targeted-online/>
 of people who had been stalked were harassed using online methods such as 
social media or email. At theNCCR 
<https://www.beds.ac.uk/research-ref/irac/nccr/contact-nccr> our own work with 
the police also bears this out. Cyber abuse in all its forms, such as revenge 
porn, sextortion, harassment and stalking, now makes up almost 40% of reported 
cyber crimes in Bedfordshire, and one in 20 crimes overall, according to police 
data.

When it comes to online harassment or cyberstalking, the intentions of the 
perpetrators are mostly born out of personal motivation, such as seeking 
intimacy with a remote figure, reconciliation of a relationship or revenge. In 
many cases, cyberstalking occurs alongside real-world stalking, and can be 
thought of as an additional channel; in others, digital tools may be the 
favoured or only method.

Occasionally friends or loved ones are the culprit, covertly monitoring or 
harassing victims digitally. While ex-partners who are stalkers tend to rely on 
physical stalking, they may also use cyberstalking to bully or victimise their 
former partner. According to a study conducted at Western University in Canada,
88% 
<http://www.digitaltrends.com/social-media/nearly-9-out-of-10-facebook-users-keep-tabs-on-their-exes/>
 of us who use Facebook repeatedly check our exes’ profiles, and a full 70% of 
us spy from a mutual friend’s account. This level of surveillance has been 
linked to higher levels of distress, but it is unclear whether the distress 
triggered cyberstalking behaviours or was the result of them.

The intrinsic motivations of cyberstalkers are likely to be fuelled by 
features of the environment in which the abuse takes place. Online settings 
provide conditions where expression is less inhibited and give the feeling of 
invisibility, even where there is not anonymity, which loosens the restrictions 
on expression most of us feel bound by in real-life social exchanges.

The internet was designed to facilitate relationship building. However, 
“helpful” invitations that point us towards people with whom we have no 
connection, or with whom we have by choice ended a connection, sum up the 
failings of algorithm-based social networking. Additionally the activity of 
mutual contacts can disclose movements that we have not chosen to share, 
triggering further pursuit. Facebook is one network that insists people use 
real identities on their accounts – and although some people try to get around 
this, it is a community focused on a lack of anonymity, so leaving can be the 
only option to truly avoid unwanted attention.

But the digital world is such that it is no longer possible for people to 
entirely remove themselves from the sight of others to whom they don’t want to 
be visible. While the web certainly facilitates stalking behaviour by enabling 
access and levels of surveillance far beyond what was possible before, it also 
provides external triggers that may both increase preoccupation with a party 
who has not consented to any form of connection, and offers greater 
opportunities to intimidate. To effectively protect victims of stalking, future 
legislation must consider how online proximity might be managed – which in our 
overly digital lives is easier said than done.

• Additional research by Professor Jim Barnes
 