
My first impressions of Waiheke Island are coloured by the sight of bare 
bottoms, all brightly painted in tinges of lime green, lemon yellow, electric 
blue and blushing pink. Sailing in from Auckland on the hourly Fullers ferry, 
we pass underneath a whole hillside of these cheeky sentinels, life-sized human 
figures standing stock-still and buck naked on the headland above Matiatia Bay. 
They were carved from wood and screen-printed to look three-dimensional by a 
sculptor named Christian Nicolson. His installation, titled Barebottomland and 
inspired by the Spike Milligan story Badjelly the Witch, was selected to open 
the biennial Sculpture on the Gulf festival which ran earlier this year.

There is talk of making it a permanent fixture, a way of saying "Welcome to 
Waiheke" that encapsulates the spirit of the place. Which is not to say the 
place is a nudist colony (though two of its 100 white sand beaches do operate a 
"clothing-optional" policy). It is merely to suggest that this island is ruled 
by artists and artisans.

The sculpture festival was founded by the Waiheke Community Art Gallery in 
2002 as a showcase for the local creative element, who have turned the 
landscape into an open-air exhibition space. Following the coastal trail 
between the various featured artworks is like taking a nature walk through some 
parallel world where eight-foot totems of Super Mario – created by 13-year-old 
Timothy Sang – are built out of giant Lego blocks and planted on the clifftops.
 Virginia King's Lookout / Pacific Radiolaria. Photograph by Stephen Phelan 
A gigantic marine fossil seems to float over the harbour with an exoskeleton 
of electro-polished steel. Luminescent boats shaped like fallen leaves are 
anchored to the shore below. Some of these pieces were made by competing 
sculptors from Auckland – which is visible in silhouette as the sun goes down, 
just 18km across the Hauraki Gulf – or other parts of New Zealand. But this 
year's first prize goes to Denis O'Connor, who has lived on Waiheke for more 
than 40 years, and is sometimes given the credit for establishing it as a 
bohemian enclave.

"I came over with the dropout generation," says O'Connor, lying back on the 
grass beside his winning entry, a horsebox filled with chalk-like etchings and 
inscriptions – a metaphor for the mind of the artist that he has titled the 
Tangler's Cave. "At that time, a lot of us were getting pretty fed up with the 
city, and Waiheke was known as a haven for what you might call 'alternative 
lifestyles'. Aucklanders used to joke that they could see a constant cloud of 
pot smoke hanging over the island." The population has since grown to around 
8,000, with another 3,400 arriving every summer to occupy their beach houses 
and holiday homes, the oldest of which are traditional New Zealand "baches" – 
simple huts with timber walls. And with O'Connor leading by example, the 
"dropouts" have become considerably more productive. Local art is now a viable 
industry, and hundreds of islanders make a living in it. The thoroughfare of 
Oneroa village is lined with shops and galleries full of their work. "For many 
years, Waiheke was a refuge," says Olivier Duhamel, who sculpts in bronze at a 
gallery called Bodyscape (+64 9 372 7220,bodyscape.net.nz 
<http://www.bodyscape.net.nz/>). "But recently it's been growing into an art 
destination. People are coming over specifically to buy here."
 Artist Chris Bailey. Photograph by Stephen Phelan 
Around the corner at the Toi Gallery (+64 9 372 2962, sallysmith.co.nz 
<http://www.sallysmith.co.nz/>), which showcases the work of Sally Smith, among 
others, I am told that an artist named Chris Bailey is so in demand that they 
can barely keep his pieces on display. Invited to visit Bailey's nearby 
workshop, I find him carving out a headstone for a recently deceased family 
member. "My heart is in the stone," he says. A hulking Aucklander of mixed 
Irish and Maori descent, with a punch-bag hanging next to his workbench, he 
first came to Waiheke to escape the gang culture of the city's west side. "I 
basically reinvented myself, away from all my peers," says Bailey. "This island 
lets you do that." Having subsequently learned the tool-making techniques of 
his Te Aupouri ancestors, he started carving native wood, granite, andesite and 
basalt, based on tribal designs for weapons, paddles or anchor stones. "I love 
how all that stuff was essential, but also beautiful." That stuff is now 
fashionable, for lack of a better word, and therefore marketable.

While we're talking, he receives a phone call to tell him that his entry for 
the sculpture festival has already been sold. "I've got goose bumps, mate," he 
says. "Every sale means I can pay a few bills, and order in some new stone."

Most islanders will tell you that Waiheke is becoming more affluent, and many 
have turned to making their own breads, olive oils, sheep-milk cheeses and 
other high-end comestibles, to capitalise on the recent influx of wealthy 
retirees from the mainland. According to Denis O'Connor, these newcomers 
"either loosen up, or get divorced".
 Flotsam by Paul Radford. Photograph courtesy of the Waiheke Community Art 
Gallery 
My hosts seem to belong in the first category. Gene O'Neill and Liz Eglinton 
were living what they call "corporate lives" in Auckland until 10 years ago, 
when they quit their jobs and built a guesthouse on 16 acres of island 
hillside, facing west toward the city and the sunset.

Modelled on Waiheke's old-style bach accommodations, but a great deal more 
luxurious, their Te Whau Lodge makes a tasteful and respectful case for 
gentrification, with nothing but local produce in evidence – from the soaps to 
the seafood and the wine cellar. Sitting in the hot tub on their sun deck with 
a glass of syrah, I can't see any signs of imminent class war. "Not likely," 
says Liz. "There's a pretty healthy relationship between the islanders and the 
people bringing money in."

The view is even better from the fine-dining restaurant on the Mudbrick estate 
(+64 9 372 9050,mudbrick.co.nz <http://www.mudbrick.co.nz/>), one of several 
boutique vineyards that began taking full advantage of Waiheke's warm and 
breezy micro-climate in the 1970s and have since covered swathes of the island 
in world-class bordeaux and chardonnay grapes. But for the first time during my 
stay, it begins to rain, and the low clouds pour down over Church Bay, 
obscuring Auckland in the distance. "Great," says my waitress, and she's not 
being sarcastic – residents depend on these showers to fill their water tanks. 
"That's how you tell a weekender from an islander," she says. "The tourists 
hate the rain, but we bloody love it."
 