
Antoni Gaudí, the eccentric Catalan architect responsible for Barcelona's 
emblematic basilica, has been known for decades as "God's architect". Today, as
Pope Benedict XVI <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pope-benedict-xvi> pays a 
visit to the city to finally consecrate the Sagrada Família, Gaudí devotees 
hope the moniker will soon become more apt: they hope he will be declared a 
saint.

Ever since 1992 the Vatican has been trying to decide whether Gaudí deserves 
to be beatified – a key step on the way to what could eventually become 
sainthood. Now, eight decades after the architect died under the wheels of 
Barcelona's number 30 tram, those who are fighting for his beatification say 
they have proof he can also produce miracles.

"There are now two examples that are being studied," said Lluís Bonet i 
Armengol, the parish priest at the Sagrada Família's underground crypt, and the 
son of an architect who worked on the church with Gaudí. Evidence has already 
been provided that the Sagrada Família's soaring towers and colourful ceramic 
adornments have converted some people toCatholicism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/catholicism>. But while there is little 
doubt about Gaudí's devout nature, the Vatican also needs proof that he can 
intercede with God to bring about the miraculous.

That "proof" may finally have come with the case of Montserrat Barenys, a 
former lecturer who claims her sight in one eye was miraculously restored after 
praying to the architect for help. Barenys said she was diagnosed with a 
perforated retina and was due to be operated on, but she prayed to Gaudí for 
help and was suddenly cured. "For me that was a miracle, even if it has not yet 
been proved officially," she said.

Architect José Manuel Almuzara, who has led the campaign to have Gaudí 
beatified, warned that the miracle was not yet accepted by the Vatican. "The 
medical specialists have yet to come up with their verdict," he explained.

Almuzara said the pope's visit to the Spanish city today would increase the 
numbers who prayed to Gaudí – and so the chances of a miracle happening. "It is 
not the same if only 50 people are praying to him for help as when five million 
are praying," he said.

He added that, just as Gaudí would defend his slowness to complete the Sagrada 
Família – remarking "my client is not in a hurry" – so those pushing for his 
passage to sainthood would have to be patient. The first stone of the Sagrada 
Família, where building work has always been funded by donations, was laid in 
1877. Gaudí, a gaunt, white-bearded vegetarian, ended up living in the 
building's crypt and would even go out begging for money to help pay for its 
construction.

Although religious services have long been held in the underground crypt, 
today will see the first religious service in the building as a consecrated 
basilica. "Gaudí always said he wouldn't live to see it finished, but 
eventually people would come from around the world to see the building or pray 
there," said Almuzara. "That will happen this weekend."

Both the main entrance and the cloisters that are to surround the building 
still have to be built. Almuzara said it was hoped the building would be 
finished by 2016, to coincide with the 90th anniversary of Gaudí's death. His 
devotees hope that he will also be beatified that year.

• This article was amended on 8 November 2010. The original sub-heading 
referred to Gaudí's Sagrada Família cathedral. This has been corrected.
 