 Investigators into the crash of American Airlines flight 587 in New York today 
started analysing its data recorder.
The investigation had been delayed by a fault in the recorder, recovered from 
the wreckage of the jet which fell on to the borough of Queens on Monday, 
killing 260 on board and five on the ground.

But national transportation safety board (NTSB) chairwoman Marion Blakey said 
yesterday the problem had been fixed.

The investigation is concentrating on how the tail fin was ripped off the 
Airbus A300 seconds before the crash. David Stempler, the president of the Air 
Travellers Association, said he and several pilots he spoke to were struck by 
how cleanly the tail fin separated from the plane.

"It's as if you had a model of an aeroplane and you just snapped the 
stabiliser off," he said. "It's really shocking and surprising."

The cockpit voice recorder, the other "black box", indicated the pilots of the 
American Airlines flight had complained about the wake, or turbulence, of 
another plane before their jet went down.

"We do not know whether this contributed in any way to the actual accident, 
but we are looking at this very closely," Ms Blakey said.

Wake turbulence, the swirl of air behind a plane, can endanger planes flying 
too close behind or below. The phenomenon has been blamed for at least one 
crash.

The plane's tail sheared away and its engines fell off as the jet went down. 
Without the two-part tail assembly, the jetliner would have suffered a loss of 
stability and turning control.

Ms Blakey said there had been less than the standard two-minute interval 
between Flight 587 and a Japan Airlines Boeing 747 that left ahead of it from 
the same runway. "We believe that, in fact, it was one minute and 45 seconds," 
she said.

She said it appeared air traffic controllers had followed proper procedure, 
and that clearances had come two minutes and 20 seconds apart. But 
investigators believe there was a delay between when the 747 got clearance to 
take off and when it actually did.

Walter Sheriff, a retired American Airlines captain, said wake turbulence from 
the 747 could have struck the Airbus with "tornado-like lateral force".

Safety records show the same Airbus was severely shaken when it hit air 
turbulence at cruising altitude in 1994, injuring 47 people. Aviation 
consultant Jim McKenna said the plane could have been weakened by the earlier 
encounter.

"I would expect that the aeroplane underwent inspection after the turbulence 
encounter to verify that it hadn't been damaged and any damage that was 
incurred was fixed," Mr McKenna said.

NTSB investigators are reviewing records, interviewing maintenance employees 
and asking questions about the 1994 incident.

Maintenance records indicated that before the plane was delivered to American 
Airlines in 1988, one of the six fittings that held the fin to the fuselage had 
to be repaired by the manufacturer, NSTB member George Black said yesterday.

Fittings for the fuselage have to be inspected every five years, and the last 
one was in 1999, Mr Black said.

"We've never had a modern civilian jetliner come apart in flight. It is so 
unbelievably catastrophic what happened," former transportation department 
inspector general Mary Schiavo said.

Authorities have not ruled out sabotage or other causes, but have said all 
signs point to a mechanical failure.

American Airlines has volunteered to inspect its 34 Airbus A300s to ensure 
there are no problems with tail assemblies.
 