
No one wants to be a mere tourist: we all want to be "travellers," 
encountering the real country we're visiting. On my own trip to New Zealand I 
was no different, determined to glimpse authentic Kiwi life. These days there 
are plenty of ways to do it, with multiple schemes allowing you to stay with 
locals – whetherCouchsurfing.org <http://www.couchsurfing.org/>, homestays, 
even your trusty B&B. But what of the visitor who, like me, was travelling 
around New Zealand in a campervan?

Help was at hand in the form of Native Parks (nativeparks.co.nz 
<http://www.nativeparks.co.nz>), an ingenious scheme that lets you park up at 
the home of a regular New Zealand family, free of charge. The pitch might be in 
a paddock on a vast sheep farm, in the driveway of a cosy cottage, even in the 
car park of a local business. There are currently 88 places to choose from. One 
of Native Parks' aims is to draw visitors to different regions and 
out-of-the-way rural areas, to show off local food, drink or attractions that 
most tourists would otherwise miss. The range of locations is enormous: all 
they have in common is that they aren't regular campsites, with not a tightly 
cordoned-off pitch or coin-slot washing machine in sight.

Our first Native Parks stop was a 90-minute drive south-west of Auckland. 
There was next to nothing around: just flinty, mist-shrouded hills redolent of 
the Scottish Highlands, the lush green broken only by outcrops of stone grey. 
As night fell, the lights from Anne and Philip Woodwards' farm (nikaucave.co.nz 
<http://www.nikaucave.co.nz>) promised the cosy shelter of home – and they 
didn't disappoint. We pulled in, hooked up our power cable to the socket and 
sat down for a homemade supper of fishcakes followed by rhubarb from their own 
garden. Anne told us about the realities of life for a New Zealand family, 
struggling to make a living from farming alone.

That night we slept in the campervan as normal, but somehow it felt more snug, 
knowing there was a farmhouse with a log fire and a family standing between us 
and the whipping wind.

Next morning, the Woodwards showed us round, trudging through the thick bush 
vegetation and into their very own cave. Wading through water, gazing at the 
stalactites and stalagmites in the cathedral-like central cavern, marvelling at 
the glow worms – the kilometre-long Nikau Cave would be a fully fledged tourist 
attraction, complete with turnstiles and giftshop, in most places. But here 
it's just the Woodwards' backyard.
 Nikau Cave, New Zealand 
Not every home listed in the Native Park book (which you must buy for NZ$75 
[£37], as the entries are not available online) has quite the same lure. At the 
bottom of the North Island, useful as an overnight stop before taking the ferry 
south, is Owlcatraz (owlcatraz.co.nz <http://www.owlcatraz.co.nz>). Curious to 
name a cage-free owl sanctuary after America's most notorious maximum security 
prison, but Owlcatraz's owners seem unable to resist a pun. One creature was 
called Owl Capone, another Owlvis Presley – and we campervanners had to make do 
with a stop in the car park.

A more enticing prospect was Fat Albert Smokehouse (fatalbertsmokehouse.co.nz 
<http://www.fatalbertsmokehouse.co.nz>), near the small South Island town of 
Fairlie. Next to the old schoolhouse, lovingly converted by Alison and Keith 
Hatton, was a kind of landing strip of grass, ideal for a campervan, sheltered 
behind a windbreak of trees – with perfect views of Mount Dobson and Fox Peak, 
both snow-capped, even in summer. The Hattons invited us in for a taste of 
their home-smoked salmon – the gravadlax soaked in vodka is a speciality – 
around their dining table. While Keith told us of his flying days in the New 
Zealand Air Force, we congratulated ourselves for, in Alison's words, "getting 
to know the real Kiwi".

• A campervan trip to New Zealand with (020-7483 6555, bridgeandwickers.co.uk 
<http://www.bridgeandwickers.co.uk>) costs from £1,459pp based on two 
travelling in November 2011, including return flights with Air New Zealand to 
Auckland and a campervan for 10 days. More information about New Zealand at
newzealand.com/travel <http://www.newzealand.com/travel>
 