
People with dementia are being let down by local services across the country, 
according to new government data that critics say has revealed a postcode 
lottery in care for the chronic and degenerative brain disease.

An interactive “dementia atlas” 
<https://shapeatlas.net/dementia/#6/52.9448/-2.1472/l-p65>, published online on 
Tuesday by the Department of Health, shows that standards of care vary widely 
in different areas, with services failing to reach almost half the patients for 
check-ups even once a year in one area.

Jeremy Hunt, the health secretary, said the data would “shine a spotlight” on 
the areas with the worst performance, and so drive improvements across the 
country. But political opponents said it revealed a healthcare system 
struggling to stay afloat.

The Liberal Democrat health spokesperson, Norman Lamb, said: “This is yet more 
evidence of theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> and the care 
system on its knees. We are the sixth largest economy in the world and yet we 
are letting down very vulnerable people in a completely unacceptable way.

“How can we tolerate allowing people who have worked hard all their lives to 
be let down in this way in their hour of need? We need a new long-term 
settlement for the NHS and care so that we can guarantee people with dementia 
and others the care they need, when they need it.”

What happens to older people who can't afford good care?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/nov/09/dementia-elderly-care-homes-funding-nhs>
The information exposes wide differentials in aspects of dementia care. For 
example, while in some parts of England, 85.8% dementia patients have their 
care looked at every year, in others just 49.3% receive the same service. Those 
checks are seen as important because, as dementia is a long-term and 
degenerative condition, “reviewing those with a diagnosis at least annually 
will ensure that the needs of people with dementia and their carers are 
discussed and appropriate care plans can be implemented”, the atlas says.

Similarly, while some areas have as many as 8,000 “dementia friends” available 
to help patients, others have none at all. There is also a more than three-fold 
variation in the number of those with dementia being admitted to hospital as an 
emergency. That ranges from 1,840 for every 100,000 people aged 65+ to as many 
as 6,046 for every 100,000.

The Observer view on dementia care | Observer editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/commentisfree/2015/jul/25/observer-editorial-johns-campaign-dementia-carers-hospital>
“Making more user-friendly information on dementia accessible online is a step 
in the right direction,” said George McNamara, head of policy and public 
affairs at Alzheimer’s Society. “People can now see which parts of the country 
are leading the way with developing dementia-friendly communities, and how many 
dementia friends there are in each area.”

However, the atlas should be expanded to become even more useful by including 
the experiences people with dementia have had of the health and care systems, 
in order to enable NHS bosses to make improvements in areas which are lagging 
behind, McNamara added.

The atlas shows that care is unsatisfactory in some places, the Alzheimer’s 
Society added. “The atlas exposes varied care, with some areas reporting much 
higher numbers of emergency hospital admissions. We must urgently explore why 
people with dementia’s needs are escalating to this point and what can be done 
in the community to prevent crisis admissions among this vulnerable group. It’s 
currently easier to find out about your hospital’s finances than the quality of 
dementia care they provide. To make hospitals more transparent and accountable, 
we are calling for them to publish an annual statement on dementia care.

Could music projects cut the cost of dementia care?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/feb/29/music-projects-cut-cost-dementia-care>
“Additionally, in some parts of the country, people with dementia were much 
less likely to have had their care reviewed in the last 12 months than in 
others – something which is extremely important given that dementia is a 
progressive condition and a person’s needs become more severe over time. The 
causes of variation need to be investigated to ensure care is never a gamble,” 
added McNamara.

The new tool will also outline how many people in each area smoke – the 
average across England is 18% – in the hope that this will spur GPs and other 
health professionals to redouble their efforts to get people to quit smoking, 
which is recognised as a major risk factor for dementia.

The health secretary is also seeking to improve NHS early diagnosis of 
dementia by ensuring that people aged between 40 and 64 are asked about it when 
they have an NHS health check. The new component of the health check will now 
be trialled through more than 250 GP surgeries in four places: Birmingham, 
Bury, Manchester and Southampton.

 * The headline for this article was changed on 16 August 2016. It initially 
said the ‘dementia atlas’ covered the UK, instead of England. This has now been 
corrected.
 