
Scientists say that they have discovered a possible explanation for how 
Alzheimer’s disease spreads in the brain.


Alzheimer’s is linked to a buildup of protein plaques and tangles that spread 
across particular tissues in the brain as the disease progresses. But while the 
pattern of this spread is well-known, the reason behind the pattern is not.

Now scientists say they have uncovered a potential explanation as to why 
certain tissues of the brain are more vulnerable to Alzheimer’s disease.


The vulnerability appears to be linked to variations in the levels of proteins 
in the brain that protect against the clumping of other proteins - variations 
that are present decades before the onset of the disease.

Hope for Alzheimer's treatment as researchers find licensed drugs halt brain 
degeneration
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jun/30/alzheimers-treatment-researchers-licensed-drugs-halt-brain-degeneration>
“Our results indicate that within healthy brains a tell-tale pattern of 
protein levels predicts the progression of Alzheimer’s disease through the 
brain [in those that are affected by the disease],” said Rosie Freer, a PhD 
student at the University of Cambridge and first author of the study.

The results could open up the possibility of identifying individuals who are 
at risk of developing Alzheimer’s long before symptoms appear, as well as 
offering new insights to those attempting to tackle the disease.

Charbel Moussa, director of the Laboratory for Dementia and Parkinsonism at 
Georgetown University Medical Center said that he agreed with the conclusions 
of the study. “It is probably true that in cases of diseases like Alzheimer’s 
and Parkinson’s we may have deficiencies in quality control mechanisms like 
cleaning out bad proteins that collect in the brain cells,” he said, although 
he warned that using such findings to predict those more at risk of such 
disease is likely to be difficult.

But others are less convinced by the results. “This might be part of the 
explanation as to why Alzheimer’s disease kills some cells and not others, but 
it is undoubtedly a complex problem and this is only part of the answer to that 
problem,” said John Hardy, professor of neuroscience at University College 
London. “This paper has only looked at a few brain regions and really only at a 
few cell [types],” he added. “So it points towards the idea that there is an 
intrinsic reason for selectivity but it does not really prove it.”

GM worm study provides 'powerful first step' towards preventing Alzheimer's
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/12/gm-worms-provide-powerful-first-step-towards-preventing-alzheimers-neurostatin>
Published in the journal Science Advances 
<http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/2/8/e1600947> by scientists from the 
University of Cambridge, the research involved the analysis of data relating to 
more than 500 brain tissues from six healthy individuals, aged between 24 and 
57 years of age.

The team looked at the levels of a family of molecules known as mRNA, that are 
encoded by genes and which are required to produce proteins. From this 
analysis, the researchers found that they were able to predict the levels of 
proteins across the brain, allowing them to map the levels of proteins 
associated with Alzheimer’s disease.

The scientists found that regions of the brain with higher levels of proteins 
prone to clumping in plaques and tangles corresponded to regions that generally 
show early evidence of Alzheimer’s disease.

The team also found a link between the susceptibility of regions to 
Alzheimer’s disease and levels of a group of proteins that are known to affect 
the clumping of those that form plaques and tangles.

The scientists found that the “vulnerability map”, produced by looking at the 
levels of these proteins in the brains of healthy individuals, is consistent 
with the map of how Alzheimer’s progresses.

Alzheimer's researchers find molecule that delays onset of disease
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/feb/16/alzheimers-research-molecule-delay-onset-dementia-found>
That, the researchers say, suggests that the vulnerability of particular 
tissues to Alzheimer’s disease could, in part, be down to a combination of 
higher levels of plaque and tangle-forming proteins and problematic levels of 
proteins that affect their clumping.

The scientists say the findings could lead to new ways to predict an 
individual’s risk of developing Alzheimer’s disease.

“Although we all have these patterns, in some people the patterns are more 
extreme, and in some others are less. Those in which the imbalance is greater, 
are more at risk,” said Michele Vendruscolo, co-author of the research, 
although he stresses that research to back up the suggestion has yet to be 
carried out.

Dr David Reynolds, chief scientific officer at Alzheimer’s Research UK, said: 
“These findings suggest that our susceptibility to Alzheimer’s may not only be 
dictated by abnormal changes in the brain, but by how our brains are hardwired 
to react to those changes.”

“Understanding the molecular mechanisms that underpin susceptibility to 
diseases like Alzheimer’s has the potential to open the door to new treatment 
and prevention approaches,” he added. “Building a complete picture of the 
biology driving a complex disease like Alzheimer’s gives scientists the best 
chance of developing effective treatments against it.”
 